

Sifting the past
A MOST readable miscellany — that's my summary of ‘New Ulster’, the latest journal of the Ulster Society.
The magazine carries a series of articles to suit all tastes and is excellent value at just £1.
The cover story recalls the Armagh railway disaster of June 1889 when 80 people died on an excursion train bound for Warrenpoint.
It remains one of the UK's worst railway tragedies.
Then there is part one of a study by Dr Brian Barton of Northern Ireland's third Prime Minister, Lord Brookeborough, and, in more contemporary vein, Clifford Smyth examines — and finds wanting — the media attitude to Ulster Protestant history and culture.
Marie Murphy then provides a musical interlude with her essay ‘Down To The Woods’, in which she takes a look at the career of that great Ulster songwriter, the late Jimmy Kennedy.
It is fascinating to learn how some of Kennedy's most famous compositions were inspired by seemingly inconsequential incidents.
For example, he once received a postcard from his mother and sisters which said: ‘Today we gone to Mexico — south of the border’.
Thus was born that timeless and much recorded hit ‘South Of The Border Down Mexico Way’.
On the military front, there is an informative memoir by David Hume on the life of the distinguished Ballycarry born soldier, General Sir James Steele (1894–1975), the man who signed the order for Britain's forces to mobilise in 1939.
A memorial fund has been set up in his native village to build a monument to one of Ulster's less remembered legion of fighting men.
And there is much more where that came from in this attractively illustrated and assiduously researched collection of articles.
‘New Ulster’ is, as I say, a bargain at £1 and copies can be obtained through the society (tel Banbridge 25131).
A must for the historically-inclined reader.
Barrett gets England call
ASTON VILLA'S Earl Barrett has been called up to reinforce England's squad for the World Cup ‘double header’ in Poland and Norway.
The 26-year-old right back, capped for the only time two years ago, increases to 26 the squad that manager Graham Taylor expects to fly out to Katowice next Thursday for the first of the Group Two qualifiers next Saturday.
But everything hinges on the fitness of the eight FA Cup final ‘marathon men’ of Arsenal and Sheffield Wednesday, who are not due to report at England's Bisham Abbey headquarters until later today, plus the Italian-based trio of Paul Gascoigne, David Platt and Des Walker, who arrive after tomorrow's Serie A matches.
Taylor expects Arsenal captain Tony Adams to be able to battle through the two matches, although he has confirmed that he will miss the US Cup matches which follow, like team-mate David Seaman, to undergo a summer hernia operation.
He is less confident about striker Ian Wright, who scored in both Wembley games but picked up an ankle injury to go with his broken toe.
‘I'm expecting him to report and, with five matches in the next four weeks, any player who is not fit for the first game will not necessarily miss the rest of them,’ said Taylor.
‘Unless there is something really untoward I don't see Ian having to pull out of the squad.’
On a day when several players missed training with niggling end of season injuries, Taylor's only other major concern is Gascoigne, who underwent an operation to repair his cracked cheekbone three weeks ago after being hurt in the 2–2 draw against Holland.
He has since returned for Lazio wearing his ‘Phantom of the Opera’ mask and Taylor added: ‘I'll be most amazed if that mask doesn't appear somewhere along the line.’
Taylor, however, is hoping that ‘Gazza’ may not need to wear the protective covering on his face against the Poles and has arranged for him to visit the surgeon who performed the original operation to check on his recovery so far.
Relieved Fogarty ends long wait!
JOY AT LAST, CARL
CARL Fogarty has done it at last!
After years of trying the 26-year-old Blackburn former world champion scored his first win in the North West 200 when he took the superbike race before 60,000 excited fans over the Portstewart-Coleraine-Portrush circuit today.
‘I can't believe this has happened,’ he told me as he dismounted from his works Ducati.
‘I kept thinking that the bike would break down or something else would happen to me for I've been in the lead so many times here only to be disappointed.
‘To say I'm relieved is an understatement.’
Fogarty won in start to finish style at an average speed of 121.36mph to beat the Dunlop brothers Robert, who was second, and Joey who was third.
Robert had earlier won the 250cc race but in the superbike he was forced to make up ground after a bad start and was never able to get to grips with the leader.
However, his scrap with brother Joey enthralled the crowd and at the finish they came over the line almost together.
The big disappointment of the race however was the non-appearance of Phillip McCallen.
He had crashed in the earlier 250cc race and although he appeared to be unhurt the doctors advised him not to ride in the superbike.
Honda manager Neil Tuxworth said: ‘Someone rammed the back of Phillip's bike and to be honest he's not in a fit state to race.
‘I told him to take a break and have a rethink about the rest of the meeting.’
Once the superbike race was over McCallen presented himself again for examination and the doctors gave him the all clear for the Regal 600cc race.
Back to the superbikes and Fogarty's win never looked in doubt.
He was first away and in the lead at Coleraine ahead of Ian Duffus, Kevin Mitchell and Joey Dunlop.
Mitchell was in second place at the end of lap one, then developed tyre trouble and eventually had to drop out.
Fogarty was left to move further and further ahead as Joey Dunlop took up the challenge, then Robert Dunlop made up ground rapidly after being seventh at the end of lap one, and by the end of the second lap it was Joey ahead of Robert to initiate a battle which continued until the end of the race when Robert just squeezed ahead.
Fourth place went to Robert Holden from New Zealand who first appeared on the leaderboard on lap two, the consistent Duffus was fifth and Terry Rymer making his debut at the North West sixth.
Rymer, a former British champion said: ‘I was a bit bemused by it all.
I only had four laps practice so I suppose I did all right finishing sixth.
‘I felt I might have passed the pair in front of me on the last lap but what was the point, I had no chance of winning and this is a tough circuit.’
But really the race belonged completely to Fogarty who said as he sipped champagne: ‘I was 17 seconds ahead for most of the race, but believe it or not I didn't know who was behind me.
‘In fact, I didn't even know McCallen hadn't started for I just got my head down and went for it from the fall of the flag.
I'll certainly remember this one.’
Robinson's first defence against British champ
CARDIFF'S Steve Robinson will make the first defence of his WBO World featherweight title at the city's national ice rink on July 10 against British title holder Shaun Murphy, of St Albans.
Lambert claims second title in three years
CATRIONA Lambert dominated today's final of the Scottish Women's Championship to take the title for the second time in three years.
The 23-year-old from North Berwick beat Mhairi McKay, 18, 5 and 4 at Prestwick St Nicholas.
McKay, the British and Scottish Girls champion, led briefly at the start, but after the third was always struggling against the two-time Curtis Cup campaigner.
Check out a big match
CHESS fan, are you?
Then check this out, mate.
Londonderry's historic craft village is the setting for a mighty encounter on the squares this Saturday (2pm).
The recently acquired giant chess set there is to be launched with an exhibition match between the current Ulster champion Adrian Gillen and a former title holder, Tom Clarke.
Apart from this summit meeting of minds there will also be the chance for other boffins of the black and white board to take on past champion John Hegarty, who is challenging all comers.
For younger enthusiasts there will be an under-14 tournament, entries for which must be received before 1.30pm on the day.
The first 16 will get in.
Sounds like a ‘must’ for all north-west chess nuts.
Further details from Helen McAlinden (tel Derry 370191).
Report shock: Firms working at loss, says Housing Executive
SOME Northern Ireland construction companies are so desperate for business they are building houses at a loss, a report reveals today.
Figures from the Northern Ireland Housing Executive show the depth of the crisis in the Ulster building industry.
And in the Republic, it is being alleged that imports of building materials from Northern Ireland are threatening hundreds of jobs in the southern border counties.
In the province, as firms scramble to win public sector contracts, the average tenders being offered are lagging far behind the actual cost of construction.
Using a figure of 100 for costs in April 1988, the building cost average in 1992/3 was 131.38, compared with an average tender price of 108.
Warning after children drink therapy oils
A HOSPITAL has sounded a safety alert over the packaging of oils used in ‘alternative’ medicine after two youngsters drank them from bottles.
The warning, from doctors at Salisbury District Hospital, Wiltshire, follows the separate incidents, one involving a 20-month-old girl.
Dr Pip Story, senior house officer in the accident and emergency department, called for child-proof caps on the containers, which, she said, should also carry clearer labelling.
She said one of the bottles, containing cedarwood oil, used in aromatherapy, ‘had only a warning to keep away from children, in very small letters’.
The oil could cause fits, coma and suppression of breathing if swallowed, she added.
Margaret Bonner-Walter, chair of the London-based International Federation of Aromatherapists, agreed that the packaging of some bottles sold over the counter ‘could benefit from better safety-labelling’.
But she added: ‘If our members sell oils to people, it is usually in blend form and we tell them to put clear instructions on the bottles.
‘I don't know how anyone, even a child, could drink these oils — they taste terrible if you just get them on your lips.’
‘Overnight idiots’ to sue church orders
ON March 17, 1955, Herve Bertrand was an ordinary 11-year-old boy attending classes at the Mount Providence orphanage in Montreal.
On March 18, he became an ‘idiot’.
The reason: The provincial government paid Mount Providence, operated by Roman Catholic nuns, 75 Canadian cents a day each for the care of orphans — for mentally retarded children it paid 2.75 dollars.
The orphanage decided on what it called a ‘change of vocation’, transforming itself into a mental institution and declaring its charges to be retarded.
Thousands of children in similar Quebec facilities were falsely labelled mentally retarded in the 1950s.
Many were sent to psychiatric hospitals and put in overcrowded wards with real mental patients and only a few overworked nuns to supervise them.
The orphans say they were beaten with straps, paddles and fists, sexually and psychologically abused, restrained in strait-jackets weeks at a time, plunged into ice water, lashed to beds.
Now a group of about 4,000 former residents of the institutions in the 1950s and 1960s has filed a lawsuit against seven religious orders that operated a dozen orphanages or mental hospitals, accusing them of physical, sexual and psychological abuse and seeks damages of almost £1 billion.
In addition to the civil suit, Quebec provincial police and Montreal city police are investigating scores of possible criminal cases against individuals who worked in the hospitals and orphanages.
ARIES (Mar21/Apr20)
Getting others involved in your aims and aspirations could make the difference between success and failure.
There's no shortage of people willing to play a part in your plans, but it's up to you to pick and choose carefully.
Someone close brings you great pleasure and joy now.
TAURUS (Apr21/May21)
If you want extra cash you'll have a very fortuitous opportunity to make more money.
Unfortunately there are sacrifices to be made, it could mean less time with loved ones or a more pressurised lifestyle, but if that's what you want now is the time to reach out and take it.
GEMINI (May22/June21)
A rush of good fortune coupled with the sweet smell of success makes Wednesday a brilliant time to forge ahead with plans.
Your love life could blossom under such amorous auspices.
Treat your other half to a romantic outing for two.
Lady Luck is yours for keeps today.
CANCER (June22/July23)
If you've had to put a plan on ice or wait for an opportune moment to announce a life-expanding decision then you need wait no longer.
People will back you 101pc now so any venture or enterprise you put into practice will give you all a chance to pull together to attain an aim.
LEO (July24/Aug23)
Today is a lucky turning point in many aspects of your life for there's so much opulent opportunity enveloping you that you can't fail to make a success of a personal plan or professional project.
Any idea or scheme based on your brainwork and intellectual agility is sure to be a winner.
VIRGO (Aug24/Sept23)
Opportunity doesn't only knock on your door it almost batters it down!
This is one of the most providential days of the year when the onus is on you to take up an idea and run with it.
There's money to be made, advantage to be gained and amour to be won by being bold.
LIBRA (Sept24/Oct23)
Forget about all your worries and concentrate on the bright and dazzling prospects that lie ahead for someone as ingenious, industrious and invitingly delicious as you!
This is a lucky time to focus on what you can make of yourself.
You're on the threshold of great things.
SCORPIO (Oct24/Nov22)
The wheel of fortune has turned up trumps and offers you a handsome payola today.
The only catch is whether you decided to make a wise investment or take a speculative chance some months or even years ago.
If you did you will get your reward now.
SAGITTARIUS (Nov23/Dec21)
Everything seems to be going your way today.
You are popular, successful, attractive and contented with the way your life's developing.
To top it all a stranger is set to make a major impact on your life.
Expect to hear good news before sundown.
CAPRICORN (Dec22/Jan20)
A fresh bloom of new vigour and vitality perks up your professional prospects or puts renewed life into a personal plan.
Today is the finale of a downward spiral of setbacks and disappointments as you begin to find new ways forward.
AQUARIUS (Jan21/Feb19)
It's a wonderful Wednesday of glorious options and opportunities that will thrill you to the core.
Most enthralling of all is an international link that promises the prospect of travelling and getting to know a foreigner who'll change your life.
PISCES (Feb20/Mar20)
You have a benefactor in your midst who will give you all the support and succour you need emotionally.
You're feeling exceptionally lucky so this is the best of times to launch a few other thoughts.
A period of big expansion and growth patterns begin today.
Youth remanded on store blaze charge
A 14-year-old youth was remanded into county council care today when he appeared in court charged with unlawfully killing two pensioners who died in a department store blaze.
The teenager, who cannot be named, appeared at a specially-convened youth court at Chesterfield charged with unlawfully killing Mr John Turner (80) and his wife Marjorie (74) of Whitwell, Chesterfield, Derbyshire.
The couple died in a fire at Littlewoods store in Chesterfield on May 7.
The boy was also charged with arson with intent to endanger life in connection with an incident at Chesterfield library on Monday.
The boy, who comes from the Chesterfield area and will appear in court again on Tuesday, was remanded into the care of a Derbyshire County Council social services secure accommodation unit.
Queen Mother to remain in hospital
THE Queen Mother is to spend a third night in hospital before being discharged tomorrow.
Latest tests on the Queen Mother, who underwent an hour-long throat operation on Thursday night, had proved satisfactory, said a spokesman for Aberdeen Royal Infirmary.
He added that she was staying a further night ‘as a precaution’.
The decision followed a morning assessment by her consultant Dr Peter Brunt.
The hospital said she was comfortable and having a light breakfast — her first full meal since was admitted to hospital.
‘She will be having a normal diet today,’ said the spokesman.
‘She is very fine and chirpy.
She had a very good night and is chatting to the staff,’ said Alan Reid, head of public affairs for the 1,400-bed hospital complex.
Hundreds of flowers, cards and goodwill telephone calls continued to flood in to the hospital today.
Wordy way with them
I AM indebted to the Esperanto Centre in London for providing me with the following gem, under the heading ‘Unfortunate Translations’.
It's the phrase ‘for instance’ that slays me!
Seen at a German camp site: ‘It is forbidden on our camp site that people of different sex, for instance men and women, live together in one tent, unless they are married with each other for that purpose.’
Theatre tragedy
TODAY the Grand Opera House presents its bomb-torn face to the world.
It is a sad sight for not only is it a famous Belfast landmark but to anyone who has spent an enjoyable evening there taking in anything from a popular musical to a classic play it must feel like a personal loss.
It is obviously disheartening for Michael Barnes.
Over the years he has done a marvellous job enthusiastically promoting the theatre and bringing world-class productions to local audiences in spite of the difficulties posed by the Troubles.
Long may he continue.
Hopefully the lights in the Opera House will soon shine again to brighten the Belfast night.
STAN HOWES Gilnahirk Crescent, Belfast.
Arnie's Ulster visit
WHICH famous film star once rippled his illustrious biceps in a hall beside the Belfast Co-op?
Just hold on a minute, now, for this is very interesting.
Newtownabbey reader Alan Beattie writes to ask, through this column, if anyone else remembers a body building exhibition which was held in the then Husband Memorial Hall in Frederick Street back in 1964 or 65.
Top of the bill, he says, was the former Mr Universe, Reg Park, now merely a muscular memory.
But — and here's the point — second billing was given to a young Austrian lad of 17 who had just won the title of Junior Mr Universe.
His name?
Arnold Schwarzenegger, man of action and few words on the big screen.
I'm here to tell you that if Alan is right and big Arnie (pictured left) did the body beautiful business behind the Co that night, anyone who happened to take a photograph of him should send it in to me pronto.
We're talking history here.
OUT FOR THE COUNT
CANDIDATES gathered anxiously at the Guildhall on Thursday to await the results of the Derry City Council election.
Belfast Telegraph photographers were there to capture the triumphs and disappointments.
Controversy surrounds schools' new transfer exam
The testing time facing children and parents
IN JUST over four months time thousands of primary school children throughout Northern Ireland will sit what has been billed as the new 11-plus.
Few could fault them if this time round their ‘big exam day’ nerves were compounded by the raging controversy surrounding the new transfer test.
In April the Department of Education issued a specimen paper of the new test to howls of protest from teachers who branded it ‘horrendous’, ‘unbelievable’ and ‘quite intimidating’.
Within days the Department was back with ‘reassurance’ that the specimen paper was deliberately intended to stretch pupils and that the actual paper would contain easier material.
Then came the announcement that a further set of specimen questions would be sent out to primary schools in September.
The Department admitted that seven questions in the original specimen were ‘too difficult’.
In general, parents will not have a chance to see the specimen paper until June 14.
Although copies of the sample test were leaked to the Belfast Telegraph immediately following its release, this newspaper in common with others cannot print questions from it before June 14.
To do so would breach copyright laws.
But parents throughout Northern Ireland have been campaigning for the new test to be revamped or at least postponed until pupils have had time to get to grips with the new format.
Amid the protests to date, perhaps the most telling line has come from Newtownards woman Phyllis Bibby whose petition demanding urgent changes in the system had been meeting with a poor response.
A lot of parents were refusing to sign she said, ‘because they admitted they just did not understand the new selection procedure.
They are totally confused.’
And it is this feeling of confusion which teacher John Mann pinpoints as one of the most damaging aspects of the current controversy.
‘Our education system should inspire public confidence,’ he says simply.
‘But public confidence has been shattered.’
Mr Mann is a dedicated professional, a teacher with 17 years experience and currently headmaster of the 260-pupil Belvoir Park Primary School in Belfast.
In speaking out now, he voices the concerns not just of others within his profession but also the concerns of a parent.
‘The Department,’ he says, ‘frequently talk about teachers and parents as if we are two entirely different groups.
‘But teachers are parents too.
My fears in this are also as a father with a daughter in P6.’
Like many other primary school teachers, he says he was stunned by the level at which the specimen paper had been pitched.
‘You look at this paper and your immediate reaction is, ‘Just where do the less able children go?’
‘With the old verbal reasoning test the questions got progressively more difficult as you moved through the paper.
‘With this paper, the child is plunged right in.’
He reckons some of the maths questions would cause problems for second year pupils at secondary level, that the paper calls for a high reading standard and that some of the questions could be ambiguous.
‘Overall this is a paper aimed at the top 15 per cent of children.
It does absolutely nothing for the child with potential.’
And he poses the question, ‘What message are we sending to children asking them to sit through something which the majority of them are not capable of doing?’
He goes on, ‘What I would like to know is just who produced this paper.
We've been told that it hasn't been trialed because it was produced in a hurry.
Are we to assume that the actual test will be trialed?
A circular from the Department explains that ‘pupils by age 11 are expected to be attaining at level 4 in any given subject therefore the test papers will be pitched no lower than level 4’.
But John Mann points out that the first test will be held in October, at the beginning of the school year when the majority of pupils will in fact, still be ten.
And the breadth of the curriculum is such that different parts will be dealt with at different times in different schools.
The test is held in October, he adds, for administrative, not educational reasons.
‘I'm not a lover of the verbal reasoning test,’ he goes on, ‘But what we are now doing is abandoning one system when we haven't perfected its replacement.
‘I have no problem with testing children in English, maths and science which the new test does.
The problem lies in using that information for selection.
‘And let's be honest.
We are not talking about a selection test here.
We are talking about a rejection test.
The majority of children who sit it will not be selected.
They will be rejected.’
At the crux of the matter, argues John Mann, is this problem of equating assessment with selection.
‘They are two different issues,’ he says, ‘The new test is not about measuring the child against the curriculum.
It's about measuring the child's proficiency against the proficiency of other children.
‘At no other stage in the child's educational career will that happen again.
Overall, he says he'd like to see grammar schools play a greater role in the current debate about selection.
And he stresses to parents that teachers share their concerns and are aware of the confusion surrounding the new system.
‘Teachers do care deeply.
In my experience teachers want to do their very best for all their children.
As I see it my first responsibility is to my children and my parents.’
He feels teachers could be kept better informed by the Department.
And that the Department could make better use of the great store of experience within the teaching profession during the consultation process.
The Department he says may deal with parents and children who have ‘failed’, at the appeal stage.
‘But it's the primary school which deals with it the Monday after selection.
We face those children and their parents.
We can't hide behind figures.
We're there.’
Overall this is a paper aimed at the top 15 per cent of children.
It does absolutely nothing for the child with potential.
Serbs take tighter hold of war gains
AS the talking went on in America the Bosnian Serbs appeared to have gained a firmer hold on their territorial war gains today.
International efforts to isolate the Bosnian Serbs suffered a setback when Yugoslavia said it could not accept the deployment of United Nations monitors along its border with Bosnia to ensure Belgrade had cut supplies to the Serbs.
Belgrade, previously blamed for fuelling the war, threw its weight behind the Vance-Owen peace plan earlier this month hoping the world would respond by lifting crippling economic sanctions against Serbia-dominated Yugoslavia.
When Bosnia's Serbs rejected the plan, Belgrade declared its border with Bosnia closed except for food and medicines.
After two of its worst days of shelling this month, Sarajevo was reported quieter overnight apart from some anti-aircraft machine-gun fire and a handful of artillery shell impacts.
Shelling of the besieged Bosnian capital yesterday killed four people and injured more than 30, many of them children, the city's radio station said today.
Business as usual for Coyle
DESPITE the current unrest at the Brandywell it has been business as usual for Derry City boss Roy Coyle.
This week he secured three pre-season friendly fixtures at the North West venue and agreed to provide the opposition for Glentoran defender Terry Moore's testimonial at the oval on August 4.
English Third Division champions Cardiff City will be entertained by Derry on Sunday July 25.
Former Northern Ireland international and Creggan man Paul Ramsey currently captains ‘The Bluebirds.’
Coyle has also invited Irish League opposition and Derry will line out against Ballymena United on Saturday, July 31 and Crusaders on Saturday August 7.
Both these fixtures will have 5.00pm kick-offs.
It will be Ballymena's first trip to Brandywell since that infamous day in 1972 when a United bus was subjected to an arson attack.
It made Brandywell a no-go area for visiting teams and marked the beginning of the end for Derry City's reign in the Irish League.
But relations between the two clubs have remained good and two Derry players, Jonathan Speak and Gregory Kearney, have moved to the Showgrounds over the past year.
BILLY Sinclair and his assistant Eric Bowyer are staying with Coleraine.
Both work without a contract, and Sinclair sought assurances about the future in recent negotiations.
He appears to have got what he wanted and will remain at the Ballycastle Road Showgrounds for another year at least.
THE manager's job at Amateur League club Crewe United is proving to be one of the hottest seat in local football.
Gerry Kerr who steered the Glenavy side to a mid-table position in Division I A of the Amateur League after they were relegated the previous season, has been told his services are no longer required.
He is the fifth manager to leave Crewe Park in the last two years following in the footsteps of Paul O'Gara, Terry Nicholson, Jack Walsh and Sammy Watson, who all parted company with the club last season.
Kerr took Lisburn Rangers to the Division II A Amateur League championship and the semi-final of the Co Antrim Shield during the 1991/92 season before being offered the job at Crewe.
Sparks fly, so model quits job
ONE of the top glamour models in the Northern Ireland Electricity advert has packed in her day job because bosses couldn't cope with her stardom.
Her mum loves it, her friends think the attention is great, but bosses at a firm of Belfast architects couldn't spare the city girl the time off she needed for her modelling.
Former Ulster dancing champion Yasmin (23) is seen in the advert strutting through Belfast city centre — dancing in a green catsuit after being energised by giant Finn McCool.
But when her company refused her time off for a quick photo shoot, Yasmin energised herself by picking up her coat and walking out.
Yasmin said she'd had enough and was now looking for full-time modelling work.
‘It was pathetic,’ she claimed.
‘I had wanted to do a charity fashion show two weeks ago, but my bosses wouldn't allow it.
‘They were being really awkward, so I just said right, that's it and walked out — and I'm glad I did.’
Yasmin said the reaction to her new found fame had been startling.
‘I have been in pubs and guys have come along and said —‘It is you, isn't it?
You are the girl from that ad’.
‘My friends think it is great too.
One day I was walking down Bedford Street in Belfast city centre and this bloke pulled over in his car and started tooting his horn.
‘Then he started to dance in the car doing an impression of me — I think.’
Her mum is her greatest fan.
‘It does get a bit ridiculous,’ Yasmin said.
‘Every time the ad comes on TV my mum has to tape it and she tells all the neighbours.’
The NIE advert was Yasmin's first appearance in a commercial, but she has already recorded another for a bank and hopes for more work.
‘It can be quite tough.
It meant five days of filming in Belfast city centre.
‘But it was really fun at the same time.
The worst thing about it was that green catsuit.
I absolutely loathed it.’
QUESTIONS REMAIN
Jackson deserves straight answers!
IT IS now five days since Tommy Jackson was sacked as Glentoran manager — and a lot of questions remain unanswered.
Why, for instance, did the Oval board of directors emerge from a meeting last month to declare that Jackson's job was safe and that he would be in charge next season?
And why did they let Tommy, who believed his job was safe, give interviews outlining his plans for the future?
The whole episode has been a major embarrassment for all concerned.
Let's try to unravel it.
Since the turn of the year there have been nods and winks that Jackson's job was in jeopardy.
The feeling was that only a Bass Cup win would save him, despite the tremendous success of last season's emphatic championship win.
It seemed that every round of the cup had become a pressure game for Tommy but the Glens made it through to the semi-final against Bangor.
They eventually lost that game although the 3–1 scoreline doesn't tell the full story of bad luck and missed chances.
But the general feeling after that game was that Jackson's head was on the block.
The season was effectively over for Glentoran; they had won nothing, had no chance of qualifying for Europe and had succumbed to Carrick Rangers in the County Antrim Shield final.
The speculation continued over the weekend; there would be a meeting on Monday night when the ‘future direction’ of the club would be discussed.
Jackson attended that meeting, presented his report and left.
People like me, who believed the firing squad had been assembled, were left with egg on our faces.
How could we have got it so wrong?
I could have sworn that there was an ‘air of resignation,’ so to speak, at the Oval.
But no!
Jackson was safe, he was staying with Glentoran, and headlines such as‘End of the line’ which appeared in the ISN the previous weekend were nothing short of scandalous.
Just over a month later, however, Jackson and his assistant Billy McCullough were on their way.
So what happened between the indignant vote of confidence and the sacking?
Certainly nothing on the playing field; as previously mentioned, the season was already over.
Any decision would surely have been made.
What led to the directors' U-turn?
No-one is saying anything, and as we all know in this game, a lack of information leads to speculation.
My theory is that the vote of confidence in Jackson was followed by widespread dismay among certain players, sections of the support — and shareholders.
Perhaps the board had misjudged the feelings within their own camp — if that's the case, there was a hasty re-assessment.
In the end, what most people believed would happen did happen — but only after the manager had been led to think it wouldn't.
It was a sad, sorry business but many people feel that at the end of the day, the decision was the right one.
Tommy's record as a manager stands up to any scrutiny; two championships, three Bass Cups, ten other trophies and regular jaunts to Europe.
He could be forgiven one disappointing season with a track record like that.
But I think it's fair to say he had lost his rapport with a lot of supporters, and when that happens the end is never really far away.
The Manchester City chairman Peter Swales sacked Mel Machin a few years ago for the same reason; rapport with fans, he believed, was even more important than results.
And Glentoran fans were disillusioned.
They wanted the so-called ‘Marseille millions’ spent on big name players who would replace the capable, but long in the tooth, lads who had brought so much success before.
But only Damian Kelly emerged as someone who curried favour on the terraces.
Michael Smyth, a more than capable full-back, suffered from the weight of expectation brought about by that massive £25,000 price tag.
And the arrival of Mark Caughey, Tony Henry, Sammy Troughton and Billy Whitehurst did little to appease.
They were all whole-hearted players, but the fans were expecting ‘wannabes’ rather than‘been theres.’
It didn't help of course that Linfield were striding towards the championship, on the back of inspired signings such as Dessie Gorman.
Why could Glentoran not land players like him?
Why did lads like Trevor Williamson not want to go to the Oval?
The momentum of despondency was gaining apace.
Suddenly the injury crisis was no longer tolerated as an excuse.
As Distillery manager Billy Hamilton said before a clash with the Glens: ‘I have yet to send my team out against a Glentoran side which didn't have eleven household names in it.’
Yes, they were household names — and perhaps they had been around too long.
It was obvious the aging side had peaked the previous season; a major overhaul was needed, either at playing staff or managerial level.
Glentoran decided on the latter, hoping the former would follow.
As a pressmen, I've had my ups and downs with Tommy.
He was often charming, sometimes rude, but always straight.
He never beat about the bush when something was annoying him, he was never afraid to give it to you straight, to say exactly what he thought.
What must be hurting him today is that others did not have the courage to do the same to him.
Tommy gave straight answers and expected them in return.
He was tremendously successful and his successor will have a hard time emulating him.
But when your face doesn't fit any more you have to go.
In football, the past is quickly forgotten.
Little change in the political map
CAN you spot the difference?
Four years down the line and, after all the campaigning, it's basically a case of ‘as you were’ in Ulster's district councils.
Speculation and dire warnings that the political map of the province would change dramatically after the elections have been shown to be totally unfounded.
The status quo was maintained in 22 of the 26 councils and the balance of power really only shifted markedly in one: Limavady, where nationalists gained from Unionists.
Magherafelt, where no party had been in control, passed into nationalist hands, while the reverse was true in Moyle.
Debt study warns of ‘time bomb’
Debt problem is time bomb, claims report
NORTHERN Ireland's spiralling debt crisis is a ‘potential time bomb’, according to a local counselling service.
The annual report of Belfast-based group Money and Relationship Counselling (MARC) reveals a sharp increase in large debts and a rise in the number of people who owe money to banks.
In 1991–92, 27pc of people who came for advice from MARC owed more than £10,000 — compared with 8pc owing that amount the previous year.
Banks were the main creditors, with 68pc owing them money, compared with 52pc the previous year.
In the report, debt counsellor Ailish McIntyre said debt is one of the main social problems of our time.
‘Its effects on individuals and families can be devastating,’ she said.
‘With the worsening economic climate we can expect more unemployment, mortgage repossessions, bankruptcies and general indebtedness.
‘This is a potential time bomb ticking away at the fabric of society.’
Fellow debt counsellor Noel Adair said the increase in debt to banks was mainly due to people who took out personal loans while they were in full employment and later lost their jobs and were unable to meet repayments.
He added that the number of people with debts totalling more than £10,000 was also a worrying figure.
Such clients usually had a multiple debt problem, owing money on their mortgage, personal loans and their car.
‘We would encourage people to look at their total income and their outgoings and work out if they can afford to take on new loans,’ said Mr Adair.
He stressed that people should also seek advice as early as possible if they feel they are getting into financial difficulties.
Maternity units lashed for not answering quiz
A NORTHERN Ireland nurse has condemned local maternity hospitals for failing to give information useful to expectant mums.
Jane Waterson, a member of the Association for Improvements in Maternity Services, asked for information from seven hospitals across the province.
But only one, the Jubilee Maternity Hospital in Belfast, gave all that was asked for willingly and promptly.
She submitted a list of 16 queries, including ones on annual figures on deliveries, the average number of internal examinations, the average number of scans per pregnancy, details on pain relief in labour, and the number of caesarian sections or forceps deliveries.
Writing in this week's Health Service Journal, she detailed her progress with the other units.
Mater Hospital, Belfast, did not reply;
Royal Maternity Hospital, Belfast, gave the information through the Eastern Board after five months of correspondence;
Route Hospital, Ballymoney, gave information after seven weeks;
Craigavon Area Hospital suggested some of the information would encroach on nursing's Code of Confidentiality, but details were given after seven weeks;
At Altnagelvin Hospital, Londonderry, nursing staff said they could not ethically give information, but details eventually were given after correspondence with the Western Board;
Erne Hospital, Enniskillen, said much of the information was not readily available or easily accessible.
Miss Waterson said she had undertaken the study after her sister-in-law had difficulty in deciding where to have her baby as she had only anecdotal evidence on which to base her choice.
‘As a nurse, I could not understand why she did not directly approach the hospitals concerned, for at that time I had little doubt that she would have received informed, prompt, honest replies.’
But Miss Waterson admitted that she was naive in assessing the sources of information on maternity care.
‘Only with patience, persistence and a willingness to approach the highest levels did I get the information and even then I sometimes failed,’ she said.
She suggested each unit should publish information that would help mothers make an informed choice as to where to have their babies.
Parties hold on to status quo AFTER months of campaigning Northern Ireland's political map is virtually unchanged.
Only Limavady changed from unionist to nationalist hands, and Magherafelt moved from no overall majority to nationalist control.
Before the poll unionists were in charge in 17 of the 26 councils, nationalists formed the majority in five and there was no overall majority in the remaining four.
Afterwards the council scoreboard stood at 16 controlled by unionists, six by nationalists and four mixed — representing a gain of one for nationalists.
The councils where the balance of power changed were:
Limavady — from unionist to nationalist.
Magherafelt — from no overall majority to nationalist control.
Moyle — from nationalist to no majority.
Ballymena — from DUP control to UUP control.
North Down — remained unionist, but Conservatives are no longer the majority party.
The Ulster Unionists ended up with 197 seats, but their share of the vote — 29.1pc, was 2pc down on the last council election.
The DUP won 103 seats and their share of the vote remained steady at 17.2pc.
The SDLP vote also held up at 21.9pc, a slight increase on the 1989 figure, giving them a tally of 127 seats.
Sinn Fein won 51 seats and their share of the vote increased from 11.2pc in 1989 to 12.5pc this election.
Alliance also did well, winning 44 seats and increasing their share of the vote from 6.8pc in 1989 to 7.7pc.
Belfast city council remains in Unionist control with the 27–24 majority over the SDLP, Alliance and Sinn Fein members.
Graf chases Seles' crown
THE absence of reigning champion Monica Seles still recovering after being stabbed in Germany last month promises to make the women's singles in the French Open the most intriguing contest for years.
Steffi Graf and Arantxa Sanchez Vicario, both winners in Paris before the Seles dynasty began three years ago, are far from the only pretenders to the vacant crown.
Waiting in the wings, too, are Gabriela Sabatini, Conchita Martinez and Jennifer Capriati.
The tournament starts on Monday and world No 2 Graf starts as the logical favourite to win following Seles's withdrawal.
Sanchez Vicario may be Graf's most dangerous opponent.
The Spaniard's hustling style has been Graf's downfall in the past and the 21-year-old from Barcelona beat her 6–3 6–3 in the Hamburg final.
Martinez, another Spaniard, has been rising steadily for years and seems to be reaching her peak after a great three-set victory over Sabatini in the Rome final this month.
The 23-year-old Argentinian Sabatini remains one of the sport's great under-achievers.
Blessed with talent and power in abundance, she seems to lack application on the big occasions.
The US Open title in 1990 and two lost finals at Wimbledon and New York are a scant Grand Slam record for such a gifted player.
The prospects for the 17-year-old American Capriati are uncertain.
Semi-finalist at her first attempt at the age of 14 in 1990, Capriati has largely flattered to deceive since and has yet to reach a Grand Slam final although she did capture the Olympic gold last year.
Queen in historic meeting with Mary Robinson
THE Queen and Irish president Mary Robinson will have an historic meeting in London next week.
The Irish head of state is to pay what Dublin sources said was a courtesy call on the Queen during a visit to Britain to receive a degree at Oxford University and fulfil other engagements.
It will be the first official meeting between an Irish president and a British sovereign since Ireland achieved independence from Britain 71 years ago.
Mrs Robinson is scheduled to be in Britain from Wednesday to Friday, and is likely to see the Queen at Buckingham Palace on Thursday.
On Wednesday the president, formerly a senior member of the Irish bar with a noted interest in civil liberties, is due to be conferred with a Doctor of Civil Law degree by diploma at Oxford — a device used by the university to honour members of royal families or heads of state.
Later the same day she will present awards marking the achievements of Irish people in Britain at a ceremony in London.
The following day she is to meet representatives of the Irish community at London's Camden Centre.
Mrs Robinson, who became Ireland's first woman president in 1990, has frequently said she would like to visit the Royal Family and receive visits from them in return.
But the meeting will also be seen as a further strengthening of Anglo-Irish ties at a time when the governments in London and Dublin are trying to start new talks aimed at finding a political solution in Ulster.
Eileen powers her way to semi-finals
THE STRENGTH of Eileen Rose Power's iron play on the fourth day of the Irish Ladies' classic was gloriously illustrated by her second shot to the 10th hole at Royal Belfast.
This is the pick of several spectacular holes on the beautifully wooded Craigavad course, and the defending champion was only inches shy of a sensational eagle-two on her way to a thrilling victory over the redoubtable Tracey Eakin, from Laytown.
It was a strenuously long day for the 26-year-old psychiatrist's daughter from Kilkenny, who had survived a two-down-with-six-to-play crisis before lunch to beat Ulster's gallant little Michelle McGreevy on the 17th.
Spare a thought for Nicola Roughan.
This attractive young Woodbrook player, three down on the 13th, seemed to have a superb match against Eavan Higgins all wrapped up after jumping ahead for the first time on the 17th, but lost her ‘thinking cap’ completely down the last.
Here she hit wood for her second when it would have been less risky to try an iron, and after finding trouble in sand, ended up taking ‘six’, the first time all week she had failed to make par on the hole.
‘If only I could play it again,’ sighed Nicola, head cupped in both hands, after losing to a bold Higgins birdie on the 19th.
The Wallace Trophy went to Anita McCaw, from Royal Co Down, who pipped Bangor's Valerie James right on the post (one hole).
BELFAST
Baton rounds fired at stoning youths
POLICE fired a number of baton rounds when about 150 youths threw stones at New Barnsley RUC station in west Belfast last night.
An RUC spokesman said there were no reports of injuries nor damage.
Meanwhile, two 19-year-old men were recovering from leg wounds in hospital today following a shooting in Highfield, in the west of the city.
A pistol was found in a garden at Ava Parade, off Ormeau Road, by police searching the area yesterday after a car was abandoned by two men.
No arrests were made.
CASTLEWELLAN
Hit-and-run probe
POLICE are appealing for witnesses to a hit-and-run accident in which a four-year-old boy was injured.
The child was struck by a red Hiace-type van driven by a man at Drumaroad, Castlewellan, at 7pm last Thursday.
Detectives would like to speak to anyone who may have seen the accident.
Telephone Castlewellan 0396 77822.
MAGHERALLY
Orange honours
DR Michael Dewar, historian and author, who now lives in Cheltenham, and his wife were guests of honour at a function held by Mount Ida LOL near Banbridge last night.
Dr Dewar, former Church of Ireland rector at Banbridge and Helen's Bay, is a former Orange Lodge member.
He will preach in Magherally and Annaclone Parish Churches tomorrow.
BANBRIDGE
100th birthday
RESIDENTS of Crozier House Home in Banbridge joined today in celebrating the 100th birthday of their most senior colleague, Alex Cairns.
This afternoon he was being presented with the Banbridge District Plaque by council chairman Drew Nelson, and among the congratulatory telegrams was one from Buckingham Palace.
ATHLETICS
Lough races for Striders
ANNADALE Striders take a 15 point lead into tomorrow's second round of the Panasonic Area League at the Antrim Forum track.
Reigning champions Striders have injury problems so they are taking no chances and have drafted in Gary Lough, who is a student at Loughborough University.
That should guarantee Annadale maximum points in the 1,500 metres, as Lough, who has just returned from a training stint with the GB squad in New Mexico, clocked 3.40.2…a personal best…at Loughborough on Wednesday night.
With Lough in the ‘1,500’, Davy Wilson switches to the 5,000 metres where he will team up with Jim Campbell for what should be another case of Annadale domination.
Ballymena are the chasing club in the league race, but they will come under pressure tomorrow as many of their young team are heavily involved in school competitions and exams.
Scientific a success in becalmed market
STOCK market newcomer Drew Scientific made a promising debut as its shares raced ahead to 155p some 50p ahead of the placement price.
Drew designs and makes instruments for monitoring diabetes and has distribution agreements with two medical companies with global networks, Ciba Corning and IL.
Elsewhere, shares were mostly dull.
The FTSE moved in a narrow band either side of the break-even line and by lunchtime was down 2.7 at 2809.5.
A cluster of ex-dividend stocks trading without the benefit of dividend payments helped keep dealing subdued.
Better than expected figures for trade in April with countries outside the EC failed to move the market.
Some dealers dismissed them as meaningless, since they left out the UK's biggest trading partners on the continent.
However, the slow-down in imports gave ammunition to those who warn that the recovery is fragile.
Ex-dividend shares included Allied-Lyons, Bass, BOC, British Airways, Hanson, Kingfisher, Land Securities, Marks & Spencer, Sainsbury and Willis Corroon.
Land Securities was one of the hardest-hit, shedding 14p to 560p.
Kingfisher was 15p off at 576p.
Stocks to benefit from broker recommendations included BAT, up 6p to 843p, Cadbury Schweppes, up 10p to 424p, Kwik Save, up 2p to 780p, and Prudential, 2p ahead at 317p.
Abbey National continued its recent good run, 2p better at 413p.
Glaxo gained 6p to 635p on the US reprieve for its best-selling asthma drug Ventolin, whose patent has expired.
US authorities were unable to agree on a process for testing rival drugs.
Midland Bank parent HSBC put on 5p to 610p after the record closing high on the Hong Kong stock market.
Army bird's eye views of city prove their worth
EAGLE-EYED soldiers at the top of high-rise flats are an invaluable asset to the Army's intelligence gathering operation.
Using sophisticated surveillance equipment they are able to monitor the movements of terrorist suspects within a wide radius — from a bird's eye point of view.
Although this is their main role, like other members of the security forces, they are permitted to shoot — but only when they feel their lives, or the lives of others, are in danger.
This week a soldier based at the top of Templar House flats in the New Lodge area shot and injured a suspected loyalist gunman as he made his getaway following a murder bid at the Sinn Fein office at Lepper Street.
The soldier was able to pick out his target in Copperfield Street from a distance of several hundred yards — and hit it with one shot.
A second man was arrested and a weapon was recovered from the scene.
Troops occupy the top floors of several high-rise buildings in both north and west Belfast.
They are heavily fortified for fear of terrorist attack — and on occasions troops can be flown in and out by helicopter to avoid further risk of confrontation in the lower floors.
The observation posts have a dual purpose — to collate information on the movements of suspected republican terrorists, and to deter loyalist murder gangs as they launch attacks in staunchly nationalist areas.
Soldiers spend ‘prolonged periods’ in the look-out posts as a more frequent turn-over rate would be counter-productive to effective intelligence-gathering.
In recent years, leading nationalist politicians have claimed members of the armed forces have been guilty of ‘collusion’— allowing UVF and UFF gunmen to enter and leave areas without fear of arrest.
This week's incident may go some little way towards defusing those allegations.
A security source said: ‘The Army, in partnership with the police, aim, through their physical presence, to show the whole community that the security forces are present to protect everyone against terrorist attack, from whatever paramilitary organisation it may come.’
Oval board is congratulated
So the Jackson era is over in BT4.
While no-one likes to see anyone lose his job the Glentoran Board are to be congratulated on having been decisive at such a vital time for the club.
Perhaps now we'll see a happier Oval under a manager who's prepared to clear out the old guard from ex-stalwarts down to assistant kitman.
A manager who's able to get the best use out of the young talent still at the Oval.
And a manager who can be relied upon to wisely invest the Marseilles Millions on established talent either locally, in the Republic or in Scotland.
Trevor Anderson has proved what an astute manager can do with an average squad, imagination — and money.
Next season the Gibson cup back to East Belfast.
One thing concerns me though — why, at such a vital stage of the close season, are the Glens advertising for a manager?
Surely no-one expects Coyle, Billy Hamilton, etc to apply while still in employment elsewhere.
These are the sort of men we need — not some half-baked internal appointment.
We need a man with experience, a record at the highest level, and contacts.
Surely the Board have someone in mind.
Sludds sets pace at halfway stage
DUBLINER Martin Sludds gave himself a major boost with a sparkling 68 over the hugely demanding K Club course at Straffan, to lead the Smurfit Irish PGA Championship by four shots at the halfway stage.
Sludds, the 33-year-old from Finglas, had a virtually flawless round shooting four birdies and not dropping a shot to par all day.
His round was made around a run of five 3s from the second to the sixth holes — that brought him to two under for the championship.
He then shot 11 straight pars before finishing with a flourish and a birdie on the last.
His 68 equalled the best round over the course — a similar effort by Kerry's Eoghan O'Connell last year.
Sludd's nearest challengers are Christy O'Connor Jnr and defending champion Eamonn Darcy, both of whom are at one over par — four shots behind.
Philip Walton, Des Smyth and the K Club's own Darren Clarke are a further three shots behind — a whopping seven shots off the pace.
There were no major casualties on a day in which only four men broke par.
So far over the two days there have only been five sub par rounds out of the 186 played.
The cut for the weekend was made at 156, with 41 players going through to the final two rounds.
Meanwhile David Gilford left a star-studded field in the Lancia Martini Italian Open trailing in his wake and then spoke of his burning ambition to make Europe's Ryder Cup team against America at The Belfry in September.
Gilford, a 27-year-old from Crewe, is so keen to make the European team that he would even be prepared to give up any invitation he might receive to compete in the US Open this year.
He added he would willingly forego a trip to the United States and play in the Jersey Open with the hope of collecting more Ryder Cup points.
After rounds of 65 and 66 for a 13-under-par aggregate of 131 at Modena, Gilford holds a clear three-shot lead over Seve Ballesteros, Steve Richardson and Argentinian Jose Coceres going into today's third round.
Ballesteros shrugged off his back trouble to shoot a superb eight under par 64 in the second round yesterday yet was not an entirely happy with his performance.
Not a memorable game
WELL, I see Man Utd and Arsenal put on a thrilling match ending 4–4 for the David O'Leary Testimonial earlier this week.
This was in stark contrast to the dross served up at Windsor Park amidst all the hype, in the recent match against Aston Villa.
Nobody expected anyone to get their leg broken but one would have thought that the top two teams in the country could have contributed more in terms of effort, flair and excitement.
Paul Ince escapes criticism for his usual wholehearted endeavours and determined talking.
Pride, surely, should have prompted the two teams to prove their League positions were deserved.
I personally felt short-changed when United left five of their stars at home — Schmeichal, Irwin, Bruce, Hughes and especially Cantona, while where were McGrath, Staunton and Atkinson?
I couldn't help contrast the boredom with United's exhilarating 4–3 encounter with Liverpool some years back, also in Belfast.
As a regular attender of Irish League games could I suggest that the 22,000 who turned up for the United v Villa debacle perhaps try the fare served up in the Irish League which I've no doubt they would find much more exciting (unless Bangor and Ards are involved!)
‘Short-changed’ Yes, it was a poor game, but the muted crowd didn't exactly inspire the players.
Windsor was noisier during the Bass Cup finals, despite that little dig at Bangor and Ards.
Organisers say thanks
THE Mervyn Brown Memorial Game organising committee wishes to take this opportunity to thank the soccer public throughout the province for the tremendous support they gave to this memorable occasion and for the spontaneous and genuine reception accorded to both teams prior to the commencement of the game.
The brilliant sunshine and the exemplary behaviour of the record crowd added to the carnival atmosphere, and although the game is now a part of soccer history, the memory of the event will linger for years to come.
It is regretted that so many people were unable to obtain a ticket for this game and the committee fully appreciates their keen disappointment; it was an impossible task to satisfy everyone so great was the demand.
Our thanks are also extended to the Police and Stewards on duty and to everyone who contributed in any way to the success of the evening.
Our visitors from Manchester United and Aston Villa were overwhelmed by the warmth of their reception and with the hospitality extended to them, and on behalf of all soccer followers everywhere the Committee would thank their Directors, team managers, officials and players for making this occasion one to remember.
It certainly helped to enhance the reputation of our province at this level.
Teenager jailed for murder plot
A TEENAGE IRA girl was jailed for 10 years yesterday for plotting to kill troops — while her accomplice was given life for helping in the murder of a businessman.
Nineteen-year-old Patricia Catherine Deane, of Riverside Way, Belfast, pleaded guilty earlier this week to the murder conspiracy in July, 1991.
She waved and smiled at relatives as she was led from the dock to start her sentence.
IRA man Philip Manning (22) of Springfield Crescent, also Belfast, denied the charge but was found guilty and jailed for 14 years.
He received the life sentence for aiding and abetting the murder of Belfast fruit merchant Craig Wallace McVeigh (45) two years ago.
The crown claimed that Manning had ferried Mr McVeigh's IRA killers to and from the scene of the killing at his Boucher Road warehouse on May 22, 1991.
Manning said he was told Mr McVeigh had been warned on four occasions not to supply goods to the security forces.
Belfast Crown Court heard that Manning and Deane were arrested in a hi-jacked taxi while on their way to deliver two rifles and a pistol to a car park in the seaside town of Bangor.
They were supposed to leave the guns and the car to be collected by gunmen who planned to attack a nearby bar used regularly by soldiers.
A defence lawyer said: ‘It is apparent she was asked to go along to give the appearance of a young man and woman out for an evenings drive.
In addition to the murder conspiracy Deane admitted joining the IRA when she was only 17, and to possessing a number of firearms between January and June 1991.
She was given lesser concurrent terms on these counts.
Passing sentence, Lord Justice MacDermott told Manning: ‘All murders are foul and also futile and will not prevent the hard-working men and women of the province from carrying on their lives.
‘They are too resilient and determined to be defeated by such terrorist activity.’
The Judge told the pair that having chosen to become involved in the evil activities of the IRA they now had to pay the price of their folly while those who had sent them out remained at large.
Manning was also given concurrent terms for possessing the murder weapons, attempted murder involving coffee jar bomb attacks on security forces, and IRA membership.
SNOOKER
Duffy into last eight
FORMER Northern Ireland champion Michael Duffy is through to the quarter-finals of the European Snooker Championship in Helsinki, Finland.
Duffy won four of his five round-robin section games which included a 4–2 win over former champion Paul Mifsud of Malta.
In the other matches he beat Ville Pasanen (Fin) 4–2; Yvan van Velthoven (Fin) 4–2; Edvard Matthaisson (Iceland) 4–0 and lost 4–1 to Janl Latti (Fin).
‘Millar’ marching on
ONE of the province's most popular marching bands, the Millar Memorial Flute, has reported an increase in membership recently with it now in excess of 35 including many young members who are building a firm base for the future.
‘The Millar’ are to be seen regularly at numerous parades and have built up a reputation of excellent musical ability, together with superb marching talent.
The band was originally formed way back in the early 1900's under the name of Milltown Flute Band, but shortly after its inauguration the band's conductor and founder member, John Millar, died and the other members decided to change the name of the band in his memory.
The band has led the Belfast Twelfth of July procession to Edenderry since 1976.
This task it has admirably fulfilled, becoming very popular with the general public.
The band has also competed in many contests over the years having won many trophies.
The Millar Memorial, however, suffered a setback recently when a fire badly damaged their band hall.
Band members have, however, worked hard to restore the hall to its original condition and this work is close to completion.
The band has recently taken delivery of a splendid new uniform which the members are rightly proud of.
The uniform was worn for the first time at Easter.
A full diary of engagements has been booked for the months ahead.
Demi's now a Linfield fan…
THOUGHT your readers might like to know that Linfield FC have recruited a new fan in the person of Demi Moore, the wife of Bruce Willis.
Seen in her latest movie ‘Indecent Proposal’ she can be seen wearing a tee-shirt with the sole word LINFIELD in large letters emblazed across it!
To aid your readers who go to see the movie, the scene in which Demi is clearly seen wearing the Linfield tee-shirt is when she is having a row with Woody Harrelson in the kitchen of her house.
Without revealing the reason why they are rowing, but could it be that her actor husband is a Glen-man and she is ‘rubbing it in’ by wearing the tee-shirt around the house to celebrate Linfield winning the Irish League Championship this season!
D McIntyre Funny, I always thought she looked a little bit like Blues official DESSIE Moore…could they be related?
Lindsay McKeown has already been on asking for her phone number.
Queen Mum stays in Scotland
THE Queen Mother has pulled out of a public engagement for tomorrow and will remain in Scotland a few days longer after her hospital stay.
The Prince of Wales will stand in for his grandmother at a church service and reception for the Victoria Cross and George Cross Association in London.
The Queen Mother, who was released from hospital yesterday after a three-night stay for an operation to remove a piece of fish lodged in her throat, is president of the association.
She had been due to return from the Balmoral estate for the engagement tomorrow afternoon at St James's Palace and St Martin-in-the-Fields Church.
Clarence House spokeswoman said the Queen Mother was still planning to attend her next scheduled public engagement, a reception on Thursday for the Church Army at Lambeth Palace.
‘It has not been cancelled and a firm decision will be taken nearer the time,’ she said.
Meanwhile, it has been disclosed that the Queen Mother was entertaining guests within a short time of leaving Aberdeen Royal Infirmary.
She was driven with a lady-in-waiting from the hospital to Birkhall on the Balmoral estate.
Clarence House said: ‘She has a house party of guests at Birkhall and life goes on.’
The Queen Mother, who will be 93 this year, said she felt ‘much better’ as she left the hospital where she spent 63 hours.
Smiling but looking frail, she was asked if she would be taking things gently, and replied: ‘A little.’
She underwent an hour-long operation under general anaesthetic for the throat obstruction on Thursday night.
On Saturday she had her first visit from a member of her family her grandson, the Duke of York.
Lions reunion for Ulster
THE pride of the ‘74 Lions are to embark on an adventurous trip that could be more hazardous than their unbeaten trek through South Africa when they hit Ulster for a 20th anniversary bash next April (writes JIM STOKES).
Willie John McBride's side was the most successful touring side to leave these islands, and a big drive is now in progress to bring the 35-man party back together again.
Under the captaincy of McBride and the coaching skills of his Ballymena colleague Syd Millar, the Lions, with nine Irishmen in tow, won 21 of their 22 games, and were only denied a clean sweep when flanker Fergus Slattery was robbed of a try in the dying minutes of the Fourth and Final Test which ended in a 13–13 draw.
As well as McBride and Millar, four other Ulstermen were involved on that magnificent tour — Ken Kennedy, Mike Gibson, Stewart McKinney, and Dick Milliken.
Milliken, now chairman of the Ulster selectors, played in all four Tests as centre partner with Ian McGeechan at present Down Under trying to plot the downfall of New Zealand.
Milliken said: ‘It was a phenomenal trip, both off and on the field.
I remember it as if it was yesterday.
I was only 23 and to hear players like Willie John, Gareth Edwards and Mervyn Davies saying that it was the best tour they'd been on, then you knew it really was something special.
‘There was a great team spirit right through the party, and I made some very lasting friendships.
It will be great to meet up with them again.’
A number of Lions reunions have taken place in the past, but this will be the first one to be held in Ulster.
The brainchild of the Newtownards and District Round Table, the anniversary will be sponsored in the main by Gilbeys, and a busy schedule is planned for the tour veterans.
Already next season's Ulster Senior Challenge Cup final has been brought forward a week to April 23 in order to accommodate the Lions party who will take in the game as part of their celebrations.
Replies are coming in thick and fast to the invitations, and as yet there have been no refusals — the charm of McBride and his way with words will undoubtedly see that there will be a full quota on parade.
The Lions assemble on Friday April 22 and Clandeboye Golf Club will be making itself available for an amalgamation of sluggers, hustlers, and single-handicap players to get into the swing of things.
A formal dinner is planned on the Saturday evening as well as a number of sight-seeing trips with a trip to a number of famous hostelries certain to be included.
Bates' out to bounce Czech
JEREMY Bates and Clare Wood both have a good chance of making progress in next week's French Open in Paris after avoiding the game's big guns in the first round.
Bates back at Roland Garros for the first time in three years opens his challenge against Ctislav Dosedel of the Czech Republic, a player ranked nine places lower on the world computer at 111.
The 128th-ranked Wood has a more difficult task against no 67 Wiltrud Probst of Germany, but Britain's No 2 from Sussex could have fared much worse.
If Bates can dispose of Dosedel, he would next face the winner of a first round clash of two qualifiers.
But the 30-year-old British No 1 will find Dosedel no pushover as the 23-year-old Czech has claimed some notable scalps on clay.
Waiting in the third round could be fourth seed Boris Becker, who has had a torrid time in the build-up to the French Championships but who has a good chance to find his feet with a first round match against 579th-ranked French wild card Nicolas Escude.
Robin's 167 not enough
ROBIN Smith's majestic 167 not out won all the plaudits at Edgbaston yesterday but today England's cricketers woke up to the same old problems.
Another defeat, another low score for captain Graham Gooch, and another pasting for their bowlers as Australia romped home by six wickets left England with more worry as the Ashes series countdown continues.
England, with the Texaco Trophy series already lost 2–0, face the final international at Lord's tomorrow with six successive one-day defeats behind them.
Losing is becoming a depressing habit and under-pressure Gooch now with 15 one-day innings without a fifty behind him will need no reminding that England have also lost their last five Tests.
Changes must be made to the attack for the first Test at Old Trafford next month but pacemen Andy Caddick, Paul Jarvis and Chris Lewis now have just one more chance to prove they should remain for the Ashes opener.
Young batsmen Mark Lathwell and Mark Ramprakash could get a game tomorrow with Somerset's exciting 21-year old Lathwell capable of taking on Aussie spearhead Craig McDermott in a manner so far beyond Gooch and Alec Stewart.
And the Australians are also thinking of bringing in both Brendon Julian and Michael Slater for a taste of international cricket.
Aussie captain Allan Border led the praise for Smith's great effort, saying: ‘If that's not the best one-day innings that has been played, then it's in the grand final.
It's very tough for Robin to finish on the losing side after playing a knock like that.’
Man of the match adjudicator Sir Richard Hadlee said: ‘It was an outstanding performance of sheer brilliance.’
Prime Minister John Major watched Smith smash 82 of the 114 runs England added from their final 10 overs his third fifty came off just 20 balls and said: ‘Gilbert Jessop would be proud of him.
It was a magnificent piece of destructive batting the sort of innings that lightens the heart.’
England captain Gooch added: ‘It was probably one of the best one-day innings you will ever see.’
But, while Border expressed his delight with the form of strike bowler McDermott, Gooch admitted: ‘We were just not capable of splitting Border and Mark Waugh when we needed to.
Not being able to protect a total of 277 is very disappointing.’
Waugh (113) and Border (86 not out) put on 168 in 27 overs after coming together at 95 for three.
Both played superbly, clinching the Australians £20,000 of the £25,000 prize money on offer from Texaco and doing almost as they liked with the England bowlers in a perfectly-timed run chase.
RIDDICK IS RIGHT
RIDDICK Bowe believes he can handle any heavyweight in the world and aims for a quick victory in his WBA heavyweight title defence against Jesse Ferguson in Washington.
Bowe's 81-year-old trainer Eddie Futch reckons he knows how Bowe should handle 36-year-old challenger Ferguson in the fight starting in the early hours of tomorrow morning.
‘Riddick should jump on him early,’ Futch said.
‘Let him know who's going to be the boss.
Let him go back to the corner thinking, ‘I'm working with the boss.’’
Futch has been around boxing most of his life and he knows what an underdog can do if he gains confidence.
That's what happened when Ferguson fought Ray Mercer in what was to be a tune-up for Mercer before a £1.6 million challenge to Bowe.
As the fight progressed, Ferguson sensed he could beat the overconfident Mercer and he did just that on points in New York on February 6.
Ferguson is the biggest underdog since James ‘Buster’ Douglas who gained a shock win against Mike Tyson in 1991.
Ferguson claims he is in the best condition of his career and is completely focused.
The fact remains, however, that the challenger whose record is 19 wins and nine defeats has lost four of his last six fights and six of his last eight.
After winning his first 13 fights, Ferguson's career slump started when he was stopped in the 10th round by former contender Carl Williams in August 1985.
Two fights later, he was stopped in the sixth by Tyson, whom he had helped prepare for several fights as a sparring partner.
‘by no means am I taking Jesse lightly,’ said the undefeated 25-year-old Bowe, who has 33 wins including 28 knock-outs.
‘This is Jesse's last chance.’
Bowe weighed in officially on Thursday at 244lb, the heaviest for his three title fights.
Ferguson weighed 224lb.
It should be Bowe's last defence until November when he is expected to fight Evander Holyfield in a rematch.
Bowe won the undisputed title on points from Holyfield in November but is only recognised as champion by the IBF and WBA.
The WBC has given its belt to Britain's Lennox Lewis because of Bowe's refusal to defend against Lewis within a prescribed time.
Bowe, who says he no longer recognises the WBC, defended the IBF and WBA titles with a first-round knockout of Michael Dokes on February 6.
Since Ferguson is not ranked among the top contenders by the IBF, that organisation would declare the title vacant should he win.
He is not ranked by the WBA either but that group would recognise him as champion.
For the first time a heavyweight championship bout will be judged by three women Patricia Jarman of Las Vegas, Sheila Harmon-Martin of Washington and Jean Williams of Atlantic City, New Jersey.
Anne Diamond gives birth
TV PRESENTER Anne Diamond has given birth to a boy — her first child since her son Sebastian died tragically in his cot.
The new baby, weighing 7lbs 30z, was born at the private Wellington Humana hospital, in north-west London, shortly after 8pm yesterday.
Mother and baby are both well, said a hospital spokesman.
Anne's husband, TV executive Mike Hollingsworth, drove her from their home in Leamington Spa, West Midlands, to the hospital.
It is Anne's fourth baby.
Her other two children are Oliver, five, and Jamie, three.
Sebastian died aged four months in July 1991.
His death prompted his mother to launch a high-profile research campaign to isolate the causes of cot death and help prevent it.
The Government later backed advice that babies should be put on their backs to sleep and not be overheated by too many blankets.
The number of British cot deaths halved in just a year after the advice.
The news of her latest pregnancy was broken in November, and it is expected the new baby will make a public debut on her Good Morning BBC1 programme, perhaps next week.
A BBC spokesman said: ‘If all goes well and when Anne feels up to it, we will introduce her and her baby to the Good Morning audience.’
Missing speedboat trio found safe
THREE young men missing overnight after a speedboat trip were found alive today after a massive air and search in Cardigan Bay.
An RAF helicopter spotted their craft drifting about 10 miles off Aberdovey and winched them to safety.
The aircraft immediately flew them to Bronglais Hospital, Aberystwyth, where a medical team had been put on stand-by to give them medical checks.
A coastguard spokesman said: ‘They were very cold but otherwise appear to be unharmed.’
Four helicopters, eight lifeboats and a long-range RAF Nimrod reconnaissance aircraft were involved in a search of nearly 1,000 square miles of sea off the west Wales coast.
Police at Aberystwyth named the three, all aged 22, as Geraint Rowlands, of Llandre, Aberystwyth; Carwyn Lloyd Jones, and Dylan Roberts, all of the Bow Street, Aberystwyth, Dyfed.
They had disappeared last night after an outing in their 14ft long red and white craft which coastguards said was poorly equipped with no distress flares or life-jackets.
Relatives of the men had been anxiously waiting for news.
Ken basks in title success
KEN DOHERTY is still savouring that winning feeling.
The 23-year-old Dubliner is a proud man through becoming the first player from South of the Border to become Irish professional snooker.
It was after a most emphatic 9–2 triumph over city rival, Stephen Murphy, that Ken pocketed the Irish title.
Doherty was aghast 12 months ago when he made his first attempt to win the title and lost heavily to the unfancied Fergal O'Brien but this year he was determined to wipe out that memory and win his third title in a matter of months.
His manager Ian Doyle, head of the multi-million pound Cuemasters stable, flew from Scotland to watch Doherty create that little niche in history and he was pleased with what he saw.
Doherty opened with a break of 72 and in just 92 minutes had established a commanding 6–1 lead.
Breaks of 106, 68 and 55 put him 4–0 ahead before Murphy managed to claim his first frame.
A break of 96 had suggested the possibility of a fight back but Doherty eliminated such thoughts with breaks of 40 and 53 in the next two frames.
Murphy subsequently extended his advantage to 8–1 before there was temporary reprieve for Murphy but a 55 break gave Doherty the title in frame 11.
Afterwards Doherty was understandably delighted.
He said it was not easy to come to Cork with a favourite's tag and play against a posse of cuemen he had grown up with and played so often in amateur competition.
Now Doherty, winner of the Regal Welsh Open and the Pontin's Open, is looking forward to his first match as Irish champion and that couldn't be a tougher one.
His opponent in a special challenge game in Killarney tomorrow night is World champion, Stephen Hendry.
ONE of Ulster's top promoters and the man who brought Eurovision to the tiny Cork village of Millstreet said today they would support plans to stage next year's contest in Ulster.
Jim Aiken said he would love to co-ordinate the contest, while Noel C Duggan, the entrepreneur dubbed ‘Mr Millstreet’, said such a move would be ‘terrific’ for cross-border relations.
‘I think it would be a great idea,’ he said.
‘Millstreet would also be a good idea — everything is in place — but I will not be applying for it.
‘If anyone wants to bring Eurovision north, I would be willing to help.
All they have to do is ask.
I would do anything that was necessary and reasonable.’
Mr Aiken, who promoted Bruce Springsteen in Dublin this week, said: ‘I would love to be co-ordinator.
It would be a challenge.
‘Next year's Eurovision could be put on at the King's Hall.
‘Entertainment is an all-Ireland business now, with no borders.
Entertainers don't want to play one date.
They want to fit in both Belfast and Dublin.
‘People from all over Ireland would be delighted to see the Eurovision Song Contest screened from Belfast.
There might be political overtones, but they could be overcome.’
And another top Ulster promoter, Eamon McCann, was also enthusiastic about Belfast, but added: ‘It would have to be a joint BBC-ITV broadcasting venture.’
It was Mr Duggan's vision that secured Eurovision in the first place for Millstreet, against the odds.
To most outsiders, Millstreet, boasting just 1,500 people, was the most unlikely place in the world to stage such a massive spectacle.
But in front of 3,000 guests from all over the world, and an astonishing 500 million television viewers, Millstreet did the country proud.
’ It was a great success,’Mr Duggan said.
‘Everything went very well.’
Several days ago, SDLP MP Joe Hendron called for the contest to be hosted in Belfast.
‘I believe that if the authorities in the South cannot host the Eurovision Song Contest, for whatever reasons, it could be hosted in Belfast,’ he said.
‘This would be a magnificent step forward for our city.
Throughout the world they hear of violence, death and destruction in the north of Ireland.
‘I believe to have such a major international festival of song on our doorsteps would do wonders for our city and in particular for our tourist industry.’
And yesterday Taoiseach Albert Reynolds did not rule out the possibility of the contest being held in the province, but 24 hours later RTE chief John Sorohan said Dublin would be the most likely venue.
Entry time is running out fast
THERE'S just two weeks left to get your entry in for one of Northern Ireland's most popular events, the Coca-Cola Lisburn Half Marathon on Wednesday, June 16.
Monday, June 7 is the official entry closing date…including the fun run.
Those entering on the night will have to pay a greatly increased fee so it pays to enter NOW.
As usual the ‘big race’ will lure the top names and Lisburn Borough Council expect to have in action ‘26 miles’specialist Peter O'Donoghue of Omega, who had a PB last year and Annadale's John Walsh…and they are also confident that last year's winner, Jerry Kiernan of Clonliffe Harriers, will take the starter's gun with the intention of making it a hat-trick.
Expect a strong southern contingent at Lisburn, intent on relieving Ballinascreen's Theresa Kidd of the ladies title.
Categories this year have been changed with the aim of spreading the £2,150 plus training grants further.
This will include male 40, 45 and 50 plus events plus male and female categories, with the first three finishers to count.
With £400 to the first man home and £300 to the first lady and considerable training grants throughout, Lisburn looks sure to turn up trumps once again.
Around 3,000 runners all told are expected to take part and for the serious athletes, there will be a bonus of £50 (male and female) for record breakers…men 64.10 and women 76.38.
Entry fees are (half marathon) £4.50 (£10 for late entries) and Fun Run £3.50 (£5 for late entries).
All finishers will receive a specially designed commemorative medal and certificate and this year's official charity is Leukaemia Research.
Sheer sum mer luxury
Charnos lead the way for lovely legs
STRABANE-based Adria, the province's leading hosiery manufacturer has developed a reputation for pushing beyond the traditional boundaries in the hosiery industry.
This season promises to be no exception, with their Charnos spring/ summer ‘93 collections reflecting even fresher developments and innovations.
It is for that difficult time of year, coming out of winter and into spring, that Charnos provide the ideal answer with their new semi-opaques.
With a 30-denier appearance plus a satin look and feel, this is the perfect transitional product between the dense winter opaques and the sheerness of summer.
Retailing in major department stores at £3.99 semi-opaques by Charnos complement the svelte, sleek and stylish look for warmer months ahead.
One of the most exciting concepts coming through Charnos' latest product development is the control top with lycra.
Combining comfort and freedom of movement with ‘contouring’ the new Glossy bodyshapers give women the confidence to wear slim-fitting clothing by removing unsightly panty-lines.
Charnos have developed a lightweight Slimling control top with a 15-denier glossy leg look.
Following new yarn developments in France, Charnos have come up with a beautiful lustrous leg look that is built for comfort —‘Sheer Lustre’ tights at £2.99 with 10 denier appearance leg.
Designer for Adria, Collenn Anderson, describes Charnos' new direction ‘Comfort fit and softness are very important factor for hosiery in the 90's.
‘In the days before lycra, we were very much more limited in finding leg yarns with the perfect fit, now lycra is the vital link between fashion leg and good function.’
Thanks to the development of microfibres, the move is towards better, more luxurious finishes for spring/summer legwear.
Charnos have taken the microfibre story and turned it into different leg looks — shiny, matt and suede — using the softer, finer handle and textures now available, the products can achieve that smoother than silk feel.
Colour for summer ‘93 is defined by the trend towards naturals — skin tones, neutrals and pale legwear are set against outerwear's neutral classics.
However, for slinky evening wear, black, be it opaque or sheer, is still the right choice.
A real success story in the Charnos range is the ‘Luxury lace top hold up’ retailing at £4.99, designed for the 90's tight fitting Lycra outerwear, it gives a stocking look without the suspenders.
The seven denier hold-up achieves ultra sheer look with the durability of a 15 denier product.
The world of modelling is renowned for the glitz, glamour, travel and, above all, the money.
It can also be a hard, cruel world where your face and figure may not fit.
For some young hopefuls the promise of stardom and success outweighs the fear of failure.
DAVID WALMSLEY has been talking to Ulster's faces of the future.
Gold prize for teacher
A NORTH West teacher has won a Gold International Award after completing an arduous series of sporting and community tasks.
Martine Mulhern, a science teacher at St Mary's Secondary in the Creggan area of Derry, was presented with her award by Cardinal Cahal Daly at his Armagh residence.
As well as working towards the award herself, Mrs Mulhern has been instrumental in a setting up a successful International Award Scheme at St Mary's with an increasing number of pupils taking part in the bronze, silver and gold sections.
Traffic routes for NW 200
ALTERNATIVE arrangements for traffic in the north west will operate today to accommodate the annual North West 200 motorcycle race.
Circuit roads closed this morning and motorists travelling to Portrush from the Belfast and Ballymena direction should turn right at the end of the Ballymoney by-pass, and travel via Ballybogey and White Rocks.
All other traffic from this direction should continue on to Coleraine and use the ring road to Ballysally Roundabout.
An alternative route for traffic from the Belfast direction is: -M2, M22, Randalstown, Portglenone, Kilrea, Coleraine, then go on to Ballysally Roundabout using the ring road.
Traffic from the direction of County Londonderry should use the Sandalford Bridge before travelling to Ballysally Roundabout via the ring road at Coleraine.
From Ballysally Roundabout, traffic for Portstewart should use the Cromore Road, while motorists for coast road car parks at the Pits area, should use the main road to Portrush, turning left at Glenvale to avoid Metropole corner.
Roads inside the course are designated as ambulance routes, and no unauthorised vehicles will be permitted to wait on these carriageways.
Trek through African cliches
OFTEN the greatest crimes in literature are committed in the dust jackets of worthy novels with lofty political aspirations.
So when the jacket of Elleke Bohemer's book An Immaculate Figure (Bloomsbury £15.99) claims it is ‘a compelling and beautifully told parable about Africa, whiteness and beauty’ the reader's first reaction is to put it back on the shelf and move quickly on.
Overall that would be the right thing to do as the story of Rosandra, a model who gets caught up in three ponderous political intrigues, is very laboured indeed.
Much of the time the narrative is weighed down by the Boehemer's perceived seriousness of the subject matter — politics, race and violence in South Africa give new meaning to the phrase ‘well-worn themes’— so that the characters are simply vehicles for the points she wants to make.
However some of her descriptive passages are excellent and the book is on firmest ground in the sections in between Rosandra's accounts of her past.
These involve her talking to a Jem, a childhood admirer, and on these occasions Boehemer captures the awkwardness of two people who have not seen each other for years meeting up.
Unfortunately the bits in between are hard work and ultimately are not really worth the bother.
The reader's time and money would be better spent reading that classic novel you have been putting off for years.
Choosing right strategy
I BRING you today a hand from a recent teams match where the number of tricks made in the same final contract was eleven in one room, but only six in the other.
It's one of those nightmarish hands where you end up playing in a no trump contract with absolutely no guard in one of the suits, and the different approach taken by the respective declarers is highly instructive.
Sitting South, playing teams at games all, you hold KQ6 A74 AQ1073 J8.
You deal and open one diamond.
West passes and North responds one spade.
After a pass from East you rebid one no trump, showing a balanced 15 or 16.
West passes again and North rebids two no trumps, inviting you to bid game with a maximum.
East passes and you are delighted to bid game as you are both maximum and have good filler cards for partner's suit.
Three no trumps then gets passed out and West's opening lead is the ten of hearts.
The full hand is as follows:
Whilst thinking furiously about the play of the rest of the hand, you try the queen of hearts from dummy, which wins the first trick.
With clubs wide open to make the contract you're going to need to try and bring the diamonds in without loss.
Now, what layout of the cards would allow you to score five diamond tricks without loss?
Both missing honours onside would allow you to double finesse your way to success.
A singleton honour offside will also allow you to score five tricks if you pick it right.
At one table, declarer thought about the hand in a rather wider fashion.
One thing was almost certain — either the top club honours were split, or they were both with East.
Secondly, if West had not had a likely looking entry perhaps the opening lead would have been different.
So, being a player who loves the spectacular, at trick two South led the queen of diamonds from hand!
West gave that a long look but eventually ducked, deciding that East ‘must’ hold the ace of diamonds.
That turned out not to be so, as when South cashed the ace of diamonds at trick three down tumbled the king and jack, allowing declarer to take in total five diamond tricks, two heart tricks, and four spade tricks.
At the other table, North South contrived to get the contract played by North.
East then found the inspired opening lead of the jack of hearts.
Declarer obviously didn't appreciate the imminent danger of the club suit and ducked in dummy allowing West to win with the king.
Seeing no future in hearts West then found the club switch and East took the next six club tricks, leaving only six tricks for declarer to collect at the end.
This week's quiz
Sitting East, playing teams at favourable vulnerability, you hold 743 52 Q105 97532.
The opponents have a confident sounding auction to a six diamond contract, during which South showed at least a five and probably a six card diamond suit.
Partner's opening lead was the ace of spades, which won the trick, and partner then led a club, won in dummy.
The diamond holding in dummy is J763.
At trick three declarer leads the jack of diamonds from dummy, what would you play?
Quiz answer
The right answer is that you should play the five smoothly, without a telling hesitation.
Although it seems to go against the ‘golden rule’ of covering an honour with an honour in this situation it can't be right.
Declarer is marked with at least ace-king to five — or more likely six — in diamonds, and so if you cover the jack with the queen declarer will win with a top honour and West's discard will make your ten the subject of a marked finesse on the second round.
So if you play small smoothly declarer,(who is only missing queen, ten, five in the suit) is almost certain to play a top honour on the first round, after which the contract will be doomed to failure as you will make a trump trick by force.
Offiah misses debut
FURIOUS Martin Offiah will miss his planned debut game for new Australian club Eastern Suburbs.
A sell-out 40,000 crowd was expected to welcome the Wigan ace for tomorrow's home game against Balmain.
But a flight delay means he will not arrive in Sydney until Sunday morning.
Offiah was due to leave Heathrow Airport at 6.30pm last night but the airline announced at 10.30pm that the flight would be postponed until this morning.
His manager Alan McColm said: ‘Martin phoned me from the airport to say what had happened and he was furious.
‘Cathay Pacific waited until all the other airlines’ flights had left before announcing their flight was to be postponed until the next day.
‘Eastern Suburbs had planned a big welcome for Martin and the match with Balmain had sold out on the strength of it being his debut.
We are very disappointed and angry.
McColm is now demanding an apology, a full explanation and compensation from Cathay Pacific.
Offiah is contracted to play for Eastern Suburbs until August.
Siege strategists face a dilemma
Smash in and risk death, or negotiate
HANDLING siege scenarios such as the North Belfast Tiger's Bay stand-off this week poses huge operational problems for security force strategists.
In a strife-torn country where terrorist hijacking and hostage taking is a common occurrence, full-blown sieges have been few and far between.
But when they do arise, police and military planners are caught on the horns of a dangerous dilemma: do they smash in quickly and run the risk of death or injury?
Or do they bide their time and seek to defuse the situation by negotiations via a mediator?
In Copperfield Street on Monday afternoon, police were condemned by Unionist politicians and some clergy for storming the house — despite bringing a suspect out uninjured.
But the inherent danger in adopting the confrontational approach was illustrated in 1980 when an undercover SAS officer was brutally gunned down by IRA killers as he stormed a Belfast hide-out.
Captain Herbert Westmacott charged at an Antrim Road door with his anti-terror team and was mown down in a hail of M-60 machine-gun bullets.
Another soldier was slightly injured.
Within minutes, Army and police surrounded the building and sharp-shooters trained their weapons on the holed-up gang.
But the men pulled a white flag and later surrendered in the presence of a priest.
More recently, the ‘wait-and-see’ approach paid off for police when an armed gang took hostage the family of Dr Laurence Kennedy, a leading Conservative in the province.
Alerted by an electronic alarm at the politician's Holywood home, scores of armed RUC men quickly moved in and surrounded the house at My Lady's Mile.
The gang eventually gave up after a priest intervened.
A Roman Catholic clergymen also featured in a notorious siege involving Maze escapers Hugh Corey and Patrick McIntyre near Castlewellan in 1983.
They threw in the towel after police brought a parish priest to the scene near Dolly's Brae.
Security sources have revealed the final decision on how to approach a potentially volatile situation would hinge on a number of key factors.
They include:
How heavily armed the siege maker is.
Presence of hostages and where they are held.
The environment — urban or rural — and the risk of hostile reaction from locals.
Psychological analysis — how amenable would the siege maker be to mediation.
But, given the meticulous planning now undertaken by terrorists on both sides, the potential for operations going disastrously wrong means siege situations are likely to remain the exception to the rule.
Paradise setting for Open contest
Golf's stars set course for luxury
THE world-ranked number one golfer, Nick Faldo, and the other millionaire stars competing in the Carrolls Irish Open Championship this year, will be pampered even more than usual.
For they will be playing on a course designed by the great Jack Nicklaus in a stunningly beautiful setting.
And they will be accommodated in an 18th century country mansion which exudes an aura of old-world luxury.
The venue is Mount Juliet, a 1,500-acre estate in Co Kilkenny dating from the 14th century.
The current manor house dates from 1760.
A consortium of Irish businessmen acquired the walled estate in 1987 and have invested IR£20 million in developing a sportsman's paradise amid majestic woods and rolling parkland.
The centre-piece of the complex is an 18-hole championship golf course designed by Nicklaus — for a fee reputed to be IR£1 million.
Nicklaus made regular visits to oversee operations as the course was being carved out of the lush countryside.
To allow all-year-round golf, a 12-kilometre network of subsurface and land drains and 37 kilometres of pipework were laid.
The course was officially opened in July, 1991, when the ‘Golden Bear’ and the legendary Christy O'Connor played a match over the 7,083 par 72 course, hailed by the cognoscenti as one of the best parkland courses in Europe.
It will provide a suitable test for triple British Open champion, Faldo, and the likes of US Masters winners, Ian Woosnam and Bernhard Langer.
The water from two rivers which sweep through the estate was harnessed to provide the five lakes strategically placed around the course.
Water comes into play at six of the holes.
Additional hazards are provided by the 80 sand bunkers dotted along the manicured fairways and the magnificent greens.
There are plenty of other pursuits in this sportman's paradise, which will enable the golfers to ease the pressure of playing in a big tournament.
They include horse-riding along 16 miles of bridlepaths, or fishing for salmon and trout along the stretches of the River Nore and its tributary, the King's River.
A log fire in the entrance hall to the elegantly and tastefully refurbished manor house will welcome golfers after the rigours of the day.
They will be able to relax in leather-upholstered comfort in the stylish bar before repairing to the dining room to enjoy the finest of food from the estate's own farms.
After a good night's sleep in the spacious suites, they should be in an excellent frame of mind for the next day's play.
jack-cap
Erne hosts GPs
THE centre of attention next weekend will be the GP14 dinghy class with Lough Erne Yacht Club hosting the Heinekin British and Irish Inland championships.
Leading cross-Channel competitors will join the top names in Ireland and the championships will be the biggest ever sailing event on Lough Erne with the 100-strong expected entry beating the previous record of 80 Mirror class dinghies in 1983.
The Lough Erne Club, who previously hosted the Irish GP14 championships in 1982 and 1989, will be extending their usual hospitality combined with a high standard of race organisation.
There will be seven races in all with two on the Saturday, three on the Sunday and two final races on the Bank Holiday Monday.
The cross-Channel entry which could be as high as 40 boats will be led by two former World champions Richard Estaugh and Simon Relph though missing through injury will be the current World champions Mark and Paul Fekkes of East Antrim Boat Club Larne.
However the East Antrim Club will as usual have a strong representation on the water and making a return to competitive GP14 action on Lough Erne will be Curly Morris.
The top southern competitors have had the edge over the northerners in recent seasons and the two names to watch will be John Delap and Hugh Gill.
The Candy Castle Cup offshore meeting at Carrick Sailing Club finishes tomorrow and many of the boats taking part in the event will be heading for Scotland for next weekend's popular Scottish offshore series.
The Royal Ulster feeder race to the West of Scotland series is on Thursday.
The regatta season on Belfast Lough starts next Saturday with Cockle Island Boat Club of Groomsport holding their annual regatta.
Lord Mayor facing defeat
Ditty staring at defeat
BELFAST'S Lord Mayor Herbert Ditty was this afternoon staring defeat in the face as the City Hall vote counting reached its climax.
The veteran Shankill councillor was set to become the first outgoing Lord Mayor in Belfast's history not to be re-elected.
His demise was predicted by party colleagues who believed he was frequently in the news for all the wrong reasons.
These included his controversial and televised snub to his Dublin counterpart, Gay Mitchell, whom he referred to as a ‘foreigner’ and failed to wear his chain of office during their brief City Hall meeting.
And independent loyalist councillor Liz Seawright was also conceding defeat this afternoon, unlikely to receive enough transfers to hold her seat in the area.
Meanwhile, Ulster Unionist leader Jim Molyneaux today accused John Hume of being responsible for an increase in Sinn Fein 's vote in Belfast.
With a 10-strong team heading for the council chamber, Sinn Fein president Gerry Adams claimed they out-polled the SDLP in the city by some 9,000 votes.
‘We are not looking for domination, but equality,’ he said, again demanding that Sinn Fein must be included in political talks.
His colleagues broke open a champagne bottle inside the City Hall to celebrate.
Although the SDLP also managed to increase their Belfast seats by one, giving them eight councillors, a bitter row broke out over the meetings, which party leader Mr Hume has confirmed will continue with Mr Adams.
Mr Molyneaux, briefly visiting the City Hall count today, claimed the SDLP leader had increased Sinn Fein 's credibility by making his recent controversial joint statement with Mr Adams.
‘The increase in Sinn Fein 's fortunes was inevitable given that they had been given resuscitation by Mr Hume, as he always seems to do when their fortunes are low,’ he said.
Sinn Fein, including chairman Tom Hartley, won three seats in Lower Falls on the first count and were confident of taking a fourth seat in the area.
The SDLP's Alex Attwood held onto his seat in Upper Falls, with 1,000 votes more than the quota, while two Sinn Fein candidates, Alex Maskey and newcomer Una Gillespie were also elected.
Ulster Unionist talks negotiator Chris McGimpsey won his City Council debut on the second count today in Court area.
The biggest electoral upset came in Dungannon, where Ulster Unionist Ken Maginnis lost his seat and Sinn Fein grabbed two extra seats on the council, which has been a model for co-operation between the two traditions.
But the council retained its 11–11 balance between unionists and nationalists.
There was a shock for the SDLP in Newry and Mourne where it lost two seats, reducing its strength to 15.
The UUP gained one seat in the area, and veteran SDLP man Jim McCart, Northern Ireland's longest serving councillor, is struggling to retain his seat.
In Antrim, the UUP lost two seats, one to Sinn Fein 's Henry Cushinan, the other to Alliance's General Secretary, David Ford.
Unpopular Workers' Party veteran Tom French lost his seat in Craigavon, but party colleague Peter Smyth became a new entry to the council.
The Conservatives suffered the biggest reversal of fortunes losing two seats in its North Down power base.
Party leader Dr Laurence Kennedy had to wait until the sixth count before he was re-elected.
Dr Kennedy later admitted the party had paid the price for unpopular government policies.
In Belfast, five councillors lost their seats including Democratic Left leader Seamus Lynch and Alliance's Tom Campbell and Mark Long.
UUP councillor Margaret Clarke and Conservative Dorothy Dunlop were also out.
Gary McMichael, son of murdered UDA leader John McMichael, won a seat for the Ulster Democratic Party in Lisburn, but the party leader Ken Kerr lost his seat in Derry.
In Derry, newly-elected SDLP councillor Jim Clifford said today his daughter was lucky to be alive after a brick was thrown through the front window of the family home.
He said it missed her head by inches, while they watched election coverage on television last night.
Fallen heroes
THE fighting in North Africa ceased on May 12, 1943, when the German and Italian soldiers, ordered by their commanders to surrender, laid down their arms and marched in long columns, defeated but still proud, into years of captivity.
Defeat of the Axis troops in Tunisia marked in Churchill's words ‘the end of the beginning’ but for the enemy the beginning of the end and was indeed the turning point of the Second World War.
Remember 50 years on the many, many thousands of our soldiers who gave all so that the victory would be ours and now lie, forever young, row after row, line after line, cold in their far off desert graves.
Cambodia plea
DUE to the continuing uncertain future for the people of Cambodia I would like to suggest that those concerned write a letter to: The Rt Hon Alastair Goodlad MP, Minister of State, Foreign and Commonwealth Office, King Charles Street, London SW1A 2AH.
It could read something like this: It is with continued concern that I write to you about the suffering of the Cambodian people and put forward the following suggestions re where government aid should be concentrated.
a) Help with clearing land mines; b) Targeting rural poverty; c) Helping the Cambodian government to make the best use of aid and d) The UK should use its influence in the United Nations to ensure the fullest support for the move to peace and democracy in Cambodia, and specifically should call for the establishment of a Human Rights Rapporteur for Cambodia reporting directly to the United Nations Security Council.
All efforts possible must be made to prevent a ‘Return to Year Zero’.
JOHN D TONER Dundrum Road, Newcastle, Co Down.
Theory slammed
I WOULD like to comment on one of the points raised by ‘Inevitable’(Writeback, May 3).
The inference to be drawn from the first part of his letter is that once Roman Catholics are in a voting majority they will automatically vote for a United Ireland.
Let us assume for the sake of argument that Inevitable is correct.
The fundamental question that then has to be answered is, who pays the bills?
America, currently fighting the largest budget deficit in its history?
Unlikely.
Germany, one of the largest contributors to the EC struggling with the costs of its own unification?
Very doubtful.
The rest of the UK?
No chance.
Or what about the Irish Republic?
Don't make me laugh.
The simple truth is that if the British withdrew this country would become an economic wasteland and whether there is a Catholic voting majority at some point in the future or not there will not be a united Ireland as no one would want to pay the enormous costs involved.
It is high time a border poll was taken with all citizens of voting age here asked (a) their religion and (b) whether they want a united Ireland or not, to find out just how many Catholics really do want the British to leave.
OBSERVER Belfast.
By Tommy Jackson
Dismissed this week as Glentoran manager
Directors all have a short memory
TO SAY I was shattered at Glentoran's decision to dismiss me is an understatement.
And I was deeply shocked at the unanimous vote that brought it about.
I thought I had genuine friends at the Oval after six and a half years.
They all have short memories.
They took for granted all the hard work that my assistant, Billy McCullough and I put in over all those years.
The directors didn't work the long hours we did!
I could have done without the ‘vote of confidence’ the Board gave me a month ago…every football manager knows what that invariably means.
I read that 10 players had threatened to ask for transfers if I stayed on…they were supposed to be polled by telephone by some members of the Board.
I take that with a grain of salt.
It sound likes a cover-up to me.
I think the players would have been men enough to tell me to my face.
There has been criticism of my buying but most were hired in a crisis when I was down to eight fit men.
Some were only on a month's loan.
Maybe someone has already been lined up, though the post has been advertised.
But I'd be surprised if they hadn't a front-runner in mind, because there will be a lot of hard work to be done getting a replacement this summer.
I've agreed a settlement and I'm happy enough with it, because I had no contract.
Apparently it's in appreciation of my success at the club — and commitment to the job!
I'll miss football and the day-to-day involvement after over 30 years boy and man.
Monday brought a sad end to my long association with Glentoran Football Club.
But with luck I'll be back somewhere.
Football is in my blood.
I have a lot of thinking to do over the next couple of months.
In the meantime I'll relax with my fishing.
All the fish in the country will have to run for cover after what happened to me this week!
Bomb blasts Jenny's debut at Opera House
FILM star Jenny Seagrove will have to wait a while yet for her Grand Opera House debut.
She was due to open there on Monday in the Noel Coward comedy Present Laughter, with Tom Conti.
Then a bomb blast devastated the theatre and wiped away her smile of anticipation.
Before that, Jenny — long-time lover of top film producer Michael Winner — had talked enthusiastically about her joy at bringing the Forties play here.
Present Laughter would have made theatre history as the first production to go from Belfast into the West End.
Such has been the success of the piece on a short provincial tour, that it has been snapped up by The Globe in the centre of London's theatreland.
It plays Brighton the week after next, then Sheffield and after that heads straight to London to give Jenny her West End debut.
The six month run there will be costly for Jenny, who had to sacrifice the opportunity of a starring role in a film to stay with the play.
‘I can't say more than that,’ she told me.
‘It wouldn't be fair to the actress who eventually gets the part.
‘However, I'm thrilled to be going to the West End at last.
I was away from my stage roots for six years because of work in films.’
In Present Laughter, Jenny plays the role of Tom Conti's mistress — with a Russian accent.
‘That is the way Noel Coward had her in the original, set in 1947.
This production is set in 1951 and I am playing the mistress the way Coward intended when he wrote the comedy.’
The West End appearance is also a personal triumph for Conti, who directs Present Laughter as well as playing Gary Essendine, the womanising matinee idol.
Later this year Miss Seagrove will be seen here in city cinemas, starring in the film Miss Beatty's Children.
‘It's a sweet, uplifting story about an English girl at a mission in India in the Thirties.
I'm the girl from the mission, Miss Beatty, who is appalled at seeing little girls being sold as prostitutes.
‘She adopts them.
Everybody is going to love this film — I enjoyed making it.’
And Jenny revealed that almost as a compensation for having to choose between an important film part and the West End, a new movie is being written for her.
‘It's a love story, a big sweeping epic against a backdrop of politics.
Work will start on this one, once Present Laughter finishes in the West End.
Ticket refunds for Present Laughter can be collected from the Opera House booking office in Wellington Place.
THE price to be paid for petty crime in Ulster can be a high one — kneecappings and beatings by terrorists for ‘anti-social behaviour’ are common place.
Young and persistent offenders are usually better off being caught and dealt with by the RUC, than by the local ‘judge and jury’.
NIGEL GOULD has looked at one centre — currently under financial threat — which helps protect young delinquents from themselves.
Computer war
VIRGIN tycoon Richard Branson is moving into computers and could be set for a head-on clash with Amstrad chief Alan Sugar.
Branson will unveil his own range of personal computers in September at the Business Computer Show.
The Virgin PC, bundled with a mixture of business and games software, is likely to compete with market leader Amstrad.
Four British manufacturers are believed to be fighting for the contract to supply Virgin with machines.
Wall Street best lifts major firms
THE latest impressive inflation rate figures had no effect on the market which fluctuated six points either side of its overnight level.
By lunchtime the FTSE was 5.9 points down at 2810.
Industrial conglomerate BTR was boosted by its annual meeting yesterday and rose 2p to 592p.
International companies responded to Wall Street's record performance overnight.
ICI was 5p better at £12.65, Reuters shot ahead 17p to £12.93 while BT edged up 1p to 408p.
Bargain hunters were making their presence felt in the brewing sector after the falls of recent days.
Allied-Lyons went 6p on to 528p and Whitbread was 6p better at 474p.
Bass was the odd one out as investors again turned their backs following disappointing results earlier this week.
It lost 5p to 457p.
Wolverhampton & Dudley Breweries was strongly in demand after results today showed it had made record half-year profits.
The shares put on 7p to 530p.
Motor dealer Lex Service dipped 3p to 335p on news that it has sold most of its shares in US electronics distributor Arrow for 146.6m dollars (£94.4m).
Unilever was still in the doldrums over fears that some of its brands will suffer in price wars.
The Anglo-Dutch household products group lost 6p to 991p.
The oil sector was generally weaker.
BP fell a penny to 307p, Lasmo went 2p lower to 145p and Enterprise Oil eased 2p to 457p.
Burmah Castrol was the biggest casualty, shedding 13p to 690p.
Property group Brixton Estates proved an exception to the rule that companies asking shareholders for cash are marked down.
Its £100.7m rights issue to fund land purchases and development left the shares 8p stronger at 204p.
Wesley hopes to avoid the blues
YOU'D think that after a long, hard and highly successful season, Linfield goalkeeper Wesley Lamont would want to put his feet up.
Not a bit of it.
Next Saturday, the Blues' custodian is back between the posts again, taking on all comers.
Wesley is turning out for a ‘beat the keeper’ sideshow at a garden fete organised by Holy Trinity church on Belfast's Ballysillan Road (10.30am).
So now's your chance to put one past the man who conceded only 15 goals in 30 matches during Linfield's championship winning season.
I should add that any Man.
U. supporters who happen to be at the fete will have extra motivation for hitting the net behind Wesley.
Down in Ballymena, he is noted as his home town's most fervent Liverpool supporter…
Euro vote: Row over refusal to abstain
Defiant MP Hoey is sacked
SHADOW Minister Kate Hoey was sacked by Labour leader John Smith today after defying orders to abstain on the latest Maastricht Bill vote.
Ulster-born Ms Hoey, MP for Vauxhall, was among a group of Labour MPs who voted against the Bill's third reading in the Commons last night.
A statement from Mr Smith's office said he had asked Ms Hoey ‘to stand down’ from Labour's Shadow frontbench team covering the Citizen's Charter and Women's issues.
Ms Hoey is the first Labour frontbencher in the Commons to be sacked since Mr Smith replaced Neil Kinnock as party leader.
Lord Desai — an economic spokesman in the Lords — had to stand down earlier this month after controversial remarks about VAT, which went against Labour's policy.
Ms Hoey, who strengthened her majority at the last general election in Vauxhall, which she first won at a by-election, has also caused a stir over Northern Ireland policy.
She is one of the strongest advocates of the case for a Labour organisation to be set up in the province.
Best praises Pele after earning a black mark
ULSTER soccer bad boy George Best will tomorrow promote a Pele video — two weeks after dubbing the legendary Brazilian ‘a nigger’.
Best stunned the audience at a Belfast footballers' dinner with his racist outburst in an X-rated speech peppered with four-letter words.
But tomorrow he will be at the House of Commons with former Manchester United team-mate Denis Law, MP David Mellor and Labour left-winger Tony Banks for a debate aimed at promoting new Pele videos.
The panel will be asked to come up with the best all-time team on earth after viewing Pele's new six-part, 12-hour range of football films.
Guests walked out of a glittering gala in Belfast's Europa Hotel when Best said that Pele ‘wasn't bad for a nigger’.
And Irish Football League secretary Harry Wallace today expressed his disbelief at Best 's decision to promote the Pele videos.
‘We all agreed after the dinner that George was obviously under the influence of drink, but that does not excuse saying that the greatest footballer of all time ‘wasn't bad for a nigger’.
‘It will take some neck for him to now sit there and sing Pele's praises at this function.’
CINEMAS
A TRUE account of how ten young Uruguayan rugby players survived a plane crash high in the Andes — by eating the remains of some of the victims (15)— Cannon, Cineworld, Yorkgate.
Distinguished Gentleman, The
A CONMAN tricks his way into being elected to the US Congress and rakes in the bucks…until the troubles of a young constituent prick his conscience.
Eddie Murphy (15)— Yorkgate.
Groundhog Day
ROMANTIC comedy about an egotistical TV weatherman who gets caught in a time-warp and decides to paint the town red and indulge his secret fantasies.
Bill Murray, Andie McDowell (PG)— Cannon, Cineworld, Curzon, Strand, Yorkgate.
Indecent Proposal
A HAPPILY married couple find themselves on an emotional roller-coaster when a wealthy businessman offers 1m dollars to spend a night with the young wife.
Robert Redford, Demi Moore, Woody Harrelson (15)— Cannon, Cineworld, Curzon, Strand, Yorkgate.
Malcolm X
SPIKE Lee's story of a young prisoner in Boston who turns to extreme Islam and becomes the most powerful mouthpiece for black militants in 60s America.
Denzel Washington (15)— QFT1.
One False Move
THREE crooks head for Arkansas tailed by a trio of streetwise cops following a catalogue of drug-related murders in Los Angeles (18) Curzon, Yorkgate.
Reservoir Dogs
VIOLENT aftermath of a failed diamond robbery as the gang tries to track down the turncoat.
Harvey Keitel (18)— Cineworld, QFT2, Yorkgate.
Sommersby
ROMANTIC mystery set in the American Civil War.
A tough Southern youth returns from the front a changed man.
Richard Gere, Jodie Foster (12) Cannon, Cineworld, Curzon, Strand, Yorkgate.
Inquest told of search for policeman
AN RUC sergeant today told how police searched for a rogue officer after he shot dead three men in a Sinn Fein office.
The duty sergeant at Newtownabbey RUC station said he was told Const Allen Moore had launched the Falls Road attack on February 4 last year.
He said he searched the base for Moore and his BMW car but there was no trace.
Ballymena bachelor, Moore (24), was later found shot dead in his car at Ballinderry.
At the inquest into his death and those he killed the sergeant said he saw nothing in the dead officer to make him question his state of mind.
The inquest has heard the RUC man talked his way into the SF centre posing as a journalist and opened fire with a shotgun.
Three West Belfast men died in a hail of bullets.
They were Patrick Loughran (61) of Clonard Street, Joe McBride (40), of Riverdale Park Drive and Michael O'Dwyer (21), Linview Court.
At hearing.
A third child, aged only seven months, was lifted out to safety in a carry-cot.
Ferry ‘war’ pays off for P&O
THE on-going ferry price war is paying off for P&O who today claimed a massive 96pc rise in tourist vehicle trade on its Larne-Cairnryan route.
And Stena Sealink claimed that the total market had grown by a mammoth 39pc over the first four months of 1993 compared with the previous year.
A spokesman said ‘This is the most dramatic period in ferry travel between Northern Ireland and Scotland and the best time ever for the customer.’
‘This growth is dynamic and a result of all the competitive activity of all the ferry companies,’ he added.
P&O said that their tourist vehicle trade had rocketed to 45,680 in the first quarter compared to 24,000 in the same period last year.
Passenger figures show a 63pc rise (up to 173,015) and freight is up by 16pc (to 36,677 vehicles).
Spokesman Roger Donkin said that P&O had captured 33.2pc of the market for tourist vehicles — up 10pc — and the passenger share had gone up from 24 to 30pc.
‘We believe the very successful start to the year is the result of not only quality service, but also an extensive advertising and competitive promotional pricing policy.
‘This has resulted in a clear message from our customers that travelling with P&O is simply the best.’
Meanwhile, a spokesman for Stena Sealink, which carries twice as much as its competitors, P&O and SeaCat, admitted its car traffic was down by about 9pc for the first four months of 1993, with the total number of passengers also slightly down.
However, he stressed that the company was on budget and was confident of regaining lost ground thanks to new promotions.
‘The competition is all healthy for the industry,’ he said.
Eavan swings into last eight
BY JACK MAGOWAN
LEITRIM Cup-winner Eavan Higgins sailed to another confident win today in the Irish Ladies Golf Championship.
Rain was only a mild irritation to the sweet-swinging Cork girl, who reached the last eight at Royal Belfast by beating Dymphna Keenan, of Belvoir Park, 4 and 3.
Four short putts, one after the other, were crucial to a plucky Keenan and she missed them all.
Out in level-par (36) Higgins was then only one up, but took a firm grip on the match after her Downpatrick rival failed with a tantalising two-footer on the eleventh green.
‘I could hole nothing on the run home’ sighed Dymphna.
Notice to jurors
BELFAST Crown Court Jurors whose numbers are 1–75 and 226–301 inclusive should contact the Juries Office after 5pm this evening regarding Jury Service at Court No 1, Old Townhall Building, Victoria Street, on Monday.
IRA bomb's £6m price tag
Bomb's £6m price tag
THE cost of the devastation caused by the IRA's massive city centre bomb could be a staggering £6.5m, the Compensation Agency said today.
Scores of buildings including the Europa — Europe's most bombed hotel — and the Grand Opera House were badly damaged in the 1,000lb blast.
Today, as the massive clear-up operation got underway traders called for extra security measures including the installation of cameras.
But an RUC spokeswoman said: ‘Neither pedestrianisation nor security cameras are an answer in themselves, nor will they prevent further incidents.
‘All measures are kept under consideration in consultation with the many other agencies involved.’
The Compensation Agency today promised bombed businesses would not lose out.
It is understood it has budgeted for around £75m this year to deal with the terrorists bombing campaign.
The damage from yesterday's blast could top that in the 1,000lb van bomb at the Europa in December 1991 by around £1.5m.
Among the worst-hit buildings were:
Grand Opera House, which bore the main brunt of the blast.
Damage included one whole wall caving in.
The Europa Hotel, which lost every window and had other interior damage.
Estimated cost understood to be around £2m.
Crown Bar, where all the stained glass windows were blown in and a ceiling collapsed.
Damage is estimated at £100,000.
The Housing Executive's Belfast Headquarters — windows were shattered, doors blown in and shutters wrecked.
Damage estimated at £100,000.
Zeus Audio, extensive structural damage.
Owner George McCague lost a business in the IRA's bomb in Coleraine last November.
Estimated cost this time, £30,000.
Ulsterbus multi-million pound depot, damage estimated at £250,000.
A crisis meeting was being held today at the National Trust's Victorian Crown Bar opposite the Europa.
‘Loved’‘The ceiling which we think is the original is obviously irreplaceable,’ an architect said.
‘All the stained glass windows at the front of the bar were blown in by the blast.
This building is so very old and loved by everyone,’ he added.
Michael Williamson, the manager of the Europa Hotel, said that despite losing all windows in the blast, damage inside was possibly not as bad as that in the 1991 bomb.
Cancelled He said ‘Once again we will re-open in sections.
We hope to have the Harper's Bar open by tomorrow and the banqueting suite by the middle of next week.’
Neat look ahead
CURRENT fashion trends in glasses tend to favour the continental look with neater eye sizes, particularly in metal and metal/plastic frames to the fore.
A large selection from designers Nina Ricci, Lacoste, Benetton, Elce and Da Vince are available from Kevin Finan, Optician at Strand Road, Derry.
Kevin advises ‘When choosing frames don't forget about the many types of lenses available.
Lens designs can improve the cosmetic effect of your glasses, making them thinner, lighter, clearer and easier to clean.
’ He also points out that ‘Contact lenses can be availed of to alter your appearance.
With tinted lenses now suitable for many types of vision defect you can change the colour of your eyes to match your outfit.’
Garments from the high-class Edel MacBride fashion shop in Londonderry are to be exhibited in the United States.
The designer knitwear will go on show in Chicago next month at a trade show entitled ‘The look is Ireland’.
The Edel MacBride label is already familiar to Chicago with clothing being sold at a large department store in the city.
As well as strengthening this connection, it is hoped that other links can be made with US buyers during the trade show.
Designer knit-denim is this season's best-selling collection.
The popular merchandise includes items such as the Denver Fringe Jacket and the Colorado Duster Coat.
For further details on garments in the collection or postcards of the styles, customers are advised to contact the Edel MacBride shop in the Craft Village in Derry.
Pedalling to health
MICHAEL O'Neill started his cycle business at Main Street three years ago as a result of his own interest in cycling.
Now employing two people, this is the only one-stop bike shop in the area and has been built up into a thriving business as people have become more aware of the need for a healthy lifestyle.
O'Neill Cycles provides a very good after sales services with a ten-year guarantee and one-year parts guarantee.
There is a free collection and delivery service for repairs within ten miles.
The shop sells ladies bikes at unbeatable prices.
Full size bikes start from only £85.
O'Neills also stock a full range of biking accessories as well as cycle clothing and is a main agent for Peugeot, Kirk, Cadex, Giant and Viking.
O'Neill Cycles also hires bikes and stocks a range of exercise bikes.
The shop is open 9am to 6pm daily.
Easy way to party success
ENTERTAINING — whether a formal party or dinner for a few friends — is something which most people enjoy.
What better way to spend an evening or Sunday lunch than sitting down with congenial company and enjoying good food.
Until now this final result involved time and effort on the part of the host.
From shopping to chopping to cooking — it was all terribly hard work leaving many people too shattered to enjoy the fruits of their own labour!
But now help is at hand.
You don't have to spend hours trudging around shops and in the kitchen to produce a perfect meal, just call into Victoria at the Good Food Shop in the Craft Village, between Shipquay Street and Magazine Street.
There you will find Victoria ready to produce everything you need to impress your guests.
Whether planning a party, a wedding reception at home or something as informal as a barbecue, relax and let the experts take the strain, from as little as £3.50 a head.
McNeill key for Armagh
MARK McNeill has settled comfortably into the Armagh defence but regrets the fact that Mark Gallagher scored two late points for Fermanagh on Sunday last.
Killeavey player Mark had held the dangerous Gallagher in check up until then and now hopes to impose an even greater stranglehold on the stocky corner forward in the replay.
One of several players to have come into the Armagh side of late to join the more experienced brigade, Mark is following in the footsteps of two of Killeavey's most distinguished players, Gareth and Padraig O'Neill, both of whom have given great service to the county.
And whatever happens in the Ulster championship, Mark is hoping to help steer his club to the Armagh county title this year.
But for the moment he is determined to see Armagh get past the Ernesiders tomorrow — a match that is of crucial importance to both sides.
Today Mark joined his colleagues for a training session in Armagh during which fitness tests were carried out on Mark and John Grimley, Ciaran McGurk and Gerard Houlahan.
After a week of anxiety and uncertainty, manager Jim McCorry was keen to bolster morale within his squad.
The team had a get-together in an Armagh hotel following their training session when McCorry and his assistant John Morrison outlined their strategy for the game.
Needless to say, one of the points forcibly driven home was the necessity to curb the Fermanagh attack — and in particular Collie Curran and Colm McCreesh.
Air show will go on say angry organisers
ANGRY organisers of the International Air Show at Eglinton Airport in Londonderry, today advised people that the show would go on, despite bogus ‘cancelled’ stickers being placed over posters advertising the air extravaganza.
According to Jeff Brownhut, one of the masterminds behind the £75,000 air show, huge red ‘cancelled’ stickers have been used to cover posters in the Coleraine and Portrush areas.
Mr Brownhut said he had no idea why anyone should want to upset the show, which is expected to attract thousands of spectators from all over the province.
He also said he had received hundreds of enquiries from people in the North West, who had seen the posters and wanted to know why the show was not going ahead.
‘I don't know why anyone would do something like this,’ he said, ‘but the stickers are proper, professional ones, not just scrawled writing over the posters.
‘If people see these posters I would urge them to ignore them as the show is still going ahead.’
The colourful event includes a visit by a US Korean War Jet fighter, the T33 ‘Shooting Star’ and the famous Crunchie ‘Stand on Wing’Flying Circus.
Clean up your pet's act: plea
ULSTER'S dog owners were today urged to clean up their pet's act.
A ‘Scoop a Poop’ campaign, organised by Tidy Northern Ireland, is aimed at encouraging responsible dog ownership.
A number of local councils are taking part in the campaign, which is also running in the rest of the UK.
Peter McGaffin, director of Tidy Northern Ireland, said the campaign is an effective way of getting the message across to owners that they must clear up after their dogs.
‘That way everyone will benefit from cleaner streets, playing fields, parks and beaches.
‘The hope is that ‘poop scooping’ will become second nature to dog owners,’he said.
Dog faeces can cause 30 diseases in humans, the most serious of which is the worm infestation toxocariasis.
In Britain, one child a week goes blind in one eye from toxocariasis while a further one-in-seven may suffer stomach aches, pneumonia, liver disease and allergies such as asthma, according to surveys.
RUC rescue bridge man
A STRABANE man seen to fall into the River Mourne from the Mourne Bridge has been rescued by police.
The incident happened around 10pm last night and with the assistance of three members of the public the man was dragged to safety.
The man, suffering from a leg injury believed to have been caused by the fall, was taken to hospital for treatment.
Can't cope with grand children
I HAVE a daughter and stepdaughter who both have children.
I look after my stepdaughter's two children three afternoons a week but I can't stand it.
My husband had a stroke last year and needs peace and quiet.
The children come in, fling their things down, jump over furniture and I'm exhausted when they go.
I have stopped myself from saying anything as my daughter's children live round the corner and I have them to stay overnight and take them on a Saturday but they are no bother.
I can't worry my husband because he's not well and I don't want him to think I'd make any difference.
My own health is suffering and my daughter tells me to stop but I can see it causing a family row.
I'm at my wits end.
THIS is delicate.
It is easy to see why you are reluctant to say anything yet this stress is neither good for you or your husband.
In fact you sound as if you've hardly a minute to yourself between looking after the grandchildren and caring for your husband.
Perhaps you could say to both daughter and stepdaughter that you are finding it hard to cope with your husband and need to ease up on the child minding.
That way they could see you are treating them equally even though your daughter's children are less bother.
Let them know that you are always delighted to have them drop in but that it is the responsibility for having children on their own you find too much.
If they can realise and appreciate the demands made on you by your husband's incapacity they should reconsider the level of minding you have been doing.
Finding family life a chore
I THINK my family is in a mess!
Sometimes I can laugh it off but inside it gets me down.
The children fight a lot, won't do as they are told, I never get any time for myself and all I seem to do is to wash, clean and pick up after them.
My friends all seem to be organised but all I seem to do is scream at the children and be in a muddle.
My husband is very laid back and he says I shouldn't get into such a fuss.
I wish I could change.
YOU sound very dissatisfied and weighed down by all that is happening in your life.
Changing just one or two of the annoyances you mention could help you to feel more positive and give you confidence to tackle further change.
Decide on the changes you see as a priority.
For instance, you might decide to really need some time to yourself.
If you would find it impossible to think in terms of a whole morning begin with an hour or so.
Similarly you could decide to make your family more aware of some of your frustrations and what sort of ways they could help you.
Make your goals realistic and achievable.
If you achieve some betterment, give further thought to other things you want to alter.
We would be pleased to talk with you about how you would take some of the initial steps.
Confidential help for parents, the Parents Advice Centre, Room 1, Bryson House, 28, Bedford Street, Belfast BT2 7FE, tel (0232) 238800.
For Londonderry, tel (0504) 266663 or call at 18, Great James Street.
Irish army ‘union’ raps new vetting procedure
THE organisation representing rank and file members of the Republic's army was up in arms today over a new security vetting procedure.
The confidential document asked soldiers to state whether they or members of their families had any links with a wide range of illegal and political organisations.
The organisations listed on the circular are: The Provisional IRA, the Official IRA, Sinn Fein, Republican Sinn Fein , the INLA, the IRSP, the IPLO, the Communist Party, the Connolly Youth Movement and the Irish Militant Tendency.
It asked the troops whether they had ever been linked to a group who aimed to overthrow the authority of the State, or if they had any family members, friends or associates connected with such organisations.
Similar questions were asked about involvement in narcotics or whether they had any criminal record, or if they had any reason to suspect they could become vulnerable to coercion or blackmail.
The president of the troops' representative organisation, Denis Whelan, described the circular as a slur on the character of his members and he urged them not to sign it.
He said all members of the Defence Forces signed an oath when they joined pledging that they would not associate with illegal organisations and this new vetting measure was an insult to those who risked their lives in the fight against terrorism.
An army spokesman said that the security vetting of personnel was a normal procedure in all defence forces.
Labour council ‘spent millions unlawfully'
A LABOUR-controlled council spent millions of pounds unlawfully, a report said today.
Lambeth Council in south London was criticised at all levels over a ‘succession of failings’ in the district auditor's report prompted by allegations of irregular spending on highways contracts in 1991.
The report said that £20.2m was spent unlawfully on highways maintenance since 1988 as it was carried out by Lambeth Direct Labour Organisation (DLO) without being put out to competitive tender.
And if the work had been put out to tender, savings to the council might have been £5m, the report found.
The 90-page report by district auditor Paul Claydon concluded: ‘There has been a succession of failings touching on almost every directorate within the council.
‘They have included serious defects in the financial and administrative systems, and in the controls that should operate to guarantee probity in the council's financial affairs.’
Mr Claydon added: ‘Stewardship by both officers and members has been inadequate.’
The district auditor also drew attention to ‘the continuing delay in producing accounts, their poor quality and the adverse effect on the stewardship of public funds’.
It had been eight years since the council published its accounts on time.
And the authority's financial health remained ‘fragile’ with substantial arrears of income still due.
Patchwork poll
DESPITE a few surprises, due to local circumstances, the district council elections have produced little substantial change.
The electorate is still highly polarised, unionist versus nationalist, although determined optimists can find some straws to cling to.
As a barometer of political opinion and a verdict on the political talks, the results can be read any number of ways.
But it is no secret that the Government's hopes rested on a thumbs down for the DUP and Sinn Fein, both considered formidable obstacles on the road to a political accommodation.
Those hopes have been dashed as, with some exceptions, both parties succeeded in holding or strengthening their vote.
The DUP has a fresh mandate for boycotting talks, at least until Dublin deals with Articles 2 and 3 of its constitution.
Equally Sinn Fein can claim that talks which exclude them are undemocratic and useless.
On the positive side, the Ulster Unionists lost nothing by being involved in talks with the Irish Government — even in Dublin.
The SDLP vote has remained solid, showing that its electorate understood, and endorsed, the thinking behind the Hume-Adams meetings.
Meanwhile the centre ground has been re-occupied, in greater strength than ever, by the Alliance party.
The fragmentation caused by the entry in 1989 of the Conservatives — the real losers in the election — has been overcome, due to Tory government unpopularity.
Alliance's revival can be attributed to its vigorous, straight-from-the-shoulder leadership, articulating a progressive pro-union approach which is so lacking elsewhere.
Using its mandate, it can now press even harder the case for council power-sharing, even in Belfast.
It is always a mistake to read too much into local elections results, where local issues can predominate.
Sir Patrick Mayhew has certainly been dealt a difficult hand — made worse, in Dungannon and other areas west of the Bann, where there was widespread anger over the dismissal of charges against six soldiers in Coalisland.
The majority of votes, however, were cast for parties which do want some form of accommodation, if only on different terms.
The argument now is whether new talks should be on the failed three-strand basis, as favoured by the SDLP and the two governments, or on the Ulster Unionists' more modest twin-track approach, involving inter-party and inter-government talks.
Looking at the patchwork nature of the results, Sir Patrick may well decide that his proposals to give new talks ‘a sense of direction and focus’ would be better grounded in reality than continued wishful thinking.
The other face
SINN Fein councillors who return to their seats in local government next month should be asked one simple question: ‘Do you support the bombing of the Grand Opera House, the Europa Hotel and the Ulster Unionist Party headquarters?’
Their party president, Mr Gerry Adams, has already refused to give a straight reply, hiding behind a mist of prevarication.
He describes the injuries of 20 people in the explosion as ‘regrettable’ and argues that only an ‘inclusive peace process’will end the conflict.
That is not an answer.
Perhaps Mr Adams knows he has no answer.
His party stood in these elections pledging to fight the undoubted problems faced by many constituents.
No sooner had the last votes been cast than the IRA — fellow republicans — added to those problems.
The Glengall Street bomb was not just an attack on buildings.
It was part of a continuing campaign to undermine the fabric of the community.
Worst of all, it was a defiant denial of the very principle of democracy.
Jobs have been lost, at least temporarily.
Badly needed public funds will be spent to repair the damage.
Millions of pounds which should be spent on health, education and investment will be diverted merely to restore what had existed until the IRA struck.
The effects of the blast will be felt far beyond the city or the province.
SDLP leader Mr John Hume said that the first question he is asked by potential investors is: ‘Will we be safe in Northern Ireland?’
How can he, or anyone else, convince them that this is a province worth coming to?
He should make that point forcefully to Mr Adams the next time they meet.
Countering the destructive tactics of the IRA is difficult.
It is suggested that pedestrianisation of the city centre should be extended to prevent car and lorry bomb attacks on prestigious targets.
There are also calls for permanent security checkpoints in the area.
Both ideas have their merits, but the problem for the security forces is to strike the correct balance.
Too many restrictions could kill the commercial life of the area as surely as bombs.
As ever, the best answer to the terrorists is the determination of ordinary people to continue to defy their worst excesses.
Try Pal in Derby ‘semi’
BY ROBERT FENTON
FORGET the time recorded by Clydal Pal in the opening heats of the Ulster Derby (550) and give him some support in the first semi-final at Dunmore Stadium tomorrow night.
Owned and trained in Roscommon by Tom Clyne, the brindle clocked 31.45 secs, by far the slowest of the four first round heats.
But it was still an eye-catching performance, considering he received a very bumpy ride before powering home in the home-straight to win by length and a half.
Clydal was almost brought to a standstill approaching the home-turn, having received a might bump at the initial bend, but remained undeterred in his victory bid.
He faces tougher opponents this time, but has bundles of stamina and with a half decent run to the corner, can outstay Stormhill Echo who relished the inside last week to score comfortably by four lengths from Murlough Blue in 30.92 secs.
The other penultimate heat sees winners Express Tico and Miss Woolco in opposition.
The latter has just over a length in hand on the watch and one could not fault her smart performance last time from the trap three she occupies once again.
Registering 30.80, Davy McClenaghan's black bitch was always holding the staying-on Mineola Gift and she'll be hard to beat again if beating Express to the corner.
Tico, a winner from trap two last time (30.88), wears the blue sheet again and it promises to be an exciting buckle between the pair.
LATEST
THE Queen Mother was today said to be ‘comfortable’ and sleeping after a ‘minor’operation to have an obstruction removed from her throat.
She remains in Aberdeen Royal Infirmary under observation but a hospital spokesman could not say if she would remain there a second night.
See report — page 6
Two-horse Falls race
THE ballot paper battle between Sinn Fein and the SDLP in west Belfast today dominated the final lap of the district council elections.
Both parties were predicting victory in the fight for two Falls areas.
The SDLP's Alex Attwood accused Sinn Fein of personation and said he was confident his party's vote would hold.
But Sinn Fein 's Mairtin O Muilleoir firmly rejected the claims and accused the SDLP of making excuses.
He predicted that his party would pick up a fourth seat in the Lower Falls and hold its three seats in Upper Falls — giving it a total of 10 seats on the council.
The outgoing Lord Mayor, Ulster Unionist Herbert Ditty, was today anxiously waiting to see if he could hang on to his threatened seat in the Court electoral area.
If he loses, he will be the first sitting mayor in Belfast's history not to be re-elected.
No major change in the strength of all the main constitutional parties is expected once counting ends tonight.
More than 400 district council seats have been filled and although support for Alliance has improved, the anticipated fall in support for the DUP did not materialise.
The Ulster Unionist vote is down slightly overall, but the DUP has held its support, reversing the trend of two previous council elections which saw its vote slipping.
The biggest upset was in Dungannon where Ulster Unionist Ken Maginnis lost his seat and Sinn Fein grabbed two extra seats on the council which has been a model for co-operation between the two traditions.
The Conservatives suffered the biggest reversal of fortunes losing two seats in their North Down power base.
Party leader Dr Laurence Kennedy had to wait until the sixth count before he was re-elected.
Dr Kennedy later admitted the party had paid the price of unpopular government policies.
In Belfast, five councillors lost their seats including Democratic Left leader Seamus Lynch and Alliance's Tom Campbell and Mark Long.
A bitterly disappointed Mr Campbell blamed his defeat on transfers from Sinn Fein to the SDLP, and claimed the recent joint statement by John Hume and Gerry Adams had helped ‘solidify’ the nationalist vote.
‘It is a sad reflection on the direction Irish nationalism is going in,’ he said.
UUP councillor Margaret Clarke lost her seat in Pottinger and the Conservative Dorothy Dunlop, a former Ulster Unionist, is also out.
Limavady Borough Council is now under nationalist control and the Unionist casualty was the sitting mayor, Councillor Norman Reynolds.
There had been fears about his position after he met namesake Albert Reynolds, the Eire Premier, a few weeks ago.
He was unseated by a young health promotions officer, Des Lowry, for the SDLP who gained first preference votes of 753, just seven short of the quota, with sitting SDLP councillor Barry Doherty going through on the first count.
And the DUP lost its stronghold in Ballymena, dropping two seats and giving the Ulster Unionists overall control for the first time in 15 years.
Gary McMichael, son of murdered UDA leader John McMichael, won a seat for the Ulster Democratic Party in Lisburn, but party leader Ken Kerr lost his seat in Derry.
Alliance scored a notable success in Ards, gaining two of the extra three seats in the area, to bring their representation up to six.
They also picked up two of the three extra seats on Castlereagh council, boosting their party strength to five.
The SDLP has polled well in rural areas, including Londonderry, a city now politically divided by the River Foyle.
For the first time Unionists may have no representative on the predominantly Catholic West Bank.
In Cookstown, the SDLP's Patsy McGlone won his first council seat as did Mrs Anne McCrea, wife of DUP MP the Rev William McCrea.
Controversial priest Fr Pat Buckley was also among the losers, losing his seat to another independent, Robert Lindsay Mason, who stood as a 1990s candidate, advocating more rave parties for young people.
SAILING
‘Ruffians’ spree
THE Candy Castle Cup weekend at Carrickfergus Sailing Club will attract over 30 racing yachts for two races tomorrow and one round the Lough race on Sunday.
The Ruffian Class will compete for the Lipton Cup and there will be racing for Channel Classes 1, 2 and 3 and PY Cruisers.
In the Channel 1 class the leading boats from last weekend's Beaufort Dyke Off-shore Race should feature strongly including the J Class Jacana owned by Maurice Flowers of Ballyholme Yacht Club, the race-winner and Roy Hamilton's Commanche Raider from Carrick Sailing Club who took second place last weekend.
ROWING
Wary, Webb back
BELFAST Rowing Club are the only Ulster club travelling to Limerick Regatta at O'Brien's Bridge with their Seniors, Novices and Womens' crews all competing.
Their Senior Eight face Cork, Lee/Shannon composite and Galway in a straight final and will benefit from the return of Dawson Wray and David Webb both recovered from back injuries.
The experienced Colin Dickson continues to fill in, this time for Chris Allen who is exam-bound.
After an injury-affected row at Queen's Regatta when they finished third, BRC will be looking to lift the magnificent Shannon Rowing Club Challenge Cup won by Queen's University 20 years ago with their main opposition coming from Galway.
Kenya beckons
THE road towards a place in the Ireland squad for the ICC Trophy — a World Cup qualifier — in Kenya next winter, takes a tentative first step with the opening matches in the First Trust senior inter-pros next Saturday, Sunday and Monday.
Of course, there is the current international season to be taken into account first, starting against Scotland at Eglinton next month, but the major attention focuses on developing a winning combination for that all-important sojourn to Kenya.
And it's the inter-pros which provide the initial rung on that ladder, with nine matches in the NCU area over those three days.
Champions North-West stood head and shoulders above the rest last year, the only side to remain unbeaten and with the same squad available, will take all the beating once again.
The two McBrines, James and Junior dominated the batting averages while paceman Gareth Love headed the bowling analysis.
They are unlikely to give up their title easily and should make a winning start against Munster at Ballymena's Eaton Park on Saturday.
But hopes of seeing Dublin-born Leicestershire batman Justin Benson in action for Munster have evaporated as he is tied up with Leicestershire's Second XI next Thursday and Friday in the hope of being selected for Leicestershire's three-day match against Australia.
The Irish selectors were keen to see him play in the inter-pro series in his bid for a place in the Irish side.
Benson declared his availability for this year's Ireland matches and the Irish selectors deemed he should play for Munster, the weakest of the six inter-pro teams.
But one man who will be the focus of attention of the three days, is former international and North opening bowler Hugh Milling.
He is in the Ulster Town side for their opening fixture against North Leinster at Newforge, having spent the last five years in Liverpool.
Milling was last capped back in 1988 but with Waringstown's Alan Nelson already ruled out of the Kenya trip due to work commitments, must feature strongly in the selectors' minds.
The Town teams also sees a return for Alan Neil of Cliftonville who missed all of last year with a broken hand and North skipper Peter Law.
Neil topped the scoring three years ago when the competition was also hosted by the NCU.
North are also represented by Irish wicket-keeper Paul Jackson, opening bowler Simon Redpath and new recruit Alan Donnelly, formerly with Lurgan and Armagh.
He gets his first taste of inter-pro cricket.
Ulster Country had a disappointing time up in the North-West last year and will be anxious to regain the trophy last won in 1990.
Skippered by Alan Waite (Waringstown), they certainly look formidable on paper, although missing Shane Harrison and Brian Sturgeon for Saturday's opener against South Leinster at Pollock Park.
South Leinster are also strong, having seven internationals in their side, so it should be quite a contest at Lurgan.
TABLE TENNIS
Juniors head off to Scotland
EIGHT Ulster Junior stars will travel to Perth in Scotland as part of the Irish Schools squad in the emerging Six Nation event with England favourites to win in all six categories.
The Ulster representation in the 30 player squad is small but team leader, Eddie Limberg, Ulster Branch Chairman, has another mission in mind at Perth when he will present a bid for the 1993 Schools event to come to Ulster.
Jonathan Cowan and Ryan Glass are selected for the U18 boys side.
Forward Trust Grand Prix champion, Dominic McGreevy will lead the Irish Cadet side.
Jana Cairns is Ulster's sole player on the U18 Girls side, Anne Glover will captain the U16 side which includes Joanne Hutton from Cookstown and Kathryn Kirk, while Michelle McGreevy and Andrea Glover head up the Irish Cadet girls side.
Trial opens on party-goer killing
AN AMERICAN accused of killing a Japanese exchange student who knocked on the wrong door while looking for a Halloween party said he acted in self-defence when his trial opened yesterday.
Lawyer Lewis Unglesby told the jury at Baton Rouge, Louisiana, at Rodney Peairs' trial for manslaughter, that his client had been a victim of crimes before and, fearing for his safety, had acted in self-defence when Yoshihiro Hattori continued to approach him after being warned to stop.
Authorities said 16-year-old Hattori was shot outside Peairs' home after he and a friend, Webb Haymaker, knocked on Peairs' front door while looking for a costume party being held in the same street.
Richardson jumps ahead
STEVE Richardson birdied three of his first six holes to take the outright lead at 10 under par in the second round of the Lancia Martini Italian Open at Modena today.
Richardson began one shot behind the three overnight leaders, New Zealander Frank Nobilo, Argentinian Jose Coceres and Stephen Bennett of Grimsby, who were eight under and all late starters today.
David Gilford, winner of the Moroccan and Portuguese Opens earlier this year, shot two birdies in his first six holes to go to nine under, one off the lead.
Stocks soar as China approves Hong Kong deals
HONG Kong stocks hit record highs today after China endorsed three business contracts valid past the colony's 1997 return to China, allowing a long-delayed cable television project to go ahead.
As the third round of Sino-British talks got under way in Peking on the handover, the blue chip Hang Seng Index rose more than 100 points.
Investors were expressing relief about a partial solution to the contracts issue, which has become entangled in the row between China and Britain over Hong Kong's political future.
Profit takers then moved in but the Hang Seng still closed the morning up 68.76 points at 7,187.72, comfortably above the previous best set earlier this week.
News after the market closed yesterday that China had approved a franchise for local conglomerate Wharf Holdings to set up a cable television network came as a shot in the arm for a market worried for months by the contracts issue.
At an informal meeting of the Sino-British Joint Liaison Group, China also approved a 15-year extension to a licence for local utility Hongkong Electric which expires at the end of 1993, and gave the go-ahead for a landfill project.
At the height of the Sino-British row last December, shares crashed.
The third round of talks go on tomorrow and Sunday.
Brixton raises investment cash
PROPERTY group Brixton Estates today called on shareholders for £100.7m to help buy and develop land as the market picks up.
The company, which is raising the money in a two-for-five rights issue at 155p a share, said attractive opportunities to increase investments were in sight with tenant demand increasing.
It said Clerical Medical & General Life Assurance and Royal Insurance, which between them own 37.4pc of Brixton's existing shares, had undertaken to take up their rights to the new issue in full.
The company plans to concentrate on Britain, Germany and Belgium — the areas expected to be among the first to benefit from a turnaround in the property sector, especially in industrial and office buildings.
Distant drums ‘too close for comfort'
A GRANDMOTHER had her record player seized after annoying neighbours by playing Jim Reeves records for up to 18 hours a day, a court was told.
The sound of not-so-distant drums brought disharmony to Trinidad Crescent, Poole, Dorset, in what an environmental health officer said was one of the worst cases of noise pollution he had dealt with in 12 years.
Eventually, environmental health officers seized Mary Carruthers' stereo system and speakers after a petition from neighbours.
Residents told Poole County Court that Mrs Carruthers (55), played deafening music and sang along with the tunes, forcing one neighbour to flee to friends in Coventry.
The court heard allegations that Mrs Carruthers, her two sons and friends were involved in rowdiness, fighting and drunkenness.
Assistant recorder Martin Axtell imposed a suspended possession order, saying Mrs Carruthers could not play music in her flat for two years or she would be evicted.
He banned her from having anyone to stay overnight, having friends around after 9pm and from causing any nuisance to her neighbours.
Neighbour Linda Moore told the court she often went to Coventry to escape the sound of Jim Reeves, whose hits in the 1960s included Distant Drums, It Hurts So Much and I Love You Because.
‘The noise was unbearable, it would go on day and night.
Sometimes it would start first thing in the morning and go on until the early hours the next day,’ she said.
Andy proves so handy in the end
ARSENAL'S Andy Linighan was today being hailed as an overnight folk hero after defying a suspected broken nose and a fractured finger to deliver the FA Cup to Highbury in true ‘Boys' Own’ fashion.
The man, once derided and jeered by Arsenal fans, earned instant immortality with the latest of late goals in a 2–1 replay win to finally end the interminable Wembley saga and break the hearts of luckless Sheffield Wednesday.
And Linighan's teammates, astonished by his courage in heading home the winner in the dying seconds of extra-time while suffering two serious injuries, reckoned it was a just reward for the defender who has battled so long to rid himself of the ‘million pound misfit’ tag.
‘Andy used to tell me that he ought to be called ‘Boo Linighan’ because boos were all he seemed to get from our fans — but he'll deservedly be a hero now,’beamed captain Tony Adams after becoming the first man ever to lift both the League and FA Cups in the same season.
Not even Adams could believe that Linighan, felled and battered by a 19th minute elbow in the face from Wednesday's Mark Bright, would be the man to provide perhaps the most fantastic finish to a four-hour saga which had been marked mostly by wretched mediocrity.
With extra time looking certain to end in a second 1–1 stalemate and dog-tired players steeling themselves for the dreaded first Cup final penalty shoot-out, the 30-year-old soared to head a Paul Merson corner into and out of Chris Woods' hands.
‘I got good contact but it was straight at Chris,’ recalled Linighan.
‘I thought he'd saved it at first and was turning to run back to defend when it popped out and over the line.
Talk about perfect timing I couldn't believe it.’
Linighan, who will be examined again today to see whether his nose is actually broken, had played for 100 minutes in great discomfort after Bright's dreadful challenge but joked: ‘You get used to taking knocks like that I'm a Hartlepool lad.’
Linigan's goal later left the forlorn Chris Waddle and his Wednesday mates in tears as Wembley became a sea of red-and-white just as it had been after the same Coca-Cola Cup scoreline a month earlier.
It had been Footballer of the Year Waddle who had resurrected the Owls' hopes with a 68th minute equaliser after Ian Wright's 30th goal of the season 12 minutes before half-time had been just reward for Arsenal's early domination.
Yet, just as in last month's encounter when Steve Morrow struck the decisive blow, it was not the much-heralded superstars but an unsung stalwart who proved the match winner.
Wright was another wounded hero.
Needing pain-killing injections in his injured big toe before the game, he brilliantly latched on to Alan Smith's neat flick to slot home his fourth Cup final goal but required more treatment at half-time after suffering an ankle injury.
Eventually, he was forced to hobble off nine minutes from time though he reported that he should be fit for England's looming World Cup campaign.
As for his replacement David O'Leary, the evening marked ‘a fairy tale ending to a fairy tale week.’
After 20 years of stalwart service, it also marked the perfect end to a great Highbury career though the Irishman was keeping mum about a possible move to West Ham.
Queen Mother sees top specialist
THE Queen Mother's consultant was today deciding whether she should spend a second night in the hospital where she was taken with a throat problem.
Dr Peter Brunt was seeing the Queen Mother this morning, when he would determine how long she would remain in Aberdeen Royal Infirmary.
The consultation comes after a night during which calls from well wishers flooded the hospital switchboard, said a spokesman.
‘We were receiving calls from all parts of the country and I had a call from one lady in Washington DC in the early hours of this morning.
‘She said she was a real fan, and loved the Royal Family, and asked if her best regards could be passed on,’ he said.
The Queen Mother, who will be 93 in August, was taken to hospital last night from her Birkhall holiday home near Balmoral Castle.
Clarence House said she was in ‘very little distress’ and was not thought to be in any danger, and her admission was purely precautionary.
Buckingham Palace said the Queen Mother was suffering a ‘slight tightening of the throat’.
The Queen, who is due to visit Balmoral in the next few weeks, was immediately informed of her mother's condition.
It was at first assumed that the Queen Mother would leave the hospital early this morning, but this now appeared unlikely.
One possibility was that Dr Brunt might want to conduct a ‘swallow test’— a test of her swallowing function — by X-ray.
Dr Brunt, the Queen's doctor in Aberdeen, treated her in 1986 after the fishbone scare.
Air crash bodies found in Colombia
RESCUERS on foot reached the mountain crash site of a Colombian jetliner and recovered 36 bodies, radio networks reported.
All 132 aboard the plane were killed.
The team of civil defence and Red Cross workers struggled to the site in northwest Colombia after gusty winds and clouds prevented air search helicopters from landing.
Helicopters would try to airlift the bodies out today, RCN and Caracol radio networks said.
Police General Carlos Pulido told Caracol radio that Wednesday's crash site was in an area so inaccessible that the site may have to be declared a cemetery.
Bodies hung from trees, Pulido told RCN.
Panamanian authorities said passengers included 77 Colombians, 29 Panamanians, two Nicaraguans, two Peruvians, two Germans, an Argentine, a Japanese and an Austrian.
The others were not identified by nationality.
A second jet disaster was narrowly averted in Bogota on Thursday.
Reports said a SAM 727 had just touched down at El Dorado international airport when an Air France Boeing 747 came roaring over it and landed ahead on the same runway.
RCN said the SAM pilot had to stop so suddenly that luggage came flying out of overhead compartments.
It's fame, at last, for the band waiting in the wings
IT'S a long long time from May to September…
Or from September to May in the case of Mark Kelly and his band Acoustic Shoe.
But tonight on the Gerry Anderson television show will make it worth the wait.
Acoustic Shoe will play in front of the cameras at last after 29 weeks of twiddling their thumbs as would be stand-ins who were never needed.
Every week since last September when the chat show season began Mark and his band — Eugene Glenn, Brian Skeffington, Ciara Harrison and Hugh Faloona are the others — have waited in the wings in case a guest celebrity didn't turn up.
‘But they always arrived dead on time so we never got on,’ said Mr Kelly.
But tonight Acoustic Shoe are star guests in their own right.
‘It's their reward after showing so much patience since last autumn,’ said Gerry Anderson.
‘And they are a really talented band.’
Newry club lay on Dutch treat
WORLD Cup hockey gold medallists Floris Jan Bovelander and Taco van der Honoret will fly into the province from Holland later today.
They will be here for tomorrow's challenge game between Newry Select and the Irish international team, as part of the Newry club's official opening of their new £400,000 synthetic pitch.
The Dutch duo are truly world class players, and they will be joined by three of Great Britain's Seoul Olympic gold medal winning team — prolific striker Sean Kerly, current England captain John Shaw, and Holywood defender Stephen Martin — for the big occasion.
Bovelander wears the unofficial tag of being the sport's top penalty corner exponent — no goalkeeper likes to face his thunderous shots — but in the game between Ireland and Holland earlier this month, it was van der Honoret who took the strikes and ended up with a hat-trick.
Newry defender Errol Lutton, called into the 20-strong Irish training panel earlier this week, has a chance to impress coach Cees Koppelaar, but it's not clear yet whether he will line out for Ireland or for his club!
The Newry celebrations start this evening with a special dinner at the Mourne Country Hotel, and after the entertainment in the marquees (2–15pm) and the unveiling of the plaque on Saturday afternoon, the Wild Geese sky-diving team will land with the match-ball in time for the 3pm start.
All doctors together are John Alderdice, Alliance Party, with his wife Joan (centre), and Tom Campbell's wife Paula after being returned for Victoria.
Ulster Unionist candidate in Castlereagh West, John Taylor, keeps a check on results with his radio and pocket calculator.
Sandy Spence of the DUP, who has served 16 years as Mayor of Ballymena.
Drug hope for treating brain disease
A BREAKTHROUGH in research could lead to a drug that would prevent and even reverse the symptoms of Parkinson's disease, say American scientists.
‘We have discovered something that could have a significant impact in treating Parkinson's,’ said Frank Collins, vice president of neuro-science for Synergen Inc.
Parkinson's disease is a degenerative brain disorder that causes tremors and muscle rigidity among other symptoms.
Currently there are no permanently effective treatments for the disease, one of whose victims is boxing legend Muhammad Ali.
Scientists at Synergen, based in Boulder, Colorado, have isolated and cloned nerve growth factor that spurs cells specifically affected by Parkinson's to sprout new neural branches without seeming to affect nearby, unrelated nerve cells.
The scientists report in today's issue of the journal Science that, in laboratory culture experiments, cells treated with the new nerve growth factor stimulated extensive growth of new neural branches in as little as seven days.
Collins warned that while the company has initiated trials with rodents and primates, clinical trials will not be conducted for some time.
Dr Paul Maestrone, scientific and medical affairs director for the American Parkinson Disease Association, said he considered any findings ‘very preliminary’ until testing has been done in humans.
If successful, the new drug would have certain advantages over a controversial experimental treatment that involves transplanting nerve cells from aborted human foetuses.
One problem with the potential new treatment, however, is that it could not be administered in a pill form because it involves molecules that are too big to be delivered to the brain through the blood.
Unless and until scientists come up with a better way, the drug would probably have be administered by a catheter permanently inserted into the brain, a method currently used in treatments for inoperable brain cancer.
Such a treatment would still be a significant advance.
Current drugs can slow the disease but eventually lose their effectiveness.
Power-sharing plea
ULSTER Unionist MP Ken Maginnis today hoped that the responsibility-sharing policy pioneered in Dungannon Council will continue — despite his future absence.
Mr Maginnis's 12 years as a councillor ended when he advised voters to give their first preferences to his two party colleagues.
They were elected, but not the MP.
‘It left me as the sweeper,’ he said.
‘I put myself forward not expecting to win, but available to pick up an extra seat if it was there.’
The use of tactical voting means Mr Maginnis remains as Fermanagh and South Tyrone MP.
The balance of Dungannon, despite two Sinn Fein gains, remains 11–11 between Unionists and nationalists.
Sinn Fein councillor Francie Molloy described Dungannon's responsibility-sharing policy as ‘a total farce’.
But Mr Maginnis said the Ulster Unionist councillors were meeting him, as local MP, and constituency officers to examine its future.
He commented: ‘We will look very carefully at how the future affairs of the council need to be conducted, given the advent of five Sinn Fein members as against three.
‘I'd hope that constitutional councillors in Dungannon would display the same principle as previously, in preventing Sinn Fein from dictating the pace.
‘It will create problems, but hopefully not insurmountable ones.
We will hear from other councillors — the SDLP and independents — how they want to run the council.’
Piggott's gloomy chapter
LESTER Piggott has been hailed the hero over and times champion jockey might wish to forget yesterday's Goodwood ride on red-hot favourite Pharly Story.
Piggott, 57, found himself in all sorts of trouble on Martin Pipe's 6–4 shot, who came from way back to take third place in the SIS Live Action Claiming Stakes won by Sarah-Clare.
Held up in rear by Piggott, Pharly Story was left with a stiff task as the leaders quickened the pace turning for home.
The jockey reported to a stern-faced Chester Barnes, Pipe's assistant, that the horse did not pick up as he expected.
‘It was not vintage Piggott,’ Barnes said.
PAT Eddery rode a 136–1 treble at Goodwood yesterday, recording his 200th career winner on the Sussex track.
Eddery's first success was Mrs Hauksbee, but he admitted: ‘To be honest I don't remember anything about that first one, but I've been lucky to ride lots of winners in good races here.’
The Irishman won on Mick Channon's Royal Ascot-bound Rohita and Cheveux Mitchell and the Michael Stoute-trained Ajalan.
ROHITA looked special after blasting clear in the final furlong for a three-lengths win in the Payne and Gunter Fillies Stakes at Goodwood and it may take a good one to stop her in the Queen Mary Stakes at Royal Ascot.
Channon rates his winner highly and said: ‘She is the best two-year-old I've had by far.
She's a professional and does everything right.
Not bad for a 8,400 guineas buy.’
Wolverhampton blow turf fixtures on the Flat this season.
Jockey Club inspectors and course management agreed that the track was unfit after a trial gallop yesterday.
Richard Muddle, Wolverhampton managing director, said: ‘The horses were struggling on it and were not happy with the undulations.
The track is much sharper than the old turf course.
‘We decided that in the interests of safety it would have been unwise to stage Flat racing on the track.’
Most of the fixtures are likely to be switched to the turf at sister track Southwell, though some will have to be staged elsewhere.
The problem arose because the old turf track has been closed to allow work on a new all-weather circuit.
The course wanted to stage this season's Flat fixtures on the jumping course.
Fatherland hopeful
LESTER Piggott's chances of renewing his famous Derby partnership with Vincent O'Brien increased yesterday as Fatherland was reported to be making good progress from injury.
A foot abscess had cast doubts on the colt's participation in the Epsom Classic on Wednesday week.
But a spokeswoman for O'Brien said: ‘Everything is now going well with the horse.’
However, O'Brien, winner of the Derby six times, is unlike to make up his mind until next week.
THE French-trained Enjoy Plan blew his opportunity to beaten two and a half lengths, by Sin Kiang in the Group Three Prix La Force at Longchamp yesterday.
Ladbrokes had quoted Francois Boutin's colt at 40–1 but have now taken him out of their list.
BACKERS are plunging on Oaks contender Yawl undeterred by trainer Barry Hills's warning that she may miss the fillies' Classic.
She was cut to 5–1 second favourite (from 7s) by William Hill yesterday after the bookmaking firm had taken ‘buckets of cash’, according to spokesman David Hood.
Yawl ran an excellent Oaks trial in Wednesday's Tripleprint Lupe Stakes at Goodwood, rallying bravely to go down by a head to Gisarne.
‘Barry wants to see how she has taken the race and I don't think he will make his mind up until next week,’ said owner-breeder Dick Hollingsworth.
Just deserts
MARK Prescott paid tribute to two of his loyal workforce following Just You Dare's emphatic victory in the 3d ‘New Carlisle’ Envelope Handicap at Newcastle yesterday.
‘The credit normally goes to the trainer on these occasions,’ said Prescott.
‘But in the case of Just You Dare it belongs to Cyril Murphy, the horse's lad, and my long serving work-rider-cum-jockey Colin Nutter.’
Just You Dare used to be ‘a very free horse last year’ according to the Newmarket-based handler.
‘But Cyril and Colin are both expert at holding pullers,’ he added.
‘They spent all last winter getting the horse to switch off and he has been more relaxed with each race this season.’
Keenans leave for secret honeymoon
FORMER Beirut hostage Brian Keenan and his beautiful blonde wife, Audrey Doyle, set off today for a secret honeymoon destination.
The blissfully happy couple had been married quietly at the registry office in Dublin on Wednesday afternoon and yesterday they received a special blessing from a Catholic priest at a secluded hotel in the Wicklow Mountains.
Later they hosted a reception for 75 guests in idyllic surroundings.
As the champagne flowed, music was supplied by members of the traditional Irish group, the Chieftains.
The guests included another former Beirut hostage, journalist John McCarthy, and Mr Keenan's two sisters, Elaine Spence and Brenda Gilham, who travelled from their homes in Belfast.
From early morning the hotel was besieged by television crews, newspaper photographers and reporters.
But a combination on gardai and security men ensured that the Keenans and their guests enjoyed the privacy they craved.
A written request for a brief photocall from the media, who were not allowed up the 100-yard driveway to the hotel, was conveyed by a garda to Mr Keenan.
He responded thus: ‘All our lives are points of departure and arrival.
The creative impulse in us demands it.
It is only important that we choose to make our departure into meaning and new life.
‘What greater joy than to find a loving companion?
The arrival point is then assured.
On this day we have both embraced a new beginning.
Something wonderful has happened.
‘In this landscape so wondrous, a tingling anticipation embraces us and we run in delight to receive it.’
They eventually agreed to walk down the driveway and pose for pictures.
The bride, who fell in love with the former lecturer, as she helped nurse him back to health after his four-year ordeal as a captive, was radiant in a full-length, ivory raw silk dress, with a slit up the side.
Her long blonde tresses were partially covered with a simple headband, a floral coronet and a chiffon train.
Mr Keenan, looking fit and tanned, wore a blue-grey suit.
ULSTER
Free helpline for hay fever sufferers
HAY fever sufferers in the province can get up to date information from a free helpline.
The Clarity Line will give daily pollen count details for the whole of the UK, including Northern Ireland.
The freephone number, which is available 24 hours a day, seven days a week, is 0800 556610.
ROSSCARBERRY
Drugs seized
A MAN was being questioned by gardai today in connection with a drugs haul in Co Cork.
A party of gardai and customs officers swooped on the scenic seaside village of Rosscarberry at dawn today to make the seizure.
They found 125 kilos of cannabis — with a street value of IR£1.25m — buried on the beach.
A Garda spokesman said he believed that the drugs had originated in north Africa and had been brought ashore from a yacht.
This was the latest in a series of drugs hauls in Co Cork.
CABRAGH
Ammunition find
THE security forces have made an arms find in the Cabragh area of Dungannon.
During a planned search last night a joint police/Army patrol found 13 rounds of assorted ammunition and a detonator attached to 15 feet of single core hidden in a hedge.
LURGAN
Water supply cut
LURGAN residents may lose their water supply for a time on Sunday due to essential maintenance work.
North Street, Ulster Street, William Street and the town centre are most likely to be affected between 9am and 6pm but other areas may see a reduction in water pressure.
Garden advice
GREEN FINGERED enthusiasts can get professional advice on how their gardens grow this Sunday at a special open day in Castlereagh.
The Beechvale Nursery on the Gransha Road will be open from 11am to 5pm with experts on hand to help with any queries.
House design praise
ECONOMY Minister Robert Atkins has praised the Housing Executive on winning a Royal Institute of British Architects award for a project at Newtownbreda.
Speaking at it's annual conference in Newcastle, Co Down, he said it was real evidence of customer satisfaction.
New arrival: Welcome aboard son is the message from SDLP former Mayor Mary Bradley to newly-elected son-in-law Martin Bradley.
Also pictured is Annie Gallagher, who did not seek re-election.
ARE YOU environmentally friendly?
Do you care about the area you live and play in?
Would you like to do something locally to make a visible improvement?
If so, this week Civic Trust is organising BT Environment Week, when adults and children everywhere are encouraged to tackle a practical project and brighten up the places where they live, work or spend leisure time.
The everyday household products we use are also of vital importance to maintain a ‘green’ lifestyle.
Some companies, such as Amway, manufacturers of the world's first biodegradable household cleaning product, LOC (Liquid Organic Cleaner), have been committed for many years to environmentally sound principles in the formulation, manufacture, packaging and distribution of their products.
For instance, many of Amway's products, such as fabric softener, bleach and window cleaner, are highly concentrated so that less packaging is required.
But don't just take their word for it.
Take this opportunity to try Amyway's products and see how they really do stand up to the products you have used for years.
All you have to do to win one of our 15 packs of Amway household cleaning products, is enter our competition and help clean up the environment as well as the house!
Study the questions below, circle the correct answer, fill in your coupon and post it to: Amway Environment Competition, P.O. Box 111, Belfast BT1 1EP, to arrive by May 26, 1993.
1) –How long does BT Environment Week last?
Is it three days, seven days or ten days?
2) –In what year was Amway founded?
Was it 1859, 1949 or 1959?.
3) –What is the name of Amway's biodegradable cleaner?
Is it SOC, BIO or LOC?
Support group for families
A SELF-support group, set up to help family and friends of compulsive gamblers is holding weekly meetings in Carnhill Resource Centre.
The meetings are held every Sunday night at 8.15pm and anyone, whose life is touched by gambling is invited to come along.
Summer studying
SCHOOLCHILDREN in the North West are being offered the chance to create their own art on computers during novel ‘computer camps’ this summer in the Magee and Coleraine campuses of the University of Ulster.
The week-long camps are sponsored by Digital Equipment Company, and are open to students aged from 14 to 17 years to give them practical experience of the computer applications they will come across when they take up their careers.
The scheme is run by the Faculty of Informations at the University of Ulster in conjunction with Nistro, the Northern Ireland Science and Technology Regional Organisation.
Using computer equipment supplied by Digital, the students will design their own ‘pop art’ by scanning in images and pictures which can be manipulated on screen.
AMERICAN FOOTBALL
Spartans fall at the finish
LAST year, when the Dublin Tornadoes played the Belfast Spartans, the Tornadoes went 13–0 up in the first two minutes of the game before the Spartans fought back to win 16–13.
This year the Tornadoes again went 13–0 up in the first two minutes.
Simon Cruise returned the opening kick the entire length of the field for the first Touchdown.
The Spartans offence then fumbled the ball and seconds later running back Eric Okatu went in for the Tornadoes' second T.D.
The Spartans however maintained their composure and with only seconds remaining in the first half were rewarded with a T.D.
of their own when quarterback Billy Boyd threw the ball to tight end John Addie.
With only 20 seconds remaining Q.B.
Boyd took the ball in from the one yard line to reduce the Tornadoes lead to one point.
Spartans Coach Ernie Milford was then faced with a tough decision — kick a one point conversion to tie the game or try a more difficult two point conversion to win.
The Spartans went for two points only to see the attempt fail and the score remained 13–12.
Tomorrow the Spartans travel to Allen Park in Antrim for a match with the Antrim Bulldogs (3.0pm).
Both teams have lost their first game so a win tomorrow is vital if they want to have a realistic chance of making the play-offs.
‘Saviours’ medal parade
LIFE-SAVING may not be the most glamorous part of swimming, but its value to society is supreme.
It's one thing being able to break the minute barrier for 100 metres freestyle but quite another to have the courage and know-how to rescue someone in distress.
The Stead sisters from Fortwilliam would know what I mean.
Laura, an accountant, has just won the Ulster ladies' individual life-saving title for the fourth year running, while Karen is in the ambulance service and plays a key role as secretary of Ireland's No.1 club in the RLSS — Southend.
It was in the Queen's Pool that Laura and 18-year-old Paul Smith led Southend to a clean sweep of all the championships.
There were 18 medals at stake there, and this Grove-based club took twelve of them, proof again of how well their top talent is coached and motivated.
Young Smith, an engineering student at the College of Technology, was a first-time winner and now represents the Province at the National championships in Dublin in October.
If successful there, he'll be sent at Ireland's expense to the British championships in Coventry a month later.
Southend swimmers meet two nights a week (Tuesday and Friday) for training and tuition.
‘Our membership spans all ages, and we focus a lot on teaching basic water safety, rescue, and life-saving drills,’ says Karen Stead.
‘First it's bronze medallion standards; then you go on to achieve merit and distinction awards.
Children learn fast and can't wait to move up the ladder.
They usually do that at the age of 14.’
Aquatic initiative, resuscitation and first aid, line throwing and swim and tow…it's in all four disciplines that marks are given in competition, and Smith and Miss Stead weren't the only medal-winners to catch the eye at Queen's.
Declan Mullan and Chris Quinn took the boys' title, and Nikki Harrison and her partner, Orla McGrath, were the top girls.
All four have still to reach their 16th birthday.
Best Juniors were John Quinn and Sean Mullan (boys) and Anne McCall and Southend clubmate Orla Camplissan (girls).
Lisburn's big day
THE best of swimming's budding young racers take the plunge in the Lisburn Pool next Saturday with three hotly competitive sessions in another Coca Cola Novice gala.
It's the fifth year of a meet that hosts, as usual, over 1,000 entries and goes on non-stop for most of nine hours.
‘This is where it all begins for the pick of our minnows,’ says Keith Buchanan.
‘The Madine's, Johnston's and Brown's all took their baptism in competition like this, and we're always hoping to discover someone a little special.’
Inishowen in Co Donegal is among nearly 20 clubs sending swimmers to Lisburn, where the action begins with the youngest age group (10's and under) at 9–30am.
Laugh a minute foray into the absurd
THE delightfully ridiculous Right Size Theatre Company is back in town with its latest foray into the absurd.
‘Penny Dreadful’, which plays at the Old Museum Arts Centre until tomorrow night, is the company's homage to the film thriller.
Sean Foley's story of scorched earth and blazing passions is sprinkled with a generous dose of comedy, so that even the blackest moments raise a laugh.
A woman batters her husband to death with a coffee pot which she forever after keeps in her shopping bag.
A lonely jailer places desperate advertisements for a wife.
A convicted criminal concocts a life of innocence in order to ensnare the woman he loves.
Micheline Vandepoel is a treat to watch as Rosa, the coffee pot lady.
Alternating between wide-eyed bewilderment and shaking grief, she endeavours to put her past behind her, and set up home for her new love.
She and Henry (Stephan Kreiss), cavort like young lovers, chasing each other round the kitchen table, while outside, in the desert, danger lurks.
Robert Thirtle is bored bachelor Richard, stuck minding the fort while everyone else is having fun; looking for love while guarding a lunatic prisoner.
When his letter of release comes, he sees happiness beckon just over the horizon.
The Right Size have the ability of turning the mundane into the extraordinary.
As this thriller unfolds, the combination of comedy and poignancy keeps audiences guessing.
Using mime, slapstick and choreographed movement, the trio perform impeccably in front of a Hockneyesque backdrop of desert brilliance, to the accompaniment of a wonderful soundtrack, cicados and all.
It's a laugh a minute, with little pools of sadness under foot.
As Henry sees his love slip away, and Rosa feels her past creep up behind her, Richard senses revenge is near.
But it's all too late, and all that's left is the heat shimmering on the sand.
May fair fun events
THE annual fun weekend organised by the Resource Centre, Carnhill, will this year take place over the last weekend in May.
A full range of events are being organised including a barbecue, gymnastics exhibition, penalty kick competition, cake sale and fairground attractions.
In addition, local theatre company Stage Beyond will provide street theatre, storytelling and face painting.
But there is always room for more and the Managing Director of the Resource Centre, Sr Anna Doherty would like to hear from any individuals, groups, clubs or organisations interested in organising an event or contributing anything to the general fun of the weekend.
Top win to host honour
DERRY will this year host the Glor na nGael prize-giving presentation after winning first place in a competition to promote Irish in the community.
Delegates from 165 local committees have been invited to attend as have other local and national dignitaries.
The prizes will be presented by Pat ‘The Cope’ Gallagher.
The presentation ceremony will take place this Saturday at the Guildhall at 4pm.
Beforehand there will be a historical walk around the city, a street theatre show and an ecumenical service.
A celebration ceili will round off the day's entertainments.
On Sunday there will be a concelebrated Mass at 12.30pm.
Just like dad!
BELFAST motor cycle dealer Ernie Coates holds a race record — he's the only man ever to lap the Isle of Man TT course at over 100mph on a solo machine as well as on a sidecar outfit.
Back in the late seventies Ernie was a regular in the Island and he achieved his ‘ton’ on the Lightweight class but he also rode as passenger for his brother Wallace as they too put up a three figure lap.
Quite an achievement but Ernie would put all that to one side if his 18-year-old son Mark could get to the top as a racer — although Mark gives every indication that he will stick with the short circuits and avoid the roads.
An apprentice fitter for the Harbour Commissioners, Mark has burst through showing tremendous talent this season and already there are some who are nominating him as a future British 125cc champion.
Well, it won't be this year for the competition is intense but there's no doubt in my mind that if he sticks at it young Coates will eventually get to the top.
Tomorrow he takes in a further round of 125cc British championship at Donington Park and after his ninth spot in the Supercup at a wet Oulton last weekend he'll be one of the leading contenders.
But the disappointment as far as Mark is concerned is the British Superteen championship in which he was hoping to ride a 400cc Yamaha.
‘We had informed the ACU of our plans and were told there was no objection’, Ernie told me, ‘but then we received news that Mark would not be accepted for the Superteen because he didn't have a restricted licence and he had also scored points in the previous year's British championship.
‘This was at Brands Hatch last autumn where Mark was fourth.
Personally I feel they are being a bit bureaucratic for Mark is, a genuine teenager and that's what the championship is for, but what can you do?’
Ernie said.
‘I'm hoping to get him a 400cc deal for the British championships and perhaps he'll be able to ride the Jim Moodie bike after all.
The plan was to let him ride Dave Leach's 400cc machine in the first round of the Superteens last weekend and then move on to Moodie's Yamaha for the Scot is only riding it at the North West and the TT.
Hopefully we'll get something sorted out.’
Young Coates meanwhile will be concentrating on the 125cc class on a Honda sponsored by Norton Insurance from Dublin and provided by importer Coates Sen.
Already he has looked something special in our 125cc races and has notched doubles at Bishopscourt and Aghadowey but more than that he was third in the 125cc Euro round at Mondello so he is heading the right way.
Let's hope he goes on to greater things.
Town saddles up for mane event
FOR three days this week the small town of Fintona, in Tyrone, will play host to the Ecclesville International Horse Show.
And according to show director Liz Pottie interest and enthusiasm for the event, which runs from Thursday to Saturday, have never been greater.
Top equestrian stars representing Britain, Switzerland, the Phillipines and Ireland are expected to attend and will compete for prize money totalling £12,000.
The first day is confined to national classes, all sponsored by Guinesss Northern Ireland.
On Friday and Saturday there will be national jumping for horses and ponies, with four international classes staged over the two days.
Major events include the Ecclesville International Derby, the Inn on the Park Royal Arms Derby Trail and the P & O European Ferries Derby.
The show will come to a close with the Scotts Feeds Inter Hunt Team chase.
Treaty go-ahead: Battle with Thatcher looms
Major is poised for showdown
JOHN MAJOR today headed for a tough showdown with his predecessor Baroness Thatcher after MPs gave him the go-ahead to ratify the Maastricht Treaty.
Mr Major won a decisive Commons majority for the ratification Bill, despite another Tory rebellion in the year-long battle with his party's Euro-sceptics to steer the measure through to law.
Both Unionist leaders James Molyneaux and the Rev Ian Paisley, Upper Bann MP David Trimble and East Londonderry MP William Ross, joined 41 Tories and 66 Labour rebels in a last-ditch act of defiance.
Biggest revolt
Labour MPs defied party orders to abstain, but the end of the debate marked the biggest revolt so far by Conservative MPs in the marathon saga of the Bill's passage through the Commons.
All other Northern Ireland MPs, preoccupied with the continuing council poll count, were absent.
The Government secured the Bill's third reading by 292 votes to 112, a majority of 180.
But Ministers' fear that, as the Bill prepares to enter the House of Lords next week, attempts by arch Euro-sceptics Baroness Thatcher and Lord Tebbit to carry on the fight will fuel a damaging Tory rift.
Since the Lords are unelected and MPs have already voted to reject the call for a referendum, the issue could provoke a direct clash between Mr Major and his predecessor.
But Government business managers are cautiously confident that the Bill will return unscathed to the Commons, allowing it to reach the Statute Book by early August.
Leaders of the Tory rebels claimed some comfort from last night's vote, pointing out that less than half the Commons — 292 — voted for the Treaty after more than 12 months of wrangling.
A final inconsequential debate on the Social Chapter will take place in the Commons once the Bill has received Royal Assent.
ULSTER Farmers' Union president Robert McCloy has welcomed comments in a report from the House of Commons Agriculture Committee criticising the Government for advancing justifications for the cuts of up to 27pc in Hill Livestock Compensatory Allowance payments on breeding sheep in the severely disadvantaged areas.
Mr McCloy said he was disappointed with the committee's suggestion that the decision to cut support to hill farmers was tenable in purely economic terms.
Sextuplets born: One-a-minute delivery
Sixfold joy for mother
A DELIGHTED woman has given birth to healthy sextuplets, seven years after she and her husband first tried to have a baby.
Mrs Jean Vince (29) was said to be recovering at St James's Hospital, Leeds and husband Jan (36)‘hasn't touched base’ since the five girls and a boy were all born healthy, weighing between 2lb 12oz and 1lb 6oz.
They were 11 weeks premature and were delivered by caesarian section in just six minutes on Wednesday night.
Mrs Vince and her computer analyst husband, from Grimsby, Humberside, have visited their babies in the neonatal unit.
They have named the smallest baby Katy.
All six, who are receiving artificial ventilation, were in a stable condition, said a hospital spokesman.
‘They are all healthy and all stable, although it is early days yet,’ said the spokesman.
Dr Simon Newell, in charge of the neonatal unit, said the couple had been trying for a baby for seven years and Mrs Vince had been undergoing fertility treatment for five years.
‘They are both over the moon.
It has been sheer delight for them.
I don't think the father can come to terms with it.
He hasn't touched base since the birth,’ said Dr Newell.
He told a news conference: ‘I am very happy with their progress so far and I think they will continue to do well over the next few days.
‘The first week or 10 days is a critical time, but they all have a good chance of survival.
They were all born perfectly formed.’
Montgomery ‘blossom'
THE County Armagh Apple Blossom pipe band championships were held in the Rugby Grounds, Armagh last Saturday amidst sunshine and hailstones.
In spite of the weather conditions 50 bands, travelled to compete at the first outdoor competition of the new season.
It was a closely fought battle between North and South in Grade 1, when the World champions, Field Marshal Montgomery, just edged into victory by 3/4 point over St Laurence O'Toole from Dublin.
The new drum corps of McNeillstown scored their first success of the season by winning best drums with the band gaining third overall placing.
The Marching and Deportment trophy was won by the pipes and drums of the RUC.
These top four bands will be rivals again next week when they compete at the European championships in Falkirk, Scotland.
Ravara Pipe Band carried on from where they left off last season by winning both piping and drumming in Grade Two.
Playing in the biggest entry of the day in Grade Three, Ballynahinch Pipe Band with Pipe Major Ian Jess, had 2 3/4 points to spare to take first place.
Bready Drum Corps from County Londonderry won Best Drums and Best Bass Drum.
Travelling the whole way from New Ross, Southern Ireland, paid off for Arklow Pipe Band, who won top honours in Grade 4A.
Best Drums was won by Frank Rainey Memorial from Drumaness.
Bangor Caledonia Band with Pipe Major J Griffiths, one of the youngest bands in the arena, once again won first in piping and best overall drums in Grade 4B.
Two well known piping adjudicators have announced their retirement from active service on the adjudicators' panel.
Pipe Major John K McAllister is stepping down after 45 years service and Pipe Major George McFetridge after 35 years.
Although earning a well deserved rest, both of these men will continue their interest and support of the pipe band movement.
Fifty years drumming and still going strong is legendary figure John Rea from Saintfield Pipe Band, who is still much in demand as a leading Irish and Scottish adjudicator.
Reminiscing recently with his old friend Jimmy Scullion, the father of World champion Andy Scullion, the two men have almost a century of drumming knowledge between them.
Grade 1 — 1, Field Marshal Montgomery; 2, St Laurence O'Toole; 3, McNeillstown; Best Corps of Drums, McNeillstown.
Grade 2 — 1, Ravara; 2, Monkstown Mossley; 3, Tamlaght O'Crilly; 4, Cullybackey Caledonia; Best Corps of Drums, Ravara.
Grade 3 — 1, Ballynahinch; 2, Ringaskiddy and District; 3, Basllycoan; 4, Syerla; Best Corps of Drums, Bready; Best Bass Drum, Bready.
Grade 4A — 1, Arklow; 2, SGT Walker Memorial ‘A’; 3, Glassdrummond; 4, Monkstown Mossley School; Best Corps of Drums, Frank Rainey Memorial.
Grade 4B — 1, Bangor Caledonia; 2, Downpatrick Hospital; 3, Killedeas; 4, St Johns Tralee; Best Corps of Drums, Bangor Caledonia.
Novice Juvenile drum majors — 1, G Waugh; 2, P Graham; 3, J McLaughlin; 4, W Elvin; 5, P Braiden.
Juvenile 11–14 yrs drum majors — 1, J Elvin; 2, L Spence; 3, A Sproule; 4, J Ussher; 5, C Chambers.
Junior 15–18 yrs drum majors — 1, D McBride; 2, D Doherty; 3, G Patterson.
Senior drum majors — 1, H McBride; 2, M Robinson; 3, R Young; 4, I Young; 5, J Gourley.
Marching and Deportment — Grade 1, RUC; Grade 2, Monkstown Mossley; Grade 3, Gortacare; Grade 4A, Cottown; Grade 4B, Tullywhisker.
Gospel star's dash for bike race
GOSPEL singer Michael Card will play the Assembly Hall in Belfast tonight — and still be up at the crack of dawn tomorrow to dash up the Antrim Coast for the North West 200.
American Card re-arranged his tour dates so that his Ulster visit coincided with the motor bike race.
‘I'm a biking fanatic,’ he said today.
‘I missed out on the North West 200 last year.
This time my whole UK tour has been shaped around the event.’
Card, a Hebrew scholar, has dedicated the song Valley of Dry Bones from his new album to Belfast.
‘I have been coming here for nine years and have a feel for the heart of the city and this song says it all.’
AMATEUR RADIO
RNARS ready for ‘call-up’
WORLDWIDE amateur radio activity during next week's Battle of the Atlantic Commemoration will be spearheaded by the Royal Naval Amateur Radio Society's HMS Plymouth Group members throughout the event — from Saturday next until Sunday, May 30.
Among operators taking part the Irish area will be ably (and most appropriately!) represented by Mike (EI5DJ) North Dublin and David (GI0PCU) Co Down, who will travel across on Wednesday next.
Three stations will be st up, GB2PLY (aboard Plymouth), with G0SJW alongside at the East Float, Birkenhead, and GB5OWA at Liverpool's Albert Dock across the river.
Operation will be on all bands (including WARC) and VHF two-metres.
Packet traffic can also be sent to the Group via GTB7CRG.
Special commemorative QSLs for all contacts made.
Coleraine…
The local Coleraine and District give advance details of their forthcoming ‘Radio Expo’ to be held on Sunday, August 29 next, from 12 noon, the venue being the Lodge Hotel there.
Further info from Raymond (G14MFM) QTHR.
Time for a new outlook
THOSE who feel Lord Arran has little to say about agriculture must now change their opinion of the Minister who has also to look after health matters in the province.
His profile at this year's Balmoral Show was as prominent as any of his predecessors in recent years.
He took the opportunity to make the occasion a sound platform for what he wanted to say about food, farming and cross-border co-operation.
He told us how he had been encouraged by the responses received from the agri-food industry ever since he threw out a challenge to it some four months ago.
But he underlined sharply too, how discouraged and disappointed he had been at the inability of his own Department of Agriculture and the Department of Economic Development to sort out their roles in the scheme of things.
No doubt, having aired these feelings well in public he will be exerting pressure behind the scenes to ensure there is no further need to repeat them in open audience.
He had some home truths to impart and presented them without fear or favour.
The recent acquisition of Leckpatrick by Cork-based Golden Vale demonstrated the world would not stand still until the dairy industry was restructured, he told us.
And with his attention still focused on the Republic his Lordship spoke in glowing terms of the ‘exciting and imaginative report’, the South's Agriculture Minister Joe Walsh and his team had prepared on their food industry.
But it didn't end there.
Lord Arran told how Minister Walsh, who spent over a day at the show, and he would be considering the extent to which they can co-operate mutually to the advantage of all involved in the food and drink industry in Ireland.
Lord Arran exhorted businessmen to be more risk-taking and more entrepreneurial.
Minister Walsh said he could have given an identical speech.
He encouraged us also to get more involved in equine matters, considering the potential Ireland had for such things.
His words made one recall the excellent reports compiled by Ian Paisley's Assembly Agriculture Committee and Sheila Magee about the industry in the mid 1980s.
They also posed a question in my mind about what had been done in the interim.
Maybe some will answer it.
Denis leads by ex ample
INTERNATIONAL flanker Denis McBride is in for a busy 12 months following his confirmation as Malone skipper for a second consecutive season.
It's almost certain that he will also be asked to continue as Ulster captain, and with the likelihood of Michael Bradley standing down as Ireland's leader, McBride could be the man to step into the Munsterman's boots.
But it will be the pre-Christmas period that will keep McBride on his toes.
As well as defending their inter-pro crown, Ulster take on board games against Edinburgh and South of Scotland in the new link-up with the Scottish Districts sides; Ireland play a full international against Romania, and, of course, with Malone not having a coach, as yet , he will be a key member of the Gibson Park set-up as they re-enter the All Ireland league after a brief absence.
But apart from his rugby chores, McBride will be stretching his maternal instincts to the limit — He's gearing himself to be a father for the first time in October.
But coping with stress seems to be a dawdle for McBride.
The 28-year-old mechanical engineer's fortunes took a dramatic twist midway through last season when his career hit rock bottom.
Initially ousted from both the Ulster and Ireland back-row after the return of Gordon Hamilton, McBride returned to lead Ulster to their ninth successive inter-provincial title when his great rival had a recurrence of a back injury.
And while he was busily playing a little-heralded starring role for Ireland in their early Five Nations games against Scotland and France, McBride was slowly guiding Malone to the Digital Ulster Senior League title.
But McBride really shot into the headlines in March and April.
Two Man of the Match performances in the victories over Wales and England were just a foretaste of what followed.
McBride was given the job of captaining Ireland's World Cup Sevens side at Murrayfield.
As outsiders they weren't given a chance, but with McBride leading by example, they reached the semi-final stage only to be pushed out by an injury-time winning try by Australia.
Even in the off-season, McBride has little time to relax.
As a standby for the Lions tour to New Zealand, he still puts in a training stint every day and can be seen regularly burning up the track at Mary P or pumping iron in the Queen's PE centre.
McBride was honoured at his club this week during their annual AGM, where former First XV prop Randal Bell was installed as President with Bill Walsh as his senior vice President, and Willie Henry as his junior vice President.
Owner in court after tarantula's hairy trip
BORIS the tarantula was today recovering in an animal hospital after a hairy experience in a post box which landed his owner in court.
Hapless Boris was rescued from the post box at Birmingham International airport after his owner, Ingrid Hannaway, from Listress, Co Derry, got into a tangle with staff.
Mrs Hannaway wanted to take Boris home in her handbag, but airport staff were having none of it.
So she popped him into a plastic box, wrapped it in brown paper and posted it.
Horrified security staff rushed to Boris's aid and saved him from what would have been a hairy trip home.
Yesterday, magistrates in Solihull were told by a Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals inspector that Boris would have suffered a lingering and painful death if his journey in the post had gone ahead.
Mrs Hannaway, in a letter to the court, pleaded guilty to a charge of abandoning the animal in a way likely to cause it unnecessary suffering.
A warrant was issued for her to attend court on a date to be fixed when sentence will be passed.
Mrs Hannaway faces a fine of up to £2,000 or six months in prison and a disqualification from keeping animals.
A STRABANE mum organising a parents' boycott of the new 11-plus exam has been threatened with legal action by the Department of Education.
Joanne McGonagle, of Carlton Drive, admits obtaining the controversial specimen paper for the new tests and distributing about 60 copies to parents.
But the Department has told her to destroy all copies, return the original and warned that further action could be taken if she ignores the advice.
But the mother of three, whose son Anthony is due to take the tests in English, Maths and Science in the autumn, said: ‘They don't scare me.
‘They have admitted some of the questions on this paper are too difficult for the children and in Anthony's school, where they took it as a class test, I believe the highest marks were about 40 or 42pc.’
Mrs McGonagle has called a public meeting in the town's Melmount Centre for Wednesday, June 2, at 8pm.
She hopes parents from right across the province will join her campaign.
‘I would hope if sufficient parents support me they will either postpone the tests until Easter, by which time the children will have some idea of what it is like, or go back to the previous system.
‘I don't want to boast, but every mother knows what their child is capable of and I know Anthony is capable of a grade one.’
The Department is commissioning a series of new questions after admitting seven questions in the specimen are too difficult for most P7 children.
In a statement, the Department said Mrs McGonagle indicated she had obtained a copy of the specimen paper and made a number of photo-copies.
‘She was advised that the specimen paper was copyright and that schools had been asked to treat it as confidential until June 14,’ it added.
‘If the Department obtains evidence to the effect that Mrs McGonagle has decided to ignore the Department's advice and has circulated copies, consideration will have to be given as to what further action may be taken.’
ARIES (Mar 21/Apr 20)
Expect surprise twists and turns Saturday especially where partially completed plans or changes are concerned.
The influence of a business contact or personal friend wins you over to new tactics making the weekend a crucial time in your future decisions and options.
TAURUS (April 21/May 21)
An unexpected piece of good fortune comes your way Saturday in the form of a friend or admirer willing to dig deep to help you out of a problem or into a successful proposition.
Sunday's dynamic, no-nonsense, no-holds barred mood makes it a go-ahead time.
GEMINI (May 22/June 21)
Whilst this is an excellent weekend for lighthearted gatherings and sociable soirees it's a tough time for taking orders or giving way to the superior power or authority of others.
Keep all your meetings and get togethers on a light note by banning anyone talking shop.
CANCER (June 22/July 23)
This is not a good weekend to be entertaining visitors or for getting to grips with a backlog of personal or professional paperwork.
You won't be feeling totally ticketty-boo so take it easy and get as much rest and relaxation as possible.
LEO (July 24/Aug 23)
A serious matter-of-fact weekend gives you plenty of opportunity to sort out a financial hassle connected with income tax, pensions or an inheritance.
Sunday's fine for discussing future plans and ambitions with a loving partner and ironing out any differences of opinion.
VIRGO (Aug 24/Sept 23)
You may feel undervalued and unappreciated this weekend.
Work out ways to raise your status at work and adopt a high profile when it comes to thinking through professional matters and sharing ideas with the people that matter.
Mull plans over with loved ones.
LIBRA (Sept24/Oct 23)
Get all your business done Saturday for it's a fine time for long distance communications and clinching all sorts of commercial arrangements and workaday agreements.
Come Sunday you're more withdrawn and reticent so any hassle or hitch will prove too much to cope with.
SCORPIO (Oct 24/Nov 22)
You need to clear the air and get deep seated anxieties and worries off your chest Saturday.
Don't be bashful about telling folk how you feel for a loved one's advice and experience will soon put your mind at rest.
It's business as normal Sunday.
SAGITTARIUS (Nov 23/Dec 21)
Enjoy a quiet weekend of undisturbed tranquillity and devote your energies to thinking through current concern or a future plan.
This is not a good time for getting involved in strenuous activity.
CAPRICORN (Dec 22/Jan 20)
Renew contacts with old friends Saturday or drop in on a parent or much loved relative.
A trip down memory lane or a sentimental reunion will give you great pleasure and allow you to say what's in your heart without feeling self-conscious.
AQUARIUS (Jan 21/Feb 19)
Do whatever gives you most pleasure this weekend.
From the physical joys of fine wines, gourmet foods and making love to the cerebral delights of a trip to the theatre, cinema or ballet this is your chance to push the boat out.
PISCES (Feb 20-Mar 20)
Issues affecting your home and family dominate the weekend.
Saturday's concerned with beautifying, improving and modernising your abode and winning general approval and admiration for your efforts whilst Sunday's taken up with subtly getting a loved one to toe the line.
Bombers fail to stop show
ULSTER's amateur actors have dramatically upstaged the bombers — by ensuring that their show would go on despite a £1,000 blast.
The IRA bomb yesterday wrecked the Grand Opera House in Belfast in the middle of the week-long Ulster Drama Festival.
And initially it was feared the festival would have to be abandoned.
But organisers defiantly refused to allow the curtain to fall on the high life of the amateur drama year.
And last night hundreds of theatre lovers packed a hastily arranged new venue, St Bartholomew's Church Hall on Belfast's Stranmillis Road.
‘We had tried four other theatres and were about to give up before the church answered our prayers,’ said Beth Duffin, secretary of the Association of Ulster Drama Festivals.
Technical staff from the Theatre 3 group from Newtownabbey won a race against time to get their set up for their presentation of a Tennessee Williams play ‘Suddenly Last Summer.’
‘It was hectic,’ said the group's director Alan Waugh.
‘We had to remove one set which was already up for a production by the church's own drama group.
And then we had to start constructing our own.
But we didn't care.
We were just delighted to get our play on.’
Adjudicator Barry Cassin from Balbriggan praised the officials for their resilience.
And he said the less grandiose surrounding would not affect his judgment.
‘I know I have seen three plays already in the magnificent splendour of the Opera House.
But I will not let the difference in setting impair my judgment when I watch the plays in the church hall.’
Officials from the Grand Opera house rallied to the aid of the festival organisers.
Administrator Michael Barnes was given a standing ovation after addressing the audience.
Tickets purchased for the final adjudication night on Saturday will still be valid for the church hall performance.
‘We are already sold out for what should be a very emotional night,’ said Mrs Duffin.
‘The last two groups to perform are from Donegal and Leitrim.
It shows that amateur drama knows no borders.’
Ironically the title of the final night play is…
‘The Gentle Island’ by Brian Friel.
See bomb clean-up, Page 4.
Parks' eyes now on a fourth title
BY RONNIE HARPER
THE Private Greens League and the Northern Ireland Bowling Association are one win away from a showdown in the IBA Under 25 Inter-Association championship.
The Private Greens have finally laid their bogey team — the Provincials — and now aim to set up a final decider for this year's championship at Ulster Transport on Thursday, May 27 when the defending champions NIBA provide the opposition.
The NIBA have yet to taste defeat in this championship which started three years ago, and following their 48 shot victory over the Bowling League of Ireland in their opening game the Parks are heading for their fourth successive title.
Tomorrow the Parks take on the Provincials at Carrick while at Pickie in Bangor the Private Greens meet the BLI.
Wins for both teams are essential if they want their Jordanstown battle next Thursday to be for the Under 25 championship trophy.
And perhaps the PGL have the slightly easier task against the Dublin team.
I'll go for a PGL victory tomorrow, while down at Carrick it would be foolish to oppose the NIBA.
However, the Provincials are certainly not out of the frame by an means and although beaten by the PGL, must not be under-rated in any department by the high flying NIBA side.
The NIBA, like the PGL, have made no changes in their side for the Carrick game.
They are hot favourites to win the title for a fourth successive time, in fact no other association have had their name inscribed on this trophy.
Tomorrow's programme is —
SDLP take control
SEVENTEEN of the 30 seats on Derry City Council are set to go to the SDLP.
Although counting has not yet completed, the party is on course to increase its representation by two.
Wilfred White has already added the SDLP representation in the Waterside while Pat Ramsey is on course to be returned with colleagues Jim Clifford and Pat Devine in Cityside.
The DUP is also set to increase its representation.
The SDLP retained its hold in the Northlands area where it returned five out of the seven seats available.
This was also the result in the 1989 election but a number of new SDLP councillors will be replacing familiar faces including William McCorriston who split from the party and ran as Independent SDLP and Annie Gallagher who did not seek re-election despite the fact that she topped the poll in 1989.
The three new faces are SDLP chairman Mark Durkan, Martin Bradley and Kathleen McCloskey.
They will be joined by John Tierney and John Kerr.
Sinn Fein account for the other two Northland seats in the form of Mitchel McLaughlin, who moved from Cityside and newcomer Mary Nelis.
On the last occasion, Northland had just six seats available and the Sinn Fein councillor was Barney McFadden who fought the Rural ward this time around.
Independent Unionist David Davis lost his seat.
In the Waterside ward, where seven seats were available, compared to six in 1989, there have been gains for the DUP and SDLP.
Representation has changed from one Ulster Unionist, two DUP, one SDLP, one Independent Unionist and one Ulster Democratic Party to one Ulster Unionist, three DUP, two SDLP and one Independent Unionist.
The new face for the DUP is Bill Irwin while Wilfred White will be joining Gerry Toland on behalf of the SDLP.
George Duddy of the UUP ran in the Rural ward and his place in Waterside has been taken by party leader John Adams.
The Ulster Democratic Party's sole representative on Derry City Council, Ken Kerr lost his seat.
Counting continues in the Guildhall today.
Joanne back in swing of things
BY JACK MAGOWAN
THE GIRL whom doctors feared would never play golf again battled fiercely to-day for a place in the last eight of golf's Lancome (Irish) Ladies' championship.
Joanne O'Haire, from Ballybofey, was out of the game nearly two years with a Gazza-style knee injury that threatened to leave her crippled.
Joanne had torn a ligament so badly refereeing a basketball match that she was on morphine for a week after hospital surgery, and couldn't even walk let alone play golf.
It was only last summer that she was allowed to get back in the swing.
Now this 21-year-old motor mechanic's daughter looks stronger and better than ever off a four-handicap, and again showed what stern stuff she is made of with a thrilling tie-hole victory over Leinster international, Carol Wickham, at Royal Belfast.
Miss O'Haire faced a formidable second-round hurdle in Ada O'Sullivan, a powerfully-built Cork lass who some people think could win the title.
Michelle McGreevy (17), kept her nerve for a splendid win over Clandeboye's best lady player, Nicola Gracey, in a game that earned both a plus mark.
The golf was terrific.
It was Aer Lingus girl, Denise McCarthy, who caused the day's biggest upset against the great Mary McKenna to set up a clash with Baltray's pretty Oonagh Purfield for promotion to the last eight.
The semi-finals and final of the championship are to-morrow.
ARDS may have lost the Irish Soccer Cup final to Bangor this season, but their swim minnows made sure Bangor weren't going to do a double at the Grove Pool last weekend.
Ards retained the Belfast Telegraph Tele-Tots league championship, pushing Bangor into second place ahead of Lisburn.
Nearly 1,000 tots line up each year for the championship, swimming in competitive matches about once every three weeks during the winter months.
And it was a double celebration for the Ards club, as they also won the Provincial Towns Senior Championship League for the first time this season.
As usual, Picture Power was at the Grove to bring readers the action from the ‘Tele-tots’ gala.
Sandy Spence of the DUP, who has served 16 years as Mayor of Ballymena.
USPCA hits out at bogus collectors
POLICE were today investigating reports of bogus door-to-door charity collections in Londonderry.
Young collectors — falsely claiming to represent the USPCA — targeted households in the Culmore area of the city at the weekend.
The teenagers conned money out of the public by pretending to raise sponsorship for a bungy jump with half the proceeds going to charity.
One householder became suspicious and alerted USPCA officials who confirmed that the collection was unauthorised.
A spokeswoman for the charity said today that the bogus collections could have damaging repercussions.
She said: ‘It does a lot of harm.
We rely on collections and donations and when we go round again people may say they have already given.
At the end of the day it's the animals that lose out.’
Shock blow for Protestant voice on West Bank
THE voice of the Protestant people on Londonderry's West Bank has been muted following the shock defeat of Independent Unionist councillor David Davis.
Mr Davis, who was the only Unionist representative west of the River Foyle, bowed out after conceding his council seat to Sinn Fein.
Bitterly disappointed by his defeat, Mr Davis said it was ‘a sad day for the historic city’, and urged Derry City Council to ‘look sympathetically’ on the needs of the Unionist people on the cityside.
‘I do not believe the council will ostracise them and I am confident that their needs and demands will not be neglected,’ he said.
It was a day which saw the political demise of UDP man Ken Kerr and a poor showing for the Ulster Unionist party on the Waterside, where only group leader John Adams was re-elected, despite fielding four men.
The DUP was in better form, after picking up an extra seat on the Waterside with the election of Bill Irwin.
And as independents Tony Carlin and William McCorriston, both formerly of the SDLP, counted their losses last night, the SDLP was celebrating victory in both the Northland Ward, where all five fielded candidates were elected, and on the Waterside, where it picked up an extra seat.
SDLP party chairman Mark Durkan romped home to a first-time victory along with another newcomer, Martin Bradley, son of former SDLP mayor Mary Bradley.
And as counting started again early today at the Guildhall, the SDLP looked set to gain its predicted 17 seats, giving it an over-all majority on Derry City Council for the first time.
DUP supporters were today celebrating an impressive showing at the polls in Moyle.
The party captured three seats in total, winning back the two seats it lost after the resignations of James Rodgers and daughter Glenda.
And that placed the party on a par in the council with the SDLP, which lost one seat.
Sitting DUP councillor Gardiner Kane boosted his vote dramatically to romp home at the head of the poll in the Ballycastle ward.
Afterwards Councillor Kane said: ‘We are ecstatic at our showing today which has demonstrated we are still more than capable of fighting our corner.’
Stripped of DUP backing, former Bushmills councillor James Rodgers, was eliminated along with former council colleagues Michael O'Cleary and Joe Mitchell, of the SDLP.
And it was the end of the road for former council chairman Archie McAuley, who crashed at the polls after 32 years on the council.
Mr McAuley polled just 94 votes and was in bitter mood with the electors who deserted him.
‘I thought I deserved better after so many years of service,’ he said.
It was a day of mixed fortunes for husband and wife Price and Beth McConaghy.
Price powered home on the first count with 465 first preference votes, but Beth mustered only 11.
THE Alliance Party scored six of the best when it added two more councillors to its group of four on Ards Council.
A delighted Jim McBriar, who leads the Alliance group on the council, said: ‘I'm sure one of the reasons for our success is our willingness to talk.’
The largest party, the UUP, also gained one extra seat, but the DUP dropped one.
The new-look council also gained two independents.
Altogether there will be 12 new faces on the 23-strong council, after two sitting councillors John Curdy,(DUP) and Bobby McBride (UU Ind) were ousted.
None of the three Conservative candidates standing in the area for the first time was elected.
And DUP man Willie Cully, jailed for 12 years in the early '70s for terrorist offences, was defeated after gaining 485 first preference votes.
All three women who stood: Nancy Orr, Kathleen Coulter and Margaret Craig, were voted in, breaching the all-male bastion.
And Councillor William Magill was joined in the DUP camp by his newly-elected son Jeff.
BIRTHDAY boy Fred Proctor was in seventh heaven after notching up yet another election success.
For the Ulster Unionist celebrated his 54th birthday yesterday as he was elected to Belfast City Council for the seventh time.
He was just 76 votes short of the quota in the Oldpark Ward on the first count, but won his place a short time later.
While disappointed that he came second in the poll to Sinn Fein 's Joe Austin, he was delighted with his eventual success on the fifth count.
‘It is a shame that Sinn Fein has topped this poll, but the Ulster Unionists also polled well,’ he said.
‘It's the best birthday present I could have asked for.’
PHILLIP'S FILL UP
AN unofficial fast lap of over 119 mph has put Phillip McCallen in the right frame of mind to grab the glory in tomorrow's Coca Cola North West 200 over the Portstewart-Coleraine-Portrush circuit (roads close 11.00am)
However, McCallen will not know until after a stewards meeting tomorrow morning whether or not he will be on the front row of the grid.
McCallen has been having problems with the RVF Honda for which he had a new engine during final practice and as a result, his times have not been up to scratch.
Mervyn Whyte, secretary of the meeting told me today: ‘At this point in time he'll not be on the front row of the grid but Billy Nutt, the clerk of the course, and myself will be going through the speeds later today and deciding the grid positions.
‘I know McCallen had a quick time late last night when he took the Honda out in the 250cc practice with the number crossed out but, of course, his speed on that occasion was purely unofficial.’
White added that the recommendations arrived at today would go to the stewards tomorrow morning and they will decide where McCallen starts.
McCallen had problems with the carburration and as a result he never really got into the final practice but unofficially he lapped at over 119 mph only three seconds behind the overall leader Carl Fogarty.
He said: ‘I'm quite happy with that.
I think I have the problem sorted out and the Honda is quick enough to win the race.
In addition I feel well enough physically and to be honest I think I've a good chance of at least two wins tomorrow.’
McCallen agreed that there is some pressure on him in view of the fact that he had five wins last year at the meeting but he added: ‘If I only get two this time I'll be happy.
Even one would be good enough for there are riders who have been racing for years and have never gone well here.’
McCallen is hoping that the Honda will remain in one piece after tomorrow for it travels on to Donington for the British Championship meeting the next day where it will be ridden by Steve Hislop with McCallen reverting to the slower RC30 Honda.
Robert Dunlop appears to be hitting form at just the right time and overall he is in second place for tomorrow's Superbike races with a best speed of 118.85mph as opposed to Fogarty's 121.65 which is the fastest lap of practice.
Joey Dunlop, who has been having problems with his Honda and Kevin Mitchell on the 500cc grand prix Yahama, share third place on 118. 84mph.
Of this lot I feel McCallen can just about win the race — or at least one of the Superbike classes — but Fogarty is obviously the man everyone has to beat and I feel he will not go away empty-handed.
Robert Dunlop will, after all, ride in the 125cc class on the same bike which he borrowed to win at Cookstown and Tandragee.
Darren Gawley who doesn't ride at the North West will take over the machine at Donington on Sunday.
Dunlop is fastest after practice at 104.16 but I feel that brother Joey may grab a win here despite the fact that he was fourth fastest in practice.
In the 600cc class which should be the best of the day, Jim Moodie is fastest on 115.90 but if McCallen gets it together he can win this race for the third year in a row.
McCallen and Robert Dunlop may again share the two 250cc races as they did last year and Moodie may lift the 400cc.
TYRONE
Job losses shock at Tyrone Crystal
FIFTEEN jobs are to be lost at the famous Tyrone Crystal plant.
The company, which made the announcement yesterday, will be looking for voluntary redundancies where possible and the losses will take effect from June 21.
A spokeswoman for the firm said the jobs would be going at all levels, from shopworker to manager.
Gordon Parkes, the firm's head of human resources, said: ‘Some current job roles are being discontinued and new more appropriate roles have been developed to meet these increased demands from the market place.
LOUGHSIDE
Foster care conference
A MAJOR conference looking at how proposed new children's legislation will affect foster carers, opened in Co Antrim today.
Foster carers and social workers from all over the province were attending the two day event, organised by the Northern Ireland Foster Care Association and Loughside foster carers groups.
Colette McAuley, senior social worker at Loughside Unit of Management, said the aim of the conference was to inform people of the changes that have taken place since the 1989 Children's Act was introduced in Britain and to discuss the implications of the draft Children (NI) Order.
DUBLIN
Pubs oppose price rises
PUBLICANS are campaigning on behalf of their customers to keep down the price of the pint in the Republic.
A proposal by brewery giants, Guinness, to put up the price of the pint by 2p has been opposed by the Vintners' Federation of Ireland, which represents 6,000 publicans outside the Dublin area.
They expressed ‘serious regret and disappointment at the prospect of an increase by Guinness’.
A spokesman said that a price hike at this time would be ‘inappropriate’.
INISHTURK
First bar for island
THE Republic's President, Mary Robinson, was the toast of a remote island community today when she opened the first licensed premises on Inishturk in Clew Bay.
The President, who is on an island-hopping tour of west coast islands, performed the official opening ceremony at the Community Centre on Innishturk, which has a population of 91.
The centre's facilities include a fully-stocked bar.
A member of the community council, Mary Catherine Heaney, said: ‘We are delighted to be able to raise our glasses, legally for the first time, to drink the health of the President.’
Murder bid charge
A PRISON officer was returned for trial to Belfast Crown Court when he appeared at Newtownabbey Magistrate's Court yesterday charged with attempting to murder his estranged wife last December.
Thomas John Williamson (46) of Downshire Gardens, Carrickfergus, was also accused of unlawfully wounding Kathleen Williamson with intent to cause her grievous bodily harm on the same date.
Electricity powers ahead in market
SHARES raced ahead initially, encouraged by the second successive record closing high on Wall Street.
But the buying spree lasted only minutes as sentiment quickly turned negative, despite expectations that the latest inflation figures will be encouraging.
Analysts are concerned US shares cannot sustain their current levels and they are expecting a sharp fall on Wall Street later.
The FTSE which at one stage had been more than six points ahead was up a mere 0.2 at 2817.
The electricity companies were almost universally ahead in a very mixed market.
East Midlands Electricity today announced a major reorganisation of its core electricity business as it aims to save £10m annually in operating costs.
Its shares climbed 6p to 455p.
Other electricity stocks were ahead.
South Western Electricity jumped 8p to 490p while South Wales Electricity pushed ahead 6p to 532p.
Water stocks, a traditional defence against turbulent times, were generally lower ahead of North West Water's results due out next week.
North West was unchanged at 485p.
Severn Trent was one of the few to move into positive territory, up 2p to 484p.
The remainder were largely weaker.
Anglian Water dipped a penny to 483p, Welsh Water lost 2p to 598p with Thames a penny weaker at 504p.
Record half-year profits at Wolverhampton & Dudley Breweries and the improved interim dividend payout were sufficient to push the share price 2p ahead to 525p.
Property group Brixton Estates defied the usual course of companies asking shareholders for cash.
The £100.7m rights issue it intends to use to buy and develop land as the market picks up left the shares a penny stronger at 197p.
Four rescued from sea after boat hits rock
FOUR men were at the centre of a dramatic sea rescue near Carrickfergus early today, after their motorboat struck a rock and began to sink.
The four were brought ashore by Bangor inshore lifeboat and a waiting ambulance took them to Belfast's Mater Hospital suffering from hypothermia.
The alert began shortly after midnight.
Police at Carrickfergus station, near the waterfront, heard cries for help after the 36ft Moonraker, called Nimrod, got into difficulties.
A passer-by also heard shouting and raised the alarm.
A Coastguard spokesman said that the Larne Coastguard and Carrickfergus fishing vessel Hummer also attended the scene.
‘The vessel, from Bangor Marina, was half-sunk, but the Hummer and the lifeboat managed to tow it into the harbour and beach it on a mud bank,’ the spokesman said.
He said the men had not made any radio calls for help.
Hume says talks with SF leader to continue
CONTROVERSIAL talks with Sinn Fein president Gerry Adams will go ahead, once the council elections are over, SDLP leader John Hume confirmed today.
He said: ‘Our talks will continue until we reach a conclusion which I hope, naturally, will be positive.’
Mr Hume was commenting after fellow SDLP MP Joe Hendron hit out at Mr Adams' refusal to condemn yesterday Grand Opera House bombing by the IRA — and warned that the talks could not continue indefinitely.
Dr Hendron said: ‘I'm not saying that the talks should stop, but that there us a question mark over Mr Adams' credibility.
‘The talks cannot go on indefinitely if the IRA go on killing and bombing and Mr Adams doesn't come out to signal any opposition to them.’
Refusing to condemn the bombing, Mr Adams yesterday said the only way to end the violence was for everyone to be involved in the talks process.
‘I regret every incident in this conflict, especially when young children are involved, but the only way to resolve this situation is for everyone to be included,’ said Mr Adams.
Two known meetings have so far taken place between both party leaders, with a whirlwind of protest from unionists when they issued a joint statement before the elections, while denying it reflected any form of electoral pact.
Another session will be held soon, but neither party said any precise arrangements have been made.
Interference claimed in Dunne case
AN investigation was demanded today into alleged interference in a drink-driving case involving a sister of supermarket chief Ben Dunne.
A probe by the Garda Commissioner was called for after a garda told Dublin's District Court: ‘Summonses keep disappearing in connection with these charges.
Somebody has been interfering with this case internally.’
The case against Therese Dunne (42), a buyer with Dunnes Stores, was halted for the second time in three months yesterday because of the alleged interference.
She faces charges of drunken driving following a road accident involving her Mercedes Sports Coupe in Donnybrook, Dublin, on May 20 last year.
A blood sample taken from her after the accident was found to contain 366 mgs of alcohol per 100 mls of blood.
Garda James McElroy said that when the case first came before the court, on February 25, it was found that there were no summonses to proceed with, although they had been served.
It was adjourned until yesterday, but when the case was called the court clerk said he had no knowledge of the case being listed.
Judge Thelma King agreed to re-enter the summonses.
She said: ‘I think this is a case where I should issue a bench warrant for Ms Dunne's arrest.’
However, after consultation with Garda McElroy, she decided to adjourn the case until June 28.
Tickets only for Derry's Down trip
BY JOHN CAMPBELL
THE Down v Derry Ulster senior football championship tie on Sunday week will be an all-ticket match — and the crowd will be limited to 14,000.
The Newry ground has already been inspected by representatives of the National Safety Council and although the extended terracing could have coped with upwards on 17,000, it has been decided in the interests of spectators' comforts to make 14,000 tickets available.
Meanwhile, Fermanagh team manager Hugh McCabe is quick to dismiss any notion that his team may have missed the boat in the Ulster championship.
The fact that the Erne outfit could only draw with Armagh on Sunday last despite having home advantage does not lessen McCabe's optimism as he anticipates this week-end's replay at the Athletic Grounds.
Unlike his counterpart Jim McCorry, he was able to announce his side some days ago — a side that showed just one change from Sunday, Paddy McGuinness coming into midfield for banned John Reihill.
The Armagh line-up is not expected to be unveiled until tomorrow morning since John and Mark Grimley, Ger Houlahan and Ciaran McGurk are all under treatment for injuries and John Toner is suspended.
Armagh's injury worries cast a cloud over their preparations and Fermanagh could mount a smash and grab raid this time.
Meanwhile, in tomorrow's Royal Liver National League Hurling final second replay Cork will again confront Wexford.
The teams have already met twice and have remained deadlocked.
Wexford had victory snatched from their grasp on each occasion and they could well have had their last real bite at the cherry.
Hughes is champion!
THERE was plenty of action and exciting moments in the Eastend this week, as the grand major finals herald the close of the Harp East domestic pool league, which overall, was very competitive in every aspect of the game.
Stealing the highlights were the Individuals semis and final.
And we salute a super champion in King Richard's Geordie Hughes.
Hughes produced top drawer pool in going through his semi and final frames unbeaten.
In the semi final he was master of the pressure game, beating Liverpool's Craig Dobbin 3–0 who was a little out of hid depth at this level.
But no doubt he will be much wiser next time around.
In the other semi another King Richard player, John ‘Rocky’ Meaney won a cat and mouse duel 3–2 against Hillfoot's Billy Tumlinson who is certainly a star in the making.
It was an all King Richard club final.
But hard as John Meaney tried he found it an uphill struggle against Hughes, who was firing on all cylinders, and his great ‘cool’ blessed with a wide repertoire of shots saw him a worthy winner 4–0 from seven frames.
The Senior Cup final was contested between arch rivals Longfellows, winners in 1992, and the Oakley.
The Longfellows solid array of red T-shirts with a logo ‘Simply The Best’ unfortunately didn't hold good at the heels of the hunt.
For opponents Oakley had other ideas, they produced the goods on the night and took their chances to emerge 7–2 winners.
GOLF
Lane in Cup lead
European Ryder Cup hopefuls Barry Lane, David Gilford and Steven Richardson considerably improved their chances of gaining selection for the match against the United States at The Belfry in September with top-six finishes in the Lancia Martini Italian Open at Modena.
Berkshire-based Lane leads the European Ryder Cup table with 326,217.75 points after finishing joint third in Italy with Gilford and South African Wayne Westner on 272 five shots behind the winner, New Zealand's Greg Turner.
Lane's total might already be good enough to win selection but he said: ‘I still think I need another 25,000 points to be certain of getting into the team so I'm not counting chickens.’
Gilford has 208,476.57 points and has consolidated his sixth place in the Cup table while Richardson, who finished sixth yesterday on 273, has jumped from 13th to seventh with 184,746.41 points.
Ronan Rafferty, who finished with a 65 — one off the course record — for joint eighth place is still well down the points table.
Lisburn wall of memories
LISBURN have come up with a novel way of raising much-needed cash for the club.
It involves the creation of a heritage wall whereby brass plaques can be put up in the club house for a one-off payment of £100.
This would involve past players and others who would want to be associated with the club's history and achievements.
Lisburn have been in existence for more than 150 years and is Ulster's oldest surviving cricket club.
‘We intend to build upon and strengthen our rich past by the provision of this heritage wall.
Plaques with individual or corporate names, will form the centre piece and invitations are extended to those with Lisburn associations, to purchase one, thereby helping the club to secure its future,’ said chairman Cecil Walker.
Frantic chase for suspect car bomb
A SUSPECTED booby-trap device has been spotted under a car in Londonderry — but the owner was still unaware of the potential danger.
A passer-by noticed the suspicious object strapped underneath the vehicle as it drove out of a car park last night, but failed in a desperate attempt to alert the driver.
Now a frantic bid to trace the car is underway in the North West.
The light-coloured car with the suspicious package taped between the front wheels was last spotted leaving the car park of Lisnagelvin swimming pool in the Waterside at 7.10pm last night.
The vehicle is thought to be a Ford Escort but police say they cannot be certain.
After the passer-by raised the alarm, the RUC immediately warned its members and others with security force links about the possible threat.
Initial enquiries by the police have failed to locate the car and they have made an urgent appeal to the general public to also check their vehicles.
Anyone who spots the suspected device under the car is asked to urgently contact the RUC in Derry on (0504) 367337.
Co Antrim in big win
COUNTY Antrim won the Coca-Cola under-16 championship in emphatic style last night, defeating North West 6–0 in a one-sided final at Sydenham.
David Lorimer (Dundonald HS), a current junior international, grabbed a hat-trick with David McGlinchey (De la Salle) getting two goals.
Ryan Dunlop (St Patrick's Magherafelt) completed the scoring.
In the third place play-off, Mid-Ulster defeated Fermanagh and Western 1–0.
Tomorrow's Irish 1,000 Guineas at the Curragh
Dayflower a good bet
DAYFLOWER a strong finishing fifth in the Newmarket 1000 gns, may find conditions more to her liking at the Curragh tomorrow and I make her the selection for the Irish ‘1000’.
Dayflower made history last week at York when she became the first Dubai trained runner to win in England and 31-year-old trainer Indian Satish Seewar will be hoping for a similar landmark in Ireland.
Dayflower has been supplemented for tomorrow's race as has Felawnah who was fourth at Newmarket and should run well under Willie Carson.
Ajfan third in the Newmarket race will also come into the reckoning and Dermot Weld thinks highly of Asema who won on her seasonal debut at the Curragh last month.
Children were seconds away from death
A SHOCKED mum wept today as she described how her two young children came within seconds of death when flames ripped through their home.
Bernie O'Neill found the stairway of her home in Upper Meadow Street, north Belfast on fire — trapping her two young daughters in upstairs bedrooms.
She could only watch in horror from the street as a local man and soldiers battled bravely to save four-year-old Stacey and two-year-old Ciara from the blaze.
A third child, aged only seven months, was lifted out to safety in a carry-cot.
‘Screaming’‘I was downstairs in the living-room and when I came out I found the whole stairway on fire,’ she said.
‘I ran out into the street screaming for help.
There was an Army patrol passing and the soldiers ran inside.’
Local man Paul McAllister heard the screams and raced to the scene with a ladder which he used to reach a bedroom window.
‘I smashed the window and climbed inside.
The room was thick with smoke and I could just see a cot, but it was empty.
‘The landing was ablaze and I could hear the soldiers shouting downstairs.
‘I had to climb out again to get some air and when I went back in I was just beaten back.
‘I couldn't find the kids but just as had to pull out the fire brigade arrived.’
With seconds to spare the two girls were plucked to safety by firemen wearing breathing apparatus.
Locals say Stacey needed mouth-to-mouth resuscitation at the scene and was taken to hospital where her is condition was described as stable.
Jobs fear grips the Tyne
TYNESIDE was today braced for news of hundreds of redundancies in the wake of the Swan Hunter crisis.
Receivers called in to keep the shipbuilding company afloat after it failed to win a Ministry of Defence helicopter carrier order were meeting union officials this morning.
Neither side has given any estimate of the extent of the anticipated cuts but the expectation is that hundreds of the 2,200 jobs, which add up to a monthly £2 million pay bill, will have to be sacrificed.
The hope of everyone campaigning for the survival of the 130-year-old warship builder is that work will be allowed to continue on three frigates which are at various construction stages.
£200,000 payout: Cash for public in misconduct claims
RUC left to count cost
OVER £206,000 has been paid in compensation by the Police Authority for alleged misconduct by RUC officers, Secretary of State Sir Patrick Mayhew has disclosed.
Cases involving allegations of RUC assault cost the taxpayer £69,900.
The total payment in all other cases was £136,474.
Sir Patrick said detailed analysis has shown that 18 settlements were made in cases where alleged assault inside RUC holding centres was a factor.
He told Labour MP Dennis Canavan that the assault cases were settled on the civil burden of proof, which had been ‘assessed on the balance of probabilities rather than the criminal standard of beyond reasonable doubt.’
Sir Patrick said that analysis backed up the view of Lord Colville, who conducted the review of the emergency laws, that only a small minority of cases involved allegations of police assaults inside the holding centres.
He declared: ‘It also demonstrates how misleading has been much of the coverage of this issue, in the Press and elsewhere.’
A Police Authority paper presented to the Commons revealed that 200 claims — assault was the basis in 127 of them — were finalised during the three-year period 1989 to 1992.
Most of the alleged incidents occurred during 1985–89, with some dating back to the late 1970s.
Sir Patrick said compensation was paid in 123 cases, but only 27 of the settlements were made on the basis of police assault.
Nine of these stemmed from incidents outside the holding centres, including five from a single incident involving plastic handcuffs.
The rest included allegations of wrongful arrest, false imprisonment and loss of property.
Sir Patrick declared: ‘It of course remains the firm position of both the Government and the RUC that any ill-treatment of persons in custody is wholly unacceptable.’
He said that new RUC codes of practice, in addition to the range of safeguards already in place, were intended ‘to enhance still further public confidence that the police have nothing to hide’ and protect officers from malicious allegations.
‘Wily’ bus stop rapist gets 12 year sentence
BUS stop rapist Oscar Messam — who staged a series of sex attacks on young women then tried to date his victims — was jailed for a total of 12 years today.
Messam (21) showed no emotion at the Old Bailey as the Common Serjeant of London, Judge Robert Lymbery, told him he terrified his victims into submission at gunpoint.
The court had heard that Messam, who is married, ‘began a campaign of rape’ last autumn, arming himself with a handgun and loitering at or near bus stops in wait for potential victims.
He threatened to shoot one victim, raped her — and moments later told her he was going to start loving her and wanted her to meet him again.
Mr Anthony Scott-Gall, prosecuting, said that at first Messam started chatting ‘amiably and mundanely’ to all his victims, girls and women aged between 16 and 20.
Then his conversation turned sinister and he would produce the gun.
Messam, a machine operator, of Edmonton, north London, was being sentenced after being found guilty yesterday of four charges of rape involving three women, and one of indecent assault on a fourth.
He denied all the charges.
Detective Inspector Paul Lowden said later that Messam was ‘a cool, calculating, cunning and wily individual’ and added: ‘He would have gone on to rape others if unchecked.’
A ‘lot’ for Linfield
LINFIELD today agreed a new, all-encompassing sponsorship deal with Italian sportswear giants Lotto.
Last season Lotto weighed in with club sponsorship with the Blues but from next season they will supply kits, boots and footballs as well.
The brand-new Linfield strip will be available in July and it's believed to be based on a classic Italian design.
The Irish League champions are the only UK side to land sponsorship with Lotto, who have just signed up Italian champions AC Milan.
ARIES (Mar 21/Apr 20)
Beware of taking yourself and your feelings too seriously.
You might say or do something you'll regret or feel foolish about in times to come.
Take your mind off yourself by keeping busy.
A good time for getting on with DIY or household repairs.
TAURUS (Apr 21/May 21)
Knowing what you'd like to say and actually having the courage to come right out with it are two different things.
You will be better off saying your piece and seeing what happens rather than keep bottling things up.
Beware of appearing over aggressive or unnecessarily rude.
GEMINI (May 22/June 21)
If things haven't been going well at work and success seems to be passing you by talk to colleague and see what they think of your prospects.
A fine time for making deals and arrangements for the future so plan ahead.
CANCER (June 22/July 23)
You've reached one of those stages of life when past pleasures and ambitions no longer have any appeal yet there's nothing to fill the void.
A good time to examine the alternatives and find a new interest in life.
LEO (July 24/Aug 23)
A flash of inspiration puts an end to a mystery.
The answers you seek are all buried in your past — if you could only remember precisely what went on when you were younger and you'd have no problems.
Stand by for a revealing insight into your childhood or upbringing.
VIRGO (Aug 24/Sept 23)
Your main aim in life is for peace at all costs.
I'm sorry to say all hopes of a tranquil day are totally out of the question.
You have and duties to attend to before you can even think about putting your tootsies up.
Avoid responsibilities and you'll make trouble for yourself.
LIBRA (Sept 24/Oct 23)
You can try to avoid disruptions, but it just won't wash.
You are going to be hard pushed to keep your mind on whatever you're doing Tuesday.
Concentrating on the job in hand will be extra hard today.
Cancel any evening plans — have an early night.
SCORPIO (Oct 24/Nov 22)
If there's one thing in the whole world you need it's peace.
Unfortunately a boss, child or loving partner seems intent on running you ragged with one job after another.
Try to make time to put your feet up and switch off but don't be grouchy if you find it's all work and no play!
SAGITTARIUS (Nov 23/Dec 21)
You're not quite as clever as you think and your shortcomings will be all too apparent to a switched-on youngster.
You're hopeless at keeping a secret for you make it so obvious that people are sure to keep probing until they've winkled it out of you.
CAPRICORN (Dec 22/Jan 20)
It's no good praying your vigour will return.
It's going to take time for you to get back to full strength and you've no-one to blame but yourself.
Stop burning the candle at both ends or you'll have more murky mornings.
AQUARIUS (Jan 21/Feb 19)
You need to take a break.
You have taken on far too much and are trying to do too many things at the double.
A lack lustre time of no-energy makes the day an uphill struggle.
Aquarians who can't avoid work and commitments will be hard pressed to get ahead today.
PISCES (Feb 20/Mar 20)
There's no holding you these days!
After yesterday's fun you've got an appetite for excitement so you won't think twice about doing something daring today.
Beware of carrying things to excess.
What starts off as a bit of a laugh could quickly turn into an embarrassing muddle.
CRICKET
Johnson's 167 record
PAUL Johnson hammered a record-breaking 167 not out as Nottinghamshire thrashed Kent at Trent Bridge and then confessed: ‘All I had in mind was finishing the job off this time.’
The England A batsman's 106-ball innings included seven sixes and 20 fours and powered Notts to a nine-wicket AXA Equity and Law League victory.
The onslaught by Johnson was Notts' highest individual score in one-day cricket surpassing Derek Randall's unbeaten 149 in a NatWest Trophy tie against Devon.
Johnson figured in an unbroken second wicket stand of 213 with skipper Tim Robinson (63no) which propelled Notts to their 265 victory target with more than 14 overs to spare.
Northamptonshire maintained their 100% record with a three-wicket win with just two balls to spare against Glamorgan at Pentrych.
Spinner Nick Cook's four for 22 helped restrict the Welshmen to 169 for nine but Northants were made to sweat before gaining victory despite solid knocks from Robin Bailey (49) and David Capel (47).
Oak leaf side won't live in the shadows
Derry keyed up
DOWN may or may not have meant it but they have certainly succeeded in providing Derry with an extra incentive to triumph in next Sunday's Ulster championship glamour tie.
Cast your minds back a few weeks.
The occasion was the Dr. McKenna Cup final, the setting was the Athletic Grounds Armagh.
Down and Derry were poised to do battle for the trophy — or so everyone thought.
Derry fielded their published side, at least nine of whom are expected to feature in next Sunday's Pairc An Iuir blockbuster.
But Down?
If the Trade Descriptions Act had been invoked, they could have found themselves in trouble.
Only a handful of players from their original selection turned out, the management obviously having decided that they were not going to give even a hint of their championship formation.
For the record the original line-up was N. Collins; M. Quinn, C. Deegan, P. Higgins; M. Magill, P. O'Rourke, D. J. Kane; B. Breen, E. Burns; R. Carr, G. Blaney, G. Mason; M. Linden, P. Withnell, G. Colgan.
Of course, it is not uncommon for alterations to be made to a side from the time it is announced until the team actually takes the field.
But wholesale surgery?
That's another matter — and Derry were none too pleased at having to face a Down shadow side.
Indeed, some of their officials expressed strong opinions on the subject at the time but have since decided to wait and, as one put it, ‘let the team do the talking on the park in Newry.’
Now whether Derry — and what looks like being a weakened Derry side, into the bargain — can overcome Down in their own back yard with so much at stake is another matter altogether.
Certainly, Derry lifted the McKenna Cup but it was a hollow victory against hollow opposition — a match that was reduced to a meaningless championship preamble.
A pity, perhaps, but then attempting to stay a step ahead is one of the great motivating factors in the sport, isn't it?
Derry's resolve has hardened since their McKenna Cup ‘success’.
They know that to compare that game to next Sunday's contest is to compare chalk and cheese.
But if nothing else, the McKenna decider served one purpose — it helped to put additional fire in Derry's bellies.
They took it as a snub that Down failed to field at anything approaching full strength and now want to show that they are a match for the real thing.
Remember, too, that last year Derry triumphed when the sides met at Casement Park in front of 20,000-plus fans — a titanic struggle that actually left Derry slightly drained for their Ulster final showdown with eventual All Ireland champions Donegal, if the truth be told.
This year, despite the injuries which have befallen them, and the unfortunate suspension of the experienced Kieran McKeever, Derry believe that their preparations have been going better than last year.
This would, on the surface anyway, appear to bode well for their chances but one thing is certain — they know that every big gun in Down's considerable armoury will be firing tomorrow week.
Wayne in ‘home’ debut
OLYMPIC silver medallist Wayne McCullough will make his Irish professional boxing debut at Maysfield Leisure Centre, Belfast, on June 18.
McCullough, based in the United States, is to face Surrey-based Antrim fighter Con McMullen on a bill promoted by Eoin and Clement McMahon.
It will McCullough's seventh fight since he turned pro at the start of the year.
He has won his first five fights inside the distance and is scheduled to fight again in Phoenix before flying home to Belfast.
McMullen has had six fights in his pro career, winning four, losing one and drawing one.
Major in firing line over threat to free prescriptions
LABOUR leader John Smith today led a fresh assault on John Major's ‘broken pledges’ as Tory MPs anxiously counted the cost of the political row over the threat to free prescriptions.
Mr Smith geared up for what threatens to become an all-out running battle with the Government, by accusing John Major of ‘deceit’.
The fierce row over threatened savage spending cuts intensified after Mr Major refused to rule anything out in the effort to claw back the Government's £50 billion deficit.
Mr Smith, addressing the Welsh Labour conference this morning, targeted both Treasury Chief Secretary Michael Portillo — the man in charge of the axe-wielding — and the Prime Minister's election promises.
He said: ‘The way they talk, anyone would think the £50 billion debt had been handed to them on a plate.
You would think that somebody else had been in control of our public finances for the past fourteen years.’
Mr Major, he said, was ‘responsible above all others for the disastrous way our economy has been managed.
But it is the British people who are having to pay the price of their mismanagement of our nation's affairs.’
Mr Smith said that he had sought an undertaking yesterday from Mr Major that he would not carry out the ‘disgraceful’ policy of making children and pensioners pay for prescriptions.
‘Instead of answering the question directly, he did his usual trick of accusing Labour of scaremongering.
Just as he did during the general election when we said that the Tories planned to put up VAT.
‘He said that was scaremongering.
Quite untrue.
They had no such plans.
We know now who was right and who deceived the public.’
Mr Major, he said, was like a ‘runaway train rushing headlong down the track’ when the whole country was telling him to stop the Government's ‘privatisation madness’.
‘This fixation with selling off every remaining part of our national life is a catastrophe unfolding before us.’
As Conservative MPs headed back to face the response in their constituencies, there were signs that many are uneasy over the way the Government has now put the future of the welfare state on hold.
Medicine Mr Portillo has made clear that he is examining every possible area of Government spending in the task of cutting the bill before the Chancellor's next budget in November.
Hard up old folk will be forced to go without medicine because they cannot afford it, Age Concern said today.
The pressure group was commenting on suggestions that the Government is considering the abolition of pensioners' prescription exemptions.
Director Chris Common said: ‘We are concerned that older people will be forced to go without necessary medication because of inability to pay’.
New sporting winner
DAINTYFIT is a major employer in the North West, employing more than 500 people at its Limavady site in the manufacturing of bras for Marks & Spencer.
The company, which is a subsidiary of Courtaulds Textiles, also has sites in Irvinestown, Plumbridge, Cookstown and Markethill, supported by a London-based design studio.
Daintyfit produce an average of 156,000 bras every week and is in an excellent position to comment on developments within the lingerie market.
The most dramatic shift in recent years has been from soft to underwire garments, which provide greater support and ‘shape’.
Allied to this is a greater emphasis on comfort, leading to the use of cotton and ‘elastan’ fabrics which are proving popular in sports and activity bras.
As women become increasingly involved in sports and aerobics activities, so the demand has grown for bras which offer moisture absorbing properties.
To meet these demands, Daintyfit make use of the most recent developments in fabric technology such as‘coolmax’, which is used in its sports bras to draw moisture from the skin and hold it within the fabric.
But look out for Ajfan
Letitia takes on a challenging role
EASTENDERS star Letitia Dean lies bleeding, trapped inside a car which has been shunted on to a railway line.
She has serious injuries — her head is bleeding as she looks up: ‘Don't worry,’ she says, ‘I'm only volunteering’
In ‘Emergency’ the first of a new, six-part series The V Word (BBC1 11.50pm), Letitia joins a group of volunteers from the Casualties Union.
They play the roles of ‘victims’ to be ‘saved’by the fire, police and ambulance services on a training exercise which simulates a major disaster.
The series is part of the BBC's contribution to the UK Volunteers Week campaign (which runs from June 1 to June 7) to encourage people, old and young, to take up volunteering.
Portrait of a champ
STANLEY Woods is regarded as the greatest all-round motorcycle sportsman ever and the repeat of Stanley Woods — the Movie (BBC1 10.10pm), a film more about the man than the sport is seasonally topical.
Stanley Woods won the Isle of Man TT ten times, a record he held for over 30 years.
He was successful in all branches of the sport, including trials, scrambling and even ice-racing.
In this programme, Stanley, at the age of 88, looks back fondly to a time when he was, unquestionably, Champion of the World.
His last competition race was in 1939, the Isle of Man TT.
A grand night for singing
SOLOISTS and the massed voices of the Association of Irish Musical Societies will again be ‘raising the roof’ of the Ulster Hall, Belfast, with another selection of Songs from the Shows (UTV, 10.40pm).
Later skiffle king Lonnie Donegan will be joining in another foot-tapping music and fun Party With The Rovers (UTV, 10.40pm) at the Unicorn, while The Rovers will be singing their way round more beautiful parts of the province.
‘Cool it’ plea to parents who butt in
THE home can be a dangerous place, especially for a young baby.
There are the cleaning products kept under the sink and a well-stocked medicine cabinet to be explored.
There are sharp corners, rough edges and slippery surfaces to watch out for.
But baby expert Deborah Jackson has just one word for the anxious parent: relax.
Thousands of pages have been filled with theories on how to rear your offspring.
But Ms Jackson, author of ‘Do Not Disturb — the benefits of relaxed parenting for you and your child’, reckons that baby is pretty good at looking after him- or herself.
Her theory is that baby has a healthy survival instinct and is unlikely to attempt anything really dangerous.
Too much neurosis about a child's progress is therefore unproductive.
Most are speaking, walking and managing very nicely by the time they are three.
Whether they do any of those things before the baby next door is unimportant.
By all means give your child a hand while it is growing up.
But don't interfere too much.
‘We interfere like petty gods in our children's lives, stamping out every form of behaviour that irritates and contradicts us,’ says Ms Jackson.
So, don't wrap your children in cotton wool.
Let them play on the swing, even if you are scared they will fall off.
‘The child who lives in a clearing in the jungle has to move out of the clearing and into the jungle one day,’ she says.
‘Only if we teach our children anxiety do they begin to move fearfully through life.
And once we make them fearful, we have disturbed the complex process of growing up.’
Try to avoid telling your child to be careful every time it goes to play with a friend.
It makes it over-anxious and gives out the message that, if something happens, YOU won't be able to handle it.
‘It is so natural to be anxious, particularly with your first child,’ says Sarah Kilby, editor of Parents magazine.
‘A baby is your most precious belonging.
You don't know what they are capable of.
Our magazine promotes a relaxed form of parenting.
But you need to strike a balance; moving the scissors but leaving a pine cone or something to play with.
‘Curb your natural instinct to be over-anxious.
We promote safety, but coupled with this is common sense.
You don't want them to grow up in a sterile environment.
Don't stifle them.’
Ms Jackson is not advocating allowing your child to play in a busy road, or watching as it tips a bottle of bleach down its throat.
It is just a matter of being reasonable.
Let it touch the radiator — it won't leave its hand there when it discovers it is hot.
And it won't put its hand in the fire, as it will be put off by the heat as it approaches it.
But tell the child not to go near it and it will become fascinated by it.
‘Children are programmed for experience, not self-destruction,’ says Ms Jackson.
‘Left to play on their own in a playground, they won't promptly break a leg — they will make good choices about the risks they run.
‘Allow a child to find its own balance — say when they need help to dress themselves, for instance, rather than springing in to help.
Only when his judgment is called into question does he doubt himself.
We need to trust our children, if ever they are to trust themselves.’
David Gribble, author of ‘Considering Children’, says: ‘If you are told what to do all the time at school, you will not be able to direct yourself when you leave.
‘I have found that the most satisfying way of dealing with my children's mistakes or unacceptable behaviour is to allow THEM to sort it out.
‘When something is spilled, I hand them the cloth.
When something goes wrong, I find the quickest way to make matters worse is to launch in with my own fury, or insist that they repair the damage MY way.
This takes the moral initiative out of their hands.’
Many experts advocate rewarding your child for good behaviour, but Deborah Jackson has a dim view of this.
If your child takes a peculiar liking to washing up, and you give it a sweet every time, it will start to get suspicious and realise that washing up actually isn't as much fun as it thought.
And the child may refuse to co-operate with you unless you give it something.
Over-praising the child is not a good idea either.
‘The aim of positive reinforcement is to make the child want to repeat the desired behaviour.
‘However, it destroys the possibility that the child is motivated to co-operate for himself,’ says Jackson.
But children do need SOME direction.
It is no good if there are no rules at all.
‘When it comes to the discipline of children, modern society seems only to have two strings to its bow,’ says Ms Jackson.
‘Either we terrorise them into submission, or we abandon them to the vacuum of a permissive existence.
‘In fact, children do not need systems of punishment and reward to keep them in line, but they do need discipline.
If all their mistakes are exposed and judged, they swiftly feel themselves to be victims of an unyielding system.
‘Soon they feel not only that what they did was bad, but that they are intrinsically bad, too.
But if a child can make mistakes in safety, learn through the warmth of a cuddle, or through laughter, his trust and feeling of parental acceptance is not destroyed.
Watching your rights
MY HUSBAND bought me a watch as a birthday present, but it kept losing time and I returned it after the holidays.
The assistant changed the battery and told me to monitor it for a week for any problems.
The watch is still faulty.
I went back again and was told that I had to send it off myself for repairs to the address on the guarantee card and pay £4 postage and insurance.
The shop assistant explained that this was a manufacturing problem and had nothing to do with them.
Is this right?
No.
You should not have to return the watch to the manufacturers.
When you buy something from a shop, you have a contract with the retailer which means that the Sale of Goods Act 1979 covers your purchase and gives you certain statutory rights.
The Act says that goods should be of merchantable quality.
So your watch should tell the time accurately.
Having purchased faulty goods, you can return to the shop (within a short time of purchase) and request a refund of money.
This is what the law says about faulty goods.
In many cases, you get extra protection from the manufacturer in the form of a guarantee.
Because this is additional to your rights, the manufacturer can build in conditions, for example returning goods at your own expense.
You should contact the shop again and explain that you are returning this faulty watch to them under your statutory rights and not under guarantee.
If this fails, try writing to the manager.
Lens troubles by the eyeful
I bought a pair of contact lenses more than two years ago, and from the start the left lens never felt comfortable in my eye; it moved around a lot.
I went back to the optician a few days after the lenses were fitted.
He said they were fine, but that it might take a few weeks for the lenses to settle in my eyes.
But it did not get any better.
I then got a bad infection in my left eye which my doctor suggested was due to the contact lens.
He said that I shouldn't wear the lenses until the infection was cleared.
I didn't wear the lenses for six months.
When I did, they were still uncomfortable, so I gave up.
Three weeks ago, I decided to try them again.
They were still uncomfortable, so I went back into the optician.
He said that he would check my eyes, but that if there was a problem and a replacement was needed the best he could do would be to charge me half-price of £50 for the new set.
Is this right?
When you have a complaint about an item you have bought, it is up to you to complain.
In fairness to the optician, he would think that when you didn't complain again, the problem was solved.
You should have gone back to the optician when you had the eye infection, as this was clear evidence that there was something wrong.
But two years on, your rights have become limited.
The best you could expect under your statutory rights would be a small compensation claim.
However, the problem with contact lenses and glasses is that your eyes can change over time, so it is imperative that problems are sorted out as soon as possible, as it will be difficult to establish whether the fault lies in your eyes or in the lenses.
The Consumer Advice team is at 6, Callender Street, Belfast BT1 5BN, tel,(0232) 328260.
Students take horse studies in their stride
ULSTER students have been saddled with a new course — in horse sense.
The BTEC National Diploma in Equestrian Studies at North Antrim College of Further Education is proving a thoroughbred.
And Ballymoney college chiefs say it isn't a case of horses for courses.
The course is linked with Killoan and The Island equestrian centres and was largely developed and pioneered on site.
At a canter, students tackle hurdles in equine science, horsemastership, stud operation and showing horses.
The two-year course also includes business, with scholars changing horses in midstream.
Marie Hegarty, head of the business department, said: ‘Whether it is for pleasure or profit the care of horses requires a considerable commitment in time and money.
‘There is also the opportunity to take British Horse Society examinations to stage three and gain other relevant qualifications including First Aid and Road Safety.
The BTEC National Diploma is a recognised entry qualification to HND and degree courses.’
Students don't have to own their own horses.
Animals and all necessary tack are provided.
ChildLine gets the ball rolling
CHILDLINE today took its first steps towards helping the voices of children in danger or trouble in Northern Ireland to be heard.
It wants to raise funds to set up a special service for Northern Ireland, and ensure that every child's call is answered first time.
Since its launch in 1986, ChildLine — the only free helpline for children — says it has counselled nearly 3,000 children from the province.
At present, there is no priority service for Northern Ireland calls, nor is there a fund raising programme.
ChildLine has the resources to answer only 2,700 out of 10,000 calls attempted to its freephone number every day from children across the UK.
Children ring ChildLine for help with many different problems, although the largest categories are sexual abuse and physical abuse.
Other common problems include bullying, family problems, pregnancy, drug and alcohol abuse, bereavement and running away from home.
To expand this valuable service to Northern Ireland and reach the organisation's goal of answering every child's call first time, funds are badly needed.
And today, details were announced of a charity ball to pave the way for a ChildLine service dedicated to Northern Ireland.
The McDonald's Friends of Childline Charity Ball on Friday, June 18, at Belfast City Hall, aims to be the first step in raising enough cash to fulfil the aim.
Childline's executive director, Valerie Howarth, said she was delighted that fund raising was getting under way in Ulster.
‘Every penny raised by the ball will help us to maintain and eventually expand our vital service to Northern Ireland.
‘Each ticket purchased for the ball will help Childline cover costs to provide half-an-hour's counselling for 10 children — half-an-hour which could change a child's life.’
The event will be a feast of international music, dance and cuisine, with children taking a large part in proceedings.
Tickets are available through Morrow Communications, telephone 0232 427697.
Sinn Fein‘10’ wait
SINN Fein was today preparing to send a ten-strong squad to Belfast City Hall as the battle for the nationalist vote moved into its final stage.
But the SDLP expected to add another seat to its team, giving it eight benches to occupy in the council chamber.
Sinn Fein, including chairman Tom Hartley, retained its three seats in the Lower Falls and took a fourth from the SDLP.
Mr Hartley, who topped the poll, described the result as ‘an obvious snub’ to the MP for West Belfast, Joe Hendron and the SDLP.
‘It shows that he does not have the support of the people.’
But the SDLP's Alex Attwood held on to his seat in Upper Falls, with 1,000 votes more than the quota, while two Sinn Fein candidates, Alex Maskey and newcomer Una Gillespie, were also elected.
The results showed little evidence of any ‘pan-nationalist front’ among voters.
As before, the trend was of SDLP transfers going to Alliance, not Sinn Fein.
The outgoing Lord Mayor, Ulster Unionist Herbert Ditty was today fighting for his political survival in the Court area where counting was still under way.
If he loses, he will be the first sitting mayor in Belfast's history not to be re-elected.
Debut Ulster Unionist talks negotiator Chris McGimpsey made a successful debut, returned for Court on the second count.
The biggest electoral upset came in Dungannon where Ulster Unionist Ken Maginnis lost his seat and Sinn Fein grabbed two extra seats on the council which has been a model for co-operation between the two traditions.
There was also a shock for the SDLP in Newry and Mourne where it lost two seats, reducing its strength to 15.
The UUP gained one seat, and veteran SDLP man Jim McCart, Northern Ireland's longest serving councillor, was struggling to retain his seat.
In Antrim, the UUP lost two seats, one to Sinn Fein 's Henry Cushinan, the other to Alliance's general secretary, David Ford.
Workers' Party veteran Tom French lost his seat in Craigavon, but party colleague Peter Smyth became a new member of the council.
The Conservatives suffered the biggest reversal of fortunes, losing two seats in their North Down power base.
Party leader Dr Laurence Kennedy had to wait until the sixth count before he was re-elected.
Dr Kennedy later admitted the party had paid the price for unpopular government policies.
In Belfast, five councillors lost their seats including Democratic Left leader Seamus Lynch and Alliance's Tom Campbell and Mark Long.
UUP councillor Margaret Clarke and Conservative Dorothy Dunlop were also out.
Nationalists took control of Limavady council from the Unionists, with the SDLP capturing the seat of the outgoing UUP mayor.
In Fermanagh, unionists have retained control, with Sinn Fein losing a seat in Erne East to independent nationalist Tony McPhilips.
There was also a major upset in Ballymena, where the DUP lost control of the council to the Ulster Unionists for the first time in 15 years.
Gary McMichael, son of murdered UDA leader John McMichael, won a seat for the Ulster Democratic Party in Lisburn, but party leader Ken Kerr lost his seat in Derry.
No major change in the strength of all the main constitutional parties is expected once counting ends tonight and all but the Conservatives say they are pleased with their result.
With almost 500 seats filled, support for Alliance has improved with extra seats in Castlereagh and Ards, while the anticipated fall in support for the DUP did not materialise.
Big guns line-up in all Ireland
THE third round draw for the Schweppes Cup has resulted in a number of very interesting pairings with the NCU clubs favoured by home draws in the battle of the big guns.
Holders Waringstown will have home advantage in their tie with Dublin YMCA, North Down will entertain Clontarf, Lurgan will play Merrion and if successful against Pembroke, Downpatrick will entertain North West side Bready at Strangford Road.
In the North West the big tie will be between the locals Limavady and Brigade.
The draw is: Waringstown v Dublin YMCA, Donwpatrick or Pembroke v Bready, Malahide v St Johnston, Limavady v Brigade, Carlisle v Strabane, North Down v Clontarf, Eglinton v Instonians, Lurgan v Merrion.
Games to be played on or before Wednesday, June 16.
Queen Mum ‘comfortable’ after minor operation
THE Queen Mother was today ‘comfortable’ after a minor operation to remove an obstruction from her throat.
She was sleeping and would remain under observation in Aberdeen Royal Infirmary today, said a hospital spokesman.
Officials could not say if the Queen Mother was expected to stay in hospital for a second night and did not divulge the nature of the obstruction.
The bulletin was the first to be issued by the hospital since the Queen Mother was taken there last night suffering what Buckingham Palace described then as a ‘slight tightening of the throat’.
The statement, read by hospital head of public affairs Alan Reid, said: ‘Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth the Queen Mother was admitted to the Aberdeen Royal Infirmary at 6.30pm on Thursday, May 20 1993.
‘Her Majesty underwent a minor operational procedure last night to have an obstruction relieved from her throat.
‘Her Majesty's condition is comfortable, and she is presently sleeping.
‘Her Majesty will remain in the Aberdeen Royal Infirmary under observation today.’
Officials gave no detail of the obstruction but said it was not a fishbone.
FACTFILE
GETTING started: Don't pay any money at first, no matter what an agency may claim to be offering.
A reputable agency can often be found through the Yellow Pages followed by a quick visit to the agent.
Most models taken on someone's books will need a professional portfolio of themselves.
This is often used by a potential client so the more professional the result the better.
But a good one shouldn't cost more than £50 to £100.
This is the main cost for any part time model starting out.
It's then a matter of sitting back and waiting for the calls!
The models are on the books of Alison Campbell Associates and Style Academy, both Belfast-based agencies.
Hard act…but they love the lifestyle
JULIEANNE McConville (20), has been modelling most of her life.
She won a beauty competition in her local newspaper in 1981 after being nominated by a neighbour.
Her prize was a trip to London to see Charles and Diana tying the knot.
A business student at Jordanstown, Julieanne said she loved every minute of the work but that she was glad she was also continuing with her education.
NICOLA Delacour (18), from Newtownards used to work in a building society but has now been modelling for nearly a year.
She said her dad at first‘hated the idea of me modelling’ but was now really proud.
She said she had had no bad modelling experiences but that running around Ravenhill at a recent Ulster rugby game against Australia in front of 15,000 whistling fans had proved ‘very embarrassing’.
TRACEY Chambers (20), is a former Miss Castlereagh.
The history student recently appeared in a TV commercial for Meadowcup butter.
She said she found modelling to be a good business to be in.
‘I'd love to do catwalk,’ she said.
‘That would be great with the thrill of it all.’
JUDITH Spratt was Miss Northern Ireland three years ago.
She still balances her job working in insurance with her part time modelling work.
Currently appearing in a Sealink Stena TV commercial, Judith can also be spotted on billboards across Belfast city centre.
She said the work could be demanding but that if the agent handled a career properly the modelling life could be a great experience.
Not to be taken seriously
THE Northern Ireland scene has seen an increase in the number of men wanting to make it into modelling.
Tracey Hall of Style Academy said she had been seeing more males looking for jobs.
She said: ‘There has been an increase with more and more boys coming to us.
The recent jeans adverts definitely made a difference.
‘Height is important in a man but the traditional chisel look and cheek bones are also needed.’
Tracey said she recruited many of her adult models by trooping the disco and nightclub circuit looking for the latest talent.
‘People can be a bit odd at first but after they realise I'm not trying to chat them up it's okay.
I find discos are one of the most reliable places.
Mark Whiteside (18), said he had only recently started modelling but that it had all been good fun.
‘I wouldn't mind a go at TV commercials.
There is a good social life and I've met friends.
I'm happy where I am and I get called every couple of weeks which suits me.’
‘Enjoyable’
Canadian Geoff Thompson, also 18, did some modelling in America before moving to Whitehead.
He said modelling shouldn't be taken too seriously.
He claimed he got started after being spotted in a bar by someone who mistakenly thought they had seen him in a male model magazine.
‘It was then that I decided to give it a try.
I daren't say about the future but I have been doing some stuff with girls teen magazines.
‘It is very enjoyable but one of the disadvantages is that when you start out you can be put low on a list after others and you may have to wait some time.
‘But that does depend on the agency you are with.’
Tunnel chief makes plans
EUROTUNNEL chairman Sir Alastair Morton is already planning for the moment he can step down from the £9 billion project.
He said he would probably stay on for about two years after the tunnel opens for passenger traffic, probably next summer, and would then take a very long holiday.
Sir Alastair said: ‘I won't disappear completely, but I've no desire to rush back into a project of such a scale.’
Comeback for cult band
LOU Reed and the Velvet Underground are re-forming after 23 years to play just four British dates next month.
The influential rock band, whose earliest fans included pop artist Andy Warhol, are appearing in Glasgow on June 1 and 2, London's The Forum on June 5 and Wembley Arena the following night.
Nun leaves hospital
MOTHER Teresa, who broke three ribs in a fall ten days ago, has been released from hospital in Rome.
The 83-year-old Roman Catholic nun, winner of the 1979 Nobel Peace Prize, fell as she walked to chapel at one of the Rome residences of the order she founded, the Missionary Sisters of Charity.
Prince makes a joke
THE Prince of Wales brought laughter from international hoteliers by telling them: ‘There is nothing like having a good pair of Bristols.’
His tongue-in-cheek comment came as he departed from the text of his speech launching a campaign to encourage hotels to adopt environmentally friendly practices to praise the restoration of Warsaw's new Bristol Hotel.
Lonely day for Naomi
SUPERMODEL Naomi Campbell turns 23 today — and if she wants to spend it with her U2 fiance Adam Clayton she will have to fly to Europe.
The bass guitarist is in the middle of a hectic European tour.
The couple were engaged earlier this month but have spent hardly any time together since then.
MPs back Esther plan
TV campaigner Esther Rantzen was tonight announcing a political initiative to back her call for a nationwide witness protection programme.
A cross-party group of 58 MPs have signed a motion asking the Government to support That's Life! star Esther.
They want action to introduce adequate protection schemes, backed by the Treasury to ensure properly funding.
‘Battle on’ plea to ship workers
Finish frigates, say union chiefs as 420 get chop
SHIPYARD union conveners from all over Britain meet today after more than 400 job cuts were announced at crisis-hit Swan Hunter shipbuilders.
The union chiefs were urging workers at the Tyne yard to fight to complete work on three frigates being built there.
Swan Hunter, whose present workforce numbers 2,200, is now in the hands of receivers and has been in acute crisis since failing to win a vital Ministry of Defence helicopter-carrier order.
Wallsend Labour MP Stephen Byers — who spoke yesterday of ‘10 traumatic days for Tyneside’— said there were fears about one of the three frigates under construction, HMS Westminster.
She left the Tyne yesterday for six days of sea trials and ‘our worry is that it will not come back to the river but will be completed somewhere else in the UK’, he said.
However, Ed James, one of the joint receivers called in to keep the company afloat, gave an assurance that the ship would return to the Tyne on Thursday or Friday next week.
Mr Byers said the MoD was ‘touting the work on the frigates around the country’, making inquiries to find other yards where it could be completed.
He and Newcastle East Labour MP Nick Brown will meet the Prime Minister next Thursday, he said, to ‘express anger about this whole sorry episode’.
Yesterday's announcement of 420 job losses came after a meeting between the receivers and union representatives at the yard, where warships have been built for 130 years.
The redundancies cover 212 established production workers, 134 staff and 74 short-term contract people, a news conference was told.
All will lose their jobs at the end of next week.
Tyne Confederation of Shipbuilding and Engineering Unions (CSEU) chairman Tommy Brennan said the union conveners meeting in Carlisle would consider a recommendation from national CSEU chairman Jim McFall that Swan Hunter workers should resist any bid to have the frigates completed elsewhere.
He said the yard's remaining 1,800 jobs and more than 4,000 in companies which supply Swan Hunter were very much in danger and called on the Government to guarantee the remaining jobs by allowing the yard to complete the three frigates and by bringing forward future MoD orders.
Experts to study threat of big-time criminals
AN analysis of organised crime by leading experts on Triads, the Mafia and Hell's Angels is to be carried out at a conference next week.
More than 100 law-enforcement experts from all over the world will be at the conference, organised by the National Criminal Intelligence Service (NCIS), to assess the threat posed by the gangs.
Simon Crawshaw, director of the year-old NCIS, said organised crime did not have the highly-visible impact of robbery, burglary or street violence.
But he warned: ‘There are now too many examples of nations whose entire economic, political and judicial structures are being subverted, not necessarily for political motives but for nakedly financial ones.
The ultimate victims remain the same.’
In Britain, there was increasing evidence of Mafia involvement, particularly in fraud and drug trafficking, of Triads operating illegal gambling, extortion, passport rackets and drugs, while Hell's Angels were involved in trafficking cannabis, LSD and amphetamines.
Det-Insp Graham Saltmarsh, of NCIS's organised crime unit, said the Hell's Angels, numbering about 200, represented the ‘purest form’ of organised crime in the UK.
‘They are extremely well-organised and well-represented legally.
They are self-contained and self-supporting, with front companies with very large bank accounts and international links.’
NCIS has set up a special desk to study their operations, which it viewed with ‘rising alarm’.
One of the speakers at the conference, being held at the Police Staff College, Bramshill, Hampshire, is a Canadian expert on Hell's Angels and other gangs.
NCIS, which has drawn up a target list of 500 top-level criminals, co-ordinates intelligence on a regional, national and international basis.
It has more than 400 police, customs and civilian support staff, based at five regional offices in England and Wales.
With a budget of £25m, it includes units specialising in intelligence on counterfeit currency, drugs, organised football hooliganism and organised crime.
MOTOR RACING
Mansell on 3rd row
WORLD Formula One champion Nigel Mansell will start from the third row of the grid for the Indianapolis 500 on Sunday after his qualifying time of 220.255 mph proved eighth fastest.
Mansell's Newman-Haas team-mate Mario Andretti lines up on the first row after finishing second fastest qualifier with 223.414 mph.
Arie Luyendyk starts from pole position after setting the top speed of 223.967 mph last weekend in a Lola-Ford Cosworth.
Only the fastest 33 qualifiers earned places on the grid for the premier motor race in the United States.
Hill outstrips Monaco rivals
DAMON Hill went a long way towards fulfilling the hopes of his family and army of fans when he grabbed provisional pole position for Sunday's Monaco Grand Prix.
On the track where his father the late Graham reigned supreme, the 32-year-old Londoner outstripped all his rivals with a string of quick laps at the end of opening qualifying yesterday.
And afterwards, he admitted he had been inspired by the special atmosphere of the unique Monte Carlo street circuit.
‘You can just reach out and touch it here,’ he said.
‘I can see the faces of the people and recognise them.
It is very special quite different to anywhere else we go.
‘I felt it all in the car and I enjoyed it.
But I know, too, that if it is a dry day on Saturday then I shall have to do it all over again.
‘I was lucky today.
It was all question of being out on the track at the right moment close to the end of the session when it was drying.
‘The track was drying out quite quickly when I did my best lap particularly on the climb up towards Casino Square where most of the cars are on full throttle for most of the time.
‘I did not get too much traffic and that was a big hope for me.
It was always going to be a tricky session because of a heavy downpour beforehand.’
Hill ended up sharing the front row of the provisional grid with his Canon Williams -Renault team-mate Alain Prost.
Mark Blundell was the next best-placed Briton in ninth place in his Ligier Renault.
He said: ‘The conditions were difficult for everyone and we took a good decision to wait until the last half-hour before doing our 12 laps.
Running for fun
Hospice helpers: Getting ready for the five miles charity fun run organised by Croft Hotels and the Shaftesbury Inn are Sean O'Neill (15) and Darren Maken (15), both from Glengormley with Lynda Watt (23) from Belfast.
The run, in aid of the NI Hospice, started at the Chimney Corner Inn and finishes at the Lansdowne Court Hotel.
Young runners: Tracey Maken (11) from Glengormley and Gemma McCallion (8) from Belfast, pictured during the Croft Hotels and Shaftesbury Inn Charity Fun Run.
Drawing breath: Brian Semple (8) and Andrew McCullough (8), both from Belfast, take a rest after the National Children's Fun Run.
Brian and Andrew ran in the under-11 section.
Get ready: Under starters orders at the Northern Ireland Sports Trust National Children's Fun Run are (from left), Emma Smyth (13), Laurina Walters (13) and Michelle Denny (12), all from Belfast.
BASKETBALL
Boston boys put on superb exhibition
BOSTON'S Holy Cross defeated a Belfast Select side 104–83 last night in front of a large crowd at the Queen's PE Centre.
The top American team produced some dazzling plays with the hustling Ted Bettencourt and slick moving Rob Feaster dominating the match.
Even so, Holy Cross's head coach George Blaney was impressed by the spirited Irish effort.
‘Holy Cross played very hard and spread the floor well which made it difficult for us to trap them in open play.
I actually felt they hustled better than us though we managed to catch them on the break quite a bit,’ said Blaney.
American import Gerald Kennedy was the most impressive for Belfast as he delivered some superb scores and combined extremely well with Pat ‘Trick’ Lynch.
One moment of magic came in the late stages of the first half when Holy Cross's Brian Lockhart surged into the danger area before pivoting past two defenders and then slotting the ball in the basket.
The Americans led 54–41 at half-time and it always seemed they could step up a few gears when required.
Bettencourt slipped a beautiful reverse pass to Feaster who raced in to slam dunk another two spectacular points midway through the second half.
The local team still had their moments with Lynch and Peter McGrattan getting their fair share of the points.
FOOTBALL
Phone-in auction
A phone-in auction is the latest fund raising idea to boost Gregg Davidson's testimonial season at Portadown.
Four prizes are up for grabs — a George Best Tampa Bay Rowdies shirt, an autographed Stevie Cowan Portadown jersey, a Derry City autographed ball, and a Derry City shirt.
Anyone interested in any of these items can bid by phoning any one of these numbers before 8pm on June 1 — Portadown 331013, 330209 or Loughgall 891605.
TENNIS
Wheelchair clinic
WHEELCHAIR tennis has been given a boost in the province in the wake of a successful clinic which was staged at the CIYMS club in Belfast.
The event was organised by the Northern Ireland Paraplegic Association in conjunction with Disability Action and Tennis Ireland.
Participants travelled from as far apart as Dublin and Derry for the clinic which was conducted by Martin McIlhatton, chairman of the British Wheelchair Tennis Association.
Also helping out were Noel McShane, a leading wheelchair tennis player, and Dutch coach Joss Danker from the International Wheelchair Tennis Association.
It is now hoped to stage further clinics in the province in the near future.
Bangor's fans are saints!
I WOULD like to join with those who have thanked the Bangor people for a great time in the three Irish Cup finals.
As a Ballyclare supporter I was not sure which fans to join in the final but thankfully I went to the South stand and found myself in the middle of the most friendly people I have ever met in my whole life.
I did not hear as much as one single swear-word during the three games.
The Bangor supporters were very clean and smartly dressed.
They can be extra-proud of their lovely children who were without doubt the best behaved youngsters I have come across.
During the first match I was amazed to find myself sitting beside a Church of Ireland minister, a Free Presbyterian Minister and a Roman Catholic priest.
They had all come from Bangor together for the game.
They even shared cream cakes and tea from a flask at half-time.
How lovely Bangor folk are!
I was invited back to Clandeboye after the game by some other friendly Bangor folk.
As we sat and sipped our half-pint shandies I reflected on what a lucky choice of company I had made.
It was with deep regret that I had to leave for home later that evening.
As I drove off to return to Harbour Road, Ballyclare, the sight of the Bangor folk coming out to wave goodbye, brought a lump to my throat and a tear to my eyes.
If I had chosen the North Stand I would have found myself in the middle of those awful drunken, swearing and spitting Ards fans.
They were even shouting ‘Useless, useless’ at the poor Bangor keeper and calling him ugly.
How horrible can you get?
Stephen Eachus is a really good-looking young man, thankfully he did not respond to these rabble.
The Ards players behaved badly as well.
They should have played a more open game and allowed us to see Bangor scoring lots of goals.
They nearly spoiled a great day out.
In closing I must remark that if we ever make contact with aliens we should take them to Bangor and let them see all that is good in the human race.
Thanks again Bangor fans for the best days of my life.
Noel Goode Yes, the fans were great.
But don't let those clergymen convert you to Bangorism; Ballyclare need all the fans they can get.
Magee bout a sell-out
DESPITE nationwide television coverage and ringside seats priced at £100-plus, Noel Magee's fight in Germany tonight will attract a near-capacity crowd of over 5,000 in Aachen, near Cologne.
Magee, from Ardoyne, once challenged for a British title held by fellow-Ulsterman Sam Storey, and lost.
Now he clashes with the tough Pole, Darius Michalczewski, for the vacant IBF International light-heavyweight championship, a formidable task, according to manager Barney Eastwood.
Michalczewski looks a stronger puncher than he is a boxer and has won 16 contests in all, 14 of them inside the distance.
…well, not all of them
LIKE Mr Rabbitte and the Clifton Red, I attended the Bass Irish Cup Final as a neutral, if a Linfield supporter can ever be classified as a neutral.
Economics (and the fear of being bored witless for the third time in 10 days) demanded that I, and my son, only got to the first two matches and watched from the Kop.
I hate to disillusion both the other neutrals and the Bangor fan, who wrote in the previous week, trying to raise his fellow fans to Sainthood.
The Kop had its fair share of ‘loudmouths and drunks’ but admittedly no sectarian chants.
The Bangor version of the bigot seems to prefer an individual approach to abuse.
One fan, in particular, abused every Ards player and the match officials during the second game as ‘dirty f…b…‘s.
Now I'm not in the business of counting but my rough guess is that this paragon of nature was, on the majority of occasions, abusing his co-religionists.
I think it is naive of anyone to think that there are any clubs in the Irish League, who are completely free of sectarian elements in their support.
Sectarianism and bigotry will stay on the terraces for as long as our society stays in its current mess, but the vast majority of all fans are only interested in one thing — seeing their team win.
Incidentally, I foresee a major problem looming next season.
Will Bangor have to play their matches against Linfield-Glentoran-Portadown-Glenavon-Cliftonville at a neutral venue?
Surely there won't be enough room in Clandeboye for all Bangor's new found fans and the regular travelling support of these clubs.
Neutral Blueman I think you're being a tinge sarcastic with that last remark.
SDLP pledge
The SDLP will continue to operate a policy of powersharing within Derry City Council, newly elected councillor and party chairman Mark Durkan said today.
He said the fact that the party had won two extra seats — giving the SDLP an overall majority — would not change their policy over the rotation of key positions such as that of Mayor.
The final line-up is SDLP 17, up two with a slightly improved vote, Sinn Fein five, as before but with an increased overall vote, DUP five, up from four even though the party's vote dropped slightly, Ulster Unionist two down one with a reduced vote and Independent Unionist 1.
The new council which will be meeting in the Guildhall from next month onwards will include a number of new faces.
The biggest change has come within the ranks of the SDLP where Martin Bradley, Mark Durkan, Kathleen McCloskey, Margaret McCartney and Wilfred White have all been elected for the first time and Pat Ramsey makes a return to the Council chamber having reclaimed the seat he lost in 1989.
Leaving the ranks of the SDLP are Noel McKenna and Annie Gallagher who did not seek re-election and Willie McCorriston who ran as Independent SDLP having split with the party earlier this year.
New to the Sinn Fein quarter are Mary Nelis and Bernie Bradley in the place of Barney McFadden who lost his seat and Dodie McGuinness who did not seek re-election.
The DUP has added Bill Irwin to its ranks to add to the four sitting councillors.
The Ulster Unionists will have Richard Dallas joining party leader John Adam's in the chamber.
But seats have been lost by Ernest Hamilton and George Duddy.
PGL bring in two new players
THE Private Greens League selectors have brought in two new caps for this season's IBA Senior Inter-Association championship in Dublin on June 4–5.
Phillip Hutton of Knock and Sammy Moore of Willowfield are included in the team for the first time, while dropped from last year are John Nutt (Pickie), Bertie Nixon (Willowfield), Roy McCune (Ballymena) and Stan Espie (Willowfield).
Moore comes in at lead on Stevie Adamson's rink while Hutton is in a similar position on Sammy Allen's rink.
The selectors have only left one rink intact from last year — Billy Montgomery (Falls), Cecil Worthington (Knock), David Gardiner (Belmont) and Seamus Elliman (Falls)— a rink which had three wins last season.
Robin Horner of Belmont has been recalled to the team as second to Willie Watson (Knock.)
There's not much change from last year, but how on earth the Private Greens selectors can overlook Myles Greenfield of Dunbarton baffles me.
Myles skipped a Dunbarton rink to an Irish fours championship last season and has been very impressive in the same position in the PGL U25 championship.
He should have been on the team, even as a second.
The PGL had a run of four successive titles broken by the NIBA last year and our hoping to get back on the rails in Dublin next month.
The PGL will be playing at St. James' Gate, Leinster and Crumlin.
LAYOUT AGREED
THE LAYOUT of the bookmakers' pitches at Down Royal has long been a bone of contention, with bottlenecks the main drawback, causing frustration among the punters — and no doubt among the men who lay the odds as well.
Now, however a new layout has been agreed by the course bookmakers association and the racecourse executive which could take much of the hassle out of betting at the track.
At least that's what is planned, anyway.
The new stand was the trigger for the layout.
Obviously the old bookmakers pitches could not stay where they were and had to be moved.
The question at the beginning of the year was ‘where?’
And at the last three meetings the bookmakers have operated in a confined square which certainly hasn't been the answer to congestion problems.
In addition, with all the hype over the new stand, many bookmakers who had deserted Down Royal, were now keen to be seen to be taking a renewed interest in betting there — obviously with the view to establishing a cosy pitch when grand opening day on July 13 takes place.
This has caused a certain amount of wrangling, with those stalwarts who had been at Down Royal through thick and thin— mostly thin — complaining because there were now too many layers to be accommodated.
Well, the new layout which is an open-ended rectangle in front of the stand with suitable access points for the public, should solve a lot of problems even though some of the diehards are still refusing to reach an agreement.
‘Obviously the new stand and the increased interest in racing at Down Royal are likely to bring a new generation to the track and we wish to be there to provide a professional service,’ a member of the bookmakers association told me.
However, I have been interested in the wave of approval which has greeted the new stand which is now nearly complete.
I haven't heard one trainer or racegoer come out against it, which is unusual for moaning about something new is the norm these days.
Homer Scott was delighted when he saw the building for the first time at the May Day meeting and even the course bookmakers who are not known for lavishing praise on anything, are impressed by what has been built.
My only reservation is that the public who use the stand will not be able to see the racing in the same manner as they did from the old open top affairs.
To my mind there will be some restriction but only time will tell.
Meanwhile, Harp Lager who have been behind the new building all along, are to be congratulated on their commitment to Down Royal and also for making sure that the flagship of racing on the track, the Ulster Harp Derby, has been boosted financially as well as given a new look.
It will now be a limited handicap which should mean avoiding the farce of last year when only three went to the post, two of them from the same stable.
Harp Lager have been trying to attract English horses and although this is never easy I'm sure that if the right money was available, then the barriers would come down.
In addition, they intend to lease a horse to run in the race and this should provide a novel angle if nothing else.
Genuine fans missed out
I WOULD just like to add my comments regarding the Mervyn Brown Memorial game.
Firstly, I've had a great season with all my favourite teams (Manchester United, Rangers and Linfield), winning their respective league titles.
However, some events of recent times have soured by happiness.
Having attended the majority of Linfield's matches, I had thought that I should be entitled to a ticket to see my other favourites, i.e., Manchester United.
But this was not to be the case.
I'm sure that a significant proportion of the crowd at the Manchester United-Villa match rarely, if ever, go to an Irish League match.
Why should these ‘fur coat fans’ get tickets?
The distribution of the tickets for this match left a lot to be desired.
The Irish League cannot just wash their hands of the matter, as Morton McKnight seems to have done.
At the very least, the outlets which sold the tickets before the official date should never again be involved in distribution.
But, back to the fans.
Let's hope that some of these people come back to Windsor Park for the less popular internationals (e.g. Latvia).
I doubt if they will, however.
They're more likely to be found at Lansdowne Road (another recent issue in your letters page).
At least I'll get a ticket for the Republic match — I've got one of the special tickets!
The best player by far in the Irish League this season has been Noel Bailie, not Paul Byrne.
Surely the awards should be given on the strength of a whole season, not just January onwards.
Before Christmas I think ‘who is Paul Byrne’ would have been a popular question.
P White I agree with all those sentiments, especially the one about Bailie.
In my opinion he was the League's outstanding player throughout the season.
Soccer terrace scribes in pitch battle
ULSTER'S soccer fanzine writers were lining up to put the boot in today — with not a typewriter in sight.
They were doing battle on the pitch rather than swapping banter in the columns of their alternative programmes.
Terrace scribes from several Irish League clubs converged on Newtownards leisure centre for their own soccer showdown — dubbed the Essay Cup.
Among them were teams from the Crusaders fanzine Where Cornerboys Collect, the Linfield publication, One Team in Ulster and Larne's Under the Moon.
But the clash everyone was waiting for was the re-match of the Bass Irish cup final between the writers of Bangor's A Close Shave and the two Ards fanzines We're All Going Down To Davy Lee's and The Butcher's Apron.
Today the Bangor editor said: ‘We are determined to emulate our team and show we are the top dogs in north Down.
‘But no doubt if we beat Linfield, they will be ajudged to have been ‘very unlucky’.
‘Either way I have a feeling there will be lengthy and detailed post-tournament analysis over a pint or two.’
Hunter injury mars Lions win
North Auckland 17 British Lions 30
THE British Lions launched their tour of New Zealand with a hard-earned win over North Auckland at Whangarei but the victory was marred by a shoulder injury to winger Ian Hunter.
All four of the Lions' tries came from the three-quarters, including Anthony Clement, who switched from full-back to right wing after Hunter went off with an injury which puts a big doubt over his immediate tour future.
Hunter was replaced by tour captain Gavin Hastings, who went to his normal position of full-back and took over the goal-kicking from match captain Stuart Barnes.
Both Barnes and Gavin Hastings landed one penalty and one conversion.
The Lions fell behind after 10 minutes before centre Jeremy Guscott had the distinction of being the first Lions' scorer of the tour in the 24th minute.
Scott Hastings followed him over two minutes later but a try by Mark Seymour levelled it at 12–12.
Barnes put the Lions ahead to stay with a 33rd minute penalty and Clement and Rory Underwood scored second-half tries for the touring side.
Coach Ian McGeechan said: ‘We gave one try away but scored with two excellent efforts as we settled down.
The players who have not been here before now know what the New Zealand experience is like.’
Stuart Barnes, the match captain, said: ‘This team was playing together for the first time.
The pace is a yard quicker out here and it was important for us to get the measure of the speed of the New Zealand game.
‘this was our first match and there were the inevitable nerves.
I hope people will not be too critical but the nervous mistakes ended with us conceding 12 points.
‘Defeat would have been catastrophic to morale.’
While the three-quarters enjoyed the glory, there were hard-working displays from back-row forwards Ben Clarke and Richard Webster while lock Damien Cronin took most of the Lions' line-out as they shaded this department 18–16.
Court told of booby-trap bomb
A DETECTIVE spent the last moments of his life watching the Grand National in a pub with friends.
Belfast Crown Court yesterday heard that detective constable Spence McGarry left the Ballycastle pub and five minutes later his friends heard the blast which killed him.
A 46-six-year old father of three died after his booby-trapped car exploded and burst into flames as he tried to leave Castle Street car park on April 6 1991.
The policeman was so badly burned he had to be identified from dental records.
Immediately after the blast the victim's car rolled down hill and struck another car occupied by a woman.
Three Ballycastle men are on trial accused of aiding and abetting in the murder.
Denying the charge are Gerard Patrick Butler (27) of Caman Crescent; Sean Martin Hill (24), Glentaisie Drive, and Stephen John Hill (32) of Caman Crescent.
They have also pleaded not guilty to causing the explosion and possessing explosives with intent to endanger life.
The court heard that the IRA victim was in the habit of visiting his mother, who was in her 80s, at her Ballycastle home at weekends.
The Crown claim Butler had collected information about his movement in the town and passed them on to the IRA.
A bomb was brought to the house which Butler shared with Stephen Hill, and there Butler showed his co-accused how the device worked.
The prosecution that both Sean and Stephen Hill were aware the IRA intended to carry out an attack on the policeman.
Yesterday publican John McKeague said that Mr McGarry had been drinking regularly in his bar for the last 20 years, but added that no one had ever asked about his movements.
The court also heard that a woman and her three-year-old daughter passed the policeman' car only seconds before it exploded.
And another witness, who had been in the car park, said in a statement to police that he had not seen the policeman check underneath his car before getting.
Butler and Sean Hill also deny plotting to kill policemen by setting up a plan with the IRA to plant a culvert bomb under the road between Ballycastle and Cushendall.
The court was told that the admissability of confessions allegedly made by the accused will be challenged by the defence.
Young teachers facing job threat, warns union
THE Ulster Teachers Union today warned of a ‘dramatic increase’ in compulsory redundancies, particularly among younger school staff.
The union, which has around 5,000 members, said new plans by the Department of Education could remove altogether special payments for teachers taking premature retirement.
The UTU said it regretted the Department had gradually reduced severance enhancement levels as a result of severe criticism of the retirement scheme by the Comptroller and Auditor General and the parliamentary Public Accounts Committee.
‘If such an incentive is not available, teachers will not opt for premature retirement,’ UTU said, ‘And the result could be a dramatic increase in the number of compulsory redundancies, particularly among younger teachers.
‘This would not be in the educational interests of either the Government, the Department of Education or schools.’
Both the Audit Office and the Parliamentary Accounts Committee have severely criticised the operation of the scheme by the Department of Education, which took action to reduce payments.
UTU also warned that the imminent merger of the Exams and Assessment and Curriculum councils must not be ‘a cosmetic exercise’ and teachers unions should be given places as of right on the new body.
‘We deplore the manner in which the Government has ignored the united voice of the profession in respect of the composition of the Curriculum and Exams and Assessment Council,’ stated the document, sent to the Department of Education.
The past practice of Ministerial appointments of teacher representatives ‘detracted considerably’ from the credibility of both Councils in the eyes of teachers, the UTU added.
GOLF
John runner-up again
BELFAST solicitor John Boston, who won the National Seniors golf championship twice and was runner-up last year, was again runner-up this season in the Munster Seniors Open championship at Castletroy.
The 70-year-old Royal Co Down golfer had rounds of 75 and 76, nine over par on this testing park course.
He had a remarkable two at the 12th where he holed out with an eight iron to come home in one over par for the closing nine holes.
Kenny Burns (Lisburn) finished in fifth position with rounds of 77 and 80.
The winner was Jackie Harrington (Adare), former close champion who had a two over par total of 143 with rounds of 70 and 73.
Help us remember!
ORGANISERS of the Northern Bank Primary mini-rugby tournament are looking for ‘forgotten’ players to help them celebrate the 21st anniversary of the Ravenhill finals on June 19.
Alex Redpath and Willie Gribben, two workaholic officials, have traced all previous 20 programmes of the finals and have ear-marked a number of players who have gone on to greater things at international, inter-provincial and senior club level.
However, there are number of players who because their mini-rugby team didn't make Finals Day, would have slipped through the net, and they are asked to contact officials with the prospect of playing in a special mini-rugby game between two ‘select’ teams.
Mini-rugby is the springboard for the game, and over 500 under 11s from various areas around the province are now in the process of attempting to reach this year's 20-team climax at Branch headquarters.
Some of the names who have appeared in the previous two decades include internationals Rob Saunders, Denis McBride, Peter Russell, Niall Malone, and Don Whittle as well as Ulster's Andy Adair, Stephen McKinty, Stephen and Andy Matchett and Mark Wylie.
Hospital discharge: Doctors to issue post-op bulletin on Royal
Ruling due on Queen Mum stay
A DECISION was expected later today on when the Queen Mother will be discharged from hospital after her throat operation.
The Queen Mother spent a ‘very comfortable’ night, said Aberdeen Royal Infirmary spokesman Alan Reid.
‘She will be seen by her medical consultant at 8.30am and he will decide whether any further treatment or tests will be required,’ he said.
The consultant, Dr Peter Brunt, is the Queen's official doctor in Aberdeen.
His assessment would determine the time —‘or indeed the date’— of the Queen Mother's discharge, Mr Reid said.
An official bulletin was expected some time after the consultation.
The Queen Mother underwent the operation, to remove an a piece of food lodged in her throat, on Thursday night.
The hospital had no information of whether members of the Royal Family were planning to visit the Queen Mother today.
But the Prince of Wales is known to have spoken to his grandmother by telephone yesterday.
Mc Mahon scores a first at Dundalk
SAINTFIELD jockey Paul McMahon has made a big hit since returning home from England where he was champion amateur in 1990.
Last night at Dundalk however he scored the most important win of his new career when he gave the Crumlin-trained La Greine a superb ride to win the old Sweet Afton Hunter Chase, now called the Tallanstown Chase.
Always in the leading group, McMahon pushed to the front before the last where he was challenged by the favourite Over the Edge, but keeping his mount perfectly balanced and running as straight as a gun barrel, McMahon found something left in the ‘Tank’ and went on to score a snug success.
‘That's my first win in the race,’ Paul said afterwards ‘and I must say La Greine gave me a great run.’
Trainer Ian Duncan, whose stable is on the shores of Lough Neagh, was also scoring his first win in this historic race although he had gone close when Camlin River was beaten by Phillipinetown Lad a few years ago.
‘La Greine is a tough mare,’ he said ‘and she won two point-to-points this year as well as a hunter chase at Downpatrick in April when Paul rode her.
That's her finished for the season but she will be back next year and should show a great deal of improvement.’
That was the only Ulster success of the night but the Bily Rock-trained Tadila was always in the leading group before finishing third in the Ardee Hurdle won by Shareef Alliance and should be all the better for the run.
It was an unusually poor night for Jeremy Maxwell whose Fun ‘N’ Games jumped badly in the Mickey McArdle Chase won by Harristown Lady while Banour ran better but found the pace too hot in the Carrolls Hurdle won by Frank Berry's Shankorak for the second year running.
Smooth away lines with beauty sleep
VISIBLE lines and results of past sun damage.
General dullness, coarseness, muddiness…
All this is what Clinique's extraordinary new Turnaround Cream attacks — with a speed so dramatic and direct, it begins its work literally overnight.
Who should sample its benefits?
Probably any skin except the fine, dry, sensitive skin and (temporarily) any skin that's sunburned.
For anyone else, it's a revelation, an all-round skin improver.
All you do is apply it to a cleansed bare face and give it a few hours to work.
Every night is the ideal schedule.
Use it tonight and see progress tomorrow.
What's so different about Turnaround Cream is its persistence.
Operating on a continuous, non-stop basis each night to rid skin of faults you don't want to see, it is a unique enough to have a patent pending.
Unusual in many ways-including its gentle liquidy texture — Turnaround Cream is exceptional in what it does for oily skins.
Added to a nightly Clinique skin care routine.
Turnaround Cream reaches into the skin and finds a world of freshness and youth inside.
(In the case of drier skin, add a moisturizer follow-up as well.)
Cookstown's bumper year
THE spoils on the massive trophy table at the Greystone and District table tennis league annual dinner were liberally distributed over three counties.
League dynamo Robert Irwin masterminded the thriving Greystone table tennis league and ensured that all the players had a feast of competition throughout the season, and pride of place went to the Cookstown team which included a unique father and daughter combination in Joe and Joanne Hutton, as well as the Scott brothers Alistair and Nigel.
Irwin's sons John and David featured in the Division Two winning side, Greystone Loopers, while Methodist teams took Division Three and Four titles.
Dungannon led by Ulster under 21 player Rodney McKirgan along with his brother Nigel, took Division Three while the Barclay brothers Uyle and George featured for Cookstown Methodist in winning Division Four.
The village side Brigh were proud Division Five champions led by Andrew Bell while the Kenneth Charles four man cup went to the Monaghan B side led by Keith Hazlett.
Olympic star Suki for Bangor clinic
SUKI BROWNSDON, Britain's four-time Olympic swimmer, will be here next week as a guest of the Bangor club.
The girl who marked a Moscow Games' baptism by placing sixth in a final at the age of 14 is coming for a Tuesday night clinic in which she will demonstrate her famous shrug-of-the-shoulders technique on breaststroke.
It was so effective that Suki was ranked fourth in the world back in the early 80s.
The ‘Brownsdon Adidas Swim clinic’ is being sponsored by Car-Tec and will take 50 of Bangor's best young talent through a training routine.
Suki —‘I hate being called Susannah’— will also host a question and answer session and outline the finer points of good stroke discipline.
Larne lad Fergus Bailie last night swam the fastest 100 metre breaststroke by a 13-year-old in Ulster.
It was in the Age Group finals at the Grove that young Fergus clocked a Gold medal time (71.31 secs) that has earned him selection by Ireland for the British Age Group championships in Leeds two months from now.
And Michael Williamson, of Lisburn, and Ards' Andrew Bree will be joining him, both in the 200m medley.
They, too, were in top gear at a gala in which Gail Hamilton and Bangor's Alison Owen scored double wins.
Let jail escaper appeal to Mayhew, claims QC
CRUMLIN Road jail escaper Joe Doherty should have had the opportunity to make representations to the Secretary of State before a decision was taken to delay a review of his sentence until he had served 10 years in Northern Ireland, a court has heard.
Doherty (39), from the New Lodge area of Belfast, and 37-year-old Michael McKee, from the city's Ballymurphy Road, escaped in 1981 and were sentenced in their absence.
Doherty was arrested in New York in June, 1983, and spent the next nine years fighting extradition.
He wants those years in jail allowed against the life sentence he got for the M60 machine-gun murder of SAS captain Herbert Westmascott in May, 1980.
McKee, who was sentenced to 20 years for firearms offences, was recaptured in the Republic three months after escaping.
He was tried there under cross-border legislation and was sentenced to 10 years for the break-out.
Their lawyers applied to the High Court for judicial reviews of the Secretary of State's decisions not to review their sentences until they have each served 10 years in the province.
Judgment in the case has been reserved.
Eilish McDermott, QC, appearing for Doherty, submitted ‘natural justice’ required that — taking account of the time he spent in jail in the US — Doherty should have been given the opportunity to make representations to the Secretary of State.
She maintained he should have got the chance to give the facts of ‘the very complicated case’ from his own point of view.
‘At one extreme, one might say: ‘Here is a person who escaped from custody in Belfast; therefore, whatever flows from that can be taken to be entirely his own fault.’
‘The danger, if one takes that extreme position, is that an element of punishment might creep in,’ she said.
Miss McDermott said there was ‘a suspicion’ Doherty had been treated in ‘the way the Secretary of State chose to treat him’because he had successfully resisted his deportation for so long.
She submitted there was no other appropriate or fair way for the Secretary of State to deal with the case other than to allow Doherty at least an oral hearing or written representation.
EQUESTRIAN
Irish riders dominate
IRISH showjumpers have dominated the classes at this week's Hickstead Nations Cup meeting at the all England jumping course in Sussex.
Irish Olympic rider Peter Charles won the Homepride Flour international yesterday on Impulse, easily outpacing Dutchman Sven Harmsen on Soviet Look in a seven horse jump-off.
Cullybackey horsewoman Jessica Chesney nearly clinched the Homepride Sauces International stakes on Thursday when she had the fastest clear round in the jump-off but tipped the gate to get an unlucky four faults.
Jessica and her 18-hand Grand Prix winning Diamond Exchange were pipped at the post by Irish colleague Cpt John Ledingham from Dublin with Kilbaha.
Jessica and James Kernan are hoping to keep up with international successes and will be competing in tomorrow's Grand Prix.
There was jubilation in the young riders Irish team when Clements McMahon from Clones won two classes with Omeara and Head Start.
Michael Buckley on Griffens Hill was also in top form to win the Foxhunter competition.
Other prizes went to Erik Holstein, Alan Griffen and Clement McMahon on other classes.
Labour warns of NHS ‘hotel charges’ plan
A POLITICAL storm erupted today over suspicions — not denied by the Government — that ministers are planning to introduce ‘hotel charges’ of up to £30 a night for patients convalescing after NHS treatment.
Labour claimed they already had ‘very good evidence’ that this was about to happen.
And Stephen Dorrell, financial secretary to the Treasury, conceded that ‘no option is ruled out’ in the Government's search for £10 billion cuts in public spending.
But, speaking on BBC Radio 4's Today programme, he described as ‘misleading’ a report in The Guardian this morning that correspondence on this issue was taking place between the Treasury and the Health Department.
Now, Shadow Chancellor Gordon Brown plans to raise the whole issue when he speaks at the Welsh Labour conference in Llandudno later today.
And he has already called on Chancellor Norman Lamont to make a Commons statement ‘as a matter of the utmost urgency’ setting out the Government's intentions.
David Blunkett, shadow health secretary, said that he made a speech three weeks ago with very good evidence behind him that the Government was going to engage in redefinition of ‘nursing care’ once a patient's surgery had been completed.
‘I do not believe they are going to be as clumsy as to try to introduce this for people actually undergoing surgery,’ he said.
‘But nursing care is being redefined as convalescence and charges will be introduced for that.
I know of hospitals putting people into private nursing homes immediately after their operation for what is called ‘post-operative care’.’
But Mr Dorrell said: ‘There is no secret about the fact that the Treasury announced last summer it was engaged in a fundamental review of not just health expenditure but four other areas of Government spending to ensure that the way the money is spend reflects today's priorities.’
He said that no decisions had been reached on any of the ‘scare stories’ which had appeared in the Press.
‘The Government has an obligation to ensure that the expenditure of taxpayer's money reflects today's priorities and delivers the best value we can today for the money spent today.’
When he was asked specifically about The Guardian report he said it was ‘misleading’.
‘What is true is that the Government is considering a range of options both in the health service and other fundamental expenditure.’
Pressed again on ‘hotel charges’, he replied: ‘No option is ruled out, that would be a completely wrong way of proceeding.’
Condition of malaria victim now ‘stable'
A HOLYWOOD woman suffering from malaria is still in intensive care at the Royal Victoria Hospital, Belfast.
Mrs Arlene Walker, whose husband William died from the disease, is said to be ‘stable’.
And 13-year-old Simon Dearden, who suffered serious burns after an aerial he was carrying touched an overhead power cable, is continuing to improve.
He has already had two sessions of surgery at the Royal.
Bomb blast soldier
THE condition of an RIR soldier who lost both legs in a booby trap bomb blast in Lurgan is described as ‘stable’.
The soldier has been transferred from Craigavon to a hospital in Belfast.
Seacat birthday gifts
HUNDREDS of passengers are set to take advantage of Seacat's first birthday celebrations which start on Monday.
Weekend car travellers on the Belfast Stranraer route, which started on June 1, 1992 can now travel on a special three day return fare.
Up to four adults can travel for £85 and children up to 15 years of age travel free.
The offer lasts until June 30.
Ulster travel firm to close with loss of jobs
A LEADING Ulster travel firm has ceased trading with the loss of a number of jobs, it emerged today.
Concord Travel has shut down its three branches in Belfast and Londonderry — but most of the 36 staff have already found jobs elsewhere.
It is understood that the lease, furniture and fittings of two of the branches — on Rosemary Street in Belfast and on Shipquay Street in Derry — have been bought by another travel firm.
Concord director Maurice Guy said: ‘Due to recessionary pressure we have closed our branches and are not taking any more business.
‘We are now concentrating on handling the business we already had on our books — it's basically a tidying up operation.
‘We don't owe anyone anything and there has been no liquidator called in.
‘Our clients have been informed of the situation by letter and I would like to reassure them that their holidays and their money are safe.’
Mr Guy said the massive response to the Hoover free flights offer had been an important factor in the firm's decline.
An spokesman for the Association of British Travel Agents said: ‘Any monies paid out will be protected by us.’
Anyone with any queries should contact Concord on (0232) 247904 or Abta on (071) 518 1953. s
Jehovah Witness baby in blood ruling
A HIGH Court judge has given the go-ahead for a critically-ill baby girl, whose family are Jehovah's Witnesses, to be given a live-saving blood transfusion.
The ruling was made by Family Division judge Mrs Justice Booth after a private hearing yesterday.
She will give reasons for her decision in public on Monday.
The 10-month-old girl, suffering from leukaemia, is being treated at Great Ormond Street Hospital in London.
It is understood relatives of the baby, from Dagenham, east London, agreed reluctantly to a transfusion, but it was blocked after objections from senior officials of the religious sect, who hoped alternative treatment could be found.
Although the Witnesses support most forms of medical treatment, one of the tenets of the faith is based on the Bible's instruction that people should not take blood into their bodies.
It was unclear who had made the court application.
The family cannot be named for legal reasons.
Double fun for Ulster's thrill seekers
THOUSANDS of fun-seekers from all over the province are expected to flock to the north west this weekend for a thrilling double bill of the North West 200 and the International Air Show.
All roads leading to Portrush for the annual motorcycle race today were heavily congested with police re-issuing warnings to race-goers to drive carefully to avoid possible accidents in the area.
The organisers of the colourful airshow at Eglinton Airport in Londonderry are confident that tomorrow's extravaganza will attract huge crowds of visitors, despite claims of bogus ‘cancelled’ posters being placed around Coleraine and Portrush earlier this week.
Among the line-up in tomorrow's air show will be the appearance of a US Korean War Jet Fighter, the T33 ‘Shooting Star’, a Dakota DC3 and a stunt show displayed by the Crunchie ‘Stand on Wing’ Flying Circus.
SOME Northern Ireland construction companies are so desperate for business they are building houses at a loss, a report reveals today.
Figures from the Northern Ireland Housing Executive show the depth of the crisis in the Ulster building industry.
And in the Republic, it is being alleged that imports of building materials from Northern Ireland are threatening hundreds of jobs in the southern border counties.
In the province, as firms scramble to win public sector contracts, the average tenders being offered are lagging far behind the actual cost of construction.
Using a figure of 100 for costs in April 1988, the building cost average in 1992/3 was 131.38, compared with an average tender price of 108.
It means that in the last four years, the building cost average has jumped by almost 20 points, while the tender average has stayed virtually the same.
And for the first time in five years, the average cost of building a house dropped from the year before — from £25,338 in 1991/92, to £24,537 in 1992/ 93.
A spokesman for the Housing Executive said: ‘While building costs have increased the tender price has not increased at the same rate.
‘At times of recession, contractors are trying to maintain their market share and they do operate some contracts at a loss.’
Earlier this month, a survey revealed the province's building contractors suffered the sharpest decline in workload of any UK region in the last three months, with a decline of 4.5pc on the previous quarter.
In the last year, the construction level in the province has crumbled by a massive 18.5pc.
The Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors has warned this will lead to redundancies among architects and quantity surveyors.
In the 1992 annual report of the Construction Employers Federation, president Tom Patterson warned the practice of underbidding for contracts was a ‘road to ruin'.
Meanwhile, hundreds of jobs in the construction industry in the southern border counties are threatened by the import of building materials from Northern Ireland, it has been claimed.
Co Monaghan Trades Council said a number of quarry firms in the south were threatening to lay off workers because of a recession created by the use of materials from Northern Ireland.
The vice-chairman, Fred Boyd, called on the Republic's government to take action which would prevent Ulster firms from ‘under-pricing’ supply contracts in the Republic.
Pressure mounts on Mayhew
PRESSURE mounted today on Sir Patrick Mayhew to place his talks proposals before the parties now — and prepare for a long wait.
The outcome of the local government election showed little change for the main parties, and SDLP MP Eddie McGrady said the Secretary of State would see the results revealed nothing that he did not already know.
‘He has to put his proposals to the parties now, because he has made so many public comments about them that he has no other choice,’ he said.
Mr McGrady said the results showed that 82pc of voters wanted talks and this was a sufficient response to proceed.
Similar opinions came from Alliance and the Ulster Unionists, with DUP deputy leader Peter Robinson saying the party would look at the talks proposals, specifically to see whether they dealt with removing Articles 2 and 3 of the Irish constitution.
Sir Patrick apparently has no plans to comment on the election's outcome until next week, when he meets the Republic's Foreign Affairs Minister, Dick Spring, in Dublin to discuss future steps towards dialogue.
It seems inevitable that his hopes for a June start will be delayed.
Local politicians do not believe that any new talks formula could be adopted before late summer or the autumn.
Sinn Fein 's increased vote will be a worrying factor for Sir Patrick, although this is somewhat balanced by an increase in Alliance's poll.
John Alderdice, the Alliance leader, today said: ‘It should be possible for the Government to bring forward the propositions which Sir Patrick has undertaken to make available to us and start bilateral talks.
‘These are British Government proposals and don't require anybody else's permission, and they can be shared with the four parties here and the Irish Government.
This should be done at a fairly early stage.’
Ulster Unionist MP David Trimble agreed it ‘seemed sensible’ to produce the proposals, as he felt Sir Patrick should ‘come off the fence’.
But Mr Trimble said talks remained impossible while SDLP leader John Hume continued his own discussions with Sinn Fein president Gerry Adams.
‘There is absolutely no question of talking to the Provos by proxy,’ he commented.
Mr Adams said Sinn Fein 's vote, now 12.5pc, showed ‘that the nationalist agenda has been strengthened and an internal agreement ruled out’.
Queen Mother to be discharged from hospital tomorrow, after tests proved ‘satisfactory’, said hospital spokesman.
See page 4.
Millwall turf going ‘for a sod'
THOSE Millwall fans who didn't manage to rip up a piece of turf during the chaotic farewell scenes at The Den the other week will be glad to know they'll have the chance to pick up some of the sacred turf next week in a special auction.
Not so much ‘Going for a Song’ as ‘Going for a Sod.’
Ever-enterprising chairman Reg Burr, sensing the chance to make a few bob out of the wave of sentimentality which has greeted the old stadium's demise, contacted local auctioneers, who will be putting some Den memorabilia under the hammer next Wednesday.
Milwall memorabilia?
What, like Doc Martens, knuckledusters and handcuffs?
No, this batch of unique lots ranges from ground turnstiles to original MFC carpets from the director's suites and the prize item, reckons auctioneer Steve Bown, will be the club's main gates.
A couple of hundred quid could see you become the proud owner of a 9ft 6in tall by 12ft wide wrought-iron masterpiece bearing the legend ‘Millwall Football Club’.
Lifelong Lions' fan Steve reckons it would be ideal for anyone who wants to stop toilet rolls being chucked into their front garden.
And then there's the turf.
Two foot square strips are likely to go for a fiver a sod and will be accompanied by certificates of authenticity from manager Mick McCarthy.
What form these certificates will take is not known, but maybe it could be something along the lines of: ‘This is the spot where I flattened…’
Brazilian soccer was in mourning this week after a match which had commentators wailing about the worst game ever to be witnessed in the hallowed Maracana Stadium.
The Fluminense and Botafogo players were jeered off the pitch after their Rio de Janeiro championship match on Sunday and ridiculed by the press for perpetrating an error-ridden, turgid version of their country's beautiful game.
Just over 6,000 fans turned out to watch a fixture which in its heyday attracted 100,000-plus crowds.
Fluminense won 2–0 but the game was so awful that one respected journalist was prompted to launch this extraordinary attack.
‘Fluminense and Botafogo maltreated the ball, the fans and soccer in general,’ wrote Raul Brunini.
‘They deserved the jeers which accompanied this attempted murder of football.’
And they thought that was bad.
Good job Raul wasn't at Wembley on Saturday…
The British Lions were amused to read of the plight of referee Steve McNally when they picked up the local paper in Paihia before the first match of their New Zealand tour.
The unfortunate McNally was refereeing a club cup final between Kerikeri and Kaeo when he inadvertently dropped his whistle in a cow pat.
After gingerly retrieving his whistle from the offending item and giving it a quick clean-up, McNally was immediately called on to blow it when he awarded a drop goal after a free-kick.
It was only then that the aggrieved captain pointed out that a drop goal is disallowed after a free-kick under modern laws and McNally had to blow again to signify a change of verdict.
And the whole episode apparently left one fan shaking his head and observing: ‘That's what you call two crap decisions…’
Irish forward Mick Galwey really felt at home when he arrived in New Zealand last weekend.
After landing on Kiwi soil, the Kerryman smiled: ‘I thought I was seeing double the airport we touched down at was called Kerikeri!’
Dennis Wise was the subject of a ‘fact-file’ in a recent edition of Chelsea's club newspaper.
Asked what advances he'd like to see at Stamford Bridge in the next 12 months, he responded: ‘I want us to win something.
I think the manager we've got now is the one to sort it out.’
Two days later, David Webb got the sack.
Journey into the unknown for Irish
NORTHERN Ireland manager Billy Bingham is under no illusions about the task confronting his side in Tuesday's World Cup qualifying tie against Lithuania in Vilnius.
‘This is going to be a difficult one for I reckon Lithuania are the best in the Baltic nations,’ he said.
‘They have experienced players now in top grade European football — players who are fast and quick on the breakaway.’
With qualification for the USA ‘94 finals an impossibility Bingham, however, wants to finish among the top four in Group Three.
And that's what his Lithuanian counterpart 42-year-old Algi Liubinskas wants as well as.
Twice within 10 days Northern Ireland ‘s 17-strong squad will be competing in the independent Baltic States.
They travel to Lithuania tomorrow, return home on Wednesday and then next Sunday leave for the June 2 match with Latvia in Riga.
Originally the Irish FA considered spending the entire period on tour but making the two trips has proved more financially viable.
With no players involved in club games this weekend, it is unlikely there will be any withdrawals.
Already out,, of course, is Luton Town ‘s 24-year-old striker Philip Gray with a groin injury which means that Iain Dowie (Southampton) and Jimmy Quinn (Reading) should form the twin spearhead.
Northern Ireland's World Cup downfall really started with that opening match against the Lithuanians at Windsor Park in April ‘92 when, after being two goals ahead, they went walkabout and Lithuania hit back to draw.
The loss of that point was crucial, a confidence sapping blow.
Northern Ireland, with the pressure off, are expected to go for a win.
‘If we get in front we won't make the same mistake of lying back and letting them in as we did in Belfast,’ said captain and centre back Alan McDonald (Queens Park Rangers).
‘We've learned a lot since Belfast,’ said Liubinskas who spent a year as assistant manager of AC Milan, favourites to win the European Cup with a victory over Marseille, the multi-talented French side which eliminated Glentoran in the first round.
Lithuania have their full squad available and it looks a formidable one.
No fewer than six play in central European football with three coming from Austria Vienna — Robertas Fridrikas — a player who hits a free kick like Ronald Koeman — Valdas Ivanauskas and the skilful midfield playmaker Arminas Narbekovas, It was Narbekovas and Fridrikas who scored in Belfast while the strong runs of 6 foot 2 inch Ivanauskas caused the Irish defence many problems.
The Lithuanian back division, as Liubinskas was a little suspect against Northern Ireland but this was primarily due to the absence of 32-year-old central defender Vlacheslavas Sukristovas who was unable to obtain a visa from Israel where he plays for Maccabi Netanya.
There is the formidable barrier too in goalkeeper Valdemaras Martinkenas, a 28-year-old who has been playing with Dinamo Kievf and three others with Austrian clubs are defenders Arvydas Janonis (St Polten), Romas Mazheikas (FC Krems) and striker Stasys Baranavskas (FC Vienna).
There are four too with German clubs in the Bundesliga second and third divisions while the top local is 19-year-old striker Eimantas Poderis of the leading club Zhalgiras Vilnius who is expected to be transferred to a German club within the next few months.
For the Lithuanians success in sport provides a welcome diversion from the harsh realities of every day life since independence.
That's why they are determined to triumph on Tuesday and lift themselves into a respectable position in Group Three from which the favourites to qualify are Spain, Denmark and the Republic of Ireland.
Herbert eyes podium spot
BRITAIN'S Johnny Herbert goes into the Monaco Grand Prix this weekend wondering if he can earn a place on the podium for the first time in 37 formula one races.
He has been trying for three years and he said today: ‘Maybe it is because, God knows, I've had some leg problems and I just cannot climb those steps that easily,’ he joked.
‘That is the only reason I can think of.
I am trying hard and I really believe this could be the one this weekend.
The car has not been perfect this year, but it feels a lot better now than it did.
Yet it is still not perfect.
‘Having said that, though, I am sure I've got the ability to do something and I shall be aiming for a points finish at least.’
But this race has not been a happy event for him.
‘I've never had much luck here,’ he said.
‘I think the best I've qualified has been 12th and I have never finished a race, so I am due something.
‘I believe we have a chance of a good points finish, but of course it all depends on how we qualify on Saturday.
That is the key thing.
‘At least it is dry now so we are aiming for a real performance.’
Burham Rally: Sponsors up the ante
Winner set to cash in
NORTH Armagh Car Club and their consistent backers, Burmah Oil, are continuing to buck the current trend.
At a time when prize money — real prize money — has all but disappeared from rallying they are INCREASING the cash on offer for their end of June Burmah Rally in Lurgan Park.
This year the winner should carry off a cheque for…£3000.
That's up a third on last year and represents an amazing reward for just 15 miles of special stage driving.
No wonder the Burmah remains the most popular event on the Irish calendar.
The prize fund for first place is split into two parts — £2000 to the driver finishing on top of the leaderboard and another £1000 to the first car home using unleaded fuel.
But as almost all the front-running supercars are environmentally friendly these days, the two cheques are virtually certain to go to the same person.
It adds up to quite an incentive for the ‘King of the Park’ Kenny McKinstry who will be bidding for an unprecedented sixth victory this year, and a second in a row in his Kaliber Subaru Legacy.
However, a £3000 reward is certain to attract a quality entry and McKinstry just might have some very stiff opposition to contend with even if Tarmac champion Bertie Fisher sticks to his guns and opts out this time.
Fisher is a great fan of the Burmah event — but not of tree-lined Lurgan Park and its short, sharp, intimidating stages.
He is a double winner of the rally but that was some time ago and since then McKinstry has made the place very much is own, his sequence of victories punctuated only by the years in which he did not have a competitive car or the opposition included someone of the calibre of Mikael Sundstrom.
He proved last year that the Subaru is an ideal car for the tight, twisty lanes and with his knowledge of place plus his total commitment, few would bet against McKinstry increasing his bank balance by handsome amount this year.
Still, it is early days and there are already whispers of impressive cross-channel interest although clerk of the course William Fullerton insists he is not, as yet, in a position to make any announcements.
As always he must wait for the dust to settle after the Scottish Rally and the Donegal International, too, before being certain which drivers and what cars will be in his starting line-up.
Woman is injured by ‘huge chunk’ of shrapnel
A YOUNG Portadown businessman told today how a two-foot long piece of shrapnel which missed him by inches ended up embedded in an employee's leg.
Robert Davidson (22), a partner in a clothes shop, said the huge chunk of metal sliced through his trousers before hitting the woman's ankle.
Peggy Holmes, who is in her 60s, is now recovering in the City Hospital.
She had surgery yesterday morning and was described as comfortable.
The pair had been standing, along with Mr Davidson's father and business partner and other employees at Bridge Street, about 250 yards from the scene of the blast.
‘I saw this piece of metal whizzing through the air at an unbelievable speed,’ Robert said.
‘I never took my eye off it.
When it came closer I jumped out of the way but it cut the bottom of my trousers.
I was very lucky.’
Mr Davidson's father, Robert Snr, said Mrs Holmes had been working for him for the last eight years.
‘She got a terrible gash in her leg,’ he said.
‘I held her while the ambulance came.
There was a lot of blood about.’
Cram to erase ‘has-been’ tag
STEVE Cram launches his new 5,000 metres career on the roads of Aberdeen in the mood to confound the critics who have written him off as a has-been.
And as Cram prepared to jump in at the deep end with a clash against Olympic 10,000m champion Khalid Skah in the BUPA International Festival of Running, race organiser Brendan Foster tipped his pal to rekindle memories of his glory days in his new event.
Eight years after setting a world mile record which still remains unchallenged today, the 32-year-old has abandoned his glittering international miling career to make his eagerly-awaited move up the distance ladder.
But many observers, considering the harsh fact that Cram has not won a major championship medal since the 1986 European Championships, believe the Jarrow ace is too old and too injury-prone to make the grade in the 5,000m.
‘Some of the people who have been having a go at Steve aren't fit to tie his shoelaces,’ retorts Foster, who has been imparting a few words of wisdom to Cram as a former miler-turned-European 5,000m champion himself.
‘He's getting fed up of people coming up to him and saying ‘Are you still running these days?’
I think it just spurs him on.
As a family man, he might have other priorities in his life now but his great motivation is to prove he's been prematurely written off.
‘He looks in very good shape and I would be very surprised if he didn't make Britain's World Championships team.’
Cram, who has hardly set the world alight this year with just one win in four races during a campaign disrupted by inevitable calf and hamstring trouble, has only flirted with the odd 5,000m race in the past.
Now it is for real and, though the race will be staged on a parkland road rather than a track, Foster believes it has considerable significance for the rest of Cram's summer.
Brave Murnin new Drumaness boss
PAUL Murnin has been told that he will never play again because of the horrific injury sustained against Crusaders earlier this season.
But as one door closes, another opens — and the former Larne defender has just been appointed manager of Smithwick's Amateur League Premier side Drumaness Mills.
Murnin, 29, played for Drumaness as a teenager.
He is now one of the youngest managers in the league.
Drumaness won the Clarence Cup this season and were beaten finalists in the Border Cup, and Ballynahinch man Murnin believes they can be a championship side.
‘It's a marvellous opportunity,’ he said.
‘For an Amateur League club the facilities here are great and we have an excellent squad.’
Murnin is still on crutches after the much publicised incident involving controversial Crusaders star Kirk Hunter — but he has already forgiven the big man for the tackle which finished his career.
Ironically, Murnin began his Irish League career with Crusaders before moving on to Cliftonville, Ballyclare and Larne.
He replaces Alan Mills, who has been in charge at Drumaness for the past two years.
McCallen on the back row
BY JIMMY WALKER
PHILLIP McCallen received a body blow shortly before today's Coca Cola North West 200 when he was told by the clerk of the course Billy Nutt that he would have to start from the back of the grid in the superbike race.
‘I have to take the rough with the smooth’ McCallen said.
‘However, what upsets me is that I have heard unconfirmed rumours that some of the riders were threatening to pull out if I were put in the third row of the grid as was at first planned.
‘I have no idea who these riders were and I have to accept the clerk of the course's decision.
It just means it will be all that more difficult to win.’
Nutt was noncommittal about riders' protests.
‘The decision was mine and mine alone’ he said.
‘I have told the stewards and they are in full agreement.’
Meanwhile Joey Dunlop was delighted to receive a gift of a 750cc Honda which he rode today.
Bob McMillan, managing director of Honda Racing, said: ‘Joey has done a lot for us over the years and he thoroughly deserves this gesture.
As far as I am aware this is the first time any Irish rider has received this sort of gift from Honda.’
Crowds today appeared to be larger than in recent years despite poor weather forecasts.
Shortly before the start there were roughly 30,000 converging from all parts of the province as well as from the South which added to the local population put the attendance at something like 80,000.
Greer gearing up for champion status
KENNY Colbert, George Robinson, Richard Smyth, Peadar Hurson…all Ulster drivers and all Irish national rally champions in the past few years.
Is the list going to have a new name from Northern Ireland added to it this season?
Ian Greer, perhaps?
The Hillsborough duo of Greer and co-driver Dean Beckett, pictured above after they jumped to the top of the Vard RIAC series last Sunday with a remarkable win on the Carlow round, an event expected to be dominated by the local ‘aces’ Enda Nolan and Stephen Murphy.
But Murphy didn't start and Nolan hit early trouble with his Sapphire Cosworth 4x4 suffering suspension damage which cost him a two-minute delay while repairs were carried out between stages.
However, what was remarkable was Greer's performance on flooded roads in a two-wheel-drive Opel Manta.
While other drivers equipped with four-wheel traction, including early leader Kenny Colbert and John Gilleece, who led the championship going into the Carlow event, skated off the road, Greer kept the Manta under control and ahead of the fast recovering Nolan to win by 15 seconds.
‘The conditions towards the end were terrible.
The roads were flooded and cars were aqua-planning all over the place,’ says Beckett.
‘But Ian did a terrific job and the win was a real bonus for us.’
It was close in the end but it might have been even tighter if Colbert hadn't made way for them on the last stage.
‘We caught Kenny after he had been off the road and were worried that he was going to hold us up because we knew Nolan was catching up quickly,’ explains Dean.
‘But Kenny pulled over and let us through and we made it.’
With Gilleece crashing out of third place on the last stage, Greer leapfrogged to the top of the championship table for the first time and now heads to round six in Cavan next Sunday with a 14-point advantage over the Belfast dentist.
Despite the damage to his Sierra which toppled slowly onto its roof after climbing a bank, Gilleece is hopeful of also being in Cavan where Andrew Nesbitt is expected to appear with his BMW M3.
He won there last year for the third time, beating Bertie Fisher, and is again likely to be the pace-setter.
Andrew, however, is not contesting the championship and won't adversely affect the points situation.
There is talk, too, of Kenny McKinstry putting in an appearance to give his Subaru a pre-Donegal work-out following its trip to Barbados.
But Nolan, who wide is expecting a baby shortly, is unlikely to take part and, according to co-driver Michael Lyster, will probably miss Donegal as well.
‘But Enda has been known to change his mind,’ added Michael.
Boy (14) in court over Littlewoods store blaze
A 14-year-old boy is to appear in court today charged with an offence connected to the fire in a department store in which two elderly people died.
The alleged offence is connected with the blaze at the Littlewoods department store in Chesterfield, Derbyshire, on May 7, in which the couple died and 38 people needed hospital treatment.
The teenager also faces charges related to four other fires — one at the Woolworth's store in Chesterfield a day before the Littlewoods blaze, and three in Chesterfield library.
The boy will appear at a special sitting of Chesterfield youth court.
Everest woman says it's great to be home
TIRED but triumphant, Rebecca Stephens arrived home today less than a week after climbing to the top of the world.
And before a huge bank of photographers, cameramen and reporters, the first British woman to climb Mount Everest declared it was ‘great to be back’.
Her mother, Jane, rushed forward to greet her as she emerged on to the arrivals concourse at London's Heathrow airport, while her nephew John (12) and niece Jessica (eight) leaped into her arms.
‘It's unbelievable,’ said Mrs Stephens, as she hugged and kissed her deeply-tanned daughter.
Ms Stephens (31), a journalist from west London, looked healthy but tired after a gruelling journey back from the Himalayas which began on Thursday with a five-hour march from the base of Everest to Pheriche, the nearest town accessible by helicopter.
Ms Stephens was asked by reporters how it felt to climb to the top of the world.
‘It's great, but tiring,’ she replied.
Gullit ponders future
RUUD Gullit is gearing up for next week's European Cup final with Marseille with many Milan fans believing it will one of his last games for the Italian giants.
Gullit's lucrative contract expires next month and he has yet to agree another one.
The Dutch master has been squeezed out of the multi-million pound Milan squad on several occasions this season; not surprising, considering the club have six top ‘foreigners’ on their books.
Gillit has to compete with fellow countrymen Rijkaard and Van Basten, plus Papin, Savicevic and Boban for one of the three permitted places open to non-Italians.
It's the legacy of the amazing squad built up by club owner Silvio Burlusconi, the Italian tycoon for whom money is no object.
He spent a world record £13m on Gianluigi Lentini last year and some observers say it was to stop others having him, not because Milan needed him.
With no reserve football in Italy it's hard for Milan to keep all their stars happy but, with Burlusconi having pumped £50m into a club which as £15m in debt when he arrived seven years ago, there are few grumbles on the terraces.
Milan are now the richest, the biggest club in the world, and if they defeat Marseille in Munich next Wednesday it will be their third success since their benefactor entered the San Siro.
Van Basten, a hero of the last two triumphs is returning to full fitness and looks likely to replace £10m understudy Papin.
Marseille, who themselves have a tycoon owner in Bernard Tapie, will be hoping to go one better than two years ago when they lost to Red Star Belgrade on penalties.
Lightning bolt blasts house
Lightning tore the roof from a house today as storms left more than 5,000 homes without power.
The lightning bolt hit the house in Kingsteignton, south Devon, but no-one was hurt, said police.
Teams of electricity board engineers were working to bring power back to more than 5,000 homes across Devon and Cornwall after electricity transformers were damaged by lightning.
Peebles signs — for Linfield!
IRISH League champions Linfield have signed 26-year-old Partick Thistle midfielder Gary Peebles on a two year contract — first step in a close season build-up schedule, writes Malcolm Brodie.
Peebles, who flew to Belfast yesterday for talks with Linfield officials, had a lone spell in the season just ending with Portadown as they made their unsuccessful bid to win the title.
He was released by Partick now engaged in a staff reduction and cost cutting exercise.
‘Gary was one of a number of players who impressed me and I'm delighted to have got him,’ said Linfield manager, Trevor Anderson.
‘He can operate as a defender, a sweeper or a midfielder, and I'll be using him in the midfield role.
He'll give us the bite and aggressiveness we need in this area,’ he added.
Peebles, who had five years with St. Mirren before joining Thistle, will join the ever growing number of Scottish players travelling each weekend and in midweek to Belfast for matches.
Linfield chairman, David Campbell said today: ‘This is a fantastic capture for us — an experienced player who will be invaluable to us in the European Cup.’
This is the first of three quality players which Anderson hopes to sign during the summer months.
His target include a defender and another striker to help ease the load on Dundalk based Dessie Gorman who has also signed a two year contract which ended speculation that he might return south.
Linfield's search extends throughout the British Isles and the League of Ireland but until the championship is completed it will be impossible for them to open negotiations with certain players.
‘People will say we are not helping locals by signing imports,’ said Anderson.
‘As so many managers have discovered such players come cheaper than those in the Irish League.
The inflated fee being asked by some clubs for players of ordinary ability is ridiculous.’
In the past Linfield have declined to take a case to the independent tribunal for they felt it was more appropriate for clubs to settle any dispute between themselves.
Now however, they will be prepared to let the tribunal decide if they sign a player out of contract — and that could happen within the next few weeks.
Take a trip back in time
THE Ulster Society are about to hit the road on one of their magical history tours.
Their latest coach journey into the past is next Saturday, and it will be through Co.
Down.
They will follow in the footsteps of the celebrated William Johnston of Ballykilbeg and also visit Dolly's Brae, site of the famous ‘Twelfth’ confrontation in 1849.
Other stops include Banbridge, Downpatrick, Bryansford, and Tollymore forest park.
These popular outings are always great crack and very good value at £15, which includes morning coffee and an evening meal.
And you can book your seat now by contacting the society at Banbridge 25131.
Talking money
SECRETARIES OF STATE often say that Northern Ireland receives a ‘subvention’ from the United Kingdom Exchequer.
The latest figure is £3.5 billion.
This usage has been current for 20 years.
Yet it is the language of a 19th century Lady Bountiful.
It is not suitable for democratic politicians referring to fellow citizens and taxpayers.
It overlooks the normality of Exchequer redistribution to UK regions with exceptional economic problems.
High regional transfers to Northern Ireland do not raise new principles.
Security expenditure in Northern Ireland is genuinely exceptional.
But this does not imply public generosity either.
It is the basic duty of any state.
It is slow work to change public usages like ‘the subvention’.
However, there is one improvement which could be made very easily.
In 1993/94 the UK as a whole borrowed £50b.
This is about £1,000 a head; and it affects the figures conventionally quoted for transfers to Northern Ireland.
If regional balance sheets were struck, the equivalent of £1.5b of ‘the subvention’ would now arise everywhere in the UK.
The Northern Ireland figures should be adjusted to reflect high UK borrowing.
The difference is enormous.
It would be politically helpful as well.
ARTHUR GREEN Downpatrick.
Town ‘top of IRA hit list'
PORTADOWN has been at the top of an IRA hit list for at least two years.
According to security sources, massive bombs which wrecked neighbouring towns, had been destined for Portadown.
These include the 1,000lb Lurgan device and the 2,000lb bomb in Craigavon in 1991.
And angry Craigavon Mayor, Fred Crowe, said the 1,000lb device which tore Portadown to shreds could have been prevented.
‘I would not condemn the police,’ he said.
‘But it was noticeable in the town that when the elections were over there was a reduction in high profile security.
‘We know for a fact that bombs had been prepared in the past for Portadown but the security presence in the area prevented them from being used here.
‘The terrorists have tried to bomb the town.
They just saw the opportunity this time and took it — but it could have been prevented.’
Photo finish
HAVING duped the Press corps by holding his marriage to Audrey Doyle a day early, the publicity-shy ex-hostage Brian Keenan nonetheless agreed to appear for a photo call at the Co Wicklow hotel where the reception was being held.
Whereupon, one of the assembled journalists — and it did not exactly endear him to his photographic colleagues — started to ask Keenan about the famous remark he made after his release — the one about drinking all the Guinness in Ireland and making love to all the women in Ireland.
He didn't even get the sentence finished.
The touchy Mr K turned on his heel in disgust and departed the scene.
Abrupt end of photo-call.
Staring death right in the face
DANGERS to be highlighted in Water Safety Weeks, from May 29 to June 11, are demonstrated in a rescue feature in 999 (BBC-1, 9.30pm) when Michael Buerk presents more remarkable stories of heroism and bravery.
Ron Treptow, an experienced canoeist, was shooting the rapids at Great Langsale Beck in the Lake District when his canoe became stuck in rocks.
Ron — trapped inside — became part of the rapids, with the freezing white water breaking completely over him.
By sheer luck, Ron was able to breath in a tiny air-pocket formed by the rapids, until he was finally rescued by the Langdale and Ambleside Mountain Rescue team, who risked their own lives to save him.
Ron says: ‘It's wonderful that people will do so much to try and help someone in trouble, just because it is the right thing to do.’
On the home run
ROBBIE and the car are now on the home run in Coltrane In A Cadillac (UTV, 8.30pm).
On his voyage, he has realised that sport is more than just a game to Americans, and that sports stars are the heroes of the nation.
He arrives in Massillon, Ohio, to discover the entire town of 30,000 people preparing for the big football game the next day.
The local High School will play in front of a sell-out audience of 20,000, with non-ticket holders tuning in to live broadcasts on radio and television.
Before arriving in New York, Robbie stops off in the Catskill Mountains where the clubs are the traditional breeding ground for Jewish comics.
Woody Allen and Mel Brooks both cut their teeth in the Catskills, and Robbie feels at home here.
It is Thursday, so it must be New York City.
Having lived in the Big Apple some years previously, Robbie is glad to be back ‘in his kind of town’.
After five weeks on the road, however, there is no let up.
Robbie is to guest on America's funniest talk show.
‘Late Night With David Letterman’, and Robbie is not short of anecdotes.
Behind the wheel
THE series about women travelling, Maiden Voyages (C-4, 8.30pm) continues with Noreen Hurlin's search for the lady truck drivers of America.
Noreen teaches HGV lorry driving at her own school in Halifax.
Small and blond with one grown-up daughter, she has been a driving instructor for ten years.
‘Truck drivers have the reputation of being big, bald, aggressive, vulgar men — but I find them quite harmless,’ she says of her work.
Noreen has always wanted to drive a big American truck.
On this trip she hires a 12-gear, 48-foot long vehicle — twice the length of her own — and takes to the highways and interstates of southern California.
Portaferry story
PORTAFERRY is featured in the first of the six-part series Once Upon A Place (UTV, 7.00pm) in which local people tell the story of their own area.
The town was an important seaport long before Belfast was established, and its ferry service dates back to at least 1180, shortly after the Norman conquest.
The programme explores human habitation in the area from the Stone Age to the present day and investigates shipbuilding, wildlife and local cures.
There is also a visit to the Galway Hooker regatta, the RNLI rowing races, Portaferry regatta and Portaferry's legendary gala.
Garden example
THIS week in Greenfingers (BBC-1, 10.20pm) the featured garden is situated in the town square in Bray in Co Wicklow and is an excellent example of what can be achieved in a town garden.
It is still very much the planting-out stage at the Greenmount kitchen garden with Crosbie Cochrane who has some timely advice for anyone interested in a fresh supply of their own vegetables.
Gerry Daly also begins to introduce plants into the conservatory starting off with cacti and succulents which are the most successful to grow in that environment.
Aldergrove stands by for big take-off
AIR travel has come a long way at Aldergrove since the first wide-eyed civilian passengers flew there 30 years ago.
And today's Government privatisation announcement writes another page into the history of Belfast International Airport.
When it took off at midnight on September 25, 1963, Aldergrove was serviced by just seven airlines and carried relatively few passengers.
It had been the Royal Air Force base in the province since the early part of the century, but took on the role of Ulster's principal airport when the Nutt's Corner aerodrome was handed over.
During the '60s, the main airline there was BEA — responsible for 10,000 fights and carrying more than 500,000 passengers to Nutts Corner in 1962.
When it opened, the Aldergrove passenger terminal, with its distinctive multi-peaked roof, attracted immediate criticism for being too small and was regularly extended as business blossomed.
Today the airport is one of the busiest in the UK with staggering statistics.
passengers passed through last year and there were 96,575 flights.
During 1992, there was a £21m turnover and profit after tax of £2.14m.
The international gateway to the skies has two runways — 2,777 and 1,951 metres long — and is equipped 24 hours a day to cope with the worst the elements can throw at it.
There are 30 aircraft-stands servicing domestic flights and scheduled journeys to Amsterdam, Milan and Stuttgart as well as other international flights, including New York from June.
Air-traffic control at Aldergrove and the privately-owned City Airport at Belfast harbour is handled by the Civil Aviation Authority, which directed 125,000 aircraft movements around the clock in 1991.
Recent innovations at the international airport include a business centre, private jet centre to speed access for visiting tycoons, a major new cargo operation and a hotel.
As the last remaining regional airport under Government control, Aldergrove is an ultra-modern transport facility and finished seventh in 199 passenger league table.
Ocean clue: Shark tissue has ‘dramatic’ effects on sufferers
‘Jaws’ hope for victims of cancer
TISSUE from one of the most efficient killers in the sea could hold clues to a cure for cancer, according to a leading American researcher.
Cartilage from the shark — a species which does not develop tumours — has dramatic effects on patients suffering with cancers of the brain, breast and prostate gland, according to US biochemist Dr William Lane.
He will be in London this week to tell top health experts about his plans for more patient trials with the substance.
The key to his research is the unique skeleton of the shark, which is made entirely of cartilage.
It is beneficial in stimulating the immune system and slowing the growth of the blood vessels which nourish tumours.
Trials in Cuba, using shark cartilage in very advanced cancer patients, showed promising results, with evidence of a reduction in tumour size and improvement in the subjects' well-being.
Professor Jose Fernandez-Britto, a world-renowned pathologist from Havana, has shown striking evidence of the death of cancer cells that become surrounded by fibrous tissue as a consequence of shark cartilage.
A rural atmosphere
A DESIRE to sample the atmosphere of a country auction again brought me to O'Kane's at Glenarm and my visit was not in vain.
For in the company of over 200 or so other eager enthusiasts, I was able to pick up a few interesting little pieces.
The auction itself, while the organisers assured me was no more than their normal one, carried quite a few important items of furniture and there was also a wide range of smalls which commanded what I would consider to be better-than-normal prices.
In all over 600 lots came under the hammer and they were dispatched in under four hours with some brisk bidding on choice items.
Among them was an Edwardian oak wind-out table which sold at £420; a mahogany bedroom suite which made £420 and a mahogany desk which realised £420.
There was strong interest too in some jewellery items especially an 18-carat cluster ring which sold at £330.
Affection however, returned to the furniture with an oak sideboard making £300; a large pine table £240 and a mahogany desk £250.
An attractive Noritaki bowl fetched £220; a carved mahogany sideboard £240 and an inlaid plant stand £150.
A grandfather clock had to be a bargain at £175 while a delph clock set made £170.
Other items: garden urns £160; pine dresser £170; three pine chests, £140, £110, £90; pine box £80; two winged-back chairs £90.
In Morgan's a nine-piece inlaid mahogany parlour suite came under the hammer at £1,950 and an upright overstrung Steinway piano went for £850.
An antique campaign chest made £725; an antique double-sided library table £660 and a Georgian carved rosewood teapot, £525.
A collection of Georgian and Victorian silver flatware realised £500; five Royal Doulton figures, made £340 and an Edwardian inlaid mahogany sideboard sold for £300.
An oil painting, St Reny signed H Iten, realised £625.
Other lots: Bohemian glass bowl, £250; two pairs, Dresden porcelain figures, £245; walnut four drawer music cabinet, £185; mahogany sewing table, £180; silver and enamel beltbuckle with six matching buttons, £160; silver two-handled bowl, Sheffield 1913, £150; basque, head German doll, £150 violin and bow, by Hugh Gordon, Belfast, £120.
Anglers, amateur or otherwise, should have a field day at Morgan's next auction when no less than 30 choice rods, carrying names like Hardy and Alcock will come under the hammer.
So too will William Conor's Musicians, a fine oil.
A George Gillespie oil painting, Coastal Scene, sold for £525 at Andersons and a similar price was paid for a three-piece Victorian suite.
Two carved back chiffonniers from the same era went at £400 and £260 and four albums of cigarette cards made £385.
An Edwardian mahogany mirror back sideboard sold at £275; a Victorian mahogany three-door fitted wardrobe made £230 and a Crane & Sons VS piano £180.
Among other lots were: brass-cased mantle clock, £170; brass pillared oil lamp, £160; Georgian mahogany five drawer chest, £160; set Victorian brass scales, £150; pine kitchen cabinet, £150; colonial style tall boy, £130; Victorian Sheffield plate plaque, £155; carved ivory, The Woodcutter, £130; eight-piece walnut dining suite, £120; mahogany Chippendale style sideboard, £120; cast iron water pump, £120; collection of linen, £115; Victorian walnut writing box, £100; large quantity of books, £100.
There was considerable interest in three limited edition prints by Russell Flint when they came up at Bloomfield auctions.
Making over £500 each to sell in total for £1,560 they exemplified the local interest there is in this internationally-acclaimed artist whose last exhibition, before he died in 1969, was in Belfast.
Two garden seats went at £155; a Vienna wall clock made £190 and a school clock £90.
Other lots: Edwardian two-seater settee £150; pine kitchen table £90; a slate mantle clock with a brass lion mount £280; small armchair £110; small armchair £80; reproduction small inlaid sideboard £190; Royal Doulton figure Balero £90; Royal Doulton figure Balloon Man £75; Royal Doulton figure, The Professor, £160; Royal Doulton figure, Lisa, £70; Royal Doulton figure, Julia, £65; Royal Doulton figure, Lady Charmaine, £215; nine-carat gold gents watch £80; oil lamp £90.
Furniture was also to the fore at Ross's where a nine-piece ash dining room suite went at £220; a three-piece Chesterfield suite for a similar amount and a Georgian mahogany chest of drawers at £200.
A collection of garage tools made £335; a colour television £230 and a set of three gilt-framed wall mirrors, £145.
Other lots: Edwardian violin in case, £120; three-piece bedroom unit, £160; Edwardian oak dining table and four chairs, £100; Victorian drawing room settee, £90; pair watercolour drawings, Co Antrim Coast, by Tom Irwin, £65.
At Hill's auction in Ballyclare a Victorian inlaid games table sold for £550; a pine-cased grandfather clock, went at £500 and a Corinthian pillar oil lamp, £310.
A large pine wardrobe made £300; an old Victorian sideboard, £340 and a three-piece suite, £325.
Other lots: overstuffed suite, £275; Victorian mahogany Davenport, £225; Victorian inlaid china-cabinet, £180; ruby oil lamp, £175; Victorian writing-desk, £200; Victorian sideboard, £125.
Great Peter fills in missing link
PETER McEVOY, 40 last month, has played golf in just about every corner of the globe, but never at Royal Portrush.
Now, at last, this missing link in his career is to be rectified.
Tomorrow this five-time Walker Cup player gets his first glimpse of what local boy Fred Daly used to call ‘the greatest links course of them all.’
The Amateur Championship begins there on Tuesday, and McEvoy would like nothing better than to emulate Mike Bonallack and Joe Carr as the only golfers since the War to win the title three times.
Carr was 38 when he did it at Portrush in 1960, so why not the ageless McEvoy?
‘Peter is always a dark horse in any championship,’ says Garth M'Gimpsey.
‘He seems to keep his best golf for the ‘big ones’, and is still one of the toughest competitors in the game.
He hasn't come here for the Portrush air and must not be written off.’
Incredibly, this is only the third time the ‘Amateur’ has been in Ireland, and the championship was first played in 1885.
This was the year officialdom was so confused by the niceties of the draw that they ended up with three, not four, semi-finalists, and a Scot named Macfie got a bye into the final.
It would be grist to the mill of the tabloids if anything so bizarre happened next week, especially after the kind of meticulous preparation all tournaments of this magnitude can expect.
Anything Royal Portrush choose to do is done well, and McGimpsey would be first to say that the famous Dunluce course is in superb shape.
Not because his title count there totals five (out of 10) already, but because he enjoys a challenge that will call for every shot in the book, and some not in it.
‘After this week's rain, the rough is like wire wool,’ comments the 37-year-old Bangor man.
‘Naturally, the premium will be on straight driving, and in this department we've got to rate players like Matt Stanford, of England, and Scotland's Dean Robertson.
‘In fact, there are 20 guys in a field of nearly 300 who could win the championship, and we keep hearing a lot, too, about the young New Zealander, Phil Tataurangi, as well as a good bunch of Swedes.
‘I also have a hunch that Raymond Burns will make an impact.
He's strong out of trouble, and nobody is going to win here without sampling a fair share of that!’
What about the chances of McGimpsey himself?
As a former winner at Dornoch (1985), where nobody took him beyond the 16th green, Garth has the right credentials for a marathon week's work — sound legs and wind, a good nerve, great concentration, and all the shots for a course that will test the strong and mock the timid.
McGimpsey confesses that he didn't go to Dornoch with hopes of victory.
All he tried to do was relax and enjoy himself, ‘and everything just fell into place.’
1And that's what his game-plan will be next week.
The less pressure on him, the better he'll like it.
It was in 1977 and ‘78 that McEvoy won this title before Ronan Rafferty beat him for the first (and only) time in nearly 30 matches for England.
Peter and Garth will be house guests of Alan Moore during the championship, only a stone's throw from the last tee.
Which poses a problem for Alan should both meet head-to-head.
I wonder will his loyalties be split down the middle!
Stephen Dundas, Scotland's first winner since Reid Jack in 1957, will make a lively bid to keep the title, and there'll be nine National champions in all in the line-up, among them Thomas Himmel, of Germany, Nicolas Joakimides, from France, and good young Spaniard, Alvaro Prat.
The action begins with 36 holes of qualifying over both Valley and Dunluce courses, following which the field will be trimmed to 64 for knock-out by match-play starting Thursday.
The final is next Saturday.
Rap for education reforms
YET ANOTHER expensive, colourful and glossy document has been sent to parents by the Department of Education (DENI).
This time it is a parents' guide to assessment at Key Stage 3.
At one point, the document states that levels 5 and 6 are: ‘the levels typically expected of 14-year-olds’.
What a meaningless and poorly expressed idea.
It is meaningless as it makes no effort to establish who is doing the expecting in such a typical manner.
In the light of the response of teachers to the chaos of the assessment process devised by DENI — and its agencies — it can hardly be them!
Or are they levels which have, over a period of time and under stringent test conditions, been achieved by large number of 14-year-olds?
If this term is to have any validity, then a large number of 14-year-olds, covering a wide spectrum of ability, social class etc, should have been tested, their results analysed, and a ‘typical level’ formulated — based on what the majority of them achieved.
Instead what seems to have happened is that groups of adults have sat around in various political and educational ivory towers, deciding in an arbitrary and subjective manner what they think a 14-year-old should be able to achieve.
Not quite the same thing!
It is abundantly clear from the steady flow of these glossy items, from DENI et al, that it is felt necessary to persuade and cajole the public at every opportunity, that all is well in the field of education.
Those engaged in this process would be well advised to remember the words of Ralph Waldo Emerson: ‘If a man write a better book, preach a better sermon, or make a better mousetrap than his neighbour, though he build his house in the woods, the world will make a beaten path to his door.’
Perhaps the fact that so much time, money and paper has had to be spent on selling the education reforms, and that so few are beating a path to the doors of Rathgael House, suggests that they ‘ain't got much of a mousetrap’!
H.S. CAMPBELL Lower Ballyboley Road, Ballyclare.
TV star applauds school green team
Pep talk: Dr David Bellamy, who was the guest speaker at the launch of the 23rd annual Shell Better Britain Campaign, has an informal chat with pupils from Coleraine Secondary School's conservation group who have created a wildlife garden suited to the needs of disabled people.
They are (from left), Tracy Cameron, Kelly Holmes, Christine Harbinson, Jill Nelson and Lorna Carmichael.
Panic over nuclear plant mishap
AN accident at a Ukrainian nuclear power station which killed one worker has raised fresh concern over safety at the former Soviet republic's network of five plants, and caused a minor panic.
The way in which authorities apparently withheld information about the explosion and fire at the Zaporizha plant in central Ukraine will also generate fresh opposition to the industry seven years after the Chernobyl disaster.
Officials said the accident, caused by sparks igniting leaking hydrogen, had nothing to do with the nuclear process at the Zaporizha plant, which is Europe's largest.
There was no increased radiation and no danger to the environment or residents of Enerhodar, the adjacent town of 50,000 people on the banks of the Dniepr river.
An official at Zaporizha's regional council said one welder was burned to death immediately.
A second received burns over 60pc of his body and was taken by helicopter to hospital, where he was reported to be seriously ill.
News of the incident on local radio and television caused a minor panic among residents of the city of Zaporizha, 30 miles away with a population of 900,000.
Residents jammed the switchboard of city authorities asking whether it was safe in the area.
Foreigners in the city said they were unable to determine the seriousness of the mishap and had tried to leave only to be told there were no trains, planes or fuel for cars.
National radio and television in Ukraine made no mention of the incident.
‘This in theory has no connection with the reactor,’ a duty officer at the plant said.
‘They were working on a weld when there was a leak.
The hydrogen supply was shut off within 10 minutes, but it took two hours to put out the blaze.’
The Zaporizha reactors are of the pressurised-water type, not at all similar to the model which exploded at Chernobyl.
Safety is a major concern at nuclear plants in Ukraine, where public opinion is bitterly hostile to nuclear power and morale in the industry is low.
The fresh accident will hamper attempts by Ministers to persuade parliament to lift a freeze slapped on completion of at least three nearly-completed reactors.
Chernobyl is to close completely by the end of the year by order of parliament.
The Chernobyl disaster killed 8,000 people, according to official statistics, and contaminated vast stretches of land in Ukraine, Belarus and Russia.
Elvis death probe demanded
OFFICIALS in Elvis Presley's home county have filed a lawsuit demanding the state of Tennessee to launch a new investigation into the singer's death.
Presley died at his Memphis mansion on August 16, 1977, aged 42.
A death certificate issued the following October listed the cause of death as heart disease.
But the Shelby County Commission has been pressing for an investigation since the 1991 book The Death of Elvis: What Really Happened, quoted doctors as saying Presley died of a drug overdose.
The lawsuit asks the court to order the state registrar of vital records to inspect all documents concerning Presley's death, including an autopsy report that Tennessee courts have refused to make public.
Since Presley's death, his long time doctor Dr George Nichopoulos has acknowledged he continued to prescribe drugs even after he knew the singer was addicted to them.
Centre of Portadown devastated
BOMBERS HIT TOWN
A HUGE bomb exploded in the centre of Portadown today injuring six people and causing widespread devastation.
A van, loaded with explosives, blew up outside the Northern Bank in the busy High Street area as police were trying to evacuate hundreds of shoppers.
One witness said the town was ‘wrecked from one end to the other.’
The bank and the nearby Wellworths store were both destroyed in the blast which also devastated dozens of other shops and offices in nearby side streets.
Ross Metcalf, whose Bridge Street pet shop was damaged said: ‘I saw the flash and heard the bomb go off, it was very, very big.
It has destroyed the town.
‘All the shops along the entire main street have been hit.
‘I saw two people hurt on the bridge about 500 metres from where the bomb went off.
A man looked like he had a broken leg and an elderly woman looked like she had a very serious ankle injury.’
A woman who worked in Burtons said the roof on the shop had been blown off and that a next-door restaurant and bakery had also been completely wrecked.
She said that the roof on Wellworths had also been brought down.
All windows were blown out and large pieces of metal and wood were scattered over a wide area.
Huge chunks of masonry and debris littered the town's main street.
The blast also brought down telephone lines, cutting off the town's communications network, including emergency services for a time.
An RUC spokesman said a police patrol spotted the suspect van and were clearing the area when the warning came, just minutes before the bomb exploded, showering people with glass and debris.
One woman, 100 yards away was hit in the leg by a piece of the van and a policeman is believed to have suffered serious leg injuries.
Three women and three policemen were taken to Craigavon Area hospital.
one woman and a police officer — were later taken to hospital in Belfast.
One man said he heard a ‘massive bang’.
‘Then there was complete pandemonium.
Everyone just panicked, it was like a stampede,’ he added.
Another eyewitness said: ‘I was in my office when I saw a lot of women coming out of a hairdresser's with towels over their heads.
‘I went out to see what was going on and a policeman told us to evacuate the area.
‘A few minutes later, there was a loud bang and a big puff of smoke.
‘The windows along the back of McGowan buildings are all smashed.’
The latest attack comes just two days after a 1,000lb IRA bomb packed into a skip lorry, caused more than £6m worth of damage in Belfast city centre.
Police in the Co Armagh area have been on a state of alert since a massive IRA bomb devastated the centre of nearby Lurgan in March last year.
A series of extra security measures were introduced in Portadown following the blast, with a number of roads in the town sealed off in the evenings to stop the bombers getting through.
The 1,000lb bomb in Lurgan reduced the town centre to rubble, causing millions of pounds worth of damage and injuring three policemen.
And a pre-Christmas no-warning 2,000lb blast ripped the heart out of Craigavon in December 1991.
The huge coal lorry bomb was left at the back perimeter wall of Craigavon RUC station which was demolished.
Dozens of homes, a church, primary school and shops were also extensively damaged.
Portadown was attacked in January last year when five stores were severely damaged in an IRA firebomb blitz.
And in April 1990, Brooke Meadow housing estate in the town was wrecked when a lorry-load of mortars blew-up opposite Mahon Road security base.
Local SDLP councillor Ignatius Fox said: ‘This is the act of mindless animals, people who have utter and total disregard for human life.
‘It's the last thing Portadown needs because we've tried in the last year to regenerate the town.’
One man at the scene said ‘There were hundreds of young people in the town earlier today because there was a junior Orange lodge march through the town.
They had a really lucky escape.
Could you image if that had gone off when they were there.’
Another man said that Portadown had been expecting something like this after the recent attacks in Lurgan.
Many houses some distance from the blast which was close to the nearby police station were badly damaged.
Dozens of slates from their roofs were blown off in the blast.
Many of them, a local man said, were lived in by pensioners.
Robert wins opening race
BY JIMMY WALKER
ROBERT Dunlop made a marvellous start to today's North West 200 when he scored an easy win in the 250cc race, even though the contest was spoiled somewhat when two of the favourites Jim Courtney and especially Phillip McCallen fell off.
Courtney's accident happened on the very first lap when he was in the lead at Mather's Cross between Coleraine and Portrush and he was taken to hospital although his injuries were not known at the course.
Later in the race McCallen fell off at Church Corner, Portrush, but was unhurt and was hoping to be able to take part in the opening Superbike race which followed the 250cc.
It appeared that someone had rammed the back of McCallen's bike, wrecking the exhaust pipe on the lap before the accident occurred.
Robert Dunlop meanwhile escaped all this mayhem to win at an almost pedestrian average speed of 112.65mph from second placed man Dave Milling followed by Ian Lougher, Alan Irwin, Brian Reid and Jason Griffiths.
Drumkeen staff clear up again
STAFF at the Drumkeen Hotel in Belfast are today yet again going through the grimly-familiar routine of clearing up after another terrorist bombing.
Although the hotel was damaged extensively in the attack early yesterday, it is hoped it may be back in business within a week.
It is the fourth time in a year that the popular south Belfast hotel has been bombed.
Some windows were still boarded up after the last attack.
Knockbreda Secondary School, which is beside the Drumkeen, was also damaged and is closed today.
The 200lb bomb, packed into a Ford Sierra hijacked in the Joy Street area, where a family was held hostage, went off just before 1.30am.
The blast left a 10ft crater in the car park.
It shattered windows and buckled walls in the hotel.
Although more than 450 people were moved from the hotel and up to 50 neighbouring homes were damaged, no-one was seriously injured.
Three people were taken to hospital suffering from shock.
Some windows in the Forster Green Hospital were also shattered by the blast.
Emergency repairs were carried out to the hotel and houses, many of which had damaged roofs and broken windows, throughout yesterday.
Among the guests were distraught newlyweds Tony and Paula Goodacre.
They had just gone to their bedroom, leaving friends and relatives at the reception downstairs, when the alarm was raised at 1am.
Although their car and many of their belongings were destroyed by the bomb, they said they would continue their honeymoon.
Police are appealing for anyone who saw the car used by the Drumkeen bombers, registration number PXI 9434, between 10pm and 1am on Saturday to contact Strandtown RUC station.
They also want to speak to anyone who saw a silver-coloured Sierra leave the hotel car park just after 1am.
Carr banned for six months
DUBLIN'S Tommy Carr has been banned for six months following his sending off in the recent National League Football final against Donegal.
Carr was dismissed by referee Brian White with just four minutes of play gone after he kicked out at Donegal midfielder Brian Murray.
Carr, a former Dublin captain, will now miss the entire championship season and indeed his County career could be in jeopardy.
The Games Administration Committee, who sometime ago reiterated their determination to take strong action in relation to off the ball incidents, have obviously decided that Carr's action merited severe censure.
Another Dublin player Keith Barr has been suspended for a month — he too was sent off in the National League.
Success at a stroke
CITY of Derry's Roisin Barr was the star performer in the early finals of the Ulster Age Group Championships today as she collected two titles with ease having won the 16–19 year old 100m Butterfly crown last night.
2.5Barr claimed her first victory today in the 400m Freestyle, leaving nearest rival Justin Boles of Bangor trailing 5 seconds in her wake.
5.1 Barr completed her hat-trick of wins by lifting the 100m Backstroke title with a five second winning margin of over Templemore's Alwyn Teague.
6.8 Richard Duncan (Ards) who collected the 200m Freestyle for 11–12 year olds last night, netted a championship triple with victories in the 100m and 200m Backstroke. 8.5 Duncan cruised to a comfortable win over Lisburn's Neal McGrann with a championship best time of 1.16.38.
An hour later he returned to the pool to notch his second success of the day.
10.7 The most exhilarating race came in the 15 years class as the Robinson twins of Coleraine battled out a nailbiting finish with Louise just pipping Emma by 0.05 seconds.
12.7 Current Ulster record holder Emma led at the halfway mark from her sister and Ards' Gail Hamilton.
Over the final 40 metres Louise closed the gap and was just first to the touch in 1.14.55.
This and sister Emma's 1.14.61 were both inside the European championship qualifying time.
15.8 Leander's Erin Small edged out Georgina Ryan of Alliance by a tenth of a second on 1.22.65 to lift the Girls' 12-y-o butterfly title.
Lineker on target for Japanese
FORMER England striker Gary Lineker was on target for his Japanese side Nagoya Grampus Eight as they beat Yokohoma Marinos 4–3 in a penalty shoot-out in their league match today.
Lineker scored from the spot after the teams had drawn 1–1 after sudden death extra-time.
Brazilian Nogueira headed Marinos ahead from a free-kick in the 32nd minute but compatriot Jorginho set up Grampus' equaliser after 77 minutes for Shigeo Sawairi.
Prost powers to 6th pole position
ALAIN Prost captured his sixth consecutive pole position of the Formula One season as he led qualifying for the Monaco Grand Prix today.
Prost turned in the fastest time on a dry track with 1 min 20.557 secs.
His Williams-Renault averaged 92.4 mph on the twisting 2.068-mile street circuit.
Michael Schumacher of Germany will start on the front row with his Benetton-Ford Schumacher after producing the second-best time of the qualifications, 1:21.
Ayrton Senna, seeking a record sixth Monaco victory, was third.
His best was 1:21.552.
Late in the session he missed a curve and slid off the circuit in his McLaren-Ford.
Damon Hill, whose father Graham won five Monaco Grands Prix, came in fourth with 1:21.825 in a Williams-Renault.
France's Jean Alesi was fifth in a Ferrari in 1:21.948.
Next came Riccardo Patrese of Italy in a Betton-Ford, with 1:22.
Hill led the qualifying Thursday with 1:38.962 on a wet track.
Today's weather was bright and sunny and most of the cars went about 20 seconds faster.
Prost said he expected a tough race but was satisfied with the performance of his car.
‘Pole is important, even if the statistics show that no more than 50 per cent of the winners here started from pole in the last 10 years,’ he said.
Schumacher was delighted with his position and attributed it to an improvement in the traction control of the Benetton.
‘The car has been really great here and it is much better to drive,’ he said.
Senna hurt a hand in his mishap but said: ‘I am only aware of it when there is a kick-back from the wheel, like on a kerb for example.
Otherwise it's okay.’
Rubens Barrichello was the best of the Jordan drivers, qualifying in 16th place.
Thierry Boutsen was 23rd fastest.
Jackman in first world tour final
ENGLISH champion Cassandra Jackman defeated Canada's Heather Wallace to reach the final of the JSM supersquash 93 tournament in Tokyo today.
Jackman triumphed 9–2 4–9 6–9 9–2 to reach her first world tour final since losing in the Australian Open to Susan Devoy last August.
Jackman, a 20-year-old from Norfolk, has reached four major finals since joining the world tour in August 1991.
She meets world No.1 Michelle Martin tomorrow after the Australian's 32-minute dismissal of young compatriot Carol Owens 9–5 5–9 9–3 9–2.
‘This could be my chance to beat her and take the biggest money prize on the women's circuit,’ said Jackman.
Just a stroll for slick Robert
‘I'M GLAD that's over.
It was a much better start than last year.’
This was pint sized Robert Dunlop's comment after he had scored an easy win in the opening R and F Mechanical Services 250cc-350cc race.
Dunlop was always in control of this race leading from the second lap and after that it just wasn't a race.
He ended up with an average of 112.65 followed by English man Dave Milling on 112.11 with Welshman Ian Lougher third on 112.
However, Dunlop's win was somewhat overshadowed by the early accident to Jim Courtney from Crumlin who was in the lead on lap one when he crashed at Mathers Cross between Coleraine and Portrush.
‘I saw the accident and it's a corner you have to have respect for,’ Dunlop said.
‘Young Jim just lost the front end of the bike and went all over the road.
I just hope he's okay.’
The medical team on the stop sent Courtney to hospital but first reports were that his injuries were not too severe.
Another rider who fell off when in contention was one of the favourites Phillip McCallen who left the race at Church Corner, Portrush on lap three.
Earlier McCallen had lost the lead at the same point on lap two after being outbraked by Dunlop.
‘This was where I took up the running,’ Robert said.
‘I saw the other riders up beside me and outbraked them.
I felt I had to get clear early on if I were to have any real chance.
After that I put in another fast lap and coasted from there on.’
McCallen who had been rammed by another rider earlier in the race was unhurt by his fall but obviously still shaken up.
Another favourite to go out early on was Kevin Mitchell who retired at Portrush on lap one so it was left to Brian Reid, Alan Patterson, and Alan Irwin to carry the main challenge to Dunlop along with Milling and Lougher.
Patterson was very unlucky when he ran out of road coming into the start and finish area and had to restart the race at the end of lap two.
At this stage he had been in contention behind McCallen and Dunlop and even after his restart he still clawed his way back into the leading group.
However, he then faded from the scene and afterwards said: ‘I had a lot of clutch trouble and I'm bitterly disappointed for I thought I had a real chance.’
McCallen meanwhile came back to the starting area but then failed to take part and was escorted back to his pit by his team manager Neill Tuxwsorth.
CYCLING
McCall races home alone
JOE McCall (Stephens) made the long journey from Dublin for the opening round of the UCF's ATB Mountainbike League, sponsored by the Cycle Shop Lisburn, at Tardree Forest Park.
His journey was worth while as he came home on his own nearly two minutes clear of Alastair Martin (Ards — Mike The Bike).
The seniors did five laps and after one circuit it was Martin in the lead by six seconds.
However a lap later McCall had passed him and led by 20 seconds and he stretched his lead all the way to the finish.
The hard course meant there were big gaps between the riders and Nial Quinlan (South Dublin Mountainbike Club) was another four minutes back in third place.
In the junior event over three laps, unattached rider Mark Briggs had an impressive debut beating established off-road rider Jonathan Plunkett (Ards — Mike the Bike) by eight minutes.
Briggs, in his first race, matched the time of the senior riders on his opening lap and his finishing time would have put him in fourth place in the senior event after three laps.
Dunlop wins on a borrowed bike
‘IT'S JUST like old times,’ said Robert Dunlop as he completed a double for the day when winning the 125cc class on a Honda borrowed from Portadown rider, Darren Gawley.
This win made up for last year's defeat by Rob Orme when things just didn't go right for Dunlop.
This time Orme finished third but the surprise packet of the race was Mick Lofthouse who was in the lead for a large part of the four laps before having to take second place to Dunlop.
At the end of lap one, Lofthouse led Dunlop with Joey Dunlop third and Orme fourth but on the second lap Robert moved ahead of Lofthouse followed by Orme and Joey.
It was obvious at this stage that the race was going to develop into the best of the day so far and when Lofthouse moved ahead again with one lap to go, Robert had it all to do.
‘Orme was in the lead as we left Coleraine and headed for Portrush,’ Robert said afterwards.
‘Mick was close beside me and it was anybody's race.
‘I managed to get clear at Metropole but then Mick came up beside me at the Juniper chicane but I wasn't going to be beaten at this stage and I just managed to hold on.’
Meanwhile in the 400cc class which was run concurrently with the 125, there was yet another man celebrating a double on the day.
Jim Moodie, who was rather a surprise winner of the earlier 600cc, showed he had lost none of his talent when leading all the way to out-gun Brian Reid with third place going to another Scot Ian Simpson.
Lofthouse (Honda) 104.84; 3, R Orme (Honda) 104.77; 4, P Owens (Honda) 103.80; 5, J Dunlop (Honda) 103.52; 6, I Lougher (Aprilia) 101.03.
Fastest Lap — R Dunlop 105.89mph on lap four.
400cc — 1, J Moodie (Yamaha) 110.82mph; 2, B Reid (Yamaha) 109.09; 3, I Simpson (Yamaha) 107.75.
Record Lap — Moodie 110.57mph on lap two.
Nicer is winner for Hills
THE Hills family dominated the Irish 1,000 Guineas at the Curragh today when Nicer stormed to victory under Michael Hills and the winning trainer was his father Barry.
The young pilot had the grey filly nicely placed to make his winning move around the two furlong mark and when the question was asked the English-trained miler was the one with all the answers.
Purchased as a yearling for just £27,000 Nicer turned up trumps for Mrs Michael Corbett and the winning price wasn't bad either with Nicer starting at odds of 8–1.
The winner got home by two and a half lengths, but two Irish trained fillies pegged back the formidable Arab challenge of English trained fillies.
Dermot Weld's second string Goodnight Kiss was second at 25–1, just inches ahead, after a photo finish, of Danse Royale (16–1), trained by Con Collins.
Courtney is ‘satisfactory'
INJURED North West 200 rider Jim Courtney was described as ‘satisfactory’ in Coleraine hospital following his crash at the circuit today.
A spokeswoman said Courtney had suffered ‘generalised bruising’ in the crash but was not thought to be in any danger.
Sinclair shines at Belvoir
STUDENT golfer Michael Sinclair flew home from Hawaii in time to boost Knock's chances of promotion to the match play stage of golf's Premier Senior Cup championship today.
Now on a scholarship at the University of Hawaii, young Michael was first to break par over a sun-drenched Belvoir Park course when he posted a splendid 4-birdie 70 in this qualifying competition.
Knock themselves totalled 307 as only eight clubs out of thirty in all will survive to the knockout stage.
Pace makers over their home course were Belvoir, their four best cards totalling 302 as Shandon Park, many times winners of this All-Ireland tournament, slipped in only one stroke behind at 303.
Their top marksman was Philip Purdy with a rock-steady 72.
Sinclair, still only 21, is a son of a past captain of the Knock club and will be on vacation until late August.
He plays off scratch in University golf, and looked like breaking 70 today.
The last two holes however were a ‘mine field’ in a sunshine wind and cost him five shots apiece for an inward half of 35.
Best left hander in this cup challenge was Bobby Wallace, the Spa No 1.
He was in the same three-ball as Garth McGimpsey, Ulsters top amateur and contender for next week's British Amateur Championship at Royal Portrush.
Full marks to Wallace, who finished with a seven feet putt for a 73 after almost holing his tee shot, a four iron, at the short 14th.
There were credit marks too for the silver haired John Boston.
Runner-up this week in the Munster Seniors, John — he'll be 70 in July — played beautifully, especially in an outward 36, for a fine 76 in Royal County Down colours.
Bombings' back lash
FOUR days of IRA intensive bombing today put the Government under massive pressure to introduce new anti-terrorism measures.
Unionist and nationalist politicians both predicted a further IRA upsurge in bombing.
But an angry Rev Ian Paisley demanded Secretary of State Sir Patrick Mayhew calls off tomorrow's Anglo-Irish Conference meeting in Dublin.
‘He should tell Dick Spring he's too busy dealing with the grave problems here, than taking a trip to Dublin to talk about matters which, at present, are not important,’ said the DUP leader, who visited Magherafelt this morning.
‘No amount of talking will stop what happened in Magherafelt, Portadown and Belfast and there must be a u-turn to a real security policy because this policy doesn't work.’
Mr Paisley said terrorists must be tackled inside their own areas by security forces.
‘It is easier to close exits from there areas than to safeguard all the areas intended for their bombs,’ he said.
Compulsory identity cards, sealing the border, internment and ‘going on the offensive’ were all urged by unionist politicians, after the huge bombings in three towns in the wake of the council elections.
SDLP deputy leader Seamus Mallon today warned that more IRA bombings were likely and the whole community should be alert, though he refused to comment on unionist security proposals.
Mr Mallon accused the IRA of sending the message to the community and its own membership ‘that violence will continue and intensify’.
He added: ‘In the wake of the election, this message from the IRA, which is one of savagery and destruction, must be seen as their indication of an intensification of what they call ‘the armed struggle’.’
It seemed the IRA had the capacity to bomb more towns, and Mr Mallon called for everyone to be on the alert.
Chief Constable Sir Hugh Annesley was briefed throughout the weekend on the latest atrocities and tomorrow is expected to meet the Garda Commissioner, Patrick Culligan, when the intergovernmental conference examines cross-border co-operation.
Mid-Ulster MP, the Rev William McCrea, job seeking in America when last night's Magherafelt devastation occurred, accused the IRA of engaging in ‘a massive sectarian bombing campaign directed at Protestant towns and businesses’.
The Government would do nothing about it, because it feared causing a nationalist reaction, he said, urging the sealing of the border and claiming that the explosives involved came from the Republic.
The DUP MP claimed that the John Hume-Gerry Adams discussions had been ‘a total failure in bringing peace’.
Ulster Unionist MP John Taylor warned Northern Ireland could become the next Bosnia unless the Government took steps to stop the IRA.
He said: ‘Time is running out, Northern Ireland is slowly developing into a Bosnia situation.
Protestants are getting very edgy and unless there is a change in security policy the situation is going to be very serious for every one of us in Northern Ireland.’
Belfast DUP councillor Sammy Wilson advocated internment, claiming security information showed only about 12 people were capable of assembling the weekend bombs and they kept themselves ‘so clean there is little chance of getting evidence against them’.
East Londonderry MP William Ross said the latest outrages demonstrated the IRA had ‘pretty well unlimited explosives’.
He said the Government ‘must now look seriously at the question of interning the IRA godfathers and also the question of compulsory identity cards.’
TABLE TENNIS
Gatien champion
OLYMPIC silver medallist Jean-Philippe Gatien, of France, won the World men's singles table tennis title in Gothenberg.
Jan-Ove Waldner, Olympic champion and former World champion, disappointed his home Swedish crowd by losing to Jean-Michel Saive of Belgium in the semi-finals, while Gatien took out Croatia's Zoran Primorac, the World No 14.
Gatien won a fast and furious men's final over 17–21 21–14 17–21 21–18.
China's vice-like grip was broken in the women's singles with title favourite Deng Yaping going out in the early stages but the oriental domination was maintained by the World No 3 Hyum Jung Hwa from Korea who defeated the World No 12 Chen Jing from Taiwan 21–16 21–15 21–14.
Irvine moves up
EDDIE Irvine moved into second place in the All-Japan Formula 3000 championship with his first victory of the season at Suzuka yesterday.
Irvine, from Conlig, Co.
Down, but based in Macau, set fastest time in a wet qualifying session on Saturday and led from start to finish yesterday in his Lola-Mugen to win from championship leader Kazuyoshi Hoshino.
BELFAST
Belfast born VIP in hospital ISRAEL'S former president, Belfast born Chaim Herzog, was taken to hospital yesterday, 10 days after leaving his largely ceremonial post, Israel Radio said.
Herzog,(74), was taken to the cardiac unit of Tel Aviv's Sheba Hospital with a respiratory infection.
DUNDEE
Baez message
AMERICAN musician Joan Baez today sent a message of support to sacked workers at the Timex factory in Dundee.
The folk superstar apologised for not being able to visit pickets during a recent visit to Scotland and wished workers well.
WAKEFIELD
Well-heeled sale THOUSANDS of people attended Britain's poshest car boot sale yesterday at Nostell Priory, near Wakefield, West Yorkshire vying with each other for cast-offs from the landed gentry.
CHELSEA
Blooming week CROWDS of garden lovers will flock this week to the Chelsea Flower Show, one of the highlights of the London summer season.
Talks planned Britain and China ended their third round of talks about political reform in Hong Kong yesterday with no sign of any agreement other than to keep talking.
Bid for pardon
The sister of Derek Bentley, hanged 40 years ago for encouraging an accomplice to shoot a policeman, was today launching a High Court challenge to the Home Secretary's refusal of a posthumous pardon.
Tuning in: TV losing ground, claims report
Radio stations are on crest of a wave
RADIO is undergoing a huge surge in popularity and starting to close the gap with television, a report said today.
Nine out of 10 people now listen to the radio for about three hours every day, despite having more TV stations than ever to choose from, according to the Cultural Trends report for 1993.
Cinema-going was also increasing, with 101 million tickets the highest figure since 1980 sold last year.
But TV viewing still averaged 25 hours a week, said the report.
Radio stations attracted a total audience of 41.6 million during the last quarter of 1992, it said.
It praised the new national commercial station Classic FM for discovering new listeners, although the station also took some from the BBC.
But the BBC's share over all was still a healthy 58.4pc of all radio listeners during the same period.
Watching a film on TV or renting a video was still a more desirable option than visiting a cinema for many.
People spent as much time watching films on TV each week as they did in the cinema each year, the report said.
Cinema box-office takings in 1991 were £300m, but consumers spent three to four times that on subscriptions to satellite or cable TV film channels or on renting videos.
‘After several decades of decline, cinema-going is enjoying something of a renaissance.
Unfortunately this revival in audiences is doing little to benefit the UK film-production industry,’ the report said.
Hollywood blockbusters were still more likely to attract people than home-made films, ‘perhaps because they are more likely to be of a genre which appeals to an escapist mentality during the recession’.
Kevin Costner's ‘Robin Hood: Prince of Thieves’ was the best earner in British cinemas in 1991, with a £20.1m box-office take and all top 20 films were American.
On the television front, satellite had not swept the country to the extent indicated by early predictions.
Forecasts were reduced and by the year 2000 it was expected that 45pc of homes 9.5 million were likely to have a dish or cable TV — 800,000 fewer than first predicted.
BBC1 tended to be the main loser against satellite TV.
BBC1 accounted for almost 39pc of viewing in the last quarter of 1990, but that figure had dropped to 34pc a year later.
Video recorders continued to be a popular buy.
In 1991, 65pc of British homes had one, compared with just 2pc 10 years earlier.
The new ITV franchise-holders had mixed fortunes, especially breakfast station GMTV, the report said.
GMTV's audience was 15pc below its forecasts.
But the station was praised for its regional opt-outs policy.
The report showed that BBC expenditure on radio broadcasting reached a record £338.2m in 1991/2, but said commercial radio stations were vying for revenue in a bigger market place.
Classic FM was not a competitor for Independent Local Radio stations, but those stations did face a significant threat from tycoon Richard Branson's national commercial rock station, Virgin 1215.
‘Virgin 1215 could well deliver an audience of 10 some million listeners worth an estimated £40m per annum in advertising revenue,’ the report said.
Medium-sized local radio stations in cities could find themselves competing for revenue with the newcomer, it added.
PGL one step from elusive title
BY RONNIE HARPER
THE Private Greens League are one win away from their first IBA Under 25 inter-association championship.
They take on arch enemies NIBA at Jordanstown on Thursday night in a ‘winner take all’ confrontation.
Both teams won their second successive victory on Saturday, the PGL scraping home by nine shots against the Bowling League of Ireland and the NIBA beating the Provincials by 12 shots to line up what promises to be a cracker at the Ulster Transport Club on Thursday.
But the PGL will be the most anxious team in this decider.
They seemed to have everything in command at Pickie on Saturday, but let the BLI come storming back over the last few ends to win on three of the four rinks.
Only a handsome up by Dunbarton's Myles Greenfield (26–12) over Carl Murphy saw the PGL home.
The NIBA too had to battle all the way against the PBA, but they only failed on one rink — that skipped by Rathfriland's Gary McIlroy was beaten 26–14 by Eamon McCann.
Both sets of selectors have said ‘same again’ for the ‘big-two’showdown which has a 6–30pm start.
Players to report at 6–00.
The NIBA are going for their fourth successive Under 25 title since the championship took the place of the meaningless Junior Championship in 1990, and it will be a very hard mission for the PGL to upset the talented Parks side which has tremendous strength in depth.
The Bowling League of Ireland side put up a heartening performance on Saturday, their biggest problem is finding front end players, especially leads.
There were far too many slack bowls from that department on Saturday which did nothing but put pressure on the back ends of their rinks.
Meanwhile, the tale of woe continued at Fruithill Park on Saturday, where Falls tumbled to yet another defeat, this time at the hands of NICS.
The home side's PGL senior inter-association skip Seamus Elliman was beaten 31–12 by Mansell Montgomery which dashed Falls' hopes of their first home win since the opening game of the league.
The only championship now open to Falls' senior side is the PGL Division One title as they are already out of the CIS Irish Senior Cup and the PGL Milk Senior Cup which continues on Wednesday night with the following fixtures.
Second round draw, Wednesday, May 26 (6–30pm): Ards v NICS, Belmont v Salisbury, Belmont Park v Cliftonville, Comber v Forth River, Dungannon v Ballywalter, Gallaher v Old Bleach, Knock v Willowfield, Shorts v Larne.
Junior Cup second round: Cliftonville v Crawfordsburn, Falls v Albert Fdry, Larne v Shorts, Northern Telecom v Gallaher, Pickie v Downpatrick, Salisbury v Saintfield, Ulster Transport v Belfast, Willowfield v Mossley.
THE second round draw for the NIBA Microfilm Bureau Senior Cup to be played on Wednesday, May 26 (6–30pm) is —
Bangor v Clarendon, Portadown v Dungannon, Dromore v Lagan Valley, Donaghadee v Musgrave, Whitehead v Newtownabbey, Newcastle v Ormeau, Banbridge v Lurgan, Warrenpoint v Balmoral, Windsor v EBCC, Stranmillis v Carrick, Ardenlee v Holywood, Markethill v Dundonald, Moat Park v Lisnagarvey, Divis v Londonderry Park, Gilnahirk v 1st OB, Rathfriland v BETS.
I'm free: Mark Gallagher (Fermanagh), cuts through the Armagh defence for another score in the Ulster Championship replay at the Athletic grounds Armagh, yesterday.
Man on SF centre murder attempt charges
A BELFAST man appeared in court at the weekend following a gun attack on a Sinn Fein advice centre on Monday.
Robert Hill (26), of Malvern Close, was charged with the attempted murder of two men on May 17 and possession of a rifle on the same date.
He was further charged with the attempted murder of a man on May 7.
A detective-sergeant told Belfast Magistrate's Court that when Hill was formally charged he replied ‘no’ to all four charges, but he said he believed he could connect the accused to the offences.
Hill was remanded in custody to appear at Crumlin Road Court on June 11.
In another, linked, case, a Belfast man was charged with allowing a house to be used to commit an act of terrorism on May 17.
Joseph Walsh Wilkinson (42), of Copperfield Street, replied ‘not guilty’ when formally charged by the CID man.
He also was remanded to Crumlin Road until June 11.
No birthday would, of course, be complete without a party, and the redoubtable James presided, with both poems and songs, at a convivial ‘knees up’ in the Queen's University common room last Thursday to which many of HU's writers since 1968 contributed.
Issue 100 is not all that far away.
I think we should have another party.
Sammy tackles a staff vacancy
FEMINISTS, pass by.
You will be less than gruntled by the following job application, posted in Sammy Dunlop's Tackle Shop at Ballydown, outside Banbridge.
Four cleared of death plot
FOUR men, two from Belfast, accused of conspiracy to murder a drug-dealer and a police informant were cleared at the Old Bailey after the prosecution dropped the case following a six-week trial costing nearly £1m.
Yesterday, after the Recorder of London, Judge Lawrence Verney, ruled that some evidence given by one of two convicted murderers who were the main prosecution witnesses was unreliable, Timothy Langdale, QC, prosecuting, said: ‘In the circumstances, it would be improper to proceed.’
At the start of the trial, Mr Langdale claimed South London drug-dealers hired contract killers, allegedly UDA hitmen, to murder two men.
The victims were John Dale, ‘the object of dislike and hatred apparently because he was in the habit of ripping people off in drugs deals’, and police informant David Norris.
Both were shot outside their homes within days of each in April, 1991.
Despite being shot at point-blank range, Mr Dale (43) survived, but Mr Norris (46) died almost instantly.
Of the four accused, Mr Langdale alleged that Patrick Doherty (35), of Brockley, and George McMahon (46), of New Cross, both of south London, were involved in drugs and the contract killings.
Terence McCrory (30), of Benicor Park, Belfast, and John Green (32), who formerly lived in north Belfast, but whose address was given as Falkirk, were allegedly hitmen.
All four denied conspiring with others to murder Dale.
McCrory, Green and Doherty denied a similar conspiracy to murder Norris.
Doherty and McMahon denied conspiracy to supply cannabis resin.
Mr Langdale claimed that in 1990 south London drug-dealers supplied cannabis to Northern Ireland, frequently sending it via Red Star parcels.
But the situation changed in 1991, when a man described as the leader of the Ulster group was shot for selling drugs to Roman Catholics.
He survived, but moved his operation to Thanet in Kent.
Events took ‘a sinister turn’ when the London drug-dealers put out a contract on Mr Dale, said counsel.
The Ulstermen accepted it and Green and McCrory were allegedly brought over to carry out the murder.
Along with a man called Renwick Dennison, they trailed Dale for days, but the opportunity to kill him never arose, said Mr Langdale.
Eventually Green and McCrory returned to Northern Ireland and Dennison alone allegedly shot Dale.
Green and McCrory were allegedly brought back for the Norris murder.
The Ulstermen had accepted this contract not just for money but for more cannabis, said Mr Langdale.
At an earlier trial, Dennison and Stuart Warne — the main link between the drug-dealers and the Ulstermen — both admitted conspiracy to murder and drugs charges and were jailed for life.
Both turned supergrass and were the main prosecution witnesses in the trial of the other men.
Bon Jovi: Band touched by crowd's warm welcome
For the anthem-like tunes — Born To Be My Baby, Keep The Faith and Bad Medicine — the crowd cast their votes with thousands of raised, waving arms.
They even broke into the chorus of Gloria, and belted out a rousing Shout.
They saved perhaps their most famous hit Livin' On A Prayer for the encore, followed by an emotional Never Say Goodbye and a pledge from Jon Bon Jovi that they'd be back.
As Bon Jovi jetted out, the faithful made their way home, unanimous that a dose of Bad Medicine had done the trick for them.
Support growing for abortions in Ulster: poll
SUPPORT is growing for the legalising of abortion in Northern Ireland, a new poll claimed today.
A survey carried out in the province showed that a massive 82pc believed abortion should be allowed to maintain the physical or mental health of the woman.
In the same poll a year ago, the figure stood at 79pc.
The poll, carried out by Ulster Marketing Surveys for the Birth Control Trust, also showed an increase in favour of abortion on a range of other grounds.
60pc — compared with 57pc last year — thought abortion should be made legal where the child might be severely handicapped;
30pc — compared with 27pc last year — agreed with abortion in cases of extreme poverty;
28pc — compared with 25pc last year — were in favour of abortion where the woman does not want another child;
76pc — the same as last time — thought abortion should be made legal in cases of rape and incest.
Britain's 1967 Abortion Act does not apply to Northern Ireland, where abortions are illegal except where the mother's life is threatened or her physical and mental health are considered to be in grave danger.
However, it has been claimed that some doctors in the province will perform abortions in certain circumstances.
The number of therapeutic abortions carried out in Northern Ireland is not known because they are contained in figures for gynaecological operations.
Official statistics put the number of women who travel to Britain from the province for abortions each year at around 2,000, although the actual figure is believed to be higher.
Birth Control Trust spokeswoman Madeleine Simms pointed out that after last year's survey was published, the DHSS said it was unlikely the results of a single poll would be a suitable basis for new and highly controversial legislation.
‘The 1993 results show an even higher proportion of people now support legalising abortion,’ she said.
‘It is time to bring the abortion law in Northern Ireland in line with majority opinion.’
Youth theatre seeks new players
TALENT-SPOTTERS from the Derry Youth Theatre group are looking for budding young actors and actresses for a summer production.
Anyone aged 14–25 is invited to sign up for an audition for the drama project which is due to take place in July.
A spokesman for the theatre group said: ‘You should be prepared to work full days over a three week period with at least one week's production work.
‘The project will take the form of workshops leading to a production which the group will decide upon themselves.
‘There will be the chance to explore different forms of theatre such as street theatre.
We are also interested in hearing from anyone who has a musical background or who is interested in stage management.’
Auditions will be held in June and further information will be available from Stage Beyond, The Playhouse, 6 Artillery Street, Derry or telephone (0504) 268027.
Brandywell needs to be surveyed
A SURVEY is to be carried out to assess the social and health needs of people living in the Brandywell area of Londonderry.
A special needs assessment team from the Foyle Community Unit of the Western Health and Social Services Board will be carrying out the research.
Funded by the Londonderry Regeneration Initiative, the task of the project team is to listen to the views of individuals and communities and relay them back to the board.
These opinions will then be borne in mind when it comes to planning future health and social care policies.
More than 100 households will be surveyed in the door-to-door research.
This random sample will cover more than 10pc of the population of the inner city area which has been hit by a number of social and economic problems.
A spokesperson for one Brandywell community group said: ‘The Brandywell area has many problems and a high incidence of poverty.
Any initiative which will contribute towards improving the quality of health care provision in the area is to be welcomed.’
Project officers are confident that the community will respond positively to the survey.
The manager of the project team is Sean McLaughlin and the other members are Christine Little and Pat Armstrong.
The Foyle Needs Assessment Team has recently completed a survey of the Fountain area.
These findings are currently being analysed.
Survey team: Representatives of local community groups and the Rev Michael Collins, Administrator of Long Tower, with members of the Foyle Community Unit Needs Assessment Team, who are to conduct a Health and Social Care survey in the Brandywell area.
Anger at plan over Derry DLO
WE WOULD like to express our outrage that the Direct Labour Organisation of the Housing Executive in Derry is being closed down.
In the past this Association has had a good relationship with the DLO in Derry.
Our tenants have been satisfied with their standard of work.
We do not want this work to be carried out by outside contractors.
We would hope that the decision to close the Derry office will be rescinded and that all local tenants and community organisations will support this.
MICHAEL McGINLEY Ballymagroarty Comm.
Organisation.
GAVIN Hastings' Lions started their New Zealand campaign with a nervous 30–17 win over North Auckland, but Ian Hunter's tour ended here in Whangarei.
Now Ireland's representation is likely to be brought up to three with winger Richard Wallace almost certain to be the replacement for the unfortunate Ian Hunter.
Hunter will fly home on Monday with his tour hopes shattered by a dislocated shoulder after only 39 minutes of action today.
Overtures have already been made by coach Ian McGeechan to Bob Weighill, secretary of the Four Home Unions committee, who is making plans to send a replacement.
Wallace had a good Five Nations championship, while his performances in Ireland's marvellous World Cup Sevens run at Murrayfield will have done his prospects of a tour blazer no harm.
The Garryowen winger toured New Zealand with Ireland last summer, but found out just how tough life is Down Under when he received a broken jaw, and made a quick exit home from the trip.
However, it was a shaky start for the Lions today with four sparkling tries from threequarters helping them to salvage a victory.
Bad co-ordination allowed North Auckland, who were relegated to New Zealand's second division this season, to take a 5–0 lead.
Further mistakes by the Lions permitted the hyped-up home team to level at 12–12 and score a late, irrelevant try.
In between the Lions took control with two match-winning tries from Jeremy Guscott and Scott Hastings.
Barnes, Guscott and forwards Richard Webster, Ben Clarke and Damian Cronin had outstanding games.
North Auckland's early period of dominance brought a try for hooker Doug Te Puni before the Lions' centres struck.
Barnes and Anthony Clement, who had a rough match in defence, combined to send Guscott streaming between two hopeful tacklers for a try converted by Barnes.
Robert Jones's kick and Rory Underwood's expert catch sent Scott Hastings in for a try two minutes later.
Those Lions tries came when Peter Wright was off the field under the bleeding-wound treatment rule.
Guscott's score came with 14 men on, but the new law that allows a temporary substitute meant that Paul Burnell had a few minutes on the pitch before Wright returned to see the Lions leading 12–5.
Underwood put Clement in trouble and Mark Seymour scored for Warren Johnston to convert to level the score.
Barnes put the Lions in front before Hastings took over the kicks after the interval.
He converted a blindside try by Clement, and added a penalty.
North Auckland scored a late try from Troy Going which was cancelled out by Rory Underwood's last-move effort.
GPs slam Board over hospital
THE Eastern Local Medical Committee representing 386 General Practitioners in the Eastern Board, wishes to express its opposition to the proposed withdrawal of 1,200 general surgical and 1,5 operations from the Royal Victoria Hospital.
In the document ‘Waiting for Patients’ it was clearly stated that the NHS reforms would increase patient choice.
Withdrawal of major services from the Royal will have the opposite effect.
Many patients are to be given no choice in where they have their operation.
The recent well publicised survey of public opinion showed a clear preference for treatment in centres of excellence.
Why then does the Eastern Board see fit to attack the high quality services available in the RVH and Jubilee Maternity Unit?
The RVH is recognised as a centre of excellence in research and teaching of doctors, nurses and para-medical staff.
These activities are essential to the maintenance of high quality medical services and can only be sustained if there is a large throughput of patients.
The Eastern Board proposals would undermine the balance of the Royal, the major general hospital in Northern Ireland.
Many of the patients referred to the General Surgery and ENT departments have complex problems and benefit from the highly specialist expertise available there.
Does the Eastern Board have no appreciation of the value to patients of the specialist knowledge and concentrated experience?
In the past GPs were free to refer patients to the specialist and hospital which both felt most appropriate to the patient's medical condition.
Now patients are to be denied this choice — a complete contradiction of the commitment given by Government.
We were told that money would follow patients, but now patients have to follow money.
The Eastern Board proposals have implications much greater than the considerable inconvenience caused to those who live adjacent to the RVH.
Their effects will be felt by patients throughout the province for they strike at the heart of one of our greatest medical assets.
These proposals make no sense and must be changed.
Eavan just champion
AFTER 15 years of trying Eavan Higgins, the 36 year old international from Cork, is the Irish Women's golf champion.
In the 18-hole final of the Lancome sponsored tournament at Royal Belfast today Miss Higgins defeated 20 year-old Aideen Rogers from The Island Club in Dublin by one hole.
Earlier Miss Higgins had beaten Hazel Kavanagh (Grange) by 3 and 1 in one semi final and Miss Rogers had knocked out the champion Eileen Rose Power (Kilkenny) by 3 and 2 in the other.
The final was a close fought affair.
Miss Rogers, twice Irish girls champion, got her nose in front at the eighth but was forced to concede the tenth where her second overshot the green into very thick rough and the twelfth where she was in a greenside bunker.
That gave the Cork girl a lead she was not to surrender.
In fact she went two up when Miss Rogers bogeyed the short fourteenth and was still two up playing the long sixteenth.
Here the Dublin girl holed from 30 feet to cut the margin to one hole and bravely holed from six feet for a half at the seventeenth.
But there was no denying Miss Higgins and a par five at the last gave her the trophy she had her heart set on.
…easy win lands treble
ROBERT DUNLOP made it a treble when he led from start to finish to take the second 250cc race.
However, he was hounded all the way by Phillip McCallen who put on his best performance of the day so far.
At one stage it looked as though McCallen might catch Dunlop as he closed the gap to three seconds but it was not to be and Dunlop opened up the gap again over the last two laps so that with victory in sight he had a cushion of seven seconds.
McCallen had the satisfaction of recording the fastest lap with a speed of 115.45mph on lap four.
This was only a second outside the class lap record set by Ian Newton last year.
Going on to the last lap Dunlop had matters well in hand but further down the field behind McCallen there was drama when Alan Patterson, who had been in third place and going well, suddenly shot through the final bend and took the wrong road for the second time today losing his chance of a place.
This allowed Dave Milling into third place, followed by Ian Newton, Woolsey Coulter and Joey Dunlop.
Dunlop went on to win with McCallen close behind, then Woolsey Coulter third, followed by Ian Newton, Dave Milling and Joey Dunlop.
Surprise package Coceres
JOSE Coceres, the little known Argentinian, was the surprise leader at 15 under par with six holes of his third round to play of the Lancia Martini Italian Open at Modena today.
Coceres, who had begun the day three shots behind overnight leader David Gilford, made up one shot on the European Ryder Cup man by going out in 33.
He then eagled the 10th to go to 15 under, while Gilford dropped a shot at the same hole to fall one stroke behind.
Two other British players, Steve Richardson and Barry Lane, were in joint third place with New Zealander Greg Turner at 12 under par all three still out on the course.
Lane, eight under after two rounds, played an indifferent outward half of 36, but then eagled the 10th and had birdies at both the 12th and 13th to force his way into contention.
Richardson, too, made a mediocre start being one over par for his first six holes, but then birdies at the seventh, ninth and 10th moved him on to the leaderboard.
Jose Maria Olazabal looked like being in a challenging position when he was 11 under with the par five 18th to come.
But he twice went into the water and finished with a seven for 69 to go back to nine under.
Seve Ballesteros, too, was making no impression.
Playing with Coceres he went out in a level par 36 and started the homeward half with three successive pars to be five shots off the lead.
IT WAS Robert Dunlop at the treble in to-day's Coca Cola North West 200 watched by a crowd of 60,000 over the Portstewart-Coleraine-Portrush circuit.
While Carl Fogarty took the big race of the day the Superbike, young Dunlop scooped up the smaller classes by landing both 250cc races as well as the 125cc, thus making up for his disappointment of last year when he scored only one win against Phillip McCallen's five.
For McCallen it was a poor day as he missed the Superbike race on doctor's orders following a crash in the first 250cc.
He did, however, come back to ride in the later races.
Scots rider Jim Moodie recorded a double when he lifted the 600cc and 400cc classes.
Armagh v Carrick
ARMAGH won the toss and put Carrick into bat.
McFarland and Adams got the visitors off to a good start putting on 35 for the first wicket.
In the 15th over Stinson made the break-through for Armagh when he bowled Adams to make it 35 for one.
In the 22nd over Fletcher was caught by fellow New Zealander Rheinholds off the bowling of Alan Jones.
And in the 29th over Armagh captured the important wicket of McFarland brilliantly caught at mid-off by Bullick when he had reached 48.
In the 32nd over Jones bowled McIlroy before the batsman had troubled the scorers.
Mean Moodie ends famine
JOEY DUNLOP cracked the lap record in the 600cc Regal race but still didn't manage to win.
Joey managed to fill third place behind Scots rider Jim Moodie, who joined Carl Fogarty in scoring his first ever North-West win.
Moodie had succeeded over Ulster's short circuits at Kirkistown and Bishopscourt but, despite four years of tryi West, he had never been able to crack what is arguably Ulster's toughest race.
Today, however, it all came good.
Moodie led from the start and never looked like being caught even though late in the race Joey Dunlop put in a spurt and was in second place with one lap to go.
Dunlop appeared to be catching Moodie and he had already put in that record lap of 115.62mph on lap three, but Moodie always had matters well in hand.
At the finish it was Mike Edwards from Wigan who presented the major threat and took second place.
Moodie said afterwards: ‘I was determined to get a good start which would take me clear of the pack.
‘I had a warm tyre on from the beginning and was delighted to be in the lead at York Corner, Portstewart.
‘That was my race plan — to make an early break.
‘Although Joey was closing late in the race I always felt I had enough in hand to win.’
Phillip McCallen, who had earlier missed the Superbike race on doctor's orders, reappeared for this one but was never in the hunt and finished seventh with an average speed of 113.69mph.
Regal 600cc: 1, J Moodie (Honda) 115.13mph; 2, M Edwards (Honda) 115.06; 3, J Dunlop (Honda) 114.95; 4, B Jackson (Honda) 114.25; 5, B Reid (Honda) 113.75; 6, A Irwin (Honda) 113.75.
Record Lap: J Dunlop 115.62mph.
Flying Scot: Jim Moodie found the winning formula.
A FIRST-AIDER who collapsed at yesterday's North West 200 motorbike race was last night recovering in hospital.
The condition of the man, who was rushed to Coleraine Hospital, was said late last night to be ‘very comfortable’.
Racing at the top sporting event was halted when he collapsed.
The drama happened as he was giving First Aid to rider Kevin Mitchell who had been involved in a crash but was not seriously injured.
Arnold Schwarzenegger — part of a greedy trio
ALAN Healsey's wife meets him at the back door of their home every night with a dressing gown.
The East Belfast man can't put a foot over the door of his Cregagh Road home without first stripping off in the garden.
FROM her Donaghadee home, award winning designer Pat Young sends out a hippy vibe.
She has about fifty jackets.
Add to that a steamer trunk full of footwear, a stack of rather lavish hatboxes (occupied) and enough jewellery to start up a stall at St George's market, and you get the idea that Pat just might be an out and out fashion fanatic.
The former Satzenbrau Designer of the Year, who has turned her skillful hand to cute childrenswear and funky adult gear, is currently planning her next big projects — a range of maternity wear that will be far from maternal, and the opening of a local retail outlet.
Pat Young is one of the province's best known fashion mavericks.
An impending thirtieth birthday and a two and a half year-old daughter called Sophie haven't turned her fashion tastes one whit.
When it comes to dressing, she shows chameleon-like tendencies.
She's currently doing the hippy thing with tassled flares, undressed hair and little round sunglasses but the feminine earth mother look is just a clothes change away.
Her most recent purchase — a transparent black coat over a long wrap skirt from Jigsaw, topped off with a dramatic black hat from La Beau Chapeau in Belfast — is destined for a wedding, and gives her the look of a modern day Mary Poppins in mourning.
Despite a liberal peppering of designer labels — like Ghost and Helen Storey as well as her own Pat Young label — in her wardrobe, Pat insists it doesn't have to cost the earth to look good.
‘I'm a big fan of second hand shops.
I've got a lot of my favourite garments from them, and I've had them for years,’ she says.
‘It's worth spending money on the wear out of, I never throw out jackets or coats, because I keep wearing them over and over — that's really good value for money.’
ARIES
A tense connection between the Sun and erratic Uranus, makes for a very unpredictable week, but this blend of energy and tension could spur you onwards.
TAURUS
You may have to contend with hidden antagonisms or even resentments, but by the weekend you will find it easier to respond to the moods or demands of a partner.
GEMINI
The start of a more serious enduring attachment is likely, but don't appear too eager and resist the temptation to bare your soul at the outset.
Start as you mean to carry on.
CANCER
Try to retain some sort of control over an emotional matter and expect partners to behave unpredictably and thoughtlessly.
LEO
You may feel like a stimulating and exciting experience, but if you are committed elsewhere, think about the consequences of your actions first.
VIRGO
Expect the re-emergence of old problems, which can be tackled successfully and positively.
Inspiring news or a touching encounter will brighten the week.
LIBRA
Temporary planetary instability will soon give way to a more tranquil period.
Keep this in your mind whilst considering a domestic or emotional problem.
SCORPIO
If you feel like withdrawing from the hurly burly and being reclusive, then do so and take this opportunity to recharge your batteries, and your energy will return soon.
SAGITTARIUS
A less turbulent week on the whole, but with disruptive Uranus and confusing Neptune affecting your finances, make sure you curb extravagant spending.
CAPRICORN
Be realistic and practical when assessing the potential of an existing relationship.
Encouraging developments are gradually restoring self confidence and optimism.
AQUARIUS
You are at a very destined point in your life and everything you are experiencing has a very definite purpose in the overall pattern of your future.
Your life is set to expand.
PISCES
Restraint and caution are advised, particularly where affairs of the heart are concerned.
Your main efforts should now focus on establishing a firm home base.
New day dawns for big band
FINDING A WAY BACK TO THE BIG COUNTRY
BIG COUNTRY'S rebirth as a major force in rock has its roots in the band's darkest hour.
The band, chart regulars through the 80s, have emerged from ‘sheer hell’ stronger and better than before.
They were dropped by their record label Phonogram after the hits dried up, and had actually split up after a gig in Jersey.
But, guitarist Bruce Watson proclaims: ‘Being dropped by Phonogram was the best thing that could have happened to us.
‘It was sheer hell for a while, but it was just the kick up the backside we needed.
‘We were really down when it happened, and had agreed to knock the band on the head.
‘But after a fortnight Stuart (Adamson) rang me up and suggested we get back together again and give it another go, I rang Tony (Butler) and we took it from there.’
The band had signed with a new label Compulsion only a matter of weeks after being cut by Phonogram, and their new album ‘The Buffalo Skinners’ is arguably their best since the ‘The Crossing’.
Bruce added: ‘Things hadn't been going well with Phonogram for quite a while.
‘Our last two albums for them, ‘Peace In Our Time’ and ‘No Place Like Home’, were stodgy affairs, and there had been so many hassles.
‘Basically the label wanted us to be something we weren't, and those records were compromises.
‘They were aimed at the American market, and quite simply didn't work.
‘Being dropped meant we could step back and reassess what we were doing.
‘Now we're back to doing what we do best — being Big Country.
The new album is what we are about — we produced it ourselves and are really proud of it.
‘The boss at Compulsion is a guy called Chris Hughes who originally signed us for Phonogram, so it was almost like starting over again.
‘We think ‘The Buffalo Skinners’ is our best album for a long while, and thankfully other people seem to like it as well.’
The original line-up has also been reunited, drummer Mark Brzezicki rejoining after leaving in 1989 to pick up his career as a session drummer.
With ‘The Buffalo Skinners’ having already spawned two hit singles —‘Alone’Country are back and buzzing.
Bruce added: ‘We have no pretensions about what we do or who we are.
We are just musicians, who love playing — what you see is what you get.’
Local audiences could have a chance to decide for themselves later this year, with the band hopeful of slotting Irish dates into their itinerary.
TATTOO FOR NOW!
TATTOED Ulster women are beating a hot trail to a private clinic in Belfast — to have their ugly body art painlessly removed.
Hundreds of Northern Ireland women who want to clean up their arms, breasts and buttocks are swamping the Health Matters clinic a stone's throw from Queen's University.
The surgery is the only one in Northern Ireland with a revolutionary new ruby laser which can permanently blast away a tattoo with no risk of scarring.
Since the Laseraze service was launched just three months, women have far outnumbered men in the queue for treatment.
Dr Donal McKenna who runs the clinic has been amazed at the numbers of girls and older women coming to his door.
‘At least 60pc of patients for tattoo removal are local women and most are respectable ladies in their 40s,’ he said.
‘A large percentage have spent years hiding their arms under long sleeves and are highly embarrassed by the results of a mistake made years ago.
‘There seems to have been a fad 25 years ago where many young schoolgirls used compasses or needles with Indian ink to scrawl on their arms,’ Dr McKenna said.
‘Many have lived in dread of summer ever since.
Some have even kept their tattoos hidden from their children and have been reluctant to explain why they will not peel off in the sun.’
The laser works by rupturing a seal formed under the tattoo, allowing white blood cells to naturally disperse the ink.
The number of treatments needed depends on the size of a he amount of ink contained.
Small home-made tattoos can totally vanish can take up to ten.
Each session is spaced out at monthly intervals.
The process itself is almost painless, rather like an elastic band being twanged against the skin.
The cost varies enormously depending on the size of the tattoo.
But an average-sized amateur tattoo will cost around £50 a session.
The service is not available on the National Health Service — but Dr McKenna believes it should be.
‘Tattoos can affect the quality of life for many people and the waiting list for NHS tattoo removal can be up to 10 years, which is far too long,’ he said.
Many of the men currently undergoing treatment are wanting rid of political-style tattoos —‘IRA’ and ‘UDA’inscriptions that could be downright dangerous.
‘It is worse than Lurgan'
THE town's, MP David Trimble walked through the rubble, the shards of glass, and the mangled remains of the bomber's van.
‘This is worse than Lurgan,’ said the Ulster Unionist, shaking his head with rage.
Stepping over shredded boxes, Mr Trimble said the traders would not be beaten.
‘They will come back, just like the people of Lurgan, have.
They will rise again.’
He said the bombing of Portadown was the answer to the democratic process.
‘Two Sinn Fein members have been elected to Craigavon council.
‘To those people who elected them, I would like to remind them of what their paramilitary godfathers have done to this town.
‘This was a dastardly act carried out on one of the busiest days of the week.
I am totally disgusted,’ said David Trimble.
Local DUP councillor Mervyn Carrick said the bombing only happened because of the Government's ‘ineffective security policy.
‘It is high time the Government did something to stop these bombers.
‘It has got to stop and it has to stop now.
I am thankful that there were no fatalities.
‘The IRA may have Portadown but not out of the people,’ said Mervyn Carrick.
BODYTALK SPECIAL:WHY HOLIDAYS CAN BE HELL ON EARTH
THE SUMMER SUN TRAPS
SUMMER can be hell if you are among the hordes who endure nettle rash, bad reactions to insect bites and stings, sensitivity to sunlight, or any of the allergies which are so common from now right on through the summer.
If you are among the 40pc of the population who show a susceptibility to allergy, don't lose heart!
There may not be a guaranteed cure for your allergy.
But there is a great deal you can do to ease your misery, alleviate the worst of the symptoms and let you join in most of the fine weather fun without spending your days in a darkened room with a crate of Kleenex.
All allergies are inappropriate responses by the body's immune system to a substance which is not normally harmful.
In some people, the system makes mistakes and wrongly identifies an innocent substance as an invader.
The white cells over-react, producing large quantities of the chemical, histamine, and the symptoms of asthma, hay fever, eczema, and all the other allergies which plague so many people.
As our society has become more affluent, the number of people suffering from allergies has polluted by traffic fumes, our homes are centrally heated, double glazed and carpeted to the delight of the house dust mite.
Our work places are often sealed boxes without a single opening window which are too hot in the winter and air conditioned in the summer.
All these factors produce an environment which is dry, dusty and filled with microscopic spores and dust mite droppings which sensitize the linings of the lungs, throat, nose and eyes.
Some people are allergic to insects.
Wasps are one of the summer terrors.
An average of 20 people die each year from their stings, around half due to allergic shock, the others asphyxiation after being stung in the mouth or throat.
If you are stung, mix a paste of vinegar and salt, and rub it into the sting.
Bee stings, which are left in the skin, should be removed with tweezers, then bathed with a teaspoon of bicarbonate of soda in half a glass of water.
If you have a serious reaction to these, ask your GP about a syringe of adrenalin for emergencies.
Rush to the nearest hospital if there is any difficulty with breathing, swelling away from the site of the sting, blue skin or lips, a sudden flush or rash, a very fast pulse or the person passes out.
Mosquito bites can make life miserable.
The more you are bitten, the worse the reaction, so if you come up in great red, preventative action you can.
Keep covered up, sleeves rolled down and trousers tucked into socks.
Use a good insect repellent.
If they get close enough to see you — about one inch — they will bite.
Another hot summer will produce an even worse plague of cat fleas than last year.
The more you get bitten, the stronger the allergic reaction.
Buy some flea powder and use it regularly.
Volarome is a good repellent, particularly against mosquitoes, and includes geranium, mint and sage oils.
Eat plenty of garlic.
The bugs don't like the smell.
You can even be allergic to the sun.
If you come up in a spotty, irritating rash after sunbathing, don't blame your suntan lotion.
It is not prickly heat, it is more likely to be Polymorphic Light Eruption, an allergy to the sunshine.
Cover up for a few days, use a higher factor lotion, and take great care.
Take a daily dose of beta carotene which your body turns into vitamin A, as added protection for sensitive skin.
Sadly, some of the things we most look forward to eating as the weather warms up are just those which are likely to cause allergic reactions.
Strawberries come near the top of the list.
If you get the occasional bout of nettle rash for no obvious reason, or even red itchy patches, which fade within a few hours, suspect a food allergy, you have eaten in the past day.
If you are strongly allergic to any foods, you will know what they are, but slight reactions can go unrecognised.
In fact, all of the berries often cause allergies.
Other things which you may consume more when the summer comes, and which are common allergens, are cola drinks, shell fish, pineapples, cherries and plums.
The only treatment is abstinence.
Final reminder
PLEASE note questions must be sent in written form, not by telephone.
Answers will be through this column only.
Lesley regrets that she cannot enter into any direct correspondence with readers.
In a flap over letter-box
A DISTRIBUTOR putting leaflets through my door broke the flap of my letter-box, but when I contacted the company concerned, Direct Delivery Ltd., of Lisburn, they said they were not liable for damages.
They did send me a cheque for £8, which I returned as inadequate.
I would like your advice, please.
To be honest, I feel you're making rather too much of this.
It's unfortunate that the letter-box broke but Direct Delivery say the flap simply fell off and who can really say whose fault that was?
After all, hinges don't last for ever and it's not as if they were trying to cram a bulky parcel through a small space, just a slim package.
What's more, as soon as he heard of your problem, Direct Delivery's manager immediately visited your home and, although it was agreed that the damage was purely accidental, as an act of goodwill toured the shops in Lisburn to try and find you a replacement.
Unable to find one with the same outward-opening flap, he did the next best thing and took an average price for similar letter-boxes and forwarded you a cheque for this amount.
I feel this was a reasonable offer in the circumstances and in your shoes, I'd be happy to accept it.
Keeping in tune with musical rule
I HAVE a small retail shop, and I struggle and juggle to keep my bills paid.
The other day I had a visit from the ‘music man’ who told me that I needed a licence to play music in my shop.
I was unaware of this and can't afford it anyway, so I was pleased when the manageress of the shop next door came up with the bright idea of playing it in my rest room, where the public are not allowed.
That way I could hear it faintly in the shop and the soft music would help the atmosphere.
Is this legal?
I'm afraid not.
The Performing Rights Society, which safeguards copyright, has confirmed that since your shop is a public area any music which can be heard within it must be played under licence — regardless of where the actual sound source is situated.
The fee varies according to the premises and the type of sound system in use, but for a transistor radio in a small retail shop it's presently £56.22 for the first year, falling to £37.48 per annum thereafter.
The inspectors are aware that many people don't know about this law so they will usually give just a warning to first offenders.
However, if court where the costs alone may be £800 or more — plus the price of a licence, of course.
Hardly worth the risk, I'd have thought.
Solution to a cereal billing
I ENCLOSE a receipt from Super Crazy Prices, Lisburn, which shows Kelloggs Golden Crackles at £1.19.
However, I buy this product regularly and for the last three months the price displayed on the shelf has been £1.
When I queried this difference at the check-out I was told they had to go by the ‘scan’ price.
But now that items are no longer individually labelled we, the public, have to go by the shelf price, and it makes me wonder how many other prices are incorrectly displayed.
IN FACT, every store in the Stewarts/Crazy Prices group employs staff specifically to keep shelf prices up-dated, and incorrect labelling is highly unlikely.
And in this case, the price was right because until March 1st, there was a 325g size Golden Crackles, priced at £1.
However, a new 375g pack at £1.19 was introduced on February 8th and until the old stock was used up the two packs were on sale side by side.
Since they look very similar even a regular buyer could pick up the larger size without realising it — but of course the scanner at the check out would recognise the different bar code and charge the correct amount.
The company is writing to you directly about all this and have asked me to stress that they're always happy to deal with any queries about their service.
Just ring (0232) 660000 and ask for the Customer Services department.
STRAWBERRIES AND PENICILLIN…?
SUZANNE, 19, had visited my surgery for a second time in five days.
Initially she'd just had a bit of a fever and a very dry throat.
When she came in for the second time her throat was like looking at a plate full of strawberries and cream — red enlarged tonsils with a coating of puss.
Such a throat demands antibiotics on spec because it is likely but not necessarily a bacterial infection.
The main exception to this is glandular fever, which is viral.
So when I look in someone's sore throat I am looking for signs of inflammation and enlarged glands.
Also, I will ascertain whether this situation has lasted for more than three or four days coupled with a fever.
This complete category of woe would suggest a bacterial throat infection needing antibiotics.
Less than this is probably a self limiting viral throat.
So Suzanne went home with a 10 day course of penicillin to take.
Suzanne was back again some five days later to my surprise, still feeling awful and with no obvious improvement.
At this point I persuaded her to part with a small sample of blood to check for glandular fever and to see that she wasn't anaemic.
I also checked her urine for sugar as she now had vaginal thrush although this was probably due to the antibiotics.
Once in a while someone has such a severe throat infection that they form a large boil behind the tonsils.
This is called a quinsy and needs to be drained in hospital with intravenous antibiotics.
I have only seen one such case in my 10 years in general practice…
Meanwhile Suzanne's blood tests confirmed glandular fever and I'm pleased to say she has recovered with rest and painkillers.
Big Country — back out of the wilderness.
MY DATE RAPE HORROR
LATELY, we have been hearing a lot about date rape.
This publicity is a recent development, but to tell you the truth, when I was a teenager date rape was simply a fact of life.
I am now 53.
I was raped twice by men I dated before I was married, and was raped on numerous occasions throughout my twelve year marriage.
Is there anything I can do to press charges against these men?
And do you think it would be worth the trouble?
I BELIEVE you when you say that date rape was, and in all probability still is, a fact of life for many women.
However, there is no need to continue suffering in silence.
You should contact the Rape And Incest Line at 105 University Street, Belfast, telephone 326803.
The women at the centre will be able to advise you about your legal situation.
While it could be very difficult to prove that you were raped before your marriage, proving marital rape may be possible.
Either way, you should seek counselling.
Sex poser
I HAVE had sex with a few girls but I don't think that they found this experience very satisfying.
I have tried to get information about premature ejaculation from magazines and I have thought about going to see a Harley Street specialist about this.
Before I pay a lot of money to try and get this problem sorted out, maybe you can tell me how I might be able to control this problem.
LOOK, this is a problem which afflicts most men at one time or another.
The basic problem here is anxiety.
And while sex can be the most relaxing experience, with the right partner, the thought of performing is sometimes incredibly stressful.
Learning to relax is not always easy, but it is possible.
In moderation, alcohol is often recommended as a relaxant — but do not overdo it or you could find that you have another problem.
DRIVEN TO DESPAIR!
AN ULSTER teenager was in a spin last week after prematurely celebrating winning a brand new car in a prize draw at a local disco.
For days later his dreams came crashing down around him.
Unlucky 17-year-old Simon Sterritt from Newry has been told he will never sit behind the wheel of the vehicle — because he was too young to enter the competition in the first place.
The draw for the Mini Cooper was held at Armagh's Gosford House Hotel where Simon had gone for a night out with his mates.
His £5 admission automatically entitled him to enter the ‘free draw’ for the £6,200 car.
And he could hardly believe his luck when he won.
But his joy soon turned to anger when the excited teenager was told that he broke the licensed premises' over 18 rule.
‘It has been a nightmare,’ Simon told Sunday Life.
‘Last Saturday night I was up on the stage being congratulated on winning the car.
Then on Monday I was told I wasn't getting the vehicle.
‘I feel really sickened.
In my view I should never have been admitted to the about being over 18.
‘If they were happy enough to let me through the door then they should have been happy to let me win their draw.
‘I even travelled to the disco on a bus supplied by the hotel.
There were no questions asked about my age then.’
But Fred Dougan of the Gosford House said that tickets for the draw clearly stated ‘persons under eligible’.
He also supplied Sunday Life with a faxed copy of Simon's winning entry where he has stated his date of birth as 30th March, 1974 — making him 19-years-old.
‘If we had given this young lad the car, people could have come back to us and said we had broken the rules,’ the hotel owner said.
‘I cannot comment any further, except to say that I have taken legal advice on this matter.’
The Gosford House has now stopped distributing any further tickets and plan to make another draw for the Mini Cooper next Saturday night.
Did you know?
EARLY ultrasound scanning may be able to pick up pregnancies most at risk of Down's syndrome.
Research is being conducted at King's College, London to see how accurate the ulstrasound is at picking up excess fluid in the neck region, in conjunction with the triple test there may be a 95 pc accurate diagnosis.
Health tip
IF YOU are going abroad this summer, don't forget to give yourself at least four weeks in which to get any necessary vaccinations.
If you are likely to visit regions where malaria is rife then you need to start anti malarian medication at least two weeks before your visit, during your visit and continue for four weeks after your return.
This also applies to children, although the very young may only be able to take either chloroquine or prognanil.
Remember in such circumstances to be careful of local food and water supplies — even cleaning your teeth in bottled water if in doubt.
AN ARMY of enormous concrete Lego bricks is marching across Belfast — changing forever the face of the city.
With astonishing speed, one of the biggest road and rail construction projects ever undertaken in Northern Ireland is transforming transport in the commercial heart of the province.
The ‘mushrooms’ as they are called by engineers, will carry 1058 sections of a new four lane highway at roof top level across the River Lagan.
The £87m cross-harbour link has already passed the half way stage and is well on schedule for completion in November next year.
When finished, three new bridges will span the river, linking the M2 Motorway with Sydenham by-pass and connection the Larne railway line to Central station and the Dublin line.
It will give Belfast one of the best road and rail infrastructure in Europe — and it is all being done by local know-how.
What's more, the enormous engineering project is being carried out with virtually no disruption to the hectic traffic flow through the city.
Advancing at more than 50 metres a week, the elevated road and rail highway is cutting a swathe through the city under the noses of astonished motorists.
Working from early morning to late in the evening, construction crews from the Grahams/ Farrans joint venture team are slotting together 90 tonnes concrete sections at the rate of three a day.
They have also worked through the night when needed to — quite literally — put up new flyovers by the following morning.
The technique of joining the pre-cast concrete boxes, known as ‘match cast glued segmental construction’ is at the forefront of tech has ever been tried in Ireland.
Project sponsor Robert Martin of the DoE said the pioneering design was a breakthrough for the province.
‘This is something Northern Ireland can really crow about,’ he said.
‘This is one of the biggest road construction contracts ever undertaken in Northern Ireland and we have not had to go overseas because we have the local skills to do it.’
The man in charge of the construction, is Dr Phil Donald, the project manager for Grahams/ Farrans.
‘I don't think ordinary people really appreciate the scale of what we are building here,’ he said.
‘The elevated section of road itself will be 900 metres long and four lanes wide with new slip roads at Middlepath Street and Nelson Street.
The railway link will be more than 1.5 kilometres long.
‘In 18 months time they will see lorries cars and trains passing through the city and across the river, more than 25 feet over their heads.
‘Driving through Belfast will never be the same again.’
Construction facts and figures
Every aspect of construction, from component design to manufacture, is under the control of local companies.
The contract was won by the Graham/Farrans joint venture by tender against stiff competition from Holland, Germany and France.
Overall cost including acquiring land will be £87m.
The EC is paying 75pc of the £31m construction cost.
A special casting factory was built at Wolff Road in the harbour estate to make the concrete box units which link together to make the carriageway.
The factory produces three ‘boxes’ each day, each four metres long.
More than 110,000 tonnes of concrete will be used — 45,000 cubic metres — and 8,500 tonnes of reinforced steel.
The road/rail link is advancing across the city centre at 50 metres a week.
It is on schedule for completion in November 1994.
More than 170 highly skilled engineers and steel fixers from Northern Ireland are employed on the scheme.
The only hiccup so far was the collapse of one span of a flyover at York Road.
FACTS ABOUT THE FORCE
THE RUC has 8,150 full-time officers and almost 3,000 full-time reservists — the second largest force in the UK.
It has one Chief Constable, two Deputy Chief Constables, two Senior Assistant Chief Constables, nine Assistant Chief Constables, 44 Chief Superintendents, 122 Superintendents, 161 Chief Inspectors, 483 Inspectors, 1385 sergeants and 8928 constables.
Total salary is 218,038.
The force is divided into three regions, each commanded by an ACC; each region is divided into four divisions commanded by a Chief Superintendent; divisions are divided into 39 sub-divisions each commanded by superintendents.
Sub-divisions range in size from 112 to 357 officers.
Divisions range in size from 474 to 1,119.
In 1992 there were around 67,500 recorded crimes.
Ten percent of the force is CID (1,059 detectives) and three percent is Traffic Branch (280 staff).
The RUC has the highest number of Special Branch officers in Britain — six percent (662 staff)— compared with around one percent in most UK forces.
It also has the highest number of community relations and crime prevention officers — 192.
Police officers at all ranks are responsible for Army personnel.
Around 4,921 officers are aligned to patrol work, which is 44pc of the total force.
There are 3.56 Superintendents to every Chief Superintendent; less than one Chief Inspector to every Superintendent; 5.5 Inspectors to every Chief Inspector; over 2.5 Sergeants to every Inspector and 6.7 Constables to every Sergeant.
Recently retired DCC Michael McAtamney was the longest serving police officer in the UK with 45 years service.
He was also the highest ranking Catholic RUC officer.
The RUC has the lead role in fighting terrorism and intelligence gathering.
In mainland Britain MI5 now has the lead role in intelligence gathering.
Around 10 percent of the force is Catholic.
Chief Constable Sir Hugh Annseley enters his fifth and final year of his contract next month.
He recently lost out in the race to become the Metropolitan Commissioner, although he is hotly tipped to take charge of a UK Anti-Terrorist Squad if it should be established.
The RUC keeps its profile high and costs low.
Dress to impress in the office
The business side of fashion
DO YOU wake up every morning dreading the decision about what to wear to the office?
Striking a balance between comfort and smartness need not be time consuming.
And it is one executive decision that can be turned to your advantage.
Whether we like it or not, clothes make a statement about the person who is wearing them.
And that means you should be aiming for an outfit that suggests smartness and efficiency rather than one that screams ‘sack me’.
That's why you need something that's easy to wear and comfortable but which won't make you look like you just climbed out of bed.
Executive fashions vary little from year to year but the most popular fashion statement of the Eighties — huge shoulder pads — are definitely out.
In come softer and more feminine shapes for women with an emphasis on good design and classic cuts.
Executive dress for both men and women means much more than finding a pair of unscuffed shoes in the morning.
Men's fashion often gets overlooked in the race to predict the latest and most fashionable trends in womens' clothes.
But over the past few years fashion for men has experienced something of a silent revolution, with smoother lines and looser fits becoming ever more popular.
Police praised
PORTADOWN police Chief Superintendent Jimmy Blair praised his officers who stumbled on the lorry.
‘But for their alertness there would have been untold carnage in the town,’ he said.
Mr Blair hit out at the bombers for giving such ‘inadequate warnings.’
‘The public should be left in no doubt that if it wasn't for the police patrol there would have been quite a few fatalities.
‘I have nothing but praise for my officers.
Sadly a number have been injured.’
He appealed to anyone with information to contact detectives on Portadown 332424.
Counting the cost
SHOP owners in Portadown will meet this morning with loss adjustors and officials from the Northern Ireland Office to count the cost of the bombing.
A special meeting has been set up at 10am between traders, the NIO and the Compensation Agency.
But last night a spokesman for the Portadown business community pledged that life would go on despite the outrage.
Bill for IRA attacks tops £110m mark
YESTERDAY'S devastating car bomb attack in Portadown and the destruction in Belfast on Thursday will push the annual bill for IRA outrages in Ulster over the £110m mark.
Even before last week's double blitz the Compensation Agency for Northern Ireland was facing record pay-outs this year — more than double the total for 1991–92.
The additional cost of repairs in mid-Ulster and central Belfast will put severe strain on the Northern Ireland Office budget.
But the Government has pledged that all bills will be met, and extra funds have already been secured from the Treasury to pay for reconstruction.
The multi-million pound trail of destruction over the past 12 months includes the following outrages:
May 8, 1992 — Fivemiletown, Co Tyrone.
Scores of houses were devastated in a no-warning attack on an RUC station.
August 2, 1992 — Bedford Street Belfast.
Two IRA car bombs exploded within minutes, wrecking scores of offices in the commercial heart of the city.
September 23, 1992 — Belvoir estate.
A huge 2,000lb bomb destroys the forensic science widespread damage to 750 houses on the Belvoir estate.
Damage estimated at least £5.5m.
October 21, 1992 — Bangor Co Down.
A car bomb explodes in Main Street, destroying scores of shops and businesses.
Damage estimated at £3.5m
October 30 1992 — Glengormley.
A huge van bomb abandoned outside the RUC base destroys 20 houses.
November 13, 1992 — Coleraine Co Antrim.
The entire town centre is flattened by a 500lb bomb.
Twelves shops are demolished in damage estimated at £14m.
March 7, 1993 — Bangor Co Down.
For the second time in just six months, an IRA car bomb causes widespread destruction.
May 20, 1993 — Glengall Street Belfast.
A 1000lb bomb explodes outside the Grand Opera House for the second time.
The Europa Hotel is again devastated and offices over a wide area wrecked.
Damage estimated at £6.5m.
Last December, as the soaring bill for bomb damage rocketed through the ceiling of the Compensation Agency's budget, the Secretary of State pledged that claims would be met.
Sir Patrick made a special arrangement with the Treasury whereby additional funds would be made available to meet the cost.
Chief Supt Jimmy Blair — praised police officers' actions before the Portadown bomb exploded.
HUGE BOMB RIPS HEART OUT OF TOWN
A HAWK-eyed policeman saved the lives of dozens of shoppers just minutes before a massive 1,00bomb rocked the heart of Portadown.
He spotted a suspicious van parked in the town centre and immediately raised the alarm.
A full-scale evacuation operation swung into action as panic swept through Saturday morning shoppers.
But seven minutes later the blue ringer Toyota Hiace van exploded ripping buildings.
Two policeman who were trying to shepherd mothers and c children away from the scene were hit by flying glass, debris and shrapnel.
Four civilians were also injured.
An elderly woman in her 50s or 60s suffered a serious leg injury from the fallout of the explosion.
According to the RUC, a police car was on routine patrol in the town's High Street when it spotted the suspicious van around 10.35 am parked outside the Halifax building society.
The van's registration number, NIB 2228, was radioed to police control who carried out a check.
Seconds later the patrol was told the van was a ringer as the owner and his van were still at home.
Said a police source: ‘The patrol immediately warned shopkeepers about the van.
‘Other uniformed officer and plain clothed detectives rushed from the station in Edward Street in an effort to close off the roads and usher passers-by away from the van.’
Minutes later a local shopkeeper received a telephone warning from the IRA about the bomb.
Two other telephone calls were received — the last at 11.15 am.
The van bomb detonated at 11.22 am blowing police and civilians off the street.
As the full horror of the explosion unfolded, the Halifax building society was reduced to a mound of rubble.
Next door the Northern Bank was severely damaged with window frames jutting out of the cracked masonry.
The bomb tore through shops and houses over a 1,000 yard radius — stretching from Bridge Street to Castle Street.
Scores of firemen spent four hours after the explosion trying to repair a fractured gas pipe in the middle of High Street.
Said a police source: ‘This town is wrecked.
If it hadn't have been for the policeman there would have been untold carnage.’
Jim McCormick's message to Sunday life
Anne Diamond: champagne toast
Baby boy for morning TV presenter Anne
TV PRESENTER Anne Diamond and her husband Mike Hollingsworth today toasted the birth of their new baby with champagne.
Both were said to be ‘very happy’ while pondering a name for the 7lb 3oz boy born on Friday night in the Wellington hospital, north-west London.
Miss Diamond has said the baby would be a brother to her son Sebastian — a victim of cot death, aged four months, in July 1991 — but would never replace him.
TV executive Mr Hollingsworth drove Ms Diamond to the private hospital from her home in Leamington Spa, Warwickshire, after high blood pressure problems.
A family friend and spokesman said: ‘She is very well, very happy but still tired.
Mike is also very pleased.
The baby may make his public debut on Miss Diamond's BBC1 programme Good Morning With Anne And Nick next week.
A BBC spokesman said: ‘If all goes well and when Anne feels up her and her baby to the Good Morning audience.’
Sebastian's death prompted Miss Diamond to launch a high-profile campaign to research the causes of cot death and help prevent it.
The Government later backed advice that babies be put on their backs to sleep and not overheated by too many blankets.
The number of British cot deaths halved just a year after the advice.
The Royal Victoria Hospital, Belfast, a life-saver
REBECCA Stephens may have just conquered the world's tallest mountain — but she insisted last night she had no plans to end her climbing career on a high note.
‘Not in the slightest.
There are lots of mountains I still want to climb,’ Ms Stephens said, just hours after arriving back in Britain.
Shortly before 8am on Monday, Ms Stephens, 31, a journalist from Fulham, west London, became the first British woman to climb Everest.
After several weeks of sleeping bags and ‘pretty awful food’, Ms Stephens, who lost a stone and half during the expedition, was looking forward to a hearty meal and a good night's sleep in a proper bed.
But not before joining some friends for a celebration.
‘I'm going to tuck into some booze tonight,’ she said.
Killers in the shadows
THE IRA wasted no time in celebrating Sinn Fein successes in last week's council elections.
as if to mark the end of voting, they blasted the heart out of Glengall Street on Thursday morning — including the Grand Opera House.
Then, with confirmation from the counts that their political mouthpiece had performed splendidly at the polls, they turned on Portadown.
It was a classic mix of ballot box and bomb tactics — a deadly art in which extreme republicans have no equals.
But the thousands of people who trudged to the polling stations to cast their vote for this party must have known what the terror tailpiece to the democratic process would have been.
They were kidding themselves if they believed they were just electing a bunch of councillors to run local services.
For in the shadow of these public servants lurk the killers and bombers of the IRA.
Not directed by Sinn Fein but given public support by members of that party in the face of the atrocities they commit on men, women and children.
These councillors convinced a big section of the electorate that they are capable of helping to run public services throughout the province.
But hours after they were given that right, the terrorists who share their political aspirations, blast every public service in Portadown's main street, injuring six of the electorate in the process.
No one should be in any doubt that these bombs were the IRA's response to Sinn Fein winning seven extra council seats in Ulster.
Anyone who thinks otherwise is living in a fool's paradise.
ULSTER pensioners have given their answer to government proposals to accounts.
A simple but effective: Thanks, but no thanks.
They belong to a generation which likes the feel of crisp fivers and tenners in their hands.
Not to mention the crack with their cronies as they queue for their lolly.
Some day all that may change and the weekly pension will amount to only a little government chit telling you how much has been credited to your account.
If that happens, life will be all the poorer for it.
BON JOVI FLIES OUT IN A BLAZE OF GLORY
JON Bon Jovi flew out of Ulster in his private jet last night after an explosive concert that set Belfast alight.
But the spectacular light show and fireworks paled in comparison to a musical performance which had the 7,000-strong audience dancing in the aisles.
And the star of the show, with his new-look short hair, lived up to his word when he promised fans a night to remember.
To rapturous applause he told them: ‘For the next two-and-a-half hours I am going to work your asses like you've never been worked before.
You guys have a lot to live up to.’
Apologising for not being in Northern Ireland since his first concert three years ago, he added: ‘I'm sorry it took me so long to get back.
I couldn't think of a better place to end this leg of the tour than Belfast.’
A specially-built crescent shaped stage with ‘runways’ at each side allowed fans the chance to get a better view of their New Jersey idols.
Then, to the delight of those lucky enough to be in the front rows, Jon leapt down into the crowd and shook hands with the sea of people almost engulfing him.
The band, who have sold 13 million records, belted out hit after hit as the walls of the King's Hall echoed with the beat of the music.
Immediately after the gig Jon Bon Jovi flew back to London on the private jet he arrived in just seven hours earlier.
And this morning the musician caught the first Concorde flight back to the US to be with his pregnant wife.
In the meantime, however, fans will be pleased to learn that Belfast promoter Eamon McCann is already negotiating a return visit.
And there's a chance too for more heavy metal rocking when Iron Maiden play Belfast tomorrow night.
Two injured ‘serious'
LATE last night three of the people injured in the Portadown bomb blast were still in hospital.
One remained in a ‘comfortable’ condition at Craigavon Area Hospital and two were transferred to Belfast's Royal Victoria for further treatment.
The two, both suffering from leg injuries, were said to be in a ‘serious’ condition.
Caribbean cruise is trip to paradise
THE CREST OF A WAVE
LIFESTYLE Editor Sue Corbett last month visited the Bahamas during a three-night Caribbean cruise.
Travel details: Cruise departs Miami, calling at Nassau in the Bahamas' New Providence Island and on to CocoCay island before returning to Miami.
Accommodation: Royal Caribbean Cruise Line's Nordic Empress.
This superb floating hotel has a passenger capacity of 1,610 and carries a staff and crew of almost 700.
Cabins are small but adequate.
Most holidaymakers will find so much do to on board that they'll rarely be in them.
Food: As much as you can eat — at no extra cost as cruise price includes all meals.
And what a choice!
Breakfast (silver service or buffet), lunch (silver service or buffet), afternoon tea, afternoon ice creams at the poolside, three-course dinner, midnight buffet and 24-hour cabin room service.
Drink: No money changes hands for drinks or, in fact, any purchases on board.
Everything is signed Your bill is then settled the evening before you leave the ship.
The captain hosts a cocktail party on the second night of the cruise.
As well as the casino, there are a number of bars on board.
Prices are comparable to home.
Hygiene: Excellent.
Good buys: Any duty free goods are worth purchasing either on board or in port.
Perfumes, jewellery, alcohol, watches are all at amazingly low prices.
It is worth saving your duty free allowances for the cruise, as you won't get better deals in Florida or at the airport duty free shops.
Weather: The average Bahamian temperature is from 70 degrees in the winter to 80 degrees in the summer.
Language: No problems.
On board all of the staff and crew speak English.
On shore most have at least an understanding of what you are saying.
Tips (you wish you'd known before you left): Get specific directions to the cruise departure point at the Port of Miami.
Driving through Downtown Miami was NOT a highlight of our trip.
The area is best avoided at night-time but during the day should be safe as long as you know where you are going stop en route.
Evenings on board are less formal than we had expected.
Smart casual wear is quite in order for dinner time, but bring one cocktail dress for the Captain's cocktail party.
Recommended places to visit: John Bull department store and most of the shops in Nassau's Bay Street.
Duty Free bargains make it a shopper's paradise.
The Drumbeat Club makes for an excellent evening on shore in Nassau when you can experience authentic Bahamian music in a venue frequented by as many locals as tourists.
CocoCay island is owned by Royal Caribbean Cruise Line.
If you've ever dreamed of lazy hours spent on a tranquil, tropical island, then it literally is a dream come true.
Places to avoid: We wouldn't recommend the glass-bottom boat tour around the reefs of Nassau.
The tropical fish and coral formations promised for our £10 never materialised.
General comments: This 3-night cruise is an excellent way to introduce novice cruisers to the concept of a holiday at sea.
There really is one on board.
As well as the excellent dining and bar facilities, there is a fully equipped gym, swimming pool, sauna and massage centre, beauty salon, duty-free shops, casino and disco.
Organised youth activities will keep the kiddies happy while you partake of exercise classes, deck games or just laze by the poolside.
Worthy of special mention is the evening Variety Show when you'll be dazzled by the colourful costumes in the Las Vegas-style revues.
A perfect way to end a perfect cruise day.
Fellow cruisers who frequently enjoy holidays at sea assured us that Royal Caribbean is by far the best cruise line to choose.
We had no reason to disbelief them.
Tour operator: Royal Caribbean Cruise Line.
Cost: Prices range from £195 to £835 depending on departure dates and type of cabin.
(Air fare not included).
Value for money: The 3-night cruise is obviously aimed largely at the US market with the incentive of no extra air fares.
But for UK and Irish holidaymakers who want to combine it with a Florida vacation, it is also an attractive deal.
Although it may seem expensive cost of getting to Florida, it will be a highlight of your trip.
And the vast range in prices according to cabin, ensures that there is something to suit every pocket.
Royal Caribbean's brochure is well worth looking at with its choice of worldwide destinations, many with air fares included in the package.
Juror ‘flattered by wolf whistle’
THE woman juror whose looks prompted a man to wolf-whistle at her in court yesterday said she was secretly flattered and took it as a compliment.
Aspiring model Alexa Hamley, 22, was a member of a jury about to return a verdict in a trial when Paul Powell, 21, whistled at her in Cardiff Crown Court.
Judge Geoffrey Kilfoil ordered his arrest and jailed him for 14 days for contempt of court.
But Alexa said yesterday: ‘The judge was wrong.
The lad should have been put in the cells for a few hours to cool off.
‘To jail him for that long is ridiculous.
It was only a wolf-whistle — he was paying me a compliment.
‘I was embarrassed at the time because it was a serious occasion but secretly I was also very flattered.
‘Men sometimes whistle at me in the street and it doesn't bother me a bit.
There's nothing wrong with it — it's only a way of saying they think I'm pretty.
‘But the middle of a courtroom in front of a judge was hardly the time or the place.’
Alexa said she had applied for a modelling but had received no reply.
She added: ‘I would still love the chance to be a model.’
Alexa, who lives with her parents in a village near Maesteg, Mid Glamorgan, is due to carry out a second week of jury service from Monday.
DEATH TOLL OF SMOKING DISEASES
Smoking is the cause of 33pc of ALL cancers, not just lung cancer.
Cancer is the second biggest killer in Northern Ireland, second only to heart disease — itself caused largely by smoking.
In 1989 3,500 people died of cancer in Northern Ireland, that's 22pc of all deaths.
Last year 2,500 people died from smoking-related diseases alone in Northern Ireland — six lives lost every single day.
More than a million working days are lost every year through smoking-related diseases.
In Northern Ireland, £7.3m was spent on a cancer programme, including treatment for diseases caused by smoking.
Last year throughout the EC, smoking killed a total of 431,000 people.
Despite the huge profits made by tobacco companies, in 1991 £900m was spent to subsidise the EC's production of tobacco.
CIGARETTES SCANDAL AT CANCER HOSPITAL
Trolley ladies Sold tobacco on wards of Belvoir Park
HEALTH campaigners in Ulster have been stunned to learn that lung cancer patients were being sold cigarettes — in the province's main chemotherapy centre.
Volunteers at Belvoir Park Hospital who run a trolley service in the wards have been selling tobacco products directly to cancer sufferers as they lay in their beds.
Last week the trolley ladies involved in the ‘ciggie sale’ were reprimanded by embarrassed hospital officials.
Members of the Ladies Committee of Belvoir Park Hospital were bringing cigarettes into wards on trollies along with sweets minerals and magazines and selling them to smokers.
Many of their customers were being treated for diseases directly caused by their habit.
A hospital spokesman admitted to Sunday Life that the practice at Belvoir Park was ‘obviously daft’.
And he promised that the sale of cigarettes would be stopped immediately.
The spokesman also admitted that it's not the first time the ladies have been hauled over the coals for selling fags.
‘Obviously it is not acceptable to have cigarettes for sale on the trolley service and the Ladies Committee has been asked to remove them,’ he said.
He added: ‘It is not happened.
‘The hospital is quite adamant that it is not our policy to encourage smoking or allow cigarettes to be sold’.
He explained that the trolley service was operated by the Ladies Committee volunteers, who stocked supplies requested by the patients themselves.
‘Tobacco is highly addictive, and patients can be quite forceful in asking for cigarettes.
New volunteers who may not be aware of hospital policy can make errors of judgment.
‘We shall be monitoring the situation to make sure cigarettes don't creep back on.’
Cigarettes are acknowledged as a serious health risk, and the main cause of lung cancer.
Smoking claims thousands of lives every year and treatment for the effects of the habit costs the taxpayer millions of pounds annually.
Yet Belvoir Park, the specialist unit for treating cancer in Ulster, is the only hospital in Northern Ireland where cigarettes are offered for sale to bed-bound patients.
The Action for Smoking and Health campaign was said to be ‘aghast and horrified’ by the disclosure.
‘It is clearly ludicrous to allow anyone to sell cigarettes in a cancer hospital to patients results of smoking,’ said a spokeswoman.
‘This is a battle we fought and won eight years ago when hospitals in Northern Ireland agreed to stop the sale of cigarettes.
It is sad to discover it is happening again.’
Michael Wood, the director of the Ulster Cancer Foundation, said the sale of cigarettes in Belvoir Park was ‘totally inappropriate’.
Belvoir Park Hospital's spokesman said the Ladies Committee did not wish to comment on the controversy.
Weapons recovered
THE security forces recovered a haul of guns and ammunition in Maghera yesterday.
Two revolvers, an automatic pistol, 118 bullets and three balaclavas were found in a planned search of a vacant house at Glen Road by members of the Royal Irish Regiment.
Bottoms up for new wine extravaganza
WINE sales are big business in northern Ireland.
And next Wednesday sees probably the biggest and most cosmopolitan trade wine show ever staged in the province.
Leading hoteliers, publicans and restaurateurs will converge at the Kings Hall, Balmoral, to choose new wines for their customers.
During the day they will meet major wine suppliers and producers flying in from France, Germany, Australia, California and South Africa as well as top London-based agents for Portuguese ports and Chilean wines.
There will be representatives of the Bordeaux and Burgundy regions amongst many others.
Event organiser and wine expert Jean Francois Jamet of Guinness Northern Ireland said: ‘The trade here work very hard to get it right for their customers, and this event will give them an unequalled chance to sample probably the widest range of wines ever assembled for buyers in Northern Ireland.’
Wednesday's extravaganza will also see Guinness launch the award-winning range of Nederburg South African wines.
The pattern of wine drinking in Northern Ireland has changed dramatically over the past few years, said Mr Jamet.
‘Wine is excellent value for money and the range of wines now available to the Northern Ireland public has increased immeasurably.
There is now something for everyone,’ he said.
RTE in gender bender storm
A ROW was raging last night after it was revealed that a sex-change model agency chief is to appear on a top Irish TV show.
Model Rebecca Tallon, 35, is to star on RTE 1's hit programme, The Birthday Show, early next month.
Rebecca was formerly Ross Tallon, boss of the Tallon Model Agency in Dublin.
A year ago Ross decided to change sex and is now bidding to become a top female model.
His RTE appearance was slammed by Dail Deputy Brendan McGahon of Fine Gael.
Mr McGahon said he feared Rebecca's appearance could shock young viewers.
And he said it could also lead to some impressionable youngsters following Rebecca's example.
On the pre-recorded show, Rebecca will chat to host Shay Healy about her experiences, and will then blow out candles on a 35th birthday cake.
‘Ross or Rebecca is a transsexual, and should not be seen on Irish television screens,’ said Mr McGahon, deputy for Louth.
‘It is totally wrong that RTE should allow him or her on the Birthday Show.’
A spokeswoman for the Birthday Show said: ‘We gramme must include celebrities from all walks of life.
‘The object is to entertain the viewer, and we believe that Rebecca will help to do that.’
Top cop bows out of force
ONE OF the RUC's highest ranking officers is retiring at the end of the month.
Senior Assistant Chief Constable David Cushley leaves the force after completing 37 years service.
His last major task was to carry out a detailed study of the force's structures for Chief Constable Sir Hugh Annesley earlier this year.
Mr Cushley's departure leaves just one officer retaining the SACC rank in the force compared to three when Sir Hugh assumed responsibility for the RUC four years ago.
The rank is unique to the RUC, and a proposal by Sir Hugh to abolish it in a restructuring package he put to the Police Authority two years ago caused anger within senior members of the force.
The Police Authority rejected Sir Hugh's proposal and last year appointed one of the three serving SACC's to the newly created second Deputy Chief Constable rank which was agreed.
Under proposals contained in the Sheehy Report, the SACC rank within the RUC would be abolished, as would most Chief Inspector and Chief Superintendent posts.
‘HANDS OFF OUR PENSION BOOKS’
ULSTER pensioners have reacted with horror to Government proposals to pay pensions directly into bank accounts.
A Sunday Life poll has revealed blanket opposition to the scheme which could spell closure for scores of rural post offices across the province.
A small number of people were happy to have their money paid into the bank, but opposed the scheme because of the threat to Post Offices and inconvenience to others.
‘I have a bank account, but the post office is handy,’ said Edward Wills from Belfast.
‘There's a good bit of banter at the post office on pension days.
It's like a meeting place for pensioners.’
A pilot scheme is operating in the north-east of England and if it is successful it could be introduced to Ulster.
Our survey of local pensioners revealed a number of reasons why such a scheme would be inconvenient.
Stewart Moorewood said: ‘It is absolutely buck stupid when you think of it.
‘I live in Lambeg and the nearest bank is in Lisburn.
And what about all the old people who have never been in a bank in their lives?’
Belfast man Hamilton Allen said he would prefer to have his pension paid into the bank.
But he sympathised with others: ‘You can see how it would do the post offices harm and nobody would want that,’ he said.
Sadie Stewart from Duncairn Gardens in the west of the city said: ‘I get my pension at the local post office.
I don't want to have to go into the city every week for it.
It's an awful idea.’
SPECTACLE TO LIGHT UP THE SKIES…
AN AERIAL spectacular will light up the skies above Derry today.
The organisers, backed by Derry City Council, expect over 20,000 people to flock to the Northern Ireland International Air Show at Eglinton Airport.
Coronation Street's Sally Whittaker will officially open the air display with the aid of Mayor Willie Hay.
The aerial spectacular includes a Hawker Hunter supersonic jet fighter, the famous Crunchie ‘Stand on Wing’ Flying Circus, Polish Gnat jet aerobatics aircraft, and a US Korean War T33 ‘Shooting Star’jet fighter.
A Douglas Dakota DC3, which was used as a US Army Air Force Skytrain in World War Two, will help bring back memories for old war dogs.
The Buccaneer strike aircraft, which was used as a fighter plane during the Gulf War, will dart through the skies over the Maiden City.
Organisers say there will also be plenty of entertainment on the ground including a motor cycle stunt team, bungy jumping, clowns, stilt walkers, vintage cars and a model aircraft display.
DRUGS PROBE AT TOP SCHOOL
THE RUC are investigating allegations of drug dealing at a leading Belfast grammar school.
Grosvenor High School headmaster Ken Reid called in the police last week after pupils confessed to being offered soft drugs by another pupil.
And he confirmed that a 15-year-old boy had been suspended while the police inquiry continued.
Mr Reid said the matter came to light after a pupil informed a teacher that he had been offered drugs by the suspended boy.
The principal's own inquiries revealed that seven boys had taken soft drugs from the pupil.
It is understood the incidents occurred at the end of last term.
‘If anything illegal happens in the school, such as theft, we immediately call in the police,’ said Mr Reid.
‘But this is very unusual.
In 20 years as headmaster this is only the second time something like this has happened and the previous incident was even smaller.’
The school's Board of Governors meet tomorrow night and will decide what further action to take.
Mr Reid will be making his own recommendations.
BELFAST'S poll-topping Tory Jim McCormick jumped to the defence of Sunday Life last week after we revealed that Conservative party bigwigs were urged to boycott Ulster.
He stuck his neck on the block, BEFORE the election, to stand over the story that senior Ulster Tories dismissed.
Sunday Life exclusively revealed that top Tories had been ‘banned’ from supporting Conservative candidates in last week's local government elections.
And the man behind the shock ‘Don't back Ulster Tories’ was alleged to be Sir Patrick Mayhew.
Leading Tory Lady Olga Maitland had been pencilled in by the South Belfast Conservative Association to go on the hustings with candidates last weekend.
But she cancelled her trip at the 11th hour as she had ‘a problem at home.’
Two days later the Northern Ireland Tory party chairman Leonard Fee issued a statement saying our article was based on ‘innuendo and unsubstantiated gossip.’
But last week the Conservative candidate in Belfast's Victoria Ward Jim McCormick — who polled 684 first preference votes — backed our story to the hilt.
In a message to Sunday Life, he said: ‘Congratulations on your very fair ‘Comment’ column in yesterday's Sunday Life.
‘You hit the nail squarely on the head.
‘Also I can confirm that contrary to a statement in today's ‘Newsletter’ the information in your article was almost 100 per cent accurate.’
He later said: ‘The only inaccuracy in the article was that senior officers from the Northern Ireland branch were summoned to a meeting at Conservative Party headquarters a fortnight ago.
‘There was a meeting of local conservatives a short time before Prime Minister John Major visited the province in April with Sir Patrick Feldon.
‘Sir Patrick took exception to a point in our manifesto about involvement in the talks process.
‘The opinion was also expressed that it was not party policy to come out and support candidates during local elections.
‘I was very surprised at Mr Fee's statement but your story was true whether he liked it or not.’
In a bizarre twist, Sir Patrick Mayhew went on the hustings last Tuesday…with who else but East Belfast Tory Jim McCormick!
Mr Mayhew denounced our report as ‘rubbish from start to finish.’
Asked why he had taken to the streets just hours before polling, he said: ‘I had other things to do, as you may imagine.’
The local Tories were crushed in the district council elections failing to get a single member elected in Belfast.
SHE'S been in bed with Michael Douglas and Arnold Schwarzenegger.
And now actress Sharon Stone is pulling back the sheets on her sexploits during the filming of the raunchy movies that have made her famous.
Today she is one of the most expensive celebrities in the world.
Yet it took a script that just about every major actress in Hollywood turned down to make her a star.
The film was Basic Instinct, one of the most sexually and violently graphic mainstream movies ever made.
Stone only made 500,000 dollars for that and her previous film Total Recall with Arnold Schwarzenegger.
For her latest film, Sliver, she has earned almost 3m dollars.
Sliver is just as steamy and hot as Basic Instinct.
Her love scenes in this voyeuristic thriller are with the hot new actor Billy Baldwin.
Now the world's hottest actress tells SUNDAY LIFE about sex in the movies, sex in real life, and what she really thinks about her leading men:
Q: You have had bedroom scenes with Arnold Schwarzenegger, Michael Douglas and Billy Baldwin.
Sharon Stone: Well, all these scenes were completely different.
In Total Recall (with Schwarzenegger) the scene was all about manipulation, about gaining power over him by being sexual.
It was not really a sex scene in the nightgown on and Arnold was wearing his briefs.
Q: And in Basic Instinct and Sliver you are totally naked.
Sharon Stone: Not so in Sliver.
Not in the sex with Billy Baldwin.
Anyway I must say that Arnold was so shy, it was adorable.
There was a tremendous vulnerability.
Q: And this differed from your experiences with Basic Instinct and Sliver?
Sharon Stone: In Basic Instinct I was naked.
Totally naked.
The scene in Basic Instinct with Michael was a very weird and very sick sort of love.
It had to be passionate — and we had to be naked.
Q: Do you have any kind of problem getting naked with an actor — especially one that you may not like?
Sharon Stone: Look, when you are really having sex, when you are alone with somebody who you care about, it can be very scary.
Now, just try to do it in a room filled with ten people, most of them strangers, and a camera.
Let me tell you something, it is far out!
Q: But you can't be worried about the nudity.
You have done nudity in most of your films and you even did a Playboy Magazine lay-out.
Sharon Stone: That's true.
But, my gosh that was something like two years ago.
People are still talking about it.
Q: I think that is because people see it as an act of desperation when an actress agrees to appear in a nude magazine like Playboy.
Sharon Stone: Well, maybe it was.
I guess I just wanted to be seen at that point.
Q: Were you well paid for appearing in the nude?
Sharon Stone: Sure.
I've got to be completely frank with you.
It was something like four or five days after I finished filming Total Recall with Arnold and I had to put every dime that I had into buying a house.
I really needed some work.
Q: After you finished Basic Instinct what kind of scripts were you starting to get?
Sharon Stone:(laughs) Just about everything.
Suddenly, I am right to play anything.
Q: You had been in the business almost a decade before you appeared in a blockbuster.
Why the wait?
Sharon Stone: It wasn't my doing.
I had had many tests.
Batman, Havanna, and Dick Tracy, for example.
But the director always just said, sorry.
Q: Have you ever considered just hanging up the business?
Sharon Stone: Oh yeah, I was tired of the usual B-run movies.
I was making two or three a year and was feeling worse and worse.
It was so bad that I actually did consider quitting the acting un less I found an exciting role.
I think that the real reason that I wanted to do Total recall was that I knew it might make me famous which then might help me get better parts.
Q: There is talk that you are a difficult actress to work with.
Sharon Stone: It's the old thing.
I say what I think.
If you have a vagina and a point of view then that is quite a dangerous combination.
Row over Irish army's IRA quiz
IRISH Army commanders have outraged thousands of soldiers by asking them to reveal whether they have any links with the IRA.
A highly-sensitive questionnaire has been circulated to almost all members of the southern defence forces.
It asks soldiers whether they, their friends or family members are or ever have been members of the IRA, INLA, IRSP, Sinn Fein, the Communist Party or the Connolly Youth Movement.
The ‘positive vetting’ questionnaire also queries whether members of the Army Navy or Air Corps take or have ever taken drugs.
But the blanket screening has backfired badly on the Department of Defense in Dublin.
Army union leaders have instructed their members to refuse to fill in the questionnaire, which they say undermines the integrity of the Irish Army.
‘This circular puts a serious question mark over our loyalty,’ said Denis Whelan, the president of the Permanent Defence Forces Other Ranks Representatives Association.
A spokesman for the Irish Ministry of Defence told Sunday Life that almost all 13,000 members of the Army, Air Corps and Irish Navy had received the questionnaire.
‘This is the first time we have carried out this survey as part of our ongoing review of security,’ he said.
However he stressed that the Irish Army does not believe it has been infiltrated by the IRA.
‘Obviously we have to ensure that our internal security within the defence forces is as tight as possible,’ he said.
The spokesman would not reveal what the results of the survey were — or how many members refused to answer the questions.
Free measures bid to curb drinking
OFF-LICENCES all over Ulster will be handing out free measures to customers next month — to help stop them getting sozzled on the sofa!
Home drinking is rapidly increasing in Northern Ireland, and is the target for ‘Drinkwise 93’— the annual booze blitz by the Health Promotion Agency.
Since 1973 the number of off-licences in the province has rocketed by 300pc, and home consumption now accounts for almost half the alcohol sold here.
Yet most of the people who sink huge quantities of beer wine and spirits in their own living rooms give hardly a thought to the damage it causes their health.
Many would take grave exception to the suggestion that they are problem drinkers, yet the volume of alcohol they consume at home can be far above recommended safe levels.
So this year the drinks industry itself is joining forces with the Health Promotion Agency to drive home the message.
‘The point is that even if the bar never shuts in the house it is just as important to keep control of your drinking,’ said the agency's Director of Programme Development, Linda Barclay.
‘If you are out in a bar, club or hotel, the drinks are carefully measured go home,’ she added.
‘But in the house ‘Ulster Hospitality’ has a habit of taking over.
One drink at home can often mean the equivalent of three in the pub.’
Ms Barclay said she had been greatly encouraged by the response of the off-licence owners, who would be distributing drinks measures leaflets and beer mats.
‘Our common goal at the end of the day is the safer use of alcohol among people who drink.’
The recommended safe limit of alcohol for men is 21 units a week, and for women 14 units a week.
A pint of beer or a small glass of wine is one unit, and a measure of spirits is one and a half units.
Falklands facts and figures
THE invasion of the Falkland Islands started on April 2 1982.
Around 25,000 British servicemen were sent in to do battle with the Argentinians.
A total of 255 servicemen were killed for the recapture of The Malvinas.
Eighty men died during the land invasion.
Twenty-two members of 3 Para died during the war.
The youngest of these was 17-year-old Private Jason Burt.
Four naval warships were sunk by Argentinian shells.
They were HMS Sheffield, HMS Ardent, HMS Antelope and HMS Coventry.
The war ended on June 6 1982 after the Argentinians surrendered.
THEY FOUGHT AND DIED
NORTHERN Ireland played its part from start to finish in the Falkands war — and for a price.
Two Ulster-born servicemen died in the war thousands of miles from home in the South Atlantic.
Colour Sergeant Brian Johnston, 33, a native of Carrickfergus, Co Antrim, died along with five colleagues when their landing craft was hit by a missile in Choiseul Sound on June 6 — on the eve of his 34th birthday.
For his bravery in rescuing 100 survivors from the frigate HMS Antelope and getting them onto his Royal Marine landing craft, Colour Sgt Johnston was awarded the Queen's Gallantry Medal posthumously.
Lance corporal Raymond Armstrong, 24, from Enniskillen, Co Fermangh, died during the build up to the island invasion.
The Royal Green Jacket soldier was drowned when a helicopter carrying 30 troops ditched into the freezing South Atlantic waters.
Lance-Corporal Anthony Cork, from land, was buried in Northern Ireland at the request of his Lisburn wife Irene.
He was killed with 16 comrades from 2 Para during the storming of Goose Green.
Others were lucky to survive.
Chief Petty Officer John Strange was badly injured during a missile attack.
The 38-year-old Larne man suffered burns after HMS Sheffield was bombarded with shells.
And weapons electrical mechanic Eric Samson survived the bombs and rockets which sank HMS Ardent.
Lance-Corporal Nigel Smith died during the recapture of Goose Green after surviving the IRA Warrenpoint massacre in 1979 which claimed the lives of 18 Para colleagues.
The advanced military technology expertise of Shorts Brothers in Belfast played a crucial role in the war — for both sides.
The land-based Tigercat was used to defend Port Stanley and Goose Green and was also in service with the RAF.
The close-range anti-aircraft Seacat weapon system was also used by the Argentinians and the Royal Navy.
And the Shorts military version of Skyvan was used as a multi-role tactical.
Making it harder for killer gangs
KILLER gangs stalking Ulster streets for murder targets have been hampered by a heightened security presence, it has been revealed.
For figures compiled by Sunday Life show that loyalist and republican murder gangs killed 27 people from January to May this year.
But at the same time last year 42 people had lost their lives at the hands of the roaming death squads.
And the overall toll, which includes sectarian murders, shows a similar trend with 46 people dying in the first five months of last year compared to 29 this year.
Last year's figures include the IRA Teebane massacre in Co Tyrone, the UFF slaughter at Sean Graham's bookmakers on Belfast's Ormeau Road, and the gunning down of three people at Sinn Fein 's Belfast headquarters by rogue cop Alan Moore.
The figures also reveal that the security forces have lost twice as many members this year as last year.
But no members of the public have been killed this year by the security forces compared to eight last year.
year's low death toll down to an increase in security force presence in loyalist and republican strongholds.
‘There has been specific targeting of areas like the Shankill and Ballymurphy areas of West Belfast,’ said one detective.
‘We have obviously had more successes in the Shankill where we frustrated many UFF operations.
This theory appears true in the Belfast area for loyalists but not for republicans.
The combined force of the UVF/UFF has claimed six lives in Belfast compared to 11 last year.
This year the IRA has killed two people in Belfast compared to none the previous year.
‘There has been a number of close calls this year like the recent UFF attack on the bookmakers in North Belfast,’ said a detective.
‘In some instances it has been sheer luck for members of the public with either guns jamming or security force patrols intercepting the terrorists.’
The UFF vowed at the start of the year to step up attacks and warned: You ain't seen nothing yet.’
The threat has not only been partially thwarted by vehicle checkpoints but by close surveillance.
The security forces have deployed more undercover Special Branch and Military Intelligence staff in notorious paramilitary stomping grounds.
But the covert groupings have had their undercover work rumbled by loyalists.
One military intelligence soldier fired on a months ago claiming he felt his life was threatened.
And an RUC Special Branch officer had been beaten up a few weeks previously after going to meet his UFF informer in Belfast's York Road district.
He suffered serious head injuries during the UFF assault and his gun was stolen.
It still hasn't been recovered.
With the heightened security in and around Belfast, the paramilitaries have tried to step up attacks in the rest of Northern Ireland.
Loyalists have killed nine people and the IRA have murdered eight in counties Down, Tyrone and Derry.
Among the loyalist tally is three workmen and a leading IRA terrorist who were murdered by the UFF in Castlerock earlier this year.
Last year loyalists gunned down eight people whereas republicans killed 15.
Said a detective: ‘We have found the tight grip around Belfast has forced a rethink in the loyalist leadership as to where they should carry out attacks.
‘The country areas are a softer option for them where they know some areas are no-gos for us because of manoeuvrability and the terrain.
Loyalist sources have told Sunday Life that attacks will be stepped up against republicans.
‘Republican targets have been pinpointed and as soon as the police cordon has been dropped units will be sent into action,’ said a loyalist source.
Diet tips to aid your healthy living
Am I missing out on iron?
Dr Carole Lowis, nutritionist for the Dairy Council for Northern ireland.
DOCTOR Carole Lowis, nutritionist at the Diary Council for Northern Ireland, answers your questions on healthy lifestyles.
I HAVE recently become a vegetarian but am worried because I'm told that I might be missing out on iron in my diet?
MEAT, especially red meats and liver, are important suppliers of iron for most people.
So, if you are a vegetarian it is certainly worthwhile making sure you include other good sources of iron in your diet.
You'll need to get your daily iron from eggs (if you're eating them), beans such as baked beans, soya beans and lentils, leafy green veg, dried fruit, and fortified breakfast cereals (check the labels to see which have iron added).
Iron from non meat sources is better absorbed by the body if it is eaten with a source of vitamin C, so try to have your cereal with a glass of fresh orange or your lentils with a tomato based sauce and so on.
CAN you tell me which type of milk is suitable for my four-year-old daughter?
ANDI GOES FOR SHOCK VALUE
A LITTLE ray of sunshine she isn't.
Cute and sweet are not adjectives that readily spring to mind on surveying the stage wardrobe of Andi, the blonde frontwoman of local cover band Sunshine.
But then Andi isn't really your average rock babe.
Two years ago she traded her long, barbie doll locks for a severe Billy Idol style crop, and filled her wardrobe with outfits that are high on shock value.
She confesses to wearing sweat-pants, no make up and trainers at the weekend, but for work, Andi has the kind of closet most 18-year-olds would swap limbs for.
There's a collection of bustiers and bra tops that would rival that other model of blond ambition Madonna.
Flares feature highly in the line up, as do dizzy platform shoes that defy gravity.
But there are older, more cherished items, too, like a black jacket made entirely of feathers, and a fake fur coat bought on holiday in Tenerife.
Her shopping policy is cheap and cheerful.
‘I can only wear an outfit a couple of times, so there's no point spending a fortune,’ she says.
‘I go to high street shops that do high fashion looks at low prices, Ms Selfridge in Belfast Oxford Street are good.’
Despite frequent shopping trips to London, Andi also patronises local designers.
Susan Scott, Margaret Lismore and Ken Stacey's names pop up in her closet, alongside London designer names bought in the sales at Belfast shops Earth and Propaganda.
Name: Andi Occupation: Lead singer with Sunshine
Age: 25 Fave Labels: Everything and anything that catches her eye.
Fave Shops: Hyper Hyper and Top Shop, London; Miss Selfridge, Castlecourt; Propaganda, Belfast.
Favourite item: A fake fur coat, with movie star appeal
Most embarrassing item: ‘Silver trousers, a black PVC jacket and a whip I wore when I first joined the band, I cringe when I think of it now’.
Most recent purchase: Black stretch flares £19.99 from Marks and Spencer.
‘Every girl should have a pair’.
Sunshine play the Glenvon Hotel, Cookstown on Sunday, the Stormont Hotel, Belfast on Tuesday, the Seagoe Hotel in Portadown on Thursday and Fivemiletown on Friday night.
MOVING UP BY MOVING DOWN…
A GROUP of Belfast residents have moved up in the world — by moving down three or four flights of concrete stairs.
Young and old are enjoying the novelty of living in a ‘proper’ house for the first time in their lives.
The residents of Unity Flats are shrugging off the stigma of living in what has long been regarded as one of the city's most undesirable areas.
Attractive new semis, terraced and detached houses are replacing the old concrete eyesores.
Sixteen houses have been completed in the first phase of a re-development scheme which will eventually remove all the 1960s-built flats.
When the scheme is completed, in ten years time, 175 new homes will be provided.
Disappearing with the flats is the name Unity, giving the area on the fringe of the city a whole new identity.
And residents of the new Carrick Hill estate are delighted with the changes taking place.
Chairman of the Residents Association, Frank Dempsey said: ‘A lot of people in the area, especially young people, have never lived in a house before.
‘The residents who have moved into the first houses are the envy of everybody.
‘The rest of the local people can't wait to get into the new houses.’
Pensioner Sarah McKeown, who has lived in the area all her life, is settled into a new three-bedroomed house.
‘I love being able to open my front door onto a garden.
I've had to carry my shopping up 48 concrete steps for years,’ she said.
‘I felt sorry for the people in the awful rain.
‘It always made the stairs slippy and because of the flat roofs on the flats, the damp came through.’
Her neighbour, Madeline Murphy said: ‘It's great having no stairs to climb and a coal fire.
It was worth waiting for.’
Catholic head for College
A TOP Ulster girls' school has appointed its first Catholic headmistress.
Victoria College in Belfast has broken new ground with the promotion of deputy head Mrs Margaret Andrews to the top post.
Mrs Andrews takes up her new role in August when the present headmistress Dr Carolyn Higginson retires.
The school has refused to make any comment on the appointment of the new headmistress until she takes up her duties in August.
However, last night the news was welcomed by Belfast SDLP Councillor Dorita Field.
‘I am delighted that the Governors of Victoria College felt able to appoint somebody on merit rather than on any other grounds,’ she said.
Teacher is hostage heroine
THE most unlikely venue in the 38-year history of the Eurovision Song Contest last night produced an Irish winner for the second year in succession.
Dublin bank clerk Niamh Kavanagh won for Ireland with a song In Your Eyes after a nail-biting final moment of the competition with British songstress Sonia.
Until the final vote from the Maltese jury — filing later than scheduled because of a technical fault — either could have won.
But Malta gave 12 points to Ireland and none to Britain.
The final figures of the leading entries into tonight's Eurovision song contest were Ireland 187, United Kingdom 164, Switzerland 148, France 121.
When the Irish victory became clear the audience of several thousand inside the showjumping arena broke into a chorus of ‘Ole Ole’, the anthem that became so popular during Ireland's progress throughout the 1990 soccer World Cup finals in Italy.
Among the first to jump to his feet to applaud the success was Irish Prime Minister Albert Reynolds, one of the main guests at the event.
The competition was staged in a specially converted showjumping village of Millstreet thanks to the persuasive powers of owner and local businessman Noel C Duggan.
He successfully persuaded RTE the Irish State-run broadcasting network the event should go ahead in his home town almost 200 miles from Dublin rather than in the capital city.
A record 25 countries took part in the contest, which was beamed live to an estimated 300 million viewers throughout Europe and beyond.
Ironically it was the vote from the United Kingdom jury in the contest that first put Ireland significantly in front in the competition.
Up to then the UK and Irish entries had been fighting a tooth and nail contest.
The Irish success landed RTE with a potential financial headache for next year as they will now have to find the funds to stage the 1994 competition.
But one of the station's journalists, Belfast-born Fionnuala Sweeney who presented the night's occasion to Europe said at the end of it all: ‘Who knows — we may be seeing you in Ireland next year.’
Jon Bon Jovi at the King's Hall last night.
‘A BUSINESS MISTAKE'
FORMER North Down Mayor Denny Vitty yesterday promised his rates bill would be paid promptly.
The DUP man said the rates bill related to an office in Holywood's High Street which he has not used since November — a month after the court judgment against him.
But he insisted he knew nothing about either the debt or the court case because the bill had not been sent to his home.
‘I have been taken totally by surprise by this,’ he said.
‘When I vacated the office I asked the Rates Agency to send me an adjusted bill, but they sent it to the office and I did not get it,’ he said.
‘It was a genuine business mistake, that's all.
‘The first I learned of either the debt or the judgement was when I got a letter about it this week.
‘I have now written to the Rates Agency explaining the mistake and the bill will be discharged.’
Mr Vitty said an earlier court judgment against him for non-payment of rates while he was Mayor was a result of Unionist opposition to the Anglo-Irish Agreement.
‘At the time the DUP had a policy of not paying rates as a protest against the Agreement and I make no apologies about that,’ he said.
Road checks block ravers
THE RUC were out in force last night to prevent an illegal rave going ahead.
They set up random checkpoints on roads between Ballymena and Portstewart stopping vehicles and looking for drugs.
One motorist who was stopped on the way to Bushmills said: ‘The police were pulling in cars and coaches and taking teenagers out and searching them and the vehicles.
‘Apparently there was an open air illegal rave planned for somewhere in Portstewart.
‘But the police were making sure these ravers weren't going to get to it.
‘There were coaches and cars driving round in circles knowing full well the police planned to put a stop to the rave,’ said the motorist.
Last year illegal raves were held on Portstewart's Strand at weekends.
Police sting nets UDA blackmailers
FIVE UDA blackmailers jailed last week after they were snared in a police sting were the organisation's top extortionists.
And RUC sources revealed that since the blackmail gang was scooped last June, extortion complaints from businessmen has virtually dried up.
Sunday Life has learned that two of the men who pleaded guilty had faced blackmail and intimidation raps previously.
The charges were later dropped.
Ernest Atcheson, 46, of Matilda Gardens, and Noel Nelson, 34, of Majestic Drive, were jailed for six years; Alister Tait, of Utility Street, was sentenced to five years; Robert Cooper, 26, of Runnymede Parade and Colin Lindsay, 25, of Kilwarlin Crescent were each jailed for three years last Tuesday.
Belfast Crown Court heard that Atcheson rang a Newtownbreda building site from a call box demanding £5,000 for the UDA's Loyalist Prisoner Aid in return for guaranteed safety.
He ran out of coins and asked the company secretary to ring him back.
But Atcheson was unaware that a detective sergeant from the RUC's C13 Anti-Racketeering Unit was posing as the company secretary.
Sunday Life can reveal that Atcheson and Noel Nelson were arrested and charged in November 1989 for blackmailing and intimidating two Chinese businessmen.
They were accused of making unwarranted demands for £10 per week from the two restaurant owners in South Belfast and attempting to stop them running their business by using force and making threats or demands.
A bail hearing later heard that Atcheson carried a UDA card stating that he was entitled to collect for Loyalists Prisoners' Aid.
Safety dropped after the businessmen feared for their safety if they took the stand.
A senior RUC source said: ‘They were the UDA's top extortionists.
We are disappointed they didn't get longer but at least they are out of the way for a while.’
In November 1988 Nelson was charged with threatening to kill a man from Sandy Row and warning him not to attend court as a witness in an assault case.
The case went ahead and charges against Nelson were later dropped.
And almost 10 years ago Atcheson was arrested and charged on the evidence of loyalist supergrass James Crockard.
He was accused of armed robbery of nearly £200 in January 1976 but 15 months later charges against him and 20 others were dropped.
Top cop and spy in secret meet
Mr Stevens, now Chief Constable of Northumbria, also had a separate meeting at the offices of the Director of Public Prosecutions Alasdair Fraser.
The DPP's office declined to comment on Mr Stevens' visit beyond saying that the officer's inquiries were continuing.
The meetings came after the publication in February of a report by American lawyers which contained further allegations about the circum stances surrounding the UDA murder of Belfast solicitor Patrick Finucane at his home in 1989.
Loyalist sources close to the now banned UDA say ‘information’ from a former leading UDA member which was forwarded to the US lawyers is flawed and is based on hearsay picked up after the event.
However Mr Stevens' visit to Belfast and his trip to see Nelson has prompted speculation that he was asked by Sir Hugh to go over details of the Finucane murder again with Nelson in case something was overlooked in the original investigation.
Shortly after he was arrested by the Stevens team, Brian Nelson made lengthy statements in the Prison outlining his three year involvement with the UDA as its chief intelligence collator and his role as a top Army agent.
One other possibility being suggested for Stevens' visit to Nelson is a review of the role of his principal Army handler at the time of the Finucane murder.
Legal representatives for Nelson refused to comment on the visit from the Stevens team or to indicate whether Nelson has decided not to proceed with legal actions against both the Prison Service and the BBC over the use of extracts from his ‘jail journal’ in television programmes without his permission.
It is understood Nelson has not communicated with any member of his family since his transfer to England in December.
ARMY spy Brian Nelson has been interviewed again by top cop John Stevens, who headed an investigation into alleged collusion between members of the security forces and loyalist paramilitaries.
Sunday Life has learned that the meeting took place recently at the secret prison location in England where Nelson is now held.
It is understood details of matters outlined in Nelson's so called‘jail journal’ were discussed.
Before the meeting with Nelson, Mr Stevens met Chief Constable Sir Hugh Annesley in Belfast.
STOLEN COP DIARY IN TERROR ALERT
A POLICE officer is at the centre of a top level security alert after a filofax was stolen in Belfast.
The constable didn't inform Ulster detectives who were called in to investigate only a car theft.
But he told his bosses in London who have now provided him with round-the-clock protection for fear he could be in the sights of an IRA killer gang.
Thieves stole a car from a house last month in south Belfast.
Sources revealed the Metropolitan police officer, who is based at Forest Gate police station in London's East End and who was holidaying in Ulster, slept downstairs in a front room terrified the car would be pinched.
‘He slept like a log and when he got up in the morning and saw the car had gone he was very upset,’ said a source.
The car was found abandoned in west Belfast the following day.
Sunday Life has learned his filofax, containing sensitive work contact numbers, was tucked away in the glove compartment.
‘It also contained the telephone number of his father who is an officer in the RAF,’ a reliable source told Sunday Life.
‘He immediately rang his bosses and told them of the theft.
‘It has been a great cause for concern in London, particularly when he lives not far from where the Anti-Terrorist Squad uncovered a quantity of Semtex explosives in an IRA dump.
‘The Met have now provided him with round-the-clock protection as they fear the filofax could fall into the hands of the IRA,’ said the source.
But RUC sources told Sunday Life that the police officer did not report the filofax theft.
‘Detectives were called in to investigate the theft of the car but no mention was made of the filofax,’ said a RUC source.
RUC headquarters told Sunday Life last night: ‘We can't make any comment.’
A Scotland Yard spokeswoman said no comment would be made about the filofax theft in Northern Ireland.
‘We do not comment on matters of security,’ she added.
‘Don't fear us’ say SF
SINN FEIN president Gerry Adams last night sought to reassure unionists of their future in a united Ireland.
Speaking yesterday in Dungannon, the former west Belfast MP said it was important for republicans to bear in mind the fears and uncertainties of Protestants.
He said he had no doubt that there was uncertainty amongst Protestants, which could be traced directly to recent comments by British ministers.
‘Republicans need to be mindful of the fears of our Protestant neighbours,’ he said.
Mr Adams said the republican demand for a British withdrawal was not aimed at northern Protestants.
‘We must reassure our Protestant brothers and sisters that we will never be made to suffer for the British-sponsored murders of Catholics’.
Glorious winners!
The winners of the Glorious Gardens video competition we ran in Sunday Life on April 4 are Mrs Muriel Bell from Castlereagh and Mrs Elizabeth McIlwaine from Templepatrick.
Kelly's in the A team
Maiden city beauty queen Kelly Craig beat a bevy of 14 leggy lovelies to win the Miss Derry pageant this week.
The 18-year-old blue eyed beauty will represent her home town at the Miss Ireland competition in Dublin later this year.
Clever Kelly is currently studying hard to get A-Levels in English, Politics and Ancient History.
THOSE SUMMER SUNTRAPS
Trio on twin trip
A LUCKY council trio will jet off to the USA after the local council elections to size up potential twin towns.
The three Craigavon councillors will wing their way to the deep south and take a trip around the towns of Macon (Georgia), Knoxville (Tennessee) and Huntsville (Alabama).
Screen double
A BORDER town where major film The Playboys was shot two years ago is on the brink of another cine bonanza.
Irish writer Shane Connaughton confirmed yesterday that a screen version of his book ‘Run Of The Country’ is to be filmed by Channel 4.
It will be shot in Redhills, Co Cavan, close to the Fermanagh border where The Playboys was filmed.
IS THERE talent in the North-West or what?
The assortment of star quality on display at Thursday's Starsearch heat in Derry's Delacroix Inn had the judging panel transfixed.
And as if one needed reminding that there's more to this year's contest than Karaoke, four of the 11 acts competing were to provide their own original accompaniment.
One such was singer/songwriter Paul Herron, the first to secure a semi-final place with the self-penned ballad ‘Donegal Dream’.
Hot on his heels were folk duo Tascam, whose rousing medley had the crowd roaring in appreciation.
Tanya Irwin, who had arrived with a gaggle of student chums with the intention of having a laugh, did just that, skipping into Round Two with her rendition of ‘That's What Friends Are For’.
Even in such quality company, one young woman truly shone.
Denise McGrory and ‘Didn't We Almost Have It All’ walked away with overall laurels on the night.
The Starsearch returns to Derry in a few weeks, and those who missed out on this occasion are strongly urged to re-enter.
The was a small but lively second heat of Starsearch at the Dunowen in Dungannon yielded no end of surprises.
Only two were going through, but having toted up the scoring, the judges discovered three contestants only five marks behind in joint third place!
Angela Reid (Crazy) and Victor Duffin (Unchained Melody) were outright winners — Eunice Lowry, Sinead Loughran and comics Rab and Mack, the ones who came oh-so-close.
Do enter again people!
By the way, contestants are reminded that, for those who require it, the usual karaoke backing is still available.
Meanwhile, we're in the Leighinmohr Hotel, Ballymena, next week.
See you there!
SHEEP KILLED BY BIG CHILL
HUNDREDS of sheep and lambs have frozen to death as arctic weather conditions cause havoc for Ulster farmers.
Freak snowstorms over hillsides have left a trail of carnage in their wake, and many recently sheared ewes have died of cold.
Yesterday the Ulster Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals pleaded with farmers to rescue flocks left exposed and vulnerable.
And USPCA director Robin Wilson warned that thousands of sheep are at risk unless they are given immediate shelter.
In one area alone around Carrickfergus, 31 ewes and lambs died between Friday night and Saturday morning.
‘Farmers found their ewes dead from exposure in the fields, with new born lambs trying to suckle from their dead bodies,’ Mr Wilson said.
‘They are probably hundreds of others across the province that have met a similar fate’.
He warned: ‘Unless they are brought in tonight, thousands more could die.’
Most at risk are recently sheared ewes who have lost their heavy woollen coats and have no defence against the bitter cold.
‘The freezing winter conditions have caught sheep farmers by surprise,’ Mr Wilson said.
‘Here we are having February weather in the middle of sheep shearing season and the animals simply cannot cope with the conditions.
‘This time last week, people were out sunbathing.
Now we have snow.
I would appeal to every sheep farmer in the country to make an urgent check on his flock’.
On your marks, get wet, go…!
There was a damp start for fund-raisers yesterday, when walkers set out on the annual march from Cultra to Bangor to raise funds for the Northern Ireland Hospice in Belfast's Somerton Road.
But walkers refused to let the rain dampen their spirits as North Down deputy mayor Jane Copeland cut the tape to start the event.
THE RUC lost a race against time to prevent the huge IRA explosion that devastated Great Victoria Street and Glengall Street last week.
Security forces were on full scale alert after finding a bomb making base in West Belfast a fortnight ago.
Sunday Life has learned that documents and materials found in an unoccupied house in the Beechmount area indicated that the IRA had resumed its bomb making activities in the Falls Road area.
There had been a lull in activity after a number of serious setbacks in the city for the terrorist organisation.
The papers were found at Locan Street near the Royal Victoria Hospital.
They were in a house formerly occupied by a man now held in Crumlin Road jail on charges connected with major bombing attacks on Belfast City Centre last year.
They detailed the ‘mix’ required to make the fertiliser bombs that the IRA uses to devastate Belfast and other commercial centres.
Part of a coffee grinder is also understood to have been found in the house along with newspapers dating back to the beginning of May.
Con men warning
POLICE on both sides of the border have issued warnings to elderly folk to be on their guard against thieves posing as Water Board inspectors.
A police spokesman said: ‘This is a particularly mean type of theft by ruthless people preying on the elderly.
‘We are urging folk to be careful before admitting strangers into their homes.’
Residents battle lab plans
THE Northern Ireland Office's first choice for siting new Forensic Sciences Laboratories remains Hydebank, on the outskirts of Belfast.
But the Maze prison is also under consideration as a possible location.
A public inquiry will start hearing local objections to the building of the complex on May 21.
Many homes in the Belvoir Park estate were extensively damaged in a devastating IRA attack on the previous laboratories.
Residents fear a relocation at Hydebank could lead to another attack with massive blast damage being caused to nearby homes.
The Government has already appointed a legal team in an effort to push through the building proposals.
This was not necessary, according to a source close to the NIO who pointed out it already owns the land at Hydebank.
Arguments for locating the facility in the Maze Prison are convincing from a security standpoint.
But the legal profession is understood to be concerned that such a move would compromise the impartial working of the Forensic Science Laboratories.
Sources claim the Government is keen on cause the agency will not be automatically identified with the security forces in the mind of the public.
Reports delay in doc trial
THE bogus doctor who ran clinics in Ulster has been given a two week reprieve before she knows her fate.
Judge Simon Evans was due to pass sentence on Elizabeth Marsh last Tuesday at London's Isleworth Crown Court.
But it was postponed as the court was told that reports on the 49-year-old quack doctor were not ready.
She will now return to the court on May 25 where she faces a possible two years in prison or an unlimited fine.
Last month Marsh was found guilty of running misleading advertisements on medical products under the Medicines Act.
Crown lawyers told the jury that Marsh handed out a booklet called Cancer and Aids: Any Hope Left For Us at a gay pub in London.
She boasted that she had obtained an American wonderdrug called Cancell which could successfully treat these incurable diseases.
But her claims were unsubstantiated, said Crown lawyers, who called Marsh a ‘charlatan and a fraud.’
Marsh ran clinics in Cookstown and Holywood under Natural Medical Healthcare and Holistic Healthcare.
Squad has been investigating her activities in Northern Ireland.
A file will be sent to the Director of Public Prosecutions.
But it is believed no action will be taken against her, according to police sources.
Fury over IRA statements ruling
A FURIOUS row erupted last night after it was revealed that Justice Minister Maire Geoghegan-Quinn has refused to end the Republic's shame over IRA statements.
Prominent Dail Deputy Brendan McGahon lashed out after Minister Maire turned down his request to end the scandal by which the Provos issue murder statements in Dublin.
He said the issuing of IRA admissions of responsibility for atrocities like the Warrington and City of London bombs from the Southern capital was shaming Ireland throughout the world.
Mr McGahon, Fine Gael Deputy for Louth, told of how he took action after receiving letters from Irish people abroad who were furious over the terror claim tradition.
They had complained it painted a picture of the IRA operating freely in Dublin as they claimed responsibility for shootings and bombings.
He raised the matter with the Minister, asking her to make it illegal to publish such claims of responsibility by the IRA.
Yesterday Mr McGahon released her reply which stated: ‘The issuing of such statements is a long-time irritant to the law-abiding citizens of the State.’
But, she went on: ‘However, in the present era of instant world-wide communication, it would be unrealistic to seek to prevent, whether under existing or amending legislation, the reporting in the media generally of statements emanating from illegal organisations, whether they purport to issue from Dublin or elsewhere.’
TV presenter Jacqui getsa kick out of pregnancy
DO NOT adjust your sets!
There really is a ‘bump’ in front of TV personality Jacqui Berkeley.
For Jacqui and her husband, bank official David Thompson are expecting another child next month.
Ulster Television presenter Jacqui is ‘checking out’ pregnancy for the fourth time — and loving every minute of it.
‘I adore being pregnant,’ said the UTV Live at Six and Check It Out ‘front’woman.
‘It's just like having a little lodger.
‘I find myself talking to the baby all the time.
It's already part of the family.
‘But strangely a lot of people don't even realise I'm pregnant.
Viewers usually only see me from above the bump up.’
Mum and dad are eagerly awaiting the new arrival, as are nine-year-old Jessica, John, seven, and four-year-old James.
The latest addition to the family, they are convinced, will be a boy.
‘We don't know for sure of course,’ Jacqui added.
‘But by now I can read the scans too well.
I know it's a little boy.’
Glamorous 36-year-old Jacqui is positively blooming with the prospect of motherhood for the fourth time.
‘I just love the 20–30 weeks period of pregnancy,’ she said.
‘It's that lovely stage when you're over the queasiness and yet you aren't too cumbersome.
‘Then, unfortunately, after the baby is born you lose all those hormones and you look like hell!’
But one part of pregnancy Jacqui is definitely not looking forward to is actually giving birth.
‘That bit I could do without’.
With the birth less than six weeks away, Jacqui is juggling a hectic schedule between work and planning for the new arrival.
And viewers will be pleased to know that she intends returning to our screens after a short spell of maternity leave.
‘I enjoy my job and motherhood, so I see no reason not to combine the two and get maximum fulfilment,’ she said.
But will the arrival of baby number four signal that the time is right to ‘hang up the booties' once and for all?
‘Definitely,’ said Jacqui, perhaps rather too emphatically…
‘But then I said that after number three!’
Brooke urged to tackle TV chiefs over RUC broadcast
FORMER Ulster Secretary Peter Brooke is being urged to and ask a TV channel to admit it broadcast unfounded allegations about the RUC.
Unionist MP David Trimble has written to the Heritage Secretary seeking his help in persuading Channel 4 to go public and concede it was conned into broadcasting the highly controversial allegations in its Dispatches programme in 1991.
The allegations made in the programme were cited in documents sent to the Northern Ireland Office last weekend by an American court hearing extradition proceedings against Maze Prison escaper James Smyth.
The Government has rejected the demands of Smyth's lawyer Karen Snell that confidential reports on the RUC compiled by British police officers should be examined in the San Francisco court.
Chief Constable Sir Hugh Annesley ordered a top level investigation into the allegations of systematic collusion between members of the security forces and Loyalist paramilitaries contained in the Dispatches programme broadcast 18 months ago while Mr Brooke was the Secretary of State.
The Director of Public Prosecutions in Northern Ireland is currently considering whether charges of obstructing the police investigation should be brought against a free Armagh and a man who has admitted being the crucial Source A referred to in the programme.
In his letter to Mr Brooke, Mr Trimble says evidence that the programme ‘was a fraud is now overwhelming.’
And he says while it may be understandable that Channel 4 is reluctant to see so much of their dirty linen washed in public he argues that it is in the public interest that this should happen.
Mr Trimble says the Heritage Secretary should ensure the true facts behind the making of the programme should receive adequate publicity.
‘Peter Brooke should also,’ he writes, ‘persuade the Chairman and Chief Executive (of Channel 4) that, even though it may cause them some embarrassment, it is in their interests that they commit themselves fully to telling the public the truth and to assisting the police and the Director of Public Prosecutions.’
Mr Trimble said large amounts of the £270,000 spent on the programme have not been accounted for and those responsible should be brought to justice.
The central figure Source A whose ‘evidence’ Channel 4 relied on to make their programme has already admitted to RUC detectives and journalists that he was coached to read a script containing the allegations before Channel 4 cameras in a London flat.
BY ALAN MURRAY
‘Admit you were conned’
Crystal winner
The winner of our recent Tyrone Crystal competition was Mrs Olive Morrow (front left) pictured receiving her prize from Winnie Corr of Tyrone Crystal.
Also pictured are Mr Ken Morrow and Stephen Conor of Sunday Life.
11-plus test run stumps Board!
EDUCATION chiefs in the Southern Education and Library Board have been stumped by some of the questions on the 11-plus exam!
This has been revealed following a meeting of the Education Board where members tried a specimen paper submitted by the Department of Education to show the types of questions which would be asked in next year's 11-plus.
Board members tried the questions and found that the ‘level of some questions had been pitched unrealistically high.’
They also found that the whole paper was poorly constructed.
The Board has recommended that the Department issue a further specimen paper drafted with the assistance of teachers.
Residents find roads blocked
PEOPLE living in parts of Clogher woke up last week to find army bulldozers sealing off the route to their homes.
Shocked residents at Murphy's Lane and Station Road could only watch in disbelief as huge concrete bollards were laid across the roads, close to the town centre.
And the RUC have confirmed fears that they could be there to stay.
‘It's a security measure and it will continue for some time,’ said a police spokesman, who revealed that the roads, one of which is part of the main Clogher to Omagh Road, had been closed under a Secretary of State's Order.
The nearby RUC station has been the target of IRA attack on a number of occasions.
Sinn Fein 's Raymond McMahon accused the security forces of cutting families off from their communities and from vital services.
And Dr McMahon accused the RUC of using the local community as a human shield to protect the police station from attack.
‘There's no need for a police station in a built-up area like this, when there's a huge security force base just half a mile away,’ he said.
SENIOR CHURCHMEN ANGRY OVER ‘MEDIA BIAS'
SENIOR figures in the Presbyterian Church are expressing concern at what they perceive as a ‘media bias’ against them when covering matters of public interest.
The issue has been discussed at senior levels within the Church in the last fortnight, Sunday Life has learned.
Recent television, radio and newspaper interviews of churchmen have highlighted what is referred to within the Church as the two Bishops syndrome whereby.
Media outlets, they say, only seek comments from the Catholic Primate Dr Cahal Daly and Church of Ireland Primate Dr Robin Eames on important political and social matters.
The BBC is particularly singled out for criticism for its recent coverage and the exclusion of senior Presbyterian Church figures from televised discussions on the worsening political situation and from a BBC radio debate on Church representation on education boards.
It is understood representations have been made to the BBC over the issue in recent days but the matter remains unresolved, according to senior Church figures.
Some leading Presbyterian Churchmen feel the Church's status as the second largest religious denomination in Northern Ireland with over 336,000 ledged by programme makers and editors of newspapers.
They concede that the Church's policy of rotating the Moderator every year can pose some difficulties for broadcasters and newspapers in terms of availability and profile, but they argue that this can be overcome and does not explain all the recent exclusions from discussions.
It is understood there is particular resentment at the exclusion from last weekend's Radio Ulster Sunday Sequence discussion on the Churches' role in education.
‘At the very least there is perceived to be an apparent disinclination to contact and involve Church spokesmen in matters like education or to approach the Moderator for his views on the circumstances of the Presbyterian community which is the second largest denomination in Northern Ireland,’ one leading Churchman said.
While there is no motion on the issue for debate at next month's General Assembly, some leading Presbyterian figures have floated the idea of creating a new position within the Church structure.
It is suggested that a spokesman on public affairs could be appointed to put forward the Church's viewpoint on the political situation.
Former Moderator Dr Godfrey Brown is regarded by some as an ideal figure to perform such a role.
THANKS FOR THE MEMORIES!
NOSTALGIA sells.
The links between high viewing figures and rose-tinted versions of the past have obviously been identified by the programme makers.
Switch on your television set these days and you can bask in the warmth of the good old days.
Alternatively, you can get a glimpse of life in the country homes of the upper classes.
Tonight's Jeeves and Wooster has Stephen Fry and Hugh Laurie playing the ingenious manservant and dimwitted aristocrat moving in the smart set of the 1930s, enjoying themselves and going to lots of wonderful parties.
And just an hour before that, viewers will be transported back to the swinging Sixties in Heartbeat, set on the wet and windy Yorkshire moors.
But the biggest nostalgic success was The Darling Buds of May.
Its first series was seen by over 18 million people.
A huge figure for any programme, but what Was it the quality of the scripts and the fact that it starred David Jason?
Or was it because the show was set in the 1950s, the sun always shone, the table always groaned under Ma Larkin's home-made goodies, and nothing nasty ever happened?
In fact, a completely unrealistic scenario of those times.
But to some, the programme's appeal was obvious.
Television writer Thomas Ellice who adapts screenplays for television says: ‘The Darling Buds of May was first shown during the Gulf War, and in times of trouble, people want to retreat to happier times.’
The writer who adapted this H.E.Bates piece clearly understood that viewers want to feel cosy, and programmes such as this have a feel-good factor.
But this was not the only series that fed on viewers' appetite for nostalgic programming.
Doctor Finlay, Miss Marple, All Creatures Great And Small and even sitcoms like You Rang M'Lord give us a flavour of life in the not too distant past.
Nostalgic detective series too have always been successful.
Poirot, Maigret, Miss Marple and the new BBC1 series The Alleyn Mysteries give us all the thrill of but in a kinder, gentler Britain.
Programmes set within living memory give us a chance to peep behind the red velvet curtains of the upper classes.
The more recent ones give viewers a chance to recapture their own childhoods.
And some allow us to indulge in the fantasy of living in an expensive house with lots of servants.
Upstairs Downstairs, one of the most popular costume dramas ever, lets us see what it's like, from both ends of the social scale.
The House of Eliot enticed viewers into a world of elaborate costumes and high drama.
And it's not just in this country that memories of a Britain in which everyone wore a vest, ate toasted crumpets for tea and never went out without a hat that these programmes are appreciated.
The Miss Marple Mysteries, featuring Agatha Christie's elderly sleuth have been sold to 60 countries as diverse as Germany, Zambia, Turkey and Nepal, and is ranked number two in the top 50 bestselling programmes of the last ten years.
Michael Gambon's moody Maigret.
Fry and Laurie Jeeves and Wooster tonight.
Gordon Jackson's Hudson keeps order Downstairs.
Give us a clue: Joan Hickson's Miss Marple, on the trail.
Wot a Darling!
Buds of May offers a feel-good factor.
captions for p38
Looking good in a Jaques Vert suit — perfect for summer days.
Cool and sophisticated — a Baumler suit spells style.
We'll be ready, says Rose town
DUNGANNON is racing against the clock to have its new leisure centre ready in time for the town's biggest coup in years.
The Ulster final of the Rose of Tralee festival takes place there next month, promising an economic boom for the area and a place in Rose folklore.
Workmen are still frantically putting the finishing touches to the plush new leisure complex, but the organisers are confident it will be all right on the night — June 26.
The ten contestants will be in the area for four days, from June 24–27, as Dungannon takes on a festival atmosphere.
UTV star Gerry Kelly is to compere the event, with the winner going on to represent Ulster in the final of the world famous event, now Europe's second largest pageant.
The official launch in Dungannon was tinged with sadness, however, when a silent tribute was paid to tragic Sinead Murphy, the 1991 Ulster Rose, who was killed in a car crash last week.
GARDEN GOODIES
TRADITION dictates that Sunday lunch should involve meat — and lots of it.
Vegetables — usually boiled tasteless — play second fiddle to the juicy joint in this culinary custom.
But vegetarians are no longer dismissed as cranks.
Now their dishes make up in imagination and taste what they lack in meat.
Seduced by the fact that vegetables are low in calories, high in nutrition and cheap, even confirmed meat eaters find themselves going veggie occasionally.
Asians have always been clever with their vegetables.
Thai food is no exception: quick to cook and easy to prepare, these spicy dishes make an inventive alternative to the Sunday roast.
Another wizard with runners and tubers is famous vegetarian Linda McCartney.
She uses Textured Vegetable Protein in her lasagne to make sure there's enough protein.
For a lighter vegetarian meal, try the delicious quiche recipe created by Roselyne Masselin, who draws for inspiration.
So next time a lazy Sunday rolls around and you can't face the performance of getting together a roast, try a vegetable alternative you may even convert grandma!
Dreams within reach
Great deals on top roadsters
CAR CLASSICS GO FOR A SONG
PSSST…
Wanna buy a cheap motor guv?
Well now's the time.
They're at rock bottom prices, and the only way is up.
The dramatic collapse of the value of second hand supercars is illustrated by the unseemly squabbling over the perceived value of a new Jaguar XJ220.
Now the company is warning potential purchasers to pay up or else.
But punters say they are no longer prepared to pay the agreed price because the value of the supercars has now crashed through the floor.
The XJ220 controversy illustrates a far wider collapse of the entire classic and supercar market.
It is all the fault of speculators who used the cars as a means of making mega-bucks, like buying paintings or antiques, rather than as personal playthings. 11 MC2966 meteoric rise in the price of even the most mundane of so-called classic motorcars, such as Morris Minors and Volkswagen Beetles, which have now come back down to earth with a thud.
But the greatest drop of all is in the value of large limousines and executive expresses, which have been hit by a number of factors — not merely the recession.
The result is that ordinary motorists can now get the cars of their dreams for a song, and they could even end up being a good little earner.
Pundits reckon that the ending of the recession will herald a gradual and eventual rise in the value of collectables.
Cars which are generally regarded as highly desirable, such as convertibles, will enjoy the most dramatic change in their fortunes.
But the ‘hairy monsters’ which no one wants at the moment are also tremendous value, and could eventually rise in value.
Consider, for example, that a three-year-old 150mph Vauxhall Carlton GSi which currently costs £25,000 will cost you just £11,500.
A Jaguar of the same vintage is down to just £7,000, and an H-registration Ford Scorpio 2.0i automatic which currently costs £18,000 could be yours for a mere £6,850. depreciation of more than £5,000 a year, or £100 per week.
Hard lines on the person who bought it new, but what a bargain secondhand!
At the very top end of the price scale the savings are far more dramatic, with Italian exotica such as Ferrari and Lamborghini having suffered some of the greatest losses of all.
A recent Brooks auction had the asking price for an immaculate Ferrari 400GT at just £16,000, an as-new E-Type Jaguar roadster was about the same price, and a fixed-head E-Type in showroom condition was less than £10,000.
Just a couple of years ago these cars would have fetched three or four times that price.
There was a rush by speculators to buy the true classics, subject them to extremely expensive rebuilds, and then to attempt to sell them for sky-high prices.
Now the speculators have hit hard times and are desperately trying to off-load the cars which have become millstones around their necks.
The result is that ordinary motorists can now pick them up at the more respectable auctions for less than the price of an everyday family car.
And, as the wheel of fortune continues on its inexorable cycle, values are likely to start going up again soon.
Motorists pay price
PANIC-stricken motorists were left fuming yesterday just minutes after the explosion.
As they tried to make their way out of a carpark, the attendant was still taking their 20p parking fees.
‘I was absolutely staggered to see the attendant still asking people for the fee,’ said one female motorist.
‘People were trying to get out of carpark and away from the town and this man was still insisting he got his 20 pence from every driver.’
But a policeman saved the day and told the attendant to forget about the money and let the cars get out.
Giving credit where it's due
WITH reference to the article carried by your paper on Sunday 2nd May, relating to the ‘Count the Cost’ exhibition and meeting at Craigavon Lakes on bank Holiday Monday 3rd May:
I would like to point out that the event was actually organised in conjunction with Craigavon Borough Council's Community Relations office by Network Craigavon, an umbrella organisation made up of a number of peace and reconciliation groups in the greater Craigavon area, and not by the group identified by you which is one member of the Network and has in the past, like other constituent groups in the Network, organised events.
This is the first event organised by Network Craigavon and was a co-operative effort by members of the different groups that make up the Network.
I would appreciate if you could publish this so that the proper acknowledgement can be made to Network Craigavon.
Finally, I would wish to thank you for publicising the efforts being made by peace and reconciliation groups in Craigavon, and Northern Ireland generally; and trust you will continue to do so.
ACTOR Bill Maynard is not most people's idea of a sex symbol.
His wife thinks he's sexy, but that's because she doesn't have to live with him, he says.
The 64-year-old actor is probably best known for playing larger than life council labourer Selwyn Froggit on TV in the 1970s.
Now he's back in the limelight again playing wrinkly wide-boy Greengrass with ex-Eastenders star Nick Berry in the country cop drama Heartbeat (ITV 8pm Sundays).
Crusty Bill boasts he's on a spicy vegetarian diet to keep his strength up for love.
His wife, 54-year-old singer Tonia Bern, lives 6,000 miles away in Hollywood and they only get together every few months.
When they do, they hit the sack for marathon love-making sessions — that's once Bill's made the bed!
The veteran comedy actor spends most of his time alone amongst mountains of dirty dishes, pots and pans at his three-bedroom house in Leicestershire.
But when Tonia is due to jet in he hits the panic button and blitzes the housework.
He orders a crate of champagne and armfuls of red roses to welcome her home.
Romantic Bill even collect her in style from the airport.
He puts on his best bib and tucker and books a top restaurant for a romantic dinner.
The only snag is that if he is filming the hit TV show he can't shave off his distinctive stubble.
Bill confesses: ‘My house usually looks like a tip.
The sink is full of washing up, the stove is covered in dirty pans.
‘The beds are unmade and there are dirty knickers sticking out of the washing machine.
‘But when Tonia's coming over, everything has to be done.’
Bill says his four year marriage to Tonia — widow of speed king Donald Campbell — survives because living apart for most of the time adds zest to their love life.
Bill reveals: ‘Whenever we meet up it's all flowers and champagne, and it's like another honeymoon.
‘For the first two days we just go to bed.
I mean, I am nearly a pensioner!
And it's wonderful, it's just great.’
Bill says their odd couple relationship works because they don't have the normal pressures of married life.
He explains: ‘We get the best of the romantic part of it, without the problems of, like, ‘Oh, God, there's another electric bill’.
resources and her own houses in America, and I've got the same thing here.
‘We've both been alone for such a long time I don't honestly know whether our marriage would survive if we were together every day.’
Bill went broke after bingeing on booze early in his TV career and after tax bills he ended up with all his worldly goods in four packing cases.
At one stage he was travelling to the TV studios in London by bus and sleeping overnight at a rail station.
But Bill says he manages his cash better these days and he's learned his lesson.
‘But I've always got champagne in the fridge.
I crack a bottle every night — but I don't get drunk.
‘I don't really know how we got together — it was so quick.
‘I said to her ‘Look, if it's not going to be you, it's not going to be anybody, so if this doesn't work, it'll never work, because it's got everything going for it’.
‘She agreed to marry me, but she told me straight away that she wouldn't be able to live in England all the time, and I told her I couldn't live in L.A.
‘So we decided we'd just get together whenever we could, and it was wonderful, like a miracle.
was so romantic, it was unbelievable.’
CONTINENTAL CLASSES
THE classic sounds of Vivaldi's Four Season's mingled with the clatter of cutlery in the canteen.
And there wasn't a chip or sausage in sight as the young diners tucked into cuisine a la France et Italia.
Lessons on what it's like to be a European went down a treat with the pupils of a rural Ulster primary school last week.
Children at Hardy Memorial Primary in Richill got to grips with such intricacies as foreign currencies, languages, customs, national flags and costumes and of course, food.
Staff and pupils alike entered into the spirit of a European Awareness Week at the Co Armagh school.
‘The idea is to make the children aware that they are now members of the European community and what that means,’ said Audrey Henderson, a teacher who helped organise the week's activities.
With the emphasis on fun as well as learning, children as young as four years learnt to cook pizzas while older pupils plotted routes on the best way to visit member countries.
There were national dances from Italy and Spain as well as a visit to a traditional Irish Cottage.
‘The children are having a lot of fun and I suspect before the week is out they will know more about the EEC than most adults,’ said Mrs Henderson.
The new bridges across the Lagan slowly take shape.
Motorists will enjoy a spectacular view of the city centre.
When the new railway link is complete, passengers will be able to travel from Larne to Dublin without changing train.
For months, motorists have been mesmerised by the advancing army of ‘mushrooms’ as they march across the city.
They will carry over 1000 sections of a new four-lane highway across the river Lagan.
Each 90 tonnes ‘box’ is lifted into position and literally ‘glued’together in segments.
Joining each box section is a highly skilled job.
But the technology is entirely Northern Ireland-based.
My wife beats me up
‘I think there is something wrong with her nerves’
PLEASE help, I just don't know who to turn to.
For the past year my wife has become increasingly violent.
I think there is something wrong with her nerves.
I can't take any more of her attacks.
The least thing upsets her and she frequently strikes out at me.
I have been bruised and cut on several occasions.
The problem is, as a man, how do I approach people and say, ‘Look my wife is beating me up.’
I feel I would be laughed at.
What can I do?
I CAN understand your apprehensions and I suggest that you talk to a Relate marriage guidance counsellor about your problem.
You might also venture to talk to your wife, in one of her calmer moments.
Perhaps she should see a doctor if she is feeling particularly stressed out.
Whatever you do, do not do nothing.
Being abused is the humiliating situation for both men and women so do not endure this punishment.
Have wheels, will travel!
MID-RANGE motorcycles may only cover the 25O-65Occ class, but there's nothing average in the type and style of biking they offer.
The UK boasts more than 50 machines from a dozen manufacturers in the class which covers everything from outright super sports machines to all rounders, custom bikes and dual purpose on/off road trail bikes.
New bike prices range from little more than £1,5OO for all rounders to more than £6, OOO.
The combination of performance, light weight, fuel economy and higher standards of comfort have made the mid-range class desirable in its own right.
Since its introduction in 1987, Honda's CBR6OOF has been top seller in this class despite competition from the other Japanese manufacturers Kawasaki, Suzuki and Yamaha.
For several years, including last year, the CBR6OOF has been Britain's top selling motorcycle over 125cc.
The CBR's most direct competition comes from Kawasaki's ZZ-R6OO, Suzuki's new for 1993 RF6OOR and Yamaha's FZR6OO.
Kawasaki has re-introduced its GPZ6OO at £4,14O and the big four names continue to be pressured by smaller capacity machines like the Yamaha FZR4OORR and the featherlight Suzuki RGV25O two strike twin which has a top speed of 127mph.
For the rider not in a hurry, the custom class is a complete contrast.
Yamaha's XV535 Virago is typical.
At £3,399 the long running Virago has remained popular and was the eighth best seller in Britain last year.
Yamaha also offer the cheapest custom machine, the £2399, 239cc single cylinder SR25O.
OVER the past ten years the International North West 2OO has become what must be the greatest sporting spectacle in Northern Ireland.
And this year's event biggest ever with five days of motorcycling embracing every branch of the sport, including trials and motocross.
The North West has become a mecca for motorcycling enthusiasts as well as a special week-end for thousands of people who don't go to any other event during the year.
This year's attractions are bigger and better than ever, with events running from Tuesday to Saturday.
The activity kicks off on Tuesday 18 May when the roads will close for the annual practice session at 6.3Opm, opening again at 9.3Opm.
On both Tuesday and Thursday there will be three different sessions for 25O, 125 and Superbikes.
Also on Tuesday at The Crescent, Portstewart, will be an Arena trial, starting at six o'clock, with the leading trials riders in Ulster taking part.
Included in the line-up of invited riders will be Ulster champion Philip Hanlon, Colin and Kenneth Perry, Stephen Murphy, Jeff Smyth and school boy sensation Andrew Perry.
And over the weekend there's the usual chance to see the traditional display and run of vintage machinery.
Saying no to drug culture
SOME of the guys I hang out with at school take drugs.
They think this is mature and because I won't take any they treat me like I'm a wimp.
I've reached a stage where I can't be bothered with a lot of these guys, but if I rule out the ones who take drugs from my circle of friends I will be left with literally no one to socialise with.
What can I do?
IT TAKES courage not to succumb to peer pressure.
By simply refusing to follow the pack you have shown considerable maturity.
While your friends are giving you a hard time at present if you persist and refuse to indulge in drug taking they should eventually accept you as a non-user.
Period query
I AM 50 years old.
I haven't had a period since November 1991.
How long must your period have stopped before you don't have to take precautions against pregnancy.
PROBABLY a year at 50 or over.
Selection snub for champion
BOWLS
BANGOR'S Alex Lightbody must be the most bewildered bowler in the NIBA this season.
He won the NIBA singles championship, and went on to become the first Parks player to lift the coveted Irish title since Balmoral's Alan McMullan in 1987.
But he is not good enough, according to the selectors, to get a place in their inter-association senior trial match at Musgrave on Monday May 24.
Lightbody's omission must go down as one of the biggest boobs the NIBA have made in recent years.
Irish singles champions from the NIBA are not exactly a dime a dozen.
But Lightbody must surely be the first not to get a senior trial in his year as Irish singles champion.
Since 1960 the NIBA have produced Irish champions like Billy Tate (1963), John Higgins (1969), Danny Laverty (1970), Sammy Ashwood (1974), Hugh Wallace (1976), and of course McMullan in 1977.
And I am almost certain that each one was included in the following year's NIBA team.
I agree that an Irish singles champion should not necessarily be an automatic choice for the Irish international team.
But surely he deserves his chance in his association trial, never mind the full association trial.
The NIBA selectors have slipped up here and no mistake.
Lightbody has already booked his place to compete in the British Isles singles championship in Worthing in July.
And I am certain he would love to have been given the chance to impress the NIBA selectors as they prepare to pick the side for next month's senior championship in Dublin.
Ports goal ace waits and wonders
PORTADOWN goal ace Stevie Cowan flew in from Scotland to pick up his Sunday Life top scorers' trophy at last Monday's Football Writers awards night.
But he returned home to Edinburgh not knowing if he will back to defend his title next season.
The 30-year-old striker is still in the dark about his Portadown future — despite topping the scoring charts with a 47-goal haul.
Cowan, top scorer in his three seasons at Portadown, is out of contract in the summer — and already he has been linked with Linfield.
He said as he stepped on the ‘plane: ‘I would love to come back for another season at Portadown — but no-one has said anything to me.
‘I will be out of contract at the start of August and honestly don't know what is happening.
‘I thought we might have got round to talking new terms before breaking up for the summer, but I was told the board weren't able to arrange a meeting.
‘I've heard that Linfield might be interested but I would prefer to remain with Portadown.
‘I just don't understand the delay.
‘I've given them good service — 130 goals in 140-odd games — and feel good for a few more seasons.’
And Cowan departed with a plea to Portadown to end his uncertainty, saying: ‘I need to know how I'm fixed for next season.
‘I have just changed jobs and have trouble enough arranging time off to fly back and forward from Scotland.
‘I don't mind the travelling but this time of year after a long, hard season, I look forward to spending weekends with my family.’
Ray's in the clear
THE Bass Irish Cup final saga disappointed many people but not Bangor's Ray McGuinness.
The rock-hard defender had expected to be kicking his heels at the start of next season after picking up a lengthy suspension a month ago.
But the twice-replayed final with Ards used up all but one game of the IFA ban on McGuinness — and the Charity Shield curtain-opener with Linfield will wipe it out completely!
‘The lads were joking that I would be back in the team before they got their hands on the trophy,’ said McGuinness.
GLENTORAN have made a sensational move for Glenavon striker Glenn Ferguson — and the Lurgan club have promptly told them to get lost.
Glenavon manager Alan Fraser insisted last night: ‘Ferguson is under contract to us for another year and is going nowhere.
‘He finished the season as our top scorer with 23 goals and is an integral part of my plans for next season.’
Glentoran have been eyeing Dundonald-based Ferguson for some time.
And manager Tommy Jackson finally declared his hand when he met up with rival Fraser at Monday's Football Writers' dinner.
Fraser said: ‘I told Tommy that Ferguson wasn't for sale.
‘We're now expecting an official approach at board level from The Oval but the answer will be the same.’
Glenavon chairman Adrian Teer confirmed: ‘Glentoran will be turned down flat.
‘We are actually annoyed that they think we would even consider selling one of our top players.
‘We didn't have a good season by our standards of the last few years.
‘But we are planning to add quality players to our squad — not give them away.’
Fraser's chief target for the new season is a midfield playmaker.
Scotland the grave
STAND by for a Tartan invasion in the Irish League next season!
Scottish imports are set to flood the League after a massive summer clear-out across the North Channel.
The Scottish season isn't over yet.
But hard-up clubs have already freed scores of players in a cost-cutting exercise.
Last week alone Motherwell freed 11 players while East Stirling listed eight.
Players released by Jimmy Nicholl's Raith Rovers include centre half Mark Cowan who was on loan to Linfield earlier in the season and midfielder Sean Strang who had a spell with Cliftonville.
FISHER IN TOP FORM
THREE-two-one…
Bertie Fisher has lift-off in his bid to remain Dunlop Tarmac rally champion.
A season which started with punctures, a turbo failure and eventually third place in Galway in February improved marginally with an accident and second position on the Circuit of Ireland at Easter.
But Fisher, a notoriously slow starter who never seems to get fully into his stride until the summer, clocked up his first win of the year on the re-scheduled Rally of the Lakes last weekend and in the process jumped to the top of the Tarmac table.
Now he's four points ahead of Austin McHale and predicting a deal dogfight in Donegal, the championship's next port of call in June.
‘Austin has won twice this year, but I got the championship lead back again last week so I don't think he is very happy.
‘He is going to come to Donegal more determined than ever,’ says Fisher.
The June rally has been the scene of some classic battles between and never more than in 1990 when McHale won by just nine seconds.
But McHale was a distant third last year when Fisher won for the third time, a sign of the troubles the three-times Tarmac champion was having with his ex-Carlos Sainz Toyota Celica.
The car seemed to lack power, its reliability was suspect, and it was difficult to handle.
But all that has changed this year.
Extensive work over the winter has resulted in a marked increase in power — so much so that Fisher now feels the Toyota heads the power league ahead of the Subarus driven by himself and Kenny McKinstry.
A switch to Pirelli tyres allied to a new hydrolock system which controls the four-wheel-drive transmission system have changed the handling characteristics and boosted McHale's confidence.
He looks and sounds like a man who feels he can beat anyone in Ireland these days.
It's all a far cry from a year ago when after sitting in beside Fisher on a pre-Donegal test day, he suggested he might as well not start the rally.
But after winning in Galway and on the Circuit of Ireland, McHale couldn't keep the momentum going in Killarney last weekend and found himself virtually out of the hunt after just one stage.
A pipe feeding the power steering system came adrift on the climb oil to pump out of the hydraulic system, and Fisher seized the opportunity to start building a lead that was eventually to carry him to a record fourth successive Lakes victory.
Bertie Fisher
ULSTER still rules the roost in ladies hockey.
That was the verdict from Dublin yesterday after Portadown again won the Sharwood's All-Ireland Cup defeating Leinster side Loreto 2–0.
Portadown's win comes hard on the heels of Randalstown's superb victory last weekend in Cork in the All-Ireland League final, and both will now be in Europe next year.
The Chambers Park side were determined to make amends for their poor showing in last season's final when they lost 1–0 to Pegasus, and desperately wanted to return to Europe.
Ironically Pegasus have done them a favour by winning the European ‘B’ Division only last month, and as a result Portadown will now play the cream of Europe next season in the ‘A’Division.
It took only eight minutes for Portadown to take the lead.
Glenda McKee shook off Gillian Dawson as she tried to climb all over her, got to the by-line, and sent in a superb cross which Judith Chapman duly despatched into the net.
Loreto supporters, who had been very vocal up until then, were silenced.
Portadown were firmly in the driving seat as they pegged back the Dublin side inside their 25, with Loreto relying on the break.
But against a resolute Portadown defence they were getting little change.
Loreto did try and upset Portadown's rhythm with some blatant stick tackling, but both umpires were in no mood to take any nonsense and carded two of the Dubliners.
In the 31st minute Portadown were pulled apart by a glorious move from Loreto, but Gerry O'Neill failed to make contact when all she had to do was touch the ball home.
Loreto were punished two minutes later when Adele Sloan took a delightful free on the edge of the circle for Lynsey McVicker.
Loreto did try and come back into the game, but they relied on the breakaway too much with Barnwell and O'Neill always on their own, and lacking the support necessary to cause problems for Portadown.
In fairness Loreto never really counted against a Portadown side who were in control for most of the game, and came out thoroughly deserved winners.
Portadown captain Glenda McKee said: ‘We knew we had to score early, and that's exactly what we did.
‘Loreto are a hard side, but the girls played brilliantly and were determined to win.
We are delighted to be back in Europe.’
Duke to make a special visit
LIVING legend Geoff Duke will be a special guest at this year's NorthWest ‘200’, writes HAROLD CROOKS.
He will be a guest at the big race day next Saturday, following an appearance on the Kelly show the previous evening.
In his day Duke was a unique champion.
He won three World Championship titles with both Norton and Gilera and was the man to introduce the one-piece racing suit — in black leather of course!
He was a late starter in the racing game, being 26 when he made his debut in the 1948 Manx Grand Prix, riding a Norton.
He was forced to retire from the race with a split oil tank while in the lead.
On the Manx Nortons, and managed by the late Joe Craig, who came from Gracehill outside Ballymena, Geoff won his first North West race in 1950 when he took the 350 race at 82.54mph.
The following year he won the 500 race at the North West at 88.71mph, and then went on to his first World Championship successes, in both the 350 and 500 classes, the first man ever to do so.
In recognition of this remarkable achievement he was awarded the OBE.
In 1952 he won the 350 world title again for Norton, before switching to the four-cylinder Italian Gileras in ‘53.
On the 500 Gilera he took the World title in three years, ‘53, ‘54 and ‘55.
He brought the screaming Gilera four to the North West in ‘55, and won on it at 97.60mph over the old course.
He crashed at Imola early in the 1957 season, and insult was literally added to injury when the three leading Italian manufacturers, Gilera, Moto Guzzi and Mondial withdrew from racing.
These two major blows basically saw the end of his racing career, although he continued to compete on BMWs and Nortons again, before retiring in September 1961 following a crash in Sweden.
SNOOKER
Queen's University student Cathy Gallagher retained her O'Loan Ladies Snooker Classic title when convincingly defeating Stoneyford's Cathy Pegg in yesterday's final.
The All Ireland champion from Donaghmore County Tyrone was a 2–1 winner over the underdog, who won the second frame on the black.
It was a gallant bid by Pegg to win her first title, and she showed tremendous determination for she had to use crutches after damaging a kneecap last week.
In the first round Pegg won two black ball games to defeat host club player Margaret Hughes at the Parkside club.
Siobhan McGlinchey from Castlederg defeated Coach Club player Elizabeth McWilliams 2–0, while Anne Jess of the Coach was a 2–0 winner over Brenda Hughes of Parkside.
In the semi-finals Pegg outpointed McGlinchey 2–0, with Gallagher, who had a bye in the first round, defeating Jess 2–0.
EQUESTRIAN
Four horse trials riders from Northern Ireland have been selected to compete in the Heineken Punchestown three-day international championships which begin this week outside Naas in County Kildare.
Representing Ireland are Lisburn horsewoman Margaret Tolerton with her chestnut gelding Ballymullan; Joanne Jarden from Dundrod with the bay mare Bellecanna, owned by Michael Gordon; Coleraine rider Philip White with his black gelding Bowes Lion and Ulster Television researcher Felicity Pierce with her grey horse Cloud Nine.
Duneight Carnival, a chestnut gelding owned by Sandra Bleakely from Lisburn will compete on the Irish team with Captain David Foster.
Countries competing at Punchestown are Ireland, Australia, Great Britain, Jamaica, the Netherlands, New Zealand and the United States of America.
The winner of the senior international receives a cheque for £5,000, the Freeman Jackson trophy and the Waterford Crystal trophy.
Djamaloudine Abdoujaparov, of Uzbekistan, yesterday won the 247.8 km 20th stage of the Tour of Spain cycle race from Salas to Ferrol.
Switzerland's Toni Rominger retains the race leader's yellow jersey, with just one stage to go in the Tour.
MOTORCYCLING
Rain not only washed out yesterday's Banbridge Club Ulster Championship Motocross at Newry, but also effected Jeremy McWilliams' qualifying times at the Saltzburgring in Austria.
The downpour during the final session ruined the chances of a number of riders, including McWilliams, to improve upon their first session times.
Team Millar rider McWilliams, who is still looking for a 500 Grand Prix finish, had a constructive finish and felt he could have been higher in the table, but for the rain.
His sponsor Joe Millar said:
‘These have been Jeremy's best sessions so far, and hopefully if his luck changes the team will not be surprised if he should get into the points.
In pole position will be American Kevin Schwantz who will be sharing the front row of the grid with Mike Doohan and Doug Chandler.
John Reynolds was the top British qualifier in 17th place, with Shaun Emmett in 20th, McWilliams 24th, Niall Mackenzie 26th and Alan Scott, 31st.
Following the final practise sessions for today's opening round of the Supercup championship at Oulton Park in Cheshire, Graeme Thompson is in ninth place in the 250 class, with Alan Patterson 17th, Eugene McManus 25th and Stephen Farmer 37th.
Ballymoney's Robert Dunlop making his debut on the Ducati, is Phillip McCallen 19th and Jamie Patterson 22nd.
The best of the 125 riders is Darren Gawley in 18th, with Adrian Coates 20th, and his cousin Mark 22nd.
CRICKET
Australian captain Allan Border hinted yesterday that Mark Waugh would open the Australian innings in the Texaco Trophy series against England.
Test opener Mark Taylor, one of four Aussies who attended the FA Cup final at Wembley, is likely to miss out and there is great competition for batting places.
Mark Waugh, Shane Warne and David Boon were the other Australian cricketers watching football.
Border was in good humour at Hove and agreed that he would prefer to attract some better headlines than the ones he has earned after some of his outbursts in the early part of this Ashes tour.
He joked: ‘Captain Happy would make a pleasant change, wouldn't it?
The Grumpy one seems to have made a bit of a comeback recently.
‘But I'm just content that things have been going pretty well on the field so far.
That's what really matters.
‘We couldn't have hoped for a better first few weeks of the tour.
Everyone has had a reasonable work-out and we've been very fortunate with the weather at a time of the year when you can have a lot of matches ruined by rain.’
SWIMMING
Lisa Martin of Ards and Lorna Cardwell of Bangor produced one of the best races ever seen at the Ulster Age group swimming championships last night.
Martin won the 13 years 100 metre backstroke by one hundredth of a second.
She led for most of the way at a terrific pace with Cardwell doggedly staying in touch before making a last-ditch effort in the final 25 metres.
It seemed that the Bangor girl had timed her late surge to perfection, but Martin held on for the closest of wins.
Young Richard Duncan of Ards was the pick of the 10–11 year-old boys as he notched his sixth title of the championships with a fine performance in the 100 metre freestyle.
Duncan and Lisburn's Neil McGrann were side by side after 50 metres, but it was the Ards swimmer who produced that little bit extra and came home a comfortable winner in a time of 1.10.13.
The Robinson twins of Coleraine battled out the 200 metre breast stroke for 14–15 years, and it was Louise who this time eclipsed Emma by five seconds.
TENNIS
Britain's women reaped the wild wind in Nottingham yesterday to blow away Turkey and book a place in the Federation Cup finals in Frankfurt in July.
Straight-sets singles victories by Clare Wood and Monique Javer in near-gale force conditions clinched the play-off clash before Julie Salmon and Amanda Grunfeld finished off a 3–0 rout in the doubles.
The success restored some badly-needed pride to British tennis two weeks after their male counterparts slumped to Davis Cup defeat in Hungary.
But Wood said afterwards: ‘It's not our problem that the men are in a worse predicament than the women.’
Wood, who assumed the role of Cup standard-bearer when British No 1 Jo Durie pulled out with a knee injury, completed her contribution to the cause in the same emphatic fashion which had seen her demolish all four of her previous opponents this week.
Her 6–2 6–3 drubbing of Turkish No 1 Ismet-Duygu Aksit took only 55 minutes, and meant she had surrendered only 20 games in her five qualifying matches.
Javer's 6–4 6–2 defeat of Gulberk Gultekin was less straightforward, though still contained some confident tennis in the awkward conditions.
Javer served for the match at 5–2 in the second, but was taken to seven deuces, before blasting a backhand to the Turk's feet to snatch the rubber on her sixth match point after one hour 12 minutes.
Although Britain's impressive unbeaten march through the expense of five lower ranked nations, Wood insisted: ‘This is an occasion to celebrate.
We have played five matches and not lost a rubber so it shows we are strong enough to be in the finals.
‘Hopefully we can stay in the there this time,’ added Wood, mindful that Britain were forced into qualifying after defeat by unsung Finland meant they were relegated last year from the elite nations.
Salmon and Grunfeld beat Aksit and Gultekin 6–2 7–5 in the concluding doubles rubber.
‘It is a battle of wits.
It is about outfoxing your opponent, about leading defenders into false positions…it is about being one step ahead'
Striker with a reputation as big as his physique
THE MILD MANNERED ASSASSIN
OUT OF such calm, such mildness of manner, a bloodying havoc is wrought.
The Mark Hateley of suit and silk tie is a polar opposite to the Mark Hateley of shorts and bootlaces.
One remains unassuming with a smack of humility, the other aggressive with a raw animal power.
In conversation he is mild and placatory, in boots he is brave and bruising.
With words he defers, with a football he crushes and wrecks.
Off-field Hateley's expression consists of a tolerant mood and smile; on it he has the generosity of spirit of an assassin with a victim in his eyes.
It is hard to savour the feelings opposition defenders experience when confronted by Hateley's presence.
They just sense damnation everywhere.
They behold a player who is 31 years old, who has played in four different European leagues, has scattered and scored from Italy's San Siro to Brazil's Maracana.
Hateley's reputation stalks just as largely as his physique.
If it is not from the plane of his forehead, it is from the stealth of his left foot, if not from these bowdlerising runs, then from the pure panic of his upright presence.
The destruction comes in various guises.
And let's not limit the language to pictures of thunder and brute strength.
For as Hateley himself insists: ‘It is as much a battle of wits out there.
It is about trying to outfox your opponent.
It is about leading defenders into false positions.
It is about being one step ahead.’
Like graphic images of cinema, his moments of demolition linger in the mind.
Such as his ferocious assaults on Mark Walters' cross to score against Aberdeen at Ibrox two years ago.
Such as his momentous climb about Inter's Colloveti in the Milan derby which gave them a goal to savour in that frenzied city.
In Glasgow, his adjustment to the Scottish game has brought increased menace with every season.
He scored 15 goals in 1990–91; 23 in 91–92 and now 28 in 92–93.
‘And I feel I have another three years at the top, after which, who knows…’ he sighs.
In Glasgow, too, he has broken a tradition.
He may be to Ally McCoist what Jimmy Millar was to Ralph Brand, he may possess the aerial threat of a Willie Thornton, a Derek Johnstone, but Hateley contributes skill where those previous Rangers centre-forwards lent mainly bravado.
Think of the other goals you see him score, the ones that are born of a deftness of touch.
Think of those, like McCoist's second at Ellend Road, which stem from passes that transcend honest British labour.
‘That's the best thing about Mark; he may have scored 28 goals himself, but he's probably created about half of our goals entirely,’ says his Ibrox team-mate John Brown.
‘He's just one helluva footballer simple as that.
In our dressing room everyone just totally admires this guy.
They admired him and himself, when he first arrived at Rangers, looking as dangerous and threatening as a man just out of casualty.
Condemnation
Hateley is hard evidence that footballers, and maybe especially strikers, thrive on strength of mind as much as body.
He came to Rangers from Monaco half-fit.
He arrived out of shape, and soon out of breath.
Those of us who were there to witness his quite wretched display against Dundee United in the league in those first few months, and to hear Graeme Souness's private condemnation of it later, can only realise now the formidable character this player is blessed with.
He had to recover his pace, his balance and his touch against a growing chorus of Ibrox dissent.
‘The players remember all that about Mark,’ says Brown.
‘He'd been out of football for nine months in France, and he had to put up with the boo-ing.
All he would say was, ‘they've paid their money, so they're entitled to their opinions’.
He just handled the whole thing magnificently.’
And now next Saturday at Parkhead, he will attempt to spearhead Rangers to yet more domestic glory.
Mention of that ground immediately conjures in the mind another typically formidable Hateley goal: from August 1991, destruction of Celtic, when he pounced upon possession just inside the opposition half, proceeded to forge ahead while defenders were dragging anchors behind him, and rounded Pat Bonner before lashing the ball into the net.
Whimpering
In that instant, Derek Whyte had been the chief pursuer.
The final image of him after that goal — flustered, exhausted, snarled up in the back of his own goalkeeper's net with his studs caught in the meshing — could be the definitive fate of most of Hateley's minders.
Nothing perturbs him, not a zonal defence, not a man marker, not the flailing, whimpering threats of any opposition teams facing Rangers.
If some of us despair at the seeming lack of real competition to them in Scotland, Hateley's reaction permits not a whit of concern.
‘We talk very little about opponents, and very little about tactics,’ he says.
‘All we are interested in is our own form there and then.’
This Parkhead final may be tactically dead on its feet, for the over-familiarity of the two teams involved.
‘What can any manager in Scotland try that others won't already know about?’ says Walter Smith.
‘What can Willie Millar try to spring that I won't be aware of, or I try that he won't have seen?
In which case, the random elements of a football match take charge, as well as that capacity for spreading fear which lurks most menacingly in tall, dark strikers.
Pollack record under threat
ANGELA Crerand of Lough Swilly SAC has landed a fine specimen pollack of 12lb 2ozs.
Angela was fishing ‘flying collar’ tactics with redgills over an offshore wreck on board Malcolm Bowden's ‘Pegasus II’out of Rathmullan.
The Lough Swilly anglers took several hundred coalfish to 10lbs, six ling to 10lbs and 500lbs of pollack including Angela's specimen.
The previous day members of Raughley SAC (Sligo) led by Ian Parke fished with the same skipper and recorded large numbers of coalfish to 8lbs, pollack to 10lbs and ling to 12lbs.
Bowden firmly believes that the Irish record pollack could fall this season from one of the wrecks he is presently working over, and these recent successes augur well for the future.
In the past week, John McLaughlin's ‘Barracuda’, captained by Des Mills, fishing out of Culdaff, Donegal, found large shoals of pollack, coalfish, ling and codling.
Anglers from Foyle, Ballymena and Moville experienced almost constant action, although the average size of fish taken was small.
Fishing for larger specimens is, however, set to improve as the shoals of mackerel, which have so far been absent, arrive inshore.
Water levels and clarity were good on the River Moy up until the recent heavy rains.
A total of 100 salmon were taken, with Foxford's Jackie Barrett landing six on the shrimp while Paul McDonnell, Lisburn took four.
Patrick Deane (Foxford) had the heaviest at 16lbs on a Flying ‘C’.
On Lough Derg, anglers took fish on dapped natural Mayflies.
The best areas were at Luska, Dromineer, Priests Bay and Mountshannon.
Fishing has been patchy due to the cool temperatures but anglers expect it to get better when the winds turn south westerly.
Yet another specimen pike has been taken on Lough Mask.
Simon Shevlin (Castlebar) bagged an excellent fish of 30lbs in Staunton's Bay near Partry.
Meanwhile, Willie Krick, on holiday from Germany, landed 22 pike while fishing on Lough Corrib.
ATHLETICS
Seventeen-year-old Inst schoolboy Neil Young was the star performer at the South Antrim District Athletics Championships at the Antrim Forum.
Young Neil, British youths indoor champion in the pole vault, was in sparkling form soaring to a winning height of 4.40 metres, smashing his own championship record in the intermediate boys event by a massive 70cms to demolish the previous best of 3.70 metres.
Coached by Inst maths teacher and leading Irish decathlete Ian Condron, Neil's performance equalled his own personal best, is a new NIAFF youths record, and missed the Northern Ireland junior record by a mere centimetre.
Neil, who dropped rugby last winter to concentrate on athletics, later finished second in the 100 metres final clocking 11.8 seconds behind dual sprint winner Jonathan Davis of Belfast High School.
For Jonathan it was a triumphant return to form following two missed seasons due to a severe hamstring injury.
Davis clocked 11.6 in winning the 100 metres and a useful 23.1 in the 200 metres.
Other youngsters who impressed included Ricky Dunn (MCB), who won the senior boys 100 metres in 11.3 and the 110 metres hurdles in 14.5.
Another Methody student, Louise Hutchinson, cruised to two easy victories taking the senior girls 200 metres in 25.8, clocked 61.4.
Karen Bleakley (Hunterhouse) was a runaway victor in the intermediate girls 300 metres clocking 42.9, and in the senior boys 1500 metres the winner was Conor Curran (Inst) in 4.11.9.
Teer pledges united front at Glenavon
ADRIAN Teer has charted the way ahead for Glenavon and warned that ‘passengers’ will not be carried at Mourneview Park.
The new chairman told members of the Triangle, which is the oldest supporters club in Lurgan, that team work and commitment would be required to take Glenavon back to the top.
He pledged boardroom support for manager Alan Fraser and his assistant Peter Watson, and urged that past history be buried.
‘We are going forward into the future and will do so with a united front,’ he said.
Teer accepted £4,500 from the supporters' club, £1,500 of which will go to the Geddis Memorial Stand Fund.
The new £250,000 stand — being built on a phased basis — has already reached the steelwork stage and will be ready for the start of the season in August.
Lurgan publican Ralph Hewitt faces an election after only a few weeks as a director of Glenavon.
Hewitt was co-opted as the replacement for former vice-chairman John Mairs, who recently resigned along with chairman Bert Megarrell.
The newcomer is one election at the annual general meeting of members in the Mourneview Park social club tomorrow night.
The others are Sammy Wilson and Sammy Neville.
There are already two vacancies on the Glenavon board with the former chairman and long-serving George Fleming losing their seats at the shareholders AGM last week.
ROVERS BID FOR GORMAN
SHAMROCK Rovers are hot on the trail of Portadown midfielder Anthony Gorman.
Manager Ray Treacy plans to follow-up an initial inquiry with a firm bid — and Portadown could be interested in selling.
They signed Gorman from Sligo Rovers last summer, but his first team appearances have been limited since Joey Cunningham's return from injury.
Gorman is based in Letterkenny and played 20 times for the first team last season scoring three goals.
He was sub on 20 occasions, but was only used on 11 of them.
Defender Dean McCullough has signed a two year extension to his contract with Glenavon.
And striker Geoff Ferris is likely to put pen to paper for 12 months.
Ferris was on the verge of signing for Linfield last season but has decided now to pledge his immediate future to the Lurgan club, who are expected to announced a major kit sponsorship shortly.
GOLF
BARRY Lane could secure his place in the Ryder Cup team today if he maintains his form at the Lancia Martini Italian Open.
Lane, who heads the Cup table with more than 303,000 points, shot a six under par 66 for a three round aggregate 202, and second place — two shots behind Argentinian Jose Coceres, who is 16 under par.
‘I think I need 350,000 points to guarantee selection, and I will pass that total if I finish in the top two tomorrow,’ said Lane.
‘I would like to win here but I think I will need to shoot 65 or 66 to do that.’
Lane, like the current top 30 players, will be measured for his Ryder Cup blazer next week.
‘It will be the third time I've been measured for a blazer — but I missed out on the last two (matches),’ Lane added.
He started badly yesterday, dropping a shot at the fourth, but a birdie at the seventh set him on his way.
He eagled the 10th with a drive, four iron and five foot putt, and also birdied the 12th, 13th, 17th and 18th.
Coceres, playing with Seve Ballesteros, began three shots behind overnight leader David Gilford and, like Lane, shot 66.
The little-known Argentinian went to the turn in a three under par 33, and, again like Lane, eagled the 10th with a drive, four iron and a 15 foot putt, and birdied the par five 18th after a magnificent three iron over the water.
Coceres outscored Ballesteros, who could only manage a level par 72, and said that though the Spanish maestro was one of his trate on his own game.
Gilford played disappointingly after a bright start.
He went to the turn in 34, and was still two shots ahead of the field, but dropped shots at the 10th, 17th and 18th to fall back to 12 under and joint fourth place with Steve Richardson (70).
New Zealander Greg Turner moved into third place on 13 under with a birdie, his sixth of the day, at the last.
Cork clinch league title
Paul Bannon was the unlikely hero at the RDS yesterday when his late goal secured victory and with it the Bord Gais Premier Division title for Cork City.
Tony Morley gave Cork an early lead, but Gary Haylock hauled Shelbourne back into contention five minutes before the break with a controversial penalty.
Dave Barry then restored Cork's lead on the restart only for Anto Whelan to equalise.
Shelbourne then suffered a blow when they had defender Paul Brady sent off only minutes before Bannon's late winner.
CARL FOGARTY smashed his North West 200 jinx yesterday with a record breaking double.
Fogarty won both Superbike races, and set a new absolute course record round the Portrush triangle circuit in the shortened North West 200 race.
Ballymoney's Robert Dunlop got the major share of the spoils in the other races, winning both 250 events and the 125 race, while Scottish rider Jim Moodie notched up another double in the Supersport 400 and Regal 600 races.
The second Superbike event was reduced to three laps when a first aider, who had gone to the assistance of Kevin Mitchell who had crashed at Ballysally roundabout, suffered a seizure.
When the second race was called off Fogarty, on a Ducati, was in the lead from Robert Dunlop and Philip McCallen, and had already hoisted the absolute course record to 122.49mph.
However Fogarty's greatest delight was shown in winning the Mobil One Superbike race from the Dunlop brothers, Robert and Joey.
Fogarty celebrated his long Schwantz style, by standing upright on his machine and punching the air with both hands as he crossed the finishing line.
An overwhelmed Fogarty said: ‘I've waited a long time for this.
Today I got away and there was no way I was going to let my lead slip.
It's as much for my wife Michella and my daughter Danielle as for me.’
Robert Dunlop said: ‘When I came today I would have settled for a lot less.
To get both the 250 and the 125 race is more than I could have imagined.’
James Courtney crashed at the very fast Mathers cross bend on the first 250 race, but was reported last night to be sitting up in hospital.
RUGBY
An opening blitz of 17 points in seven minutes put Wales well on their way to a 35–14 victory over Zimbabwe in the first match of their six-game African tour in Bulawayo.
Neil Jenkins started the early points rush with a fifth minute penalty, and then converted two tries in the space of two minutes.
Both scores began with illegal kick-offs by the home side and were worked off the back of Welsh scrums on the halfway line.
Rupert Moon started and finished the first, bagging his first Test try in only his second international, while new cap Simon Hill went one better when he claimed a kick and chase try after only seven minutes on the international stage.
Zimbabwe skipper Dave Walters and Jenkins then swopped penalties, but having scored 20 points in 15 minutes, Wales went to sleep and had to wait for outside half Adrian Davies to drop a goal with virtually the last kick of the half for their next score.
Walters landed a second penalty in the opening minute of the second-half before wing Wayne Proctor squeezed in at the left corner for the tourists' third try.
But no sooner had they increased their advantage, than Wales sat back again.
This time Zimbabwe made the most of it, and midway through the half wing Victor Olonga pounced for a try.
That came after full-back Mike Rayer had dropped a huge up and under from Craig Brown beneath his posts and Olonga just won the touch ahead of Hill.
The final quarter was virtually all Zimbabwe, although lock Phil Davies was able to charge through for Wales' fourth try seven minutes from time, which Jenkins again converted.
Ford off but Cork still too good
CORK'S superior craft and greater practical awareness earned them the Royal Liver National Hurling League title after a marathon contest with Wexford in Thurles yesterday.
They won despite having Leonard Ford sent off after only ten minutes and, as in the case of the football final replay a fourteen man team once again defied the odds.
Cork were playing into the strong wind in the first half but made the early running with a sixth minute goal from Barry Egan.
It meant that Wexford, once again showing bad finishing, never succeeded in going in front during the half.
It ended Cork 1–5 Wexford 0–8 at half-time.
With less than a minute of the second half played Cork again jumped into the lead with a Thomas Mulcahy goal but Wexford replied immediately and led for the first time when Eamonn Cleary had their only goal in the 37th minute.
A short time afterwards Tom Dempsey pointed to stretch their lead to three points but remarkably they were not to score again until three minutes from the end.
By that stage Cork had the title well and truly secured.
Firstly Tony O'Sullivan, in his first game since the all Ireland final, made a big impression at centre field and another substitute, John Fitzgibbon, scored the goal in the 53rd minute which finally shattered the Wexford challenge.
GLOOM FOR HUNTER AS LIONS WIN
GAVIN Hastings' Lions started their New Zealand campaign with a nervous 30–17 win over North Auckland, but Ian Hunter's tour ended here in Whangarei.
The injury-prone versatile Northampton player lasted just 39 minutes before dislocating his shoulder and booking his place on the plane home.
Garryowen's Richard Wallace will fly out tomorrow to join the squad.
A shaky victory, and a massive disappointment for a Lions player, followed the pattern of 1980 and 1989.
Welsh flanker Stuart Lane lasted less than a minute in South Africa, while Irish stand-off Paul Dean had his tour ended in Australia before half-time in the first match.
Coach Ian McGeechan took encouragement from his side's resilience and aggression.
He said: ‘We came back from demanding situations and scored excellent tries.’
Four sparkling tries from threequarters helped McGeechan's men overcome the disappointment of Hunter's injury.
Bad co-ordination allowed North Auckland, who were relegated to New Zealand's second division this season, to take a 5–0 lead.
Further mistakes by the Lions permitted the hyped-up home team to level at 12–12 and score a late, irrelevant try.
In between the Lions took control with two match-winning tries from Jeremy Guscott and Scott Hastings.
Stuart Barnes, Guscott and forwards Richard Webster, Ben Clarke and Damian Cronin had outstanding games.
North Auckland's early period of dominance brought a try for hooker Doug Te Puni before the Lions' centres struck.
Barnes and Anthony Clement combined to send Guscott streaming between two hopeful tacklers for a try converted by Barnes.
Robert Jones's kick and Rory Underwood's expert catch sent Scott Hastings in for a try two minutes later.
Those Lions tries came when Peter Wright was off the field under the bleeding-wound treatment rule.
Guscott's score came with 14 men on, but the new law that allows a temporary substitute meant that Paul Burnell had a few minutes on the pitch before Wright returned to see the Lions leading 12–5.
Underwood put Clement in trouble and Mark Seymour scored for Warren Johnston to convert to level the score.
Barnes put the Lions in front before Hastings took over the kicks after the interval.
He converted a blindside try by Clement, and added a penalty.
North Auckland scored a late try from Troy Going which was cancelled out by Rory Underwood.
CYCLING
JAMES Millar (Erskine CC) won the 80 miles Tommy Smyth Classic at Bellaghy in a sprint from Andrew Moss (Ballymena Scott Rooftiles).
The two riders broke away from the leading group on the second climb of the day.
Millar, who won the ‘92 Tour of the North, and his Erskine clubmates, travelled from Scotland for the event.
On the first climb of the day at Lough Fea, Millar and Paul Giles (Team Fuel Services) broke away, Millar leading over the KOH.
Ian Chivers was third at the top, leading five chasers up to the leaders.
This seven-man group split on the second KOH climb at Moneyneaney, Millar again going clear, this time with ‘93 Tour of the North winner Moss.
These two stayed clear through Feeney and Dungiven and, on the third climb, which Moss took, they had 1.15 in hand from Chivers, Cormac McCann (Phoenix) and Mark Lyttle (Team Trainor Solicitors).
Barry Fullerton (Ballymena Scott) was dropped on the ascent.
The bunch were 3.30 behind at this stage but the gaps widened hugely over the final miles, the chasers finishing over three minutes back and the third group, led in by Norman Campbell, over 13 minutes down.
HOCKEY
NEWRY Olympic and the full Ireland squad shared ten goals in the sparkling exhibition match yesterday to officially open the new artificial pitch at the border venue.
The home side, boosted by the inclusion of Dutch world Cup stars Taco Van Den Hornet, Floris Jan Bovelander and GB gold medallists John Shaw, Stephen Martin and Sean Kerly, clawed their way back with two goals in the last twelve minutes after Dan Clarke, with a hat-trick, had steered Ireland into a 5–3 lead.
Shaw set up Kerly for Newry's opener in the eighth minute when the Canterbury star beat Brian Blythe with an angled shot after a superb off-the-ball run.
Eleven minutes later Ger Burns levelled the scores with a short corner conversion and Clarke put Ireland 2–1 up with a fierce shot which went in off the crossbar after Jimmy Kirkwood had done the initial damage on the stroke of half-time.
Clarke put Ireland 3–1 ahead three minutes after the break but schoolboy Ivan Steen, who didn't look out of place in such illustrious company, got the deficit two minutes later with a sweetly struck shot from the edge of the circle.
In the 59th minute Van Den Hornet conjured up a magical strike to put Newry back on level terms only for Rick Johnson to restore the Irish lead within 90 seconds.
Clarke completed his hat-trick minute only for Erroll Lutton to reply in kind leaving Newry trailing 5–4 with ten minutes on the clock.
Van Den Hornet turned provider in the dying seconds when he set up Kerly who squeezed in the equaliser to send the 300-strong crowd home happy.
GAA
ULSTER COLLEGES FOOTBALL DALTON CUP FOUR-GOAL hero Paul Murphy was the toast of Maghera yesterday after inspiring his side to a Dalton Cup triumph.
Team captain Murphy grabbed a first half hat-trick and added a fourth 15 minutes from the end to make it a great day for the Derry boys.
ROWING
LADY Victoria's John Armstrong will be attempting to overcome the disappointment of missing out on a record sixth title at last weeks Trinity Regatta next weekend.
Armstrong and his international team-mate Neil Darby (Queens), will be fancied to claim the honours in the annual Belfast Sprint Regatta scheduled for the Lagan next Saturday.
SQUASH
FORMER international Dorothy Armstrong last night called for a radical change in the format of domestic squash following last week's vote to amalgamate the Northern Ireland Men's and Women's Associations.
The Windsor veteran has proposed that women be allowed to compete in the Guinness Ulster Mens league.
‘We had a similar set-up some years ago and if it were reintroduced I think the standard of the women's game would rise’.
‘I'm not suggesting a wholesale restructuring, merely that a few of the top ladies could benefit from participating at a higher level of competition’.
Blow for Armagh
ARMAGH'S Mark Grimley will miss today's Ulster Championship replay against Fermanagh at the Athletic Grounds after damaging knee ligaments in the drawn match.
Ollie Reel is expected to assume the free-taking role in the absence of the suspended John Toner, while both Colm Hanratty and Gerard Reid are in line for championship call-ups, as is Damian Horisk.
John Grimley will again line out at centre half back despite suffering a broken nose in the drawn game.
Dublin's Tommy Carr will miss this season's championship.
He has been banned for six months after being sent off in the Royal Liver League final replay against Donegal.
Keith Barr and Charlie Redmond, sent off in the drawn game, were suspended for four weeks.
TENNIS
British number one Jeremy Bates, playing for Raynes Park, lost to British number two Chris Wilkinson 7–6 6–4 in the Everest National Club League Premier Division match at the Royal Berkshire Club.
Bates, 5–4 up in the first set tie-break broke a racket string in the middle of the next point and eventually lost the tie-break 7–5.
Wilkinson's Royal Berkshire side went on to beat Raynes Park and now qualify for next Saturday's final at the Puma Centre in Welwyn.
In the women's event Holcombe Brook from Bury, led by Russian pairing Svetlana Parkhomenko and Natalia Egorova, beat Banbury West End 8–7 on sets to reach next Saturday's final where they will play Winchester.
GOLF
Eight-times Ryder Cup star Neil Coles produced a spectacular display to fire himself into contention for top prize in the £50,000 Gary Player Seniors Golf Classic at St Pierre, Chepstow.
pion fired on all cylinders to roar to a five under par 66 and a 36-hole total of 142, just two strokes adrift of leader Tommy Horton, who was beaten by Brian Huggett in a play-off for the crown a year ago.
Coles recorded 11 pars, six birdies and just one bogey and was in immaculate form from tee and fairway and around the greens.
He finished with a birdie two on the notoriously difficult 18th where his three wood tee shot finished a mere two feet from the pin.
But Horton, determined to make amends for missing out by such a narrow margin last year, moved to the front with an excellent 68 but with Coles so close to him, nothing can be taken for granted over the final two rounds.
Defending champion Huggett, the former Ryder Cup skipper, missed six putts of under five feet as he slipped to a 73 for a two round aggregate of 145 — three over par.
Sludds stuns Darcy
MARTIN Sludds produced the finest finish of his golfing career in yesterday's third round of the Smurfit Irish Professional Championship at the K Club in County Kildare.
The Lancashire-based Dubliner had just been overtaken as tournament leader by Eamonn Darcy when he unleashed a quite unbelievable finish over four of the most feared holes in Irish golf.
He holed big birdie putts on the 15th and 16th, made par at the tricky short 17th, and then eagled the water strewn 18th with a three iron to 25 feet, and a putt that raced into the centre of the hole.
Sludds, winner of the title in 1984, has been struggling unsuccessfully to make an impression on the European tour, but now looks a very good bet indeed for the £10,000 first prize in the Irish Championship.
Nevertheless he faces a very stern examination today when he will be pitted head-to-head against the formidable defending champion Eamonn Darcy, who still stroke deficit is not too much for him to make up.
It appears that Sludds and Darcy have turned the championship into a two-horse race.
Sludds at 5 under, 211, is three ahead of Darcy, who in turn has four strokes to spare over the leading Ulsterman Darren Clarke and Christy O'Connor junior.
Dungannon's Clarke, now attached to the host K Club, has improved his score each day — 75 on Thursday, 73 on Friday and a splendid 70 yesterday — but it is most unlikely that even a golfer of his calibre could make up seven shots in one round.
Wallace flies out to join Lions
RICHARD Wallace arrived home from Russia last night and immediately set about repacking his bags.
His proud mum met him at Shannon Airport with the news that he has been called up by the Lions as a replacement for winger Ian Hunter.
Hunter dislocated his shoulder after only 39 minutes of the Lions opening tour match against North Auckland, and returns home tomorrow just as his replacement flies out.
The 25-year-old Garryowen winger, who first cut his teeth with Constitution, made his full Irish debut against Wales at Lansdowne Road in January last year scoring a try as Ireland went down 16–15.
He toured Namibia with Ireland two seasons ago, coming on in the First Test as a replacement for Simon Geoghegan.
Ironically his own tour of New Zealand with Ireland 12 months ago came to an abrupt end when he sustained a broken jaw in the first of two internationals.
Bright Castle top in Belvoir shock
BRIGHT CASTLE were the shock cup team in the qualifying stages of the Ulster Senior Cup at Belvoir last night.
Inspired by the former Downpatrick inter-provincials Dale Baker and David Gibson, who both shot a one under par 70, they finished ahead of Warrenpoint.
Gary McNeill, the former Irish Close champion had an impressive 70.
Ardglass were squeezed out on the final card.
At Portstewart Gordon Parkhill fired a two under par 70 to help the defending champions Castlerock to qualify easily.
Parkhill played superbly with birdies at three holes, including the second where he had a four iron to one inch from the hole.
Other top scorers included a 75 by John McIlwaine from Carrickfergus and a 76 by Mark Windebank of Portstewart.
Superbike wins end hoodoo at North-West
FLYING FOGARTY DOUBLE UP
TWO Superbike wins and a new course record gave Ducati rider Carl Fogarty a unique double in yesterday's Coca-Cola North-West 200 road races at Portstewart.
The Blackburn rider opened his scoring with a win over Robert and Joey Dunlop in the Mobil One Superbike race.
Fogarty led all the way and was never troubled by the Dunlop duo behind him.
They showed no sign of brotherly love as they battled it out for the runner-up spot before the record crowd.
Joey held second spot for two laps before Robert assumed the mantle.
On the final lap it was Robert who beat his brother to the Metropole corner, after the 180mph descent from Coleraine.
Robert, on the second Ducati held his advantage over Joey's Honda to the finishing line to take second.
Afterwards Fogarty admitted: ‘I thought a North-West win would never come for me, but now that it has I'm a happy man.’
In the second of the Superbike races, which was cut short, winner Fogarty was more than delighted when clerk of the course Billy Nutt announced that the full prize money would be paid out.
It was halted following an incident at the Ballysally roundabout with Fogarty well clear of Robert Dunlop and Philip McCallen, who were credited with a second and third place respectively.
In the opening 250 race Robert Dunlop stayed well clear of a hectic battle for second place behind him.
He took to the front on the second lap and left Dave Milling, Woolsey Coulter, Phillip McCallen and Alan Irwin to go for second best.
After a hectic five laps Milling took second spot as Welshman Ian Lougher came from behind to take third, ahead of Alan Irwin.
In the second 250 race Robert made no mistakes, leading all the way to win from McCallen and Coulter.
Riding the PJ O'Kane Yamaha, which he will ride at next month's TT races in the Isle of Man, Robert averaged 114.84mph, while second placed man McCallen set the fastest lap at 115.44mph.
McCallen, who was having a day to forget after his five wins last year, battled with Coulter and Ian Newton right to the flag.
His comment when he mounted the rostrum: ‘At last I've got up the steps today.
I thought that my five-timer was the last time I would be up here.’
In what was probably the best race of the day, Robert Dunlop completed his hat-trick in the 125 event.
It was a tight race all the way to the final bend with Dunlop, Mick Lofthouse, and Joey Dunlop all involved.
Robert got the verdict with Lofthouse second and Orme third.
Robert averaged 104.87 for the four laps and set the fastest lap of the race at 105.86mph.
Flying Scot all the way
MOODIE MAGIC
SCOTTISH rider Jim Moodie had his best ever North-West 200 with a double in the Supersport races.
He led the Regal 600 race from start to finish, but was quick to point out that it was a far from easy victory.
‘When you're at the front it can be more difficult to keep your concentration,’ he said.
‘However, when I managed to make the break I was not going to give it away.’
Behind Moodie, Mike Edwards and Joey Dunlop fought for second.
It was Dunlop's experience matched by Edwards' youthful ambition.
In the end it was Edwards who arrived at Metropole corner first on the last lap, and held his advantage to finish ahead of the maestro.
On the rostrum Joey said: ‘You really need to be the first man at the Metropole if you want to be first at the finishing line.’
Moodie's second win came in the Supersport 400 race.
Again he made an early break and sustained it throughout the four-lap race.
Brian Reid slotted into second place on the opening lap, and like Moodie, never looked like losing it as Scotsman Ian Simpson came home.
In the 400 race Moodie averaged 110.82mph and also took the lap record at 110.57mph.
The day ended as it had begun with a win for Carl Fogarty, with Robert Dunlop getting his hat-trick, and Jim Moodie, making it only three winners for the seven races.
AUTOGLASS TROPHY
PORT Vale celebrated their first visit to Wembley with victory in the Autoglass Trophy, thanks to first half goals from Paul Kerr and Bernie Slaven.
Vale dominated the first 45 minutes against a Stockport side they dismissed from the second division play-off last Wednesday.
But, with next weekend's play-off final at Wembley against West Brom in mind, Vale took their foot off the pedal for the final half hour.
Kevin Francis's header on 66 minutes threatened a County revival.
Kerr gave Vale the lead when he latched on to a perfectly weighted Slaven pass to shoot home deftly after 14 minutes and eight minutes before the interval Slaven strolled into the penalty area before finishing in style.
BORUSSIA Dortmund maintained their slim title hopes with a 2–1 away win against Nuremberg today.
Matthias Sammer netted both goals in the second half to keep Dortmund in third place.
League leaders Bayern Munich travel to Karlsruhe today, and could open a two-point lead over second-placed Werder Bremen, who trailed by goal difference following a 4–0 defeat of Saarbrueken on Friday.
Both teams are on 44 points, Dortmund have 41 and Eintracht Frankfurt, who won 5–2 at relegation-threatened Bayer Uerdingen, are on 40.
FRENCH LEAGUE
FRENCH soccer officials are to inquire into allegations that champions Marseille attempted to fix last Thursday's league match with Valenciennes.
The investigation will begin when details are received from Valenciennes over the allegation from defender Jacques Glassmann that he had been offered a bribe from a Marseille official to take it easy.
The allegation is strongly denied by the European Cup finalists, and will not be heard until after Wednesday's match with AC Milan.
Marseille beat Valenciennes 1–0, to virtually seal the title, while leaving the losers threatened with relegation.
‘All this is nothing but a tissue of inventions,’ Marseille vice-president Jean-Louis Levreau said.
‘It's an attempt to unsettle Marseille at an important moment in their history.’
Belfast's Big Two in showdown clash
IT'S showdown time for the young bowlers of the NIBA and the PGL.
For the first time in the short history of the IBA Under 25 inter-association championship Belfast's Big Two clash in their final game with unbeaten runs under their belt.
But how they both had to fight to make next Thursday night's match at Ulster Transport (6.30pm) a title decider.
The PGL were expected to coast home at Pickie against the Bowling League of Ireland.
What they didn't expect was a sudden erosion of their lead in the later stages of the game, and they were glad to come out of it with their scalp intact.
And the young man they can thank for keeping their championship hopes alive is Dunbarton's Myles Greenfield, who was the only PGL skip to finish with an up.
He turned in a brilliant performance when guiding his four to a 26-but it was defeat on the remaining three rinks.
David McRandall let a seven shot, 15 ends lead, slip away and was beaten 24–23 by Patrick Heade; Clifford Dennison never really got away from Blair Somers who won this one 16–13, and Glen Thompson's four lost a hard battle to John Nolan (17–16).
It was a cracker of a game, and if the BLI selectors can sort out their front end problems — especially their leads — they could well produce a title winning quartet.
And the NIBA also had to battle hard.
They finished up on all four rinks in their 78–66 win at Carrickfergus with Rathfriland's Gary McIlroy being their only loser.
Gary's four were outbowled by the Provincial four skipped by Eamon McCann (26–14), while Noel Graham had a 24–13 win over Gary McCloy; Andrew Hughes beat Colm McHugh (20–15) and Keith Taylor won 20–12.
Neither the PGL nor NIBA selectors have made any changes for Thursday night's showdown, and players of both teams are asked to report at Jordanstown at 6pm.
Blues snap up Peebles
LINFIELD have signed Partick Thistle midfielder Gary Peebles on a two year contract.
The 26-year-old was a free agent having been given a free transfer by the Scottish Premier League club, and flew to Belfast on Friday to complete the deal.
Linfield had been alerted by his impressive performances for Portadown last season — including a five-star showing in the 3–0 win at Windsor Park — and moved quickly, tempting Peebles with a lucrative deal — in everything but name only a full-time contract.
Peebles played 18 games for the Ports during an extended loan period, and scored three goals — ironically one of them against the Blues in that 3–0 win on the last day of the season.
Meanwhile, eight of Portadown's first team panel are currently out of contract, and manager Ronnie McFall will be deciding this week who he'll be retaining.
Linfield and Portadown are also interested in Ballymena's Scottish winger Neil Candlish.
Both are attempting to put together player which might appeal to Ballymena boss Jim Hagan.
Three of Linfield's transfer listed players, Ricky Wade, Lindsay Curry and Jeremy Robinson could shortly be on the move.
Coleraine would like to bring Wade back to the Showgrounds; Curry is interesting Larne, and Ballyclare are keen on Robinson, as well as Glenavon pair Davy Armstrong and Michael Crowe.
Black day for Railway Union
GLUM despondency turned to jubilation for Instonians captain Johnny Black at Shane Park last night.
Black was bitterly disappointed after a disastrous batting collapse threatened to ruin the old boys' Schweppes debut.
They were dismissed for 118 in only 44 overs but redeemed themselves in the field, cutting an impressive swathe through the Railway Union batting to win by 39 runs.
Instonians seemed to have recovered from a false start to their first appearance in the All Ireland tournament when Chris McQuay and Andrew Rose put on 57 for the fifth wicket.
The quick succession departure of both batsmen sparked off an Instonians landslide, with the last three wickets going down at 118.
Rose was caught by Rory Guthrie off Connor O'Brien for 30 at 103, and a mishit drive accounted for McQuay, who had scored 32, three runs later.
The innings fell apart with Connor O'Brien, who also opened the Railway Union innings along with his brother Paul, taking four wickets for eight runs from only five overs.
the Instonians skipper was soon lifted when man of the match Andrew Rose sent back three Railway Union batsmen for four runs in his first six overs.
Rose finished with four wickets for eight runs from nine overs, the only resistance encountered by Instonians, lively and athletic in the field, being a seventh wicket stand between left handed Alan Corcoran, the Railway Union captain, and Dave Varian.
They put on 24 after the previous six wickets had gone down for 40.
Rose may have claimed the bowling honours but there was a neat spell of off spin from schoolboy Jonathon Walsh, who conceded only 15 runs from his full allotment of 10 overs.
Easy for holders
SCHWEPPES Cup holders Waringstown humbled Phoenix, Ireland's oldest cricket club, by nine wickets in Dublin.
Phoenix were bowled out for just 46, Bill Dwyer top scoring with an unbeaten 21.
Waringstown knocked off the runs for the loss of just Shane Harrison's wicket.
Lurgan cruised to a five wickets victory over CYM at Terenure.
They lost openers Graeme Hunter and Derek Wislon with just six runs on the board chasing 147 to win, but a stand of 75 between Ross McCollum (55) and man of the match Craig Irwin (60 not out) saw them home.
Pembrooke had a wasted journey to Downpatrick yesterday.
Their scheduled second round match at Strangford Road was called off an hour before the start because of an unfit outfield.
The match will now be played at Pembrooke on Thursday week.
Carlisle defeated North West kingpins Donemana by 58 runs at Kimmage.
TENNIS
WINDSOR'S Willie Noteman has been forced to pull out of the Carlsberg Ulster Championships which begin tomorrow week at the Boat Club.
The Ulster Inter-Pro ace has failed in his battle to recover from a thumb injury sustained during a recent skiing holiday.
Its the second blow in as many months for Noteman who missed out on a glamour trip to Barcelona with the Irish over-35 team for the same reason.
TABLE-TENNIS
OLYMPIC champion and top seed Jan-Ove Waldner tumbled out of the World Championship s in Gothenburg when easily beaten by Jean-Michel Saive.
The Swede went down yesterday 21–17 25–23 21–16 to an inspired display from the Belgian.
EQUESTRIAN
All eyes will be on Vina Buller today as she goes into the final showjumping phase in the lead of the National Championship sponsored by Heineken at Punchestown in Co Kildare.
After an amazing cross country round yesterday with her agile horse Knockdrin Vina finished in first position with 49 points after the dressage, and is hoping for a clear round today to win the £1,500 national championship and title.
Vina, who was Irish champion two years ago, had taken a year off from competition to have a baby last September, and Punchestown was her first major outing this season with Knockdrin.
Portadown's Sonya Rowe and her horse Amsterdam had been leading after dressage, but were eliminated on the cross-country at fence four after the horse put his tongue over the bit and Sonya lost control.
The unfortunate incident meant Sonya was immediately out of the competition and paved the way for Vina Buller to come from third into first position after Caroline Sharp had also faults on cross country.
If Vina Buller has a clear round today not only will she collect a hefty cheque she will receive two Cork crystal trophies and the Gowran Grange cup.
In the international class today Ulster riders will be going out on cross country to try and gain higher placings.
Dundrod rider Joanne Jarden position on 59.40, Philip White from Coleraine is in 18th position on 60 penalties, with Margaret Creighton (Lisburn) in 19th position and Ulster Television researcher Felicity Pierce in 26th position.
In Hickstead Ulster showjumper Jessica Chesney from Cullybackey, and Crossmaglen's James Kernan will compete in the Grand Prix event which is televised on BBC.
DERMOT Reeve has replaced injured fast bowler Chris Lewis in England's squad for the final Texaco Trophy international against Australia at Lord's today.
The 30-year-old Warwickshire captain was the selectors' choice after Lewis broke down with a groin strain.
They could have gone for a potential Test candidate — like Essex left-arm paceman Mark Ilott.
But, instead, they preferred one-day specialist Reeve, who now looks set to face Australia.
MOTOR RACING
Damon settles for second row
DAMON HILL was disappointed, but not altogether downhearted, after failing to fulfil his dream of grabbing a front row position for today's Monaco Grand Prix.
As his Williams Renault team-mate Alain Prost secured his sixth successive pole position, Hill ended up fourth on the grid, with Ayrton Senna third.
Hill said: ‘I would have liked to be on the front row, but I think fourth is a pretty good place to be.
‘Of course I am disappointed.
But this is a very difficult track and I was not happy with the car this afternoon either.
‘The set-up was not quite right and I just could not go quicker on my second flying run whatever I did.
The car never felt as if it was going to come good.
‘Now I am faced with a tricky start to the race.
I shall have to see what happens.’
Hill admitted too that his father would have been more than surprised to have seen him in action in Monaco three decades on from his supremacy in the 1960s.
Hill's disappointment was nothing compared to that of the other leading British drivers.
Derek Warwick was 12th in his Footwork, Martin Brundle 13th in his Ligier, and Johnny Herbert 14th in his Lotus.
Mark Blundell was back in 21st after struggling with back pains after a morning bump in his second Ligier.
All the Britons were disappointed and complained of poor grip on the track.
Brundle was optimistic, however.
He said: ‘My time in the morning on full tanks was my fastest in these conditions at Monaco.
I hope to finish in the points.’
Strasbourg try to block Monaco bid for Hughes
STRASBOURG are sorting out a new deal for Northern Ireland winger Michael Hughes — even though the Larne man has two years of his current contract remaining.
The French club are trying to keep Hughes ‘sweet’ in the wake of speculation that Monaco are preparing a bid.
There has also been talk about a return to England for Hughes (pictured above), who left Manchester City to join Strasbourg a year ago.
But the 22-year-old has no plans to come ‘home’ yet.
‘I'm happy at Strasbourg; they have been very good to me and next season I think we can make a big play for the French championship,’ said Hughes.
The winger is likely to have a more attacking role for Northern Ireland next week, when they make their first ever trip to Lithuania.
With Philip Gray ruled out through injury, manager Billy Bingham is toying with the idea of pushing Hughes up front alongside Iain Dowie — in a ‘little and large’ partnership.
The international manager wants to take full advantage of Hughes' tremendous form at the moment.
He says: ‘The wee man was simply dynamite against Spain; they couldn't cope with him.’
He added: ‘I'd like to see him scoring a few more goals.’
To date Hughes has only found the target once for his country — that epic solo effort against Germany last year.
The Lithuania match is meaningless as far as World Cup Group Three is finish his career with an unbeaten run.
And he's gunning for revenge after the 2–2 draw at Windsor last year, which dented the hopes of Northern Ireland before they had time to begin.
Bingham is keeping his fingers crossed that Gray's withdrawal is the only one.
Melly earns Parkhead reprieve
CELTIC boss Liam Brady has offered Derry boy Nigel Melly a one year extension to his contract — just weeks after showing him the door.
Nigel Melly — formerly with Derry City — was originally given a free transfer by the Scottish Premier League club.
Now instead they've offered him a new one year contract.
Nigel explains: ‘Manager Liam Brady saw a lot of reserve games recently because they were held in midweek.
‘I played pretty well, so maybe that influenced his decision.’
A phone-in auction is the latest fund raising idea organised by the Gregg Davidson testimonial committee at Portadown.
Four items are up for auction, George Best's Tampa Bay Rowdies shirt; Stevie Cowan's autographed Portadown jersey; an autographed Derry City ball, and a Derry jersey.
Anyone who fancies any of these items should phone their bid to any of the following numbers before 8pm on June 1 — Portadown 331013, 330209 or Loughgall 891605.
All proceeds will help boost Gregg Davidson's benefit, the East Belfast man's reward for eight seasons at Shamrock Park.
Experienced Carrick Rangers defender Neil Cummings has been given a free transfer.
And despite several offers from ‘B’ Division clubs he would prefer to get fixed up with a senior side.
Cummings (29) missed most of last season through injury — but he's fully fit again and waiting for offers.
The top match-day programme in the Irish League will be announced on Saturday.
On that date in Maysfield Leisure Centre the Northern Ireland Programme Club, organisers of the award, hold their Annual Fair.
The fair, in the main hall, runs from 11am.
Most Irish League clubs will have stalls, and collectors from throughout Ireland and the UK are expected to attend.
MOTORSPORT
ULSTER'S top hillclimb drivers, like Denis Biggerstaff, Robert Woodside and Norman Kittle, can take a Saturday off on June 5.
They would usually be in action on the Croft hill just above Holywood, but this year the event could be termed ‘old-timers only.’
Now run by the Thoroughbred Sports Car Club, Croft hill was first used more than 60 years ago, coincidentally around the time Ambrose Sidney Baird was setting up a car dealership in Belfast.
It was also during the period when the Tourist Trophy races were in full flight on the old Ards circuit.
So in a kind of celebration which links all three, the TSCC are linking up with Bairds of Belfast and the Ulster Vintage Car Club to stage a commemorative hillclimb at Croft on Saturday week.
permission from the Association of Northern Ireland Car Clubs to opt out of the NI championship for one year only, but they have agreed and so will be running the event for vintage, historic and class cars only,’ says William Heaney of the TSCC.
Pilgrimage
‘We are expecting 30- plus cars from across the water, including a couple of Aston Martin Ulsters and a Ford TT Special.’
It is the lure of the TT which has attracted many of the cross-channel visitors.
And they will be making a pilgrimage to the famous circuit which ran from the outskirts of Belfast through Newtownards and Comber.
This is the 65th anniversary of the first race in 1928, and almost 80 cars from that era are expected to take part in a nostalgic three lap run around the course on June 4, starting at 7pm.
Two of the most famous cars ever to take part in the TT races, Kaye Don's Lea Francis and Freddie Dixon's Riley, will be among those taking part.
Other events have been laid on for the old-timers, including a tour on Wednesday of Craigantlet hillclimb, one of the oldest events in the British championship, and an autotest at Ballywalter on Thursday afternoon.
Then it's on to Croft on Saturday, and afterwards to a prize-giving dinner being staged in the RUAS Conference Centre
BIG ROY PLANS A RETURN
ROY McCreadie is set to return to Irish League football next season — as a player.
The big Derryman, who quit as Omagh Town manager at the beginning of April after two years in the St Julian's Road hot seat, is currently considering several offers to resume his playing career.
But his managerial performance — he led the Tyrone team to victory in the Budweiser Cup, their first piece of silverware as a senior club — hasn't gone un-noticed.
McCreadie, now 35, says he's also been ‘sounded out’ about a possible return to team management by an Irish League club, but for the moment his sights are firmly set on a resumption of his playing career.
team management is still something he would consider.
McCreadie said last night: ‘If a chance to manage comes up I would probably take it.
Effort
‘I enjoyed my time at Omagh and was reasonably successful, but in the meantime I'm back in training.
‘Four clubs have asked me to play next season, and I'm going to make a big effort to get fit again.
‘At 35 it's not getting any easier, but I didn't play much last year and that might help me.
‘I have never had great pace so I've had little to lose.
I know I can still be a good asset to any club.’
The former Coleraine and Portadown midfielder refuses to divulge where the enquiries have come from.
But it is known that he still holds a soft spot for Portadown where his combative midfield drive played a huge part in the County Armagh club's championship successes in 1990 and 1991.
And the Ports have lacked real aggression in midfield since McCreadie's departure!
Queen's talent search
QUEEN'S are going on the offensive as they prepare for their first season of All Ireland league rugby.
It was confirmed this week that Ulster stars David Humphreys, Gary Longwell and Innes Gray were all staying with the students next season, with Humphreys as captain.
And Queen's hope that they will be joined by other top quality players who are currently studying at the university but play with other club sides.
Queen's coach John Wilson said: ‘The news that David, Gary and Innes have all decided to stay is very welcome, but not all that surprising to us.
We were always confident they would stay on, despite all the pressures being put on them.
David and Gary are in their final years, and playing at Queen's makes sense from an academic point of view.
‘David was the key — once he decided to stay the others were certain to follow.’
Now Wilson hopes to recruit some top quality support to help Queen's out of All Ireland Division Four.
‘There are a number of high quality players at the university who are playing with other club sides, as well as a few players returning to the province,’ he said.
‘I am hopeful that we will be able to persuade them to throw in their lot with us for next season.
‘And if we do manage to land all the players we are thinking off we could have the best Queen's team since the early 80s.
‘David and Gary, in particular, are proof that playing for Queen's is no barrier to progress at a higher level.
‘In fact, they were given every encouragement by the Ulster coach, chairman of selectors, and important people at an Irish level to stay on at Queen's.’
Watching brief
By JOHN FLACK
PETER Minnis will miss the Carlsberg Ulster championships because of a recurrence of a long-standing injury — but the inter pro star is quite looking forward to being a spectator at the Boat Club tournament which begins a week tomorrow.
Minnis aggravated a back problem during the Boat Club's Belfast and District singles' league title charge and has set his sights on a return to action at the Ulster Hardcourt championships at Windsor next month.
The 30-year-old former Davis Cup squad member — ranked seventh in Ireland last season — acted as Pied Piper as the Boat Club's teen-machine reclaimed the title from Belfast rivals Windsor.
David Markey, Bryn Cunningham and Steven Watters were playing for Ulster at U-14 level last season while Andrew Curran and Mark Magrath are only marginally older.
‘I wasn't intending to play singles league tennis that season but suggested that I might be able to help out the youngsters and we won most of our matches 5–0 or 4–1,’ said Minnis.
‘I was pleasantly surprised at how they performed as more experienced opponents, although technically inferior, can sometimes be tricky to play against.
‘David is very strong-willed, a great competitor and he works very hard under coach Michael Ferguson at CIYMS.
‘Last year he ran a number of well known players very close, took Harry Russell to three sets at the Boat Club and beat Willie Noteman at Portrush.
‘It will be interesting to see if any of the lads can make another breakthrough at the Carlsberg Ulster championships, and I must admit I'm looking forward to watching for a change.’
Cavan ace Jim has no regrets
THAT WAS THE LIFE OF REILLY
FOR the first time in 15 years Jim Reilly will this afternoon be missing from Cavan's championship side.
The once great Cavan cross swords with Monaghan at Castleblayney, bidding to end a frustrating losing championship sequence.
He said: ‘You miss it coming up to the time, but I made up my mind some time ago to call it quits.
‘The amount of travelling from my home in Dundalk to Cavan for training and matches was simply too much.
They were the worst roads in the country and there wasn't much enjoyment in it.
‘I certainly don't miss that end of it.’
Reilly's last competitive game was against Donegal in the league this season, but he still plays club football with Kingscourt with whom he won seven cham 
On reflection he admits that the 1983 Ulster final against Donegal was probably the closest he ever came to capturing an elusive Ulster senior championship medal.
‘Twelve months ago we lost to Donegal when a few harsh decisions went against us.
We appeared to have a decent squad then.
The whole secret is to get over the first round and then improve your display for the next game.’
Fintan Cahill only arrived back in the country yesterday from Florida, scarcely the ideal championship preparation.
Cahill hasn't really performed since the drawn game against Donegal last season but has put in a major effort in training.
Cavan's biggest problem is tradition according to Reilly, so much so that if a manager doesn't deliver the goods within a few years he's gone and a new one comes along.
Generally a new broom sweeps clean and consequently some very good players were lost to the county side because of the constant chopping and changing.
Adge King, Stephen King and Paddy McNamee are three names that readily come to mind.
‘Certain players were dropped and never adequately replaced.
It's always easier getting rid of a player rather than replacing one as Cavan found to their cost.
‘There is so much pressure on managers and county boards to deliver.
Expectations are always exceedingly high and at the minute club football in Cavan is poor.’
Five Railway Cup medals with Ulster and representing Ireland stand out as the highpoints of Jim Reilly's marvellous career.
Analysing the Ulster championship he said: ‘If Down beat Derry they will be hard to beat.
‘They have kept a low profile and they have basically the same squad as won an All Ireland.
Donegal wouldn't fancy meeting Down in an Ulster final.’
Stephen King
Dublin start title defence
ROYAL Liver League champions Dublin take the first tentative steps towards retaining their Leinster crown when they face Wexford in Wexford Park today.
Wisely, the Leinster Council decided to make the game all ticket.
The capacity of the stadium has been limited to 17,000 with Dublin being allocated 10,000, 5,000 to Wexford and the remainder set aside for neutrals.
Leinster Council secretary Michael Delaney said last night: ‘We were faced with two options, either make it all ticket or take the game out of Wexford Park and obviously Wexford weren't too keen on that idea.’
Despite the size of Dublin's allocation some fans will be disappointed, especially when you consider that 59,000 turned up in Croke Park for the Dublin and Donegal Royal Liver League final replay.
Suspended
Dessie Farrell, one of the few Dublin players to emerge from last with his reputation intact, is back in the side today after being absent for two months through injury.
He returns in place of the suspended Tommy Carr with Vinny Murphy switching from full forward to the ‘40’.
Only left half forward Niall Guiden retains the position he occupied against Donegal in the league final replay.
Apart from the reshuffled attack the rest of the side is the same as played so effectively to deny Donegal in the league final replay.
Dublin have won 29 of their previous 40 championship meetings with Wexford and are well enough equipped to improve upon that this afternoon.
Heading for a fall
FALLS, 23 times champions of the PGL Senior Division One, have got an unexpected fight on their hands.
It has been many years since the proud Fruithill Park outfit languished in the bottom half of the division after only three games, which is the case this season.
And unbelievable as it may seem the champions have a meagre nine points to show for their labours following trouncings by Willowfield and Ballymena.
Add to that the fact that they no longer have an interest in Ireland's premier club championship the CIS Irish Senior Cup, and the Private Greens Senior Milk Cup, and many wonder just what has gone wrong with the senior team at Fruithill Park this season.
Last year they won the senior division championship for a club which won another five trophies.
The senior team's rebuilding period was over and they once again looked a force to be reckoned with.
However, things have gone wrong, and if ever Falls now.
After three games of the championship Willowfield are a point ahead of Cliftonville at the top of the table, with Ballymena, Castleton and Knock a point further behind.
Albert Foundry and the rejuvenated Salisbury are the pace-setters in division two, while Larne have a narrow half point lead over Ards and Willowfield at the top of junior division one.
Pride of place goes to Crawfordsburn Country Club who are making a bid to get into junior division one for the first time.
The club, which joined the league only four years ago, are the only one in all divisions with a 100 per cent record this season.
ARMAGH hurlers will this afternoon find themselves playing before their biggest ever crowd.
They face Mayo in the All Ireland B championship replay at the Athletic Grounds in the curtain-raiser to the Armagh and Fermanagh Ulster senior championship replay.
The hurlers get the chance to show off their skills to a whole new audience after staging a miraculous recovery in the drawn game when they trailed by 12 points at half-time.
Sean Hughes and Damian Short provided the inspiration for a storming second half display, and with home advantage there is a growing belief that they can go one better than last week and lower the colours of high-flying Mayo.
On the record!
LISBURN, the oldest cricket club in Northern Ireland, are to put their rich heritage on record.
A wall is to be created at Wallace Park which will not only raise funds, but also trace the chequered and cherished moments in 150 years of cricket.
Brass plaques, which will cost £100, are being offered corporately, to individuals, and the families of players who have made a contribution to the fascinating Lisburn story.
‘We felt this was the right moment to do it.
Cricket at Lisburn is on an upward curve,’ said Chairman Cecil Walker.
‘The idea is taking off and we are confident the end result will be something to be proud of,’ he said.
Cecil Walker
Erosion problem at crisis point
GREENCASTLE, on the shores of Lough Foyle, has been hit by an erosion crisis.
Two holes, the 5th and 7th, are under serious threat from the sea, club president Bobby Bell confirmed.
Storms and high tides over the winter gauged even deeper into the sand dunes.
The damage has come within yards of the boundary fence at one part of a 150 yard stretch.
‘We are in terrible trouble,’ said Mr Bell, former Ulster branch chairman and now GUI trustee.
‘We must get to grips with the problem within the next couple of weeks.’
Arrangements have already been made to bring in lorry loads of two ton boulders from a quarry at Carndonagh to try and halt the erosion.
Costs could be enormous, and the Royal and Ancient, the game's governing body, has been asked for financial assistance.
The Donegal club celebrated its centenary last year by adding nice new holes.
But the threat of the old section of the course has meant some swift action to deal with a worsening plight.
Over the years about two acres of land has been washed away, and even though Gerry Glover, a former president and club historian, feared this could happen, he didn't expect it just yet.
He said: ‘We always knew we would have to deal with this at some stage — maybe in 20 or 30 years time — but the damage caused over a couple of nights during January and February was much worse than we ever anticipated.’
Meanwhile just up the road from Greencastle, work is due to start soon on extending the Redcastle Hotel's nine-hole course to 18.
General manager Joseph Mikhael (42) said the scheme should be completed in two years time.
Bobby Bell
New Level target
NEW LEVEL, winner of the £20,000 Regal Scottish Derby at Shawfield, is on target for a crack at Dunmore's Guinness National Sprint next August.
After his short head win from the favourite Unique Bay, with the Jimmy Johnston-trained Premier Slippy from Greenisland back in third, owner Dave Johnston ruled out a crack at the English classic now underway at Wimbledon.
Success at Wimbledon would have carried a £150,000 bonus, which Regal were offering for victory in both derbies, but the owner has refused the opportunity.
New Level, a white and black son of Murlens Slippy, took part in last year's Wimbledon event when only a pup, but Johnston obviously feels he is not suited to the tight London circuit.
Instead the dog is on his way back to Irish trainer Matt Travers, with the Champions Stakes at Shelbourne, the National Sprint and Irish Derby on the agenda.
The sprint classic at Dunmore, now worth £10,000 to the winner, has attracted more and more entries from the south.
Last August Drogheda's Seamus Graham was successful with Boyne Walk in the fastest ever final (23.30), following on Leaders Best's triumph two years earlier for Tipperary's Michael O'Donovan.
Ulster entries are very thin on the ground as far as the English Derby is concerned.
Although there are 21 Irish contenders, headed in the ante-post lists by Ger McKenna's pair Nikitas Sand and Special Moment at 14–1, only two are from the north, Point Break, handled by Armagh's John Quigley and Greenane Slippy, owned by Newry's Martin White whose Siostaloir was third behind Farloe Melody last year.
RAY Close was last night robbed of the WBO super middleweight title in the Scottish Exhibition Centre in Glasgow.
Belfast's European champion produced a quite stunning performance which totally belied his relative immaturity and made a mockery of the fact that he went into this fight with no world rating of any description.
But the WBO last night left itself open to ridicule when three judges scored the fight a draw — so leaving Eubank still champion of the WBO super middleweight division.
Londoner Dave Parris scored it 116–113 to the challenger, the Dane Torben Hansen scored it 116–112 Eubank with Ray Francis of England making it 115–115.
This must rank as one of the truly great performances by any Irish boxer, anywhere in recent times.
Consequently, the decision was all the more difficult to comprehend, and Close's manager Barney Eastwood was both furious and dumbfounded.
He said: ‘I always said we would never get the title if it went to points and that's exactly how it turned out.
‘Ray was simply brilliant, but he still didn't get the decision.’
lenger, smiling bravely through his obvious disappointment, said: ‘I felt I had won.
I did more work, but I'll be back, make no mistake’.
A surprised Harry Mullan, widely respected editor of Boxing News, said: ‘I felt Close had won the fight by three to four points.
I was astonished how well he boxed.
‘He did everything right.’
Never at any stage was the challenger intimated by the controversial and eccentric Eubank — now unbeaten in 36 fights.
The only knockdown of the fight came in the 11th round when the champion floored Close with a short, right upper cut.
But bravely Close hauled himself up at the count of nine and by the end of the round he was back to his old self.
But there is little doubt that the knockdown had a crucial bearing on the fight.
In such a situation, ruling bodies, be it the WBO, WBA or WBC, are reluctant to take away a champion's title when it has been so close.
It was an unforgettable night for the challenger and those fortunate enough to have been at ringside.
Close, superbly fit, fought with savage intensity shrugging off the champion's best efforts from first to last bell.
Eubank went into the ring the overwhelming favourite at 1–7 and 2–5 to win inside the distance class was never obvious to the spectators.
From an early stage the pattern was set for a memorable bout as Close jabbed with great conviction, never once taking a backward step and trading punches on an equal basis throughout the fight.
In the closing rounds Eubank, sensing that his title was on the line, dropped the facade of arrogance that had earlier been his hallmark.
Frantically, in the last half of the fight, he sought to hold on to his title.
But, sadly, at the end of the road, there was nothing but heartache for one of the bravest challengers of recent times.
‘We'll knock out Gunners'
TREVOR Francis is convinced his Sheffield Wednesday team will beat Arsenal in Thursday's FA Cup final replay after finishing the stronger side during extra-time in the 1–1 deadlock.
But Francis first has to sort out a crop of injury problems and also an international dilemma over Swedish full-back Roland Nilsson before he lays his replay plans.
Skipper Viv Anderson picked up a knee injury while Danny Wilson (ankle) and Peter Shirtliff (calf strain) both missed yesterday's match.
But Francis said: ‘I know we've got enough in the side to beat Arsenal provided we give one of our very good performances.
‘Don't get me wrong.
I tipped Arsenal for the championship at the start of the season and that's the measure of respect I have for them because they are so resolute.
But I'm encouraged by the way we finished extra time.
‘George Graham says they can go up a few gears for the replay, but we'll wait and see.
It should be very interesting.’
Francis is poised to postpone a planned testimonial match on old time centre-forward hero Derek Dooley.
But Arsenal will go ahead with their benefit match at Highbury on Monday against Manchester United to mark veteran David O'Leary's 20 years at the club.
O'Leary was a surprise substitute at Wembley in extra-time, coming on to replace goalscorer Ian Wright for his 721st senior appearance for the Gunners.
Wright had threatened to complete a unique Wembley double for his team by heading Arsenal in front after 21 minutes with his 29th goal of the season.
Nicer easy does it for thrilled Hills
BARRY Hills, who has suffered such a wretched start to the season, was all smiles after Nicer (8–1) landed the Irish 1,000 Guineas in the hands of his son Michael at The Curragh yesterday.
The daughter of Pennine Walk cruised into the lead over a furlong out and soon sprinted clear to beat Goodnight Kiss by two lengths with Lester Piggott's mount Danse Royale a short head away in third.
Felawnah, supplemented along with Dayflower earlier in the week, finished fourth, the same place she occupied in the Newmarket equivalent.
‘This is one of the greatest thrills of my career,’ enthused trainer Hills.
‘A Classic winner is super at any time, but having Michael in the saddle makes it a really special day.’
The triumphant jockey, whose only previous win at Classic level was in the Italian St Leger, gave a victory salute with his whip when passing the post.
‘I can't even remember the name of the horse that won it for me in Italy, but I will always have a special spot for Nicer,’ he said.
‘It was bad luck on Darryll Holland, who probably would have been riding here but for picking up a four-day suspension.
‘Nicer was travelling really well all the way and quickened up immediately I asked her,’ he added.
Nicer is expected to take her chance in the Coronation Stakes at Royal Ascot next month, while Goodnight Kiss is earmarked for the Jersey Stakes.
Danse Royale, a half-sister to the brilliant Salsabil, could be prepared for the Irish Oaks, Piggott reporting the filly will be more effective over middle distances.
The 3–1 favourite Zarani Sidi Anna could only manage seventh place, Walter Swinburn reporting: ‘I was in trouble at halfway.
You would have to question whether she is genuine.
She does not produce on the track anything like she shows in her work in the mornings.’
Dayflower flattered when taking the lead shortly after halfway and was still in front until Nicer took control.
‘Dayflower was going as well as anything until Nicer came alongside us.
She did not fire when I asked her to go with the winner and faded right out in the last furlong,’ said disappointed rider Frankie Dettori.
SWIMMING
RESULT of the Teletots Play-off which was held at Avoniel Leisure Centre on Friday night.
New Northern 314 points, Lurgan 285 points, Cookstown 242 points.
This result means that New Northern will compete in Division I next year.
EQUESTRIAN
Michael Whitaker, denied victory earlier in the day because of a timing mix-up, finally made his breakthrough when he won the Royal Windsor Horse Show top cash prize.
Whitaker justified his position as favourite for the Toyota British Horsemaster by collecting the £3,300 cheque — but only after Marie Edgar had thrown away her chance.
Whitaker began the day by being pipped by Everest team-mate Nick Skelton in the Toyota Area International Trial after the jump-off timing was adjusted to reverse the original result.
But Whitaker's luck changed in the four rider Horsemaster final when he again looked likely to finish as a runner-up.
The 22-year-old Edgar was clear of the first three horses she rode in a World Championship final style event.
But in the last round she had two fences down on the most difficult course, with Mandevilles Supreme, the mount of William Funnell, another of the finalists.
It meant a three-horse jump-off of the riders on four faults and, when it came to this, Whitaker had no problems going clear with his own Everest Lifestyle to leave Mark Armstrong, Friday night's Grand Prix winner, as runner-up with Rockall.
The bonus of an £11,000 car to a winning rider going clear on all four horses was not awarded, but Whitaker said: ‘I think it should have gone to the winner whatever the scores.’
Skelton was finally declared winner of the AIT class with Limited Edition, but only after his jump-off timing was changed.
The official explanation was that a finish flag had blown down on to the mechanism and the timing had run on.
Eventually the time had to be decided by the stopwatch of an arena judge.
Ian thought he'd won Cup
ARSENAL striker Ian Wright said after the game he thought he had snatched a late winner for Arsenal before Woods made a superb 89th minute save.
Said Wright: ‘I thought I had done it.
‘It was a good shot but then it has got to be something special to beat Woods — he is such a good goalkeeper.’
Woods thoughts were on Wright's first-half score: ‘We were disappointed with the marking for the goal.
‘It was a tough match with a fair result and now we have got to do it all again on Thursday.’
George Graham blamed fatigue for the poor standard of entertainment in what should have been a showpiece occasion.
Graham has frequently hit out at the authorities for squeezing in too much football.
After yesterday's scrappy Wembley affair he said: ‘The two teams gave everything they had but they looked tired.
‘Tiredness took its toll after a long hard season.’
David O'Leary had another reason for the lack of flair: ‘Once it went to extra time everyone was afraid to make a mistake.
We deserved to lead but then we sat back.’
SQUASH
ULSTER'S Stanley Campbell steered the Ireland over 45 team into a winning 3–1 lead over Wales in the Home International Series in Cardiff last night.
UUJ player Campbell defeated Tom Cantwell in four sets as Ireland moved 3–1 ahead.
Ballymena's Alex Richardson and Jim Fleming (Crawfordsburn) both had straight sets wins in the over 55 team's 4–1 success over the host side.
Fleming defeated Tom Jukes 10–8 9–3 9–6, while Richardson had a 9–2 9–3 9–4 success over Tom Donovan.
Ireland, who were beaten 5–0 by England on Friday night, can improve on last year's third place finish if they defeat Scotland this morning.
Goran Ivanisevic served world No 1 Pete Sampras off the Foro Italico centre court and advanced menacingly into the final of the Italian Open in Rome.
Sampras admitted he felt powerless in the face of Ivanisevic's 13-ace onslaught which consigned him to a 7–6 6–2 defeat.
The second set took just 24 minutes as Ivanisevic lost only four points on serve, banged down eight aces and broke Sampras's serve twice.
‘I felt kind of hopeless out there — even his second serve I had trouble with,’ Sampras said.
‘When he's getting his serve in like that and serving two aces a game, there's really nothing you can do about it.
Ivanisevic now has a 4–1 record over Sampras and said after the match he thought the American had not done enough to deserve the top ranking, claiming that Jim Courier's two Grand Slam wins last year gave him a greater claim to the title.
The fourth-seeded Croatian, who took his ace tally for the week to 42, will contest his first clay-court final since 1990.
Courier, the title-holder and second seed, overwhelmed fellow-American Michael Chang 6–2 6–7 6–0 in the second semi-final.
Chang, the sixth seed, was clearly exhausted by the two-and-a-half hour match after having been on court for nearly four hours on Friday when he beat Russian Andrei Chesnokov in the quarter-finals.
GOLF
ULSTER survived an early challenge from Connacht in the men's Senior Inter-Provincial Championship at Lahinch yesterday to easily win by eight-and-a-half matches to four-and-a-half.
Today, the Ulstermen clash with holders Munster for the title after the southerners nosed past Leinster by 7–6.
In the morning foursomes Ulster beat Connacht 3–1 with Walker Cup player Garth McGimpsey and Neill Anderson paving the way with a superb 6 and 5 win over Seryth Heavey and Derek Basquill — the winners finishing on level par for the holes played.
McGimpsey also won the top singles clash beating pro-bound Francis Howley by 3 and 2 but then Ulster had to survive a determined Connacht comeback.
Banbridge teenager Raymond Burns, the only Northern player unbeaten in the competition, had to be content with a half in his match with Derek Basquill before Robbie Hutton, Neill Anderson and Dale Baker were all defeated.
That left the tussle on a knife-edge but the tail-enders produced the goods for Ulster.
Shandon Park's Philip Purdy turned in a storming display to demolish Hugh O'Neill by 5 and 4 finishing with an eagle 3 at the 14th hole where he steered a three iron to 12 feet and rolled the putt.
That left Purdy a superb three under par.
The honour of clinching victory for Ulster fell to Gary McNeill as on the home green against Sean Horkan before David Mulholland and Gerry McAleese both won their matches.
Munster's narrow win over Leinster means that they, like Ulster, have two wins under their belts and will put the title on the line today.
Ulster v Connacht (Ulster names first)— Foursomes: G McGimpsey and N Anderson bt S Heavey and D Basquill 6 and 5.
R Burns and D Baker bt T O'Shea and P Killeen 1 hole; G McNeill and P Purdy lost L MacNamara and F Howley 2 holes; R Hutton and S Paul bt S Horkan and T Ford 1 hole.
Ulster 3, Connacht 1.
Singles: McGimpsey bt Howley 3 and 2; Burns halved with Basquill; Hutton lost to Killeen 2 and 1; Anderson lost to MacNamara 1 hole; Baker lost to O'Shea 2 and 1; McNeill bt Horkan 1 hole; D Mulholland bt Heavey 1 hole; Purdy bt H O'Neill 5 and 4; G McAleese bt A Moran 3 and 2.
Ulster 5.
Munster v Leinster (Munster names first)— Foursomes: J Morris and N Goulding bt P Harrington and J Fanagan 3 and 2; D Higgins and E Power bt R
Coughlan and K Nolan 1 hole; D O'Sullivan and P Lyons bt A Morrow and J T Fitzgerald 1 hole; T Carridon and T Cleary lost to B Kinsella and A Dalton 3 and 2.
Munster 3, Leinster 1.
Singles: Goulding lost to Harrington 2 and 1; Morris lost to Fanagan 6 and 5; Higgins bt Coughlan 7 and 6; Power lost to Nolan 2 and 1; D O'Sullivan bt Morrow 3 and 2; Corridon lost Kinsella 1 hole; Lyons bt S McParland 4 and 3; G O'Sullivan bt Dalton 1 hole; Cleary lost M Gannon 3 and 2.
Munster 4, Leinster 5.
Overall result: Munster 7,
MOTORSPORT
Britain's Roger Clark took on the blizzard conditions in the Lombard London-Sydney Marathon today to move into fourth place.
Snow covered 70pc of the longest stage of the 13-hour leg from Wangaratta to Canberra but Clark's Ford Escort passed six of the front runners to record three fastest stage times.
‘I knew most of the drivers would take it easy so I put in an attack,’ he said.
‘I guessed the only other experience Aussies have of ice is when they put it in their drinks!’
Marathon leader, Britain's Francis Tuthill was more cautious but still spun the Porsche twice and was passed once on a stage by second-placed Australian Ian Vaughan (Ford Falcon).
‘This was probably the toughest day of the marathon,’ said Tuthill, who leads Vaughan by more than 12 minutes.
Brits charge on!
BIG GUNS Nick Faldo and Ian Woosnam are just two shots off the pace after the third round of the Peugeot Spanish Open in Madrid.
Joakim Haeggman of Sweden and South African Ernie Els, who both shot 69s, are joint leaders on 207 with Spaniard Miguel Angel Jimenez on 208 after a nine-birdie 65.
Then comes Faldo, Woosnam, Peter Baker and Sweden's Mats Lanner on 209 leaving today's outcome wide open.
Faldo partially blamed his height for starting badly, while Woosnam, at 5ft 4ins, complained of driving too frequently into the rough.
Yet both British stars shot level par 72s and believe they have only to improve slightly to have winning chances today.
Faldo said: ‘When you are my height you have a tendency to go down too far on the ball and that is what I was doing.
My legs were all over the show and I've got to stand tall tomorrow.’
Yet Faldo, who finished his second round in semi darkness last night, and started badly yesterday with two bogeys in his first six holes, was remarkably cheerful.
‘It was so late when we finished yesterday that I queued up for 20 minutes for a takeaway hamburger,’ he said.
‘The chips were so bad the carton would have tasted better.
Faldo, at least, improved as his round went on, with birdies at the eighth and 11th, but Woosnam made a fine start and finished badly.
TENNIS
IT has been a tremendous week of involvement in the learning process for Belfast teenager Claire Curran.
The promising Belfast youngster has been gaining experience on the international front among the Federation Cup aspirants in Nottingham.
And Claire got involved in the action as national coach Matt Doyle was of the opinion that she was entitled to match play.
Curran won her match yesterday in the doubles partnering Dublin teenager Karen Nugent.
It was the only piece of good news emanating from the Nottingham centre as Israel snatched a remaining main draw place for Frankfurt at the expense of the Irish.
Both Ginna Niland and Siobhan Nicholson lost the crucial singles to Anna Snashnova and Yael Segal respectively.
But in the doubles the youngsters were given a chance and grabbed their moment of glory.
They beat Segal, ranked 200th in the world, and Elaine Berger 6–4 7–5.
Frank finds happy ending
A SENTIMENTAL day at Parkhead — the last Celtic match before the Jungle area of the ground becomes seated — also ended positively with goals by Frank McAvennie and Paul McStay overcoming Dundee.
And while neither manager was wholly satisfied with events, Liam Brady could take more from the proceedings, in which his side dominated the second-half.
Gordon Marshall had to save a dangerous cross from Andy Kiwomya after only five minutes, and seven minutes later the Celtic keeper upended the same Dundee player in the box.
Unfortunately for the visitors assistant manager Jim Duffy blasted the resultant spot kick over the bar.
For Celtic, a Gerry Creaney chip dipped over, and a McAvennie strike hit the bar.
Two minutes after the interval good work by McAvennie allowed McStay to round Paul Mathers and shoot into an empty net.
McAvennie did well again in the 52nd minute with the goal that sealed the points.
Steve Fulton's shot broke to him in the box, and he turned past Duffy before guiding the ball beyond Mathers.
Thereafter, the meaningless game produced little, only a fine save from Mathers denying Mike Galloway in the last minute before the Jungle in its present form shut its gates.
RUGBY LEAGUE
Grand Slam or no Grand Slam, John Monie will leave Wigan with a legacy that could last for ever.
In four unbelievable seasons, the brilliant coach has guided the all-conquering Cherry and Whites to a record-breaking era which has brought 15 trophies.
Today, in his last game in charge, he attempts to put the icing on the cake by leading the champions to premiership glory which would complete the sport's first five-trophy clean sweep.
But even if his men fail to topple deadly rivals St Helens in the final at Old Trafford and fall just short of the Grand Slam, Monie's achievements are still unlikely to ever be equalled.
Wigan had already scaled great heights when he took over from Kiwi Graham Lowe in September 1989 but, under the Australian master, they have climbed new peaks.
Four successive championship and Wembley doubles are just the highlights of a fabulous four-year reign at Central Park.
Add to that two Regal Trophys, one premiership and Lancashire Cup each, plus the World Club Challenge, Charity Shield and the World Sevens — and the full extent of the silverware won becomes apparent.
On a personal level, the calm and cool Monie has also swept all before him, winning the Coach of the Year award every season he has been in Britain.
It was said when he first arrived at Wigan that he had a great act to follow after Lowe but that becomes even more relevant this time for fellow Aussie John Dorahy who takes over the reins.
Monie will be sadly missed, not only at Wigan but throughout the domestic game where he has set a shining example with his model behaviour off the field and his professionally-sound methods on it.
Make no mistake about it — Britain's loss will be Auckland Warriors' gain.
TRIATHLON
Ireland's biggest triathlon, and one of Europe's richest in terms of prize money, is to be held at Portaferry on July 3.
The Coca-Cola International, which was established at Portaferry in 1990 and draws upwards of 25,000 spectators, is again expected to attract the top men and women triathletes from around the world.
The event begins with a mass start swim across the notorious Narrows from Strangford to Portaferry.
On completion of the swim — the coldest of any triathlon in the world — the competitors dash to their bikes for a three-lap, 42k road race, taking in Windmill Hill, which has been dubbed ‘the Beast’ by the world stars due to its length and steep gradient.
The final part of the event is a 10k run, finishing on the seafront at Portaferry.
The 1992 Coca-Cola International was awarded World Cup status for the second consecutive year, and organiser Desi McHenry was offered it again for this year if he could change the date, something he was unfortunately unable to do.
PORTADOWN skipper Brian Strain tops Linfield's summer shopping list, writes JIM GRACEY.
The Blues are also looking enviously at the Ports Dublin-based midfielder Martin Russell.
But the reaction from Portadown manager Ronnie McFall last night was: ‘I hope they've got plenty of money.’
Blues manager Trevor Anderson, determined to keep the League title at Windsor Park, has also been tracking top midfielders down south and in Scotland.
He sees PFA chairman Strain as the man to strengthen his defence.
And he could finance his bid with the cash he raises from the sale of players like Lindsay Curry, Ricky Wade and Stephen Baxter.
Striker Baxter could be first to leave in a £12,000 move to Distillery, a record signing for the Whites.
Glenn Ferguson — staying put
A new era is dawning at Strabane cricket club.
Not since the heady days of 25 years ago when the Tyrone men last won the North West senior championship have they started a season with so much promise and expectation.
If early season form is anything to go by, Strabane could well be dark horses in the most open League race for years.
And what a start they've made!
Five straight wins — three in the League plus success in the Senior Cup and the Schweppes All-Ireland competition — is clear evidence of the confidence sweeping the Strabane pavilion.
At the heart of the latest revival is a familiar cricketing name in Strabane — Gillespie.
Skipper Michael, leading the side for the fourth year on the trot, is joined in the team by brothers John, Mark and Peter.
Tradition
As so often happens in North West cricket, they are following a family tradition.
Their father Paddy, a former inter-provincial player, was a key member of the last title winning side and also figured on the double winning line up of 1966.
John, the eldest of the four brothers, made 41 runs and Peter, the youngest of the cricketing quartet and a member of Ireland's U21 squad shortly to tour Denmark, carried his bat for 51 in the 39 run victory over St Johnston.
The following Saturday, Peter's 33 was the top Strabane score in the League victory over 1991 Cup winners Brigade at Beechgrove.
Last Sunday Strabane scored an impressive Schweppes Cup win in Dublin against Old Belvedere — and again the Gillespie clan were in splendid form with the bat.
Strabane scored 212 — the Gillespie brothers accounting for 149 of the runs and for good measure Mark (64 not out) was voted man of the match.
Skipper Michael believes it's too early to say how well Strabane will perform this year but he insists confidence is high.
He told me this week:
‘We're a young side but the players are growing in experience.
‘Two other factors will make us a better team this season — Keith Finlay has come back to the club from North Fermanagh and that has stiffened our batting while Tony Johnson from Barbados is a superb all rounder.’
Harvest
The icing on the cake for Strabane may well be the continued good form with the ball of the ageless Terence Patton whose medium paced deliveries have produced a promising early harvest.
The vice-captain took 4 for 41 in last Sunday's Schweppes Cup success and 24 hours earlier in the Senior Cup, Patton finished with 6 for 11.
The Tyrone men have another important League fixture this afternoon — visitors Limavady inspired by the mercurial Des Curry are likely to provide the first searching test of Strabane's ability to stay the course.
Glens bid set to fail
THEIR pitch is up and running, survival is assured…now the party can begin in earnest for Newry Olympic Hockey Club.
The country outfit with big ideas, having enjoyed a first season on their £400,000 synthetic pitch at Belfast Road, celebrate next Saturday with a star-studded game between Ireland and an internationally-strengthened home team.
And the very fact they have secured the services of two of modern-day hockey's finest servants — prolific Great Britain and England goalscorer Sean Kerly and Dutchman Flores Jan Rovelander, probably the world's greatest short corner exponent, merely underlines the frontier town club's ambition.
Newry, for whom the next step in their evolution is to make an impression on the park as well as off it, proudly and quite rightly tout their immaculate facility as one of the major sporting successes in the district.
Funded jointly by Newry and Mourne Council, the Foundation for Sport and the Arts — and their own fund-raising efforts — next Saturday afternoon's official opening promises to be a carnival affair.
Ireland, just back from Holland where they sustained five defeats in as many matches, field a full strength side against the Newry select, with coach Cees Koppelaar still shuffling his hand in a bid to find an established side for the Inter-Continental Cup in August.
The match has added significance in that Stephen Martin plays against his Irish team-mates for the first time in his illustrious career.
the Newry select have Great Britain midfielder John Shaw on board along with Taco van den Honeret, classed as one of Europe's most skilful players.
‘We have a few more surprises up our sleeves, including a sky diving team who will arrive with the match ball from 5,000 feet,’ explained club official Gavin McCullough.
Newry are also hosting a special celebration dinner in the clubhouse on Friday night to mark the completion of their development.
Strip caption one line over 5 cols
STAR ATTRACTION…
Great Britain international Sean Kerly who'll be playing at Newry on Saturday
Incentive to race in top charity event
CO-OPERATION North — the organisation committed to cross-border exchanges — are again banking on athletics to help raise much needed sponsorship.
And they are offering tasty incentives to runners who answer their call.
The women's mini-marathon in Dublin on Sunday June 13 is one of two events in which Co-operation North are engaged.
For northern entries there is the offer of a superb free package, including return rail travel to Dublin, bed and breakfast in a top hotel, guaranteed race entry, an event T-shirt, finisher's pack and an evening's entertainment.
There is a catch, however!
To be eligible for the free weekend runners must raise at least £150 in sponsorship.
Those who fancy running just a little further for Co-operation North can make the November 14 New York marathon their target.
Raise £2,000 in sponsorship and the trip of a lifetime is yours for free.
On offer to those who raise the target figure is a five-day all expenses trip which includes flights, accommodation in a Central Manhattan hotel, transfers and insurance, guaranteed race entry, participation pack, a specially designed jogging suit, and more!
For details about either event contact Co-operation North at 7, Botanic Avenue, Belfast (Tel. 321462).
Switching the focus to track and field competition, more details are emerging about some of this season's important fixtures.
The bad news is that the U-23 Home Counties international in Whitehaven has been cancelled because the sponsors have withdrawn.
There is also confirmation that Northern Ireland will be sending an 18-strong team to the West Athletic Games in Sittard, Holland on June 5 and 6, with the selection likely to feature the main contenders for next year's Commonwealth Games.
However, the NIAAF are emphasising that the number travelling to Holland is not to be taken as the number likely to go the Commonwealth Games.
On June 22 the Antrim Forum will host a junior international featuring Northern Ireland and the Scottish Universities.
Today at 3pm at the Mary Peters Track the national children's fun run for youngsters under-16 will be held with the aim to raise cash for the Ulster Sports Trust.
QUEEN'S ARE BACK — AND IN BUSINESS
QUEEN'S are back!
The students have learned all about cricketing failure in recent seasons, but now they're handing out lessons in the game.
‘Head boy’ in the school of ‘93 is opener Stephen Mann, one of the longest-serving players with the Section Three club — even though he's only been there three years!
‘We've one of our strongest teams for some time,’ says the skipper.
‘A number of first year under-graduates are coming through, and that bodes well for the future.
‘For a while the cricket club was badly funded and something of an outcast.
But we've turned the corner.
‘The biggest problem though is Queen's students not playing for the university team and going to other clubs instead.
As it is, we miss out — and the players miss out as well.
‘We're not asking them to stay with Queen's for the rest of their lives, just take the opportunity to represent the university when they are studying here.
‘The club is unique, and we want to see it develop so that it compares with the Queen's Rugby Club, that is serving as a platform to provide some of the country's top players.
It also gives them a chance to play in inter-varsity matches and for Ireland at university level.
‘I would say to under-graduates — try it for a season and if you don't like it move on.’
Queen's, in Section One a decade ago, are hoping this summer ends with them regaining their place in Section Two.
And skipper Stephen is optimistic about their prospects.
Certainly they've a useful university side, which includes the likes of Johnny Irons, ex-Cliftonville and Ulster Town bowler, all-rounder Michael Anderson, son of Waringstown and Ireland great Ivan, Paddy English, son of Bangor stalwart Tim, and recent recruit from Carrick, star batsman Andy Hayes.
Burns back in spotlight
TWO seasons ago Eamon Burns emerged as one of the brightest young prospects in the game.
He turned in a sparkling performance for Derry against eventual All Ireland champions Down in the Ulster semi-final at the Athletic Grounds.
But then injury cut short his meteoric rise.
This evening, again at the Athletic Grounds, he's back in the spotlight when Derry face Down in the provincial U-21 final.
Providing he comes through unscathed he could then find himself in line for a place when the same counties come face-to-face in the senior championship this day fortnight in Newry.
Ulster minor league champions Armagh will be without Anthony Cunningham when they open their championship campaign against Fermanagh in Irvinestown.
The home side have a number of St Michael's, Enniskillen MacRory side on board, while the visitors will be looking to their colleges stars to point the way to victory.
Diarmuid Marsden and James Byrne, who cap Hogan Cup medals with St Colman's, are key figures, as are captain Des Mackin, Eamon Fearon, Kevin O'Hagan and Damian Jordan.
BOYS' Brigade football has always been a breeding ground for talent and the proof will be on parade at Seaview on Tuesday night.
A host of current Irish League stars who came through the ranks will line up in a special BB challenge match.
They include Linfield trio Lee Doherty, John Easton and Alan Dornan, Glentoran rivals Alan Paterson, Johnny Jameson and Gary Macartney, Glenavon's Trevor Williamson and Dean McCullough.
Linfield and Glentoran supporters clubs have combined to rig out the teams with 1st Newtownabbey Blues and Castlereagh Glens supplying the kits.
And organiser Billy Neill said: ‘We would also like to thank Crusaders chairman Jim Semple and his committee for delaying the re-seeding of their pitch to allow the game to take place.’
ALMOST inevitably All Ireland champions Donegal have been installed as 5/2 favourites to retain their Ulster crown.
But Belfast bookmakers McGranaghans can't separate Down and Derry, who meet in the opening round at Newry this day fortnight.
Both are quoted at 10/3 with Tyrone, scheduled to face the winners of Fermanagh and Armagh, on offer at 5/1, while Armagh are 12/1, Cavan 14/1, Monaghan 20/1, Antrim 66/1 and Fermanagh 66/1.
Derry were the last county to retain their Ulster title in 1976, so in a sense history is against Donegal.
But the odds being quoted reflect the general consensus that it is a three-horse race between Donegal, Derry and Down.
Newly crowned league champions Dublin are 3/1 to win their first senior All Ireland in 10 years, with Cork 9/2, Kerry 9/2, Donegal 7/1, Meath 9/1, Derry 10/1, Down 10/1, Kildare 10/1 and Mayo 12/1.
Three of the super powers in hurling Cork, Tipperary and Kilkenny the All Ireland senior title, with Galway 5/1, Wexford 8/1, Offaly 10/1, Limerick 12/1, Antrim 40/1 and Down 40/1.
Sponsors help ease the cost
THE cost of promoting this year's race will be £120,000 — with prize money totalling £50,000.
Sponsorship, including a donation of £5,000 from the North West 200 Supporters Club, adds up to £40,000.
The shortfall can only be made up by the sale of programmes and income from official car parks — so spectators are asked to support both.
Coca Cola are the main sponsors, with additional financial support coming from Coleraine Borough Council, Bohill Hotel, Spanboard and Forward Trust.
To recognise the support being given by the Bohill, the Ballysally roundabout at Coleraine, from where Alan Drysdale is the race commentator, will be known this year as the Bohill roundabout.
The Chicane at Juniper Hill will be named the Spanboard chicane.
The current lap record holders are Robert Dunlop in the Superbike class at 122.301 mph; Joey Dunlop, Regal 600 at 115.04 mph; Ian Newton, 250–350 at 115.859 mph; Steve Ives and Dave Leach, Supersport mph.
Clerk of the Course is Billy Nutt, the Race Secretary is Mervyn Whyte and Race Treasurer Alan Toms.
CARR FACES LENGTHY BAN
TOMMY CARR is in danger of missing the entire Leinster Championship campaign after his dismissal against Donegal.
The former Dublin captain, sent off after only four minutes following an off-the-ball incident with Donegal midfielder Brian Murray, could be left kicking his heels in frustration for the best part of the summer.
For reasons best known to himself Carr kicked the legs from under Murray, leaving referee Brian White with no option but to order him off.
The full extent of his suspension will hinge on the referee's report.
If he is reported for striking with the boot then he's liable for a three month ban.
It's difficult to determine what effect if any this defeat will have on Donegal's prospects of retaining their Ulster and All Ireland crowns.
Certainly it was an even more comprehensive defeat than the scoreline would suggest.
It's a long time since Donegal were found wanting in so many key areas.
Both tactically and technically the All Ireland champions were a huge disappointment.
Martin McHugh's absence was a massive blow, but why was he left idle until four minutes from the end when the game was effectively over.
Yes, Donegal had two excellent goal chances in the second-half, but on two separate occasions both Noel Hegarty and Manus Boyle were guilty of taking wrong options.
Even with 14 men Dublin played more as a unit, and Donegal had no answer to the sheer ferocity of Dublin's approach.
Through the brilliance, industry and far greater mobility of Jack Sheedy and Paul Bealin Dublin ruled supreme in the middle of the field.
It was revealing that late in the game Jack Sheedy came from five yards behind Anthony Molloy to win possession.
Equally significant was the fact that in both the was held scoreless, though in fairness Manus Boyle and Declan Bonner were only marginally better.
Defensively too Donegal were often a shambles leaving Donal Reid and Martin Shovlin to ponder if they still have a future at this level.
Paul Clark back after injury contributed enormously to the Dublin effort with five points from eight frees, and Niall Guiden too played splendidly.
Donegal's insistence on playing the short ball out of defence cost them at least two points, a luxury they could never afford in a close scoring game.
Tactically too Dublin were more clued in than their opponents, and their ability to get players behind the ball repeatedly denied and defied the All Ireland champions.
SAILING COLUMN
NORTHERN Ireland's reigning GP14 world champions, Paul and Mark Fekkes from Larne, will be missing this year's first major event of the season — and it's on their home waters.
Due to injury the brothers will be unavailable to participate in what is expected to be the largest inland dinghy championship in Ireland for several years — the Heineken GP14 Inland Championship at Lough Erne.
Around 100 boats will be taking part in the three-day Bank Holiday event — May 29, 30 and 31 — hosted by the Lough Erne Yacht Club, a number well in excess of the 80-plus boats which participated in the Mirror nationals ten years ago.
It will be the first time Northern Ireland waters have been chosen for the GP14 inland championship, but representatives of the class association have already visited the area, and they were well pleased with their reconnoitre.
A one and a half square mile section will be laid off the Fermanagh shoreline, within which the racing will be held.
Such is the size of Lough Erne that the contestants should experience good, uninterrupted winds.
Among the prominent GP sailors who have already indicated their intention of taking part are Richard Estaugh and Simon Relph from England, both past world champions.
Other leading crews from Scotland, Wales force, with entry tag number one going to John and Ruth Delap of Clontarf Yacht Club.
Next weekend Newtownards Sailing Club on Strangford will be hosting the Ulster Windsurfing Championship, while further down the lough Strangford Sailing Club will be organising the latest round in the North Coast Trophy for Optimists.
At Carrick the Ruffians will be competing for the Lipton Cup, while the cruisers will be in action for the Cardy Castle Cup.
Today the Optimists will be out at Ballyholme, where a good turnout is expected as the European Championship, to be hosted at Newtownabbey Boat Club in August, draws near.
Anderson in line for trip to the States
DOCTOR CHASES CUP PLACE
NEIL ANDERSON is still in with a chance of a place on the Walker Cup team — according to new Ulster senior captain Brian Hoey.
The doctor must come from virtually nowhere if he is to join the powerful Irish representation which is anticipated will cross the Atlantic to take on the Americans at the height of summer.
But Hoey feels Anderson (31), desperately unlucky to be left behind four years ago, has hit the sort of form which could thrust him into the reckoning.
An international exile for over two years he is poised for a late, late charge to try for a spectacular break into the Great Britain and Ireland side heading for Minneaoplis in August.
He may have an enormous amount of ground to make up, but Hoey (58) believes selection, even at this stage is within the Shandon star's reach.
He told me: ‘At the moment I think everything is up for grabs.
‘The selectors are taking a great interest in Irish golf simply because the better players are coming out of this island.
A cracking performance at the Lytham Trophy, where he finished fourth, could have heightened his chances, but a great deal more needs to be done before the side is chosen at the end of June.
Raymond Burns and the vastly experienced Garth McGimpsey must be considered virtual certainties.
Padraig Harrington, Jody Flanagan, Niall Goulding and Irish Close champion Gary Murphy are also clamouring for places.
Strong
Anderson also plans to go to the St Andrew's Links Trophy early next month, instead of the East of Ireland at County Louth, to intensify his bid for selection.
Bank manager Hoey added: ‘Neil needs to have a very good run at Portrush, and maybe even win something.
‘But he would be a very strong runner indeed for Walker Cup honours, never mind international selection, if he could lift a trophy.’
‘Potentially there are a lot of places up for grabs.
It might be very hard for Ireland to get five on the team, but the way things are shaping up the selectors will probably not care where the players come from.
‘He will be satisfied if he gets back on the Irish team, but it is not possibility he could push himself right to the forefront.’
Anderson, twice winner of the North of Ireland, and once the South, was hurt when he failed to make the 1989 team which won at Peach Tree.
Losing his international place two years ago was also a major blow.
Last season he hardly played at all because of his medical studies, but according to Barry Wilson, the club professional at Shandon, his big game has never been sharper.
He is now involved in full time pathology research, but with a schedule to suit the heavy demands when away from the books.
The forthcoming Walker Cup match does exercise his mind, but not at the exclusion of everything else.
Neil said: ‘Two things are pulling me in opposite directions.
When you are not on the international panel it is hard to work your way in.
‘There could be 60 or 70 people ahead of me, but on the other hand I am playing very well, particularly over the last month or so.
I haven't felt so good about my game since 1987 when I was at my best.
‘Walker Cup selection is very open this year.
Normally by now there would be six or seven almost certain, but this time there are only two or three.
‘Anybody who shows good form between now and the end of June must stand a very good chance, and with the Amateur at Portrush it certainly helps people from this province.’
‘I intend to give it a really good go, because I have the opportunity this year which I didn't have last season.’
Ballyskeagh up and running
AT long last, it seems as if work on the proposed new greyhound stadium at Ballyskeagh is about to get off the ground following the signing of a deal between Distillery and the Northern Ireland Greyhound Company.
Since the initial idea first surfaced in January 1992 with racing scheduled for the spring of ‘93 and then the summer, it will now be the autumn at least before the traps ‘lift.’
Indeed, many were beginning to doubt whether it would ever get off the ground but news that work will start next week will provide fresh confidence and eagerness to see what develops.
It is a vast undertaking at considerable cost and hence a very brave venture in the current economic climate.
Only time will tell whether it can hold its place in this competitive field.
However, the company headed by chairman Paddy Owens, is confident of success and is willing to let its money do the talking.
The deal is reputed to be worth £1m to Distillery which includes lease of the stadium and a share of the profits.
That being so, then the company is going to have to generate considerable revenue to maintain their own viability.
Plans are to run two nights per week but while the company has indicated Monday and Friday, this has not yet been agreed with the Irish Coursing Club.
locating which nights northern tracks operate and with Dungannon having already made great efforts to obtain Fridays — to move away from Saturday competition with Dunmore — the Oaks Park management are unlikely to take kindly to the idea of Friday racing at Ballyskeagh.
BELFAST jockey Pat McWilliams is beginning to settle down and ride a few winners since he returned from England before Christmas facing an uncertain future.
In recent weeks his perky figure has turned up twice in the winners enclosure on Northern tracks and when Dance of Words went in for Mick O'Toole last Friday night at Downpatrick this was his seventh winner since his return to Ireland.
‘Obviously I'm pleased that I'm getting a few winners,’ he told me, ‘but I would still like to have more mounts.
They are not easy to come by.’
Two men have stood by him for most of his career — Homer Scott and Ian Ferguson — and it was heartening for Homer that Pat was able to ride Glitter Grey to victory in the Governors Cup at Down Royal.
This was the second success that Pat had landed for the Scott stable since his return, the other having been on Crawford Says who beat subsequent Irish national winner Ebony Jane at Fairyhouse.
It was Scott who launched McWilliams on his Irish career after he had come home from England where he had made his start and Pat stayed with Scott for two and a half years before moving on.
During that time he also rode for Ferguson when he rode Lacken Beau for the Ballymena trainer at Downpatrick.
Undoubtedly however the days of wine and roses came in the season of 1990–91 when Pat was riding for Noel Furlong and Andy Geraghty.
The Iliad went in for the triumvirate in the Ladbroke of 1991 at Leopardstown and then the biggest success of all came at Cheltenham where Destriero was supposed to have landed a gamble of over £1m in taking the Supreme Novices Hurdle.
Halcyon days indeed but now the trio have broken up and McWilliams after another brief spell in England is back searching around for mounts.
Hopefully with Mick O'Toole's son Kieran acting as agent the rides should soon mount up and with them will come the winners.
McWilliams is one of the most talented jump jockeys in the land but he has not always been flavour of the month and that's a pity.
However with Scott supporting him and the stable having hit form he should be able to knock out the odd winner or two in the coming weeks.
One of them might in fact be Glitter Grey who runs in the Mickey McArdle Chase at Dundalk next Friday night.
With a four pound penalty for that Down Royal win, Glitter Grey has a reasonable weight of 10st 2lb and she should be in with a chance for she will love the ground.
Fun ‘N’ Games is also expected to run in this race for Jeremy Maxwell whose stable is also in form and after that close up third place behind Solar Symphony at Fairyhouse, he shouldn't be too far away.
This could be the best yet!
NEXT Saturday's North West 200 over the famous Portstewart-Coleraine-Portrush circuit promises to be the biggest and best ever.
Over 80,000 are expected on the day, making it the best attended sporting event in Ulster.
And that's not counting the numbers who will be there for the week-long build-up.
Every branch of the sport will be involved, starting on Tuesday with the first practice session at 7pm (roads close 6.30pm).
The second practice run takes place at the same time on Thursday.
On Tuesday, the order of practice will be 250–125 Superbikes, reversed on Thursday when the Superbikes will be first out.
On Wednesday, there are two events — an arena trial and chat show.
The trial will be held at Portstewart Promenade, beginning at 6pm when leading trials exponents, including Phillip Hanlon, Colin Perry, Jeff Smyth and Stephen Murphy will show off their skills.
Three hours later the panel at a Causeway Coast Hotel chat show will include Phillip McCallen, Terry Rymer, Carl Fogarty, Rob Orme, Kevin Mitchell, James Courtney and Denis McCullough.
The now traditional display of Vintage bikes will be held on Friday at the start-finish area from 6pm with laps of the old and new circuits beginning at 7pm.
Also on Friday, Portstewart Station will be the venue for the Supercross, on a new purpose built track, with Alan Morrison, Alastair McClintock and Phillip Neill among the top competitors.
On Saturday morning, the Downtown Radio road show comes live from the paddock, between 9am and noon, when the real action begins.
There are over 350 entries for the seven races, which begin with the R&F
Mechanical Services 250–350 race.
This is followed at 1.15pm with the Mobil 1 Superbike race, the Regal 600 race at 2.30pm, and the concurrently run Iwak (UK) 400 Supersport O'Kane Haulage 125 race at 3.30pm.
The Alan Hutchinson Tiles NW Junior race is scheduled to start at 4.30pm, with the actual North West 200 race at 5.30pm.
Team work the key to success
AN army of helpers are needed to ensure the smooth running of the North West 200.
Nearly 400 road marshals will be involved in crowd control.
A further 54 flag marshals will keep the riders informed of any mishaps.
Twelve doctors, 150 First Aid workers and 18 ambulances will also be in attendance at over 60 medical and first aid posts.
Altogether 800 people will be involved with the race organisation, from MCUI officials to timekeepers, commentators, fire officers, paddock controllers and catering supervisors, all giving their services on a voluntary basis.
A number of Ulster riders will be competing in today's opening round of the Supercup series at Oulton Park.
Phillip McCallen, Robert Dunlop and Jamie Patterson go in the Superbike class.
Graeme Thompson and Alan Patterson will contest the 250 championship and in the 125 category, Darren Gawley and Phelim Owens will be joined by young Mark Coates.
In the remaining rounds of the televised series Coates will also ride in the Supersport 400 championship, taking over Jim Moodie's V&M Yamaha for the rest of the series.
We're simply the best says classy Collie
FERMANAGH'S FINEST
BEATING Antrim in the championship two seasons ago remains the highpoint in Collie Curran's colourful footballing career.
But he may have to review his sporting memories should Fermanagh beat Armagh in this afternoon's Ulster championship opener at Irvinestown.
The 27 year old Lisnaskea stalwart made his championship debut against Down in 1984 and since then has served both county and club with considerable distinction.
His appetite for the sport shows no sign of waning and his enthusiasm and commitment to the cause typifies the new generation of Fermanagh footballers.
Adamant
He is convinced this is the best Fermanagh side he has ever played on, and adamant that the county's emergence is no overnight success.
Instead he points to the contribution initially of PJ McGowan and more recently current manager Hugh McCabe as the men who have offered Fermanagh a new route forward.
Times have changed dramatically for the county, but this afternoon's game will determine the full extent of a well publicised revival.
Reflecting on the new and indeed unlikely scenario Collie Curran said: ‘PJ McGowan came in three years ago and showed us the way ahead.
‘Hugh McCabe has maintained that trend and we're hoping to build on that.
We lost three League games since Christmas, but we had chances enough to have beaten both Armagh and Mayo.
‘In my own time we've lost four cham always do so well before losing our way in the second half.
‘But I'm convinced they won't be as confident about coming to Irvinestown as they would have been in previous seasons.
‘If we perform adequately in the middle of the field I feel we've every chance of making it through to the next round.’
Twelve months ago Fermanagh stayed with All Ireland champions Donegal until the half way stage before being eventually well beaten.
Collie Curran isn't one for taking solace in moral victories, but he said: ‘Had we had a full team it would certainly have been much closer.
It's easily the best Fermanagh side I've played on.
Injuries
‘They are a great bunch of fellows all training away with the one common goal — victory over Armagh and a place in the semi-final.’
Hugh McCabe's men have played reasonably well in recent challenge games, but championship football is a totally different environment.
Injuries have reduced their defensive options, but they are blessed with a number of fine attacking players ranging from Mark Gallagher and Brian Carty to complement those of Collie Curran.
MIGHTY MITCH LOOKS THE ONE TO FEAR
CARL FOGARTY predicts a race for second place against the Grand Prix Harris Yamaha of Preston rider Kevin Mitchell in next week's North West 200 Superbike battle.
If the superfast Yamaha proves reliable and can withstand the constant high revving on the long straights between Portstewart and Coleraine, and Coleraine and Portrush, it should be easy for Mitchell.
The lightness, acceleration and speed of the Grand Prix machine cannot be matched by any of the Superbikes, including Phillip McCallen's RVF Honda.
And Fogarty, who rides the ‘works’ Ducati feels that he, for one, has no chance against the GP machine.
Blackburn ace Fogarty said last night: ‘All Kevin has to do is point the bike towards Coleraine or Portstewart, open the tap, and he will be out of sight.
‘It definitely is not a fair match, but whether his bike will stick the bumpy course is another matter.
‘If he wasn't competing, it would be very open race.
I feel I would have had a chance of breaking my North West ‘duck’.
‘But if Kevin keeps going, we are on a hiding to nothing.
The race among the rest of us will be for second place.’
In addition to machine advantage, Mitchell knows his way around the North West course, having won here in ‘84 and ‘89.
But I would not rule out the others quite so easily as Ducati, he is sure to give Phillip McCallen, Terry Rymer, Joey and Robert Dunlop and Nick Jeffries plenty to worry about, not to mention Mitchell.
The Kawasakis of Alan Irwin, Ian Simpson and Jim Moodie must also come into the equation, together with the Yamahas of Rymer, Johnny Rea and Alan Patterson, who is making the step up to Superbike for the first time.
Patterson, winner of the Euro 250 race at Mondello Park, could be the dark horse in these races.
Despite what others may do, one man who has already proved this year that he is far from finished is Joey Dunlop.
First
His winning performances at Cookstown and Tandragee are proof of his frame of mind and quality of preparation.
I will stick my neck out and say that he will be the first superbike home, in at least one race, with Mitchell taking the other.
However, Phillip McCallen on the RVF Honda must also be a very short-odds bet.
There is also the distinct possibility that Joey could take the Regal 600 race, which in the past two years has proved to be the race of the day.
With Joey, Phillip McCallen, Mike Edwards, Alan Irwin, Ian Simpson, Brian Reid, Ian King and Jim Moodie all on Hondas, the fans are in for a treat.
The only threat to the Honda armada would Regal Champion Johnny Rea on the Millar Yamaha, but so far it has not proved a match for the Hondas.
Replay
In the Supersport 400 class, Rea, McCallen, Moodie and Reid should make the running, with Mike Edwards and the in-form Rodney McCurdy on Kawasakis not far behind.
This race gave McCallen one of his five wins last year, and looks his best bet for an action replay victory.
Running concurrently with the 400s will be the 125s, and here the class is bristling with potential winners, led by last year's victor Rob Orme.
Orme will renew his rivalry with Robert Dunlop, Joey Dunlop, James Courtney, Denis McCullough and Alan Patterson.
The two 250–350 races are sure to be firework displays involving Alan Patterson, Phillip McCallen, Ian Newton, James Courtney, Joey Dunlop, Brian Reid and Robert Dunlop, the only man to beat McCallen last year, in the NW Junior race.
Last year McCallen crashed out, leaving Robert to win, and Ian Newton to set a new lap record at 115.86 mph — but this time it should be a different story.
I cannot see McCallen repeating his University Corner mistake, and he should be well in contention along with Newton, desperately anxious the Dunlops, Ian Lougher and Alan Patterson.
A late entry for the 250 races is Woolsey Coulter who will ride the QUB Yamaha, which was ridden by Jeremy McWilliams last season.
Although out of match practice, Coulter is always a threat in any race, and will be again.
You could not ask for a better curtain-raiser to the day's racing.
In fact I would hazard a guess that one, if not both of these races, could provide the closest contests of the day.
Taking everything into consideration, the 1993 Coca Cola North West 200 — which is the 64th of the series — must be the most open and potentially exciting for quite a number of years.
JOHN O'CONNOR will have nightmares if Wexford fail to beat Cork in today's Royal Liver Hurling League replay in Thurles.
With the last puck of the drawn game O'Connor squandered a gilt-edged chance to secure victory when his free drifted wide of the Cork posts.
Had it gone over the bar Wexford would now still be celebrating their first major title in 20 years.
But they must prove themselves all over again against a Teddy McCarthy inspired Cork side.
Reflecting on the missed chance that could yet change the whole course of Wexford's season John O'Connor said: ‘I didn't feel any pressure.
In fact I was quite confident coming up to take it.
‘I felt I did everything right, like the simple things of making the right contact, but I was striking it into the wind and it seemed to tail off at the last minute.’
But Cork, hugely disappointed with their overall display, show two changes.
Leonard Forde, who hasn't played since the quarter-final win over Down, returns to the left corner of the defence, and Paul O'Callaghan takes over at left half forward.
Tough test at Irvinestown
ARMAGH'S NEW BOYS HOLD KEY
ARMAGH put their faith in three championship newcomers against Fermanagh at Irvinestown.
Carrickcruppin's Keith Quigley gets his chance in the right corner of the defence, while in the last line of attack Shane McConville and Barry O'Hagan have been included, alongside the experienced Kieran McGurk.
But the biggest bonus for Armagh fans is the inclusion of the Grimley twins, Mark and John.
With Kieran McGeeney absent through injury, John will wear the number six jersey, while Mark partners Jarlath Burns in the middle of the field.
Earlier this season Jim McCorry's men accounted for Fermanagh in the league by the minimum margin, but that has little or no bearing on today's match.
It was though an important win for Armagh, coming as it did after a series of disappointments prior to Christmas.
That coupled with an away win over Connacht champions Mayo was a timely boost for morale.
But in the Dr McKenna Cup against both Monaghan and Tyrone they failed to keep the momentum going.
It's 11 years since Armagh last captured the Anglo Celt Trophy, and ironically their opponents on that occasion was Fermanagh.
In the subsequent years they have appeared in losing finals against Tyrone 1984, Derry 1987 and Donegal 1990.
But both in 1991 and in the opening rounds to Down, at Newry and the Athletic Grounds respectively.
Manager Jim McCorry, who twice played against Fermanagh in the championship, is desperately hoping for a prolonged run to compensate for a disappointing and dismal league campaign.
The changing face of Armagh football is reflected in the fact that the side includes three players making their championship debuts, while a further four in the squad have still to experience championship combat.
Physically strong in the central positions Armagh's greatest strength is their vastly experienced and resolute half back line of Martin McQuillan, John Grimley and John Rafferty.
Mark Grimley and Jarlath Burns are a formidable midfield pairing by any standards, but even with players the calibre of Neil Smyth, Kieran McGurk and Ger Houlahan there are still too many question marks over an attack that too often blows hot and cold.
Despite having to play away from home Armagh remain the bookies choice to advance to face Tyrone.
But it will be desperately close as two exceptionally committed sides bid to keep their championship season alive.
New York call rules out Johnny
DUAL sportsman Johnny Magee has had his immediate sporting priorities sorted out.
Magee, elevated to unique status when he won a Bass Irish Cup medal on Tuesday night, is committed to football for most of the summer.
His place in the final British squad for the World Student Games has been confirmed, selection for the New York tournament being a blow to Lurgan.
It means that he cannot turn out for the Pollock Park club until at least August.
He will be involved in warm-up matches, and the Games are in New York in July.
‘Naturally, we are delighted with Johnny's football success, particularly in the Irish Cup, but we could be doing with him at Lurgan,’ said skipper Ross McCollum.
The 21-year-old university student is believed to be the first Lurgan sportsman to win senior medals for both football and cricket.
A talented batsman he helped Lurgan defeat North in the 1989 Touche Ross Cup Final.
His dad Eric Magee turns out occasionally for the Pollock Park Taverners.
He played in six Irish Cup finals and did not win a medal, so Johnny has ended a family hoodoo.
Magee is off soon to France with the British World Student Games squad for a series of preparatory fixtures.
Schools row still simmers
THE schools-club conflict referred to in a recent column is highlighted by the position in which talented Lisburn batsman Graeme Lyness finds himself.
Lyness was in the Lisburn team beaten by North at Ormeau, but will not play club cricket for another five weeks.
He is committed to schools fixtures and studying for his ‘A’ levels at Friends School.
Graeme and his father, Givan Lyness, the former Lisburn and Ireland spinner, have adopted a philosophical approach.
‘Schools cricket has to take priority and that's the way it should be,’ said Givan.
The earlier 1pm start to Section 1 matches has virtually ruled out schoolboy cricketers, who are also denied Touche Ross Cup selection with ties now beginning at noon.
Holders ready for a battle
WARINGSTOWN are expecting a battle when they begin their defence of the Schweppes All Ireland Cup in Dublin.
They go to Phoenix on Saturday to play a team which has given them trouble in the past.
The Dubliners will be treated with the utmost respect.
‘We have learned to take nothing for granted.
The Schweppes Cup is a long hard haul,’ said Waringstown captain Garfield Harrison.
Waringstown are disappointed at being back on the road in the Schweppes, having played four out of five matches away when winning the trophy last summer.
‘We seem to be travelling all the time when it comes to cups, and indeed we will be at Instonians in the next round of the Touche Ross at the beginning of June,’ said Garfield.
He reckons this makes things a little more difficult.
‘There can be wicket variations and other factors, but we are expecting to do well in Dublin,’ he said.
Waringstown have swept through their games, winning three by the maximum points margin, and giving Instonians an early indication that there is a gap to bridge between sections one and two.
Their neighbours Lurgan will also be taking the road to Dublin, with CYM awaiting them at the end of the journey.
Lurgan are a little concerned about their lack of bowling depth, which could make things tough in the knock-out tournaments.
Traditionally this is the sorting out round of the Schweppes, with matches dispersed around the country, but none of these immediately stand out.
There could be an interesting tie at Limavady, where the North West side, having already disposed of North, take on Lisburn.
The full second round programme is: Brigade v Leinster, CYM v Lurgan, Carlisle v Donemana, Clontarf v Drummond, Downpatrick v Pembroke, Eglinton v Bangor, Instonians v Railway Union, Limavady v Lisburn, Malahide v Cork County, Merrion v Sion Mills, North County v St Johnston, North Down v Limerick, Strabane v Ballymena, The Hills v Bready, Woodvale v YMCA.
TENNIS
NEVIL MARTIN is back in business again after a debilitating illness ruled him out of the local tournament scene last season.
The 19-year-old Boat Club starlet was struck down by glandular fever last summer, and spent a frustrating time on the sidelines.
But now he has been given a new lease of life after securing a sports bursary at Stirling University.
He's due back home at the end of the month, and will be totally involved on the Grand Prix circuit.
First stop for the business law and economics student — who was top junior in 1991 — will be the Carlsberg Ulster Championships, which begin at the Boat Club on May 31.
Nevil feels his game has improved, helped by the intensive coaching and practice he undergoes at Stirling University.
The campus boasts superb facilities, including indoor courts, and last winter the youngster travelled to Spain for an intensive training camp.
Martin has been playing both doubles and singles, and reached the semi-finals of the British Universities Championships, and was a beaten finalist in the recent Scottish Varsities tournament.
His top priority this season will be to regain his place on the Ulster senior squad, and banish last year's unhappy memories.
Sligo anglers strike it lucky
ANGLING
GO WEST young man…for the Mayfly are up on many western lakes, especially Loughs Cullin and Cara, where there are tremendous hatches.
On Cullin 68 trout to 1lb 12ozs were reported with the best taking flies being, Mayfly, Golden Olive Bumble and Bibio.
Sligo anglers Brendan Smith and Cecil Marshall took 11 trout for 10lbs, while Walter and Susan Byrne, Edenderry, had nine for 8lbs.
At Lough Carra, most of the fish are being taken on the dap, but wetfly was also producing some sport for Jim Stafford, who landed a nice brace at 4lb 8ozs.
Trevor West and his three friends took nine trout for 19lb 8ozs, best fish 3lb 8ozs, and Messers Teague and Hughes from Londonderry had four for 8lbs on the dap and wetfly.
Water levels were normal and clear on the River Moy where 105 salmon were taken.
Dennis Barrett had a good fish of 15lbs, and fellow Ulsterman Bill Morrison had a nice brace, while Belfast angler John Cunningham landed his biggest ever salmon at 13lbs on the worm while fishing the Foxford stretch.
The opening match of the Lurgan CAC midweek league took place on Lurgan Park Lake.
Winner on the night was Rick Hewitt with a good bream of 5lb 8ozs from peg 2.
Philip Jackson won the second round of the club's float only league at Bond's Bridge.
Philip used long pole, short line tactics to net a catch of 6lb 8ozs.
Coleraine's Ken Millar broke the five hour record at the Straid Fishery this week when he took a great catch of 27 trout for 47lb 9ozs on Ace of Spades and Viva lures.
The old record was held by Vaughan Chambers, Newry, at 21 fish for 47lb 6ozs.
Other good bags were netted by Robert Clements, Banbridge, 17 for 29lb 11ozs; Albert Moore, Coleraine, 16 for 30lb 7ozs and Uel Hutchinson, Coleraine, 13 for 30lb 5ozs.
At the Bridgewater, Donaghadee, Edward Rolston, Belfast had the best catch of the week with six trout for 18lb
CRUSADERS would be interested in on-the-move Derry City captain Paul Mooney — at the right price.
That's the word from Crues chairman Jim Semple who is determined to help manager Roy Walker strengthen his team after missing out on the Irish League title on goal difference.
Former Linfield full-back or midfielder Mooney is leaving Derry this summer to be closer to his business interests in Belfast.
The Crues, however, could face competition from Glentoran, Glenavon and Ards.
Crusaders are also pondering their first Euro headache — two months before they go into the UEFA Cup draw.
Scottish keeper Kevin McKeown and their four southern players count as ‘foreigners’ under Euro rules and only three will be permitted to play.
McKeown will be an automatic choice leaving manager Walker to choose two others from Roddy Collins, Martin Murray, Robbie Lawlor and Derek Carroll.
Crusaders fifth Dubliner John Cleary has gone into junior management down south.
Life looks bright for Castle quartet
SURPRISE packet Bright Castle look poised to jump another Senior Cup hurdle, this time at Lurgan.
The Downpatrick Club had a scoring average of 73 for four cards to head the Belvoir Park qualifiers and now meet Moyola Park for a place in the Ulster quarter-finals.
The match must be played by June 21.
Dale Baker and David Gibson are now key players in Bright's new look side, both made 70's.
Warrenpoint open their Cup campaign against Mourne at Ardglass and Knock clash with Belvoir at Shandon Park.
Castlerock, last year's All-Ireland finalists go to Killymoon for a first round tussle with Donegal, and other matches are: Shandon v Massereene at Malone; Clandeboye v Fortwilliam at Knock; Portstewart v Moyola at Carrickfergus and Holywood v Ballybofey at Dungannon.
Cork girl Eavan Higgins will lead Ireland's ladies into battle in the European team championship in Holland less than two months from now.
This is Eavan's reward for a cool and competent victory in the national championship at Royal Belfast, where she beat 20-year-old Aideen Rogers in the final (one hole).
Sadly, there is no place for an Ulster golfer in this European line-up, which is: Higgins, Rogers, Eileen Rose Power, Ada O'Sullivan, Denise McCarthy and Tracy Eakin.
School reports changes ‘not a must'
SCHOOL reports to Ulster parents this term will not have to use the Government's controversial new levels of attainment system, principals said today.
The National Association of Head Teachers accused the Department of Education of an ‘unrealistic and unreasonable demand upon schools without consultation and preparation’.
Regional Official Walter Ievers said it had been confirmed that schools are under no statutory obligation to report to parents of children finishing primary seven and third form in secondary and grammar schools in the way the Department has indicated in the recent Parents Guide.
But in a letter the Department has recommended schools should report subject attainments by level whether pupils have reached the end of a formal ‘key stage’ or not — though it is not mandatory.
Mr Ievers said, however: ‘There is still a considerable amount of work to be done before schools can report to parents using the levels and attainment targets used in assessment of children introduced as a pilot project only very recently.
‘We regret that the Department has encouraged parents to expect schools to report to them using these measurements so prematurely.
Indeed even the Parents Charter does not require such reporting until June 1994.
‘Of course schools will want to continue their good practice of regular reports to parents and responding to any concerns parents might have.
Parents should understand however that the expectations they might have as a result of the parents guide are not based on anything other than an unrealistic and unreasonable demand being made upon schools without consultation and preparation.’
Clydal Pal all the rage
CLYDAL Pal will be all the rage for Dunmore's Ulster Derby final next Saturday night after an impressive semi final victory.
The brindle made the trip from Roscommon to stamp his authority on the event with a 30.66 victory over the 550 yard trip.
Owned by Tom Clyne, who also won the last sprint on Saturday night with Clydal Chief, Pal had 2.1/2 lengths to spare from Stormhill Echo.
After early bumping at the first bend, Clydal found himself in arrears and Pilot Error made the early running from Stormhill, who quickly took control down the far side and looked set to win.
However, although several lengths behind, Clydal Pal soon moved into overdrive and picked up the leader in the home straight to win going away.
Murlough Blue ran on to grab the other place in the £2,500 final.
Gerald Watson's Carnlough based Express Tico took the honours in the other penultimate heat where Miss Woolco was the unlucky victim of first bend crowding.
Tico on the inside, hit Miss Woolco at the initial corner but came off best and shot clear, holding off a late challenge from Newry Blue by three quarters of a length in 31.03 seconds with third.
Police hunt man after sex attack on woman
POLICE in south Belfast are hunting a sex attacker who assaulted a woman in the Ormeau Road area.
The victim was walking along Sunnyside Drive at 11.30pm on Thursday when a man ran behind her and grabbed at her body.
The woman was unhurt, but badly shaken after the attack, according to police.
A similar attack was reported in the Ormeau area in January, and police believe it may be the same man.
The attacker is described as five feet eight to nine inches tall with short cropped hair.
He was wearing a dark bomber jacket and light coloured trousers.
Anyone with information is asked to contact police at Ballynafeigh, telephone 650222.
Shankill lifeline faces axe
YOUNG Belfast offenders appealed today for a £140,000 Government injection to help them stay straight.
In an extremely frank and honest interview with the Belfast Telegraph, the Shankill boys told how their final hope from a life of constant offending was a special project which is facing the axe.
Without the Higher Force Challenge, a scheme to help wean young offenders off their addictions to crime, they would either be in jail or in hospital — victims of paramilitary punishment squads.
Already, many have had brushes with both the law and local terrorists who have left them with painful reminders of their activities on the Shankill streets.
One tells of how he was left paralysed after paramilitaries beat him senseless with a baseball bat.
He now has a metal plate in his head.
Another youngster talks about being shot three times after incurring the wrath of the paramilitaries for ‘anti-social behaviour’— car theft and joyriding.
Voluntary Project administrator Roy Montgomery is convinced the scheme, which has been running for three months, is a major success — and a lifeline for local young people.
‘These guys want and need our help,’ he said.
‘This is a last chance for them.
They will definitely end up back on the streets if something isn't done soon.’
What they want is money — £140,000 — which would cover the annual cost of running the scheme.
Despite its success — eight out of 11 young people have got jobs — no definite funding has been body.
Force for good on the Shankill — Page 5.
War crimes claims
Geared-up Gawley left in pieces
PORTADOWN rider Darren Gawley claims he was left ‘high and dry’ and unable to compete in yesterday's British Championship round at Donington Park because of Robert Dunlop's win in the 125cc class at Saturday's North West 200.
Dunlop rode the Honda which Gawley has had all year and the plan was for Gawley to take over the bike and ride it at Donington.
According to Gawley, Dunlop had agreed to make alterations to the gear box immediately after the North West race but he added: ‘When I got to the pits at the North West immediately after the 125 class had been run off, I saw the bike lying there with no-one attending to it.
‘I knew I was in a race against time so I set about altering the gear box myself.
However this is a long job and at the end of the day I just gave it up and decided not to travel.
I am disillusioned and saddened by the whole affair.’
Dunlop said: ‘I agreed to alter the gear box for Darren so it would be more suitable for Donington but I was riding in every race after the 125 and I physically just hadn't the time to attend to it immediately.
When I did get to the bike I saw it was virtually in pieces and realised that Darren had been attempting the job himself.
‘I told Darren's mother, who was standing watching over the machine that I Donington with Darren and make the alterations en route.
But the offer wasn't taken up.
I'm just sorry the whole thing happened and the man who must be embarrassed about this most of all is sponsor Matt Laverty who lent me the bike on Thursday night at practice.’
Dunlop had previously ridden the Honda in the Cookstown and Tandragee races where he won on both occasions.
Gawley confined his activities to short circuits.
Gawley wasn't the only non-starter from Ulster at Donington.
Phillip McCallen decided to rest for a week following his spill in the opening 250cc race on Saturday.
‘I'm still stiff and sore and I'm receiving treatment for an injured shoulder’ he said.
‘I was rammed twice in the 250cc race when in the lead and then fell off later on.
It was a nightmare day.’
McCallen's next outing will be the Isle of Man TT, practice for which begins next week.
Of the Ulster riders who did appear at Donington only Eugene McManus, who was 17th in the 250cc class and Stephen Farmer who was 19th finished.
Graeme Thompson crashed while lying fourth two laps from the finish in the 250cc race won by Nigel Bosworth.
Mark Coates crashed when fifth in the 125cc race on lap two and his cousin Adrian also crashed when lying 11th.
Steve Patrickson won.
Garth sights on a second ‘Amateur'
ALL major golf championships are won with your driver, Peter Thomson used to say, and this is the club that will guide many destinies in the ‘Amateur’ at Royal Portrush.
‘Stray at your peril.
Some fairways are so narrow, we may have to walk single file,’ joked one young American visitor on the eve of this 22 nation classic.
The rough this week is knee-high and punishing, placing a high premier on long straight hitting, especially off the tee.
The action begins tomorrow with the first of two qualifying rounds, and as usual, the field is studded with quality.
Entry players, all scratchmen or better; Garth McGimpsey and Banbridge lad Raymond Burns head Ireland's challenge of 50-plus; and Stephen Dundas is hoping to be the first Scot to win the title two years running.
Sweden's National team is here as well as the champions of six other European countries, and from halfway across the world comes a young Maori whom some critics think is good enough to take the trophy back to New Zealand.
Philip Tataurangi is 21 and a demon putter, arguably the boldest and best amateur golf has seen for ten years.
McGimpsey, director of his own sports equipment company, holds the record for Dunluce at 67, and has also holed both Portrush courses on successive days in a total of 136 shots, another all time best.
Whether these figures could be under siege may depend on the weather.
Burns, at 19 Ireland's most exciting talent since Ronan Rafferty, says he's hoping the wind blows hard, and so is McGimpsey.
‘Garth is a strong, rough weather player,’ says young Ray, ‘and especially good in wind.
He has won five championships over this course already, and will be hard to beat again.’
The pressures on McGimpsey are immense.
It was in 1985 that he won this championship at Dornoch when nobody expected him to, but this time he could start favourite over what he calls ‘my own private Shangri La’.
It was here that Joe Carr demolished the American Bob Cochran for the last of his three victories in 1960, and a warm welcome awaits Joe, an historic triumph.
The great course has changed very little since then.
It's still a superb test of skill and character, combining a clutch of relentlessly demanding holes with a scenic splendour that rivals all but a few.
Shares drifting as weaknesses show
SHARE prices drifted lower on the first day of the new account as Wall Street's poor showing on Friday and Tokyo's earlier weak performance sapped confidence.
A cluster of ex-dividend stocks trading without the benefit of dividend payments also kept dealing subdued.
The FTSE came in just 0.2 points ahead and slipped around eight points before settling up 0.7 points at 2812.9.
Many dealers were content to stay on the sidelines until the publication of April trade figures later in the day.
Weekend press comment about the fragility of the recovery meant they were not expecting good news.
Ex-dividend shares included Allied-Lyons, Bass, BOC, British Airways, Hanson, Kingfisher, Land Securities, Marks & Spencer, Sainsbury and Willis Corroon.
Land Securities was one of the hardest-hit, shedding 16p to 558p.
Kingfisher was 13p off at 578p.
Carlton Communications firmed 1p to 735p on a 16pc profits boost and a confident statement about current trading.
Industrial conglomerate BTR opened 3p stronger at 594p after it announced two joint ventures in China.
MAI, Lord Hollicks's media group, was 1p stronger at 182p after it unveiled a £111 million private placement of bonds.
Water utilities began mixed ahead of final figures for some companies due this week.
North West Water, which reports on Wednesday, opened 1p lower at 478p.
South West Water, which reports the following day, was also 1p down at 503p.
Anglian started 2p lower then regained 1p to stand at 479p.
National Power was 5p off at 330p ahead of its final figures on Thursday.
Senna lauded by Hill as Monaco record is broken
DAMON Hill saw his late father Graham's Monaco Grand Prix record broken by Ayrton Senna but was the first to congratulate the Brazilian despite his own personal disappointment of being beaten into second place.
Senna regained the lead in the world drivers' championship and broke the famous five-wins record of Monaco great Graham with a fortunate win in yesterday's big race.
But Damon, who not only drove brilliantly but survived a late collision with Gerhard Berger's Ferrari, showed true sportsmanship in warmly applauding the great Brazilian.
‘My father would have been the first to have congratulated him if he had been here,’ he said.
‘It is a fantastic achievement to win here just once but to do it six times is amazing and a very special feat.’
Senna, 33, in a Marlboro McLaren Ford, won by more than 52 seconds from 32-year-old Hill's Canon Williams Renault to claim his sixth Monaco triumph.
It was a win handed to him on a plate when chief rival Alain Prost was forced out of the race by the stewards and young charger Michael Schumacher by a blazing fire on his Camel Benetton Ford car.
Hill, who survived a late collision with Berger's Ferrari lost a lot of time in the traffic and this gave Gerhard the opportunity to close up in the closing stages.
‘He saw an opportunity to go past me and went for it and I had no choice there but to close the door.
‘This produced a pretty farcical scene really with us both stopped on the track, but I managed to get away and hang on for second.
‘It is 30 years since my father's first victory here and I am sure he would have been the first to have congratulated Ayrton on breaking his record of five wins.
‘Myself, I am thankful to finish second and thank Williams for giving me the car to do the job.’
Hill now has 18 points and is third behind Senna (42) and Prost (37) in the drivers' title race.
Charges on cards after hijack ‘jape'
A 17-year-old youth who was arrested after trying to hijack an airliner as a ‘prank’ may face charges, an airline said today.
He told the pilot of the Spain-bound jet that he had a bomb and wanted to go to Beirut, said a company spokesman.
The youth was travelling with his mother on a Britannia Boeing 737 carrying 130 passengers from Newcastle-upon-Tyne to Malaga early yesterday.
Britannia said he had asked for permission to see the flight deck and apparently made the threat while casually chatting to the captain.
The pilot ignored the threat and contacted the authorities in Malaga, where the youth was arrested.
‘From information received this seems to have been a stupid prank,’ said a Britannia spokeswoman.
‘However, matters of security are treated with the utmost seriousness and the strongest action will be taken against the passenger concerned.’
She added: ‘There will be a prosecution of some description.
We get the impression that the Spanish authorities are keen to press charges.’
Britannia said the youth had been named unofficially as John in from Spain.
He was thought to come from the Newcastle area.
The youth's mother said in a radio interview with IRN that the incident had been a prank that went wrong.
‘It was sad and a joke and it just backfired,’ she said.
‘Everything's been apologised and I mean there was nothing serious happened.’
Election pointer: The dilemma facing the province's leaders
Ulster: The tricky political road ahead
THE ELECTION results have confirmed what most people already suspected — that the differences between the political parties and their supporters may be too great to be resolved in another round of talks, however well-meaning.
The elections were apparently to decide the membership of 26 district councils, but in fact they were more like a refererendum, with multiple choices, on the province's future.
As most similar opinion polls show, there is an almost total lack of consensus, both on the unionist and nationalist sides.
Sir Patrick Mayhew must have been hoping for some winners and losers, as he considers how to kick-start his talks process.
It would have helped him if the two most awkward customers in the political equation — Sinn Fein and the DUP — had been given a drubbing by the SDLP and the Ulster Unionists respectively.
As it turns out, however, both fared better than expected in an election which produced something positive for almost everyone.
Sinn Fein 's vote was up by 1.2pc (5pc in Belfast), yielding 51 seats, and although the DUP's fell by a half per cent overall, it was up 3.2pc in Belfast.
The Ulster Unionists could be reasonably pleased with themselves, since a fall of 2pc in — equivalent to the drop in the DUP's tally.
The Alliance prospered with the demise of the Conservatives, taking eight more seats with an extra .8pc of the vote.
The gains by Alliance and some Ulster Unionist moderates mean that there will be even more partnership at district council level, with Belfast possibly joining the ranks of the 13 power-sharers.
It does not follow, however, that this development will make Sir Patrick Mayhew's task any easier, in the short term.
He will meet the Irish Foreign Minister, Dick Spring, in Dublin tomorrow to discuss the future of the talks, in the light of the election and his own proposals to give them ‘focus and direction’.
If there was general agreement, he could ask for a suspension of Anglo-Irish conference meetings from next month, beginning talks before the summer recess.
But the election results must cause some re-thinking to be done.
Clearly it is now almost impossible to proceed without the DUP, as some had hoped, and there is little enthusiasm in the UUP for full-scale inter-party talks.
In the wake of the election, only the SDLP and Alliance, together with the British and Irish governments, want a return to the old three-strand approach.
This, as the definitive statement by Peter Brooke in March 1991 laid down, involves talks between the parties here, between the parties and Dublin and between London and Dublin.
The Ulster Unionists, by far the largest party with nearly 30pc of the vote, are presently engaged in finding an alternative formula.
Their leader, James Molyneaux, has been holding meetings with business and community leaders — not involved in politics — to devise a ‘blueprint for stability’.
Whatever it contains, it will almost certainly be based on storing power at local government and Westminster level, rather than Stormont.
Mr Molyneaux has long been associated with the integrationist wing of his party, which feels that devolution for Northern Ireland would be too unstable, given the requirement for power-sharing between unionists and nationalists.
Just before the last talks were abandoned in November, the Unionists revealed their ideas about new north-south institutions, covering common topics like agriculture, which could have limited executive power.
The status of the document, which was never submitted to the party for approval, is still uncertain, but it could be the basis for new discussions.
Some nationalists saw it as a cosmetic measure, to end the talks on a high note for Unionists.
Others regarded it as a measured response to the Dublin government's paper proposing ‘new institutions’ to satisfy the nationalist aspiration and provide ‘executive functions for the development of practical north-south co-operation and co-ordination in all areas of mutual benefit.’
The Unionists would hope to discuss their blueprint with the other parties, in bilateral talks, and then take their conclusions to the two governments.
They would want more powers for local government, plus a Northern Ireland committee at Westminster, but the possibility of the SDLP or Dublin being diverted from the three-strand approach is remote.
The DUP's attitude to future talks is unambiguous — either the Dublin government ‘deals with’ articles 2 and 3 of the constitution and John Hume stops talking to Gerry Adams or Ian Paisley will not be at the conference table.
Even if the second pre-condition is met, Albert Reynolds is unlikely to go further than to promise that a referendum would be held, if everything else was agreed.
Committed would have to take place without the DUP or Sinn Fein, representing 29pc of the electorate.
What, many would ask, would be the point?
But Sir Patrick Mayhew is firmly committed to re-opening discussions as soon as possible — firstly, in bilateral meetings with the party leaders and secondly, in a resumption of inter-party talks.
Much will depend on how the parties react to his own proposals, foreshadowed in an important speech in Liverpool last month and to be discussed with Dick Spring tomorrow.
Already Dublin has been showing some concern, since they will be submitted as British government rather than Anglo-Irish proposals.
There was a nationalist fear that they might be confined to an internal Northern Ireland settlement, but this has been denied.
So far, it is only clear what the proposals do not contain.
They will not recommend any form of joint authority, nor a purely internal settlement, though there is the promise of a Northern Ireland committee at Westminster, if agreement can be reached.
Sir Patrick must hope this will be enough to bring the parties back to the table, to build on the broad principles agreed last time.
He and John Hume rely heavily on all-party agreement that the allegiances of both communities — unionist and nationalist — extend beyond the boundaries of Northern Ireland.
Some, like Alliance and the British government, see devolution as the answer, while the SDLP is, so far, unwilling to contemplate a Northern Ireland administration without a representative of Dublin and US-style separation of powers between the executive and the Assembly members.
Alternatively, there is the softly-softly Unionist strategy, based on finding more common ground at district council level time for such an interim stage, many would ask.
Since each of the main parties, on either side, has a practical veto on progress, Sir Patrick's task is a monumental one.
He will try to lead the discussion, this time, instead of acting as a mere facilitator, but he could find himself shouted down or boycotted.
His difficulty is that, as the election results showed, there is little optimism left in the population at large.
Most people — though not all — continue to vote tribally for objectives which, after nearly 25 years of conflict, are as far apart as ever.
How those opposing loyalties can be accommodated within new structures involving Northern Ireland, the Republic, the UK and possibly the EC is the big question to be resolved
‘Betrayed’ Muslims vow to keep fighting
AN international policy shift on Bosnia's civil war buoyed the former Yugoslav republic's rebel Serbs at the weekend but the Muslim-led government felt betrayed and vowed to fight on to recapture lost territory.
‘It is finally clear to the Muslims that there will be no unitary Bosnia under their domination,’ Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic said after the United States, Russia and key Western allies agreed on a new containment strategy.
‘It is also clear there will be no military intervention,’ Kardadzic told reporters in his Bosnian stronghold of Pale.
The United States and its allies agreed on several measures including the possible use of US air power to protect UN forces in Muslim ‘safe areas’ in Bosnia and to ensure that arms do not reach Bosnian Serbs from Serbia.
But they appeared to retreat from their previous hard line against the Serbs, perceived by the West as the initiators and main aggressors in the war which erupted almost 14 months ago after Bosnia broke away from the Yugoslav federation.
Bosnian Muslim President Alia Izetbegovic angrily accused the world of appeasing Serb ‘aggression and genocide’ and he urged his nation to fight to the bitter end.
‘We are not going to waste time any longer in futile negotiations,’ Izetbegovic said in a radio address.
The Muslims, Bosnia's largest ethnic group, have lost 70pc of the Serb rebels and much of the rest to Croat forces.
Karadzic, apparently encouraged by the new international policy announced in Washington, not only invited Bosnian Muslim and Croat leaders to meet him to discuss a settlement but he also challenged the Muslims to a soccer match.
‘Izetbegovic has called the Muslim people to all-out war.
I invite Izetbegovic and the Muslim people to a soccer game.
It is much better to have a showdown on the soccer pitch than on the battlefield,’ he said.
I'M STAYING
KINGSLEY Black is staying with Nottingham Forest.
The Northern Ireland winger is expected to meet new Forest manager Frank Clark on his return from this week's World Cup game in Lithuania, for discussions on his future.
But the 25-year-old does not envisage any problems.
Black says he is happy to stay at the City Ground, and will not be joining the big-name exodus of Forest players which includes Roy Keane, Nigel Clough and Stuart Pearce.
All have indicated willingness to leave following Forest's relegation to the First Division at the subsequent retirement of manager Brian Clough.
‘I haven't actually met Frank yet; he was appointed after we had broken up for the summer,’ said Black.
‘But he seems to have a lot of good ideas aimed at taking Forest back to the Premier League and I'm happy to be part of that.’
Another Northern Ireland player staying put is Newcastle United goalkeeper Tommy Wright, who has just agreed improved terms with manager Kevin Keegan.
Big Tommy is now on Premier Division wages following Newcastle's promotion; he's hoping his own personal promotion to first choice goalkeeper follows on from that.
Wright will have a key role in Vilnius tomorrow as Northern Ireland begin what has been disparagingly described as the ‘battle of the also-Manager Billy Bingham is unlikely to make many changes from the team which lost 3–1 in Spain last month; Iain Dowie should come in to replace the injured Philip Gray.
Michael Hughes, who met up with the rest of the party here in Frankfurt last night, is likely to be given a more forward role supporting Dowie.
Bingham, who has no further injury worries, is confident Northern Ireland can gain some semblance of revenge following last year's disappointing 2–2 draw with Lithuania at Windsor Park.
‘That was a game we should have won after taking a two goal lead, and I think it's still rankles with a few of the lads.
‘We want to put on a good performance, and I believe we can win this one if we adopt a positive attitude.’
The expected Northern Ireland team is: Wright, Fleming, Worthington, Taggart, McDonald, Donaghy, Black, K Wilson, Dowie, O'Neill and Hughes.
Nigel Worthington appears to have got over the disappointment of losing in last week's FA Cup final replay to Arsenal and will play what is believed to be his 67th game of the season tomorrow.
‘It has been a long hard season for Nigel, and obviously he'll be a little bit down after what happened at Wembley,’ said Bingham.
‘But he's a good solid pro and I'm sure he'll bounce back for us.
Had he any problems, he would have told me by now.’
The Northern Ireland squad will fly from Frankfurt to Vilnius later today and will take in a training session at the Lithuanians' stadium in the evening.
I killed film crew men, says Iraqi
AN Iraqi guide has confessed to killing two members of a BBC film crew who were working in Iraq during the Gulf War two years ago, according to a report today.
Hashim Ciftci told the Today newspaper that he shot cameraman Nick della Casa and his assistant Charles Maxwell after they hired him to guide them on an expedition to film fighting between the Iraqi army and Kurdish rebels in the mountains of northern Iraq.
But he denied killing the third member of the film crew, Mr della Casa's wife, Rosanna, who has never been found, said the newspaper.
Ciftci is in prison in Iraq awaiting trial, after being charged with the murders of the two men by the Iraqi authorities.
The newspaper says he will plead guilty.
Queen Mum back to work soon
A DECISION was being taken today on whether the 92-year-old Queen Mother, newly released from hospital, can immediately get back to work by attending her first official engagement, scheduled for tomorrow.
She is due to attend a service for the Victoria Cross and George Cross Association at St Martin-in-the-Fields church in London, with a reception after at St James's Palace.
The Queen Mother, the Association president, has not crossed the engagement off her diary.
But a Clarence House spokesman said that a decision on whether she should go would be taken today.
The Prince of Wales has offered to take her place at the service if necessary.
However, his grandmother will almost certainly be keeping an appointment on Thursday, a reception organised by the Church Army at Lambeth Palace.
It has been disclosed that within a short time of leaving Aberdeen Royal Infirmary yesterday where she stayed three nights and underwent an operation to remove a piece of fish lodged in her throat she was entertaining guests.
She was driven with a lady-in-waiting from the hospital to Birkhall on the Balmoral estate.
A spokesman at her Clarence House office said: ‘She has a house party of guests at Birkhall, and life goes on.’
The Queen Mother, who will be 93 this year, said she felt ‘much better’ as she left the hospital where she spent 63 hours.
Smiling but looking frail, she was asked if she would be taking things gently, and replied: ‘A little.’
She was admitted on Thursday amid suggestions that her problem was no more than ‘a slight tightening of the throat’.
But over the following 24 hours it gradually emerged that late on Thursday night she had undergone an hour-long operation under general anaesthetic for a throat obstruction, which was later disclosed to be a piece of fish.
Gooch crisis looms
OLD mates Graham Gooch and Keith Fletcher are just one more defeat away from a crisis that could seriously threaten their international partnership.
England's shattering 19-run Texaco Trophy surrender against Australia at Lord's has left captain Gooch and manager Fletcher under severe pressure.
And if yesterday's result is followed by defeat in the first Test at Old Trafford, the clamour for change at the top will reach a crescendo.
Fletcher, given a five-year contract only last September, should be able to survive any storm even though England have already lost four out of four Tests under his management as well as eight of 11 one-day internationals.
But Gooch's hold on the captaincy deliberately loosened by the selectors a few weeks ago has never looked less secure.
England are committed to a review of the situation midway through this six-match Ashes series.
Defeat in the first Test, which starts on Thursday week, would leave many people asking: ‘Why wait that long?’
Gooch who has Fletcher's total support is nothing if not a fighter, however, and insisted last night: ‘I've no second thoughts about staying on as captain.’
A 0–3 Texaco scoreline need have no bearing on the Test series ahead, of course.
whitewashed West Indies in the one-dayers and were then routed 4–0 during the main business of that summer.
It would take a brave gambler to bet on a similar turn-around this season, though.
‘We threw it away,’ said Gooch after England set only 231 for victory lost their last seven wickets for 52 runs in 11 overs at Lord's.
‘We have got to get our act together.’
From what the captain indicated last night, that act at Old Trafford will see Alec Stewart reverting to the role of specialist opener and handing over the wicket-keeping gloves.
That should be good news for Jack Russell but bad news for Mike Atherton, who had looked favourite to partner Gooch if Stewart kept wicket and batted in the middle order.
With Robin Smith and Graeme Hick first Test certainties, the vacancies now appear to be at Nos 5 and 6.
Graham Thorpe, who batted soundly in all three Texaco matches, should get one spot.
When the next round of championship matches start on Thursday, a host of batting and bowling candidates will be hoping to do a spot of last-minute selector-nudging.
Gooch, still worried about his own form despite making 42 yesterday, must get his practice during a second XI match at Colchester.
Essex are without a first-team fixture this week forcing the skipper to drop down.
‘An innings of 42 is not good enough,’ he said.
‘I want a game this week and the only one available to me is against Somerset 2nds.’
The last time Gooch played for the reserves was nearly 20 years ago.
But if it helps him to start leading from the front again, a trip back in time will be well worthwhile.
Spotlight on ‘special needs’ of children
New education laws on cards
THE Government is planning new laws for Ulster children with special educational needs.
And the proposals are likely to contain guidelines for teachers dealing with dyslexia and other reading problems in the classroom.
Ulster Unionist MP Roy Beggs said today it was essential that dyslexia was recognised as a problem and proper provision made for it in primary and secondary schools.
It is estimated that around 600 pupils at present receive assistance for literacy and numeracy difficulties but the Government has baulked at estimating how many children suffer from dyslexia.
In a letter to Mr Beggs, a long time campaigner on the issue, Education Minister Jeremy Hanley said that a consultative paper setting out a series of measures for new special needs legislation will be published later this year.
It was intended to include the need for a code of guidance to give practical help to both schools and the five area boards, he said.
‘We have been progress of the Great Britain Education Bill with a view to ensuring that, as far as possible, parents of children with special educational needs in Northern Ireland enjoy the same rights as those in England and Wales.’
Mr Beggs said future teacher training should include courses for the identification and special requirements of children suffering from dyslexia.
He is one of the signatories to an early day motion in the House of Commons on the issue.
North West are six-hits in Cup
NORTH West lead the way with six survivors after the sorting out round of the Schweppes Cup on Saturday.
They still have six teams involved in the All Ireland tournament, the NCU have four which will become five if Downpatrick manage to beat Pembroke in Dublin.
Leinster are left with four after Carlisle pulled off the biggest win for the Southern contingent by despatching North West kingpins Donemana.
The Dubliners had 58 runs to spare after a half century by Mark Cohen helped them reach 181.
Donemana registering a rare failure with the bat could only manage 123 in reply.
Holders Waringstown flashed a warning that they will not be easily deprived of the trophy, sweeping out Phoenix Park for only 45 in Dublin and winning by nine wickets.
The Phoenix total is one of the lowest on record for the competition, Alan Nelson taking three wickets for 10 in seven overs to claim the man of the match tankard.
By contrast Brigade ran up a massive 337 for three at Beechgrove to swamp Leinster by 209 runs.
There were two centuries in their total, scored by Marshall Kilgore and Ireland's batsman Stephen Smyth.
Another notable performance came from Instonians, who made their Schweppes Cup debut by successfully defending a moderate Shane Park total of 118 to beat Railway Union by 39 runs.
Lurgan also went to Dublin and won, eliminating CYM by a five wicket margin helped by a superb all round performance from Craig Irwin who took two wickets for 24 and then hit a not out 60.
The teams through to the third round are: NCU: Waringstown, Lurgan, Instonians, North West; Brigade, Eglinton, Strabane, St Johnston, Bready, Limavady and Leinster; Malahide.
The tie between Downpatrick and Pembroke was postponed because of an unfit outfield at Strangford Road and will be played in Dublin on Thursday week.
Downpatrick claimed some compensation by going to Comber yesterday and defeating North Down by eight wickets to claim 19 valuable section one points.
Geoffrey Ferguson hit a not out 71 out of their 174 for two total and took two wickets for 31.
John's on the right line for a new video
I SHOULD have known what was coming, of course.
Steam trains and old buses are the ‘big two’ in the nostalgia industry.
Still, the flood of calls and letters I have received since writing last week about the trolleybus era in Belfast has been remarkable.
‘You should talk,’ said public relations consultant John Laird, an enthusiast himself, whose videotape ‘Trolleybus Days In Belfast’is now into its second edition.
‘People are stopping me in the street to ask about it.’
As with me, they are either ex-crewmen, or the relatives of drivers or school children studying the history of transport or just plain old nostalgia buffs.
What they all want to know is where John's video can be obtained, so here, to let me get on with my work, are a few possible outlets — Dillon's, Waterstone's, Eason's or the BBC Shop.
It costs £10.99.
John tells me, by the way, that the response to his trolleybus venture has been so great that he now plans to do something along similar lines, as you might say, with the railways.
Don't worry, I'll keep you informed about that too.
DUP increase
THE Democratic Unionist Party enjoyed a slight increase in its vote in the Derry City Council elections and not a slight decrease, as reported here on Saturday.
Despite a lower turnout than in 1989, the party increased its vote in the city overall from 5,000 to 5,200 and now has five councillors — an increase of one.
Unions urged to work for equality
A JOINT conference organised by the FEC and the Irish Congress of Trade Unions gets underway tomorrow in Londonderry, aimed at encouraging trade unionists to promote employment equality.
The conference, at the Waterfoot Hotel, will be attended by around 40 representatives from a wide-range of public and private sector trade unions.
Terry Carlin, Northern Ireland officer of the ICTU, said ‘The ICTU first called for legislation to outlaw discrimination in employment in 1966 and had been actively involved ever since in the issue of promoting equality of opportunity.
‘The Northern Ireland committee was instrumental in the formation of the Van Straubenzee Working Party and had supported the work of the Fair Employment Agency and now Fair Employment Commission.’
The conference is aimed primarily at public and private sector full-time trade union officials and senior lay trade union representatives.
The central theme will be the active role to be played by trade unionists in working for the promotion of employment equality and affirmative action.
The purpose is to prepare trade unionists to fully participate in consultations with employers concerning the ment composition and practices that employers are required to undertake.
Under the Fair Employment legislation registered employers are required to review their workforce compositions and employment practices at least once every three years and identify appropriate affirmative action measures.
Fair day
COIN-SHOVING, darts and a tin-can alley are just some of the attractions which can be enjoyed at the summer fair in Strabane Primary school this Friday at 7pm.
A similar event last year raised £1,000 for school funds.
Admission, including free burger, will be £1.
Magherafelt bus service
MAGHERAFELT bus services have returned to normal, Ulsterbus bosses said today.
Temporary facilities have been set up in the Union Street car park because the depot was reduced to a heap of rubble in Sunday evening's IRA bomb.
Lens ‘extortion'
BRITAIN'S three million contact lens wearers are being forced to pay through the nose for cleaning and soaking solutions, an MP has claimed.
Labour consumer affairs spokesman Nigel Griffiths said he wanted all retail outlets to be allowed to sell the solutions.
‘The current restriction is keeping prices up.
Prices are frankly extortionate.’
Drinks slump
SALES of sugared baby drinks slumped last year amid fears that they would rot children's teeth, a report claims.
Sales of the drinks fell by 3pc in 1992 against a 27pc rise in 1991, said the annual review of the baby products market by the Institute of Grocery Distribution.
Ad dropped
AIR France has dropped an advertising campaign which poked fun at an English town after being bombarded with protests by furious residents.
One showed an elderly couple in a tatty cafe with the caption: Springtime in Stoke-on-Trent.
Just an hour and ten minutes away.
The next showed a glamorous couple sipping champagne in a plush restaurant, and said: So is Paris with Air France.
RAC
TOLL booths on motorways will simply push motorists on to other roads and that ‘must not be allowed to happen’, an RAC report claims.
Introducing pay-as-you-use booths on motorways was also ‘out of the question’ on grounds of both cost and environment, it said.
Salmon secrets
THE secret night-life of salmon has been revealed thanks to infra-red cameras.
Scientists at Glasgow University used night-vision cameras to watch young salmon in a temperature-controlled pool.
Far from hibernating in winter and emerging only briefly to feed, when the temperature drops the fish reverse their feeding habits and dine in the dark.
Prison ships
PRISON ships are being considered as one option to reduce prison overcrowding, the Home Office has confirmed.
Mooring ships off the coast to accommodate low security prisoners was ‘one of a series of options’ under consideration, a spokesman said.
New gun for Army
THE Army's firepower gets a major boost this week when the first new self-propelled field gun for 30 years enters service.
The development of the British-made gun, a 155mm self-propelled howitzer, known as the AS90, ends decades of American domination in
Liver campaign
A ‘YELLOW Alert’ National Awareness Campaign is being launched in a bid to curb the death rate among babies suffering from liver disease.
The Children's Liver Disease Foundation campaign aims to warn parents and health experts of the dangers.
Pay deals falling
PAY deals have continued to tumble in recent weeks but most have stayed above inflation, a report has shown.
More than half the pay settlements in April were worth between 2pc and 3.9pc, reflecting falling inflation, now down to 1.3pc.
Research group Incomes Data Services said that 10pc of the 100 deals it monitored involved a pay freeze.
Salesmen warning
DOOR-TO-DOOR salesmen are posing as Fire Brigade representatives to sell potentially lethal fire extinguishers, it has been disclosed.
Trading Standards Officers in West Sussex warned consumers to beware of buying the second-hand domestic fire extinguishers.
Brigade duo in top form
BRIGADE batsmen Marshall Kilgore and Stephen Smyth hit top form at the weekend as their club cruised into the third round of the All Ireland Schweppes Cup.
Both players scored a century in a massive total of 337 for 3 against Leinster.
Limavady also booked a place in the next round with a victory over Ballymena while Eglinton beat Bangor and Strabane recorded a magnificent win over Lisburn.
No such joy for Sion Mills and Donemana — both teams lost in spite of being asked to chase relatively modest totals.
Flag Week
FLAG Week for Cancer Research begins today and there will be house-to-house collections and Flag Days on May 26 and 27.
Euro-fever at Limavady
LIMAVADY High School is in the grip of Euro-fever!
The Co Londonderry school has been promoting greater European awareness since September and has arranged two foreign trips to mark their continued efforts.
A school party left last weekend for a visit to a school in Nany in France.
Next month, a group heads off to Tuttlingen in Germany.
The Euro-events organised by the school so far this year have included a French-only ‘immersion’ weekend and a school referendum on Maastricht as well as an interview with Euro MP John Hume.
Boost for relief projects
MONEY raised through the Church of Ireland's Bishops' Appeal will go towards relief projects all over the world.
Cash will be sent out to promote development in several areas of Africa, Brazil, Egypt, India, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea and Thailand.
ARMAGH
Exotic flowers to help church funds
A FESTIVAL of Flowers is being staged in Holy Trinity Church, Drumsallan, near Armagh this weekend by international demonstrator the Rev William McMillan.
The arrangements will include exotic flowers from many parts of the world.
The festival, from Saturday to Monday, is being held to raise cash for the church repair fund.
TANDRAGEE
Jewellery raid
GOLD jewellery worth £5,500 was stolen from a house at Gilford Road, Tandragee, after a door was forced open.
Police in Armagh are appealing for information about the weekend burglary.
ARMAGH
Priest on leave
ARMAGH'S longest serving priest, Fr Raymond Murray, is taking a year's leave to work in Germany and Rome.
Next month he travels to Nuremburg to do parish work before going on to work in the archives in the Papal capital.
ARMAGH
Vandals wreck drum
VANDALS who broke into an Orange hall outside Armagh over the weekend damaged a large drum, smashed three windows and ransacked the interior.
Police are investigating the incident at Allistragh on the Moy Road.
GLENARM
Club blaze probed
POLICE are investigating the cause of a blaze which extensively damaged a GAA Club at Feystown Road, Glenarm, early today.
KILLINCHY
Dean appointed
THE Rev Raymond Fox has been appointed Rural Dean of Killinchy.
He succeeds Canon Norman Woodrow who has retired.
ARMAGH
Photos on tour
‘THROUGH The Lens’, an Arts Council well known local photographers, opened today in Armagh County Museum on The Mall.
It continues until June 3.
DUBLIN
Paintings sale
MORE than 150 lots will come under the hammer at Christie's Irish paintings sale in Dublin this week.
A Sean Keating work, ‘Fishing Boats Returning to a Pier’ carries an estimate of IR£20,000.
Watercolours include four by Irish writer and painter Percy French.
Strangford wildlife trips
THE National Trust has arranged four boat trips to view wildlife at Strangford Lough.
The three-hour trips will be held on Saturday afternoons, June 5, 12 and 19 and Wednesday evening, June 23.
Bookings can be made on 039686–668.
Bombers condemned
PORTADOWN families holidaying as far away as Crete have written home condemning the IRA for destroying their town, it was revealed today.
Canon Reggie Twaddell of St Mark's Parish Church said he had received letters of condemnation from as far away as Crete, Cork and Kilkenny after damage to the stained glass windows.
Dungannon shuts gates
DUNGANNON'S security gates have been closed, leaving only one access to the town centre open to traffic.
The decision was taken in response to fears that the town could be the next target in the current IRA bomb blitz.
Banbridge
A NEW business training programme for young people is being hosted by Banbridge Enterprise Agency.
The Business Rehearsal programme, which will combine training with actual business practice, runs from next month until September.
Information on 08206–62260.
Education chiefs sue over computer system
ULSTER education chiefs are taking a giant hi-tech firm to court to seek more than £1m compensation over an alleged computers bungle.
But McDonnell Douglas, which beat more than 100 firms to win the contract for a payroll and personnel system, says it will oppose the ‘ill advised’ legal action.
And there is speculation that the controversy, which dates back to 1986, could be settled out of court within the next year.
The court claim has been initiated by the Belfast board on behalf of all five Education Area Boards across the province.
The Department of Education has already been severely criticised by both the Audit Office and the Parliamentary Accounts Committee over the overall system which is more than £4,5m over the original estimated budget.
But the legal action centres on allegations of delays and detailed specifications for the payroll and personnel system which is just now going live in the area boards — almost four years late.
Board official Stan McIvor said Coopers and Lybrand, which helped the Boards draw up an information technology strategy from 1985, were supporting the compensation claim.
‘There were totally unacceptably delays and quite recently the Boards lodged a full statement of claims with lawyers for McDonnell Douglas, They have asked for more details, and these have now been given.
The ball is now in their court,’ he said.
The assistant finance officer with the Western Board — the first to been hoped the payroll personnel system would be operational in all boards by 1989, so a three to four year delay has occurred.
‘One of the major problems was that McDonnell Douglas had two packages — one developed for payroll, one for personnel.
There was a lack in the degree of integration between these, and our view is that this was unreasonable.’
Ray Jones, of McDonnell Douglas, said: ‘There is a lot more to this than meets the eye and I would like to make extensive comment, but I cannot.
The matter is sub judice.’
A formal statement from the company added: ‘In the unlikely event of this ill-advised action coming to court, we have no doubt about its successful conclusion for us.’
Peace line rally hailed a success
DUBLIN peace campaigner Susan McHugh walked with more than 200 Falls and Shankill residents yesterday in an brave Belfast display of cross-community unity.
Marchers carried banners to Northumberland Street for a symbolic crossing of the wall that divides them.
Mrs McHugh said her work for reconciliation would continue: ‘It's good to see ordinary people come out today, especially in the wake of the bombings over the last few days.
‘It is times like these which give us all hope,’ she said.
Embraces and handshakes were shared by the marchers before they broke bread and sang hymns at a cross carried to the peace line.
Warrington teenager Valerie Morgan said the demonstration, organised by the Cornerstone Community, showed there was a real desire for peace in the province.
The event was also attended by SDLP councillor Alex Attwood and Sinn Fein chairman Tom Hartley.
Full marks for Norway!
IN Belfast Music Society's long and distinguished history of concert promotion, no season has been more successful than the one which ended on Saturday night with a recital by the Grieg Trio.
In the 150th anniversary year of Grieg's birth, a work by the Norwegian composer, played by native artists, was interesting.
Grieg was never particularly happy in the chamber music medium, but the Andante con moto in C minor, from a projected piano trio, brought rewards in a sensitive performance.
Haydn's piano trio in E flat major, Hob XV No. 30, is billed as his final composition in this field.
However, authority Robbins Landon's researches have brought the number up to 43.
The Norwegians certainly had the measure of this splendid music, each player contributing a full quota to a very relaxed and very rewarding performance, with only the damping effect of the Elmwood Hall's heavy window curtains a minus factor.
Tchaikovsky's epic piano trio, one of his greatest achievements, is a monumental work without parallel in chamber music repertoire featuring the piano.
The piano part is outstanding not only for its dominance, but also for its difficulty, although the writing for the violin and cello is equally demanding.
A trio of outstanding artists is needed here, and on this occasion honours were evenly divided between the outstanding pianist and the quality and eloquence of the string playing.
There were touches of real magic in the demanding Variations, and even the wide span of the lengthy first movement held interest throughout.
A fine end to the current BMS series, with a promised programme for next year that whets the appetite.
Police hunt sex attacker
A MAN is being sought following sexual assaults on two women in Limavady.
Both attacks happened early on Saturday morning near Roe Valley Hospital.
At 1.30am, a 46-year-old was assaulted as she walked alone Hospital Lane and at 3am he attacked a 22-year-old as she walked along a path at Greystone Road.
The man is said to be in his mid 20's, with a thin face and sharp features.
He has short, dark, spiked hair and speaks with a local accent.
Police at Limavady 66797 would like to hear from anyone who may have any information about the incidents or the identity of the man.
They are particularly anxious to hear from a man they think may have witnessed one attack.
Field fits bill
GEORGE Duffield has been partnering winners for more than 25 years.
The Yorkshire-born jockey broke his duck at Yarmouth in 1967 and has never once doubted his ability to compete with the best.
But despite the many successes, not even his greatest fan probably Newmarket-based trainer Sir Mark Prescott has been inclined to nominate ‘Honest George’ as a likely future champion.
Until last year, that is.
Duffield scored 108 times in 1992 and grabbed the headlines for his riding of User Friendly in the Oaks and St Leger.
The publicity may not exactly have gone to his head but it certainly set fire to his ambition.
Following a tremendous start to this term, the one-time journeyman has pronounced his determination to go for the title.
And Lord of the Field, trained by James Toller, should help Duffield take another small step towards his goal by winning tomorrow's Hermitage Conditions Stakes at Newbury.
Toller's six-year-old ran a cracker on his reappearance, throwing down a strong challenge in the last two furlongs of Newmarket's Earl of Sefton Stakes before finding Ezzoud and Cloud of Dust just too strong.
Useful performers such as Lucky Lindy and Shuailaan were behind Lord of the Field that day, giving the form a rock-solid look, so Duffield's mount is recommended as the evening's outstanding bet.
Face North seems the answer to the Castrol Handicap following his win over Sylvan Breeze at Lingfield a fortnight ago.
Reg Akehurst's charge was a firm favourite for that contest and gave his backers not the slightest hint of a scare when leading at the furlong pole to score by a length-and-a-half. way off the pace makes an accurate assessment of his progress very difficult for the handicapper, but this observer is convinced there is significant improvement still to come.
Merrydown
CIDER to natural foods group Merrydown has appointed Alan Rutherford (41), from Ranks Hovis McDougall's specialist foods subsidiary Sharwood as sales director.
Blackland Oil
OIL and gas company Blackland Oil said it was currently in discussions which may lead to a substantial acquisition.
New BT shares to go on sale
A HUGE advertising campaign gets under way today to promote the Government's £5 billion third BT sale.
The marketing of the share sale over the coming weeks is designed to attract the highest possible number of private investors.
Last week, Financial Secretary to the Treasury Stephen Dorrell announced more attractive terms for private investors prepared to invest a minimum £1,500 in the new shares through a personal equity plan.
PEPs, which have a £6,000 investment limit each financial year, are free of income and capital gains tax.
Individuals who apply for the shares through a PEP will be entitled to more shares than other applicants.
The offer will be priced next month when it will become clear what percentage of the Treasury's remaining 21.8pc stake in the telecommunications giant will be sold.
The sale itself is due in mid-July.
The UK public offer for BT2 in December 1991 raised £5.4 billion.
By the end of the third offer, the Government's three BT sales will have swollen Treasury coffers by more than £14 billion.
The share shop scheme which was set up to deal with BT2 has been extended from eight companies to about 150 businesses covering about 10,000 high street outlets.
Share investment services group, ShareLink, and a major player in the last sale, today unveiled a new dimension to the share shop concept.
The Birmingham-based company is understood to be the first in Europe with its ‘AutoDeal’ service which offers investors a telephone dealing system enabling them to place a purchase or sale order in the new BT shares from the start of trading 24 hours a day seven days a week.
ShareLink chief executive David Jones described the service as a ‘real breakthrough’.
Bid to ban condom ads on RTE
A DUBLIN city councillor went to the High Court today to try to prevent explicit advertisements advocating the use of condoms being shown on the Republic's national television service.
The Department of Health intends to screen the ads on RTE as part of a national campaign aimed at preventing the spread of AIDS.
Green Party TD, Richard Greene, said his legal team would seek an injunction to stop the ads being shown.
He added that they would argue in court that the promotion of the use of condoms as a way of preventing the spread of AIDS was a dangerous message and could have the opposite effect.
Mr Greene said: ‘It appears as if the campaign will make no distinction between the healthy population and those infected with HIV or AIDS.
The lethal message is that those who have AIDs can engage in sex as long as they use a condom.
This will spread the disease rather than control it.’
He said there was scientific evidence that the AIDS virus could pass through latex.
Mr Greene claimed that in Britain campaigns aimed at the population as a whole had been shown to have been a waste of money and there had been a change of policy to target the high-risk groups such as homosexuals and intravenous drug users.
He said he had a fundamental objection to a health campaign being used to promote the use of condoms, which was a multinational business.
‘To mix the prevention of disease with the promotion of the sale of condoms is totally repugnant,’ he added.
Wright defence ruled out
IRISH Davis Cup player Peter Wright will be unable to defend his Carlsberg Ulster tennis championship title at the Boat Club due to work commitments.
Wright, who helped Ireland whitewash Ghana in Dublin earlier this month, has landed a new coaching job in his native California and can't get time off at such short notice.
However, tournament referee, Robin McDonough, will be announcing a bumper entry, including a number of prominent cross-channel and overseas players, for the richest event on the local calendar which begins next Monday and continues until June 12.
Air-sea search for three missing men
AN RAF air-sea rescue helicopter today joined a massive search for three young men who disappeared in a small speedboat after setting out on a two-hour trip along the west Wales coast.
An RAF Nimrod aircraft, eight lifeboats and local fishing vessels were making a massive sweep of almost 1,000 square miles of Cardigan Bay as the search resumed this morning.
Coastguard shore parties were also checking the coastline from Aberystwyth to the Lleyn peninsula in North Wales in case the missing men had come ashore.
The three men — one aged 20 and two aged 22 — left the resort of Borth, north of Aberystwyth, for a pleasure trip in their 14-foot red and white speedboat at about 5.30 yesterday afternoon.
Anxious relatives raised the alarm when the men, who all live near Borth, were nearly five hours overdue.
One man's father told coastguards that normally the group only travelled a few miles along the coast on the speedboat trips.
Aberystwyth lifeboat secretary David Jenkins said one of the missing men was wearing a wetsuit but the other two were thought to be wearing shirts.
The boat carried no lifejackets or distress flares, he added.
‘We believe they only had a couple of gallons of fuel aboard.
Unfortunately it was not a well-equipped boat,’ he said.
The fuel would have been sufficient to keep the boat going for only a couple of hours, he added.
BELFAST
Belfast born VIP in hospital
ISRAEL'S former president, Belfast born Chaim Herzog, was taken to hospital yesterday, 10 days after leaving his largely ceremonial post, Israel Radio said.
Herzog,(74), was taken to the cardiac unit of Tel Aviv's Sheba Hospital with a respiratory infection.
WAKEFIELD
Well-heeled sale
THOUSANDS of people attended Britain's poshest car boot sale yesterday at Nostell Priory, near Wakefield, West Yorkshire vying with each other for cast-offs from the landed gentry.
Talks planned
Britain and China ended their third round of talks about political reform in Hong Kong yesterday with no sign of any agreement other than to keep talking.
PM stands firm over reshuffle
JOHN Major today held out against pressure to speed up his expected ministerial reshuffle amid Tory unease that the Government is facing a growing backlash from voters.
Claims that Mr Major might be ready to replace Chancellor Norman Lamont at the Treasury as early as next week were rejected by his close allies.
The Financial Times suggested that the Prime Minister might use the week-long Whitsun break to carry out his anticipated changes to middle and junior ministerial ranks, coupled with a limited Cabinet shake-up.
Although Downing Street is refusing to discuss the timing or scope of any reshuffle, other sources insisted that July was still the most likely date.
The talk fuelled anxiety among Tory backbenchers who returned to the Commons with more gloomy news about the damaging impact of the Government's spending review in their constituencies.
The latest speculation suggested that the Treasury is aiming to target homeowners, by reviewing mortgage tax relief, and slashing grants which enable council tenants to buy their properties.
One MP Gary Streeter said: ‘Clearly, it is hurting our fortunes in the constituencies.’
He said the piecemeal release of speculation about the targets of the review was ‘rocking people out there in the country, and I
Treasury Chief Secretary Michael Portillo sought to ease fears by insisting the Government would stick to its manifesto pledge to keep child benefit rising in line with inflation.
Labour said it was stepping up the pressure for an urgent Commons statement from the Chancellor to clarify which areas of spending were ruled in or out from the Treasury review.
Transport Secretary John MacGregor became the latest Cabinet ministers to try and calm nerves.
He insisted that no decisions about future spending had been taken, but he believed that it was right ‘that there should be a widespread review and it is right that there should be a big debate.’
Mr Major's troubles deepened as he consulted the Government's business managers about the threat of a new Conservative revolt over the British Rail sell-off plan at the start of a two-day Commons debate.
Up to a dozen Tory MPs, alarmed at the threat of the loss of concessionary fares and line closures in the wake of privatisation, were said to be ready to defy the Government.
With the Government's overall majority now down to just 18, the presence of Ulster Unionists and other minority parties became a key factor in whether the Bill could be wrecked.
Conservative MP David Nicholson, one of the sell-off critics, said today that a Government defeat was ‘possible’.
Transport Secretary John MacGregor, due to meet Conservative backbenchers, admitted that there were concerns among Tory MPs about ‘two or three issues’.
He said that the Government had already made ‘quite a number of changes’ to meet the concerns, but he hinted there could be more to come.
a better way to achieve my objective, of course I will.’
Jarrett joins line-up
TONY Jarrett, one of the best sprint hurdlers in world athletics, is on his way back to Belfast for the Pearl Assurance Les Jones Memorial Games at the Mary Peters Track on June 19.
Details of the summer bonanza meeting, on a par with most of the top venues in the United Kingdom, were outlined at a House of Sport Press Conference today where it was revealed that for the first time the meeting will be held on a Saturday night (6pm start).
The NIAAF recognise that with the meeting coming so early in the track and field season the next few weeks are going to be hectic, with so many of Britain's top athletes having just returned to these shores after sunshine training abroad…so the booking of Jarrett is a tremendous ‘start’.
The Londoner has starred at the Upper Malone arena for the past three meetings and his clashes with arch rival Colin Jackson have been something special.
Jarrett finished a gallant fourth, edged out of the bronze medal position by a whisker, in the 110 metres hurdles final at the Barcelona Olympics last summer.
Although he has usually had to play second fiddle to Jackson, he is a super athlete in his own right, having won silver medals at the European championships (4x100 metres) and Commonwealth Games in 1990.
Jarrett, who has a personal best of 13.04, has been summer training in Portugal and already this season he has been timed at 13.33…if the NIAAF can arrange to bring Jackson along to Belfast, it will be another clash to savour.
British athletics boss Andy Director and although time is not on his side he is confident, with an overall budget of £150,000 coming from Pearl Assurance, television and other avenues, that Belfast will stay in ‘Division One’.
Striders increase lead
ANNADALE Striders increased their lead in the Panasonic Area athletics league when they finished 27 points clear of Ballymena and Antrim in the second round at Antrim yesterday.
Annadale's decision to fly Gary Lough over from Loughborough University paid off when he grabbed a double in the 1,500 and 800 metres.
ough cruised past Sparta's Bobby Farren in the home straight to win the metric mile in 3.49.6 and despite being passed by Ballymena teenager Eddie King, he recovered to win the ‘800’ in 1.53.6.
Jim Campbell dominated the 5,000 metres winning in 14.15.3, but his Annadale team-mate Davy Wilson had a off-day and finished a long was behind in second place on 14.47.
Ballymena led Striders in the early stages when Ian Neely won the 400 metres hurdles impressively in 54.9 and team-mate Douglas Thom took the ‘B’ event, but Annadale hit back with maximum points through Ian Craig (100m ‘A’10.8), Johnny Anderson (100m ‘B’11.00) and Mike Atkinson (discus 40.46).
Lisburn's Paul McBurney looked good winning the 200 metres in 21.17 and he clocked the fastest time when his club took the 4x400 relay in 3.32.3.
Douglas motors back to the top
YOUNG Wayne Douglas jumped back to the top of the Irish Opel Lotus championship at Mondello yesterday with his second victory in three rounds.
Douglas, from Newtownhamilton, won the opening round of the series at the Naas track and then finished second behind reigning champion Mike Edgar in round two at Kirkistown.
But yesterday it was Douglas again at the front, this time winning ahead of David Wright with Edgar third in an all-Ulster 1-2-3 finish.
Douglas now leads the series by eight points from Edgar with Wright in third place.
The Ford of Ireland FF1600 race saw another Ulster victory with Alister Johnston winning in his Golden Pages Swift ahead of Alan Dallas and Chris Paul — another 1-2-3 for Ulster drivers.
Portadown's Peter Duke also took first place in the Star of Tomorrow FF1600 race.
In Portugal, Omagh haulage contractor Trevor Noble and his Glengormley co-driver Chris Patterson finished eighth overall and second in Group N in their Ford Sapphire Cosworth on the Rota do Sol Rally.
Victory went on the European championship event went to Fernandez Peres in an Escort Cosworth.
BRC at double
DOUBLE success came Belfast Rowing Club's way at Limerick Regatta when they won the mens and womens Senior Fours.
The girls had a comfortable three length win over University College, Galway.
The men had a good one length win over Galway who had earlier beaten BRC into second place in the Senior Eights.
Leading by half a length with just 250 metres to go, BRC were overhauled by Galway but the result is encouraging given the injuries the squad have coped with.
Johnny Curran, competing in the Intermediate Sculls — his first competitive outing with chopper blades finished second in his heat, first in the semis and had the narrowest one-third length win over Crean of Cork Boat Club in the final.
Carol Ross and Brenda McCleary suffered their second defeat at the hands of the talented junior Offaly pair recent winners at Ghent Regatta.
Computers leading way through advice maze
ULSTER'S hard-pressed Citizens Advice Bureaux service went hi-tech today.
It launched two computer programmes aimed at giving people on-the-spot help through the maze of social security benefits and advice on managing debts.
The Bureaux, with 28 offices in the province, deals with almost 3,000 inquiries a week — about 1,000 of them on benefit entitlement and some 500 on debt.
‘There is little doubt that financial management is an aspect of life which gives many people sleepless nights,’ Education Minister Jeremy Hanley said at the launch in the CAB's Belfast headquarters.
‘Therefore, it is essential that sound guidance is available to those who need it.’
The Bureaux, which has more than 300 staff, mostly volunteers, is to computerise all its local offices at a cost of around £200,000.
GYMNASTICS
Sonya's title
SONYA Cairns put together a series of complicated moves today to clinch the Northern Ireland senior gymnastics championship at the Salto Gym.
Placed first on the beam, vault and bar, and second on the floor she accumulated a score of 34.4 points under the new points code.
Fiona Burgess was placed second with Jenny Dwyer improving on past form to gain third position.
Final positions — 1, S Cairns, 34.4 points; 2, F Burgess, 32.35 points; 3, J Dwyer 31.2 points; 4, N Craig 29.5 points; 5, C White 28.9 points; 6, L Dwyer 28.5 points.
Portadown faces a £15m bill for repairs
THE overall repair bill for bomb-blitzed Portadown could reach an astonishing £15m.
The early estimate — more than twice that for the Europa bomb blast — was predicted today as dozens of traders prepared hefty damage claims.
Scores of businesses were damaged in the 1,000lb blast and at least 12 buildings, some more than 100 years old, may have to be demolished.
But the town's shaken spirit is not about to be broken.
Some businesses vowed they would be back today and a number of ‘business as usual’ signs had already gone up around shop windows.
More than 50 business men and women showed their incredible resolve when they turned up for an emergency meeting in Craigavon yesterday.
They joined politicians including local MP David Trimble, Compensation Agency chief executive, John Robinson and an array of councillors and solicitors in a 90-minute talk.
The Mayor of Craigavon, Fred Crowe, said: ‘I think the damage caused in Portadown could be between £12m and £15m.’
He added defiantly: ‘This bomb will not deter us from putting Portadown back on the North.’
Three miles away work was already well under way to get the town back on its feet.
High Street which bore the full brunt is barely recognisable.
Businesses, including several clothes shops, a pub, and an estate agent, lay in tatters.
The Halifax Building Society, where the bombers had placed their device, is now a heap of rubble.
Many more businesses in nearby Edward Street could also face demolition while in Woodhouse Street enormous gaping holes were punched out of walls.
St Mark's Church, damaged in a bomb attack ten years ago, had all of its stained-glass windows either buckled or broken.
The town clock was also wrecked.
Across the streets whole shop fronts lay in a mangled mess.
Surveying the damage at his Cordner shoe shop, Harold Lindsay said: ‘It's bad but we could have been all killed.
‘We were down in the cellar when a policeman ran and told us to get out.
‘We then ran as fast as we could and only minutes later the bomb went off.’
Wallace drinks in Lions call-up
RICHARD Wallace, the British Lions' replacement wing for the injured Ian Hunter, learned about his emergency call-up in a Moscow bar called Rosie O'Grady's — a great place for an Irishman to discover that his summer plans were cancelled.
After learning that his next six weeks will be spent in New Zealand rather than at home in Limerick, Wallace (25) is taking a couple of days to sort out his personal and business life before flying to join the Lions in Wellington at the end of this week.
This means that instead of a Lions' debut being guaranteed for the 10-times-capped Garryowen player against Canterbury in Christchurch on Wednesday week, he might miss the match.
That may not bother him because it was in Christchurch that he had his Ireland tour brought to a premature end last year by a punch from Canterbury's Andy Earl which broke his jaw.
Earl was suspended for two matches for his assault.
‘To say I am delighted is an understatement,’ said Wallace, who was tracked down on a business trip to Moscow by a Garryowen club colleague.
‘But nobody appreciates more than me how Ian feels because I endured the same thing at exactly this time last year.
My tour lasted a match and a bit and I sympathise with Ian's frustration and disappointment,’ added Wallace, who is also an interamateur pilot.
Hunter dislocated his shoulder in the Lions' tour-opening win against North Auckland.
The Lions are turning round their entire team for Wednesday's game against first division North Harbour in Auckland.
This means that tour captain Gavin Hastings will be half a game ahead of his colleagues, as he came on to replace Hunter against North Auckland in Whangarei.
A way ahead?
AS Sir Patrick Mayhew and Irish Foreign Minister Dick Spring met in Dublin today to discuss the way ahead, following the local election results, there was no clear path for them to follow.
The divide between the unionist and nationalist parties has widened — the combined SDLP-Sinn Fein vote is up by 2pc to 34.4pc — and, worst of all, the IRA is making a mockery of security policy.
Yet, faced with the necessity for resolute leadership, at this time of trial, Sir Patrick could only declare his satisfaction with the present policy and say he did not anticipate many changes.
It was an inadequate response, bereft of any practical measures on the ground, to one of the worst bombing onslaughts in recent times.
Not surprisingly, there is a feeling that Northern Ireland has slipped down the Government's agenda, in view of all its other financial worries.
If so, there is a reminder in the size of the compensation bill — £22m in four days — of the need to introduce some stability into the situation.
The present uncertainty, about Government policy, must be ended.
The value of the political talks so far has been to expose three basic truths.
These are that northern nationalists, through the SDLP, seek some form of joint sovereignty; that unionists want a lesser, rather than a greater, role for Dublin and that the Irish Government has little to contribute to a solution, beyond the offer of a referendum on Articles 2 and 3, when all else is agreed.
The unionist focus, therefore, has been on getting rid of the Anglo-Irish Agreement and replacing it with something much less intrusive.
That is what first tempted the UUP into the talks, but clearly they are now back-pedalling fast, having seen the nationalist alternatives, and are more inclined towards internal or integrationist solutions, without the Anglo-Irish Agreement.
The DUP is even more intransigent, but it no longer dominates the agenda.
upping the ante, with puzzling proposals for devolved government through a partly-elected power-sharing commission, including a representative of Dublin.
This would be the essential Irish dimension, to satisfy their nationalist aspiration — and, perhaps, they hope, Sinn Fein 's.
Both propositions, based on the minimum and the maximum Irish dimension, are equally unrealistic, because they could never win widespread public support.
But if unionists could be persuaded to accept the present Anglo-Irish Agreement, with increased local democracy, and if the SDLP would settle for a unionist input into cross-border institutions covering common interests like agriculture, tourism and roads, would this not be progress?
Sir Patrick has promised to give new talks ‘direction and focus’, by providing some new parameters, which do not include joint authority or exclusively internal arrangements.
Taking the election results as his guide, he should decide on a step-by-step approach, building on the fragile trust that does exist rather than risk another failure.
Teeing off
AS so often in the past, a major sporting event is set to give Northern Ireland a morale boost at just the right time.
The Amateur Open has arrived at Royal Portrush, and the golfing spectacle will draw the crowds from today until the final on Saturday.
Among the field of 300 are top amateurs from Britain, the Continent, New Zealand and the United States, and the competition for the trophy will be intense.
But with a strong showing of 70 Irish players, much hope is resting on Bangor's Garth McGimpsey, who won the event in 1985.
Remarkably, although the Amateur Championship first took place in 1885, this is only the third occasion on which it has been staged in Ireland.
But seldom will the visitors have been more welcome than they are today.
After a bleak weekend, the event provides an opportunity for Northern Ireland to project a better image than that conveyed by the news footage of devastated town centres.
For all our troubles there is a brighter side to Ulster and the fairways of Portrush should provide another example of that, as was the case last weekend with the North-before 7000 fans of Jon Bon Jovi.
The singing star, like so many others before him, was impressed by his reception and says he wants to return.
Indeed, he should.
Those who come with an open mind and see the place for themselves invariably return home as ambassadors for our province.
Berry ‘Flyer’ winner of the season it will be all systems go to reach 100.
The Cockerham trainer is well known for spreading his net far and wide in his search for success and tomorrow The Fernhill Flyer should keep the ball rolling in the Puma Claiming Stakes at Southwell.
This two-year-old is already well acquainted with the Midlands track, having scored a comfortable three-and-a-half lengths success there on her latest outing.
Bursting from the stalls, The Fernhill Flyer was soon clear, and should provide another excuse to celebrate for her first-time owners, a syndicate of drinking companions from the Fernhill public house at Preesall, near Blackpool.
Lady Roxanne should also be ready to do the business after a break of almost two months in the Subaru Impreza Handicap.
Lord Huntingdon's charge was last seen on Lingfield's all-weather surface finishing third, beaten a neck and a head by Scots Law and Sarum.
Prior to this, she recorded a promising third to all-weather specialist Hershebar, and looks to have an excellent chance at the weights tomorrow.
Luca Cumani appears to have found the ideal opening for Tej Singh in the Smeeth Median Auction Maiden Stakes at Folkestone.
Odds-on favourite last time at Haydock, he was narrowly beaten into third place, but tomorrow should prove third time lucky.
BOXING
Bowe protest
FRANK Maloney, manager of Britain's WBC heavyweight champion Lennox Lewis, claims Riddick Bowe ‘proved nothing’ with his second round knockout of Jesse Ferguson.
Bowe faced another storm of protest about the quality of his opponent after retaining his WBC world heavyweight crown.
And, after watching Bowe's quickfire victory in Washington, Maloney described it as ‘the biggest scandal since Watergate.
‘Anybody can fight a sparring partner.
It didn't prove anything,’ he said.
Ferguson lasted a little longer 17 seconds into the second round than Michael Dokes did in Bowe's first title defence last February.
Drugs seized as buses head for rave in Eire
RAVE parties in the Republic are fuelling a massive cross-border drugs trade, it was claimed today.
Customs sources say that raves held just over the border are attracting hundreds of teenagers from all over Ulster — and drug dealers.
At the weekend, Customs Flexible Anti-Smuggling Teams (FASTs) swooped on buses and cars on their way to a rave at Castlebellingham, Co Louth.
They made more than 20 arrests and seized 30 separate quantities of Ecstasy, LSD, cannabis and amphetamines.
One bus is believed to have been from west Belfast.
Later four men, believed to be from the Ballymena area, were arrested returning from the same event.
A search of their car netted Ecstasy and LSD tablets along with £2,000, and more drugs were uncovered in follow-up searches of two of their homes.
Considerable quantities of Ecstasy and LSD have been seized this year from buses and cars along the Derry-Donegal border.
Last night, a 22-year-old man was arrested on Culmore Road, Londonderry, when drugs were uncovered in his car.
An RUC spokesman in Londonderry said: ‘We have had several successes in recent months at permanent vehicle-checkpoints at the border.’
Since the removal of fiscal barriers, Customs officers have changed the emphasis of their operations.
A source said: ‘They now acting on intelligence, and work on a day-to-day basis with the RUC drug squad.’
Tenby ‘drifts'
CONFIDENCE in Derby favourite Tenby continued to wane over the weekend in response to his poor workout.
Ladbrokes drastically revised their price on the Henry Cecil-trained colt, pushing him out to 8–13 (from 2–5) and Coral now quote 4–7.
Tenby is reported to have finished last of four to Commander In Chief in a Newmarket gallop which also featured Allegan and Placerville.
The home trial has prompted greater support for Commander In Chief.
Trainer Barry Hills was the proudest man at The Curragh after his son Michael triumphed on Nicer in the Irish 1,000 Guineas.
‘This is one of the greatest thrills of my career,’ said Hills.
‘A Classic winner is super at any time, but having Michael in the saddle makes it a really special day.’
Cruising into the lead over a furlong out, Nicer soon sprinted clear to beat Goodnight Kiss by two lengths, with Lester Piggott's mount Danse Royale a short head away in third.
Nicer is expected to take her chance in the Coronation Stakes at Royal Ascot next month, while Goodnight Kiss is earmarked for the Jersey Stakes.
Lyric Fantasy exploded back onto the sprint scene with an all-the-way victory in the Hambro Countrywide Charlotte Fillies Stakes at Newmarket.
juvenile filly had failed to stay when finishing sixth in the 1,000 Guineas.
‘It worries me to death bringing her to the races at long odds-on, but she is a great filly and just flies out of the stalls,’ said trainer Richard Hannon.
Lyric Fantasy will now stick to sprinting with Royal Ascot's King's Stand Stakes her next target.
Intrepidity did her Oaks prospects a power of good with a smooth success in the Prix Saint Alary at Longchamp.
But it is still undecided whether the Andre Fabre-trained filly will join her stablemate Wemyss Bight in the Epsom line-up on Saturday week.
She is also in the Prix du Jockey-Club (French Derby) and the Prix de Diane (French Oaks).
Intrepidity maintained her unbeaten record in clear-cut fashion, striking the front a furlong out under Thierry Jarnet and comfortably holding Dancienne by a length.
GOLF
Champion Sludds
MARTIN Sludds is the 1993 Smurfit Irish PGA champion.
Despite carding his worst round of the championship, a two over par 74, he held his nerve to see off the challenge of defending champion Eamonn Darcy over the testing K Club course.
Playing with Darcy, the 33-year-old Dubliner dropped a shot early on to see his lead reduced by two shots.
The turning point was the par 4 eight hole where Darcy found water from the tee and had to eventually settle for a double bogey six.
Sludds held on to take the title he last won in 1984 by three shots, and a cheque for £10,000.
Best rounds of the day were two 71s, the only rounds under par, by veteran Liam Higgins and Peter Hanna.
Armagh 4–8 Fermanagh 1–16
A HOLLYWOOD epic was staged in Armagh yesterday — and there wasn't a silver screen in sight.
It may have been one of the shortest epics on record — just seven minutes — but you won't hear any Armagh supporters claiming they were short-changed!
The action that really matters was condensed into the final segment of this rollercoaster Ulster senior football championship preliminary round replay at the Athletic Grounds.
And cast in the main role was unsung, bit part player Denis Hollywood.
Oh yes, he had performed well in the Sigerson Cup competition and his Higher Education track record is second to none.
But in county terms he was a nobody up until about 4.30 yesterday.
Then Armagh manager Jim McCorry whipped the 22-year-old student out from the wings, placed him on centre stage — and watched as he took the house down.
When the sturdy Hollywood, who soldiers in the trenches with the modest St. Michael's club in Newtownhamilton, was plucked from the ‘extras’ the last rites were being administered to Armagh's championship hopes.
They then trailed buoyant Fermanagh by 0–13 to 1–4 and were in danger of not only losing the match but the remnants of their pride and prestige as well.
The self-inflicted loss of Dominic Clarke following an off the ball incident in the second minute had left Armagh dicing with death and the killer blows subsequently rained in mainly from the accurate boot of Raymond Gallagher — remember what I said about him at Minor level last week?— and the deadly finishing of Mark Gallagher and Malachy O'Rourke.
But for Gerard Houlahan's supreme skill in driving home Armagh's first goal in the 25th minute the orchard county would surely have been dead and gone by the interval instead of trailing by just one point at 0–7 to 1–3.
Their fate, it seemed, had merely been delayed replaced the out of touch Ollie Reel — Armagh haemorrhaged even further by slumping to 1–15 to 1–6.
And as scores of saffron-clad fans in the 6,000-strong crowd wended their way towards the exits, it seemed as if there was not even going to be a respectable attendance at the funeral!
But where there is life, there is hope.
And no-one looked more livelier than Denis Hollywood in the last seven minutes of a contest that will be talked about for a long time to come.
He had watched, as we all did, a matter of minutes earlier as Jarlath Burns, Armagh's outstanding player, was stretchered from the playing arena with a suspected broken leg following an accidental collision.
And he had observed, too, from close-up as Neil Smyth drove his penalty against McAdam's legs and Houlahan rifle a shot ball past an upright when he would normally ensure a vigorous shaking of the rigging.
These were all blows for the home side yet, with skipper John Rafferty providing the kind of leadership that is reserved for ‘Boys Own’ stories, Armagh suddenly hauled themselves out of the grave.
Ray ‘draws’ on spirit
Monaghan 2–9 Cavan 0–15
RAY McCarron, Monaghan's rotund scoring machine was up to his old tricks at Castleblayney when he fired in two goals to give his side an Ulster championship lifeline.
The first from play and the second from a penalty and both combined to provide Monaghan with the incentive they needed after Cavan had threatened to overrun them.
Noone epitomised this threat more than Ronan Carolan who helped himself to ten of Cavan's points — a generous haul by any standards.
But Monaghan proved that they still have a sizeable heart.
Gene McGurk, Frank McEneaney, Bernie Murray, Loughman all played with typical ferocity as they strove to orchestrate a smash and grab act following Cavan's early dominance.
Monaghan came close to snatching victory but this would have been rough justice on Cavan who showed flair and fluency in the first half before fading.
They will need to sustain their effort at a much greater level in the replay, though — and you can be sure that Monaghan might have a couple more tricks up their sleeve.
Armagh 1–16 Mayo 1–10
A brilliantly-taken goal by Paddy Lavery helped to cement Armagh's superiority in the closing stages of this All Ireland ‘B’ Hurling championship tie yesterday.
Up until Lavery's strike — he pulled first time from an acute angle — Armagh had huffed and puffed against a Mayo side that relied too heavily on a few individuals.
They had taken an early lead with four points from Damien Short but when Oliver Lennon was sent off for a high challenge they were plunged into temporary disarray.
Almost immediately, Martin Trench fired home Mayo's goal and three points from Joe Henry helped to consolidate the westerners' effort.
Armagh scorers — D. Short (0–4), P. Cunningham, S. Hughes (0–3 each), P. Lavery (1–0), J. McCormick (0–2), G. McCann, P. Lappin, E. McKee, O. Lennon (0–1 each).
Mayo scorers — J. Henry (0–5), M. Trench (1–1), K. Heffernan, C. Collins, D. Geally, G. Greally (0–1 each).
Referee — J. J. Larkin (Galway).
A chance to pile in
CARPET mogul Sir Phil Harris is giving the public the chance to buy around 25pc of the shares on offer in the flotation of his Carpetright company.
The number of shares and offer price will be set on June 8 to raise £10m, according to the pathfinder prospectus issued today.
Although some 35pc of Carpetright is nominally for public offer, up to 10pc has been earmarked for directors and employees.
The rest will be placed with financial institutions.
The prospectus was issued to coincide with results for the year to May 1 which showed pre-tax profits up 178pc at £7.8m from £2.8m on turnover of £78.6m.
Belfast limbering up for a fitness challenge hat-trick
BELFAST is limbering up for the big international fitness challenge.
More than 100,000 people who live and work in the city are being called to action tomorrow in a bid to score a hat-trick of victories in the friendly fitness competition.
In previous years, the city has seen off Calgary in Canada and Frankfurt in Germany.
This year's challenge is against another German city, Rostock.
Last year's competition, against Frankfurt, was the biggest participation event held in the province, with 107,000 people joining in the fun.
Now organiser Belfast City Council is setting a target of 110,000 participants for the challenge against Rostock.
People can take part by doing any physical activity that makes the heart beat faster and lasts for 15 minutes.
Activities can include walking, dancing, swimming, jogging or skipping.
People can join in an organised event or can ‘do their bit’ at home or in a leisure centre.
Schools, colleges, sports clubs and families which will be exercising tomorrow as part of their normal fitness routine can also register.
Anyone who takes part must register as soon as he or she has completed 15 minutes' exercise, between midnight tonight and 10.30pm tomorrow.
To register, groups and individuals must phone Belfast 683000.
The aim of the Challenge Day is to encourage people of all ages to experience the fun of exercise and to incorporate a daily exercise routine into their lifestyle.
The penalty, if Belfast loses, is to fly the Rostock flag over the city comes up trumps, Rostock will have to fly the Belfast flag over its city hall.
Cash boost for Belleek Pottery
THE first stage in a major investment programme at Belleek Pottery is being opened today by IDB chief executive Desmond McVeigh.
The £3.2m investment in the pottery includes the provision of new kilns and is expected to result in a trebling of the workforce over the next four years.
Mr McVeigh said the investment programme would enable the company to benefit from economic recovery in its most important markets.
He said the company had ‘a clearly-defined strategic approach to its business, a professionalism and forward thinking which has resulted in a strengthening of its position in fiercely-competitive markets.
He also praised Belleek Pottery for its involvement in industrial tourism.
‘The visitors’ centre which the company has developed is now one of the most impressive and popular attractions of its kind in Northern Ireland,’he said.
Airport gears up for trade sale next year
PLANS for the multi-million pound sale of Belfast International Airport were announced today by the Government.
The Aldergrove operation — with a turnover last year of £21m — is to be sold off by the end of next year in a major privatisation project.
Announcing details of new legislation which will also affect how Ulster airports are run, Economy Minister, Robert Atkins, described the decision for the trade sale as a ‘positive opportunity for Northern Ireland’.
Speaking at the province's main airport, the Minister added: ‘It will free the management of the airport under new owners to maximise the scope of the enterprise.
‘It will also free taxpayers’ money from being unnecessarily tied up in an asset which has the prospect of becoming more profitable under privatisation’.
The Minister said the trade sale of Northern Ireland Airports Limited — which owns Belfast International — was decided on for ‘technical reasons’.
The Draft Airports (Northern Ireland) Order 1993 also includes measures to update legislation controlling airports in the province and bring them broadly into line.
The privately-owned Belfast City Airport — Ulster's second major air-base — will also be affected by changes including the introduction of new regulations on charges to ensure fair competition.
Business Telegraph columnist John Simpson said today the changes mean Ulster's two airports are free to compete with airlines to attract new routes.
‘The new legislation will leave open the potential for further competition,’ he said.
‘Provision is, however, made for the possibility that at any time the two airports may have the same owner.
If that happened, the CAA would have the authority to set the maximum level of airport charges for each.’
BT set to track down investors
A NEW TV detective will use breaks between programmes to embark on his first case — to track down investors in the latest sale of BT shares to the public.
Comedian Mel Smith took on the daunting role of Inspector Morose — a parody of John Thaw's more famous Inspector Morse — in an advertising campaign launched today.
The Government still holds almost 22pc of the telecommunications giant and is selling ‘substantially its entire holding’ worth about £5 billion in the third sale of shares, known as BT3.
Leaflets with details of the offer were being sent to 18 million households in the UK today and a Share Information Office was set up to handle inquiries from the public on 081 200 3000.
The offer will be priced next month when it becomes clear what percentage of the Treasury's stake will be sold.
The sale itself is due in mid-July.
At least half of the shares in BT3 will be offered to the public as part of the Government's continuing campaign to develop the share-owning habit.
In fact, it is the last major privatisation share issue of its kind.
The only other assets left — such as British Rail and British Coal — will be sold to commercial buyers.
The UK public offer for BT2 in December 1991 raised £5.4 billion.
By the end of the third offer, the Government's three BT sales will have swollen Treasury coffers by more than £14 billion.
As well as the Share Information Office, some 150 organisations, including banks and building societies, are turning their combined 10,000 outlets into ‘share shops’ for the sale.
Pse substitute last par of first leader for country
Back to bombs
YEARS ago, a Sinn Fein spokesman was frank enough to admit that republican policy was to ‘take power in Ireland’, with a ballot box in one hand and an Armalite in the other.
The party's tune has changed, but the means and the objective are still the same, as four devastating bombs have underlined since Wednesday.
Now that Sinn Fein 's votes are safely stored away, the IRA feel free to wreak havoc against targets which they regard as unionist and Protestant.
If the vote had gone against them, the bombs would have been a gesture of defiance; as it is, they are sheer triumphalism.
Anger and, sadly, revenge are the two emotions which naturally dominate Northern Ireland today, as the IRA must have calculated.
The sight of blasted buildings in Belfast, Portadown and now Magherafelt sear the soul, because of what they represent in lost hopes and wounded civic pride.
Having won their votes from the gullible, as well as the dedicated, the republicans now show their utter contempt for democracy.
Yet the way to respond to provocation must be cool and calculated, avoiding knee-jerk reaction and pressing the Government harder than ever for action, rather than words.
If the security forces are as well informed as they claim about paramilitary leadership, north and south of the border, they must carry their offensive to them, wherever they are.
Retaliation by loyalist gunmen must be avoided at all costs.
After nearly a quarter of a century of violence, the plain people of Northern Ireland are surprised by nothing and shocked by very little.
They are fearful today, however, that the republican machine that won more votes than any other party in Belfast is on a high, more hopeful than ever of blasting the Government into submission, in the longer term.
Once again, Mr John Hume must justify continuing to devise an ‘overall strategy’ with Mr Gerry Adams, who still has the gall to claim that ‘peace’is a central part of his party's platform.
The only strategy Sinn Fein is interested in is whatever will bring about British withdrawal.
Sir Patrick Mayhew and Mr Dick Spring must give him his answer tomorrow, in terms that everyone can understand.
Chocks away
HARD on the heels of Finn McCool comes the announcement today of the sell-off of Northern Ireland Airports.
The Government is committed to the philosophy of privatisation, and the policy grinds relentlessly on.
While NIE is a public flotation, the smaller concern of Northern Ireland Airports is to be a trade sale, as was the case with Shorts.
One option for Aldergrove would be a management-employee buy-out, and despite troubled times in the aviation industry, the Government is confident of a high level of interest.
Economy Minister Robert Atkins says the prospect is that Belfast International will be ‘even more profitable’ than at present once the airport is in private hands.
There is no doubt that NIA should be an attractive prospect, given the amount of public money which has been ploughed into the expansion of Aldergrove over the past 30 years.
As with any privatisation, there will be concern that the result will be higher charges and fewer jobs.
Already NIA has decided to shed 100 of its 400-strong workforce, and some car park charges have gone up already.
Mr Atkins promises that landing charges will be regulated as in Britain, and this — plus competition from the City Airport — should prevent the new owners imposing exorbitant increases on the already hard-pressed airlines.
With Northern Ireland so reliant on its air links, Belfast International will always have a key role to play in the province's transport and tourism infrastructure.
Less emphasis on profitability and more focus on the long-term interests of the travelling public at this time of change would be welcome.
Mango and grape millefeuille
250g (8oz) ready made puff pastry 1 medium sized mango 100g (4oz) black seedless grapes, halved 25g (1oz) butter 15ml (1 tbsp) Billingtons Golden Granulated Sugar small carton of creme fraiche to serve.
Roll out pastry into two 20.5cm (8in) rounds.
Cut into heart shapes using a sharp knife and place onto a non stick baking sheet and prick well.
Bake at 230C (450F) mark 8 for 8–10 mins.
Meanwhile, quarter, stone and roughly slice mango, halve and de-seed grapes.
Brush melted butter over pastry and scatter over the fruit.
Sprinkle with Golden Granulated Sugar and drizzle with remaining butter.
Flash under a hot grill for 1 min.
Serve immediately with creme fraiche or Greek yogurt.
We'll never let IRA win, warns Mayhew
THE Secretary of State, Sir Patrick Mayhew, today issued a defiant message to the IRA: ‘The people of Northern Ireland and the British Government will never let you succeed.’
Speaking at the launch of a £12m Government-backed research and development project at Du Pont in Londonderry, Sir Patrick said the future of Northern Ireland would be shaped by ‘the creativity of the people’ and not by ‘the evil sophistication’of the IRA's intensified bombing campaign.
He also accused the IRA of living in the past.
Referring to the recent bomb blasts in Belfast, Portadown and Magherafelt, Sir Patrick told reporters that he believed the IRA had stepped up its campaign of destruction because it would never win by the ballot-box and he revealed that he would be talking to senior RUC officers later today to discuss the present security situation.
Following his visit to Du Pont, Sir Patrick was due to go on to Magherafelt, much of which was destroyed by a bomb explosion yesterday.
The Du Pont investment, backed by the Government's Industrial Research and Technology Unit, will result in the underpinning of 100 jobs and the creation of a further 20.
Sir Patrick said: ‘The fact that a research project of this scale has been undertaken by Du Pont outside the USA is significant and reinforces Northern Ireland's standing in the global arena ‘It's good news for Derry and the whole of Northern Ireland that Du Pont is to research the development of a new generation of environmentally-friendly hypelon at its Maydown.
The new pilot plant is at the design stage and the success of the plant would result in the conversion of the existing hypelon-manufacturing process.
‘The project will be of international significance and will demonstrate once again Northern Ireland's reputation for technical excellence,’ Sir Patrick said.
ULSTER
School bullying ‘on the rise’
ULSTER schools are threatened by a growing bullying problem, a teachers' leader said today.
Rosemary Rainey, Press officer for the Association of Teachers and Lecturers, said: ‘There is growing evidence of a gang mentality among the young.
‘What is particularly alarming is that bullying is on the increase among young primary school children, many of whom threaten or thump their peer group en route to and from school,’
MAGHERALLY
Orange award
THE Orange Order, the Royal Black Institution and the Apprentice Boys of Derry last night presented gifts to Canon Dr Michael Dewar to mark his 50 years as an Orangeman, at a meeting of Mount Ida LOL 26A in Magherally Parish Church Hall, outside Banbridge.
Dr Dewar is a former curate-assistant of Shankill Parish, Lurgan, and was a rector in Scarva, Magherally and Helen's Bay.
He now lives with his wife in Cheltenham.
NEWCASTLE
Business plea
A DOZEN visiting American businessmen have been urged to help Northern Ireland overcome its ‘tremendous image problem’.
The plea to spread a message that the bombers will not succeed was made by the chairman of the Down Economic Development Agency, Councillor Malachi Curran at a dinner in Newcastle last night.
The function was hosted by the agency for the US businessmen, who fly home today after a five day golfing trip organised by the Northern Ireland Partnership.
Masons celebrate
A SERVICE of praise and thanksgiving marking 250 years of Freemasonry in Lurgan was held in Holy Trinity Parish Church, Waringstown yesterday.
It also marked the continuous existence of St John's Masonic Lodge No 134, and was conducted by the Rector, Canon John The special preacher was Canon Stanley Coulson, Provincial Grand Chaplain of Londonderry and Donegal Provincial Grand Lodge.
The lessons were read by the Grand Master of the Grand Lodge of Ireland, Mr Darwin Templeton and Charles McCollum, Provincial Grand Master, Armagh.
DOWNPATRICK
Power pledge
THE SDLP on Down Council has confirmed its intention to continue power-sharing between the two traditions, after extending its majority to three in last week's elections.
The council has rotated the top two positions between the SDLP and Ulster Unionist since 1973.
LISBURN
New mission
MR Graeme Stewart, who is a member of Sloan Street Presbyterian Church, Lisburn, is to be licensed for the ministry at a service there on June 6.
Mr Stewart, who is student assistant in First Comber Church, was brought up in Fannet congregation, Co Donegal and was an Irish mission worker for three years.
MAGHERALIN
Vintage rally
A VINTAGE vehicle run in aid of the Northern Ireland Hospice will leave Magheralin Parish Church at 7.30pm on Friday, led by the Dean of Dromore, Rev Roland Hutchinson on his classic motorcycle.
The drive has been organised by the parish and Banbridge Old Vehicle Club.
COOKSTOWN
NSPPC cash
COOKSTOWN branch of the NSPCC raised £1760 last year.
Mrs Elizabeth Devlin has been elected chairman and Mrs Denise Drumm, vice-chairman.
Flower battle
THE Dromore in Bloom Committee is to hold a flower arranging competition in the Market Square on June 1 as part of the town's civic week.
New look
NEW uniforms for Ballinacross Accordion Band were dedicated at a service in Knockloughrim Maghera yesterday.
Stuntman ‘may have pulled wrong ripcord’ inquest is told
EXPERIENCED stuntman Michael ‘Tip’ Tipping, who plunged to his death during a reconstruction of a parachuting accident, may have pulled a dummy ripcord by mistake, an inquest was told today.
Mr Tipping, from Cobham, Surrey, died in February during a reconstruction for BBC Television's 999 series of a real-life incident in which a skydiver's parachute became entangled in a plane's wheels.
Anthony Butler, technical officer for the British Parachute Association, said that on leaving the Cessna plane at 10,000ft, Mr Tipping was required to deploy a throw-away pilot chute packed so it would not open, to give the impression of trailing behind.
But in fact it did become partially filled with air and slowed his rate of descent so he lost touch with the cameraman who was free-falling and was quickly 1,000ft below him.
After Mr Tipping discarded the throw-away chute, he went into free-fall and was able to link up with the cameraman at 5,000ft.
Hurtled The plan was for his main chute to open at 3,000ft but it did not open and he hurtled to conclusion of the association's investigation was that he had failed to locate the ripcord handle.
Mr Butler explained that for the purposes of the filming there was a dummy ripcord handle for Mr Tipping's reserve chute as well as the real one.
He concluded that after the main chute had failed to open, Mr Tipping (34) either could not locate the handle for the reserve chute or possibly pulled the dummy by mistake as he hurtled towards the ground.
Mr Butler told the hearing at Berwick-upon-Tweed that after two rehearsals the main jump went ahead over Brunton Airfield, Northumberland.
Former Royal Marine Mr Tipping, whose film and TV credits include Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade, Casualty, Bergerac, Inspector Morse and Tumbledown, was attempting to reconstruct a lucky escape by parachutist Terry Wakenshaw.
Mr Wakenshaw's parachute became tangled in the wheels of a plane and he was dragged along its fuselage.
Despite breaking his right arm and gashing his head and chest, he freed himself, plunging 500ft before his reserve chute opened.
Among the recommendations being made by the British Parachute Association arising from his investigation of Mr Tipping's death, was that parachutists should consider fitting automatic activation devices.
Dr Andrew Hastings, a pathologist, said Mr Tipping died from multiple injuries consistent with falling from a great height.
Trade gap narrows to £831m
BRITAIN'S trade gap with non-EC nations has narrowed for the second month in a row, it was revealed today.
The April deficit of £831m — down from a revised £929m in March — was the lowest for six months, the Government said.
The gap was less than the £1 billion deficit which most experts had feared.
The reduction was regarded by Ministers as modest grounds for hope that the high level of imports is at last beginning to ease and the three-month picture shows a 13.4pc fall in the deficit.
But officials cautioned against reading too much into the statistics.
The data does not include Britain's trade with EC countries which accounts for half of total business.
And, excluding oil and other erratic items, the underlying deficit with non-EC countries went up to £711m in April.
Imports were valued at £5,516m last month, down by over £100m on the March figure.
The value of exports also dropped slightly to £4,685m, compared with a record £4,702m in the previous month.
But Labour leader John Smith, in another onslaught against the Government's management of the economy, claimed that the overall trade deficit was ‘dangerously high’.
He told the Blackpool conference of the MSF union that millions of manufacturing jobs had disappeared since 1979 and imports had increased by over 100pc.
SECRETARY of State Sir Patrick Mayhew today sent out a defiant message to the IRA bombers —‘You will never win.’
Speaking in the wake of an 86-hour bombing blitz which is expected to run to almost £30m — nearly a third of the total compensation bill for the past 12 months — he conceded the people of Northern Ireland had been through ‘a harsh time’.
Talking to reporters in Magherafelt, the scene of the latest bombing last night, Sir Patrick said he was satisfied the present security policy was adequate and he did not anticipate many changes.
And he revealed that only a few weeks ago Magherafelt traders turned down the option of having security gates erected in the town during a meeting with police.
Sir Patrick said he would be meeting the Chief Constable, Sir Hugh Annseley, and other senior officers today in the wake of the IRA's intensified bombing campaign.
Asked about increasing pressure to re-introduce internment, Sir Patrick said: ‘Internment is a power which has been used in the past both north and south of the border.
We are determined that it will remain on the statute book for use if and when it is necessary to be used.’
The Magherafelt attack, the fourth in as many days, was part of a renewed IRA campaign after the elections.
DUP leader the Rev Ian Paisley travelled to London today to urge the Commons to adjourn because of the recent bombings.
He accused Sir Patrick of failing to address ‘the real issues of the province’ and said he should not be attending tomorrow's meeting of the Anglo-Irish conference in Dublin.
Backlash The four huge attacks — two in Belfast and others in Portadown and Magherafelt — sparked a bitter backlash against the Provisionals. dozens more had miraculous escapes as some of the devices detonated as police were implementing evacuations after inadequate warnings.
Warning Magherafelt was the Provo's latest target.
At 10.30 last night a 300 lb van bomb wrecked the heart of the Co Londonderry.
A ten minute warning was given.
It was not until daylight broke that the scale of the devastation could be seen.
Nearly 20 shops and offices in Broad Street, just off the Diamond, were wrecked.
The explosion left the Ulsterbus depot in Broad Street reduced to a pile of rubble.
As traders met today to assess the damage, Local businessman, Declan Cosgrove, estimated damage to his premises to amount to between £75,000 and £100,000.
Church of Ireland Primate, Dr Robin Eames, said the destruction was ‘totally pointless.’
Speaking on a visit to Magherafelt he said: ‘All I can say is that the community's reply will always be that they will not be moved by this type of thing,’ he said.
Police said three armed men took over a house at Garvagh Road, Dungiven, last night and hijacked a white Transit van which they abandoned with the bomb on board.
The van driver ran up an alleyway from Broad Street to Union Street at around 10pm.
Police are seeking witnesses.
In the early hours of yesterday morning the Drumkeen Hotel at Upper Galwally, Belfast, was extensively damaged when a 200 lb car bomb went off in the car park.
Up to 50 nearby homes were also caught in the explosion.
The overall repair bill for Saturday's blitz on Portadown could reach £15m.
Scores of businesses were damaged and at least 12 buildings may have to be demolished.
Two days earlier Belfast city centre was devastated when 1,000 lbs of homemade explosives detonated in a skip lorry.
The IRA's bombing campaign cost the taxpayer a staggering £102.5m in compensation claims over the last 12 months.
McBride will get key role
A 15-year old player who captained Derry in their final game of the Ulster League series will have a key role against Down in the Minor championship on Sunday.
Johnny McBride is hardly out of the Juvenile ranks but he is regarded as one of the most talented under-age players within the Oak Leaf county.
McBride, a versatile player, is just one of a number of particularly young Derry players who will sample the championship atmosphere for the first time.
Ronan Rocks, Sean McGuckin, Damien Hasson, Louis McPeake and Colm O'Loughlin are others to whom manager John McGoldrick will be looking to spike Down's guns.
Derry won just one game in their Minor League campaign but that statistic must be viewed in the context of the county's policy of experimentation during the competition.
A number of players were tried out with the championship very much in mind and now comes the real test for the youngsters on Sunday in Newry.
The bulk of the Derry side are under seventeen but several have already gained a measure of senior experience with their clubs.
Names will be named
MY compliments to the recent local government election candidates, successful or otherwise, and will they now see to it that their earnest phizzogs are removed forthwith from all neighbourhood telegraph poles, lamp standards and walls.
Some parties have been assiduous in doing so, others have not.
I'll name no names at this stage, but will do so fearlessly if the exhibition continues much longer.
Cyclists get their spoke in
NEVER mind the weather, so long as we're together.
Thus the undaunted attitude of that brotherhood of the bike, the Cyclists' Touring Association.
It is the largest cycling organisation in the UK, and has a flourishing Ulster branch.
Their Northern Ireland president is Billy McCormick from Craigavad who tells me that membership is 200 and rising, and new recruits are always welcome.
All the more so, he adds, since this is the CTC's 65th anniversary year in the province.
‘It was founded here in March 1928,’ says Billy, ‘and since then members have been pedalling round the highways and byways of Ulster and further afield, even during the war years.
‘Our outings are held all the year round, regardless of the weather.
As far as we're concerned, cycling is the best way to see the countryside and keep fit at the same time.’
Our photograph shows some of the members cheerfully tootling along the Antrim coast road on a recent 120-mile jaunt from Belfast and Ballycastle and back.
But they've a rather shorter run planned this birthday celebration.
About 60 members and their friends are heading off to Whitehead for the day and anyone who would like to join them should contact Billy (tel Belfast 423740) for further details.
Takeaways take aim for the stars
CHINESE takeaway restaurants will soon be given a star rating to encourage higher standards.
The initiative comes from the industry following the setting-up of the first Chinese Takeaway Association to represent the country's 10,000 shops.
The Birmingham-based group was launched in London yesterday with MP Clare Short as the president.
Dennis Chow, one of the directors, said: ‘We shall be visiting takeaways over the next six months and giving help where it is needed.’
Libel damages for princess
PRINCESS Stephanie of Monaco (right) has accepted undisclosed libel damages over a Daily Mirror article which suggested she demanded a 100,000-dollar fee (£65,360) to attend a charity gala in Dublin.
Her counsel, Andrew Caldecott, told Mr Justice Otton in the High Court in London that the princess attended many charitable events and had never charged a fee.
She was very distressed and embarrassed by the March, 1992, report which said that having agreed to attend a gala for the blind — with only her expenses to be paid — she had broken her word by demanding a fee only two days before the event.
It also suggested her conduct had left the charity facing a serious financial loss.
The allegations were entirely untrue, said Mr Caldecott.
The princess had never agreed to attend the gala, nor had she demanded a fee for doing so.
Martin Cruddace, solicitor for publishers MGN Limited, said the allegations were entirely unfounded and should never have been published.
The company apologised for the distress and embarrassment caused and had agreed to pay the princess appropriate damages and all her legal costs.
Princess Stephanie was not in court.
Video advice on dealing with sex crimes
WOMEN in Scotland are being given advice on how to deal with sex pests in the office, indecent phone calls and other threatening situations in a new Government booklet and video.
The safety-advice package was produced by the newly-established Scottish Crime Prevention Council in response to growing concern that more needs to be done to protect women.
About 250,000 booklets will be distributed throughout Scotland, while the video will be used by police to generate discussion among women's groups.
Scottish Office Minister of State Lord Fraser, launching the package in Edinburgh, said: ‘What we must always remember is that the victim is never to blame.
‘All too often, the excuse has been given: ‘She asked for it.’
That attitude must not be allowed to prevail.’
Yesterday's launch was attended by rape victim Judy, who told the recent Scottish Conservative Party conference of her ordeal and appealed for tougher sentencing in cases of violence against women.
She described the excellent initiative a very, very good first step.’
The booklet explains how to cope with intruders and doorstep callers, and also gives advice on unwanted phone calls, problems at work and violence within the family.
Lord Fraser, who is chairman of the Scottish Crime Prevention Council, said: ‘In one third of incidents involving violence, the victim is a woman.
‘The package is the council's direct response to the need to provide women with sensible and practical advice on personal safety, and importantly to help reduce the fear of crime.
‘The council also hopes that the package will help many women who are subjected to violence to overcome the problems which prevent them from seeking help.’
Positive alternative to breaking the law…
THE idea behind the Higher Force Challenge is to give young offenders a positive alternative to breaking the law.
Held at the Stadium Youth and Community Centre in the Shankill, the crime-busting project has been a major success to date — with eight out of 11 young people getting jobs.
Funded initially by the Probation Board and the Belfast Action Team, the cash-starved scheme now requires a further £140,000 injection to keep it going for a full year.
With that sort of money administrator Roy Montgomery reckons they can carry out up to four programmes in 12 months and provide opportunities for up to 40 young people.
‘That's peanuts compared to some of the schemes the Government are running,’ he said.
‘There have been lots of promises and pats on the back but little else.
‘If we were in Catholic west Belfast instead of Protestant north Belfast we would be treated differently.’
The course involves a range of physically challenging activities including a gruelling assault In a follow-up programme they go potholing, canoeing and parachute jumping.
The course lasts for eight weeks and also involves regular discussion periods where the young people re-evaluate their lives.
Other activities include job search programmes and intelligence tests.
The ages of the young people on the course range from 18 to 25.
Treating joyriders with ‘loving care'
TENDER loving care is the name of the game at the stadium — according to Roy Montgomery.
Roy, administrator of the Higher Force Challenge, believes the young people who've been involved in everything from assault to joyriding, respond to a ‘simple thing called love’.
‘The scheme is Christian based,’ he said.
‘When somebody takes an interest in them — they respond.
‘Some of these lads are hard cases — little frightens them.
But when someone puts an arm around them and asks them how they are, they are bewildered.
‘At the beginning when the community police saw the names of those on the programme, it was like ‘You won't be able to do anything we these guys’.
‘But since that they are asking us what has happened them because they have not seen them around.
‘We basically say to them if you put your trust in us we will not fail you — and that has been the case.
‘Nothing bothers them.
They've experimented with drugs.
What we have to do is to thinking.
‘The bottom line is these guys want and need our help.
‘The idea is that we believe there is a higher force within everyone so there is a chance for change.’
Roy also revealed that at one stage they went to local paramilitaries to ask them to leave one young offender alone.
‘They basically just said that whatever we were doing to keep doing it,’ he said.
‘They wanted to see them off the streets.’
NATO talks on ‘safe areas’ for Muslims
NATO Defence Ministers, rejecting criticism of a new western policy to contain the conflict in Bosnia, met in Brussels today to discuss how to protect Muslim enclaves designated as ‘safe areas’ with troops and air power.
The United States and its allies have been forced to defend the controversial plan, agreed at the weekend after a divisive debate, as a real recipe for ending the 14-month-old war.
Defence Secretary Malcolm Rifkind and his German counterpart Volker Ruehe denied the new proposals meant the west would leave the Bosnian Serbs in control of the territory they have seized.
‘The international community, as much as ever, is determined to see real pressure (on the Serbs),’ Rifkind told reporters.
‘But there's no use in creating false expectations…the question is whether there's a will to accept that the killing has to stop.’
Ruehe said the long-term goal was still to roll back some of the Serb gains, as foreseen under a UN-backed peace plan that would divide Bosnia into 10 regions.
‘This new policy can only be an interim solution.
It cannot be the political solution,’ Ruehe said.
No formal decisions are expected at the Nato meeting, partly because France — a key United Nations member with a major involvement in Bosnia — will not attend.
France left NATO's military structure in 1966.
Derry visitors study culture
FIFTEEN people from 10 different European countries stopped off at Londonderry yesterday to take at look at how the different cultural traditions work in Northern Ireland.
The visit to Derry yesterday was part of a week-long study visit, aimed at providing opportunities to develop partnerships for future youth exchanges between Europe and Northern Ireland.
Hosted by the Youth Council for Northern Ireland, the group also visited Belfast, Coleraine, the Giant's Causeway and Limavady.
While in Derry, the group visited various youth and community projects in the city, were given a talk on ‘The Siege of Derry’ and attended a musical evening.
Today they were expected to visit the Play Resource Warehouse and Pilot's Row Centre, before departing for Belfast.
Rise in jobless total
UNEMPLOYMENT in Strabane is now five per cent more than this time last year, according to the latest Government statistics.
The total out of work in the town now stands at 27.6pc.
The percentage of males unemployed is a staggering 37.5pc with the ratio of women unemployed standing at 12.3pc.
In Londonderry, the figures also make depressing reading.
The overall unemployment level stands at 22.4pc, three per cent up on a year ago.
The number of unemployed claimants in Northern Ireland on April 8 was 105,336 representing 14.1pc of the workforce.
Past lessons for children
AN EVOCATIVE and touching exhibition of photographs and the writings of children has gone on display at the Central Library in Foyle Street.
‘Past Continuous’ is the result of work by poet Joan Newman with the residents of the Rectory Field Residential Home and children from nearby Oakgrove Integrated Primary School on the theme of old age.
The children were encouraged to talk to the elderly residents about their own childhoods and life experiences.
The poetry which the children produced as a result forms a major part of the exhibition which also includes photographs from the library's archives, the Bigger-McDonald Collection, the Willie Carson Collection and those donated by the late Mabel Colhoun.
The exhibition will run until May 29.
Book marks school jubilee
A NEW book marking the silver jubilee of a long school is to be launched in the city next week.
‘St Cecilia's — A Celebration of 25 Years’ is a tribute to the work done by the school with young people of the area — often in very difficult circumstances.
The book will be launched in the school tomorrow by the chief executive of the Western Education and Library Board, Michael Murphy.
Pop help: Top artists release record to benefit charities
Album aims to aid homeless
UP to £100,000 for homeless people could be raised from sales of a compilation album featuring pop giants Phil Collins and Annie Lennox.
The Gift Of Song is being released on June 7, the start of National Housing Week, and organisers expect it to top the compilation album charts.
Shelter will be the main beneficiary from royalties, but other designated charities include The Elton John AIDS Foundation and Cliff Richard's Charitable Trust.
A spokeswoman for the album said: ‘Last year there was a compilation charity record released to coincide with the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro and it sold 100,000 copies.
‘We think this can do even better because it's for home charities and also because many of the names involved don't usually contribute to compilation albums, such as Genesis and Cher.’
Other artists featured include Bryan Adams, Seal, Wet Wet Wet, Eric Clapton and Tina Turner.
Meanwhile, TV presenter Shane Richie is slicking back his hair and growing his sideburns to appear alongside Craig McLachlan in the new musical Grease.
Richie (29), host of BBC's home video series Caught In The Act, is playing rockabilly rebel Kenickie (John Travolta's best friend in the film).
He makes his West End debut starring Neighbours and Home and Away actor McLachlan and American pop singer Debbie Gibson.
The show is being co-produced by singer and actor Paul Nicholas — he played male lead Danny in a 1973 stage version — and is tipped as one of the most popular musicals in London this summer.
The John Travolta/ Olivia Newton-John film was a huge hit and spawned a string of huge hit singles, including the title song and You're The One That I Want.
Choreographed by Arlene Phillips, the new production opens at London's Dominion Theatre on July 15 with previews from July 5.
Jim shows top form
City of Derry
SATURDAY'S Charity Open at Prehen in aid of the Waterside Churches Trust Ltd attracted quite a large field of competitors.
The winner Jim Huey (10) covered the front nine with a steady 18pts, but an excellent homeward run in which he birdied 14 and 18 gave him 23pts and an excellent total of 41pts.
In second place Chris Donaghey (8) and probably one of Prehen's steadiest golfers also found the homeward nine to his liking with 17.5pts out and 22pts back, thanks to a birdie at the 18th he returned a fine 39pts.
David Bratton was third.
Again the back nine proved to be the deciding factor, 18pts out and 21pts back in his total of 39pts.
Best gross went to Eamon McCaul whose 74 was a brilliant effort in a difficult cross wind.
First nine went to Alfie Kane (17) with 21pts, second nine went to Cecil McKeegan (11) 21pts.
Robin show ready to roll
THE Ulster Grasscourt championships will be bigger and better than ever this year.
That was the promise made by tournament referee Robin McDonough at today's formal launch of the event at Belfast Boat Club.
Already a number of British and overseas players have indicated that they will be in action at the championships and Robin is still hopeful that others will sign on the dotted line before entries close.
The standard of play over the past few years has shown a considerable step-up and the cream of the local talent now face a daunting challenge in their bid to reclaim the title for ‘home’ keeping.
Most of the leading Ulster players will participate and with Carslberg underwriting the championships the prize fund has been increased.
The overall entry now stands at 235 — a figure which Robin McDonough describes as ‘excellent’.
prestigious Carlsberg Masters Grand Prix will be on offer while there will also be coaching seminars in conjunction with the championships.
Mark Cox, the former Great Britain Davis Cup player, will conduct some of these sessions which should prove a big bonus for younger players.
The tournament seedings are;
DUNDONALD
Man charged with bid to murder girlfriend
A 24-YEAR-old Dundonald man appeared at Ards Magistrates Court yesterday charged with attempting to murder his girlfriend.
Phillip Brian Winter, of Dunoon Gardens, is accused of the murder bid on Deborah Gail Wilkinson on Saturday.
He is further charged with possessing a sawn-off shotgun.
A detective sergeant told the court Winter replied ‘I strongly deny it’ to the murder charge.
He was remanded in custody to appear at Crumlin Road Courthouse on June 11.
MAGHERAFELT
New head appointed
THE head of Northern Ireland's first integrated secondary school, Lagan College, has been appointed principal of Rainey Endowed Grammar School in Magherafelt.
Terence Flanagan, who has been principal of the flagship college for the last six years, takes up his new post in September.
A graduate of Trinity College, Dublin, he holds diplomas in Education from Queen's and the University of Ulster and recently gained a diploma in company management.
BELFAST
Evangelist visits
US evangelist Dr Stephen Olford was in Belfast today to address a seminar at Crescent Church, University Road, entitled ‘Preaching Today.’
He is currently head of the Institute for Biblical Preaching in Memphis.
ROSETTA
President preaches
THE Very Rev Derek Ritchie, President of the Methodist Church, will be the guest preacher at the annual Down and Connor Diocesan ecumenical service in St Bernadette's Church, Rosetta, this Sunday (3.30pm).
DUNGANNON
Nigel aims for top
ULSTER'S top young businessman, baker Nigel Fleming, is hoping to put the icing on the cake with the £3,000 first prize in the Livewire Young Entrepreneur awards in London next month.
Nigel (25), who runs the Upper Crust coffee house in Dungannon, will line up on June 8 against nine young business people from other UK regions.
Builders go it alone
NORTHERN Ireland is to separate from Scotland and have its own region under the National Council of the Federation of Master Builders.
Two new branches are being set up in the province — Londonderry and Armagh/ Tyrone.
Canon elected
THE Rev James Derrick Tyney has been elected Canon of Belfast Cathedral in succession to Canon Norman Woodrow.
He has been rector of Groomsport for 18 years and Rural Dean of Bangor since 1991.
Gardai monitor island dispute
A DISPUTE between fishermen and sheep ranchers has shattered the peace of the abandoned island of Inishbofin off the north west coast of the Republic.
Gardai confirmed they are keeping a close watch on the Atlantic outpost and keeping regular surveillance to prevent any breach of the peace.
Fishing families left the 300-acre island in the mid-1980s because of dangerous landing conditions.
Now former island landowners are angry that mainland sheep farmers are placing sheep flocks on the islands without permission.
Claims are also being made that over-grazing is causing environmental problems.
Owners of island farm-holdings have returned to the island to carry out extensive ploughing in an effort to force sheep owners to remove their flocks.
The island is separated from the Donegal mainland by a dangerous mile-wide channel.
Less than 40 years ago the island had a population of about 150, a schoolhouse, a post office — and a chapel serviced by priests from the mainland.
Bronte trail
I FOUND the article on Cliff Richard and his plans to play Heathcliff in Emily Bronte's ‘Wuthering Heights’(Update, April 21) very interesting.
The Lyric Theatre put on in recent years a fine production of the book dramatised by John Boyd and Louis Muinzer.
There are, however, one or two points in the article which I would like to comment upon.
Charlotte Bronte and her husband did not, alas, attend Killead Presbyterian Church on their honeymoon.
Sad to relate, they did not come to Northern Ireland at all!
Two excellent books Margaret Lane's ‘The Bronte Story’ and Rebecca Fraser's ‘Charlotte Bronte’give details of their itinerary.
From Haworth they went to Holyhead and on to Dublin.
They travelled on by canal (Mr Nicholl's brother was the manager of the Dublin to Banagher section of Grand Canal) to Banagher where they stayed in Dr Bell's (he was Arthur Bell, Nicholl's uncle) fine house.
They went on to Cork and Killarney and then home to Haworth.
Orphaned Arthur Bell Nicholl left Killead, as a small boy and was brought up by his uncle, Dr Alan Bell, headmaster of the Royal High School, and aunt.
He graduated in Trinity College, Dublin.
Unfortunately, Emily Bronte never went to Ireland (nor did her grandfather travel to England), so I am afraid she would not have heard any story ‘at the fireside on the farm at Drumballyroney in Co.
Down’.
Patrick Bronte's home was actually at Emdale, Co.
Down.
BRIAN N.B. BAKER Belfast 4.
Lilley comes under attack
SOCIAL Security Secretary Peter Lilley was under fire last night for claiming the Government had protected the less well off through the recession.
He was commenting on the latest income support statistics, which showed that average weekly benefit payments had risen from £38.52 to £51.89 between 1990 and 1992.
‘That shows the level of our commitment to those with the greatest needs who have been protected through the worst of the recession,’ Mr Lilley said.
‘We should welcome the fact that we have the widest safety net in Europe.
‘We will continue to play our role in helping Britain back to work.
Our current Family Credit campaign, new Family Credit Helpline and other initiatives will give unemployed families more choice in their job hunting and make going back to work easier.’
Mr Lilley's remarks outraged Labour and charities helping the poor.
Donald Dewar, Labour social security spokesman, said: ‘How can the Government claim to be protecting the less well off when the rise in the number of those on income support is directly the result of its own failed economic policies?’
MPs urge debate on bombs
NORTHERN Ireland Ministers today faced a new demand for a statement about the Government's security policies in the wake of the latest IRA bomb onslaught.
DUP leader Rev Ian Paisley said he had submitted a bid to Commons Speaker Betty Boothroyd to debate on Thursday the upsurge in terrorist activity.
The Commons will stage a series of brief debates before MPs break for the Whitsun recess.
Mr Paisley said he had taken up an invitation from Miss Boothroyd to raise his concerns after an unsuccessful request by Upper Bann MP David Trimble for an urgent debate in the Commons yesterday.
The DUP leader complained that frequent efforts to raise the issue of terrorist atrocities had failed to elicit a response from the Government.
Mr Trimble told the Speaker he appreciated that it was the normal practice not to have immediate statements on specific terrorist incidents ‘because that amplifies the terror’.
But he said the province was now faced with ‘a quite alarming series of incidents, which perhaps marks a new phase in the terrorist campaign, and it has serious implications for people in Northern Ireland.’
Referring to the latest spate of bombings, Mr Trimble urged Ministers to answer at the despatch box ‘instead of their shameful silence, which demonstrates their ineptitude and incompetence.’
The ‘blockbuster’ bombs were part of the IRA's economic war, but there had been a tendency for people to despair of the political process, he warned.
Mr Paisley denied a claim by Labour MP Dennis Skinner that Unionist politicians had agreed with both front benches ‘to be silent about such atrocities’.
A stroll through summer footwear
HIDE your ankle boots and put away your sensible lace-ups when summer arrives.
Now is the time for cool, light shoes that you can slip straight on your feet.
Who wants to bother with hot, sticky socks or stockings when the sun is beating down?
Deck shoes are always popular in summer.
Classic leather deck shoes are blue or white, but you can buy canvas versions in just about any colour you like.
Lace-up or slip-on, they all look great with light-weight summer trousers or clingy leggings.
A major advantage of deck shoes is their price — you can easily pick up a pair for a fiver.
If they get smelly, a simple spin in the washing machine should help.
Continue the canvas look with classic espadrilles which are equally at home on the beach or the street.
The newest styles hark back to the Seventies; wedge-soled styles which lace up the leg.
They are ideal worn with this season's long, buttoned skirts.
Summer loafers in bright colours can be matched with trousers for a co-ordinated, streamlined look.
Don't try wearing your black winter loafers in summer, they'll look terrible, but navy ones are OK.
Clogs and platforms, which look great with cool summer flares, are back with a vengeance too.
Strappy black platform sandals will be an essential this year, but there are many other sandals around for people who Go for sling-backs with heels or a ballerina look with comfortable flatties, which team well with jeans or leggings.
Some sandals offer a peep-toe look, which can be cooler than the fully closed up variety.
Remember to keep toe-nails trim and prettily painted as you show your feet to the world.
Hot shoe tips
When you are choosing summer footwear, be extra careful about comfort.
Badly fitting shoes will rub even more painfully if you are not wearing tights.
Try Scholl socks to prevent your shoes rubbing.
These come below the top of most shoes and are invisible when you wear them.
Don't forget the cardinal rule of shoe-buying: if they're not comfortable in the shop, they won't become comfortable with wear.
Try to find a shop that sells half-sizes and, even better, different widths to ensure a good fit.
Buying a size larger just because the shoes feel too tight only means a narrow shoe that slips off!
Sir Patrick tight-lipped at Dublin conference
SIR Patrick Mayhew refused to discuss the enveloping Iraqi supergun row, when he arrived in Dublin today for the latest Anglo-Irish conference.
‘You will recall that in my statement last night I said I would reserve further comment.
I don't think this is a matter for today's meeting,’ he told reporters.
The devastating IRA bombings — four in four days — topped an agenda which both governments had hoped would concentrate on resuming inter-party talks, now the council elections are over.
Sir Patrick and Foreign Affairs Minister Dick Spring said that they would do everything they could to try to bring about an early renewal of the talks on the future of Northern Ireland.
BELLEEKS
Bomb fears after fertiliser theft
POLICE were today on full alert amid fears the IRA could use four tonnes of stolen fertiliser to make another huge bomb.
The fertiliser, Richardson's Nitro Pack 2644, was packed onto two pallets on a lorry which was stolen from Belleeks, in south Armagh.
The robbery happened last Friday but police have not been able to trace the whereabouts of the blue-coloured Ford truck, registration, B31 BBD.
Detectives are appealing for anyone who knows anything about the matter or who may have seen the lorry to contact CID at Bessbrook, tel 838222, immediately.
ANTRIM/DOWNPATRICK
Gardens to visit
TWO gardens open to the public in Co Antrim and Co Down this weekend under the National Trust's Ulster Gardens Scheme.
Mr and Mrs R Schierbeek are opening their garden at ‘Windrush’, Station Road, Antrim, from 2–6pm on Saturday and Sunday.
Proceeds are in aid of the National Trust and the NI Hospice.
Drs Magill will open their garden at 1 Ballytrustan Road, Downpatrick, from 2–6pm on Sunday.
BELFAST
Tackling poverty
A ONE-DAY conference being held in Belfast today focuses on community based solutions to poverty.
The event, at the Ulster Peoples College, Belfast, is being organised by the Northern Ireland Development Education Forum.
The conference had a cross-border input as members of the Irish Development Educators Association attended.
BELFAST
Rail chance to help
STAFF at the City Way Day Centre, Belfast, are on the look-out for old artefacts relating to railways to decorate their dining room on the theme of a buffet car.
The centre, at Boyne Court, Sandy Row, offers a range of social and recreational activities for people of varying ages and Anyone who can help should contact manager Diane Fulton on Belfast 243000.
DUBLIN
Mother Teresa coming
THE VISIT by Mother Teresa to Ireland is going ahead — but is expected to be scaled down because of her recent fall in which she broke three ribs.
The Lord Mayor of Dublin, Gay Mitchell, said today that his office was informed that the Nobel Prize winner, renowned for her work with the poor, will travel to Dublin next month.
IRVINGSTOWN
Help for town's ‘heart’
IRVINESTOWN in Co Fermanagh today received an £800,000 cash injection from the Government and the International Fund for Ireland.
The money will be used to regenerate the commercial heart of the town.
The project will include the development of the new Lakeland Flying Museum and a miniature railway to link the town centre with the Necarne Equestrian Complex.
End of an era as Kinkead bows out
THE Irish badminton team are in Birmingham preparing for their opening world championship group six match tomorrow against Iceland and the championships will mark the end of a 15 year spell for Joe Kinkead as manager of the Irish team.
Joe, who was an outstanding goalkeeper in the Irish League and had a spell of management with Ards, has been looking after Ireland's senior badminton players since the 1978 European championships in Preston and over the years he has had an excellent working relationship with the players, motivating them and looking after their fitness.
He has travelled with the team to every country in Europe and his outstanding memory was Ireland's victory in the European Helvetia Cup in Norway in 1981.
He recollects vividly the outstanding singles performances of Bill Thompson and Diane Underwood and with the final match standing at 2-all his team went on to dominate the doubles and lift the trophy.
Joe is the current chairman of the Ulster branch of the BUI and will be staying in the game on the administrative side of things but the next week or so he will be very busy on court.
He left for Birmingham ahead of the team for a managers meeting yesterday and with coach Jens will be working hard to get the best out of the team against Iceland and against the Czech Republic on Thursday and the USA on Friday.
Joe's squad for the world team event is Michael Watt, Bruce Topping, Graham Henderson, Jayne Plunkett and Ann Stephens of Ulster and Michael O'Meara, Mark Peard and Sonya McGinn of Leinster.
Meanwhile the world's top players have turned down a tempting financial offer aimed at attracting them away from the Ulster Milk Games match between Europe and Asia in Belfast on June 8.
The Belgium federation offered players considerably more than Belfast to take part in an exhibition game on June 7, but fortunately they prefer to compete in the prestigious inter-continental event.
Among those coming over to Belfast are world silver medallist Thomas Lund (Denmark) and double world and Olympic champion Park Joo Bong (Korea).
Province set for US bonanza
A GROUP of Ulster companies is set to share in a £5m export sales bonanza in the United States, it was revealed today.
The local firms are heading west to Chicago as part of a unique joint-venture trade mission organised by the Industrial Development Board and its counterpart in the Republic, the Irish Trade Board.
With 87 exhibitors from the South and 25 from the North, the three-day event is the biggest-ever overseas promotion of goods from either side of the border.
Atlanta
When the Irish Trade Board ran a similar event for southern companies in Atlanta, Georgia, two years ago, £3.3m worth of orders was generated.
This time, the ITB expects the participating firms to score at least £5m in direct sales.
The companies will also have the opportunity to build on existing business links and introduce their goods to new markets in the United States.
Opening on June 11, the trade show will feature a wide range of goods, including clothing, knitwear, jewellery, home furnishings, giftware and food.
Among the local participants will be Tyrone Crystal, Belleek Pottery and Ulster Weavers.
The IDB and ITB will be taking over several floors of the Embassy Suites Hotel in Chicago.
The area will be transformed into an Irish ‘shopping centre’, with each company having its own shopfront and showroom.
During the three days of the show, the hotel will be serving Irish cuisine in its restaurants and there will also be evening.
More than 1,000 key buyers from the mid-west region of the United States have been invited to attend and more than 500 confirmations have already been made.
‘The buyers represent a network of Irish stores throughout North America as well as department stores, speciality independent stores, mail-order catalogues and premium-gift buyers,’ explained Alan Hingston, executive director of the Industrial Development Board's marketing development division.
The Republic's Trade Minister Charlie McCreevy will open the exhibition officially on June 11.
Senior IDB executives will also attend the event.
Inquest told of bomb making equipment find
POTENTIALLY-lethal bomb making equipment was found at the Ballymena home of rogue RUC man Allen Moore's parents, an inquest heard yesterday.
Forensic expert Gordon McMillen revealed that fireworks, shotgun cartridge parts and a small copper pipe containing a flash bulb were found in a locked desk in a bedroom at the Broughshane Road house.
The witness said that these types of items had been encountered previously in improvised explosive devices and could be used in letter or parcel bombs.
He also revealed that some explosive devices of a similar type had been recovered since September 1991.
Belfast Coroner's Court heard earlier that Moore had bought fireworks while he was attending a rehabilitation centre in Harrogate.
However, Mr McMillan said that no direct physical link had been found between the recovered explosive devices and the items founds in Moore's home.
The pipe uncovered in Ballymena, the witness estimated, could have contained about nine grammes of fireworks powder.
‘It is impossible to say what effect would have been achieved but certainly injuries would have been sustained, and sition (of powder) used and the proximity of a person they may be fatal.’
The forensic officer described to the jury how such a device could be assembled.
He said the copper pipe could be filled with a mixture of fireworks powder.
The bulb inside would be attached to a battery and when the bulb flashed the heat sensitive powder would explode — either splitting the copper pipe or causing it to splinter into shrapnel.
The details emerged during the inquest into the deaths of Moore and the men he killed in a Belfast Sinn Fein centre.
His victims were Patrick Loughran, Joe McBride and Michael O'Dwyer.
Romania arms check
AN international party of arms control inspectors has left Britain to check military equipment in Romania.
The six UK inspectors and one each from Azerbaijan, Hungary and Ukraine formed the first international team from the UK.
Under the terms of the 1990 Conventional Forces in Europe Treaty, the signatories — NATO and former Warsaw Pact states — have the right to conduct inspections on each others territory.
Skydive mystery
AN inquest has failed to pinpoint why one of Britain's top film stuntmen, Tim ‘Tip’ Tipping, plunged to his death in a skydiving tragedy.
The hearing at Berwick-upon-Tweed, Northumberland, was told Mr Tipping (34), of Cobham, Surrey, was unable to open either his main or reserve parachute — but witnesses were only able to speculate about the reasons for this.
At the end of a four-hour hearing, the inquest jury returned a verdict of death by misadventure.
Police arrests
FIVE policemen were arrested and face possible criminal charges in San Salvador for opening fire on a protest march by disabled war veterans, President Alfredo Cristiani said last night.
6 0039
STORMS in north-east Romania killed three people and forced hundreds from their homes over the past three days, television reported last night.
Floods destroyed 148 houses and swamped nearly 3,000 acres of crop land in the Bacau region.
Japan stays
JAPAN has decided to remain a member of the International Whaling Commission to lobby against the creation of a whale sanctuary in the Antarctic, Farm Minister Masami Tanabu said last night.
Fighting threatens aid
MORE than two million people in drought-stricken Angola will need emergency food aid in the next year — but fighting threatens to block aid shipments, a United Nations agency said today.
‘Angola has recently experienced a rapid intensification of civil strife, which…has made relief food distribution to large expanses of the country impossible,’ the UN Food and Agricultural Organisation said.
Dissident poet freed
A DISSIDENT woman poet, jailed for opposing the government had been unconditionally released early from prison, Cuba's Foreign Ministry said last night.
Maria Elena Cruz Varela (40), had served 18 months of her two-year sentence.
Opium crop destroyed
COLOMBIA'S army has destroyed at least three million opium poppies in province of Narino, the largest crop ever destroyed in the South American country, the Colprensa news agency reported yesterday.
It said 60 anti-guerrilla units cut down the plants in the indigenous area of Aponte in El Tablon, more than 460km (312 miles) southwest of Bogota, at the weekend.
Computer poet is resourceful
A MAN who has been blind since birth has written a book of poems with the aid of a talking computer.
Richard Daniels (42), has called his 23 poem collection of verse, If Milton Could Do It — So Can I. He wrote the book on a computer at a community resource centre in Kingsteignton, Devon, where it will be launched tomorrow.
Mr Daniels, from Newton Abbot, Devon, who had been making poems up in his head, was helped by a voice synthesiser which ‘spoke’ each letter typed, and read back what he had written.
Clinton's clipped speech
THE White House is still trying desperately to live down the story of US President Bill Clinton's 200 dollar haircut — almost a week after the trim aboard Air Force One closed down part of Los Angeles airport.
A spokesman last night insisted that the president did not pay 200 dollars for the haircut because the Clinton family has a personal service contract with Cristophe, the to the stars.
Asked if closing the airport cost 76,000 dollars, the spokesman said: ‘It's the first I've heard of that report but obviously, I mean, it's something we regret.
The president did not want this to happen.’
Spielberg's sour smile
DIRECTOR Steven Spielberg has received the ‘Order of the Smile’ from Polish children for his science fiction movie, E.T.
the Extra Terrestrial.
To receive the award, he had to drink a full glass of straight lemon juice without grimacing.
Then he was ‘knighted’ to the order with the touch of a red rose to his shoulder.
The Order of the Smile was established in 1968 by newspaper as a way of thanking Polish and foreign actors, writers and others for their work for children.
Director Brook honoured
BRITISH theatre director Peter Brook and Czech President Vaclav Havel have received two of the Onassis International Awards, which honour contributions in scholarship, human rights and the environment.
Greek President Constantine Caramanlis presented the awards, The annual awards, each worth 100,000 dollars, were established by shipping tycoon Aristotle Onassis in memory of his son, Alexander (23), who died in a plane crash.
Dr Hi-Do-Ho Calloway, The King of Hi-De-Ho, celebrated his honorary doctorate in fine arts from the University of Rochester with a show-stopping rendition of his signature song ‘Minnie the Moocher.’
Hands clapping and bodies swaying, an estimated 9,000 sang along as Calloway (85), clad in the ceremonial cap and gown, belted out the tune in his gravely voice.
‘Filth’ game gets mild rating
A CONTROVERSIAL £270 computer game condemned as filthy, violent and evil has been given a mild 15 rating by British film censors.
SEGA's Night Trap is the first computer game to be rated in the same way as a video by the British Board of Film Classification.
The game uses SEGA's Mega-CD system which combines startlingly realistic images of living actors and actresses with computer graphics.
It was viewed by the BBFC last week in the wake of a storm of controversy over claims that the game depicted torture and mutilation.
SEGA brought Night Trap before the Board voluntarily, but had it not done so the game would have been made a test case.
BBFC director James Ferman last night predicted future live-action computer games would be likely to carry U, PG, 15 or 18 ratings — just like films or videos.
SEGA has decided to submit all its forthcoming Mega-CD games to the BBFC.
Night Trap, featuring blood-sucking alien monsters preying on attractive actresses, caused a furore when it was introduced.
Sir John Wheeler, Tory MP for Westminster North, described the game as ‘abhorrent rubbish’.
Another Conservative, Terry Dicks, MP for Hayes and Harlington, condemned it as ‘filth’, while the pressure group Family and Youth Concern advised parents: ‘Do not buy this game for your children.
It is evil.’
SEGA, which has always denied that Night Trap is gratuitously violent, is delighted with the game's 15 certificate.
A spokeswoman said: ‘We were quite surprised when it came back as a 15 after all the controversy.
In a so.’
Mr Ferman said previous computer games have not been covered by the 1984 Video Recordings Act, which lays down criteria for rating videos.
But Night Trap could not be exempted because it depicted violent actions involving realistic images of human beings rather than straightforward computer graphics.
BT's TV floater
Wooing public to buy shares
THE irritating Buzby has long since flown from BT's nest.
Even Beattie has hung up her curlers along with her telephone.
Instead, BT is set to fill our TV screens with Mel Smith as ‘Inspector Morose’, persuading us to buy the third lot of BT shares, which goes on sale in July.
The ads come hot on the heels of the current NIE campaign starring Finn McCool.
For a minimum investment of £100, investors in Northern Ireland, the Republic and Great Britain can take a stake in the local electricity supplier.
It's expected that the flotation will take place in early June.
To date, more than 600,000 people have registered with NIE's Share Information Office.
The share price will be revealed shortly.
Since Margaret Thatcher began the privatisation fever by selling off British Aerospace in 1981, the Government has privatised almost 50 companies.
And in that time the number of share-owners has more than tripled to more than nine million.
Most of the new breed of share-owner have bought shares in privatised companies.
And very well they've done out of it, too.
A glance at the list of some of the most popular privatisations shows that, in most cases, you'd have more than doubled your shares when they were issued and held on to them.
Over all, you'd have fared much better than keeping your money in a bank or building society.
The two big flops in the list have been Rolls-Royce and British Steel.
With both of these, you'd have lost money, but they are exceptions.
Since those heady early days of privatisation, the world of high finance has become far more accessible to the ordinary man and woman in the street.
No longer do you have to go to a bank or stockbroker to deal in shares.
There are now a lot of low-cost ‘share shops’ we can deal through as well.
Local investors can use special share shops run by the Northern, Ulster, First Trust and AIB Banks.
To qualify for the NIE sell-off, you have to register before June 1.
Call 0232 232232 for details.
Registering your name does not compel you to buy shares.
Want to know more about share investment?
The ProShare Association is an independent, non-profit-making organisation which was set up to help people understand and benefit from stockmarket investments.
It publishes a monthly newsletter and a monthly Investors' Handbook which builds up into a comprehensive reference manual covering all aspects of share investment.
For details, phone the recorded information line on 071 971 0061.
Thorn stings shares into an early rise
THE stunning profits performance by music giant Thorn EMI contributed to the initial tentative rise on the FTSE.
Thorn's shares shot ahead 20p to 848p on the news that it had almost doubled annual profits to £289.9m.
A little while later, its shares fell slightly to be 18p up.
Within a short time of opening, the FTSE had edged ahead 3.3p to 2828.9.
A firm overnight performance on Wall Street also helped underpin the market which presented a mixed picture in early dealing.
Safeway supermarket group Argyll suffered at the hands of profit takers despite impressive full-year results and a confident prediction it can push profits ahead.
The stock, which powered ahead yesterday, lost 6p to 312p.
Other supermarket groups were marginally firmer, with Sainsbury a penny better at 468p and Tesco also up 1p to 214p.
Williams Holdings, the industrial holding company, was weaker after the company confirmed Brian McGowan is to resign as chief executive.
He was regarded in the industry as the main driving force behind the acquisitions.
Williams news.
A dramatic profits rise by home shopping group Betterware sent their shares soaring initially before they later came back to be 5p ahead at 265p.
BT continued to make headway as the Government outlined plans for its £5 billion plus sell-off of its remaining 21.8pc stake in the telecommunications giant.
BT firmed 5p to 418p.
News of BTR's £121 m investment in China with its bottling ventures helped the company put on 2p to 598p.
British Steel, which yesterday broke through the 100p barrier for the first time in almost two years, lost 3p today to 100p as investors became jittery that its recovery potential might not be as great as originally anticipated.
Ticket fever hits Derry
DON'T panic!
That's the message from the Derry County Board today to the hundreds of followers still seeking tickets for Sunday's Ulster championship tie against Down.
Derry's allocation of tickets was distributed to the various clubs in Maghera last night where there was an unprecedented clamour for the precious pieces of paper.
‘It was like a scene in some stricken Bosnian town where people were scavaging for food,’ said Bernie today, ‘Demand is just unbelievable — I had to eventually leave my own telephone off the hook at midnight in order to get some sleep.
I took countless calls from people seeking tickets up until then.’
Derry officials are hoping to receive an additional allocation of tickets later in the week.
Derry manager Eamon Coleman will announce his team after training tonight but a big question mark still hovers over the fitness of Enda Gormley.
The Allstar forward has been battling against injury lately and is given a 50/50 chance of being fit for Sunday.
Tony Scullion, though, is expected to make the starting line-up but Seamus Downey and Collie McGurk are out of the reckoning.
Cavan manager P.J. Carroll is expected to name an unchanged side to meet Monaghan in Sunday's replay at Breffni Park.
Image crisis for Clinton over new haircut
NOT since Samson lost his strength through a haircut has a short back and sides caused such hairy day for a leader.
Almost a week after President Bill Clinton's £130 snipping aboard presidential jet Air Force One closed down part of Los Angeles airport, forcing planes to circle, hairdresser Cristophe's coiffure is still making waves.
Cristophe doesn't want to talk about it.
The White House, trying desperately to sweep the loose bits of hair underneath the rug, unfortunately does not have that advantage.
At yesterday's daily news briefing, an anguished presidential spokesman, George Stephanopoulos, was forced to talk about it, over and over again.
Then, if he picked up the news magazines he was forced to read about it over and over again.
‘Shear Dismay: For Bill Clinton, little things like a fancy haircut and a tempest in his travel office loom large,’ said Time magazine, also referring to the uproar caused by the president's sacking of the White House travel office and putting a distant cousin in charge.
The latest public opinion without the hair and travel troubles more people now disapproved of Clinton's performance than approved.
An ABC News poll showed 48pc disapproved and 46pc approved, with the rest having no opinion, and that Clinton's main problems were the continuing weak economy and dislike of his tax plan.
Three weeks ago 59pc approved.
For the record, Stephanopoulos insisted the president did not pay £130 for the haircut because the president and his family have a personal service contract with the Beverly Hills hairdresser to the stars.
For the record, too, the Press spokesman said the president only had the haircut because he was assured that doing so would not tie up traffic at the airport.
Asked if tying up the airport cost £50,000, Stephanopoulos said: ‘It's the first I've heard of that report but obviously, I mean, it's something we regret.
The president did not want this to happen.
‘The president had asked if the runways were being closed and he was told they weren't.
Unfortunately, they were.
We regret this and it's not going to happen again.’
Massive manhunt after attack on grandmother
POLICE were today continuing a massive hunt for the man who savagely beat a grandmother in an apparently motiveless attack as she walked her two dogs in woodland at a quiet village.
Linda Hardy,(43)— who was so badly beaten that police initially thought she had been shot — was this morning said to be ‘critical but stable’ in London's Royal Free Hospital, which has a neurosurgical unit specialising in treating severe head injuries.
Her husband, Dave Hardy, and their two daughters were at her bedside.
Police were today searching the woods at the village of Chipperfield, near Hemel Hempstead, Herts, where the attack took place.
The woods were cordoned off yesterday and kept under police guard overnight.
Officers would also be making house-to-house inquiries, said a Hertfordshire Police spokesman.
Detective Chief Superintendent Alan Shannon, who is heading the investigation, said: ‘We are looking for either a youth or a young man.
‘That is all the description we can have until we can have until we can speak to Mrs Hardy further.’
The weapon used in the attack had not yet been found, a police spokesman said.
Mrs Hardy, of Tower Hill, Chipperfield, was found crawling through undergrowth in the woods yesterday morning by two women who were out for a walk.
She was so badly injured that she was able only to tell them her name.
Later she recovered consciousness enough to tell police that her attacker was a ‘young man’.
Shortly afterwards her daughter Debbie and granddaughter Emily left their nearby home to investigate police sirens — to find Mrs Hardy, her clothes drenched in blood and her face paramedics.
Police drafted armed officers into the village and called in a helicopter with heat-seeking equipment.
The motive for the attack was unknown — there was no evidence of any sexual assault, and Mrs Hardy's belongings were untouched, the police spokesman said.
Detectives warned women to be careful while the attacker was on the loose and said people going for a walk — especially women — should go with a friend or a neighbour, not alone.
Morris under pressure
DEWI Morris is one of 14 Lions playing their first match of the New Zealand tour, against North Harbour in Auckland tomorrow, un
Doctor rapped
I FEEL I must respond to the May 14 letter from R Hagan regarding transferring babies in-utero over a distance of 1,000 miles in Western Australia.
When working in Canada, I occasionally transferred babies in-utero by jet plane over distances of around 800 miles safely and here in Downpatrick we transfer babies in-utero to Belfast when required and transfer them safely.
However, all of these cases are obstetrically assessed by a Consultant Obstetrician, whether in Canada, or Downpatrick, so as to minimise the potential dangers of transfer.
What he fails to grasp is that if that obstetric experience is withdrawn from Downpatrick, then there will be no selection of patients whatsoever and all will have to make their way to Belfast or Lisburn irrespective of clinical condition.
I have no doubt whatsoever that the patients of the South Down area will consequently be worse off and perinatal mortality and morbidity will rise.
He also fails to note that the Eastern Board's proposal to remove obstetric services from Downpatrick is described by them in their same document as intending to produce an improvement in entirely wrong.
The logic of his own argument follows that all mothers throughout the entire province could safely be transferred and delivered in London (after all it is only 640 miles from Belfast)— I leave this to your readers to decide if this is reasonable or not.
Although his interest is welcomed, it does seem somewhat inappropriate for someone on holiday from the other side of the world, without any apparent local knowledge, making brief comments in what is a major debate within the Board's area, the outcome of which could seriously affect many patients and their families for many years.
Regulator replies
J R IVENS in his letter of May 10 asks whether ‘NIE's responsibility under its licence to choose the most economic generation’ applies to the proposed Scottish interconnector.
The licence was issued by the Department of Economic Development on March 31, 1992, to a newly vested company, Northern Ireland Electricity plc, which inherited some of the assets and liabilities of the old nationalised industry.
The condition of the licence (Condition 8 of Part III) concerning economic purchasing applies only to actions after March 31, 1992, when the company is in existence and the licence is in force.
Thus the signing of a Heads of Agreement relating to the interconnector, which occurred before the licence came into force, was not subject to the condition but any decision relating to the interconnector taken after March 31, 1992, is.
I have not undertaken a review of NIE plc's purchases of generation and I am not in a position to comment on the relative costs of the various options.
May I refer him to the reports on economic purchasing issued in December 1992 and February this year by my counterpart in Great Britain, Professor Littlechild, for an indication of the complexities involved in this type of exercise?
My terms of reference as Regulator are mainly the Electricity (Northern Ireland) order 1992 and associated regulations and licences.
G R HORTON Office of Electricity Regulation, Fountain Street, Belfast.
People awards
READERS might like to know that they can play a part in choosing the UK ‘People of the Year’.
People in any field — business, sport, those who have shown courage or bravery, the arts and entertainment — can be nominated by writing to me.
The awards are organised by the Royal Association for Disability and Rehabilitation (RADAR) and sponsored by Leeds Permanent Building Society.
Until 1992 the event was known as the ‘Men of the Year’, but the organisers considered that in this day and age the title was outmoded.
Among the last year's award winners were Sally Gunnell, Linford Christie, the Speaker of the House of Commons, Betty Boothroyd, Roy Castle, Linda Chalker and Dan Maskell.
But we emphasis that nominations need not be famous names; they just need to be people who have distinguished themselves by their courage or achievement.
Peter spells it out in black and white
‘IF you get through, it's great.
If you lose, it's a disaster.
That's it in black and white.’
Down manager Peter McGrath's clinical assessment of next Sunday's senior championship joust with Derry aptly sums up just what is at stake at Pairc An Iuir.
The Mourne boss is determined that his side will make up for their semi-final defeat by Derry last year but refuses to embrace this as an additional spur in his motivating process.
‘What happened last year is over and done with.
We are now in a new championship and we will be starting from scratch on Sunday,’ states the Newry schoolteacher, ‘To get through the first round is always a big task.
My players know how hard it will be and they are ready for the challenge.’
Down, who will train tonight in Newry and again on Friday, have placed the emphasis on physical fitness allied tio mental alertness.
Manager McGrath has watched as both Cavan and Fermanagh have been caught napping in the championship so far and does not want a similar fate to befall his side.
‘It is vital that we maintain our concentration for the entire match.
It only takes one lapse and a match can undergo a total transformation — there must be no slip-ups,’ adds McGrath.
His preparations were further boosted when Barry Breen and Gary Mason came through week-end training sessions without mishap having been previously sidelined through injuries.
Both will be further monitored tonight.
With John Kelly already declared fit and James McCartan back from suspension, McGrath has grounds for feeling optimistic.
But he has considerable respect for Derry, a side he has encountered on numerous occasions to date during his speel in charge of Down.
When he announces his side tonight following training, it is safe to assume that McGrath will include perhaps as many as thirteen of the players who won the All That's the kind of experience they will take into the match — and perhaps may yet parade in the Ulster final.
Malaria solution
THERE is a very simple and effective prophylaxis for malaria which people generally don't know about.
It consists of placing a small clove of garlic underneath the tongue in hours of darkness when exposed to the carrier — the female anopheles mosquito.
Of course, this can be a problem when sleeping — you would still need a net or wire mesh on windows — given the danger of the garlic lodging in the throat.
(The insect does not bite in the daylight hours).
The way in which this works is simply that the garlic deters the mosquito — no mosquito will come near you in fact.
I am not medical or a scientist, but can guess that the garlic affects the whole of the blood stream as far as the insect is concerned.
It is angering to meet with the retort from some doctors that this is so much mumbo-jumbo, when they have not themselves lived in malarial areas and when they know that the present anti-malarial drugs on offer are not failsafe.
I have used this method as a precaution with complete success in Nigeria — an area of high malaria incidence —and can vouch for its efficacy.
ROBERT BALLAGH Belfast Road, Holywood.
Cards sought
I AM writing to ask if any readers have business cards — not necessarily their own — which they are prepared to donate to my collection with the hope that, one day, it may be large enough to gain some form of record.
C EDWARDS PO Box 21, Ashton-under-Lyne, Lancs OL6 9DZ.
Double murder: man being questioned
A POLICEMAN was today being quizzed in connection with the double murder of a retired Co Tyrone minister and his daughter.
The Rev Eric Davidson (74), and Judith Anderson (35), were found dead after a blaze at the minister's home at Drum Road, Cookstown, on December 15 last year.
Police initially believed the pair had died in the fire — but within three days a full-scale murder hunt was launched.
Post-mortem examinations revealed ‘unexplained injuries’ inflicted on the victims before the blaze started.
Mr Davidson was battered to death while his daughter's eye was pierced with a knitting needle.
The bodies were discovered by Mrs Anderson's only child, eight-year-old Kelly, when she returned home from a school function.
Judith, a nurse, was living with her father after being separated from her husband.
The RUC today confirmed that a man was being questioned by detectives.
However, a spokesman said it was not police policy to discuss the occupation of people helping with inquiries.
Detectives have carried out more than 800 separate inquiries and taken over 170 statements killer.
Derry's big chance comes at long last DERRY County Board chairman Harry Chivers today totally discounted the team's recent success in the Dr. McKenna Cup final against Down — and with good reason.
Chivers, providing dynamic leadership as Derry get ready for their most important match since last year's Ulster decider, is adamant that the side can play much, much better than they did in the McKenna climax.
‘Down fielded a weakened side but about nine of our players from that day will be championship contenders,’ stresses Chivers, ‘The McKenna Cup final was a pedestrian affair but next Sunday's game will be about life and death.
Our lads know this and it's many months ago that they first trained their sights on success in Newry.’
Even when Derry were achieving the occasional result in the National League, the talk invariably centred on one match — versus Down in the championship.
‘That has been the only topic of conversation throughout the county lately,’ adds Chivers, ‘We beat them last year at Casement Park, then fell to Donegal in the final.
We sold ourselves short then but we believe we have the ability and the temperament to cope on Sunday.’
Derry's recent injury problems have been well emanating from the county today is quite simple — the fifteen players selected for duty on Sunday will be expected to do us proud!
‘There is no point in bleating.
Sure, we would like to have everyone available but we must make the very best use of what we have.
I'm confident that no one will let Derry down,’ adds the county chairman.
Double take for Minors
DERRY Minors could be forgiven for suffering from ‘double vision’ as they prepare to meet Down in the Ulster MFC on Sunday.
For the team is controlled by not one but two John McGoldricks!
The duo are cousins and share a fanatical interest in under-age football.
So much so, indeed, that they were given the task of overseeing the Minor side this year.
And even though Derry won only one game in the Ulster Minor League, that statistic is causing no sleepless nights within the Oak Leaf county.
Championship success is what is high on the agenda and the McGoldricks hope their players can deliver a measure of this on Sunday.
Their deliberate, low-key approach means that Derry's preparations have been carried on virtually behind closed doors but they have nothing to hide.
Indeed, they have a lot to show, including the skills of players like Ronan Rocks, Johnny McBride, Damien Hasson, Louis McPeake and Colm O'Loughlin.
The ‘two Johns’, both from Bellaghy, have paid diligent attention to detail in their team's preparations and their track record with under-age sides is enviable.
Cahill ready for kick start
CAVAN football team manager P.J. Carroll today revealed that full forward Fintan Cahill had been an absentee as his side completed their preparations for last Sunday's match against Monaghan.
Cahill, an insurance company executive, had spent last week at a seminar in Florida and only returned home on Friday night.
He was still suffering from jet-lag but opted to plunge in at the deep end against Monaghan.
He took time to settle and it was not until the second half that he began to make a positive contribution to the match.
Now manager Carroll is hoping that a keyed-up Cahill will make an impact right from the start of next Sunday's replay.
‘Fintan is a clever, sharp player and I feel he will have a much greater influence at Breifne Park,’ states Carroll, ‘Besides, we expect to have even bigger support there and that should be an additional bonus.’
But while Carroll expects Cahill to make his presence felt, he is also determined to see a much more concerted effort from the Blues' defence.
‘Our backs were disappointing in some respects against Monaghan,’ he chides, ‘We gave away two goals within a couple of minutes and you simply cannot do that and expect to win championship matches — it's not just on.’
Bernard Morris and Aidan Connolly were exempted from managerial criticism while Stephen King's midfield authority evoked praise from Carroll.
And he believes that Ronan Carolan can repeat his form of Sunday last, too.
‘He scored six points from frees and four from play and there's nothing wrong with that — a similar helping would do nicely this Sunday,’ smiles Carroll.
Cavan will complete their preparations for the game with a light work-out at Breifne Park tomorrow night.
Donegal on song
ANYONE who thinks that Donegal are a spent force following their National League final defeat by Dublin should think again.
Brian McEniff's side took on a full strength Roscommon in a challenge match at the week-end and won by six points.
What's more, Tony Boyle, much maligned after his two abortive outings against the Dubs, scored four points.
Declan Bonner was not in the Donegal line-up — he was far too busy running the show in a club championship match.
He turned out for Na Rossa against Convoy and scored an incredible 2–11 within the space of thirty five minutes.
He had been held scoreless for the first twenty-five minutes of the game but certainly went to town afterwards!
Help groups warn of crisis over fuel tax
VOLUNTARY groups in the province today warned they would be flooded with desperate demands for help from people forced into cash crises by the Government's plans to impose a VAT levy on domestic fuel.
They fear the rises will lead to more cases of hypothermia among pensioners and an increase in illness among children in lower-income families.
The proposal has already provoked widespread anger in the province, which has some of the highest fuel bills in the UK.
The voluntary organisations fear the groups least able to afford the rises of 8.5pc next year, doubling to 17pc in 1995, will be hit hardest.
They are particularly concerned that the poor, elderly and sick will be forced to run up debts or cut down on the amount of electricity, coal, oil and gas they use.
Derek Alcorn, regional director of the Citizens' Advice Bureaux, said pensioners and children would be at risk of illness and hypothermia if the plan went ahead.
Les Allamby, casework manager for the Belfast Law Centre, agreed the voluntary sector would face an increased workload if the rises went ahead.
‘There were 2,200 electricity disconnections 1991.
That means one in ten disconnections in the whole of the UK is in Northern Ireland.
‘The average yearly fuel bill here is already £200 a year more than in Great Britain, and these rises will lead to ‘voluntary’ disconnections, with people being forced to use less coal and electricity.’
The ten groups supporting the anti-VAT campaign include the General Consumer Council for Northern Ireland, Help the Aged NI, the Anti-Poverty Network and Energy Action NI.
‘Mother killed man accused of raping child'
A MOTHER stabbed to death a pensioner the day after charges alleging he raped and indecently assaulted her four-year-old daughter were dropped, a court was told today.
The 40-year-old woman from Wakefield, West Yorkshire — who cannot be named to protect her child's identity — was charged with murdering John William Lockwood (65) of Halton Road, Wakefield.
Reporting restrictions were lifted at Wakefield magistrates court after an application by Stephen Switalski, defending.
Roger Stevenson, prosecuting, said that in January the little girl told her mother Mr Lockwood had sexually abused her.
Police investigated, a file was submitted to the Crown Prosecution Service and Mr Lockwood was arrested and charged with rape and indecent assault.
Mr Lockwood was due in court last Thursday and the mother went to the court with another daughter, aged 19, he said.
Mr Lockwood did not appear and the daughter went to his home and demanded to know why.
He showed her a letter from the CPS saying proceedings against him had been discontinued because of lack of evidence.
The daughter told her mother and, said Mr Stevenson, that appeared to have been the last straw for her.
After drinking some vodka, she went to Mr Lockwood's home and demanded to see the letter from the CPS.
He got in his car for safety and locked the doors.
She tried to get in, then smashed the driver's window with a knife and was seen stabbing towards Mr Lockwood, who was trying to defend himself, said Mr Stevenson.
He shouted to his wife that he had been stabbed and when the woman walked off he staggered from the car and collapsed.
He was dead on arrival at hospital.
The woman was remanded in custody until Friday.
Mortgage lending down due to recession
Ulster housing cheapest in UK
ULSTER homebuyers borrowed £415m from building societies in Northern Ireland last year, it was revealed today.
The slow-down in the housing market due to the recession resulted in a 10pc drop in mortgage lending, compared to the previous 12 months.
But the province fared better than the UK as a whole where building society mortgage lending fell by 20pc in 1992.
Canny Ulster investors showed their preference for saving rather than spending during the recession, putting £204m into the societies' coffers last year, compared to £175m in 1991 and just £61m in 1990.
The figures were revealed in a review of the local housing market by the Northern Ireland Committee of the Building Societies Association (BSA).
Success Committee chairman Derek Young, Belfast manager of the Alliance and Leicester, said: ‘Building societies in Northern Ireland have performed well in 1992.
‘Some of their success in attracting savings may have been due to people's desire to save rather than spend and they are well placed to fund mortgages for those now planning to buy homes.’
BSA economist Bev Taylor found that house prices in the province rose by 2pc last year, comparing favourably with a fall of 4pc across the UK as a whole.
And she revealed that first time buyers in Northern Ireland have the most affordable housing in Britain.
Prices currently below the national average which has helped to make mortgage repayment less of a burden on income than in Great Britain.
‘Under 13pc of income on average was spent on initial mortgage repayments in Northern Ireland in comparison with nearly 18pc for the UK as a whole.’
The BSA report also reveals that despite the slump in the construction trade, private sector builders started work on 6,199 new houses last year, up 12.1pc on 1991.
Sales of Housing Executive homes to tenants amounted to 3,191 last year, down on 4,120 the previous year.
Sales are likely to drop further over the next three years, says the report.
Investors set to make another killing
CLEVER Ulster investors are set to make a killing on the forthcoming NIE and British Telecom share sell-offs, a local building society boss predicted today.
Bill Webb, managing director of the Progressive, said Northern Ireland investors know just how to play the market — and win.
‘In our experience of past privatisations, customers have dipped into their savings to fund the share purchase and then returned to us a month later to deposit the proceeds of an immediate sale.’
Despite current low interest rates — which mean a low return on savings — the society has seen an increase in deposits, mirroring the trend reported in the BSA review.
‘Personally, I thought there would come a time when people would say ‘What's the point of saving if interest rates are so low?’
‘But actually people are still very keen to save, although they are much more aware of all the different rates and products offered by various institutions.
It's a competitive market.’
Progressive has had an exceptionally good start to 1993, said Mr Webb, with demand for mortgages currently running at around 50pc above last year's level.
‘Demand has been increasing steadily since November and we're now dealing with twice the number of applications compared to the same time last year.
There's a lot of pent-up demand in the market.’
In 1992, the Progressive reported pre-tax profit up 6.9pc to £3.1m.
Total assets grew by 8.7pc to £278.6m.
The society committed £43.7m in mortgage loans.
New air service flyaway success
MORE than 18,000 passengers have flown on the new Belfast City to London Gatwick service since it took off two months ago, Jersey European revealed today.
Demand for the service is 25pc higher than expected and the company has bought a new aircraft which will enable it to run extra flights.
The new plane, a British Aerospace 146 ‘whisper jet’, will be based at Birmingham, and will also increase the Belfast City-Birmingham service from four flights a day to five.
And Jersey European will now run five flights daily on the popular Belfast-Gatwick route, said the company's managing director, Trefor Jones, who was in the province today.
The BAe 146 will also fly the Belfast-Blackpool services.
Starr cancels Derry shows
TIME-OUT
ZANY comedian Freddie Starr (right), has called off his two concerts in Londonderry next month.
News of the sudden cancellation is no laughing matter for the hundreds of fans who bought tickets for his two-night run at the Rialto.
Ticket-holders for the performances will be given a refund.
Freddie was due in Derry on June 4 and 5.
Originally, he planned only one show but demand was so high for tickets that an extra night was added to the tour.
The Rialto will giving out full refunds to all ticket-holders for both shows.
NO such last-minute hitches are anticipated for tomorrow night's concert by Frances Black and Kieran Goss at the Guildhall.
James Blennerhassett will also be performing with the tuneful twosome.
The pair gained rave reviews for their Belfast concert earlier this week and are likely to be just as good tomorrow night.
Mary Black, France's big sister, is also playing in Derry this weekend.
She will be in concert at St Sunday night.
So all concert-goers can sit back and enjoy plenty of Black magic this weekend.
TONIGHT is the penultimate night of the Crack's Ninety Comedy Club at the Delacroix Inn.
One of Dublin's funniest comedians Carl McDermott will be appearing as well as Scotland's answer to Paul Daniels — Kevin Kopfstein, a magician/ comic.
IRISH band The Saw Doctors will be playing at the University of Ulster in Coleraine tomorrow night.
Tickets can be bought at the Richmond Centre in Derry.
CD of the Week — Various Artists ‘The Posse’(A&M Records)
Like all movie soundtracks, this album is likely to improve considerably after watching the film.
The big screen picture —‘Posse’— looks set to break new ground in Hollywood.
It's a traditional western focused on the adventures of black cowboys.
The soundtrack captures the mood of the film with some macho exciting music combined with some mellow saddle-up-and-ride-into-the sunset stuff.
The Neville Brothers feature on the best track ‘Let the hammer fall’.
Foyle Labour says thanks
THE Foyle Labour Party Press officer Len Green has thanked the people across Londonderry who voted for the party in last week's local government election.
Although the party failed to gain a seat, Mr Green said it would not deter the Labour group from running again in local polls.
He said: ‘The majority of people have voted on strictly tribal lines, for the SDLP and Sinn Fein on the one hand, and for the DUP and Official Unionists on the other.
‘But the performance of the Labour candidates indicates that, if a viable alternative political force presents itself, a sufficient number of people may be prepared to break ranks and vote in a way which does not tend to propel our communities into deadly conflict with each other.’
Mr Green added: ‘It is clear that the middle ground in Derry favours the ideas put forward by Labour.
Also, the transfers to and from Labour were spread right across the political spectrum, demonstrating that people of every persuasion find merit in what the Labour candidates stood for.
‘Therefore, Labour will be back in strength in the next election, and in the meantime, will be tiny of the performance of the council which has been elected on this occasion.’
Coroner ‘not prepared’ to accept constable's evidence
Inquest told RUC man was ‘lying'
A CORONER has said he was not prepared to accept some key evidence from a woman alleged to have had a love affair with Constable Allen Moore.
The admission came as Mr John Leckey cross-examined Ulster's top psychiatrist Dr Alec Lyons at the inquest into the deaths of Moore and his three victims.
Earlier yesterday Constable Sandra Dougan told Belfast Coroner's Court Moore was ‘lying’ when he had claimed they were lovers and insisted they were just ‘friends’.
When Mr Leckey asked whether the fact Moore telephoned her three times before the killings and once afterwards showed there was ‘something special in the relationship’, she said she did not know why he called.
Mrs Dougan, who attended the court with her husband, added: ‘I was a friend and he wanted to speak to one of his friends.’
She said other friends did not have phones.
But when Mr Leckey asked Dr Lyons if he was prepared to accept that explanation, he replied: ‘No’.
Mr Leckey said: ‘Neither would I’.
In his specially-commissioned report, Dr Lyons pinpointed what he saw as the four factors leading to his suicide.
They were depression, an alcohol problem which included a heavy drinking bout the night before he killed himself, the disgrace he had brought on himself.
And he said there were a number of errors in the supervision of Moore after he had been discovered firing shots over the grave of a dead colleague.
Dr Lyons said Moore should have been escorted the morning following the cemetery incident when he left the home of a colleague where he had spent the night.
He said arrangements should have been made to actually take him to a medical officer and said he should not have been allowed to leave Comber and Newtownabbey RUC stations when he called that day.
‘If he had been stopped, the tragedy would have been prevented,’ said Dr Lyons.
Moore's suicide note was also read to the court.
In it he wrote: ‘I'm sorry.
The people I love them know I love them without saying any more.
Love you lots, Mum and Dad, Allen.
I will always be with you.’
Dr Lyons said Moore may have used the phrase ‘the people I love’ because he did not wish to name those involved as his parents might see the note.
The doctor also said it was a ‘disgrace that young men’ in the RUC were killing themselves and no-one was studying the problem.
He said figures revealed there from 1978–93 there had been at least 57 suicides within the force but that the police authorities were reluctant to admit this.
And he added the problem was heightened because young men in the DMSU units such as that in which Moore had served would feel ‘stigmatised’ in seeking help because it ‘would show weakness’.
Bomb-making materials found at Constable Allen Moore's home were similar to those in three devices used in attacks in 1991.
One was a booby-trap bomb found in Belfast.
It would have been detonated by a pull-line to a switch, a forensic scientist officer told the Coroner's Court.
sent through the post to addresses in Carnlough and Roslea on October and November 1991.
The forensic officer said it was unclear from examination how the Carnlough device would operate because the materials were in a ‘disrupted’ state when they arrived at the laboratory.
The inquest continues.
Row rages on Mayhew Iraq role
OPPOSITION MPs today demanded an urgent Commons statement as disputed claims about the role of Sir Patrick Mayhew in the arms-to-Iraq affair threatened to engulf the Government.
Sir Patrick's vehement denial that, as Attorney General, he had tried to stop crucial evidence about the 1990 Iraqi supergun affair reaching court, failed to quell the demands.
The row grew as MPs questioned the conflict between Sir Patrick's words and the allegations made by Sir Hal Miller, a former senior Tory MP and party vice-chairman.
Sir Hal was not immediately available to respond to the denial today.
Labour and Liberal Democrats said the Northern Ireland Secretary had to make a Commons statement to clear up whether Government Ministers knew the Iraqi arms embargo was being broken.
One MP suggested that, if he did not, he should resign.
Labour's trade spokesman Robin Cook claimed that Sir Hal had ‘blown open the cover-up’.
But Whitehall sources dismissed the call and underlined Sir Patrick's own categorical statement.
Ex-defence minister Alan Clark, a key figure in the controversy, in ‘very honourable’ man.
And he cast doubts on Sir Hal's ‘preposterous’ allegations, given in evidence to the Scott inquiry which is investigating the supergun affair.
Sir Hal alleged that Sir Patrick urged him not to produce documents which could have cleared businessmen accused of illegally exporting weapons.
But Sir Patrick said last night: ‘I have never urged Sir Hal Miller or anyone else to withhold evidence which would advantage a defendant.
‘I should be glad to give evidence to Lord Justice Scott's inquiry.’
Mr Clark said he accepted Sir Patrick's word ‘entirely’.
‘I think it is very peculiar that someone can just give evidence, like Sir Hal Millar, and not be cross-examined on it at all.’
But Liberal Democrat spokesman Menzies Campbell said the allegations were ‘very serious’.
‘I think the Government will feel very embarrassed about what's been said.
‘I think Sir Patrick will, undoubtedly, have to go before the inquiry…but I don't believe that will be enough.’
New hope of funding as MEPs look to province
A GROUP of MEPs will visit Northern Ireland, to examine work carried out using European funding, SDLP leader John Hume has disclosed.
Speaking from Strasbourg, Mr Hume said: ‘They will be looking at new ways in which structural funds can assist us.
‘I will be hoping that would lead to special attention for our problem as the most peripheral region in the north west of the European Community.’
Mr Hume said: ‘This is especially important because of our exclusion from the EC's cohesion fund.
I am very interested in building a special case for an additional structural fund because of our exclusion.’
When the European Parliament's regional policy committee last carried out a study in Northern Ireland it produced the Martin report, which resulted in £63m for housing, he added.
Mr Hume said the committee made only one annual special visit to a selected EC region, and had agreed unanimously to come to Northern Ireland later this year.
Final curtain
THE Princess of Wales's favourite touring ballet company, The London City Ballet of which she is patron, is to close in July claiming it failed to receive promised Arts Council grants.
Train smash
A PASSENGER train smashed into a truck on a level crossing near Lisbon killing the train driver and injuring about 30 passengers.
The truck driver survived with injuries, firemen said.
Aid increase
BRITISH medical aid to Croatia is to be extended, Armed Forces Minister Archie Hamilton announced last night.
AIDS agenda
THE health ministers of 21 countries met in Brazil on Tuesday to discuss a common strategy for combating AIDS, including research to find a vaccine.
Shuttle delay
AN improperly marked spring in one of Endeavour's engine pumps could delay next week's planned launch of the space shuttle, NASA said in Cape Canaveral last night.
Deportation death
A CHINESE man was dead as scores of Chinese being held for deportation attacked guards in an attempt to escape from a detention camp in Honduras, authorities said last night.
Sour note economic recession has said it would produce only 4.2 million tonnes of sugar this year, one of the lowest harvests in recent history.
Release day
CHINA will today release on parole Xu Wenli, a leading dissident who has spent 12 years in prison for taking part in the Democracy Wall movement, human rights campaigner John Kamm said.
Awaiting trial
THE UN Security Council is to set up an 11-judge international court at The Hague to try people accused of war crimes in the former Yugoslavia, including murder, rape, ethnic cleansing, torture and other atrocities.
Refugee rejection
GERMANY looks set to slam the door on hundreds of thousands of foreign refugees when its parliament votes on whether to limit political asylum rights.
Ballyclare lets its hair down
ALL the fun of the fair has been the order of the week at this year's Ballyclare May Fair.
The event this year boasted its largest ever grand opening parade, with the theme ‘Our Town At Work And Play’.
Among the entertainments on offer are amusements, a band parade, stalls, sports and a grand finale fireworks display.
Yesterday business was mixed with pleasure when the traditional horse fair was held, featuring plenty of spirited horse trading in the Main Street.
Continuing the animal theme yesterday there was a show of Clydesdale Horses in the Main Street and the finals of the sheep shearing competition.
Today it is the turn of the youngest members of the community to get into the picture, when a Bonny Baby Contest is held at the Youth Centre.
And tonight those with large appetites will be taking part in a bean-eating competition, live on stage in The Square.
Those interested in less energetic pursuits can take part in the mixed pairs darts at RBL2, Harrier Way.
Tomorrow, senior citizens will be top of the agenda, when a sing-a-long and magic show will be held in the Town Hall between 2pm and 4pm.
Marjorie Rea will also be appearing and there will be tea afterwards.
Throughout the week the pupils of the council's art class in Ballyclare High School and their tutor, Di Whitla, have been exhibiting their work in the Town Hall.
Queen Mother hospital staff suspended
THREE hospital staff members have been suspended after being caught trying to peer into the Queen Mother's room, it was revealed.
The three, all male teenage domestic workers, climbed on to a roof of the Aberdeen Royal Infirmary on Friday, a day after she was admitted.
A police spokesman said: ‘Apparently they were trying to get a better view of what was going on.’
He said they did not get near enough to the 92-year-old Queen Mother's third-floor room to pose a security risk.
It is believed the roof they clambered on to was not even on the same floor.
They were quickly spotted by police, taken from the roof and reported to the hospital authorities.
‘There was never any question of anyone being charged.
We had a word in their ears and it was left to the hospital to deal with them,’ said the police spokesman.
The workers have been suspended under the Health and Safety at Work Act and will be dealt with at a disciplinary hearing shortly.
man Alan Reid said they had not been disciplined because a member of the Royal Family had been a patient there.
The hidden life of Tiny Rowland
FEW men in public life have so successfully concealed their activities and provoked such controversy and mystery as Roland ‘Tiny’ Rowland.
Inside Story (BBC-1 9.30pm) producer Tom Bower presents the first investigation into Rowland, unravelling his past, tracing the controversial path which earned his fortune and revealing those who have benefited and suffered under his single-minded dictat.
Born in India in 1917, he was educated in Germany and Britain.
In 1948 he left Britain following a dispute with the Inland Revenue.
He returned to London in 1961 from Rhodesia to develop the Lonhro corporation into a unique global commercial empire which employs more than 100,000 people and, until recently, also owned The Observer Newspaper.
Battle for succession
IT IS 1945, and the time of the first post-War General Election.
During a gathering of families at beautiful Seal Park, to christen a grandchild and celebrate the return of the good life after the War, a battle for succession is resolved in Country (BBC-2 9.00pm) continuing ‘The Richard Eyre Season’.
‘Country’— first shown in 1981 as a BBC-1 ‘Play For Today’— is written by Trevor Griffiths, directed by Richard Eyre (now Director of the Royal National Theatre) and produced by Ann Scott.
Peter flies flag PETER Purves, best-known as a presenter on ‘Blue Peter’ despite a couple of mishaps, is subject of TV Heroes (BBC-1, 8.50pm).
Danny Baker reveals that Purves literally swam to ‘Blue Peter’ success — he first appeared in a life-saving item on the programme before becoming a regular.
The first programme Purves presented was on November 20, 1967.
Purves was previously a teacher, and also a straight actor, appearing in ‘Z Cars’ and as an assistant in ‘Doctor Who’.
He also made an appearance in ‘EastEnders’ on October 13, 1987.
Gunsmoke action JAMES Arness as Marshal Matt Dillon, keeping a tight rein on law and order in the give a new generation of viewers the chance to see the classic 1960s Emmy award-winning Western adventure series Gunsmoke (BBC-2, 6.50pm).
The action takes place in tough Dodge City, Kansas during the 1880s, and centres on the lives and experiences of five people: Matt Dillon, the dauntless and fearless United States Marshal; Kitty Russell, proprietress of the Longbranch Saloon, a woman with a heart of gold who has eyes only for Dillon; Chester Goode, Matt's deputy; Doc Galen Adams, the kindly, dedicated physician; and Festus Haggen, Matt's unkempt, hillbilly deputy.
In this opening episode, Marshal Matt Dillon tracks down and tragically kills Ray Gilcher, an outlaw but a man who was once a friend.
Filled with remorse, Dillon decides it's time to resign his post and he turns in his badge to a new marshal, Clint Tucker.
Deputy mayor's post ‘wide open'
ULSTER Unionist councillor John Adams today dampened speculation that he was in line to be Londonderry's next deputy mayor.
Current SDLP deputy mayor Annie Courtney is almost certain to be elevated to the top post at next month's AGM but the deputy's position remains wide open.
If the pattern of recent years is followed, the new deputy will be a unionist, under the rotation policy adopted by the majority party, the SDLP.
The last two unionist mayors have been an independent and a DUP councillor, making an Ulster Unionist the favourite this time round.
Alderman Adams, the most senior Ulster Unionist, has emerged as the front-runner.
But today he said: ‘No-one has approached me and it's mere speculation at the moment.’
The SDLP and the DUP council leaders are both playing their cards close to their chests in the run-up to the June 7 AGM at which the top two mayoral posts will be decided.
The SDLP's Pat Devine said that his party would be working out their policy for the AGM at a series of meetings involving all 17 of their councillors.
He said today: ‘The positions of mayor and deputy mayor are very important items on the agenda.’
The DUP's Gregory Campbell refused to be drawn on his party's attitude to the issue.
He said: ‘Our position is that we will not be making public statements about who we may or may not be putting forward for the mayor and deputy mayor's position.’
Anger has been simmering in SDLP ranks since DUP leader Ian Paisley and Mr Campbell both criticised the party's ‘power-sharing’ policy in the run-up to last week's election.
Criticism arrangement and pointed out that William Hay had only been elected the first DUP mayor after being nominated for the fifth time.
Senior members of the SDLP are believed to have taken great exception to the criticism.
Mr Hay was elected Mayor last year with full SDLP support.
Only eight unionists remain on Derry City Council — one independent, two Ulster Unionists and five DUP representatives.
Port rush tee time
Top amateurs get in the swing of things
THE DAY the Amateur Championship came back to Royal Portrush after 33 years dawned calm and still after torrential overnight rain.
But a drop of rain is no problem for the famous Co Antrim golf links set among the sand dunes behind the strand.
‘Best thing that could have happened,’ said club captain Bill Logan, an eye specialist at the Royal Victoria Hospital in Belfast.
‘It's like a long drink to a thirsty man’.
And the course, beautifully manicured in preparation for one of golf's oldest championships, looked like a landscape painter's dream as play began at 7.30 on the dot yesterday morning.
In front of the clubhouse, the flags of the 20 or so nations represented among the 260 competitors hung limply in the flat calm as the early starters fidgeted nervously awaiting their call to the first tee.
But they would not be still for long.
The weather forecast bulletin provided by the Met Office for the tournament predicted — under the appropriate heading ‘hazards’— a strong easterly wind.
But that, and the problems it posed, came later.
As the dawn patrol began the first of their two qualifying rounds from which 64 players will move into the match play stage the only sound to be heard was the twittering of larks overhead.
‘Your honour, Mr Stahl, and good luck,’ said the starter on the first tee at Royal Portrush's Valley course as Cincinatti businessman and Amateur regular, 54-year-old James Stahl Jnr stepped up at 7.30 to do battle.
And it was an honour in both senses, for, like his counterpart on the first tee at the Dunluce course — qualifiers play both championship.
‘Hardly slept a wink last night,’ he said, ‘worrying about missing my starting time.
But at least I'm staying in Bushmills, so I may be diving into a vat before the week's out.’
But he will have to defer that pleasure for he shot a six over par 76 and must make amends in today's even more exacting outing on the Dunluce.
Stahl belongs to that dyed-in-the-wool amateur breed who follow the sun not for money but for fun.
With the scratch golfer's appreciation of a demanding test of skill, he loves Royal Portrush, and appreciates just as much the way he was greeted by the club.
‘They are naturally excited about getting the championship back after 33 years,’ he said.
‘and what I particularly like is the way that they make you feel so welcome.
I'm really enjoying myself.’
This was after his round.
As he spoke there were others who were not enjoying themselves quite so much, for the wind had got up and men were finding out what the soft spring this year had done to nurture growth in the grass lurking on either side of the fairways.
Back at the clubhouse, it was just another day's work for the club professional, the irrepressible Dai Stevenson, who has been dispensing tees and sympathy to the Portrush members for 16 years, as had his late father, the legendary P G Stevenson, from 1922 to 1977.
A truly remarkable family connection of over 70 years.
Dai told the story of how one of the visitors, a wealthy industrialist, came into his well stocked shop to use the phone and find out how things had been going at work during his absence.
‘You'd have heard him all over the shop,’ he said, ‘and he came off the phone complaining that he'd just lost 40,000.
‘I asked him was that pounds or dollars and he said dollars, so I said sure that's not so bad and offered him £5 off the price of a new sweater.
We all have to make a living.’
Meanwhile, in the clubhouse bar, the young Turks just off the course compared scores and swings and the older members sipped ruminative gins and tonic and waxed nostalgic about the last time the Amateur was played on their course.
That was in 1960 — I was there myself was won by that great Irish player, Joe Carr.
On his way to the trophy he met and defeated in the quarter finals an up and coming English youngster, one Michael Bonallack, now secretary of the game's ruling body, the Royal & Ancient, and present in his official capacity at Royal Portrush this week.
Success for Bonallack was not to be long delayed, for in 1961 he won the championship for the first of what was to be five times, the fifth being at Royal Co Down in 1970, the last occasion on which it was held in Northern Ireland.
He talked about how many of the young players this week would be tempted into professional ranks by the golden vision of all the money that is there to be earned on the circuit.
‘My advice to them would be that if you can't win as an amateur, you won't do it as a pro,’ he said.
In the bar, where the staff gently chided the occasional American for sacrilegiously ordering ‘a Bushmills with Coke’, the hi-tech which accompanies the modern golf tournament contrasted quaintly with the club's superb gallery of historic old golfing photographs and prints.
Here are the game's finest traditions juxtaposed with modern technology and beating it with holes to spare.
In one corner, a blue computer screen blips out the latest scores for anyone with good enough eyesight to read the small print.
In another, there is a splendid portrait of that great old Scottish professional of yesteryear, Tom Morris, who won the last of his four British Open titles in 1867, 18 years before the Amateur championship was inaugurated.
Looking at the primitive clubs and golf balls which Morris would have had at his disposal in those days, it was engaging to speculate on how, with this equipment, he would have handled Portrush in an awkward easterly wind.
It's for sure that he'd have had respect for the course.
This week, the venerable ‘Royal’ links, 105 years old and still tigerish, was at its majestic best.
Right name
IN Monday night's North West edition, newly-elected Londonderry DUP councillor Bill Irwin was wrongly named as Billy McIlwaine in a caption to a photograph.
Fingerpost goes monthly
DERRY'S popular community magazine ‘Fingerpost’ has decided to go monthly due to public demand.
In the first issue, which is currently on the streets and on sale in all good book shops, there is an article on The New Religion — the Church of the Jobs-to-Come, a look at the behaviour of a section of Derry City fans and an investigation into industry and a clean environment.
The magazine also contains a problem page, church spy, stories, poetry and horoscopes.
Each issue of the magazine costs £1 or £12 yearly subscription.
Republic stores food ‘while millions starve'
THE scandal of more than one-third of a billion pounds worth of intervention food being held in cold storage in the Republic while millions of people are dying in Africa has angered TDs.
Fine Gael spokesman on foreign affairs Jim O'Keeffe said the government could not feel happy that such an amount of food was ‘hoarded on this island while millions of people starve’.
He called on the government and the EC to ‘deal with this awful situation where we are sitting on such a mountain of food while millions are starving’.
Minister of State for Agriculture Brian O'Shea revealed that a total of £360,623,000 worth of food was in intervention at the end of last month.
The gross cost to the exchequer of storing this food was £55m.
Some £39m was received from Brussels, leaving a net cost of £16m to the exchequer.
Mr O'Shea said that in an ideal world, Mr O'Keeffe's point was absolutely valid and he totally supported him in that.
He stated that the Irish government always pressed that food supplies would be sent to areas of distress where it was practical to do so.
But sending food in was not always an effective mechanism because in countries where there was starvation and deprivation there were invariably problems in terms of distribution because of armed conflict.
He added: ‘The bottom line is that efforts are continuing.
The government will and has supported the provision of these stocks into areas where it is practical to get them.’
Fine Gael spokesman on agriculture government to take an initiative to ‘beef up’ distribution of the European Community's food aid programme.
Derry firms set sights on Chicago
THREE Londonderry companies are to take part in a huge trade exhibition to be held in Chicago next month.
The overseas trade fair will give 25 companies from all over Northern Ireland the opportunity to sell to hundreds of US buyers.
The three local companies taking part in the three-day show are Callan Knitwear, Edel McBride, knitwear designer, and St Brendan's Irish Cream Liqueur.
The show is being organised jointly by the Industrial Development Board and the Irish Trade Board.
With 87 exhibitors from the Republic taking part, the 112-company event is the biggest-ever overseas promotion of goods from either North or South.
The exhibition runs from June 11–13.
Executive director of IDB's marketing development division, Mr Alan Hingston, said: ‘The idea for the US exhibition developed from the highly successful joint promotion in Liberty's store in London in August last year.
‘During that event 60 Northern and Southern companies took part, generating business worth almost £250,000 for the 26 Northern Ireland companies involved.’
Chicago show was ‘aimed at leading US consumer goods buyers’.
‘Products on show from Northern Ireland will include high quality clothing and textiles, pottery, crystal and speciality food and drink.’
Floral lessons for Claudy WI
AT THE May meeting of Claudy WI, N Brown of Walworth Garden Centre showed the members how to plant tubs and hanging baskets for a good display during the summer.
The competition for a healthy pot plant was won by A McClelland while S Coll was runner-up.
The winners of the raffle were S Coll and A Montgomery.
Hume and Trimble clash over talks with Sinn Fein SDLP leader John Hume has clashed with Unionist MP David Trimble over the impact of his continuing talks with Sinn Fein president Gerry Adams.
Mr Hume, speaking in a BBC World at One interview yesterday, vowed: ‘But I'll keep talking until I get lasting peace.’
The Upper Bann MP said unionists wanted Mr Hume to end his dialogue with Sinn Fein, before any fresh talks could be considered.
Mr Hume told him: ‘We have made it very clear that what we are seeking in our dialogue is an overall strategy for lasting peace.
‘That means a complete end to all violence.
‘I will talk to anybody if I can bring about lasting peace.
That's what I am about.
No one doubts my opposition and total opposition to violence.’
Asked if he accepted Mr Hume's word, Mr Trimble replied: ‘I think a very serious question-mark — I am sorry to say — has to be placed against Mr Hume's motives, because he is persisting in talking to republican paramilitaries at a time when other people are anxious to see positive dialogue taking place.’
But Mr Hume said he was ‘quite willing’ to talk to unionists as well.
‘I am quite willing to talk to loyalist paramilitaries.
I have made that clear.
I'll talk to anyone, that's my job.’
Mr Trimble interrupted: ‘We draw a line at terrorists.’
The SDLP leader retorted: ‘I don't need advice from unionist politicians who have not only talked to paramilitaries, they have sat down with them, in order to achieve political objectives working together.’
He added: ‘The Ulster Resistance Movement was set up by loyalist politicians, and it's their guns that are now killing innocent people.’
A case for stronger links in food chain
FOOD production, food processing and food marketing are each part of the chain between farmer and consumer.
They are, however, different links in the chain.
Too often, policies for the food industry get confused because the distinctions are blurred.
This is not a new problem, nor is it only a local problem.
The following paragraph appeared on the last page of a recently published official report: perhaps it should have been nearer the front!
‘So long as food is a function of the Department of Agriculture…food will remain subordinate to agriculture.
At best, our vision for food will be restricted to the agricultural horizon.
At worst, food will be allowed develop only to the extent that it serves the needs of agriculture.
This, I suggest, is what has been happening up to now.’
The opinions are those of one of the island's best known food retailers; Feargal Quinn, of Superquinn.
His comments came as a minority report to the Expert Group on the Food Industry in the Republic.
He made clear that he agreed with the thrust of all the other recommendations, except the one which said that responsibility for food should remain within the Department of Agriculture.
To put the point no more strongly, there is an issue here to be resolved.
It is an issue which applies North and South on this island.
Until this issue is resolved, efforts will be wasted as different agencies fail to operate in an agreed framework and, unintentionally, the value of different efforts will be diminished.
In the various comments made by Lord Arran, as Minister with responsibility for agriculture, there are signs of this dilemma.
In January, Lord Arran said that there was a need to solve the problems of improving sales and seeing where Government could help.
Then, on April 9, he commended a group, none of whose names was included in the Press release, called who suggested that the industry should set up a body to be more pro-active and dynamic in the promotion of food products.
This was followed by Lord Arran's speech at the Balmoral Show where, according to some reports, Lord Arran seemed to challenge his own civil servants to come up with new ideas.
Again, however, he spoke in general terms about greater competitiveness and supplying what the market wants but failed to suggest what steps he intended to take.
Is the Northern Ireland food industry doing well, or badly, in the outside markets?
By the comments of Lord Arran, things could be a lot better.
By comparison with the ambitious ideas in the report of the Expert Group in Dublin, both North and South could do a lot better.
Yet, on April 28, one of Lord Arran's senior advisers published an article which started by saying that ‘Northern Ireland’ is well known as a successful food producing region with innovative manufacturers and efficient farmers.’
Of course, the local economy would benefit if Northern Ireland supplied a larger part of the EC market for food as well as increasing exports elsewhere.
However, Feargal Quinn makes a valid point when he argues that to talk about farm-based commodity production and the factory based processing to meet consumer demands as if they are one industry is a misleading simplification.
Farms supply commodities which are inputs to food processing.
Farms may need to be encouraged on the marketing of their output…to processors.
A Department of Agriculture might function more effectively for agriculture if it did not take on, unnecessarily and confusingly, a role in food marketing.
The difficulties are well illustrated by the terminology sometimes used: the agri-food industry.
Such a term tries to encompass all the elements but with danger that the different responsibilities are then blurred.
The Industrial Development Board has a group of executives specialising in developing the food processing industry.
They may even claim some capabilities in assisting the promotion and marketing of food.
Where to they fit in Lord Arran's new design?
Perhaps now is the opportunity for a Northern Ireland Expert Group to straighten machine.
This ought to be one of the easier local economic problems to solve!
Flowers for anniversary
CENTENARY celebrations at Saint John the Evangelist parish church, Malone Road, Belfast, begin with a flower festival this weekend, organised by the NI Group of Flower Arranging Societies.
During the festival an exhibition on the history of the church will be presented by parishioner Dr Paul Larmour, an architectural historian.
Gala concert
THE City of Belfast Youth Orchestra will hold a gala concert at the Ulster Hall, Bedford Street, tomorrow night (7.30pm).
K is for…know your client
UNDER the terms of the Financial Services Act, it is the duty of a financial adviser to know the client.
What exactly does this mean and how is it achieved?
It means getting factual details, but more importantly, understanding the client's aims and aspirations.
It also means ensuring that any risk inherent in investment advice is explained to the client and clearly understood by him.
To obtain the factual details, the adviser will complete a confidential questionnaire or ‘fact find’.
This will start with basic background of names and dates of birth of the client, spouse and children.
Information will be taken on income from all sources: from paid employment, investments, pensions and/or State benefits.
This will be followed by an analysis of capital assets: value of personal residence (is it mortgaged?) holiday home, details of bank and building society deposits, National Savings shares, unit trusts, bonds etc.
The next stage is a policy profile, which will itemise savings plans, life-cover policies and pension schemes.
If the client is a company director of a partner, then business details will be required.
These could include the value of the company or practice, turnover, pre-tax profits, bank loans and overdrafts.
In the case of a company director, it will be important to establish whether there are director's loan-accounts and, if so, whether personal guarantees have been given; whether, if there is a buy/sell agreement, key-person assurance has been arranged; and whether or not a pension scheme is in force.
In the case of a partner, it will be necessary to determine whether there is a partnership agreement and to have details of partner capital accounts.
As we can see, it is necessary to acquire a considerable amount of information about the client.
However, as a doctor would not be happy to give a diagnosis without knowing all the patient's symptoms, so the financial adviser would not wish to make recommendations without knowing the full financial background.
In this week's article, I have described the ‘hard’ facts which need to be elicited by the financial adviser.
Next week, I shall demonstrate how these should be used as the foundation for the financial planning necessary to establish and achieve the objectives of the client.
Festival to make drama out of crisis
AMATEUR drama lovers have vowed the show will go on despite being bombed out of the venue for their drama finals for the second time in two days.
Last week the Ulster Amateur Drama Festival had to be moved at a few hours notice, after Belfast's Grand Opera House was extensively damaged by a 1,000lb bomb.
Now it has emerged that the bomb which devastated Portadown on Saturday severely damaged the town hall, venue for the province's One Act Drama Finals this Saturday.
Although the damage is estimated at £100,000, the Association of Ulster Drama Festivals is confident the curtain will rise at the hall as planned.
Festival organiser Ruth McKinley, said: ‘It is unbelievable that lightning should strike twice.
‘No sooner had everyone recovered from the trauma of having to reschedule the full-length play festival than we heard about Portadown.
‘The irony is that the town hall was one of the alternative venues considered after the Opera House was wrecked, but the hall was already booked.
‘A major clean-up is for Saturday's festival.
There is no way that the repairs will be completed on time, but we have been assured that the hall will be patched up and the festival will be running as planned.’
Two of the drama groups involved in the Grand Opera House disruption — The Holywood Players and The Theatre 3 Group — will also perform at Portadown.
The festival starts at 8pm and tickets will be on sale at the door.
Elephant has trunk severed in zoo attack
AN elephant in Dublin Zoo had its trunk severed by a visiting elephant from Chester Zoo, the Dail has been told.
Green Party TD, Trevor Sargent, who called for a debate on the matter, said that, as a result, the injured elephant could not feed itself.
He urged the zoo authorities to return the attacking elephant to Chester ‘where there is a social group of elephants of which it is a member’.
Mr Sargent said that the elephant was at Dublin on loan and the Chester authorities had given an undertaking that the animal would be taken back if it could not be happily accommodated.
He said that the two elephants had to be kept apart and they were increasingly confined to avoid fighting.
The Speaker, Sean Treacy, ruled out a debate on the matter.
Top soldier's marriage set to end: claim
LIEUTENANT-Colonel Bob Stewart, who commanded the British peace-keeping force in Bosnia until earlier this month, has reportedly returned home to marital difficulties.
He has formed a close relationship with a woman during his six months in Bosnia and now wants to end his 19-year marriage, the Sun newspaper reported today.
Colonel Stewart (43) became Britain's best known soldier as millions watching television reports of the conflict in Bosnia watched his troops protecting aid convoys as part of the UN force.
Viewers saw him explode with fury at militiamen who tried to stand in the way of aid convoys, and shake with emotion at the tragic plight of victims of ethnic cleansing.
Colonel Stewart was re-united with his wife and family when the regiment returned to its base in Fallingbostel, Germany, only 11 days ago.
But later editions of today's Sun newspaper say Colonel Stewart and his 40-year-old wife, Lizzie, are now living apart and have consulted solicitors.
Diana's lunch partner was voice coach
The mystery man seen leaving a restaurant with the Princess of Wales is a former Coronation Street actor who is thought to have been giving her voice coaching, it was disclosed last night.
Peter Settelen (42)— who appeared in three episodes of the long-running soap in 1974 as a brewery executive named Warren Coates — was seen lunching with the Princess in London this week.
His agent confirmed the meetings were to discuss voice training.
The revelation comes after speculation that the Princess was receiving assistance after her speech a few weeks ago at an eating disorders conference.
There was a dramatic difference in her delivery compared with earlier public speeches in which she talked quickly and was accused of mumbling her words.
She has been hampered by her awkward delivery when making speeches on what are often highly emotive subjects.
She pauses in the wrong places and puts emphasis on words which do not merit the stress, giving the effect of a halting delivery.
Nevertheless, on subjects which include the eating disorder bulimia nervosa and AIDS, she still manages to convey a depth of passion in her speeches often lacking in those of other members of the Royal family.
A spokeswoman for Mr Settelen's agents, London Management, confirmed last night that a photograph of the Princess emerging from a restaurant with red-headed Settelen had followed a ‘business meeting’.
She said: ‘He is a director, writer, actor and a voice coach’.
Asked if he had been regarding his voice coaching, she said: ‘I believe so.’
Peter Settelen has a long list of television credits to his name, appearing in Crown Court and Z-Cars.
His television career has also had a ‘Royal’ connection.
He appeared in a children's BBC Jackanory playhouse production of the Prattling Princess in which he played Prince Hugo.
And in an episode of the comedy Brass he was the Duke of Windsor.
A Buckingham Palace spokesman, asked if Mr Settelen had been hired to coach the Princess, said: ‘If he has been, it's a private arrangement and we have no details on it.’
Lendl now seeks British ‘comfort'
IVAN Lendl was today looking to Britain's grasscourt season to resurrect his flagging career after failing miserably in his bid to land a fourth French Open title.
The 33-year-old Czech-born American will almost certainly make straight for the turf at the Direct Line Insurance championships in Beckenham after being bundled out of Roland Garros by unheralded French qualifier Stephane Huet.
However, Lendl's appearance at the curtain raiser to the grasscourt circuit will depend on his recovery from a foot injury picked up during his shock 3–6 7–5 6–0 7–6 defeat.
‘I'm going to go to England very soon.
Whether I play (at Beckenham) or not will depend how my foot feels and also on practice possibilities,’ he said.
His hopes of adding Wimbledon glory to his collection of eight Grand Slam titles now look more forlorn than ever, even though he insists: ‘You cannot give up after one day.’
Although Lendl finished a runner-up at Wimbledon in successive years in 1986–87, the lawns of SW19 have proved a major stumbling block for the former world number one.
Huet, a 22-year-old ranked 297 in the world, could hardly believe his success over the seventh seed.
‘The idea of playing him was magical.
I knew I should not miss that appointment with him and I had to succeed in the match,’ he said.
World number one Pete Sampras reached the second round with the loss of one set against potentially dangerous clay-courter Andrei Cherkasov of Russia.
TD calls for clamp on terrorist gang
A FINE Gael TD today called for a Garda crackdown on a gang of terrorists who, he claims, are the ‘nerve centre of a crime ring’ in his midlands constituency.
The Fine Gael TD for Westmeath, Paul McGrath, told the Dail that a group of terrorists had set up a firing range on the shores of Lough Derravarragh last week and fired off 1,000 rounds of ammunition from Kalashnikov rifles.
He believed they may also have exploded blast bombs.
Anti-aircraft gun He said the car used in the shooting of three RUC constables some time ago had been stolen in his constituency, and a lorry used in ramming a British Army checkpoint was also stolen in the area.
He added that it was believed an anti-aircraft gun was in the locality and that it was fired recently.
Mr McGrath called on the Minister for Justice, Maire Geoghegan-Quinn, to put suspects under surveillance on an around-the-clock basis.
He said: ‘You will be doing a service for the people of north Westmeath and, indeed, to the people of Ireland, North and South, if you enable the Garda to successfully prosecute these people and put them behind bars.’
Mrs Geoghegan-Quinn said the shooting incident on Lake Derravarragh was being investigated.
After reports that gunfire had been heard, gardai and troops cordoned off the area and a major search operation was undertaken.
She added: ‘The Garda authorities inform me that a quantity of spent ammunition rounds was recovered in the course of the search, and that these are currently undergoing forensic examination.
a high calibre which is normally associated with subversives rather than criminals groups.’
Fair old canter for White Horse
THOSE great racey bits of music sent the crowd away happy from ‘The White Horse Inn’ with Fortwilliam Musical Society at the Arts Theatre last night.
Surely this is a show where the music reigns supreme.
Somehow, you can sing ‘Goodbye’ till the cows come home, and it comes up as fresh as ever every time.
Indeed Michael Blair did it full justice several times last night and who says Josef Locke wasn't standing in the wings giving it an envied ear…
Last night's presentation of this very old and very, very popular musical provided a lot of notice and much needed financial assistance for the superb Glenveagh Special Care School in south Belfast.
Here, through the use of music, art and drama, very educationally disadvantaged youngsters are given a new insight into life.
This is yet another Northern Ireland example of self help in a very needy situation.
But back to the show, and immediately to a couple of men, for a start.
What a talented fellow Peter Kennedy is, and is there no end to his energy and expertise?
Last night, as John E Grinkle, a chap from Lancashire, he was superb putting fire into a show which was somewhat slow to get going, and the second act was consequently the better of the two.
Running Peter a close second was the equally versatile Paddy Jenkins, as Sigismund Smith.
A great talent here, and a veritable rubber man.
Paddy's a real treat to watch on stage.
Voice-wise, perhaps.
that of Helena McCriskin was very dis .
Josepha, as the owner of the White Horse Inn, did a particularly good job on the part and her performance got better and better.
Elsewhere, there was Joanne Laverty, a hardworking John McGrillan, Paul Toal, Joe O'Connor, Siobhan Mullin and Paul Anthony.
Great entertainment this, and the audience loved it.
Somehow the atmosphere of the theatre last night was light and informal and no doubt many hundreds of other patrons will enjoy the show before it comes to an end on Saturday night.
It's well worth a visit.
Richards in wars but Lions win
DEAN Richards went to hospital for an x-ray on his jaw after a prolonged second-half punch-up as the British Lions beat North Harbour 29–13 in Auckland.
Richards used his feet vigorously in a ruck and as the locals took exception he was punched on the jaw.
North Harbour coach Brad Meurant said: ‘Everybody helped their mates.
That's what I expect.’
North Harbour's Frank Bunce needing stitches in his head after the brawl.
The Lions will decide whether to complain about the assault on Richards when they have seen the video of the game.
The Lions were nearly penalised out of the match by referee Alan Riley, conceding the unacceptably high number of 20 penalties, especially in the line-out, but coach Ian McGeechan denied that he was worried, even though he was ‘puzzled by the decisions.’
The Lions eased away after the anticipated all-action start from North Harbour and a 70-yard touch kick by Rob Andrew set up the first score in the ninth minute.
Andrew fed Tony Underwood on the diagonal and Hastings caught a rebound off Will Carling's shoulder to give Andrew a rare international try.
Hastings converted from a long way out before John penalty attempt.
Underwood launched his career as a Lion perfectly when Carling, Andrew, Scott Gibbs who had a blinder and Hastings gave him some room.
He beat Rush and when tackled chipped the ball behind the line and followed up to score.
Hastings and Carter exchanged penalties before the interval.
In the 64th minute the Lions' control was threatened when flanker Apollo Perelini was part of a two-on-one against Ieuan Evans, who had no chance to stop the try that Carter converted.
During this spell the Lions went 35 minutes without being awarded a penalty but conceded 10.
When the referee finally noticed a North Harbour infringement Hastings missed the kick, but it is inconceivable that North Harbour were guilty of offending against rugby's laws only twice in the second-half.
In the final eight minutes it all came right again.
Dewi Morris, Peter Winterbottom, Andrew, Gibbs and Hastings transferred the ball crisply and Evans surged in with typical power.
Hastings converted beautifully from the right touchline and added the points when replacement loose forward Richard Webster was powerfully driven over between the posts in the final minute.
Lions: G Hastings (Scot, capt); I Carling (Eng), T Underwood (Eng); R Andrew (Eng), D Morris (Eng); N Popplewell (Ire), K Milne (Scot), P Burnell (Scot), W Dooley, M Bayfield, M Teague, D Richards replacement R Webster (Wales), P Winterbottom (Eng).
North Harbour: I Calder; E Rush, F Bunce, W Little, R Kapa; J Carter, A Strahan; R Williams, G Dowd, K Boroevich, B Larsen — replacement D George, D Mayhew, A Perelini, R Turner (capt), L Barry.
Zimbabwe rookie is a fast learner
ZIMBABWE'S Lewis Nuridzo has been a scratch player since the age of 14 and called himself ‘God's child of fortune’ after shooting a 71 on the first day of the Amateur championship at Royal Portrush where the winner collects only a trophy and medal, not money.
It was on the shorter, wind-sheltered Valley course that young Lewis marked his baptism in the Amateur, so his task today was a more formidable one.
He faced the challenge of Dunluce, a 6860-yard, par 73 giant that had already brought quite a few players to their knees, among them title favourite Phil Tataurangi.
The young New Zealander never looked comfortable in a freshening breeze and slumped badly to an 80 that left him in danger of missing the match-play cut.
He could need a 70, or better, to survive.
Not so Nuridzo however.
This 18-year-old rookie averaged 69 over four rounds to win the Zimbabwe Championship some weeks ago and plays a stronger game than his dad, the professional at Wyngate, a posh club in suburban Harare.
‘I'm here to learn,’ he said matter-of-factly.
‘Both Portrush courses are tougher and so different from anything at home, but I like them.
For me, wind and rain could be a problem.’
Matt Stanford, a 23-year-old full-time amateur from Saltford, had the lowest score of the day, a 67 on the Valley.
He too is a newcomer to Portrush, but who would have guessed it from a three-under card that showed 16 pars, one eagle and one birdie.
Bradley Dredge, last year's beaten finalist, also looked poised for a 67 after a run of five straight birdies to the 11th on Dunluce, but happily settled for 69 as the wind reduced the 17th to a drive and short iron, but put the 18th out of range for everybody.
Dredge is still only 19 and good enough to play Walker Cup.
Best of the Irish was Robert Hutton, 68 on the Valley, and Milltown's Jody Dunluce wasn't bettered until the twilight stage of a long day.
Jody had help from a two-iron gifted to him by Darren Clarke and hit it solidly before finishing on a high note birdie-eagle over this great links.
David Cameron, a 34-year-old Coleraine engineer, and Lisburn's Robert Heasley both made 71 here and are well placed for a good finish tonight, after which the field will be trimmed to 64 players and ties for the knock-out tournament proper.
Garth McGimpsey and Raymond Burns were both out on the Valley today after overnight 75s.
Heat is on in battle for sausage honours
FOR years we have claimed to have the best butchers in the United Kingdom.
The proof of this is found in the number of championship trophies they brought home from national competitions, in different parts of the British Isles.
The names come easily off the tongue: David Burns, Roland Wysner, George McCartney and many others — worthy winners who took their laurels in the face of stiff competition from all over the country.
They brought praise and prestige to their trade while reinforcing Northern Ireland's reputation as the home of good food.
Their participation in such competitions was is expensive.
After paying entrance fees, they often found themselves out of pocket to the tune of £1,000, just for the privilege of taking part.
But they never quibbled; put their money alongside their confidence and took the silverware home to Northern Ireland.
Imagine the surprise then, in local meat circles, when it was learned our representatives would not be allowed to take part in the bi-annual National Sausage Competition in Harrogate.
One of the sponsors maintained only sausage-makers from England, Scotland and Wales could enter.
They severely under estimated the enthusiasm of the Ulster meat fraternity.
Now a formula has been worked out which enable sausage-makers from the province to take part in this prestigious contest.
Back among the best in the land will be entrants from Northern Ireland their prowess will instil some little fear in the hearts of other competitors.
I have a niggling thought, too, there are some who would have been quite content to have our representatives remain at home.
Is there a deeper fear that someone from this little part of the world could become another champion of champions like those who went before?
It would be a fitting ending to a scenario which need never have arisen if an entrant from the province does take the top award.
It will be no mean achievement.
But it has been done before so why not again?
VOLLEYBALL
Geoff's challenge
NORTHERN Ireland's junior men's squad face an exciting challenge in an end of season tour to the North of England at the weekend.
Head coach Geoff Hill feels that the hard work of a season training deserves an outlet against good opposition.
‘Despite what I thought to be a clear understanding on the part of their coaching staff, the Republic's squad that played against us in the St Patrick's Day match in Enniskillen, was too old and too experienced.
Their U-24s knew too much for my U-16 year olds,’ said Hill.
This weekend Hill knows the competition will be tough but that his players are ready for the challenge.
Hill is accompanied by manager and Maxinova Newtownabbey stalwart Mervyn McDowell.
Four Larne boys will be in the squad — Marc Booth, Peter Sheppard, Conor McKernan and Bill McNeill.
Three members of the Northern Ireland Division II winning Portadown Aztecs side complete the squad, Mark Pollock, Paul McIlwaine and Michael Magee.
The first match at the Hillsborough Centre, Sheffield, is against the Lancashire County U18s, several of whom are in the England squad.
The Northern Ireland youngsters will then have a training evening with the England Juniors (U-17s) and follow that with a full match.
On Sunday, the strong Yorkshire U-18s will provide a tough final match at the Hillsborough Leisure Centre.
KARTING
McAdam in fast lane
ON Saturday 130 of Britain's fastest kart racing drivers will take part in the Townparks Car Sales sponsored opening round of the British championships for gearbox driven machines.
The short three round championship will mean that all the championship contenders must get a good result and since results from the two heats also count towards championship points, racing throughout the day is guaranteed to be close and fast.
A number of the visiting drivers will also be using the event as valuable race practice before round two of the European Championships at the circuit on July 2 and 3.
Top local driver is Richill's Stephen McAdam in the fast 250 National class.
Stephen finished fifth overall in last year's championship and although he won this round at the circuit last year, he will face tough competition from the mainland entrants.
FELL RUNNING
England's strength
ENGLAND will have a strong representation in the Stena-Sealink international fell race on Saturday.
They will be competing against teams from Scotland, Wales, the Republic of Ireland and Northern Ireland over a four and three quarter mile course on the steep slopes of Knockdhu nar Carncastle.
Their senior men's team of Steve Hawkins, Mark Croasdale, Sean Livesey and Mike Kinch will start hot favourites to retain the team.
Hawkins from Bingley is the reigning British champion, livesey finished fifth at Knockdhu last year while Kinch was runner-up at the second race of the British championship in Wales two weeks ago.
Former Olympic XC skiier, Croasdale is the man in form having won the first two rounds of the British championship breaking course records in the process, and clocking a useful 63–47 for the half marathon in York.
The ladies team is headed by Carol Greenwood who won a big international race in the Pyrennes just last week while three of the junior men team picked up silver team medals at last year's World Cup in Italy.
WATER POLO
Diamonds on show
DONEGALL Diamonds ladies water polo team will stage a Junior tournament at the Grove Pool on Sunday (start 12 noon).
North ‘in control'
CHAMPIONS and section one league leaders Waringstown are in danger of going down to their first defeat of the season.
2 WARINGSTOWN
It will take a peak performance in the field at Ormeau tonight to preserve their unbeaten record after being restricted to 109 for nine by North.
North, second in the table and also undefeated, have given themselves a great chance of pulling off a win which will close the gap at the top.
There was no hint that Waringstown would be kept down to such a moderate total when Shane Harrison and Brian Sturgeon put on 46 for the first wicket.
Both scored 24 but the rest of the night belonged exclusively to North and more specifically pace bowlers Alan Donnelly and Simon Corlett.
Donnelly back in section one after playing for Armagh, took four wickets for 25 and Corlett two for 20.
Some superb striking by Michael Glass took Ballymena out of trouble after Lurgan had whipped out their first three batsmen for nine runs at Eaton Park.
Glass hit 91 which included 11 boundaries, his half century coming off only 40 balls.
The Glass blitz enabled Ballymena to reach 170 for nine.
Lurgan earned their four bowling points through a spell of sustained accuracy from veteran Alan Johnston.
He took five wickets for 18 in a full 15 over stint.
North v Waringstown.
Waringstown 109 for nine (S Harrison 24, B Sturgeon 24; A Donnelly 4 for 25, S Corlett 2 for 20).
Match continues tonight.
Ballymena v Lurgan.
Ballymena 170 for nine (M Glass 91; A Johnston 5 for 18).
Match continues tonight.
7 WARINGSTOWN
CYCLING
Bell hopes to hit the right note again
An all-star field will take part in tonight's Calor Gas Grand Prix in Ballymena town centre with riders from England, Scotland, Wales and the south taking on the local stars.
The programme gets under way with a juvenile race at 7 p.m.
This is followed by an overflow event and then the main event over the triangular 650 metre circuit of Wellington St., Church St. and Mill St. Mike Bell from the Merseyside team won in 1990, lapping all but two of the field in the process.
However, the standard of the field tonight will make such a feat unlikely.
Bell is supported by Gary Adamson and ex-pro Dave Williams.
Last year's winner Raymond Brownfield is on the NICF team along with local hero Andrew Moss and the UCF include Cormac McCann and Tommy Evans.
Late entries are a Tipperary team which includes '90 Irish sprint champion Declan Byrne, Mark Kiely, who had a very good Ras and Ray Clarke.
In his last weekend racing before defending his British Milk Race title which starts on Sunday next, Conor Henry was 9th in the 180 kms Paris-Chauny and 10th in the 160 kms Paris-Fontenay.
Stephen Roche, who has been spending the season preparing for the two big tours of Italy and France, seems to have got it right.
On yesterday's third stage of the Giro d'Italia from Rieti to Scanno, the Dubliner finished 4th behind Piotr Ugromov, a Latvian riding for the Mecair team.
HOCKEY
A Six-hit already!
THE Antrim Sixes, the biggest sixes hockey tournament in the United Kingdom, will see almost 200 teams in action next month.
Again backed by Tennent's Lager, the Sixes will run from June 2–12, catering for senior men, junior men, veteran men, senior ladies, intermediate ladies and junior ladies.
Games will take place at Antrim Forum each evening, starting from 6–45pm, with semi-finals and finals scheduled for Saturday June 12 with a 2pm start.
Meanwhile, Cathal Brugha moved into a four point lead at the top of Division Two of the National Vincent's from Dublin 5–4 at the Grove Pool last night.
With two games left to play Brugha now need only one point to lift the title and ensure Division One status next season.
Nicky McCormack (2), Jonathan Giles, Len McDonnell and Dessie Monaghan got the scores for Brugha in a very scrappy game.
UN acts to set up war crimes court
THE United Nations Security Council has voted to establish a war crimes court at The Hague to try those accused of murder, and other atrocities in the former Yugoslavia.
It will be the first international tribunal of its kind since the main allied powers set up courts at Nuremberg and Tokyo after the Second World War to try leading Axis war criminals.
The vote on yesterday's resolution was a unanimous 15–0.
The court, not expected to be in operation before September, would include 11 judges with a staff of 373 at a cost of around £20 million during its first year of operation.
The Security Council endorsed a 34-article statute governing the functioning of the court, which will try cases involving grave breaches of the Geneva Conventions, violations of the 1948 convention against genocide, and other serious crimes against humanity and the laws of war.
These include mass killings, murder, rape, torture, pillage, the wanton destruction of property and ‘ethnic cleansing’.
The resolution was sponsored by France, New Zealand, Russia, Spain, Britain and the United States.
US ambassador Madeleine Albright said the US was determined to see that women jurists sit on the tribunal, that women prosecutors ‘bring war criminals to justice’ and that the systematic rape of women and girls be prosecuted thoroughly.
Meanwhile, Bosnian Muslims and Croats stopped fighting today in Mostar and will exchange prisoners taken in pitched battles that devastated the ancient city, Croat radio reported.
It said UN military observers helped after it collapsed in a dispute over control of the local police, prompting new fighting for territory yesterday between the former allies.
Economist warns of tough times
THE province's economy has been ‘on hold’ during the past two years as the rest of the UK has struggled to cope with the recession, a leading economist said today.
Michael Smyth from the University of Ulster at Jordanstown said that although there were strong indications of an upturn in recent months, Northern Ireland may be facing tough times ahead.
‘The medium-term economic environment in the UK is hostile.
The NI economy is demand-led and based on public expenditure and a recovery in consumer demand in the UK, which will follow on from an export-led recovery, mid-to-late 1994.
‘Northern Ireland's public expenditure allocation may well be subject to cuts during the present spending round, so our medium-term economic environment may suffer.’
Mr Smyth was speaking at an economic review seminar in Belfast organised by the Confederation of British Industry and First Trust Bank.
Pioneer heart op hospital ‘to close'
PIONEERING heart transplant centre Harefield Hospital is earmarked for closure in a National Health Service shake-up, it has been claimed.
The Royal Marsden cancer hospital, St Bartholemew's and Queen Mary Hospital in Roehampton are also under threat, according to BBC TV's Newsroom South East.
It said last night that details were disclosed in leaked drafts of six forthcoming reports on specialist health services in the capital.
Harefield in west London, where leading heart surgeon Professor Sir Magdi Yacoub is based, is recommended for closure by the review group studying cardiac services.
Harefield chief executive John Hunt said: ‘We would be firmly opposed to any such recommendations.
We feel this very strongly.
‘Team spirit and research expertise developed over the years would be lost.’
Conservative MP for Uxbridge, Michael Shersby, said: ‘Harefield is a worldwide, recognised centre of excellence, and it would be an incredible act of vandalism to propose the closure of the cardio-
Final reports from the six review bodies on cardiac, renal, neuro-science, cancer, child cardiac, plastic surgery specialisations are expected to be sent to Health Secretary Virginia Bottomley in the next few weeks.
She has the final word on whether they are put into action or not.
The reviews follow the Tomlinson report earlier this year which also concentrated on ways to slim down health services in the capital.
St Bartholomew's was among hospitals threatened by that report — but it was saved by Mrs Bottomley.
However, the specialist review recommends closure of its child cancer ward and several others, and managers feared this could renew the threat to its existence.
The Department of Health refused to comment on the claims.
‘This is the third ‘leak’ in a fortnight, and the reports haven't even reached Ministers' eyes yet,’a spokesman said.
PA.
Boy engulfed in flames as power sub-station explodes
A SCHOOLBOY was ‘very ill’ in hospital today after he was engulfed in flames when an electricity sub-station exploded.
The terrified 13-year-old ran screaming 50 yards along the road after the accident yesterday before he was caught by passers-by, who smothered the flames.
The teenager, who has not been named, was on his cycle within feet of the sub-station in Hartley Road, Radford, Nottingham, when it exploded.
Firemen were already on their way to the scene because smoke had been reported billowing from the sub-station.
The boy was rushed to Nottingham Queen's Medical Centre with severe burns and later transferred to a specialist unit at Nottingham City Hospital.
A hospital spokesman declined to reveal the youngster's condition, but a police spokesman said he was ‘very ill’.
Eyewitness Gary Toft (29) said: ‘There didn't seem much danger of it going up, but suddenly there was an almighty bang.
The young lad, who was sitting on his bike nearby, took off down the street with his back and legs covered in flames.
‘He was yelling out in terror and must have run 50 yards before two blokes caught him and rolled him about the pavement to put the flames out.’
Nobody else was hurt, but surrounding houses were scorched by heat from the blast.
The explosion created chaos on surrounding roads when traffic-lights were put out of action.
today continue its investigation into the cause of the explosion.
Courtaulds a market pleaser
ALMOST every sector was marked down in early dealing as sellers dominated the market.
Brokers believe the market will lack any clear direction over the coming weeks as spare institutional money will be earmarked for the Government's gilt auction, the BT3 share sale and the Zeneca rights issue.
Although the FTSE opened in positive territory, it quickly fell to be 3.3 down at 2834.4.
Chemicals group Courtaulds was one of the few to register any positive movement.
The 3pc profits rise and an improved dividend payout proved a market pleaser as the stock jumped 5p to 527p.
North West Water's impressive set of results failed to attract support.
The shares were unchanged at 480p.
Other water stocks turned negative on NWW's results.
Anglian Water fell 2p to 475p while Thames Water was also 2p weaker at 499p.
The news that Abbey National's finance director is leaving for condoms to Marigold gloves group London International sent the bank's share running for cover.
Abbey fell 3p to 416p while LIG was steady at 181p.
Barclays Bank was back in investors' good books, firming 4p to 461p, despite its £50m exposure to property group Speyhawk which yesterday appointed receivers.
Music giant Thorn EMI continued to revel in the support it received yesterday following its stunning profits rise.
Today the shares edged ahead 2p to 858p.
Safeway supermarket group Argyll was also one of the select band to enjoy share price rises.
It marched ahead 4p to 318p as investors digested yesterday's annual results.
Man arrested after burglary shooting
A MAN was under police guard in hospital today after being shot during a burglary.
The incident happened when a 66-year-old pensioner picked up a gun during a struggle with an intruder at his home near Ashford, Kent.
Police said the house, at Little Chart, was isolated and a prime target for burglary, but could not comment on reports that the break-in was the eighth the home-owner had suffered.
When he was disturbed, the intruder assaulted the home-owner with a heavy china ornament and then threw him downstairs.
But the pensioner got up and fought back, police said.
After a struggle, he broke free and grabbed a ‘rabbit gun’, warning the burglar that he would shoot if he was attacked again, police said.
The burglar ignored the warning.
He later required surgery to a wound around his kneecap.
‘The home-owner is now on police bail to report back to Ashford police station,’ said a police spokesman.
‘And we are guarding the injured man in the William Harvey Hospital, Ashford, where he has pellets removed from his leg.
He is now in a stable condition.
He has been arrested.’
Playgroup
THE Travellers Support Group is to hold a Pre-school Playgroup Open Day at Ballyarnett Park, on Friday, between 2pm and 3pm.
Antique fair to benefit hospice
A SPRING Antiques and Collectables Fair will be held at the White Horse Hotel at Campsie tomorrow.
The event is being organised by the North West Antique Fairs with the profits mainly going to the Eglinton branch of the Foyle Hospice.
Some of the province's top antique dealers will be in attendance.
Apart from antiques and collectables, a special feature will be ladies antique jewellery.
The fair starts at 2pm and finishes at 10pm.
Overseas water work flows in
MASSIVE overseas contracts, particularly in the Far East, will help underpin growth at North West Water over the coming years, the group said today.
They include a 25pc stake in a £1.25 billion investment programme in Malaysia's waste water system, services for two million people in Mexico City for £285m and a similar £160m project in Bangkok.
‘These contracts offer significant revenues from long-term operations.
They form a significant foundation for the continuing growth of the group as a global water and waste water business,’ said chairman Sir Desmond Pitcher.
He made his comments as the group reported a healthy jump in pre-tax profits to £247m in the year to March 31 from £230m in the previous 12 months.
Warrington-based NWW, the first of the major water companies to report results, is paying shareholders a total dividend of 21.4p per share.
Unions slam amnesty for tax dodgers
A GOVERNMENT amnesty for tax dodgers in the Republic was slammed today by trade union leaders.
The amnesty on an estimated IR£2 billion of ‘hot money’ stashed in illegal accounts in foreign banks provoked sharp disagreement within the Cabinet.
It was agreed on a split decision.
The Taoiseach, Albert Reynolds, strongly supported the scheme to attract money back into the country, while it was opposed by the Finance Minister, Bertie Ahern, and most of the Labour Party Ministers in the Coalition Government.
It is understood that the Attorney General, Harry Whelehan, advised that the amnesty could work to undermine public confidence in the equity of the tax system.
The Revenue Commissioners and senior officials of the Department of Finance also advised against the idea because of the difficulty in implementing the scheme and policing the flow of funds back into the country.
However, the majority of the Cabinet was swayed at the prospect of the exchequer being boosted by about IR£300 tax on any ‘hot money’ repatriated from abroad.
The amnesty applies to money sent abroad prior to April 6, 1991, to avoid the Republic's high tax rates.
The Government warned that it would apply only for a short period.
The repatriated funds will have to be invested in Government bonds for a number of years.
Eddie Browne, joint chairman of the country's biggest trade union, SIPTU, said it was ‘incredible that the Government had decided to reward social criminals’.
Pupils losing out on learning time, claim Ulster teachers
EIGHT out of ten Ulster teachers say Government reforms have reduced time for teaching pupils, a survey revealed today.
The same number also believe the new curriculum and assessment changes have been detrimental to schools, with 40pc claiming education standards have fallen.
The Irish National Teachers Organisation, which organised the survey of about 500 members during the first two weeks of this month, said Education Minister Jeremy Hanley must now delay statutory assessment.
An announcement by the Minister is expected within days.
The survey, sent to the Department of Education, also showed: 94pc of schools are not ready for statutory assessment, 97pc say the assessment system is unworkable, and 97pc have not included official attainment targets in classroom schemes of work.
It also disclosed that 87pc of teachers have not fully incorporated cross-curricular themes such as education for mutual understanding in the classroom.
And almost 60pc said children with special educational needs are worse off since the introduction of the reforms.
INTO Northern Secretary Frank Bunting said: ‘The evidence the Minister wants is now overwhelming and he should stop procrastinating.
The children in the system must no longer be used as guinea pigs.’
Speaking at a press conference at INTO headquarters, he repeated his demand for immediate consultations with teachers, to work out manageable arrangements and restore faith in the province's education system.
Dominic on honours list
THE Ulster table tennis Player of the Year awards will be handed out at the start of the 1993 annual general meeting on Friday.
Dominic McGreevy, winners of the three Forward Trust Grand Prix titles at junior, cadet and under-12 levels, features heavily in the nominations.
He joins his sister Michelle, and Andrea Glover all bound for the European Youth Championships in Slovania, in the RUC Community relation cadet player award short list.
Dominic's opposition for the EK Limberg most improved under 12 player award is Jack McCullaugh from RBAI, Jonny McNamee and another Darragh Cross protege Leanne Skelly.
Brian McRandal, another European youth championship traveller joins Ryan Glass as the final nominations for the BHS most improved junior award, but Dominic McGreevy is assured of honours on Friday when he will be jointly awarded the Crystal Trophy with Wai Sun Chan for gaining maximum Grand Prix points over the season, Dominic's success coming in the cadet boys and Wai Sun dominating the under-21 event.
The Ulster branch annual general meeting at the House of Sport, commencing at 7pm is operating on a new constitution and offers the chance for all affiliated players to gain access to the table tennis, with delegates from clubs carrying voting rights.
‘Away day’ for Lancs
LANCASHIRE face another trip away from Old Trafford in the Benson and Hedges Cup.
Neil Fairbrother's team, who have already won at Surrey and Sussex, were today drawn to visit Leicestershire in the semi-finals.
That is the one clear-cut tie for June 8.
The other match will be at either Taunton or Derby, depending on results in the two quarter-finals to be completed today.
Somerset and Derbyshire managed to get through just 20 overs yesterday because of heavy rain while at Southampton, Northamptonshire need 64 runs off 63 balls to beat holders Hampshire after bad light prevented a finish last night.
Yesterday's Benson and Hedges Cup quarter-final scores:
At Southampton — Hampshire 223–7 (V P Terry 76).
Northants 160–3 (N A Felton 73).
At Leicester — Leicestershire 205–9 (N E Briers 58).
Worcestershire 150 (G A Hick 82, V J Wells 4–37).
Leicestershire won by 55 runs At Taunton — Derbyshire 69–0 v Somerset.
At Hove Sussex 178–7 (C W J Athey 61 no).
Lancashire 182–5.
Lancashire won by 5 wickets
Cunard hits back over QE2 ruling
THE QE2's owners Cunard have hit back after a US federal review board blamed confusion and poor communication for the world's largest liner running aground off the US east coast last summer.
More than 1,000 passengers were taken off when the accident happened on August 7, 1992, en route from Martha's Vineyard, Massachusetts to New York.
After the National Transportation Safety Board review, Cunard claimed charts used by the crew failed to indicate the shallowness of the water.
‘Cunard contends that the cause of the grounding was the presence of significantly shallower depths than those charted.
The QE2 hit an uncharted rock,’ it said in a statement.
‘If correct depths had been shown on the charts, the QE2 would have avoided the area completely and the grounding would not have occurred.’
The Board claimed the crew of the liner, the world's largest, and a harbour pilot made course changes without realising that would take the vessel over a shoal, marked by the crew as an area to avoid.
‘Dangerous’ prisoner caught after break-out
POLICE today recaptured a ‘dangerous’ prisoner who escaped with three others from Edinburgh jail.
George Lindsay (25), from Edinburgh, was sentenced to seven years in November 1991 for attempted murder.
He was caught in a massive police hunt launched after the four fled through a hole in a fence around the jail playing field.
Road blocks were set up by Lothian and Borders police and neighbouring forces were also helping.
A second prisoner was described as ‘dangerous’.
He is Alexander Hillhouse (23), from Glasgow, jailed for seven years last June for culpable homicide.
The Scottish Office said he should not be approached by the public.
The third man who escaped last night was John, known as Joe, Steele (31), who is serving a life sentence for murder for his part in Glasgow's ice-cream wars in which a family of six, including an 18-month-old baby, were killed in a petrol bomb attack.
Steele escaped only weeks ago from Edinburgh prison and turned up in London where he glued himself to the railings at Buckingham Palace to protest his innocence before being re-arrested. escape, Steele telephoned the Daily Record newspaper.
He said: ‘The reason I escaped again was to highlight my case as part of my campaign to prove that there has been a miscarriage of justice.’
Offences The other prisoner on the run is James Gardner (31), jailed last month for two years six months for assault and road traffic offences.
Alan Walker, deputy chief executive of the Scottish Prison Service, said: ‘We view the escapes with the gravest possible concern.’
A fifth man who fled, Louis Cunningham, alias Reynolds, from Dumbarton, was quickly re-captured.
Charity backs smoking ban
THE Northern Ireland Chest, Heart and Stroke Association today urged the Government to withdraw its objection to a proposed EC ban on cigarette advertising.
The Council of Health Ministers of the EC meets tomorrow.
Executive director Andrew Dougal said that 2,439 people die prematurely each year in the province because of smoking.
‘In Northern Ireland as many as one quarter of our 15 year olds are already addicted to tobacco.
‘Surely the Government cannot continue to support this,’ said Mr Dougal.
He claimed the Government was aware that a ban on advertising would help reduce illness and death, but was continuing to succumb to pressure from the tobacco industry.
Courtaulds caution as profits edge up
CHEMICALS group Courtaulds has come through the past year with a 3pc profits rise but is far from confident market conditions will be any easier in 1993.
‘The trading outlook for the business as a whole remains mixed with the slightly more positive economic climate in the US and UK markets offset by a more negative tone in the rest of Europe,’ chief executive Sipko Huismans said today.
He described the results for the 12 months to the end of March as ‘the best we could have hoped for’.
Although sales in its chemicals division fell, productivity improvements and the pound's devaluation enabled profits to remain virtually unchanged.
In fibres and films, profits fell slightly, largely due to weaker prices in the US for viscose rayon.
The UK viscose business enjoyed a good year.
Patients ‘missing out on better drugs'
PATIENTS are being offered second class treatment because doctors are using older, cheaper drugs to save money, it was claimed today.
This means the UK's track record in cutting infant deaths and improving life expectancy is falling behind other major countries where newer medicines are used more widely, said Dr John Griffin, director of the Association of the British Pharmaceutical Industry.
He told a conference in Salzburg, Austria, that the NHS was being ‘penny wise pound foolish’ in the use of medicines.
Beta blockers, introduced in the 1960s, were still the most common form of high blood pressure treatment in Britain, despite an increase in the amount of drug-induced impotence.
Yet patients in Italy, France and Germany had switched to newer ACE inhibitors with fewer side effects and greater benefit to patients with linked problems like diabetes and heart disease, asthma, gout and high blood-fat levels, said Dr Griffin.
Other examples included medicines to combat sickness from side effects of cancer chemotherapy.
These were given to only half the proportion of patients treated with them in France, Germany, Italy and Spain.
Even then, they were in such low doses, they were often less effective.
Dr Griffin said delays in encouraging NHS staff to be immunised against Hepatitis B had cost the NHS several million pounds in two incidents this year as a result of surgeons infecting patients with the disease.
Jobs report: Pendulum swinging slowly — Cooper
Catholic bias claim refuted
THE latest progress report from the Fair Employment Commission proves ‘beyond doubt’ that Catholics are not being given preferential treatment by employers, according to Bob Cooper.
‘There are those who would claim that under the fair employment legislation, preference is being given to Catholic applicants,’ said the FEC chairman.
‘The evidence clearly shows that this is not the case.’
Mr Cooper is also keen to refute the claim, occasionally made by unionists, that the pendulum is swinging towards an under-representation of Protestants in the workforce.
‘There's been a lot of talk in certain quarters about the pendulum swinging too far in the other direction,’ said Mr Cooper.
‘The evidence shows that while it is swinging slowly, it's still a long way from the centre and it's certainly not swinging the other way.’
There's no doubt that Bob Cooper and his team are pleased with the results of the Commission's third monitoring report which shows a marked increase in the number of Catholics in employment — up 3,500 in the past two years.
But he admits there's still a lot of work to be done before the Commission does itself out of a job.
‘There is no room for complacency and these trends will need to be maintained and indeed accelerated if the unacceptable difference between Protestant and Catholic unemployment rates is to be eliminated and if the Commission is to achieve its target of bringing about a situation where there is equal representation of both communities in all areas and sectors of employed.’
This is the first monitoring report to include returns from small firms, those employing between 11 and 25 staff.
It shows that, overall, the breakdown of the 36,755 employees in this sector is 60.9pc Protestant and 39.1pc Catholic — almost exactly the same as the breakdown for the available labour force.
These results leave the Commission free to concentrate on the real problem areas:
Large firms employing more than 250 people where under-representation of Catholics is 5.1pc below target (39pc); The police and other security-related occupations, like the Prison Service.
Out of 11,265 employees, the RUC has just 807 Catholics — 7.4pc of the force.
While conceding that this is an area of ‘great difficulty’, Bob Cooper intends to keep up the pressure on the security forces to improve their fair employment record.
‘It requires a continuous programme of selling themselves to the Catholic community.
It's an issue which must be addressed by the whole community.’
Mix-up rules out Thorpe
FORMER World 500cc Moto Cross champion Dave Thorpe will miss taking part in the Lisburn club's All Star meeting on June 12 because of‘a lack of communication’.
Thorpe who was to have headed the bill said that he had been in touch with the promoters earlier in the year and had agreed to come over provided he was given details in writing.
‘Nothing happened and as I like to race every weekend I signed up for a meeting in France on June 13’, he said.
‘However I wanted to race in Ireland and I was frustrated when the Lisburn club came back to me a few days after I had signed up for the French meeting and gave me the full details.
By then, of course, it was too late.
Three times world champion Thorpe would have been a major attraction at the Lisburn meeting, but in his absence they have signed up world championship rivals Mervyn Anstie and Gared Smith for the Toyota trophy meeting which takes place at Larchfield Estate close to Legacurry, Lisburn.
Details of what looks like being Ulster's best Moto Cross of the year were released by the Lisburn club today and spokesman Jimmy Walker said: ‘In view of the fact that the province doesn't have a world title date this year, we are anxious to fill the gap.’
Belgian rider, Jacky Martens has also been confirmed as a definite runner.
Martens is currently second in the world 500cc championship.
Archbishop welcomes hospital agreement
THE Church of Ireland Archbishop of Dublin, Donald Caird, today welcomed an agreement on the future of the Adelaide Hospital, the Republic's only Protestant teaching hospital.
The agreement will ensure that the Adelaide will fully retain its Protestant ethos when it is merged with two other Dublin hospitals, the Meath and the National Children's Hospital, in a new hospital in the rapidly-expanding suburb of Tallaght.
The agreement, which was announced by the Department of Health, brings to an end six years of controversy over the future of the Adelaide.
Dr Caird said he was happy to accept the invitation to become the hospital's president.
He added that he was glad that his acceptance would enable agreement to be reached by the boards of the three hospitals in relation to management structures, maintenance of denominational ethos and other issues which has caused uncertainty and anxiety in the past.
The Minister for Health, Brendan Howlin, welcoming the agreement on the new hospital, said that it would allay fears that the denominational ethos of the Adelaide would be lost in the new hospital.
The hospital will be a public voluntary teaching hospital and will include a nursing school.
It will be multi-denominational and pluralist in character.
A statement from the Department of Health said: ‘The agreement recognises the mutually-agreed principle that the new hospital be maintained as a focus for Protestant participation in the health services and the continuation of that particular denominational ethos in Tallaght.’
Construction of the new hospital will begin before the end of this year.
Trying times as the rugby season closes
ANOTHER rugby season has just drawn to a close and many followers of the game in Ulster are asking questions about the future.
Perhaps the Ulster PR spokesman might care to comment on the following points.
1.
Representative rugby at senior level, ie games played by the Ulster provincial team seem to be reducing in number each season.
In the season just ended Ulster played once under the Ravenhill lights.
Once upon a time teams from Britain and all over the world were seen under the lights.
Where are they now? 2.
The daylight fixtures are going too, I understand that Yorkshire are bowing out after at least 30 years of playing Ulster every season.
3.
Once upon a time a sprinkling of fixtures with cross-channel clubs was normal, but these too have disappeared.
To summarise, it would appear that rugby in Ulster is becoming more and more insular which can do nothing but harm in the development of the game here.
To those of us who watch the game the fare on offering nowadays is very limited indeed and a cause of some disappointment and annoyance to many of us.
Is there no hope of improvement in season to come?
If there's a better goalkeeper in Britain than Big Tommy I have yet to see him.
The Ballyclare man proved his worth yet again last night as the visitors produced what manager Billy Bingham described as a ‘classic Northern Ireland performance’ in Lithuania.
It's a simple strategy; score a goal at one end and hope Big Tommy saves you at the other end.
With Wright in such commanding form these days, it's bound to succeed.
And it succeeded last night, courtesy of Iain Dowie's excellent strike in the ninth minute of this World Cup Group Three game — and four world-class saves from Wright afterwards.
It took Northern Ireland to fourth place in the group, still in with a mathematical chance of reaching the finals in USA ‘94.
But we'll not hold our breath.
As far as awful games go this one takes some beating.
Come back Ards and Bangor; all is forgiven.
It might have been oh so different had Northern Ireland capitalised on that early lead but instead they treated it like a hot potato and the two points were not safe until the Finish referee heralded it the Finish of the game.
Afterwards Bingham said: ‘This was an excellent result for us.
‘We were under a bit of pressure in the second half but it was our fault.
A second goal would have killed them off but we didn't manage to get it.
Michael Hughes had an excellent chance in the second half’.
I'll say in terms of excellence they come no finer.
A good run and cross from Michael O'Neill left Hughes in the clear with not even the goalkeeper to beat but somehow the little winger managed to put the ball wide of the target.
A goal at that stage, midway through the second half would certainly have ended all the arguments, but Dowie's opener was enough to be going on with.
The big Southampton striker doesn't score enough for his country; this was only his second for Northern Ireland — but it was Hughes tried a shot off the edge of the box, the ball cannoned off a Lithuanian defender and into the path of Dowie who rifled an unstoppable drive past Martin Kenas from 14 yards.
Dowie was delighted at his goal, and it was no more than Northern Ireland deserved after making a positive start in atrocious conditions.
A thunderstorm before the game had made the pitch very greasy, following on from two days of non-stop sunshine.
Driving rain fell throughout the 90 minutes.
But the players were singing in it afterwards and Dowie managed to take a tenner off Bingham; he had bet the manager he would score a goal.
Bingham appeared happy to part with the money but, the goal apart, this was Dowie's best performance at international level.
Both his running and work-rate were excellent; the goal was a tangible bonus.
Kevin Wilson was another who had a fine game; he has developed into a player Northern Ireland cannot afford to be without.
But the star of the show was inevitably, Wright.
‘I am just doing my job’ he said afterwards.
My goodness, he does it well.
Keegan offered him improved terms this week but, why he is not in the Newcastle first team remains a mystery.
Only Keegan knows the answer but Wright posed some serious questions last night.
He pulled off a tremendous save from Sukristovas in the first half and denied the same player in the second.
Add to that breath-taking stops from Kirilovas and Fridikrkas and you get some idea of the man's contribution.
It was essential because by the end of the second half the nerves were jangling.
Lithuania's cause was helped by some ropey Northern Ireland defending, and several occasions when the midfield dropped back too far, causing a traffic-jam in the last third of the pitch.
But when it comes to defending a 1–0 lead few teams are better than Northern Ireland.
They appeared to have lost the art for a while; last night went some way towards suggesting they had got it back.
It was not pretty but it was pretty effective.
Full spectrum of drama across the city
WHILE the Grand Opera House remains closed for repairs — with no date yet as for its re-opening — disappointed ticket-holders for its forthcoming shows have been queuing for refunds.
No Tom Conti this week; no ‘Return to the Forbidden Planet’.
‘The Magic Roundabout’ and the premiere of Timothy West's ‘Himself’will not now be seen.
While alternative venues have been found for Nanci Griffiths' concerts, the rest of us have been forced to imagine what might have been.
We can take consolation in some of the excellent shows which are still playing, in venues that have as yet(fingers crossed) escaped the IRA's attentions.
The Old Museum is playing host to Druid Theatre Company this week, which is playing to packed houses with its wonderful production of Merriman's ‘The Midnight Court’.
The show runs until Saturday, with late night shows tomorrow and Saturday.
Great fun.
Catch it if you can.
And the Old Museum — the venue that never shuts — has just issued its June programme.
Those of us who haven't planned bucket and spade holidays in the howling wind and rain can seek refuge in College Square North and enjoy some first class entertainment.
The month kicks off with the Not-So Innocent Bystanders' production of ‘3 Steps to Heaven’, a new music theatre piece by writer/performer Helen Trew, and directed by local actor Richard Orr.
This tragi-comedy explores one man's promising suicide attempt, and comprises an unholy alliance between Helen Trew, Richard Orr, musician Jules Maxwell and actor Peter Knight.
Later in the month, Belfast Youth and Community Theatre will perform ‘Castle Rackrent’, directed by Fintan Brady, a play which explores the war between brothers.
And still to come is Replay Theatre Company, with its current production ‘The Zoo Story’, which has been touring special schools around the province.
And news from the Lyric.
One more show before the curtain falls.
Visiting company Dynamo Theatre from Montreal will be playing their only gig in Northern Ireland at Ridgeway Street on Saturday June 5.
The company will be performing ‘Desequilibre: The Challenge’ in which a gang of four teenagers escapes from a school party.
From there, anything happens, as these circus trained acrobats and gymnasts take risks on a huge structure built on the stage.
Finally, a quick look ahead, to the autumn festivals.
Belfast Festival at Queen's has announced that the RSC will this year perform ‘Julius Caesar’; the RNT plan to bring ‘Mother Courage’, and The Kosh will make their festival debut with ‘Klub Anima’, a thrilling dance drama.
Derry's October Fest is making plans to bring Co-Motion Theatre Company back to the North with Pat McCabe's too-fab-for-words ‘Frank Pig Says Hello’.
Hurrah.
Anti-euthanasia drive: Storm after the case of Tony Bland
Doctors' petition battle
EIGHT hundred doctors have pledged to oppose euthanasia in the wake of the Tony Bland case, it was disclosed today.
Mr Bland spent four years in a persistent vegetative state after his brain was starved of oxygen in the crush at the Hillsborough football ground in Sheffield in which more than 90 people died in 1989.
His parents and doctors caring for him in hospital faced lengthy court battles before winning the go-ahead from Law Lords to have his feeding tube disconnected earlier this year.
The decision caused a huge public outcry and a national debate on euthanasia.
Now 800 doctors have signed a petition for the British section of the World Federation Of Doctors Who Respect Human Life.
The petition was made public at a conference in the House of Lords as part of a campaign by the Alert group which aims to meet growing concern about the threat of legalised euthanasia.
Chairwoman Dr Peggy Norris said: ‘The Hippocratic ethic — the foundation of Western medicine — is now being ignored; being brushed aside to permit the removal of the aged and infirm, and those like the old soldiers who do not die but take too long to fade away.
‘First the Law Lords allowed a breach of the Homicide Act so that Tony Bland died by involuntary euthanasia, then a Select Committee on euthanasia was set up in their Lordships' House, only to be rechristened ‘Medical Ethics’.
Pity Hippocrates and his oath.
‘I have the signatures of over 800 doctors who will neither kill nor refer patients to be killed.’
Dr Norris said the doctors were demanding protection for all health care ‘homicide’.
Donegal, Bonner on song
Albion in tickets bonanza
WEST Bromwich Albion's second division play-off final against Port Vale at Wembley on Sunday, is to be televised live by Birmingham-based Central TV.
Albion have sold almost 41,000 tickets for their first trip to Wembley in 23 years.
And Port Vale are set to take around 22,000 fans to the twin towers for the second time in a week.
Sterling
THE pound at 10am was 1.5438 dollars and 2.5153 marks compared with 1.5456 dollars and 2.5139 marks at the previous close.
The trade weighted index was unchanged at 80.7.
FT Index
THE FTSE-100 index at 2836.3.
The FT30 index at 9am was down 4.2 at 2202.4.
Schoolboy dies in swing accident
AN 11-year-old boy has died after a tragic accident while playing on a swing in the garden of his Co Londonderry home.
Police said the swing Kieran Michael Donaghy was playing on, was attached to a tree in the back garden of his home at Glack near Ballykelly, when the tragedy occurred.
It is believed the young boy may have become entangled in the ropes of the swing.
He had just returned to his Laurel Road home from school yesterday afternoon when the tragedy happened.
Staff and pupils at Ballykelly Primary School have been deeply shocked by the news of Kieran's death.
A number of pupils and staff are away on a four-day school trip and efforts were being made today to contact them and break the dreadful news.
Ulster terror powers win backing of Europe
SPECIAL Government powers to arrest and detain terrorist suspects in Northern Ireland do not violate human rights, judges in Strasbourg ruled today.
The European Court of Human Rights ruling follows a complaint by Peter Brannigan (29), from Downpatrick, and Patrick McBride (42), from Belfast.
The pair claimed their human rights were breached when they were arrested and held under the Prevention of Terrorism Act.
But the European judges voted by 22–4 to reject their complaint.
The Ulster human rights group, the Committee on the Administration of Justice, has expressed its disappointment at the decision.
It has vowed to continue its international campaign against seven-day detention in Northern Ireland.
Spokesman Michael Ritchie said it appeared the judges had agreed a crisis situation required crisis measures.
But the two men had argued that the emergency had been going on in Northern Ireland for so long, it was a question whether it was a crisis situation or if it had become normal.
‘There should be some kind of effort at rolling Instead, we have had retrenchment,’ he said.
The Northern Ireland Office would make no comment until the whole judgment had been studied in detail.
The European Court said the situation in Northern Ireland justified an exemption for Britain from a requirement under the Human Rights Convention to bring suspects ‘promptly’ to court.
Mr Brannigan and Mr McBride were arrested in January 1989 and held for six days, 14 hours and 30 minutes and for four days, six hours and 25 minutes respectively.
Today the judges effectively stated that the ‘public emergency’ in Northern Ireland was sufficient grounds for the Government to take exceptional measures.
The judges said there was no indication that the exemption was ‘other than a genuine response’ to the terrorist situation.
There was no immediate response from the IRA's political wing, Sinn Fein.
Tourists' breakdown nightmare
PLANNING a driving holiday in France this summer?
Here's a fact to take the edge off your excitement: one in 20 of all British motorists who take their cars abroad are likely to face the ordeal of breaking down.
Engine failure
According to General Accident, about 50,000 drivers find themselves stranded on the autobahn every year.
The most common problem is engine failure.
‘Of the breakdown claims we receive, 34pc involve problems with cylinder-head gaskets, overheating or damage to pistons,’ said a spokesman for the company.
‘Gearbox and clutch failures account for 16pc of claims, steering and suspension problems 9pc, and electrical and fuel-system faults, 16pc.
Accidents and vandalism make up 25pc of claims for loss of use of the vehicle.’
According to GA, the average cost of emergency assistance is £375, with a tow to a garage costing between £95 and £155.
The company warns that it can cost up to £75 a day to hire a replacement car and if your own vehicle has to be transported home the bill is likely to be about £400.
‘Without adequate breakdown insurance, you could find yourself several hundred pounds worse off,’ said the spokesman.
Belfast steps out to do battle
THOUSANDS of people in Belfast were putting their best foot forward today in a bid to beat the citizens of Rostock.
Belfast City Council is hoping 110,000 people will take part in some form of exercise today to notch up a hat-trick of victories in the international fitness challenge.
In previous years, Belfast has seen off Calgary and Frankfurt in the worldwide competition — and now the town to beat is Rostock in Germany.
More than 2,000 events are being held throughout the day, including keep-fit sessions, a wheelchair push, tug-o'-war, mass aerobics, wheelie-bin and trolley races, Irish dancing and an aqua disco.
But people don't have to take part in an organised event to register.
Any form of exercise which increase the speed of the heartbeat and lasts for 15 minutes will qualify.
This can include walking to work or to the shops, jogging, skipping, swimming or dancing.
A council spokeswoman urged people to register their participation as early as possible by telephoning Belfast 683000.
The 25 telephone lines, which will be manned constantly, must shut down at 10.30pm sharp.
The result will be announced at 11pm on Downtown Radio by Mervyn Elder, chairman of the International Challenge Day organising committee.
Race ace relives brush with death
A TOP Co Antrim motorcycle ace today spoke of how he thought he was going to die when he crashed at more than 150mph during a race at the North West 200.
James Courtney from Dundrod only broke his wrist and suffered severe bruising of his back and shoulders, despite being hurled into a field backwards as he skidded off the road.
He said he had fought in vain to control his bike as he hurtled through Mathers Cross, which leads the riders towards Portrush and into the fastest section of the nine-mile long circuit.
James said he was going at almost top speed on his 250cc Honda when the front wheel slipped away from under him.
‘I was on about 12,000 revs and tried to bring the wheel back in at the apex of the corner,’ James said, ‘but it was too far gone and that was it.
‘The bike skidded on past ahead of me and I followed it in to the side of the road.
I was so lucky because the bike cleared hedges and fencing.’
James said he was told after the accident by the police that he had been recorded at 153 mph.
‘When I fell off I just kept thinking this is it, this is it.
Please God, don't let me hit anything into the field backwards.
‘I hit it very hard but I remained conscious the whole time.’
James was full of praise for the medical teams who helped him both at the scene and at Coleraine hospital.
He said Clerk of the Course Billy Nutt also deserved a mention.
‘I was stopped by a catch fence at the field which undoubtedly saved me.’
But despite the ‘scariest moment’ of his life, James said he would be back in action in four weeks' time at the Dundrod 150.
BELFAST
Man recovering after leg shooting
A 22-year-old man is today recovering in hospital after being shot in the leg in Belfast.
The incident happened shortly before 2am in Fane Street and a police spokesman said the injured man's condition was not known.
Also today, police are investigating reports of shots being fired in the Grand Street area of Lisburn at 11.30pm yesterday.
New York nannies
A BELFAST-born woman is in the province to recruit nannies for New York.
Catherine Gallagher, who runs Kindercare Nanny in New York, is back to drum up candidates to meet an increasing demand in the US for Irish nannies.
‘Our nannies must be paid at least 200 dollars net a week, have two days off, their own room and the families must pay their air fare,’ said Ms Gallagher.
She is looking for applicants who have some experience in child care and can be contacted today at Belfast 629274, or at the same number from May 29 to June 1.
Wine-tasting feast
WINE-growers from as far afield as South Africa and Chile are in Belfast today for the annual wine-tasting organised by drinks company Guinness.
The event is being held at the King's Hall and includes wines from Italy, Spain, Germany, France and the United States.
ALAN BOOST
N. Ireland skipper ‘cleared’ to play against Latvia
NORTHERN Ireland captain Alan McDonald breathed a sigh of relief today when it was revealed that he will not be ruled out of next week's World Cup match against Latvia in Riga.
McDonald, who was booked in yesterday's 1–0 win over Lithuania here in Vilnius, spent an anxious night worrying that he faced an automatic suspension from next week's Group Three qualifying match.
He believed he had been booked in the corresponding match against Lithuania in Belfast last year — or possibly against Albania.
‘I thought I had been booked in one of the earlier matches at Windsor Park but I wasn't certain,’ said the Queen's Park Rangers centre back.
But a telephone call to the Irish FA offices in Belfast this morning confirmed that no previous booking was recorded against McDonald and he is free to lead the Northern Ireland team in the ninth match of this World Cup programme.
Meanwhile, manager Billy Bingham was happy with his team's victory on a rain-sodden pitch in Vilnius but admitted: ‘We put pressure on ourselves in the second half.
We should have knocked in a couple of goals and killed off the game.’
Northern Ireland have now moved into fourth place in the Group Three table, and Bingham said: ‘I want to finish the series on a high note and obtain as many points as possible to consolidate our FIFA grading position for future tournaments.’
Bingham will now assess the situation before deciding on the composition of his squad for next week's return trip to the Baltic republics.
‘I'll see what reaction there is to a number of minor knocks but I'll keep the options open,’ said Bingham.
The Irish found themselves under almost moment Iain Dowie scored after just nine minutes.
The hero again was Newcastle goalkeeper Tommy Wright who brought off three superb saves at crucial stages of the second half while Dowie's goal, his second in international football, was impressively taken.
Magherafelt May Fair festivities defy bombers
THE people of Magherafelt defied the bombers today to hold their annual May Fair in the devastated town.
The local community was determined that the event should go ahead, despite the 500lb IRA bomb which blasted the heart out of the Co Londonderry town on Sunday morning.
Stalls were set up in Rainey Street, Queen Street and Market Square, while police diverted traffic away from the town centre.
However, Broad Street, which is normally one of the main areas for the Fair, remained closed off because of the blast damage.
May Festival organiser Fergal Kearney said the town was packed with stalls and hopefully large crowds would turn out to support the Fair.
‘The fair is the highlight of our week long festival and we were determined that it should go ahead,’ he said.
He described the event, now in its 17th year, as a ‘slice of normality’.
Price warning for traders
TRADING standards officers are preparing to swoop on retailers who keep customers in the dark over prices.
And it was revealed today that ‘most’ motor dealers are breaking the law by not displaying price tags on vehicles.
Under the Price Marking Order 1992, virtually all goods must be priced in such a way to allow consumers to see the total cost of the item.
Bob Johnston, chief inspector with the Department of Economic Development's Trading Standards Branch, said: ‘The Order allows for the selling price to be indicated on the goods themselves, a ticket or notice close to the goods or grouped together with other prices on a list close to the goods to which it refers.
‘Consumers are entitled to know the price of almost any item which they may be interested in purchasing, should it be staple foods, confectionery, clothing or even a motor car.
‘Retailers should be aware that they are committing an offence if they do not display prices on or near to the goods.
They can be fined up to £2,000 if they fail to comply with this legislation.’
Mr Johnston revealed that Trading Standards officers had recently carried out a survey of motor dealers which showed that most were breaking the law by not displaying vehicle prices properly.
He warned: ‘Our inspectors will be carrying out random checks in trading premises throughout Northern Ireland to identify those traders not complying with the order.’
Steady Cowan blows hot in Portrush wind
GALE-force winds posed cruel problems for Europe's best amateur golfers at Royal Portrush today.
Mercifully there was no rain, but conditions couldn't have been much tougher.
Sand vaporised in bunkers and only long hitters managed to reach the fairway of their first shot of the day on Dunluce.
Par for this giant among seaside courses has been amended to 73 for the Amateur Championship, ‘but today it's more like 76’ declared club professional, Dai Stevenson.
And it was after a pre-lunch 76 here that first time Scot, Chris Cowan, found himself heading the charge for a top qualifying place.
Six-footer Chris, a 25-year-old bank official from Elie, had been rubbing shoulders with the leaders after an overnight 70 on the Valley, but manoeuvred the ball smartly for a 39 out (3-over) before gratefully accepting the bonus of a five yard eagle putt on the long tenth.
Ardglass farmer Robert Hutton was one of Cowan's three-ball and suffered all kinds of agonies in the wind.
‘This is Portrush at its toughest’ smiled Hutton.
‘You're right into the teeth of it over the first five holes.
And there's not much relief even on the down-wind holes!’.
Hutton, 68 yesterday, struggled to an 82 for 150, which could be several shots below the total at which the field will be reduced to 64 golfers, and ties for the knockout stage beginning tomorrow.
The standard scratch was at 75 when 19 year old Bradley came in late in the day with a score that included no fewer than seven birdies.
There's a big group of Americans at Portrush, but one who knows he'll be packing for home tonight is Michael Gillis from Philadelphia.
Poor Michael — he drifted out to a horrendous 93 today (20 over par) in the punishing winds.
600 power jobs in jeopardy — claim
MORE than 600 of Northern Ireland Electricity's 3,750 staff could lose their jobs as a result of privatisation, a leading economist claimed today.
John Simpson says employment levels at the company are ‘on the high side’ compared to English electricity companies.
Writing today in Business Telegraph, Mr Simpson says: ‘Even taking the most favourable comparator, the South Western company, NIE is about 20pc higher.
On this basis, over 600 jobs might disappear in the longer term.’
Other economic commentators have also suggested that there's room for labour cuts at NIE.
Writing in The Times earlier this month, Ross Tieman said:
‘Admittedly NIE has an extended distribution network, but does it really need 3,750 employees — six for every 1,000 customers — when its peers on the mainland average only 4.5 per thousand.
‘Clearly not, as directors privately acknowledge.
The breakdown of national pay bargaining in the power industry gives NIE the opportunity to quickly reduce demarcation and improve labour efficiency and gradually bring pay rates employment market.’
Robert is 12th
ROBERT Crawford finished 12th in the third round of the World Motor Cycle Trials championship in Germany.
Crawford, who had a bad second lap, lost 76 marks, 50 more than the winner former champion Jordi Tarres.
Second place was taken by Donato Miglio on 38 followed by Mark Colomer on 40.
Last year's champion Tami Avala was seventh and the best British competitor was Manx rider Steve Colley on eight.
Meanwhile most of Ulster's top moto cross riders will be heading for Saintfield on Saturday when the Brian Bell Memorial Trophy is run for the 24th time.
The meeting counts as the third round in the Ulster championship and will in fact be a two day affair for it begins on Friday night at 7.00pm.
Sidecars and quads will be catered for and on Saturday it will be the turn of the solos with racing starting at noon.
The pride and the passions of Brian McEniff
Gaelic guru who wooed the west
HE doesn't drink, he doesn't smoke, he's from Donegal and he loves his mummy.
But he is not Daniel O'Donnell.
He is Brian McEniff, Donegal gaelic football manager, hotel-owner, former politician and father of ten.
Having just been named Donegal person of the year, it is clear that McEniff is climbing the ladder in the Donegal's-most-famous-son stakes.
It was not always thus.
Sacked three times from the county football manager post, McEniff can be forgiven the odd pinch of himself as he takes in the widespread adulation accorded to him now everywhere he goes.
The father of ten is now a figurehead to thousands.
After guiding Donegal to their first All Ireland Championship victory last September, his name has been volleyed into immortality.
Parts of the county are still sobering up from the unprecedented celebrations.
Yet not a drop of Guinness has passed the McEniff lips.
‘I'm not anti-drink, I'm anti the abuse of drink and the hassle that it causes,’ he told me during an interview carried out in one of the three plush hotels he owns.
Appropriately, it was an interview of two halves.
The first period was a one-on-one.
The second was two-on-one, with the extra player his 83-year-old mother Elizabeth.
McEniff laughed as a ‘wild cub’ in his youth.
His 50-year-old lived-in face smiled not out of embarrassment, rather out of nostalgic reflection.
Wild?
Wild parties and wild women?
No.
Wild as in wild about gaelic football.
There was the time he kicked the ball in the house and smashed his mum's good plates, but apart from that he was a decent youngster.
‘Mad about football, but good at heart,’ according to his mother.
McEniff's zeal for football has not subsided in later years, but it now has to compete with two other compelling passions, his family and his business.
The two are intertwined.
His sister Mary helps run one of his hotels in Bundoran, the Great Northern, while daughter Catherine does likewise at The Southern in Sligo.
His wife Catherine is involved at the Holyrood Hotel in south Donegal seaside town Bundoran.
This is where the couple are based.
It is a luxurious 87-room hotel overlooking the bay and is currently undergoing a complete overhaul at considerable cost.
McEniff prefers not to talk figures but he is clearly a wealthy man.
As public relations the Sam Maguire All Ireland Cup is a pretty good one, and there is no reason why McEniff's business interests should not gain a measure of reflected glory.
His problem is that he is so busy with the GAA team that he is unable to give his hotels his undivided attention.
The same goes for his family.
So how does he keep the balance right?
‘The three are married together,’ he said, and then tried to prove it by citing the events of a previous day.
‘I went to Co Tyrone, my mother's county, with the cup all day and then came home and sat at the fire with my wife and talked about the hotel and what had gone on that day.’
Home is very important to McEniff, and home is Donegal.
The man is fiercely parochial.
He loves his county and has taken immense pride in the wholesale jubilation at the football team's success.
More than 1,300 letters of congratulation had reached him within 10 days of the Croke Park cup final victory.
He says he has appreciated every word and gesture, from the plethora of ‘well done banners’ to the sheep painted in the team's colours.
Impact He said: ‘The impact has meant as much, if not more, than anything.
It has given a lift to the people of Donegal what with all the problems of immigration, unemployment and high interest rates.
‘There's a confidence in the people that heretofore wasn't there.’
McEniff himself has plenty to be confident about.
In football, although the team lost the national league final they are in with a reasonable chance of retaining the All Ireland cup.
In business, he has 271 bedrooms at his disposal in attractive Irish surroundings.
His experience of life is wide.
He has had a spell in politics as Fianna Fail councillor in the 1970s, and broadened his horizons working in Canada in the 1960s after qualifying from Dublin College of Catering.
Thirty years later, he is still ambitious and busier than ever, revamping a hotel and hunting for further sporting glory.
If, contrary to the popular perception, Donegal has a fast lane, then McEniff is certainly on it.
Daniel had better watch out for him in his rear-view mirror.
Roland to rescue of Ulster hopefuls
NORTHERN Ireland butchers have been given the good news they can compete in a major English contest to find the country's top sausage-maker.
Over the years, several butchers from the province have returned home with championship honours.
This time round they were told they would not be able to enter the National Federation of Meat Traders bi-annual sausage competition at Harrogate as one of the sponsors, the Meat and Livestock Commission, held that they only provided sponsorship for mainland competitors.
Ballycastle butcher Roland Wysner (pictured), a former champion, contacted joint sponsor Lucas Ingredients.
‘They got in touch with the Northern Ireland Livestock Marketing Commission who agreed to become a joint sponsor, allowing our butchers to compete,’ he said.
Cutback for moustached MP
FERMANAGH-South Tyrone MP Ken Maginnis voted for a House of Commons ‘cutback’ today.
The Ulster Unionist security spokesman maintained a stiff upper lip as he had his moustache shaved off — for charity.
He was one of seven MPs who agreed to lose their moustaches or beards in a ‘shave-athon’ to raise funds for research into leukaemia among children.
The former teacher went under the razor at Westminster along with five Labour MPs and one Conservative.
He has sported the distinctive moustache for many years and admitted it took some ‘bare-faced cheek’ to get rid of it.
But everything went smoothly, and afterwards Mr Maginnis appealed for other volunteers to lose their locks ‘in aid of a very worthy cause’.
Coleraine surgeon resigns
SACKED Coleraine surgeon dramatically resigned today shortly after being given his job back by the Northern Health Board.
Mr Dane (50) from Mountsandel Road, Coleraine, had taken the board to court in March following his dismissal for allegedly failing in his duties to train junior doctors.
But at the High Court in Belfast today an agreement was reached and a statement issued to the media: ‘The board has agreed to reinstate Mr Dane.
Following reinstatement Mr Dane has resigned and submitted a letter of resignation which has been accepted by the board,’ it said.
Your province-wide guide to what's on where…and when (27 May-3 June)
TO PUBLICISE your events in the Thursday Update Listings service, send details by post to: Betty Arnold, Listings Compiler, Editorial Dept., Belfast Telegraph, 124 Royal Avenue, Belfast BT1 1EB, to arrive not later than Monday of each week.
Late items or alterations can reach her on Wednesdays, Belfast 321242/Ext 4872, between 10.00am and 12.30pm.
Lindi St Clair — Miss Whiplash — today made bankrupt by Inland Revenue
Lamont vulnerable as PM gears up for Cabinet rejig
JOHN Major today kept the door open for a possible Cabinet reshuffle within the next ten days as Chancellor Norman Lamont's Cabinet post looked more vulnerable by the hour.
Downing Street sources made little attempt to choke off intense speculation among MPs that a limited Cabinet shake-up is still on the cards.
The absence of clear-cut signals to quash the rumours by Mr Major's team meant that the uncertainty about the Government's front-line team remained as strong as ever.
The reshuffle fever sweeping Westminster intensified the pressure on Mr Lamont — already seen by some of his colleagues as a Chancellor beyond redemption — to consider whether the gossip about his job has become too much to bear.
Some Tory MPs believe that Mr Lamont may decide to step down in the face of the unrelenting doubts about his future at the Treasury.
That would enable Mr Major could keep any Cabinet changes, which he is reluctant to order, to a minimum.
The favoured contenders for Mr Secretary Kenneth Clarke — favoured by the left — and Environment Secretary Michael Howard, on the right.
The doubts about Mr Lamont's survival grew after it was disclosed that he had withdrawn from the panel on BBC TV's Question Time programme tomorrow, with Mr Clarke replacing him.
Downing Street sought to explain the decision by saying that it had not been on his diary anyway.
Mr Lamont also pulled out of a scheduled question-and-answer session at the end of a keynote speech at the CBI's conference on private finance today.
His deputy, Treasury Chief Secretary Stephen Dorrell took over.
Small-scale Cabinet changes would still leave the Prime Minister scope for his intended wider reshuffle of middle and junior Government ranks later, possibly in July or September.
Reshuffle talk unsettles trade
THE market see-sawed throughout the morning as rumours spread of an imminent Cabinet reshuffle.
The FTSE, which had climbed almost six points at one stage, was down 0.2 at 2837.5 by lunchtime.
Brokers believe the market will lack any clear direction over the coming weeks as spare institutional cash will be earmarked for the Government's gilt auction, the BT3 share sale and the Zeneca rights issue.
Chemicals group Courtaulds was an impressive performer on the strength of its 3pc profits rise and an improved dividend payout.
The stock jumped 19p to 541p.
The City was particularly encouraged at its plans to merge its viscose and acrylic fibres operation with Hoechst of Germany.
North West Water's impressive set of results finally managed to attract some support.
The shares edged ahead 4p to 484p.
Other water stocks, having been down initially, were encouraged by NWW.
Anglian Water firmed 3p to 480p while Thames Water went 3p better to 504p.
The news that Abbey tor is leaving for condoms to Marigold gloves group London International sent the bank's shares running for cover.
Abbey fell 3p to 415p while LIG firmed 4p to 185p.
Barclays Bank was back in favour, putting on 3p to 460p despite its £50m exposure to property group Speyhawk which yesterday appointed receivers.
Plysu, the plastics containers and housewares group, was stable at 248p even though it pushed profits ahead last year.
A depressing outlook for aero engine giant Rolls-Royce, sketched in at today's annual meeting, deflated the shares by 4p to 145p.
The announcement that British Aerospace has agreed terms for repaying more than £40m in ‘sweeteners’ offered by the Government to encourage it buy the Rover car company in 1988 took the wind out of BAe, which lost 4p to 321p.
Additional share prices
NW 200 races on UTV
BECAUSE of technical reasons, Ulster Television was unable to screen all the highlights of Saturday's North-West 200 last night.
In a change of programme tonight, the remaining races will be shown from 11.55pm to 12.20am.
Graphic accounts of Everest conquest
On top of the world
ON June 2, 1953, the world watched as the Queen was crowned in London.
Britons were at last letting their hair down after the grey years following the Second World War.
Rationing was still in force, but the mood in the country was one of jubilation and hope at the start of the second Elizabethan age.
As well as the Coronation, the crowds lining the rain-soaked streets of London, and at street parties and gathered round the spate of new television sets the Coronation had sparked, were also celebrating some news from the other side of the world.
Britain was on top of the world — literally.
An expedition led by Colonel John Hunt had finally succeeded in conquering Everest, the highest point on the planet.
The Union Jack was fluttering proudly more than 29,000 feet above sea level, planted there by New Zealander Edmund Hillary and Sherpa Tenzing Norgay three days previously on May 30.
For most of the century Mount Everest had been the ultimate symbol of human endeavour.
The highest summit in the world — accorded the status by British surveyors in the 1850s — Everest has been the crowning target for the world's mountaineers since the first attempt to climb it in 1921.
The 40th anniversary of the first successful attempt on Chomolungma — the Sherpa name for Everest — has seen a glut of books on the subject.
Arguably, two of the best, are Coronation Everest (Boxtree, £6.99) a reprint of Jan Morris's account of Hunt's successful 1953 expedition, and Everest, The Best Writing and Pictures from Seventy Years of Human Endeavour (Little Brown, £25).
Cost of going under cover
WHY has my insurance gone up by 30pc in one year when I have not made a claim in 40 years, touch wood?
The Co Down reader who asked the simple question is a mature driver with a modest car.
As it happened I had heard a very similar point being put to a group of Belfast managers from top insurance companies a few days previously.
Their answer, not mine, was that the basic principle of insurance is that everybody puts money into the pot so that funds are available for the minority who make claims.
The problem is that more has been coming out of the pot than going into it over recent years.
That is how insurance works.
The claims of the careless, or merely unlucky, are paid for out of the premiums of the careful, or lucky.
No one is saying it is fair, but the system has more or less worked over the years.
The insurance men were willing to admit that the safe driver is subsidising those who have accidents.
Indeed, if they tried to charge ‘economic’ premiums for young drivers, they would be prohibitively expensive.
What is alarming, however, is that the whole system appears to be getting out of balance.
Ask an insurance man and he will come up with a catalogue of reasons why his company is losing millions on car insurance.
People are more likely to claim these days.
A stiff neck for a few weeks after a bump was tolerated in the past.
Now it is translated into a whiplash claim.
More people have only third-party cover these days, which leads to more disputed claims and expensive delays.
One manager told me it would be more economic to give everyone comprehensive cover.
There has been an upsurge in theft of cars and their contents.
Some of us know all about that.
Fraudulent claims are increasing.
Some motorists deliberately set fire to their cars, others do under-the-counter deals for new tyres or batteries when claiming for a new windscreen.
The old saying that ‘it's coming off a broad back’ is being stretched beyond its limits.
Why aren't the insurance companies doing more to curb such tactics?
Well, they have launched a campaign against fraud and are lowering the groupings of new cars with safety and security devices fitted as standard.
But the companies, and in particular the bigger ones, face a problem.
If they get too with their customers will be damaged.
As one manager put it to me: ‘None of the companies here is in the business of finding reasons not to pay legitimate claims.’
Not having the powers of an auditor, I must accept that the insurance industry is having difficulty balancing its books.
And having pilloried them in the past it is only fair to hear their point of view.
I am still not convinced that they are as efficient at policing claims and repair costs as they could be.
But perhaps their greatest weakness is that they are heavily dependent on trust, a commodity which is in diminishing supply these days.
A POLICE constable appeared in court today accused of the double murder of his wife and her retired clergyman father in Cookstown almost six months ago.
Robert William Alan Anderson, in court on his 35th birthday, was charged with the murders of Judith Anderson (35) and her 74-year-old father, the Rev Eric Davidson, a retired Church of Ireland minister.
Their bodies were found after a fire at Mr Davidson's home at Drum Road in the Co Tyrone town on December 15 last year.
The RUC at first believed they had died in the fire, but it started a murder investigation three days later.
Anderson, whose address was given as c/o Magherafelt RUC Station, was smartly dressed in a dark suit, white shirt and striped tie.
He showed no emotion as the charges were read out at Cookstown Magistrate's Court.
A detective chief-inspector said that, when charged at Dungannon RUC station yesterday afternoon, Anderson replied to the charge of murdering Mr Davidson: ‘I did not murder my father-in-law.
I made a full statement and the contents of that I rely on for my defence.’
The packed court heard that in reply to the second murder charge, Anderson replied: ‘I did not murder my wife.
I made a full statement, the contents of which I rely on for my defence.
I co-operated fully.
I gave you clothing, my shoes, fingerprints, blood, anything else you asked for.’
The detective chief-inspector said he believed he could connect the accused to the charges.
Asked by Anderson's solicitor, Liam McNally, about the nature of the evidence to connect the police officer replied: ‘It is circumstantial evidence and there is ongoing forensic examination of various items.
‘I do not wish at this stage to disclose the nature of the circumstantial evidence.’
Mr McNally then asked the police officer a series of questions.
Mr McNally: ‘This investigation has been ongoing for five months.
Are you seriously telling the court that you are still awaiting the results of examinations from the forensic laboratory?’
Police officer: ‘That is correct.’
Mr McNally: ‘Is it correct that over the two days Mr Anderson was interviewed not one shred of forensic evidence was put to him?’
Police officer: ‘That is correct.’
Mr McNally: ‘Is it correct that on each and every interview he denied the two charges?’
Police officer: ‘That is correct.’
The detective chief-inspector confirmed Anderson was interviewed on four occasions on Monday and twice yesterday.
Mr McNally then asked him to indicate to the court any evidence which arose out of the two interviews held yesterday.
The police officer replied that they involved showing certain exhibits to Anderson and putting certain questions.
However, he said the defendant did not make any admissions and that those two interviews would be assessed along with the four interviews the previous day.
The police officer personally listened to the complete tapes of the interviews and I am therefore not in a position to give a conclusive answer to the question.’
The detective chief-inspector said he was aware a superintendent had authorised the defendant's detention to be extended for a further 12 hours.
Mr McNally: ‘Are you aware that when he authorised the extension that he told Mr Anderson, and indeed told me at 10.30am yesterday, that there was not sufficient evidence at that stage to charge Mr Anderson following the four interviews on May 24?’
The police officer agreed Anderson would have been charged at that stage if there had been sufficient evidence.
Referring to media reports, he also told the court there was no evidence a knitting needle was used in the murder of Judith Anderson.
Anderson was remanded in custody to appear at Crumlin Road Courthouse on June 11.
Mr McNally said a bail application would be made to the High Court on Friday.
A fair day's work
Shear delight: Crumlin YFC member Gary Davidson wastes no time as he competes in the annual sheep shearing contest organised by Holestone and Straid YFC at the Ballyclare May Fair.
Organiser forced to cancel peace concert
SATURDAY'S Peace Together concert in Belfast has been cancelled.
Organiser Neil Storey said ‘I am trying to find a word that goes beyond disappointed.
So much work had gone into it — more work than anyone out there on the ground can know.
We got so close, but as someone said it's better to have tried than not.’
There is, however, a possibility that the peace concert, which was to have taken place this Saturday, May 29, in the King's Hall, may be rescheduled for the autumn.
Full refunds will be available for all ticket holders.
Details were first announced in March for three concerts — in Belfast, London and Dublin — in aid of Northern Ireland's young people.
The concert in Dublin will still go ahead, a date has yet to be fixed for the London event.
The concert was beset by problems almost as soon as it was announced.
A switch of venue from Boucher Playing Fields to the smaller King's Hall fuelled speculation that the project was over-ambitious.
Tickets sales were believed to have been slow and there was some criticism of the £23.50 ticket price tag.
Peter Gabriel was to have headlined the bill which included Del Amitri, The Sawdoctors, The Levellers and local bands Peacefrog and The Adventures, as well as Abba revivalists Bjorn Again.
Organiser Ali McMordie said earlier this week: ‘We have had a problem with the sort of cynicism that you find in Northern Ireland about peace initiatives.
It's natural, because peace drives have come and gone, so it's easy to be doubtful about the success of yet another one.
‘We have been working on this project for 14 months, and it's been difficult to persuade people that we have no political objectives.
We are doing this for the right reasons.’
Kit bits for alfresco treats
WELL, we're back to the time of year when, hopefully, it will be warm and dry enough to get a barbecue organised.
And I was asked this week if it is possible to make up your own, rather than buy one of these metal affairs on wheels.
The answer is yes, you can get the bits needed — like charcoal tray, grille and ash collector from some of the superstores.
Then all you need is a pile of bricks or blocks.
These can either be built into a permanent unit, or merely carefully stacked to form supports for the bits, then dismantled when not required.
Do check on wind direction when siting your barbecue.
If it blows towards yours or your neighbour's house, you may not be too popular when the greasy smoke starts billowing around!
And don't site it too close to a house wall, or you will get sooty stains — unless you build some form of screening.
If you would like a complete kit of parts, with instructions on how to organise your bricks, Black Knight Barbecues Ltd, of Farleigh Hill, Tovill, Maidstone, Kent ME15 6RG,, can supply full details.
They also provide just about every kind of portable unit too — and if you're worried by mosquitoes, they have special candles to shoo them off.
A gnome of your own?
Another rather unusual query…
Is it possible to make your own garden gnomes — by casting them?
It certainly is, for Supercast Ltd supply flexible moulds for a whole range of gnomes — including a baby one on a potty!
And they've lots of other garden ornament moulds, ranging from peacock to water nymph — plus the casting powder and a range of metallic finishes and a pack of coloured paints.
If this is for you, contact Supercast Ltd, Blanket Row, Hull HU1 1SQ.
Or call them Before I leave them, perhaps I should add that they also do moulds for a large range of chess sets, Nativity sets, with Christmas in mind — and candle moulds of all kinds.
Stripping made easy
I remember visiting the home of a radio producer, and all the doors were missing except the front and back ones!
They had all gone away to be professionally stripped.
He had sent one first as a test, for sometimes it doesn't do the doors a lot of good, and you find you've wood of a variety of types and colour — indicating the door was never meant to be seen in the raw.
But the question I was asked was — is it possible to just varnish — or is any special treatment necessary after stripping?
I think it's worth checking with the company concerned, but where caustic soda has been used, it leaves a whitish residue, and this should be washed off with clean water, then the wood allowed to dry.
You may find the grain has been raised, so some fine sanding will be necessary, working only with the grain of the wood to avoid scratches.
Dust off, and you can then varnish.
Colouring varnish
It seems to be all questions this week, and I've had a friend asking if it is possible to add stain to varnish to change the colour.
I wasn't positive on this one, so I checked with a leading manufacturer who said it was not wise to mix, as the addition of stain could upset the drying time.
It was far better to buy a fresh varnish stain which has been specially formulated.
Roof proofing
If we get a good dry spell, that is the time to nip up on your flat roofs and check for winter damage.
Cracks in bitumen felt can be sealed with a bitumen mastic, but even if you find the roof surface in relatively good condition, it would be a good idea to give it a nice thick coat of roofing compound, such as Isoflex, by Roncraft.
Catching a roof early could add 20 years to its effective life, so you're really investing in peace of mind in the future.
to get rid of it, as it tends to hold water like a sponge.
Use a garden moss killer, then brush off when the moss has died and gone black or brown.
Burns blown off course in Portrush wind
Juicy task to get your teeth into
IT used to be said that ‘you planted pears for your heirs’, the inference being that a generation could pass before the pear trees came into crop.
This adage was true in the days when pears were grafted onto a miscellany of vigorous rootstocks, which encouraged the growth of great, large trees which took many years before they settled down to cropping.
The selection of what are known as quince rootstocks by fruit researchers earlier this century changed the situation by bringing about a degree of control of the vigour of the grafted trees.
The two most common rootstocks used nowadays are known as ‘Quince A’ and ‘Quince C’, the latter being the more dwarfing stock, but ‘Quince A’bring the most used by fruit growers.
To say the least, however, it is difficult to grow regular crops of fine juicy pears in local conditions.
Do I hear someone comment —‘you can say that again'!’
Yes, I know of warm, sheltered south-facing walled gardens where good crops of quality pears are produced in ‘good years’, but such ideal sites being used for cordon, fan and espalier-trained pears are few and far between.
There is no doubt that if you have a desire to test your horticultural skills in growing pears then a warm south wall is the ideal for the support of spur-pruned and carefully trained trees.
I am reminded of all this by a correspondent who tells me that she has had a pear tree ‘for about 30 years and in that time, have only once had good fruit’.
The great problem with pear growing in this country is flower pollination.
Only a few varieties, Improved', are self-fertile and even these varieties benefit from being cross-pollinated by another compatible variety.
Cross-pollination All other varieties require the proximity of a compatible variety for successful cross-pollination and fruit setting.
Just to make matters more difficult, certain varieties are ‘incompatible’ in that they will not cross-pollinate successfully with certain other varieties, eg, ‘Williams’and ‘Louise Bonne de Jersey’.
And varieties known as ‘triploids’, such as‘Jargonelle’ and ‘Merton Pride’, simply fail to pollinate anything else.
The advice is, therefore, pick your pear varieties with great care.
The best pears for northern gardens are, probably, ‘Conference’, ‘Fertility Improved’, ‘Winter Nelis’, ‘Beth’(a new variety), ‘Concorde’ and ‘Jargonelle’.
The other limiting factor in relation to flower pollination and fruit setting is weather.
When the pears are in flower, bees and the other pollinating insects must be present in abundance and busy — this means calm, sunny warmth.
Swell and ripen And the fruit must be able to swell and ripen and achieve their flavour in more sunshine than we can generally expect in August and September.
Sorry about all this!
Finally, congratulations.
The Irish Garden Plant Society has recently honoured Billy Douglas with an Honorary Life Membership.
Well deserved indeed.
Reel appeal for bikers
MY leisurely drive down the Antrim coast road last Sunday turned out to be anything but relaxing.
I found myself heading into what I can only describe as a ‘ton-up’ tide.
For coming in the opposite direction was an endless flood of motor cyclists zooming home from the North West 200.
Don't get me wrong — I've nothing against the leather-clad hordes, for they are a cheerful fraternity.
I met a few of them at my own destination, Cushendall, where the Co Antrim fleadh was in full swing, amid glorious sunshine.
‘Nice of them,’ said a visiting English biker, ‘to organise a bit of music for us on our way back.’
And I'll you what — some of the reels were just as fast as their wheels.
Soccer day a ‘draw'
WHEN did the Blues play the Reds with only one Linfield man in the team?
Answer: in a charity match at Windsor Park on May 19, 1948.
The game, to raise funds for local hospitals, was held just two weeks after Manchester United had won the FA Cup under the captaincy of Irishman, Johnny Carey.
The ‘Linfield’ team, in fact, contained only one Blueman, Harry Walshe.
All the rest were guest players, and they included the great Peter Doherty, who was then with Huddersfield Town.
In blazing sunshine, a crowd of 30,000 enjoyed a real thriller which resulted in a 3–2 victory by United.
All this I learn from the official match programme, price sixpence and now something of a collector's item.
It was supplied to me by John Duffy, secretary of the NI Football Programme Collector's Club.
This, and other rare items of soccer memorabilia, will be on show at the club's 11th annual fair in Maysfield leisure centre tomorrow (11am).
Dealers from all over the UK will be there and it sounds like a historians.
Tiny tots sing their praises for musical maestro
THE tiny tots of St Kieran's Nursery School were asked to pick their favourite ditties.
And the eight they voted Top of the Pops for were all by veteran songwriter Elizabeth Quinn.
Magic Words, Light a Little Candle, Baby, Hold My Hand and Cats were so loving and gentle, the kindergarten pupils at Poleglass told teacher Kathleen Durkan.
So Elizabeth, who has been composing magic words and tunes for more than 50 years, paid her new generation of fans a visit.
And now the class of ‘93 at St Kieran's have performed the songs for a cassette, sponsored by Suffolk Action Team.
‘If they like them so much, why not put them on tape for posterity?’, said Elizabeth who produces children's song festivals all over the province.
The cassette, with Joe Fox on guitar, is called Magic Words (We Love to Sing) and will be available soon.
It will come complete with a booklet giving the words and music of each song.
Lesson to be learned from subsidy-free life
THE New Zealand Dairy Board has been touring Europe over the past two weeks pressing its case for continued access to the British dairy market.
Its chairman, Dryden Spring — a second cousin of Irish Foreign Minister Dick Spring — reported that New Zealand farming was in what he described as ‘good heart’, with land prices climbing.
This happy situation owes as much to the devaluation of the New Zealand dollar as it does to the general improvement in world commodity price levels.
But what, of course, makes New Zealand different is the fact that farmers there receive no subsidies whatsoever.
This means the eight or nine pence a litre they receive for their milk — little more than a third of European prices — reflects the reality of world dairy markets rather than the subsidies enjoyed by European farmers.
New Zealand farmers lost all subsidies in the mid-1980s — because a government facing tough economic times could no longer afford them.
Now, almost ten years, on farmers there say they would not go back to the days of Government subsidies and control over what can be grown.
New Zealand's meat and dairy boards have developed new markets in Asia in competition with European and American suppliers competing with the benefit of massive export subsidies.
This means farmers receive the real price from the market and there has been a price to pay in New Zealand.
Many businesses close; employment has been lost in rural areas; when subsidies first went and interest rates were high large numbers of farmers were forced to leave their land.
But over time, the industry has adjusted and farmers there cannot claim to be the only farmers in the developed world farming and exporting without the benefit of subsidies.
Farmers in Europe have just completed their IACS forms which in theory detail what is grown, farmed and subsidised in just about every field throughout the European Community.
As this exercise in bureaucracy continues many farmers must have been left wondering if it was all worthwhile, or whether we would not be better off without both the subsidies and the problems which surround the common agricultural policy.
The argument is certainly persuasive for efficient farming areas, and, according to farm unions in Germany, some farmers there have decided to do just that by not completing the IACS forms and not seeking the subsidies or the controls which are the price of the subsidies.
Opting out of a policy which costs each family of four over £1,000 a year would certainly do much to help the farming industry regain the esteem it once enjoyed with the general public.
Farming journalists and politicians who visit New Zealand come back convinced life without subsidies is not just attractive but a realistic option — an argument they generally base on claims that British farmers by conventional standards are amongst the most efficient in Europe.
While no single Member State could unilaterally opt out of farm subsidies, a Government pressing the case for agricultural aid to be aimed solely at those who need it would be in a strong position to eventually win the day in a Community facing constant budget cuts.
Scholars will remember the original theory of the CAP was based on what was known as ‘the law of comparative advantage’— in short, countries should each farm crops and enterprises in which they had a significant economic advantage.
If Britain was to farm without the benefit of subsidies it would clearly have to enjoy some significant advantages — and before advocating radical policies the industry would have to be in a position to answer ‘yes’ to a number of harsh economic questions.
These include whether we can produce grain at prices which match those of the Paris basin or the re-emerging countries of the former Eastern Bloc, once known as the bread basket of Europe: can we produce and process milk with the efficiency of the Danes who last year paid producers an average price of 25 pence a litre for milk against 21 pence in Britain; can we match the Dutch when it comes to producing, and in particular processing pigmeat; can any horticultural enterprise compete with Spain with its cheap labour and sunshine.
If the industry can answer ‘yes’ to these and similar questions about other sectors of the industry it probably makes sense to take a hard look at what is happening in New Zealand and to then advocate some radical thinking in both London and Brussels.
A new agricultural policy could be launched with bonfires on hillsides — as was the Single European Market at the start of this year — but this time the bonfires would be burning IACS forms and all the other paraphernalia which surrounds the CAP.
Consumers would see food prices fall overnight because the CAP is claimed to push up the food bill for the average family by over £15 a week.
But the reality is — certainly for areas such as Northern Ireland — is probably ‘no’.
We lack the sunshine of some Member States, the cheap labour of others, and the food industry structure of northern member states in particular.
Our ‘comparative advantage’— as it has always been — is to grow grass better than most, but with grain prices under CAP reform set to fall towards world level grass is an increasingly expensive feed.
Under these conditions we have little option other than to accept that we can do little more than look with envy towards those farmers in New Zealand making a living without the ‘benefit’ of subsidies.
We can continue debating their demise, while we wait for the day when European taxpayers rather than farmers finally call the day on the common agricultural policy.
Rootin' tootin'
A FOUR-DAY ‘roots music’ festival is currently under way at that jumpin' joint, Downpatrick folk club.
It opened last night with a jazz session, but tonight the focus turns to bluegrass and Irish traditional tunes.
Providing the hoedown music will be that fast picking local band Seldom Herd, and the jigs and reels are supplied by some of the club's legion of resident minstrels.
Tomorrow night there's an Ulster-American double bill on offer — the North Carolina cajun specialists The Peanut Butter Boys and Co Derry traditional group Oige.
Then on Sunday night all styles will merge in a monumental jam session.
Go help them to bring it all back home.
Don't phone home from your hotel.
Use the public booths in town where it's much cheaper.
Hire a four-wheel drive vehicle — there are lots of off-the-beaten-track spots to discover.
If you go during winter (October to March) take some warm clothes.
You'll probably have warm temperatures and good sunbathing weather, but it can also be chilly and windy.
Some sea currents are dangerous.
Take care not to swim out too far, particularly on deserted beaches.
Nude bathing is illegal in Spain, but there are plenty of naturists in the dunes near Corralejo.
Flocking round
THE church which was founded in Belfast's ‘plain of the lambs’ is celebrating its centenary this year.
I refer, to give it its full title, to the fine parish church of St John the Evangelist on the Malone Road.
And why the pastoral allusion?
Well, that's because the word Malone derives from the Irish ‘Magh Lughan’— the plain of the lambs.
And it was there that the parish had its origin, way back in 1839 when the Rev Alex Orr ministered to his human flock in what was then verdant countryside.
The organisers of the St John's centenary programme tell me that those early services were probably held in some form of temporary accommodation.
But by 1842 the congregation had moved into a new building, later used by the Presbyterians of McCracken Memorial and demolished in 1968 to make way for their new church hall.
Argument when the urban sprawl of Belfast had begun to encroach on the ‘plain of the lambs’.
So, a bigger church was needed to cater for the rapidly increasing numbers, and a most un-lamb like argument over whether they should extend or move to a new site raged for six years.
Eventually, in 1892, a new site was offered at the corner of Osborne Park, and a new church, the present one, built there.
Two transepts, north and south, were added in 1906, but, curiously enough, a church tower which had originally been proposed remains uncompleted.
So much for the past.
Now for the immediate future, and the various centenary celebrations which begin this weekend.
They are centred around a flower festival at St John's from today until Sunday and include two organ recitals by Dr Donald Davison and an exhibition on the history of Malone parish, which will be presented by parishioner Dr Paul Larmour, the writer Take it from me, nobody knows more about the past of that part of Belfast than Paul.
The plain may be bereft of lambs these days.
But people will be flocking to it this weekend.
Mushroom boost
THE mushroom industry got a boost today with the opening of a new spawn distribution centre in Co Armagh.
Operated by the Sylvan Group, it is at the Tullygoonian Industrial Estate.
The Group — it includes three spawn production companies, Sylvan, Somycel and Hauser — will distribute all spawns and casing agents from the new depot.
New Ford baby due
FORD'S first four-wheel -drive off roadster, built by Nissan in Spain, is about to hit the market.
The Maverick comes in three-door, short-wheelbase or five-door, seven-seat long-wheelbase versions with a choice of 2.4-litre petrol or 2.7-litre turbo-diesel engines.
Claimed to offer car levels of style, safety and comfort along with cross-county capability, the Maverick is set to claim a share of the growing leisure vehicle market.
In typical Ford fashion, we will have to wait to hear the prices.
Through a glass…
TAKE a pleasant day trip on a glass-bottomed boat to Isla de los Lobos, about a mile-and-a-half off the coast from Corralejo.
There is good snorkelling and swimming and the excursion usually includes a barbecue lunch.
There are also jeep safaris round Fuerteventura, and more staid island tours.
The best outing is to the neighbouring island of Lanzarote with its spectacular sandy beaches, extraordinary lunar volcanic landscapes, plunging cliffs, and white-washed villages.
The real hot spot of this island is La Montana del Fuego (Fire Mountain) in Timanfaya National Park.
Here you can ride camels around the rim of a volcano, eat a meal cooked over heat rising from its core and watch demonstrations to show the heat of the mountain.
NATO nuclear reduction complete
NATO says it has completed a huge reduction in its Cold War nuclear arsenal, cutting the number of weapons in Europe by 80pc.
The alliance withdrew all short-range missiles, nuclear artillery-shells and tactical nuclear weapons from US warships last year, leaving only about 1,400 nuclear bombs launched from aircraft.
‘Following last year's removal…the substantial reduction of air-delivered weapons has now been accomplished,’ NATO Defence Ministers said in a statement at the end of a two-day meeting in Brussels.
Yesterday's statement gave no figures, but NATO sources said the stock of aircraft bombs had been cut in half, to about 700.
The withdrawn weapons which come from the United States and Britain are to be destroyed.
The former Soviet Union made a similar pledge to destroy tactical nuclear weapons, a responsibility now carried by Russia.
Eros returns for centenary
LONDON'S landmark statue Eros is back in Piccadilly Circus after five months of restoration work The statue, which will be 100 years old next month, was damaged by drunken revellers two years ago.
Repairs, carried out by Naylor Conservation in Telford, Shropshire, cost £30,000 and the over-all cost of cleaning up the monument, known as the Shaftesbury Memorial, was £80,000.
To prevent a repetition of the vandalism, surveillance cameras and other security measures have been installed to monitor the 9ft statue.
Eros, by Sir Alfred Gilbert, was erected in 1893 and celebrates its centenary on June 29.
The statue, which was gently lowered back into its place yesterday accompanied by gentle applause from onlookers, was a memorial to Anthony Ashley-Cooper, Seventh Earl of Shaftesbury, for his philanthropic work with poor children.
Busy show season in store for rare specimen
BY the end of the summer show season there will be few in the farming world who have not seen an Irish Moiled calf, despite the fact they are still a rare breed.
And many will leave shows better informed about the animals that captured the prizes.
Thanks to the efforts of Dalgety Agriculture, an Irish Moiled calf will be on its stand at Newry, Ballymoney, Ballymena, Saintfield, Clogher Valley and Enniskillen shows where the public will be asked to guess the weight of the animal.
Two prizes will be offered at each show, the first a £50 voucher to be used at the Rare Breeds Survival Trust's sale in August and the second a voucher to the value of £25.
The Rare Breeds Trust was formed to keep alive many native livestock breeds — including the Irish Moiled — which were facing extinction.
The competition, the organisers say, will help the Trust to achieve its aims.
Norman McMordie, Dalgety's sales manager, said: ‘Local shows are being attended by many members of the public who do not have an in-depth knowledge of farming.
‘To facilitate them we have asked a number of show societies to provide judges with an opportunity to bring a selection of prize-winning animals back into the ring and explain why they have been considered champions.’
ULSTER
SPUC ‘rubbishes’ abortion claims
A PRO-LIFE group has dismissed as ‘rubbish’ claims that support for legalising abortion in the province is on the increase.
A new poll commissioned by the Birth Control Trust showed that 82pc of people in the province thought abortion should be legal where it was necessary for the physical or mental health of the woman.
When the same question was put in a similar survey last year, the figure in support was 79pc.
However, Mrs Betty Gibson, chairwoman of the Northern Ireland Society for the Protection of Unborn Children, said people here were firmly opposed to the introduction of abortion legislation, as are politicians and church leaders.
‘All the pressure to extend the Abortion Law is coming from outside the province,’ she said.
RVH denies privatisation
THE Royal Group of Hospitals has strongly denied union claims that sections of the catering service are to be privatised.
Martin Burns of the Amalgamated Transport and General Workers' Union alleged that catering facilities were being run down and warned that jobs would be lost if the in-house contract was given to a private firm.
A hospital spokesman said there was no move to privatise any sections of the catering service.
Watchdog quizzed
NORTHERN Ireland's Ombudsman, Jill McIvor, was today quizzed on her task of being watchdog over people's complaints about public services.
A Westminster Select Committee of MPs which scrutinises the Ombudsman's work questioned Mrs McIvor at Parliament Buildings, Stormont, on her annual report for 1992.
Last September Mrs McIvor reported that complaints had dropped by 25pc, but that the reduction may have been because the public is not fully aware of her work.
THE annual ‘Save Belvoir Forest’ Walk which had to be postponed earlier this month, due to bad weather will take place on Saturday, May 29.
The walk which is organised by the Friends of Belvoir Action Group was originally planned for May 15.
But organisers were worried that heavy rain had made conditions unsafe for those taking part.
The re-scheduled event will kick off at 10am on May 29.
Further details can be obtained from the Friends of Belvoir Group at Belfast 691554.
DONEGAL
Arms cache discovered
GARDAI in Donegal have discovered an arms cache near Manorcunningham.
Following a search of a shed, they discovered three rocket launchers, two shells, a launch base and an assortment of tubes, drills and grinders.
Cancer charity looks at new approach
A NEW cancer charity to raise money for research into alternative treatments was launched yesterday.
Members of the House of Lords and MPs backed the move, which, it is hoped, will pay for studies into homeopathic and other ways of treating patients that do not involve conventional therapies.
If enough money is raised, clinics could also be set up nationwide.
The Madeleine Newton Fund for Alternative Cancer Research and Treatment is named after a primary school teacher who died of breast cancer in 1987 at the age of 32.
Madeleine ran a smallholding in Argyll, with her husband, Ian, and two-year-old-daughter, Gwen.
At the time of her death, she was nearing the end of her third year as a student homeopath.
Cancer was diagnosed only eight months earlier, and Madeleine held a strong conviction she could find a way of helping in her own healing.
After studying much of the available literature and alternative methods of cancer treatment, Madeleine began the Bristol Cancer Diet and, with the co-operation and put together her own ‘alternative’ treatment plan using diet, homeopathy and psychotherapy.
But the tumour continued to grow and she finally opted for surgery and chemotherapy.
However, Madeleine kept up a spirit of personal participation and deep involvement in her own healing.
She was inspired and strengthened by seeing herself not as a passive victim, or a cancer patient, but as an individual working for her own health and well-being.
Eventually though, after Madeleine's fifth chemotherapy session, it was discovered the cancer had spread to her liver and she died in hospital.
Her husband who attended the Press conference in Westminster with Conservative MP David Tredinnick donated money to the Natural Medicines Society.
Fast-fit service proves to be a big hit
THOSE McDonalds of the car repair trade, the fast-fit centres, have proved a hit with Ulster motorists.
It is not just a matter of price, it is the whole concept that is appealing to the modern life-style.
Today's motorists like the idea of being able to drive in without an appointment, see menu pricing and have the job done quickly in the evening or the weekend.
Kwik-fit and ATS have stolen a considerable slice of the market in recent years, but now the industry is fighting back.
Coulter's opened the first Ford fast-fit and next week Pentlands will open the first Vauxhall Masterfit depot opposite their dealership on Belfast's Ravenhill Road.
Open until 8pm on weekdays, and until 4pm on Saturdays, it will offer replacement tyres, exhausts, batteries and shock absorbers as well as pre-MOT checks, brake repairs and servicing by trained Vauxhall technicians.
‘We want to make sure that we are open when the customer needs us,’ says dealer principal Charles Taylor.
Deal on repayment of Rover ‘sweeteners'
BRITISH Aerospace has agreed terms for repaying more than £40m in ‘sweeteners’ offered by the Government to encourage it to buy the Rover car company in 1988, it has been announced.
The company was ordered to pay back the money by the EC, which ruled that the benefits constituted illegal State aid.
The EC put a figure of £44.4m on the payments, plus interest, but BAe has settled for £42.2m net of tax relief.
‘It was most encouraging to see the manner in which the Department of Trade and Industry worked to ensure that the basis for final settlement met the EC requirement fairly,’ said the company's finance director, Richard Lapthorne.
BAe bought Rover for £150m.
The sweeteners were uncovered by Whitehall's financial watchdog, John Bourn, comptroller and auditor-general.
Former EC trade commissioner Sir Leon Brittan took up the issue and he ordered repayment in July, 1990.
The affair then became bogged down in argument and procedural wrangles before the European Court of Justice.
Fall in imports: LMC
FEWER cattle have been coming into Northern Ireland from the Republic, according to the Livestock Marketing Commission.
‘Imports have continued to fall although there was some increase in store heifers,’ states LMC chief executive Brendan McGahan.
During April, heifer imports fell by 77pc on the corresponding month last year; store bullock numbers dropped by 41pc and steers by 8pc.
There was a 5pc increase in the number of store heifers coming north but a 24pc drop in total imports during the month.
Total cattle slaughterings in the province were 3pc down on last year but there were increased slaughterings of young bulls and steers.
These rose by 90pc and 15pc respectively while heifer slaughterings fell by 46p and cows by 20pc.
Sheep slaughterings continue to rise and at almost 49,000 head were a third up on the same month last year.
Pop singer calls off Wembley date
POP singer Bobby Brown has called off his only British concert this year on doctor's orders.
There were hopes that his wife, Whitney Houston, would turn up at his date in London's Wembley Arena next month for a guest spot.
But now high blood-pressure has forced Brown to cancel the European leg of his Humpin' Around The World Tour.
‘He has a history of high blood-pressure and an added problem is that his stage show is quite physical.
He dances and moves about a lot,’ said a spokeswoman.
Mr Brown, whose hits include ‘Don't Be Cool’, is returning to the United States for an over-all specialist health check-up when he finishes his remaining dates in Japan and Hawaii.
Major gets in muddle over name of heroine
THE Prime Minister met the first British woman to reach the top of Mount Everest — and got her name wrong.
As Mr Major posed for photographers on the steps of 10 Downing Street yesterday with Rebecca Stephens, he spotted a party of schoolchildren.
‘Come over here and meet the children, Rachel,’ he said, guiding her to the group.
‘My name's Rebecca,’ said the 31-year-old journalist, from Fulham, south-west London, correcting the Prime Minister.
Mr Major just grinned and continued talking to the children, from Dulwich College, south London.
Rebecca, dressed in a black mini-dress, was joined by joint leaders of the DHL Everest expedition Peter Earl and John Barry.
A spokesman for the team said: ‘I am not surprised Mr Major got her name muddled up.
We have a Rachel in the office and we are Rebecca.’
Rebecca said she was fit and well after her triumphant climb of 29,000ft Everest.
Her only problem was a sore throat, which made speaking difficult.
Fleeting stars of those clear summer nights
SUMMER nights are very short and not the right time of the year to look out for the stars.
There are a few planets in the evening sky, though.
Mars is low in the west in Leo, the Lion, and will pass just north of the bright star Regulus on the 22nd.
More prominently, Jupiter is in Virgo, the Virgin, high in the south.
Venus and Saturn are best seen before sunrise.
This month's Full Moon on the 4th will pass through the Earth's shadow and produce a splendid lunar eclipse.
Unfortunately, we will not see anything of it since it happens in our daytime.
That pleasure will be for the peoples in and around the Pacific and Indian Oceans.
Take an evening walk after dark on any clear night and you are likely to see one or more meteors, short streaks of light shooting across the sky.
On some nights one can see so many of these popularly-called shooting stars that we speak of a star or meteor shower.
There are two basic things to be understood about shooting stars.
First, they are not providential signs inviting the beholder to wish for something with the promise that such a wish will be fulfilled.
Second, shooting stars are not stars.
Rather, they are luminous streaks, officially called ‘trains’, produced when tiny particles the size of a grain of sand plunge into the earth's atmosphere and interact with atmospheric molecules at an altitude of, typically, 80 km.
They come from the space between the planets and are believed to be the remnants of matter that was used to form the Solar System.
While still in space and before hitting our atmosphere, they are called ‘meteoroids,’ particles capable of proused for the luminous train they produce.
Some particles, however, do not evaporate completely and survive the entry-heat to impact on the Earth's surface.
When found, they are called ‘meteorites.’
Meteorites are studied in the laboratory because it is thought that their chemical composition is showing us quite accurately the chemical composition of the Solar System at the time of its formation.
On the basis of these laboratory studies, meteorites have been divided into three main classes.
There are the ‘aeroliths,’‘siderites’ and ‘sideroliths’or ‘lithosiderites.’
Siderites consist chiefly of iron and nickel and, when etched, show beautiful crystal patterns, the so-called figures of Widmanstaetten.
Aeroliths, or stony meteorites, are composed chiefly of silicates.
Sideroliths are about half nickel-iron and half silicates.
Aeroliths are further subdivided into two classes: chondrites and achondrites.
Chondrites contain many small globules of olivine, pyroxene and other compounds rich in carbon.
Such globules, or chondrules, are not found in terrestrial rocks.
Achondrites have no such chondrules.
The presence of carbon is the most interesting aspect of the carbonaceous chondrites, because life as we know it is based on carbon chemistry.
Therefore, these meteorites are believed to contain clues about the origin of life on Earth.
A small sample of meteorites have compositions which are completely different from the above.
These are believed to come from beyond the Solar system, i.e. from interstellar space, the space between the stars.
Some of these, also, are rich in carbon.
This has led to speculations that life may have originated in the depths of space and that it was brought to the Earth by meteorites.
It seems to me that for those, like myself, who want to include divine revelation with science in their total picture about the origin of life, the thought that it could have originated in one that supports their belief that God had a hand in these matters.
As to whether, after that, life came to this Earth by meteorites or in some other way, I must leave to the reader to decide.
There is another interesting aspect of the carbonaceous chondrites, though.
Under high pressure, carbon can turn into diamonds.
In 1987 a team of scientists found small amounts of diamonds in meteorites which, because of their composition, seemed to come from interstellar space.
This was followed last year by the announcement that diamonds have been found in dust clouds surrounding forming stars.
Of course, nobody has gone that far into space and sampled stardust to come back with a bag full of diamonds.
The presence of diamonds was inferred from the infrared characteristics of that dust.
Those actively interested in diamonds will have to wait a very long time before they will be able to put their hands on these cosmic ornaments.
Maybe just as well they have to, because, even when cosmic diamonds are still a rare find, we do not want the beauty of the Universe to be compromised by adventurers who are after personal gain.
Grand finale for bomb-hit drama festival
THE 41st Ulster Drama Festival finished in triumphant style on Saturday night despite the fact that the event had to be re-located due to the devastation of the Grand Opera House.
In the final ceremony, chairman Paddy Ormonde paid tribute to the countless people who had helped to salvage the festival, and in particular, to St. Bartholomew's Church and the Bart Players, who had provided a venue and services.
Holywood Players and Lifford Players took the main awards, with Holywood's ‘84 Charing Cross Road’ winning the overall title of Ulster champions.
They were presented with the Grand Opera House Cup by Mrs Pat Henderson, wife of the Association's president.
Beth Duffin who produced the winning play won the Belfast News Letter Cup for best director and Carole Stewart who played Helene Hanff won the UTV Hubert Wilmot award for best actress.
Terry O'Doherty from Lifford was best actor and won the James Young gold award.
The Lifford Company, whose Passing Day took second prize also won the supporting actor and actress trophies — for Aussie Bryson (Looney) and Anne Shiels (Mrs Fibbs).
Most ambitious play was deemed to be Bardic's ‘The theatre went to Gregory Lavery in the same play.
The Friers' award for decor was presented to Cornmill Theatre who had staged ‘The Gentle Island’ on the final evening.
Louise Emerson from Theatre 3's ‘Suddenly Last Summer’ was most promising young player.
Fans ignore warning on Albanian hardship
ABOUT 700 intrepid fans of the Republic of Ireland's soccer team were making their way to Albania today, despite a warning from team manager Jack Charlton.
‘Big Jack’ advised them against travelling to cheer on their team in a vital World Cup qualifying match, because of the primitive conditions in the Albanian capital, Tirana.
Mr Charlton and officials of the Football Association of Ireland experienced the lack of modern facilities when they travelled to Tirana last February to watch Northern Ireland play Albania.
They were shocked by the conditions they encountered.
Due to a power blackout, their hotel was in total darkness when they arrived, and they had to trudge up the stairs with their luggage to the 10th floor.
Row over bill for para trial
A GROUP of criminal lawyers is to complain to the Lord Chancellor, Lord Mackay, about the huge legal bill for six paratroopers acquitted last week on charges arising out of a fracas in Coalisland.
The six soldiers, who were variously accused of disorderly behaviour, assault and criminal damage, were represented by four senior Queen's Counsel and an equal number of junior barristers at a cost estimated to be around £95,000 for the seven day hearing.
Legal sources say a member of the public facing similar charges would be very lucky to get legal aid for one junior barrister.
The bill is being paid by the Ministry of Defence out of public funds, and lawyers say the amount spent on the case contrasts with new guidelines introduced by the Lord Chancellor to reduce costs for legal aid.
One solicitor, who did not want to be named, said the new rules were introduced to ensure public accountability for legal aid fees, to which they did not object.
But he added; ‘If we have to be accountable for public money then so too should the Ministry of Defence.
Otherwise we are going to develop two legal systems — one for ordinary people that skimps and a superior one for members of the security forces where money is no object.’
The solicitor said the newly formed Solicitors Criminal Bar Association were making representations to the Lord Chancellor's office to scrap the legal aid changes and would specifically complain about last week's hearing.
Founding fathers are Belfast bound
June — a hot time for gospel
TWO of the founding fathers of gospel music are poised to play Belfast.
Randy Stonehill will be at the Elmwood Hall on Tuesday June 1 and Larry Norman, fully restored to health, will be at the Assembly Buildings on Monday June 21 — the Longest Day of the Year.
Stonehill, last in Belfast two years ago is coming as part of a European tour.
In 1990 he was so impressed by the Belfast reception that he came back just three weeks later to do it all again.
Norman introduced people like Bob Dylan and Eric Clapton to Christianity and is a regular guest on Cliff Richard concert stages.
He was in Belfast in 1990, but two heart attacks put him out of action for a while.
£30m bill for IRA's 86-hour reign of terror
THE cost of the IRA's 86-hour bombing blitz is expected to run to almost £30m — nearly a third of the total compensation bill for the past 12 months.
Four huge attacks in as many days — two in Belfast and others in Portadown and Magherafelt — sparked a bitter backlash against the Provisionals.
More than 20 people were injured, but dozens more had miraculous escapes as some of the devices detonated as police were implementing evacuations after inadequate warnings.
As in the wake of previous attacks, beleaguered traders and businessmen have vowed to be back in business as soon as possible.
It is the most intensive IRA bombing campaign against commercial targets in the province in recent years.
Unionist politicians have re-iterated calls for the re-introduction of internment and for tighter security measures — including the sealing of the border.
But one senior RUC officer said: ‘We can only work within the law.
Intelligence is one thing, but proof and evidence is what the courts require.’
DUP leader Ian Paisley, incensed by the attacks, has demanded Secretary of State Sir Patrick Mayhew call off tomorrow's Anglo-Irish Conference meeting in Dublin.
Mr Mayhew was at the scene of the latest bombing outrage in Magherafelt earlier today to see the carnage at first hand.
The sporadic shutting off of town centres by selective use of barriers is already under way to stop the bombers.
Some traders voice concern about such on-and-off closure of security gates, but a senior officer said this had to be weighed against the level of threat.
short term measure, as local RUC commanders and Chief Constable Sir Hugh Annesley examine all options.
Magherafelt was the Provo's latest target.
At 10.30 last night a 300 lb van bomb wrecked the heart of the Co Londonderry market town.
A ten minute warning was given.
It was not until daylight broke that the sheer scale of the devastation could be seen.
Nearly 20 shops and offices in Broad Street, just off the Diamond, were wrecked in the blast.
The explosion left the Ulsterbus depot in Broad Street reduced to a pile of rubble.
Local traders met today to assess the damage.
Local businessman, Declan Cosgrove, estimated damage to his premises to amount to between £75,000 and £100,000.
Police said three armed men took over a house at Garvagh Road, Dungiven, last night and hijacked a white Transit van which they abandoned with the bomb on board.
The van driver ran up an alleyway from Broad Street to Union Street at around 10pm.
Police are seeking witnesses.
In the early hours of yesterday morning the Drumkeen Hotel at Upper Galwally, in Belfast, became the second leading Belfast hotel to feel the wrath of the bombers within four days.
The building was extensively damaged when a 200 lb car bomb went off in the car park.
Up to 50 nearby homes were also caught in the explosion.
The overall repair bill for Saturday's blitz on Portadown could reach £15m.
Scores of businesses were damaged and at least 12 buildings may have to be demolished.
Craigavon Mayor, Fred Crowe, claimed the attack could have been prevented.
‘Following the elections there has been less high profile security presence in the area,’ he said, adding that some time ago he asked for extra security measures for the town.
But he vowed: ‘This bomb will not deter us from putting Portadown back on the map as the hub of the north.’
Two days earlier Belfast city centre was devastated when 1,000 lbs of homemade explosives detonated in a skip lorry.
It was a carbon copy of an attack 18 months ago.
The IRA's bombing campaign cost the taxpayer a staggering £102.5m in compensation claims over the last 12 months.
The Provos embarked on an orgy of destruction across the province targeting Belfast and Bangor twice, Glengormley and Coleraine.
A 2,000 lb van bomb, left outside the Forensic Science Laboratories, wrecked 750 homes in the Belvoir estate — although the biggest repair bill was for Coleraine at £14m.
Bombings in the first few months of last year — among them attacks at Lurgan and Fivemiletown — accounted for part of the £100m bill.
World Cup tie goes on screen
A VITAL World Cup soccer match this week between Albania and the Republic of Ireland will be seen on TV by Irish fans after all despite a breakdown in negotiations for broadcasting rights by RTE.
Wednesday's tie, which Jack Charlton's team need to win to help them reach next year's World Cup finals in the US, will be shown live at about 70 Irish locations to supporters paying up to £10 a time.
A consortium, which stepped in to clinch the deal when RTE pulled out, thinks tens of thousands of fans will crowd the selected venues.
As many as 800 Irish supporters are expected in the Albanian capital Tirana for the match, despite advice from the Football Association of Ireland not to make the trip because of lack of facilities there.
Sheffield Wednesday midfielder John Sheridan has had to withdraw from the Republic squad, following the thigh injury picked up in the FA Cup final replay defeat against Arsenal on Thursday at Wembley.
His misfortune turns out to be a bonus for Portsmouth's Alan been called up to augment the 17-strong travelling party.
Tranmere striker Tommy Coyne has been sidelined by a flu bug, but Charlton remains optimistic that he can shrug off the effects in time for Wednesday.
As part of the recent Belfast Civic Festival celebrations the IFA staged a kids' five-a-side soccer tournament in the Shankill Leisure Centre.
Winners Beechmount show off their trophies, under the eye of Eddie Boyle of tournament sponsors Coca-Cola.
p/20/50.
The Craftworks gallery in Belfast's Linenhall Street is currently staging an exhibition featuring products geared towards children.
The display is entitled ‘Child's Play’ and showing off some of the exhibits are (from left): Patricia Flanagan, acting chief executive, Craftworks; Valerie Wherry, LEDU; Katie O'Toole, of Katie Blue, Ormeau Avenue, and Freda Robinson, of Arabesque Braids, Knock.
P/20/16.
Little Colin Patterson returned to the Jubilee Maternity Hospital with his mum Karen to celebrate his first birthday and to hand over a cheque for £675 to the neo natal unit, where he weighed in at only 2lb 14ozs.
His granny, Mrs Carol McMeekin (front right), raised the money through staging praise concerts in Belfast.
Accepting the cheque were Sister Hazel O'Neill (back left) and midwifery manager Marie Crothers.
P/20/14.
Pupils at Wellington College tested their fitness levels at the launch of the Mars Focus on Fitness pack last week with the help of former Superstar champion Brian Hooper.
P/19/112.
Take a walk on the wild side
LOCAL people are being urged to take regular exercise in their stride with the launch of a province-wide campaign to promote the benefits of walking.
Representatives from a range of voluntary, health, sporting and community organisations stepped out at Ormeau Park recently for the launch of the Health Promotion Agency's ‘Walk It’ campaign.
And leading the way on the one-mile hike through the park was a Belfast man who has been helping the Ulster-led Everest expedition walk to the top of the world.
As the expedition nears the summit of the world's highest mountain, base camp manager Nick Stevenson joined the campaign to get local people to step out for health.
‘Walking is good for everyone whatever their age or level of fitness,’ said Frank Kelly, the Health Promotion Agency's physical activity programme manager.
‘It helps to increase energy and stamina, control weight and reduce the risk of a heart attack.
No special equipment is needed and to begin.
The Agency has produced a new leaders' guide for people organising outings of up to five miles with family or friends.
Packed with information on how to select a route, the right clothes, and safety tips, it's hoped it will be used by scores of groups and families across the province in the run up to World Walking Day on October 16.
And advice sessions on making full use of the booklet are being organised throughout the city next month.
‘The aim is to point the way to an activity which doesn't always get the credit it deserves,’ Frank Kelly said.
‘We hope that the booklet and the enthusiasm of many people across the province will result in many more of Northern Ireland's residents taking one of the easiest and most enjoyable first steps to healthier living.’
For further details about next month's advice sessions or a copy of the ‘Walk It’ leaflet contact the Health Promotion Agency at Belfast 311611.
Pupils at Wellington College tested their fitness levels at the launch of the Mars Focus on Fitness pack last week with the help of former Superstar champion Brian Hooper.
P/19/112.
Pupils at Wellington College tested their fitness levels at the launch of the Mars Focus on Fitness pack last week with the help of former Superstar champion Brian Hooper.
P/19/112.
Crazy Prices stores raised over £14,700 for the Ulster Cancer Foundation by balloting a food hamper.
The cheque was handed over at a party held in the Dundonald Ice Bowl.
P/20/ 11.
Crazy Prices stores raised over £14,700 for the Ulster Cancer Foundation by balloting a food hamper.
The cheque was handed over at a party held in the Dundonald Ice Bowl.
P/20/ 11.
Crazy Prices stores raised over £14,700 for the Ulster Cancer Foundation by balloting a food hamper.
The cheque was handed over at a party held in the Dundonald Ice Bowl.
P/20/ 11.
Crazy Prices stores raised over £14,700 for the Ulster Cancer Foundation by balloting a food hamper.
The cheque was handed over at a party held in the Dundonald Ice Bowl.
P/20/ 11.
Keith Campbell, from north Belfast, has picked up a top award from computer firm Digital after coming first in the BTEC National Diploma in a computer studies course at Belfast Institute School of Informatics.
Keith receives his cheque from Digital's Brian Watt, while looking on is Don Alexander of the Training and Employment Agency.
P/20/52.
East meets west in Bangor school
A BANGOR school has been forging electronic mail links with Japan.
Education Minister Jeremy Hanley paid a visit recently to Bangor Girls' High School to see first hand this technology in action.
The school has teamed up with Assumption Grammar School from Ballynahinch to communicate with schools in Osaka and other cities in Japan.
‘I cannot stress strongly enough the value of this type of project to schools.
Not only does it offer the opportunity for forging strong links and friendships between schools in Northern Ireland but it also allows them to learn about a very different social and cultural environment in Japan,’ said Mr Hanley.
During his visit to the Castle Street school, Mr Hanley sent and received messages from a high school in Osaka.
Hospital may not cope with area's growing population: councillor
THE Alliance Party in North Down has submitted its response to the Eastern Health Board's document on the future of acute services.
Speaking to the Herald and Post this week, Brian Wilson said they had submitted their views on the document to the board at the end of last week.
The group outlined its fears that the Ulster Hospital cannot cope with the growing population within the North Down and Ards areas.
‘We are also concerned that the North Down and Ards unit has lost half its beds in the last 10 years and recent board proposals are likely to mean another hundred closures.
‘If the trend continues, within five years the area with the fastest growing population in the province will have no acute beds at all,’ said Mr Wilson.
Highlighting the rise in population in the area, Mr Wilson questioned the government's financial policy towards health care.
‘It is government policy that money should follow patients.
There has been a massive movement of patients from Belfast to has been no equivalent transfer of resources.’
‘We would ask the board to reassess its capital programme before any further significant capital expenditure is approved.
Would it not be more cost effective to provide a new hospital in North Down rather than spending large sums on extending the Ulster Hospital or rebuilding 200 beds at the Royal Group of Hospitals,’ he concluded.
The consultation period for the highly controversial document officially closed at the weekend and the board will be preparing its response to the public comments.
Rays and means to a safer tan
Helen Carson on the darker side of the sun
A GOLDEN glow is still associated with good health, despite all the darker publicity on the sun and its skin cancer links.
Sun worshippers, however, who feel the anti-sun lobby are simply killjoys can take heart because a safe tan does actually exist.
And to publicise this much-misunderstood fact, pharmacists in Northern Ireland recently joined in a national campaign, entitled ‘Smart Cookies Don't Burn’.
The chemists encouraged people to have fun in the sun while protecting their skin from the harsh rays which can prove dangerous.
Surprisingly, Northern Ireland has the third highest death rate from skin cancer in the world.
For Lurgan woman Louise Kearney, who recently had a pre-cancerous mole removed, soaking up the sun just doesn't appeal to her anymore.
Fair-skinned Louise spent a year in Gran Canary in 1986, while studying Spanish at Queen's University, herself then as a ‘serious sunworshipper’.
‘I would go down to the beach around 7am for an hour and would not have used a proper skin care procedure.
‘I did everything you're not supposed to do.
I would lie out in the midday sun and plaster myself in baby oil!’
Last year, when she was two months pregnant Louise noticed a mole had appeared on the back of her leg.
Her husband, Vincent, asked her to go to the doctor and have it checked, but Louise held off for nearly four months.
‘I didn't associate the mole with the sun exposure I got while in Spain,’ she said.
The doctor explained that moles can take up to 10 years to appear, or for existing ones to become bigger or darker.
Pregnancy It had been Louise's pregnancy which caused the mole to appear, her change in hormones stimulating its growth.
Indeed, the incidence of malignant melanoma, the most deadly form of skin cancer, has increased more than three times in the province since the 1960s.
It is sudden sharp bursts of sun which are most damaging.
An office worker who has two weeks of intense sunbathing is at greater risk of developing skin cancer than a construction worker labouring outdoors and subjected to longer, but less intense doses of sunlight.
There is an urgent need to consider adopting a healthy approach to the sun, bearing in mind the evidence of a thinning ozone layer.
And the pharmacists' slogan, ‘If You Want a Tan — Get a Healthy Tan’, is worth repeating as thoughts turn towards all those sunshine holiday bargains currently plastered over travel agents' windows.
Last week's devaluation of the Portuguese escudo and the Spanish peseta means that tourists will undoubtedly be heading for blistering climes.
But with the right precautions, even the most fair-skinned people can become lightly bronzed and beautiful.
Arming yourself against the sun's harsh rays is a commonsense precaution — long-sleeved t-shirts, wide-rimmed hats and, of course, a high protection factor sun cream.
A tan acquired slowly not only looks nicer and more natural, but it lasts longer and rarely peels.
People on medication should always check with their pharmacist before sun-bathing either at home or abroad.
Many medicines make the skin more sensitive to the damaging effects of the sun.
The short-term effect will be a very painful sunburn, the long-term effect will be greater damage to the skin.
Louise Kearney's mole was successfully removed, but the experience has left Louise with a different attitude to sun worshipping.
‘If I went on holiday in the sun I would use high factor cream, stay in the shade at midday and wear a hat and t-shirts.
‘Before, all I was interested in was the glamorous side of the sun, and being able to wear short skirts and skimpy tops.
‘Now, I would recommend to everyone that they adopt a good skin care procedure.’
Basking on a beach will definitely not be on the agenda for Louise.
Although, it is safe for her to sunbathe, Louise's whole perspective on holidaying has changed.
‘After three or four weeks a suntan comes off in the bath, but you have damaged your skin and maybe even have skin cancer — why compromise yourself?
‘You won't see me on the beach, I'm sight-seeing!’
Siobhan heads off Euro competition
BELFAST karate girl Siobhan Brunton recently returned triumphant from a European karate competition in Prague where she took fifth place.
She battled her way to the last eight finalists of the 28th European Open Karate Championships, taking on 32 of the world's best female karate exponents.
Siobhan's placing in this championship has also gained Ireland a place in the mini-world championships, to be held later this month in Maxime.
Her coach and father, Oliver Brunton, described the atmosphere back at the College Street club where she trains.
‘The club is buzzing with excitement since we returned; everyone is extremely happy with the result and Siobhan herself is very happy to have unseated some of Europe's most experienced karate performers,’ he said.
Anyone interested in learning karate can go along to 35 College Street, or contact 616453.
Summer sale
ST Matthew's parochial hall, Shankill Road, will be the venue for a summer sale on Friday, starting at 6.45pm.
The admission charge is 20p and all the proceeds will go to the Northern Ireland Hospice.
Open Lanark Way, says Rodgers
WEST Belfast MP Dr Joe Hendron has been challenged to justify his opposition to opening one of the main routes from the Shankill to the Royal Victoria Hospital.
The challenge, from a unionist candidate in today's local government elections, comes only days after people from the Falls and the Shankill joined together to protest at moves to cut jobs and operations at the hospital.
Fred Rodgers, an Ulster Unionist Party candidate in the Oldpark ward, said he supported the MP's recent call for the people of Protestant west Belfast and surrounding areas to back the embattled RVH.
‘I would, however, ask Dr Hendron to tell the people of the Shankill how they should gain access to the hospital as he has been so determined to keep the gates in Lanark Way firmly closed,’ Mr Rodgers said.
‘I would also like to dispute the suggestion that these gates are opened in emergencies, as the grass growing under them would bear out.’
Ups and downs of Belfast's hillwalkers
THE Belfast hills will be alive with the sound of walking boots next month as hundreds of local people enjoy one of the highlights of the province's walking calendar.
The 1993 ‘Save the Belfast Hills Walk’ kicks off from Hannahstown at the junction of the Upper Springfield Road on Sunday June 6, at 10am.
The annual walk is jointly organised by the Cavehill Conservation Campaign, Ligoniel Improvement Association, Blackmountain Action Group, Blackmountain Environmental Group, Colin Conservational Society and Bryson House.
The ten-mile route takes in Black Hill, Blackmountain, Divis, Wolf Hill, Squire's Hill, Cavehill and Belfast Castle.
The aim of the walk is to demonstrate opposition to prospecting, quarrying, mining, dumping and speculative developments in the area and to support the maintenance of rights of way.
But the organisers stress that the walk will also allow local people to simply enjoy the beauties of the Belfast Participants are being asked to pay a contribution of £1 to help meet the costs involved in organising the walk.
Sponsorship forms are also available for those who wish to boost a local charity.
For sponsorship forms and further information contact Bryson House Urban Environmental Unit, 38–40 Ormeau Road, Belfast BT7 2EA; telephone (0232) 234180.
Culture vultures' summer schedule
A FEAST of arias and overtures is in store for Belfast's classical music lovers as Belfast Education and Library Board kicks off its summer season of concerts next week.
On Saturday May 22, at 7.30pm the Ulster Hall is the venue for the annual Orchestras' Concert.
It features over 200 young musicians from the ranks of the Junior Youth Chorale, the Junior String Orchestra, the String Training Orchestra and the Training Orchestra.
They will be performing music by Bizet, Holst, Mozart, Shostakovich and Vivaldi.
And on Wednesday May 26, the Ulster Hall plays host to the City of Belfast Youth Orchestra's Summer Concert.
The musical menu for that evening's entertainment includes the ‘The Hebrides’ overture by Mendelssohn, Rachmaninov's Piano Concerto No 2 in C Minor and Dvorak's ‘New World’symphony.
Tickets for both concerts are available from the School of Music, 99 Donegall Pass, Belfast BT7 1DR, and at the door.
They are priced £4 for adults and £2 for zens.
Police issue warning
HOUSEHOLDERS in north Belfast have been warned to take extra security measures following a spate of burglaries in the area.
Police at Antrim Road RUC station said there had been an increasing number of break-ins in the Oldpark and Cliftonville districts.
‘The criminals have been concentrating on sheds, outhouses and garages and taking bikes, lawnmowers and garden equipment,’ the crime prevention officer at Antrim Road explained.
‘Not only is it important to make sure that houses are secure but it is equally important to secure outhouses and garages.’
For further advice on security contact your local crime prevention officer at Antrim Road, Tennent Street, North Queen Street or Newtownabbey RUC stations.
Kids go Dutch to cross the divide!
SIXTEEN Newtownabbey schoolchildren are going Dutch this week as part of a scheme to boost cross-community understanding between kids in two of the most deprived parts of the borough.
Youngsters from the Bawnmore and Rathcoole estates jetted out to Holland on Monday for a 12-day stay in Almelo, near the German border.
The children have been invited to the town as part of a scheme run by the Dutch Stichting Europa Kinderhilp group.
This is the fifth time a group of local youngsters has visited Almelo.
The aim is to promote contacts and friendship among children from Bawnmore and Rathcoole who would otherwise never have the opportunity to meet.
During their visit, the children, aged between 8 and 15, will stay with the JF Kennedy scout group.
They will spend a few days with their hosts in the classroom, before going on a camping trip in the Dutch countryside.
Adree Wallace of the Group, which has helped to organise the trip, said past visits had been very successful.
‘The children have had a great time.
In the whole time that the kids have been going away we've never had a single problem over religion and the biggest boost is that they actually want to meet each other again after the holiday,’ she explained.
Unfortunately in past years, due to lack of financial support, it had been impossible to maintain regular contact between the youngsters, she added.
‘A couple of years ago the kids who had been on the trip from Bawnmore just turned up at the self-help group premises and wanted to see the friends they had made on the holiday again,’ Adree said.
This year, however, the holiday is forming the centrepiece of a 16-week scheme backed by the Northern Education and Library Board.
‘The children have spent the last four weeks getting to know each other.
After coming back from the holiday regular outings to the pictures, ice-skating rink and other activities are planned, culminating in another holiday, this time in Northern Ireland, at the end of the summer,’ Adree explained.
‘We felt it was important to try and make the programme last longer this time around so that the friendships made aren't lost.’
Art sale
THE Ulster Cancer Foundation's annual art exhibition and sale opened its doors to the public yesterday.
The event at UCF Headquarters, at 40 Eglantine Avenue in Belfast, runs until Saturday, with opening times being 9am-5pm tomorrow and 10am-12.30pm on Saturday.
Among the artists exhibiting this year are George Morrison, Jean Harrison, Bob Killen, George Gillespie and Brian Ballard.
All the artists featured in the charity's 25th anniversary exhibition have either donated a picture or given 50 per cent of the sale price.
New-look 900
SAAB has produced the first pictures of its first new car for quite some time, the new-look 900.
The new model is due to be unveiled officially to the public at next autumn's Frankfurt Motor Show.
The Swedes, mind you, aren't giving too much away outside of the altered shape of the car.
But it still looks very much like a Saab!
They are promising new innovations on the safety and environmental fronts, as well as a wider range of engines than before, including a new 16-valve, 190 bhp, 2.0 litre turbo with double balance shafts.
Nursing survey
PATIENT care is suffering while nursing posts remain vacant across the province, according to local nurses in a new survey published at the weekend by the Royal College of Nursing and Nursing Standard.
The joint report shows that 49 per cent of nurses in Northern Ireland say there are empty posts in their workplaces.
Despite problems of cutbacks and a diminution of services, more than two-thirds of nurses quizzed still see their future with the National Health Service.
‘Nurses everywhere are saying that although they remain loyal to the NHS, they are frustrated by not being able to give patients the quality of care they need.
Yet posts remain empty.
Action must be taken now by policy makers and health service managers to fill those vacancies,’ said Christine Hancock, General Secretary of the RCN.
A £100,000 boost
A CROSS-community group from Strangford has received a welcome £100,000 boost towards the cost of a new accommodation block at its residential home.
Glebe House at Kilclief in Strangford, a 19th century rectory, was bought by the Harmony Community Trust in 1975.
And the Trust has just been awarded six-figure funding from the International Fund for Ireland (IFI) for a new block at Glebe House.
Announcing the Fund's decision to present the grant to the Trust, William McCarter, chairman of the IFI, praised the ongoing work of the Trust at the residential centre.
‘The cross-community work undertaken by the Harmony Community Trust is crucial to the development of a healthy society in the future.
Their work complements that of the IFI and deserves the full support of public and private sector and individuals alike,’ said Mr McCarter.
The completion of the new accommodation block will mark the end of the Trust's development programme.
Guitar firm is praised
THE world renowned Lowden Guitar factory in Newtownards is a fine example of how local companies can succeed in highly competitive markets overseas, according to a government minister.
During a recent visit to the factory in the town's Glenford Industrial estate, Economy Minister Robert Atkins praised the company for its high achievements.
‘Lowden Guitars has established itself as a prestige company producing a specialised product for a specialised market.
The company's commitment to quality has been vital to its success,’ he said.
Sales of the guitars have been growing, with 75 per cent of production being exported abroad.
The company manufactures high quality hand crafted acoustic and electric bass guitars and boasts Cliff Richard and Mark Knopfler among its many famous customers.
Musical will unravel unanswered questions
FORTWILLIAM Musical Society is set to bring its production of Hans Muller's musical ‘The White Horse Inn’ to the Arts Theatre next week.
Set in Austria just before the First World War the play revolves around Josephea, proprietress of the inn; Leopold, the head waiter; several well-to-do local businessmen and the Emperor of Austria who comes to stay at the Inn at the start of the shooting season.
After that the pacey plot leaves the audience wondering who is engaged to whom, who is to marry whom, who wrote the love poems and why and how it's all to be unravelled before the final curtain.
The show runs from Tuesday until Saturday.
Tickets are available from the booking office at the Arts Theatre or Eileen Kennedy at Belfast 840151.
Planners accused of adding to decay
PLANNERS are contributing to chronic unemployment and decay in north Belfast, the Green Party has claimed.
The party's chairperson, Alan Warren, who is standing as a local government candidate in the Castle ward, has hit out at planning restrictions on commercial development in the north of the city.
He has called on the Department of the Environment's Planning Office to re-think existing policy in a bid to encourage more new business start-ups in the area.
At present north Belfast and Newtownabbey contain less than five per cent of the office space in Greater Belfast: much less than is contained in the small area around the university and less than a quarter of that found in east Belfast.
Under the Belfast Urban Area Plan strict restrictions have been placed on any further office development outside the city centre.
But Mr Warren said that while these may be appropriate to prevent over-development along the Lisburn, Malone and Ormeau roads, they were ‘totally inappropriate areas of decay in the north of the city.
‘To take but one example, the right hand side of the Antrim Road at Fortwilliam travelling out of town is considered by the Planning Office as commercial, and the office buildings along that stretch of road are generally in a good state of repair,’ he explained.
‘By comparison the left hand side is viewed as predominantly residential.
On that side of the road there are at least five derelict buildings with many more in a poor state of repair.
‘Despite this, planning applications for change of use to offices have been turned down on this ‘residential’ side of the road.’
Mr Warren said such buildings were ‘ideal’ for commercial development.
And he called on the Planning Office to designate ‘Office Development Areas’ in the north of the city in an effort to stimulate employment.
‘Large Victorian dwellings on major roadways do not provide suitable accommodation for families and if converted into flats they tend to decline rapidly,’ Mr Warren said.
‘These buildings do however provide excellent accommodation for small offices which in turn create much needed local employment.
‘The north of the city has areas of chronic unemployment, civil unan urgent need to encourage new business start-ups by providing support and reducing restrictions.’
DHSS rapped for blocking extension to alcohol ban
LAGER louts are still drinking openly on the streets of north Belfast despite the extension of city bye-laws banning the consumption of alcohol in public places, a local councillor has claimed.
And Independent Unionist councillor Nelson McCausland has accused the Department of Health and Social Services of treating residents in Belfast like ‘second-class citizens’ for blocking moves to make the ban a blanket one.
Earlier this month Belfast City Council rubber-stamped proposals to extend the scope of the existing bye-laws restricting public drinking in streets and parks throughout the city.
The new bye-laws now cover most parts of north Belfast.
But Mr McCausland said that while he welcomed the extension of the ban, he felt it should be extended even further.
‘This is an issue about which I am very concerned.
As a local resident who travels through north Belfast every day of the week I can see the problems which are caused by young people gathering at street corners with bottles,’ the councillor said.
‘I believe that the whole of Belfast should be included in the ban and this is the view of the council, but the DHSS, which has to approve our proposed extension, will not allow the council to include the whole city.’
Mr McCausland said that having made a survey of the non-drinking areas implemented by other councils he was convinced that Belfast was being treated ‘less sympathetically’ than elsewhere in the province.
‘In many of the rural parts of Ulster, a different standard is being imposed by the DHSS.
If that standard was implemented in the city we would be able to designate almost the entire area of north Belfast,’ he claimed.
‘The DHSS has no right to treat the residents of Belfast as second-class.
The benefits of this legislation and the protection it affords should be available to all the people of the city.’
Pedalling to help wildlife
HUNDREDS of people will be pedalling across County Down next month in a World Wide Fund for Nature sponsored Bike Ride.
Scheduled for Sunday June 13, the bike ride will take in some of the loveliest parts of the county, starting and finishing at Belvoir Park Forest in Belfast.
Prizes of tickets for transatlantic flights, provided by Air Canada Vacations, are up for grabs for the top fundraisers.
There are two routes available: a 50-mile circular sponsored cycle from Belfast along Strangford Lough and back, or an optional 25-mile route between Belfast and Comber.
For further information contact Jim Kitchen, WWF Bike Ride, 59 Cable Road, Whitehead, Co Antrim, BT38 9PZ, or telephone (0960) 353005.
Case for new Bangor library is put to Board
HIGH on the agenda at the start of the next council term in the borough of North Down will undoubtedly be the controversial issue of a new library for Bangor.
The issue has been very much on the minds of some of the current councillors after the South Eastern Education and Library Board decided to place Lisburn above Bangor in the priority list for new library premises.
A group of councillors, along with council officials from North Down, recently met with representatives from the Board to discuss the move.
Present at the meeting were outgoing Mayor Ellie McKay, deputy mayor Jane Copeland, three councillors and two council officers.
Addressing the Board, Mrs Copeland put forward the council's case for the priority provision of a new library in Bangor in preference to Lisburn and nearby Newtownards.
The deputation decided to seek a meeting with the Board after it reversed a decision made at meetings in January and February which had given Bangor two towns.
The deputy mayor emphasised the real need for a new library, basing the council's case on the Board's own statistics.
Mrs Copeland pointed out that Bangor is a designated ‘growth centre’, its population having doubled over the past 25 years.
‘Bangor is a much more compact area than either Lisburn or Newtownards and the potential for library usage is therefore greater,’ said Mrs Copeland.
A 10-point council case included the fact that Bangor's current library membership exceeds both Newtownards and Lisburn by over 30,000, with over 100,000 more new issues in 1991–2 than Lisburn and over double that of Newtownards.
Bangor's 80-year-old Carnegie Library, situated in Hamilton Road, is in constant need of repair, with a large stock of books which cannot be put on public display because of the limited floor space.
It also has less floorspace than the current libraries in the other two towns.
The proposed new Bangor library site at Castle Street in the town — it's temporarily being used by the Post Office — has now become available after the relocation of the fire station to the ring road outside the town.
The centrally located site is owned by the received outline planning permission, unlike the proposed site at Linenhall Street in Lisburn, which has still to be released by the Department of the Environment and is currently being used as a car park.
The council's Library Committee now plans to make a further recommendation to the Board as to which town should receive priority.
The latest meeting between representatives from North Down and the Education and Library Board came less than two weeks after the opening of the new Holywood Library in Sullivan Place in the town.
Links are applauded
THE forging of links between schools and industry in Northern Ireland has been applauded by Education Minister Jeremy Hanley.
He said co-operation between schools and industry was becoming ever more important as the government strives to encourage a ‘spirit of enterprise and togetherness for the future of Northern Ireland’.
Mr Hanley made his remarks at a Project Day in Belfast's City Hall at which he presented awards to pupils from 33 primary and secondary schools who had taken part in the Belfast Action Teams' Schools Initiative.
Appeal for 10p pieces
HELP The Aged is keen to get its hands on old 10p pieces.
On June 20, the old 10p ceases to be legal tender and the charity is hoping to collect as many of them as possible before that date.
Collection boxes are available in the charity's eight shops here and Help The Aged is hoping pubs, offices, clubs and shops will help with the collection.
All monies gathered will be used for the good of the elderly in the province.
Speech device launched
BT has developed a new portable speech communications device for people who have developed sudden speech loss due to illness.
When connected directly to the telephone the device, known as Claudius II, allows people who cannot speak to communicate with others.
The new system, which was launched recently, enables phrases and sentences to be recorded onto a memory chip by a carer or speech therapist, and replayed in a natural sounding voice by the user.
‘Claudius II has been welcomed by speech therapists and users as a product that makes day-to-day life easier and more tolerable for those who have suffered sudden speech loss,’ explained Ian Lyon of BT's Action for Disabled Customers Unit.
New shelters
ULSTERBUS has announced plans to grant-aid the province's 26 local councils for the provision of new bus shelters throughout Ulster.
The scheme could provide nearly 800 shelters at a cost of £1.8 million over the next three years.
Local authorities will be given a 50 per cent grant towards the cost of each shelter.
Teacher to go down und-orr!
WELLINGTON College teacher Kenneth Orr will be heading off down under on the trip of a lifetime next month.
He has been selected to undertake an eight-week lecture tour of Australia under the UK-Australian Teacher Fellowship run through Queen's University.
So far 10 teachers from Britain have been selected to travel to Australia on the scheme, but Mr Orr is the first from Northern Ireland.
The science teacher will be based in Adelaide, travelling to other parts of the country to give his talks.
Young triathlete aims for the top
MAN OF STEEL…
BELFAST student Alastair Duffield is on his way to the top in one of the most gruelling sports yet devised — the triathlon.
The exhausting discipline, which features a mile and a half swim in open water and a 40-kilometre cycle topped off with a 10-kilometre road race, is one of the fastest growing sports in Europe.
This year a bumper crowd is expected to turn out for Northern Ireland's premier triathlon event at Portaferry in July, and Alastair should be up with the front runners.
Last year he won the Irish Junior Triathlon Championship and he will be representing Ulster at the British Championships in Swindon next week.
And those Games are in preparation for a trip to Spain for the Junior European Championships in July.
‘The season has started well for him with successes at the Peninsula Duathlon in Newtownards and at the Hole in the Wall Triathlon in Dublin, and we have great expectations for the major championships,’ McKnight.
‘He has the advantage this year of having a new £2,500 lightweight hi-tech Cannodale bicycle which will be a great help.’
The Coca Cola international triathlon at Portaferry on July 3, which normally attracts upwards of 25,000 spectators, will be a good test for the Belfast student as it features the coldest swim of any triathlon in the world.
He'll be battling it out in Portaferry for one of the richest prizes in European triathlon as £10,000 goes to the winner.
Swimming forms the backbone of triathlon and actually provided the 20-year-old Queen's architecture student with his introduction to the sport.
‘I have been a member of the Leander club for the past 12 years and still train with them,’ he explained.
‘As I became more experienced I wanted to branch out and the more technical aspects of triathlon, particularly the cycling, interested me.
‘It is the swim which is still the most exciting as everything depends on the tide.
It is exhilarating to begin the race with up to 500 people all surging into the water.’
Every week, Alastair gets out of his bed at 4am to head for swimming training at the Robinson Centre with his Leander clubmates.
The pool is also used for running training, to help build up stamina and he does his weight training there as well.
Over the past year Alastair has spent more time cycling, putting in up to 150 miles a week.
At Easter he took part in the Tour of the North — a five day, 250-mile trip around Northern Ireland.
As with most sports, triathlon can be expensive, and so far has cost Alastair between £3,000 and £4,000 a year in travelling and training costs.
His current bike was provided by local businessman CP Granleese, but he is still on the lookout for a major sponsor.
Just the achievement of finishing a triathlon, let alone managing to win one, would be enough for most athletes, but not this one.
His ultimate ambition is to take part in the Australian-style ‘Iron Man’ competition — a swim of two and a half miles, a 112-mile cycle and a full 26-mile marathon.
‘Now that,’ he says, ‘is a challenge.’
Meanwhile, Alastair may also be appearing at this year's Coca Cola Lisburn Triathlon, which is one of the top local triathlons.
June 2, starting at 6pm from Lisburn Swimming Pool, and it comprises of a six mile run, half mile swim and 13 mile cycle.
Belfast-based triathlete Alastair Duffield, his trainer Ron McKnight and sponsor CP Granleese admire Alastair's new £2,500 bike.
P/20/116.
Search is on for ‘soap opera’ star
A YOUNG north Belfast girl is bidding for instant fame, and a place in one of the nation's most exclusive portrait galleries, after entering the United Kingdom's longest running ‘soap opera’.
Five-year-old Nikole Cunningham from Forthriver Link is one of thousands of little girls from throughout the UK vying for the title of Miss Pears 1993.
The annual competition, now in its 36th year, aims to find a fresh-faced, naturally attractive and photogenic child to represent the soap company.
The winner will feature on the Miss Pears soap cartons for the following year and have her picture painted for the Pears portrait gallery, as well as picking up a cheque for £1000.
Miss Pears will be chosen from 10 national finalists, each of whom win £200 plus a two day all expenses paid trip to London.
Another 40 runners-up will each win £25.
To qualify for the competition entrants should have a clear, fresh complexion and be between three and nine years old.
Black and white or colour photographs should be sent together one of the special Pears Soap cartons.
Forms can also be obtained by phoning 0532 739501.
Closing date for entries is July 1.
Is this the face of Miss Pears 1993?…
Five-year-old Nikole Cunningham from Forthriver Link is among the contenders in the soap company's 36th annual search for a star.
p/20/58.