

Dear Anne
Sponsorship Questionnaire
Thank you for your letter of 4 February 1988 and the completed sponsorship questionnaire.
I would agree it is always difficult for small Associations to achieve sponsorship but as the saying goes ‘if at first you don't succeed…’
Concerning your request for possible grant aid for the weekend in October I would think the Council would look favourably on your request once again.
Perhaps nearer the time you could send details of the weekend course plus the costing for it.
In the meantime good luck with your classes and do remember if there is anything I can do to assist please do not hesitate to contact me.
Yours sincerely
Dear Sir/Madam
Sportslink: Strengthening Sports Links Between Schools and Community
The Scottish Sports Council and The Times Scottish Educational Supplement are launching this month the second year of the Sportslink Awards.
These Awards are intended to encourage schools and local agencies to work together in involving young people in sport, and keeping them involved when they leave school.
I enclose a leaflet which describes the aims and conditions of the Awards, which offer £2,500 worth of prizes to the winning projects.
Copies of the leaflet have been sent to all secondary schools in Scotland, district and regional councils, local sports councils, governing bodies of sport and other youth organisations.
Your help and support in promoting the Awards would be much appreciated.
If you would like additional copies of the leaflet, or have any enquiries about the scheme please do not hesitate to contact me at the Council offices.
Yours sincerely
Dear 
Open Meeting: Sports Development Groups & plans 
As advised by Ian Russell in his letter of 15 December 1989 the next open meeting in the series organised by the Council and the Scottish Sports Association will take place on Monday 22 January 1990 at 1830 hours in the Council Offices, Caledonia House, South Gyle, Edinburgh.
The meeting will be about Sports Development Groups and Plans and the Programme is as follows:
As local Sports Development Groups and Plans can represent a significant source of support for sport I do hope that your organisation will be represented at this meeting.
Yours sincerely
Dear Secretary
Medical Defence Subscriptions
I am writing to inform you of the new Government legislation concerning liability cover for medical staff working in the National Health Service.
As you may be aware, doctors and dentists employed in the hospital and community health services are contractually obliged to subscribe to one of the three medical defence organisations (MDOs): the Medical and Dental Defence Union of Scotland, the Medical Defence Union or the Medical Protection Society.
Currently, each of the MDOs has a similar subscription structure: dentists pay less than doctors, some non-clinical staff pay much less than clinicians, and junior doctors pay on a sliding scale reaching the full rate after 7 years.
The full rate is the same for all clinical specialities and for general medical practitioners.
The MDOs give subscribers cover against findings of negligence both in NHS practice and in their private work and also provide an extensive legal and advisory service.
Until 1988, doctors and dentists employed in the hospital and community health services were personally responsible for payment of their own MDO subscriptions.
In recent years MDO subscription rates have risen sharply in response to the growing number of claims resulting from greater public expectations and willingness to sue, more ambitious surgical techniques and more expensive Court settlements.
Consequently some of the MDOs have considered introducing differential subscriptions which would require doctors in high risk specialities to pay significantly higher rates.
To offset the effects of disproportionate increases, the Government implemented as an interim measure a scheme whereby two thirds of the medical rate of MDO subscriptions was reimbursed to those practitioners employed full time in the NHS.
However, from 1 January 1990, new legislation, as outlined in the Department of Health's paper entitled ‘Medical Defence Subscriptions’, will come into operation.
Briefly, the new Crown Indemnity legislation states that the NHS will now cover all claims of negligence, and the like, made against full time hospital doctors in respect of their daily work.
The NHS indemnity however will not extend to any work, such as voluntary medical advice or so called‘Good Samaritan’ work at road accidents, performed outwith the contractual working day.
Since almost all the basic sports medicine provision within governing bodies of sport is provided by doctors who are either paid nothing or who are given a small honorarium, the prospect of maintaining separate medical defence cover for their voluntary activities may place their valuable contribution to sport in jeopardy.
I am pleased to inform you however that the Council the British Association of Sport and Medicine Scotland have persuaded the Medical and Dental Defence Union of Scotland to include voluntary sports medicine care in the lowest subscription category along with advisory services and ‘Good Samaritan’ work.
This will effectively mean that doctors involved on a voluntary basis with the governing bodies of sport can continue their contribution for the minimum extra cost.
The subscription rate for this category will be announced when a policy decision is made by the two MDOs in England.
Although clearly this matter concerns only those doctors working full time in the NHS and not in general practice, I strongly recommend that you ensure your medical officer or advisor is aware of the situation and has taken appropriate steps to obtain adequate medical defence cover.
Please do not hesitate to contact me if you have any queries relating to this matter.
Yours sincerely
Sponsorship Seminar, 14 May 1988 Jordanhill College, Glasgow
In 1983 the Council organised a major and very popular seminar for governing bodies to encourage the effective use of sponsorship.
We are presently putting the final touches to the programme for another seminar on this topic to be held on Saturday 14 May 1988 at Jordanhill College in Glasgow.
We are sending you this advance notification partly to give you as much notice as possible but also, as the seminar is likely to be over-subscribed, to take advance reservations for places.
The programme will include Brian Porteous from the Council's Sponsorship Advisory Service speaking about the latest research exercise carried out by the Council into sponsorship in Scotland; Derek Etherington, Consultant to the English Sports Council talking about UK developments: lawyer Stephen Townley giving guidance on contract negotiations plus media experts and representatives of leading Scottish companies giving practical advice on how to make effective sponsorship proposals.
The cost for the day's seminar will be £15 inclusive of VAT, morning coffee, lunch, afternoon tea and the seminar report.
For guaranteed places at the seminar, please complete the enclosed form and return it to us no later than Friday 22 April 1988.
Full programme details will be circulated at the end of March.
Yours sincerely
Open Meeting — 19 April 1988 Grant Aid and the House of Sport
An Open Meeting has been arranged to enable the Council to bring governing bodies up to date on two important issues and to have joint discussion on them.
The issues are revenue grant aid and the acquisition of new office accommodation.
On grant aid the Council will be able to give details of the budget for revenue grant aid for 1988/89, and indicate the position as far as is known on the likely budgets for the following two years.
It is hoped also that a revised grant application form will be available for distribution before the meeting.
On new office accommodation the Council will explain the latest position regarding the new building at South Gyle.
The venue for the meeting is the Roxburghe Hotel, Charlotte Square, Edinburgh on 19 April 1988 at 1830 hrs.
It is hoped that there will be as full an attendance as possible.
It would be helpful if you could indicate on the attached reply slip if your Association will be represented at the meeting.
Yours sincerely
Dear Secretary
New Office Accommodation
You will recall that at an Open Meeting in May 1987 governing bodies were provided with details of the Council's plans to move to new office premises at South Gyle, Edinburgh.
The plans then were delayed considerably whilst discussions were pursued with the Scottish Office and the Treasury over the financial details.
Approval has now been given for the acquisition of the building.
The proposed date of entry is November 1988, still feasible because the developer continued with early work because, although the Council had first option on the new building, there were other potential clients also.
However the timescale for contributing to planning and design features has been shortened drastically, and in fact most of that detailed work has to be completed by the end of this month.
In particular, the partitioning requirements for governing bodies' accommodation which will be provided on a cellular basis need to be determined now.
If your Association has decided that it wishes to take up the offer of accommodation at South Gyle the Council needs to know:
1
What your requirements are in terms of office space and number of rooms.
2
What your storage requirements are both at your office location and possibly elsewhere in the building.
3
Whether you anticipate any other special requirements.
I readily acknowledge that this is a very difficult request but I am afraid the timescale has to he met.
To save time it would be helpful if you could telephone either me or Ian McKenzie who has been seconded from the Facilities Planning Division to lead the work in commissioning South Gyle.
Thank you for your co-operation.
Yours sincerely
Dear 
School-Aged Sport
As you will be aware the Council has taken a major initiative to investigate the levels of participation and standards of performance in sport and physical recreation among young people.
As part of this initiative a Working Party has been established to consider four main issues:
— levels of participation and standards of performance
— links among different agencies which provide opportunities to take part in sport and physical recreation
— community use of educational facilities
— manpower and training requirements.
We have been very grateful to the Scottish Sports Association and in particular to Jim Wylie and Hammy Smith for their support and interest in this area of work.
One major part of the ongoing work of the Working Party is to discover what opportunities are being provided by a range of different agencies and what your attitudes are to the provision of opportunities for young people.
With the help of System Three Scotland we have developed the questionnaire which is attached and we would be very grateful if you would take a little time to complete it.
I know that you tend to be inundated with questionnaires but hope you will agree that this is a vital area of concern and will help us find ways of reaching new ways of assisting young people in and into sport.
I can also appreciate that not all the statistics requested necessarily will be to hand but hope you can provide as much information as possible.
Completion and return of the questionnaire by 21 March would be much appreciated.
Best wishes,
Yours sincerely
Appendix I
TSB REGIONAL SCHOOLS OF SPORT
The Scottish Sports Council
Application Information
Definition
The Regional Schools are aimed at participants at ‘district’ or regional level — ideally in the 12–19 age range.
Although the Schools generally are based in cities, it is intended that they cater for participants from the surrounding ‘region’.
This wider region will in all probability reflect the district, regional or area organisation and/or competition structure of many governing bodies.
Organisation
The 1988 Regional School of Sport will operate during August, September and October in the following five venues:
Each School will be residential and will cater for 8–10 sports and 80–100 athletes, senior coaches and trainee coaches.
All dates will be confirmed as soon as they are finalised by the Regional Committees.
General Finance
All accommodation, food, facility and equipment hire will be paid for the athletes and coaches.
Travelling expenses for the athletes will be paid on an out of pocket basis.
Coaches
Each governing body selected will be expected to provide a top senior coach and an assistant coach.
The coaches must be prepared to ‘live-in’ and will be responsible for the group for the duration of the School.
Each governing body selected will receive £100 to cover the fees, expenses and travelling costs of both coaches.
Some governing bodies provided additional finance to secure the services of a particular coach for the Regional Schools and it may be that your governing body would want to consider this.
The £100 will be paid directly to each governing body selected.
This will permit appropriate fees and expenses to be paid directly to the coaches by the governing body concerned.
The Regional Committees will not be involved in paying fees and expenses to the coaches at the School.
Please make this clear to the coaches you select.
The Regional Committees have reported that the presence of a top visiting senior coach proved to be particularly beneficial for the youngsters.
They have asked that governing bodies should take this factor into account when selecting the coaches for the Regional Schools.
Generally this will strengthen an application.
Selection
The sports for each school will be selected by a local Regional Committee including representatives from District Sports Councils, District Councils, the Scottish Sports Council and TSB Scotland.
The final selection will be based on local requirements and the information returned from governing bodies wishing to be considered for inclusion.
Dear Sir/Madam
TSB Schools of Sport 1988 and 1989
Please find the enclosed application forms for the five 1988 Regional Schools and two 1989 National Schools in Glasgow and Edinburgh.
They have been sent out together as a result of the recent meeting of the Board of Governors which discussed the selection of sports.
One of the main recommendations from the Governors was that governing bodies might wish to present a case for linking participation in regional and national schools.
This would have the advantage of allowing forward planning in terms of an overall residential training programme for 1988 and 1989.
It might also facilitate some participants progressing from Regional to National Schools in certain sports.
However, as you may recall, the Regional Committees select the sports for the Regional Schools based on local needs and on the strengths of individual governing body applications.
This will not change, but the Regional Committees will be alerted to the possible advantages of relating Regional and National School selections for those governing bodies presenting a convincing case.
The National School sports for 1989 will be selected at the next Board of Governors meeting on 19 April.
The Regional Committees will be informed immediately of this selection so that they can take it into account when making their own choices.
The application form is therefore extremely important and detailed information should be included.
Particular attention should be paid to the section linking regional and national squad development where this is desired and appropriate.
Completion of Applications
The detailed information for the National and Regional schools is attached in Appendices I and II respectively.
Please complete the appropriate application forms for the Schools, and return them to me by 6 April 1988.
No application forms received after this date will be considered for a place in the Schools.
I look forward to hearing from you.
Yours sincerely
THE SCOTTISH SPORTS COUNCIL
APPLYING FOR REVENUE GRANT AID — GUIDANCE FOR GOVERNING BODIES OF SPORT
INTRODUCTION
The purpose of these notes is to assist all bodies to improve their applications, to ensure that they present the kind of information to justify grant aid previously offered and to strengthen the case for continued and/or increased grant aid.
PRESENT PROCEDURES
The application procedures for the Council's scheme of revenue grant aid require governing bodies annually to submit a written statement in support of a set of budget estimates.
Ideally the combined written statement and budget estimate should stand as the Development or Corporate Plan of the governing body.
Both the statement and financial figures are expected to relate to a plan for development over a period of 3–4 years.
The annual submission serves both as an update report on the progress of the plan and provides opportunity to change the emphasis in the light of experience, the resources available, and other factors.
In the three years since these procedures were introduced the standards of development plans and the annual statements have varied widely.
Where the information supplied to the Council has been less than adequate, discussions at meetings between representatives of bodies and the Council's members and officers have been helpful in enabling the Council to obtain more of the information it wishes to have to assist it in determining the grant offer.
PREPARING DEVELOPMENT PLANS
In planning for development, principally to increase the numbers of participants and to improve standards of performance in their sports, bodies need to take account of a number of factors.
These include:
4.1
Financial resources.
4.2
Personnel resources, both employed and voluntary.
4.3
Communication within their administration systems.
4.4
Collation and dissemination of technical information.
4.5
Organisation of appropriate competition opportunities in Scotland.
4.6
Participation in representative competitions.
It is suggested that two-stage process is required.
First, bodies should determine a set of reasonable objectives to be achieved in the longer term, say over three to four years, for each of their areas of activity.
In short, they should establish the kind of position in which they would wish to see themselves at the end of that period.
Governing bodies should take a reasonable, optimistic and realistic view, not a highly unlikely state of success and well-being.
Then they should establish sets of year-by-year targets, the achievement of which will carry them forward towards their ultimate objectives.
That planning process can be encapsulated, albeit very simplistically, by a three part statement:
6.1
‘This is where we are now’
6.2
‘That is where we would like to be.’
6.3
‘These are the steps along the road to getting there.’
The Present Position —‘Where We Are Now’
This section of the plan should be objective, detailed and accurate, describing honestly the position in the main areas of activity — membership, administration, domestic competition, recruitment and education of coaches, preparation and training of representative teams, participation in international competition, contributing to the business of international federations.
The extent of financial resources derived from membership subscriptions, competition entry fees, sponsorship, grant aid and other sources should be recorded, and means of maintaining adequate income identified.
It is also helpful to record past trends eg growth in membership, the number of coaches or standing in Commonwealth, European or World rankings.
It is useful to present these in tabular form simply adding on an extra column each year.
Long Term Aim —‘Where We Would Like To Be’
This section should be an attempt to find a position which might be attained, albeit not without some difficulty, and neither only a slight improvement on the existing situation nor hopelessly out of reach.
It is suggested that a five year timespan may be too long.
It may be more appropriate to set a period of three to four years for the achievement of the longer term aim.
Shorter Term Objectives —‘How To Start Getting There’
Targets can be set, year by year, again in all the main areas of activity.
They will combine both qualitative and quantitative measurements.
Inevitably there are aspects of performance and achievements in which targets will be difficult to define.
Nevertheless some form of indicator of performance must be laid down beforehand or progress cannot reasonably be assessed later.
Means of Assessment
The means by which progress is to be measured and assessed should be recorded within each set of targets and objectives, in each area of activity.
In some they will be quite simple numerical calculations, for example:
Target
— to organise six courses for the introductory coaching award and to train 90 coaches.
Assessment
— by recording and reviewing number of courses and coaching awards gained, and, if appropriate, recording the constraints which contributed to the results falling short of the target.
In others they will be more difficult, especially in terms of performance in competition.
Review of Objectives
The results of assessment will then determine whether short term objectives should be overhauled and re-stated.
Longer term aims may not require to be re-stated after just one year's experience — numerous changes of direction will only serve to confuse, but they should be re-examined in the light of progress in attaining short term targets and the development plan should be altered accordingly.
Constraints
Inevitably, unforeseen difficulties will arise to inhibit progress towards some targets.
Hoped-for support or resources may not materialise.
In planning for development constraints have to be identified and parts of the plan will be concerned with devising means of overcoming or by-passing the constraints.
ANNUAL SUBMISSIONS
Each year bodies apply for grant aid towards the costs of their annual programmes in advance of the commencement of their financial years.
The application process has several components:
14.1
The budget estimates.
Estimates of income from various sources, and expenditure under areas of activity usually including administration, coaching, training and competition.
14.2
A report of progress in the previous year.
14.3
A statement of intent for the year ahead.
14.4
Audited accounts presented to the Council within fourteen days of bodies AGM's.
After examination the Council confirms its grant for the previous year which until the accounts are received remains provisional.
If necessary, adjustments can be made to the grant for the current year.
These components should each bear reference to the development plan.
The Budget Statement
This is presented on a standard form covering all aspects of likely income and expenditure.
A set of guidance notes is provided to assist applicants in completing the form.
Bodies have welcomed particularly this component of the application procedures, stating that it provides them with a good reference point for budgetary control through the course of their financial years.
Part of the form consists of a forecast of budgets for three years ahead.
This should be used to indicate the financial implications of special features within the development plan.
Progress Report
Grant having been offered specifically towards a year's programme within the plan for development, clearly it is necessary that a reasonably full report should be provided to explain progress, or the lack of it, and to illustrate particular successes or problems.
The report usually should comprise sections on the following:
16.1
Membership
16.2
Financial Position
16.3
Administration
16.4
Domestic Competition
16.5
International Competition
16.6
Recruitment and Training of Coaches
16.7
General Aspirations
16.8
Constraints
Progress on these areas of activity should be detailed, with a statement also relating to achievement of targets.
The Year Ahead
This part of the statement can follow a similar pattern.
Indeed the headings of budget estimates can serve as a guide to the content of both sections of the supporting statement.
Targets and constraints should be set down in accordance with the ambitions of the development plan.
Development Plan Update
This third section of the annual submission should be concerned with notification of any changes in the development plan which may have been decided as a result of progress and experience in the early years.
The plan should not be formulated and then forgotten after grant for the first year has been obtained.
Nor should it be a policy document to be rigidly adhered to, come what may.
It should, however, be used as a management tool both by officers and officials and as a clear statement to members of how their subscription to and interest in the sport are being expended.
CONCLUSION
There are no grounds for anticipating that public funds available to the Council for supporting the activities of governing bodies of sport are likely to be increased beyond existing levels.
It is essential therefore that bodies manage their finances efficiently and apply them effectively to maintain development.
A practice of continued planning is required.
The advice on how to put planning for development into practice can be supported by the experiences shared by the Council and a number of bodies over the last three years.
It is hoped that the procedures suggested above will assist and encourage all bodies to undertake such a practice.
Dear Secretary
Open Meeting — 19 April 1988 Grant Aid and the New Headquarters
With reference to my letter of 16 March please now find attached copies of the revised grant application form and a paper, Applying for Grant Aid — Guidance for Governing Bodies of Sport.
These will be discussed at the Open Meeting which, may I remind you, will be held at the Roxburghe Hotel, Edinburgh on Tuesday 19 April at 1830 hours.
Discussion will be based under the following main headings:
1
Revenue Grant Aid Budgets, 1988–89 and beyond.
2
Budget Planning and Control — Examples of Practice:
2.1
Mike Sheppard, Treasurer, Scottish Amateur Swimming Association.
2.2
Andrew Warrender, Treasurer, Scottish Canoe Association.
3
The Revised Application Form.
4
The New Headquarters:
4.1
Current planning and design.
4.2
Governing bodies — provision and estimated costs.
4.3
Budget implications.
If you have not yet returned the pro forma sent to you on 16 March and do intend that your Association will be represented at the meeting would you please return the pro forma to ensure that seating arrangements are adequate.
Yours sincerely
THE SCOTTISH SPORTS COUNCIL
NATIONAL AND SUB-NATIONAL FACILITIES
OUTLINE OF PROGRAMMES
NATIONAL PROGRAMME
OBJECTIVE
The objective of the national facilities programme is to ensure that each sport — if appropriate — has access to at least one venue suitable for the staging of international events and for national squad training.
In some cases competition and training may take place at the same facility, in others at separate facilities.
PRIORITIES
Within the programme, in broad terms the priorities in descending order are:
3.1
provision of sports with no facilities;
3.2
upgrading of existing facilities; and
3.3
provision of additional facilities where the existing ones are under heavy pressure.
SUB-NATIONAL PROGRAMME
DEFINITION
A sub-national facility is one which:
4.1
allows/encourages the staging of competitions immediately below that of international level;
4.2
allows/encourages the training of high standard competitors who are in national squads or in area squads or individuals showing outstanding promise; and
4.3
allows/encourages the training of high level coaches and officials.
PROJECTS ASSISTED
The programme encompasses initial provision, extension or upgrading of existing provision of competition, training, spectator, and ancillary facilities and equipment.
No priority is given:
5.1
between new provision or extended/upgraded existing provision;
5.2
between competition or training equipment;
5.3
between a facility or equipment.
However, ancillary capital facilities have a lower priority for assistance than competition or training facilities.
Also, facilities with a project cost of less than £25,000 are given a low priority.
Equipment projects with a cost of less than £2,500 are ineligible for assistance.
No financial assistance is given for the revenue costs of a project.
However, where appropriate, commitments to rolling programmes of equipment purchased for governing bodies are made.
Apart from such specific commitments no financial assistance is available for upgrading or replacement of previously assisted projects.
PRIORITIES FOR FUNDING
No geographic priorities for investment are established.
However the Islands Areas have been recognised as requiring a special policy and a portion of the budget, currently £15,000 annually, is earmarked for this purpose.
Within the specialist facilities for a sport priority is given to projects which are expected to produce the highest level of participants.
CONDITIONS OF GRANT
Each project requires specific conditions but the general thrust will be to secure guaranteed or priority access for target participants/bodies, at charges which are not disadvantageous compared to the normal level of charging for the facility or type of facility.
Dear 
National and Sub-National Facilities: Construction of Rolling Programmes
With your assistance, we intend to construct rolling programmes for national and sub-national facilities.
I am writing to explain why we believe this work is necessary and to enlist your help.
Since its inception, Council has operated a programme of capital grants designed to assist governing bodies gain access to facilities suitable for international competition and national training purposes.
Much has been accomplished under the programme, although one or two major facilities have still to be provided.
None the less, from time to time governing bodies identify new or revised requirements which we try to slot into the programme.
We expect to find it increasingly difficult to do so at short notice because our budgets are under mounting pressure.
In the last three years we have been operating a programme of capital grants designed to assist governing bodies and their area associations gain access to facilities suitable for the standard of competition immediately below national level and serving major areas of Scotland.
As this sub-national programme has developed, it has become apparent that a major ingredient in its success will be the construction of a rolling programme encompassing the specialised needs of all governing bodies.
A complete list of requirements will enable Council to present a case to Government for extra funds and will allow Council and partners (especially local authorities) to plan expenditure.
Consequently we are asking all governing bodies to work with us in the compilation of comprehensive statements of their present and foreseeable needs at national and sub-national levels.
Some governing bodies may consider that their needs at both levels presently are satisfied or that they have advised us of their requirements.
If so, we shall be grateful if you will review the positions and confirm them.
Others have not yet let us have statements of needs and we urge them to work with us to produce them.
So far as the sub-national programme is concerned, we have already worked up provision patterns for competition sports halls and for multi-purpose, high quality pitches; so there is no need to include these items in your returns.
However, we are seeking information on your needs for the ancillary facilities (such as conditioning suites) and specialised equipment related to them.
Indeed, throughout this work, please take the word ‘facility’ to include equipment.
We have set a target date of 31 December 1987 for all submissions on the basis of which we will construct 12 year implementation programmes.
The programmes will be subject to review with the passage of time but no substantial additions to them will be made for the first six years (except for changes required because of matters outside of governing body control and except for minor alterations to equipment).
As a starting point, notes are attached summarising the programmes and our understanding of the facilities available to you and your needs at both national and sub-national levels.
In order to progress the working up of your requirements, please liaise with my colleague identified in the enclosure.
On policy matters please contact one or both of Jim Macdonald for the National Programme, Lee Cousins for the Sub-National Programme.
Additionally, Jim, Lee and I will be present at the Joint Conference at Inverclyde on 3–4 October when we will be pleased to expand on the foregoing and to assist you further.
With kind regards.
Yours sincerely
Dear 
Drug Testing Programmes 1988–89
The majority of Scottish governing bodies of sport have now introduced drug testing programmes to combat the misuse of drugs in sport.
The Council and the Drug Control Centre are in the process of planning for the year from 1 April 1988 and to do this we need information on your plans.
Please complete the enclosed form ‘Drug Testing Programme April 1988 — March 1989’ and return it to the Council by 26 February 1988.
It is appreciated that the dates for some events may not yet be finalised.
However, we would ask that you complete the form as far as possible so that realistic estimates of the total number of tests to be undertaken may be made.
In an attempt to reduce administration costs, in future we will only notify your drug control officials of positive test results.
You can assume that tests are negative if you have not heard from us within 6 weeks of the test being taken.
Please find the following information enclosed:
1
Drug Testing Programme April 1988 — March 1989 Proposal Form
2
Drug Testing Procedures — Information Sheet
The past year has seen very few problems concerning the administration of drug testing programmes.
We would like to thank all the officials who have helped to make the programme work effectively and we look forward to receiving your co-operation in 1988.
If you have any queries about the enclosed information please do not hesitate to contact us.
Drug Abuse in Sport — Open Meeting, March 15 1988
An Open Meeting to enable the appropriate representatives of governing bodies to discuss matters relating to Drug Abuse in Sport will be held on 15 March 1988.
The venue for the meeting is the Royal Scottish Automobile Club, 11 Blythswood Square, Glasgow and it will start at 1830 hrs.
The main purpose of the meeting is to enable governing body representatives to discuss drug testing, the various issues which are associated with it, and any problems which may have been experienced in administering a drug testing programme.
The meeting will be structured under the following headings:
1
Dangers of Drug Abuse — Miss Elizabeth Johnston (Chelsea College Drug Control and Teaching Centre)
2
Education Programme
3
Legal/Constitutional Implications
4
Future Initiatives
This is an important opportunity to discuss drug testing in sport in Scotland and indeed is in response to enquiries for information from many governing bodies.
The meeting will also give us an opportunity to discuss future initiatives in drug testing and the implications for governing bodies.
The Council presently is considering the report ‘The Misuse of Drugs In Sport’ by Colin Moynihan MP, Minister for Sport and Sebastian Coe, Vice Chairman of the Sports Council (issued by the Department of the Environment, September 1987).
Information on any changes in response to this document will be given at the open meeting.
Please return the enclosed pro forma about the open meeting by 7 March 1988.
We look forward to seeing you or an appropriate representative of your organisation on 15 March.
Best wishes,
Yours sincerely
Dear 
National and Sub-National Facilities Construction of Rolling Programmes
I refer to Ivor Davies' letter to you of 29 September 1987.
You will recall that we have set a target date of 31 December 1987 for all submissions setting out the perceived needs of governing bodies of sport for national and sub-national facilities, to provide the basis of a 12-year implementation programme.
Basically this calls for an identification of present requirements and an assessment of likely requirements over the next 5 years, subject to review/upgrading in year 6; it may be that our letter conveyed the impression that we were asking for a ‘12-year plan’, this is not the case.
Should you need advice, assistance or clarification please do not hesitate to contact me; alternatively you may wish to contact the nominated liaison officer for facilities projects, Ian Cramond that we hear from you before the end of this month.
With kind regards.
Dear Secretary
National Coaching Foundation Level II Courses — Free Offer
As you will be aware from previous correspondence, the third series of level two coach education courses are being staged presently at the Scottish School of PE, Jordanhill College and at the Scottish Centre for Physical Education, Movement and Leisure Studies at Moray House College.
There are still plenty of places available on both sets of courses and we have decided that, in an attempt to help governing bodies evaluate the courses, we can offer a free place on each course which still has to be held.
To take advantage of this offer please complete the attached forms.
The form for courses to be held in March should be returned by 2 March 1988 and for all other courses by 31 March 1988.
Please do not send bookings for the free places direct to the two colleges.
Yours sincerely
Dear Secretary
British Association of Sport and Medicine (BASM) Congress ‘88
This year the British Association of Sport and Medicine is being organised by its Scottish Committee.
The chairman of the organising committee is Mr Donald Macleod, vice-chairman of the Scottish Sports Council's Consultative Group on Sports Medicine and Sports Sciences.
The Scottish Sports Council is providing administrative support and assistance with promotion of the event.
The conference will be held at Gleneagles Hotel from 11–13 November, and it is hoped that delegates will include, doctors, sports scientists, physiotherapists, coaches, athletes and administrators.
Full details of the programme and accommodation arrangements are attached.
I would be most grateful if you could pass this information on to any representative of your sport whom you think may wish to attend the conference.
Yours sincerely
Dear Anne
Revenue Grant Aid to Governing Bodies — Timing of Applications
As you know at present governing bodies are requested to submit their applications for grant aid one month before the end of their financial years.
If applications have not been received five months into bodies’ financial years it is assumed by the Council that they do not need, and therefore do not intend to apply for, grant aid.
In the three years that the revised scheme has now operated the Council has noted that the majority of bodies clearly have been able to submit their applications well within that timescale.
However a few bodies have persisted in applying very late.
The Council takes the view that although late submissions impose problems upon the Council officers and members, more importantly they cause difficulties within the bodies themselves in respect of budgeting and cashflow.
Accordingly, the Council has decided that the timescale should be shortened from six months to three.
That is to say, bodies should continue to submit applications one month prior to the end of their respective financial years, but grant aid will not be provided for any governing body which submits its application more than three months after the required date.
This change will become effective from 1 July 1987.
The Council is very aware of the pressures placed upon voluntary officials in respect of drawing up development plans and budgets, and preparing annual submissions for grant.
In time of special and genuine difficulty the Council will of course be prepared to extend the period for submitting applications but bodies must seek approval for a late application no later than the time when the application normally would be due.
It is emphasised that the Council believes the arrangement to be in bodies' best interests.
Many bodies have stated that the grant aid procedures and the application form provide them with a ready basis for an effective budgeting system.
Such a system can only be fully effective however if it is applied to the whole of the financial year.
Yours sincerely
Dear Anne
Coach Education Modules
You may have read recently in the press that the Council's coach education distance learning project now has been formally launched.
The Council is of course very keen to ensure that all coaches are well informed of what is available.
The enclosed standard article has therefore been produced in the hope that governing bodies will agree to include it in appropriate publications, for example magazines and newsletters.
Yours sincerely
THE SCOTTISH SPORTS COUNCIL
The Scottish Sports Council announced today that its Vice Chairman and Chief Executive Mr Ken Hutchison has intimated his decision to retire at the end of November.
Speaking in Edinburgh Mr Hutchison said ‘The end of this year will see the completion of eighteen years in this post.
A great deal has happened in that time and I have enjoyed every minute of it.
But there is a great deal more that I want to do with my life and I think I should start while I still have the energy and enthusiasm.’
‘Also, now that the Council is well settled in its new headquarters at South Gyle and is about to embark on the implementation of Sport 2000, the strategy designed to take sport in Scotland into the 21st Century, I believe it is a good time to hand over to someone new.’
Commenting on Mr Hutchison's decision Professor Raymond Miquel the Council Chairman said they would be sorry to see him go and paid tribute to the contribution he had made to Scottish sport over the past 26 years.
‘The Council is on the threshold of exciting new developments and we shall miss Ken Hutchison's drive and experience.
He has dedicated his entire career to the development of sport in Scotland and I am sure all Council members will want to join me in thanking him for the commitment he has shown over the years.’
Dear 
Sport 2000
I am pleased to enclose a copy of Sport 2000: A Strategic Approach to the Development of Sport in Scotland, which is being published tomorrow.
Sport 2000 seeks to create a situation where all sportsmen and women will have the opportunity to take part in sport at whatever level their ability or interest allows.
It sets out, for the first time, a framework for achieving that situation and outlines the resources, both human and financial, which will be needed.
But above all, it calls for a co-ordinated approach from the private, voluntary and public sectors to the development of sport in Scotland and suggests how that might be achieved.
As the national agency charged with the promotion and development of sport, the Scottish Sports Council will take the lead and shortly we will be launching new initiatives to implement our role as identified in the strategy.
However, it is important to stress that Sport 2000 should not be regarded as a Council strategy, rather it belongs to all who are committed to the future of sport in Scotland.
The year-long consultative process which, as you may know, preceded the publication of Sport 2000, clarified the key and complementary roles to be played by each agency.
Chapter Six highlights the need for Governing Bodies to build on the progress already achieved in becoming financially more self reliant and to improve further the efficiency of your organisation.
Governing bodies also have an important role to play in encouraging volunteers to assist in your work and proposals to achieve this are set out in Sport 2000.
My colleagues and I look forward to discussing with you ways in which together we can help your organisation fulfil that role during the decade ahead.
In order to promote general awareness of Sport 2000 we have also prepared a promotional leaflet, a copy of which is enclosed.
This is available from us free of charge in bulk orders and I hope you will consider taking some for distribution.
Yours sincerely
Dear Anne
Minibus Legislation
You may recall that there has been considerable discussion recently about the licence requirements for those driving minibuses.
We have received recently, from the Department of Transport, a consultation document which is the result of negotiations with the European Commission officials and which proposes certain relaxations in the proposed legislation.
A copy of the document is enclosed for your information.
We very much welcome the recognition given to the importance of voluntary and community organisations providing transport by using minibuses but you will note from the document that this relaxation is related exclusively to those groups which are set up for ‘charitable purposes’.
Clubs and other organisations which are set up purely for sporting purposes cannot normally be recognised as charities and would not be able to enjoy the relaxations proposed.
The Council's view is that it is invidious to make distinctions among and between voluntary and community organisations on the basis of antiquated charities legislation.
We suspect that this will be of great concern to many sports clubs and organisations throughout the United Kingdom and you might wish to consider taking appropriate action to make your views known on this matter.
It is important to realise that negotiations on the final provisions within the Directive have not yet been completed and so there is the opportunity for the Department of Transport to receive comments from sporting bodies and make these known to the European Commission.
Should you wish to make contact with the Department its address is Department of Transport, Driver and Vehicle Licensing Centre, Longview Road, Swansea, SA6 7JL.
Yours sincerely
Dear Anne
Printing Services
As you may be aware the Scottish Sports Council's printing department has recently undergone a comprehensive review in which the feasibility of all aspects of the service were assessed.
The outcome of the review was very much in favour, not only of retaining the department, but also of increasing and improving existing services for the benefit of both the Council and the Governing Bodies of Sport.
Consequently, the printing department will shortly be in a position to offer a full range of printing services which will include document and newsletter design and typesetting in addition to our usual single and colour printing.
The department has been forced recently to increase its prices but will continue to offer its services to the Governing Bodies of Sport at a heavily subsidised rate, well below that of competitive commercial rates.
For your information I have attached details of the services we are able to offer.
Departmental staff have extensive experience in the production of a wide range of material and are available to discuss and advise on your individual print requirements.
Free quotes are also provided by our department on request and costings may be compared with external rates before work is undertaken.
Samples of work are also available if required.
The Reprographics Officer, Derek Lawrie, should be contacted in the first instance on 031–317 7200 extension 281.
The Scottish Sports Council looks forward to assisting new Governing Bodies of Sport in the production of printed material and aims to develop still further its good working relation with existing users.
Yours sincerely
Dear Organiser
Glasgow Garden Festival Sports Information Point
As you will be aware the Glasgow Garden Festival is taking place this summer.
One of the Festival's six major themes is that of ‘Recreation and Sport’ and the Scottish Sports Council through Actionsport Scotland has undertaken to organise a daily programme of sports activities.
The National Governing Bodies  whose sports can be  accommodated in the facilities have taken the opportunity to promote their sport to a potential audience of four million people and are organising displays, coaching clinics, tournaments and so on.
In order to maximise the long term impact this sports component has on participation in Scotland a Sports Information Point will be in operation throughout the Festival's duration.
Manned by Actionsport Scotland staff, it will function as a ‘What's Your Sport’ Info point providing club specific information for all sports recognised by the Scottish Sports Council.
I am writing to you now to ask if you would provide me with a list of your affiliated clubs.
Any additional information you may produce such as a Year Book, coaching calendar, etc would also be of assistance.
Please do not hesitate to contact me if you have any queries and I look forward to receiving your information in the near future.
Yours faithfully
Dear Secretary
Newsletter Seminar, 10 December
The Scottish Sports Council has organised a seminar for Governing Bodies on the subject of Newsletter Production.
The seminar will take place on Sunday 10 December in Caledonia House from 0930 hours to 1600 hours.
The seminar will concentrate on the main aspects of newsletter production:
1
Design and Layout
2
Printing Methods
3
Value of good photography and other visuals
4
Editing
5
Analysis of participants' newsletters
The seminar will cater for governing bodies already using newsletters and also those currently contemplating this as an addition to their services.
There will be an opportunity to analyse participants' newsletters so, where appropriate, delegates are invited to bring examples.
The seminar fee is £22.50 per delegate, including lunch at Caledonia House.
Please complete the return slip below and return to MRS LYNNE MEIKLE, OPERATIONS DIVISION, SCOTTISH SPORTS COUNCIL, CALEDONIA HOUSE, SOUTH GYLE, EDINBURGH EH12 9DQ, enclosing your remittance.
Please return by 1 December.
Yours sincerely
Dear 
School-Aged Sport: National Seminar
As you may know, the Scottish Sports Council launched an initiative to examine School-Aged Sport at a seminar on 28 October 1987.
Following the very worthwhile discussion at the seminar we set up a Working Party to explore the main issues of concern and to suggest practical guidelines and recommendations for implementation.
The Working Party has met on several occasions and a research project is  under way to provide all relevant background information.
Having examined the issues and made some preliminary recommendations we consider it is now appropriate to consult interested individuals and agencies.
An interim report is being prepared and this will form the basis of discussion at a second national seminar to be Friday 22 April 1988 at 1400 hours in the Crest Hotel, Queensferry Road, Edinburgh.
We do hope your organisation will be represented at this seminar and I enclose a pro-forma for you to complete and return with details of your representative(s).
I would be grateful if you could return the form to me no later than Friday 15 April 1988.
In advance of the seminar we shall send a copy of the interim report to all those attending.
Yours sincerely
ADMINISTRATIVE ASSISTANT
SCOTTISH UNIVERSITIES SPORTS FEDERATION REQUIRE A PART-TIME ADMINISTRATOR TO ASSIST WITH GENERAL ADMINISTRATION INVOLVING A WIDE RANGE OF SPORTS.
FURTHER INFORMATION MAY BE OBTAINED FROM THE DIRECTOR OF PHYSICAL RECREATION, HERIOT-WATT UNIVERSITY, RICCARTON, CURRIE, ED14 4 AS PLEASE ENCLOSE A STAMPED ENCLOSED ENVELOPE.
Dear Sir or Madam
Major Events 1990
Further to my letter of 14 September, I would appreciate it if you could return details of your sport's major events for 1990 by Friday 3 November.
If you are currently unable to provide us with the relevant information, please indicate by which date this would be possible.
Yours sincerely
Dear Sir or Madam
Major Events 1990
In December 1988, with your co-operation, we distributed to the press and broadcasting media a calendar of major sporting events in Scotland for 1989.
This has proved to be of major benefit to those planning coverage of sport and to those staging the events and seeking publicity.
We are now working on a similar list for 1990, and accordingly would be grateful if you could complete the enclosed form, and return it to the Scottish Sports Council by Friday 29 September.
A stamped addressed envelope is enclosed for your convenience.
Yours sincerely
Dear Anne
Governing Body Directory of Proficiency Schemes and Coaching Awards
Please find enclosed a copy of the text for your entry in this Directory, which we are about to send for printing.
We would be grateful if you could check it for accuracy and also for any changes since you first kindly provided the information.
In one or two cases gaps in the existing information have been noted in bold print in brackets, and it would be helpful if you could respond to these as well.
Could you return your comments by Monday 10 November; please don't trouble to reply if you are happy with your text as we will assume no reply means that it is satisfactory.
Many thanks for your help in producing this Directory which we hope will be of value to all governing bodies.
We should have it published by the end of the year.
Yours sincerely
Dear 
Participation Figures Address List
I enclose for your interest a copy of Sports Participation in Scotland 1988 which gives overall participation rates, outdoor and indoor, and individual figures for those sports where the sample size was adequate.
I also enclose a copy of the relevant page from the address list of national sports contacts which we intend to publish again next month.
It will be circulated freely and provides the public with one key contact for information on each sport or branch of a sport.
To protect privacy, phone numbers have only been included for those governing bodies which have an office.
If you would like a contact number added please let us know, indicating whether it is for business (B), evenings and weekends (H) or both.
Please advise us of any updating or errors, which we can incorporate until 11 August.
Many thanks.
Yours sincerely
Dear Sirs
We are currently updating our sports section in the Library.
We would, therefore, be very grateful if you could send us a copy of your latest handbook or yearbook, lists of officials and current club contacts.
Please address to the Library
Many thanks in advance
Yours faithfully
Dear Secretary
Meeting Rooms (Caledonia House) for Governing Bodies of Sport
As advised in our letter dated 7 February 1989 when we indicated the charge for the use of the meeting rooms would be reviewed after six months, please note the following amendments to the guidelines.
With effect from 1 January 1990 the charge will be £3.00 per hour for the use of a meeting room outwith normal office hours, ie evenings and weekends.
For governing bodies using both meeting rooms, a charge of £6.00 per hour will be levied.
The Scottish Sports Council includes within the hourly charge any provision required for Reception staff and taxis.
I would be grateful if you would amend accordingly your copy of the Guidelines.
Yours sincerely
Dear Secretary
Sponsorship Opportunities
Please find enclosed the latest issue of Leads, the Council's quarterly newsletter on sports sponsorship in Scotland.
In response to a recent readership survey Leads has been re-designed to take better account of your needs and in line with the Council's new corporate identity.
In particular, we have re-designed the back page of the newsletter which shows current sponsorship opportunities in Scotland.
We hope you like the new format.
We also hope that those wishing to sponsor Scottish sport will find it easier to use as a directory of opportunities.
Consequently, in order to provide more accurate information, we have re-designed the ‘Sponsorship Opportunities’ form which you use to provide us with the information for the back page.
Please find six copies of the new form enclosed which I would ask you to complete for all your current opportunities (photocopy further copies if necessary).
I appreciate that you might recently have sent information on your sponsorship opportunities to the Advisory Service on the old-style pink forms but I would ask you to provide the information again on the new form.
Please attach any additional material such as promotional literature or press releases.
The next issue of Leads is scheduled for January 1990 and the copy deadline for you to submit information to us for the back page is 15 December 1989.
PLEASE NOTE: ONLY INFORMATION GIVEN ON THE NEW FORMS WILL BE CARRIED ON THE BACK PAGE OF THE NEXT ISSUE OF LEADS.
I look forward to receiving information from you over the coming weeks.
Best wishes.
Yours sincerely
BUILDING ON ABILITY: SPORT FOR PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES REPORT OF THE MINISTER OF SPORT'S REVIEW GROUP 1988/89
I am delighted to be able to send you a copy of the report prepared by my review group called ‘Building on Ability: Sport for people with disabilities’.
The report is the first of its kind and is the result of eighteen months of  wide-ranging and intensive research and debate.
The report contains recommendations aimed at organisations involved with sport for the disabled.
I hope that you will consider its relevance to your own activities.
I also hope that ‘Building on Ability’ will help to raise the general awareness of the talents of our disabled sportsmen and women and focus on their future development.
Dear Anne
Grant Aid for Post Holders on International Federations
Further to Brian Porteous' letter of 24 August 1990 I am pleased to be able to enclose the guidance notes and application forms produced by the Sports Council in respect of grant aid to be given to elected representatives on international sports bodies.
You will see from the notes and form that applications should only be directed to the Sports Council in respect of post holders of international bodies, ie those who have been elected in their own right and not those who are simply fulfilling a representative function.
The costs of delegates attending in representative capacities should be included in annual grant submissions to the Scottish Sports Council.
Anyone who has been in receipt of this form of grant aid from the Sports Council has already received guidance notes and application forms direct from that Council.
If you require any further information on this matter then please do not hesitate to contact me.
With best wishes,
Dear 
Sports Development Groups and Plans Information Digest OP1
‘Sport 2000: A Strategic Approach to the Development of Sport in Scotland’ noted that the current delivery system for the promotion and development of sport is fragmented.
In some areas of work there is an overlap in functions and in other gaps exist.
The Council is promoting the concept of local co-ordinated sports development plans involving all of the agencies which have the prime responsibility for developing sport and increasing participation in sport locally.
These agencies include district council recreation departments, local sports councils, voluntary organisations and clubs.
Presently all make a valuable contribution but generally events are not planned in a co-ordinated way taking into account the work of other agencies.
The Information Digest stresses the need for planned sports development and suggests that sports development might be categorised as follows:
target geographical areas
target groups of the population
coach and leadership training
sports specific programmes in conjunction with National Governing Bodies of Sport or the appropriate local committee.
Copies of the digest have been sent to all district councils, district sports councils and sports development groups and I am sending copies to governing bodies for information in the hope that the governing body itself or your district associations might become involved in the local planning process.
I have enclosed two digests and I would be grateful if you could pass them on to the most appropriate person within your association.
Further copies are available from the Scottish Sports Council at £l.00 each.
Best wishes.
Yours sincerely
Dear Secretary
Research into Women's Participation
‘Sport 2000, A Strategic Approach to the Development of Sport in Scotland’ identifies women as low participants in sport and therefore Council has identified women as a target group.
A number of initiatives are planned to contact more women to encourage them of the benefits of involvement.
We think that one way of encouraging more women's participation is to increase the number of women coaches, and therefore provide girls with more positive role models.
Although we believe there are fewer women coaches than men in Scotland, the Council does not have the figures.
Enclosed is a questionnaire designed to establish the percentage of women coaches in Scotland, and I hope you will be able to complete it for me, so that we get a true picture of all sports in Scotland.
Kate Gaunt, a student at Moray House College will be analysing the results on our behalf, and she may wish to contact you for further details.
Only when we have established the facts will we be in a position to make moves to change the situation, and we need your assistance to establish the present position.
If your coaching structure is not comparable to the categories in the questionnaire, then it would be useful if you could follow the headings as closely as possible and if necessary an ‘educated guess’ would be appreciated.
On 26 August, the Council, along with the National Coaching Centre at Cramond is organising a seminar entitled Women and Sports Coaching, we will examine the problems faced by women and make recommendations on how these difficulties might be solved.
Men and women will be welcome to attend, and applications will be available within the next few weeks.
I would be grateful if you could return the form to me by Friday 15 June 1990, and many thanks for your help.
Yours sincerely
Dear 
Women in Sports Coaching Seminar Report
The Scottish Sports Council identified the need to examine reasons contributing to the low numbers of women involved in sports coaching.
As a result a one day seminar was held in August and enclosed is a complimentary copy of the report from the seminar.
Further copies are available at a cost of £1 each.
I would be grateful if you could pass the document on to the most appropriate person within your department for information.
If you have any questions or comments, please do not hesitate to contact me.
Best wishes.
Yours sincerely
Dear 
School-Aged Team Sport Enquiry Group
On publication of the Scottish Sports Council's report into school-aged sport ‘Laying the Foundations’, Michael Forsyth MP, Scottish Office Minister for Sport, requested that Council Chairman Professor Raymond Miquel set up a high level enquiry group to examine the problems of school-aged team sport, and to consider what positive initiatives were needed to assist with the development of team-based sport in Scotland.
The Enquiry Group was established in February 1989 and the Minister was presented with the Report in October 1989.
Mr Forsyth announced the Government's response to the Report today, in which he welcomed the Report and its positive recommendations.
Because of its wide ranging implications for a number of agencies, the Minister has issued a Consultative Paper seeking views on the Report by 30 April 1990.
The Council has welcomed the Minister's positive response and looks forward to hearing the results of the consultation exercise in due course.
I am pleased to enclose a copy of the Report for your information.
Further copies are available from the Council, priced £5.00.
The formal consultative process is being carried out by the Scottish Education Department and comments on the report should be directed to J C Pearson Esq, Scottish Education Department, Room 2/19, New St Andrew's House, Edinburgh EH1 3SY.
If we can provide any further information or clarify any of the issues raised by the Group then please do not hesitate to contact me.
With best wishes,
Yours sincerely,
Dear Secretary
Open Meeting: Revision of Governing Body Coaching Awards
The next Open Meeting in the series organised by the Council and the Scottish Sports Association will take place on Tuesday 20 March 1990 at 1830 hours at Moray House College, Cramond Campus, Edinburgh.
Revision of coaching awards represents a major undertaking for a governing body.
The main purpose of the meeting is to address how this may be achieved and in particular to discuss coach education elements which might be included in revised qualifications, and what resources the Council and NCF are making available in Scotland directly to assist governing bodies.
The programme is as follows:
This is a very important area in the light of increasing demand within and outwith governing bodies for well-qualified coaches.
I hope that your governing body will be represented at this Meeting and it would be helpful if you could indicate on the attached reply slip if your Association will be represented at the meeting.
Key Courses for Sports Coaches.
1990 Scotland
Please find some copies of the brochure providing information on the dates and venues for the above course programme.
Further copies can be obtained from the Council, please complete the attached pro-forma.
Alternatively the National and Regional Coaching Centres have supplies which can be made available to local or district associations of governing bodies.
Yours sincerely
Dear Anne
Nationality Regulations
The Immigration and Nationality Department of the Home Office has asked through the Scottish Education Department that we write to all governing bodies in Scotland reminding them of the difficulties created by urgent requests for naturalisation shortly before international sporting events.
The case of Scottish badminton player, Anthony Gallagher, was well publicised just before the Commonwealth Games and the Home Office is clearly concerned to ensure that this situation does not arise again.
The Home Office publishes a leaflet (BN7) giving detailed guidance on the requirements for individuals seeking British nationality and if you have any competitors who intend to compete internationally and who might fall into this category, then you should ensure that an early clarification of nationality is sought.
Yours sincerely
Dear Anne,
Doping Control Programme — Open Meeting
The second full year of Council's Doping Control Programme starts on 2 April 1990.
The first year has progressed reasonably well and good working relationships between Council and governing bodies have contributed to the success of the programme.
With further development of the programme in mind, we are holding an Open Meeting on Thursday, 10 May 1990, at 1830, at the Royal Scottish Automobile Club, 11 Blythswood Square, Glasgow.
It is hoped that governing bodies will be fully represented with, where possible, their Drug/Doping Liaison Officer.
The main purpose of the meeting will be to review the procedures in light of this year's experiences and to discuss development of the programme.
There will be opportunity for bodies to raise for discussion any related issues.
The attached slip should be completed and returned to Christina Douglas at the Scottish Sports Council by 30 April, 1990.
Yours sincerely
Dear 
Minibus Legislation
You will recall our previous correspondence on this issue noting that the proposed changes by the European Commission were likely to have an adverse effect on those driving minibuses in a voluntary capacity for sporting purposes.
Since we last wrote, we have been lobbying to achieve the same relaxation for voluntary drivers from sport as is proposed to be granted to those driving in a voluntary capacity for charities.
We have received much support from the Scottish Euro MPs on this issue and the matter was debated in the European Parliament in Strasbourg on 12 June 1990.
The opinion of the Parliament at that time was to support the changes which we were seeking but the immediate reaction from the European Commission was not to accept the opinion of the Parliament.
If the Commission does not change its views then the matter will have to be resolved by discussion in the European Council of Ministers.
We have written further to the European Commissioner with a responsibility for transport, Mr Karl Van Miert and also to Commissioner Bruce Millan, urging them to accept the opinion of the Parliament.
There is some evidence that further changes are being considered by the Commission but the matter is not yet fully resolved.
Nonetheless I felt it important to keep you informed about progress being made.
We will write to you again whenever there is something more concrete to report.
With best wishes,
Dear Secretary
Drugs, Doping and Sport Booklet
Please find enclosed three copies of the Council's new advisory booklet ‘Drugs, Doping and Sport’.
The booklet endeavours to be a comprehensive guide both to individuals and governing bodies on all aspects of drugs and sport.
As well as identifying the categories and types of drugs abused in sport it attempts to answer the questions which arise frequently, illustrates the side-effects on health and takes the reader through the whole process of doping control.
It examines in depth the important area of doping control of school-age competitors.
Governing bodies are recommended to give careful consideration to this area and to ensure that, when appropriate and with parental approval, testing of youngsters can take place.
Governing bodies are also asked to consider their follow up actions in the event of an adverse finding being returned.
The importance of prior notification of possible testing on competition entry forms and precise constitutional mechanisms to deal with confirmed drug abuse is emphasised.
The Council hopes that you will find this booklet of use.
Further copies can be obtained by completing the attached form.
Yours sincerely
Dear Secretary
Drug and Doping Control Programme
Please find enclosed:
a
The calendar of events form for the next six months period which should be completed and returned before 2 MARCH 1990.
b
Governing body liaison officer form which must be returned with above.
c
Two ‘Drug and Doping Control’ signs which should be displayed appropriately at testing occasions.
d
A ‘rough guide’ to flu and cold remedies which you may wish to circulate to members.
Yours sincerely
Dear Sir/Madam
‘PERFORMANCE'
The second issue of ‘Performance’ has now been published and we are pleased to make copies available to your organisation.
It is general practice for the Council to provide governing bodies with sufficient copies of its publications to distribute to their officials, coaches and clubs as appropriate.
As a result of the amalgamation of ‘COACH’ and ‘SUMS’we are taking this opportunity to find out whether the quantity being sent at present meets your requirements.
The Council also is interested in knowing the market its publications are reaching and accordingly it would be appreciated if you would complete the form below and return it before the next mailing in June.
Yours sincerely
Dear 
Major Events 1990
As you are perhaps aware, this year's Major Events Calendar is being printed in two six-month parts.
As we fast approach the end of the first section of the calendar, it is time to gather information for the July — December section.
The purpose of the calendar is to provide the press and broadcasting media with a colourful and informative guide of Scotland's major sporting events.
This has proved to be of major benefit to those planning coverage of sport and to those staging the events and seeking publicity.
I now invite you to complete the enclosed form detailing your sports events for the second half of the year.
Please ensure you include all major events and the names of sponsors where they appear in the name of the event.
I would be grateful if you could return the form to the Scottish Sports Council by Friday 25 May.
A pre-paid  envelope is enclosed for your convenience.
Yours sincerely
Dear  Colleague 
Free Posters
In an effort to promote sports coaching further, the National Coaching Foundation, in association with the four Sports Councils in the United Kingdom, has produced two colourful posters, ‘Come Into Coaching’ and ‘Coaching Makes a Difference’, both of which are available free of charge.
A copy of each poster is enclosed for your information.
Should you require additional copies then simply send a large stamped addressed envelope to either the Scottish Sports Council, the National Coaching Centre Edinburgh (Moray House College, Cramond Campus, Cramond Road North, Edinburgh EH4 6JD) or the National Coaching Centre Glasgow (Division of PE, Sport and Outdoor Education, Jordanhill College, Southbrae Drive, Glasgow G13 1PP), marking your enquiry ‘Free Coaching Poster Offer’.
Yours sincerely
Dear 
Over the past few months I have noticed a slight decrease in the amount of information being sent for publication in Touchline.
As you probably know, Touchline is a monthly calendar giving dates, locations and contact names of Scottish sporting events.
The information is supplied by the governing bodies and is sent to the Scottish media.
There is a format which we try to follow in the lay-out of Touchline and would request that you supply the information in the same way:
Please remember to keep the information as clear and simple as possible.
When supplying a contact name please include a title (eg Mr, Mrs, Ms, Miss etc), and then the initial(s) of the forename.
It is a help to members of the media if they know the responsibility of the contact (eg organiser, development officer, secretary etc).
Finally, please ensure, at all times, that you have supplied a contact telephone number — this saves on numerous calls to directory enquiries.
With information coming from 90 governing bodies, Touchline can be very time consuming, however, if we receive the information in legible writing and a clear format we will be able to work more efficiently in the future.
If you are sending information to us on a monthly basis, please ensure completed forms are returned by the first day of the month preceding the event (eg for events taking place in November, information should reach the editor by 1 October).
Please find enclosed a copy of the Touchline information form.
Please make copies of this so that you may use them at your convenience in the future to return information to the Council.
If your event information is already printed in a calendar form, please ensure that all the required information is included.
Thank you for your co-operation.
Yours sincerely
Dear 
Following the recent press statement by Mr Michael Forsyth MP, Scotland's Sports Minister, I write to inform you that Mr Forsyth has accepted the Scottish Sports Council's view that the system first introduced at its request in 1987 whereby senior staff of the Council serve also as Members of the Council, should be discontinued.
Due to recent staff changes the only existing senior staff who are members of the Council are Dr Ivor Davies, Director of Planning and Mr Robin Barratt, Director of National Sports Training Centres and they will now cease to attend as members.
At its meeting in January the Scottish Sports Council took the opportunity of paying tribute to their contribution as members of the Council for the past two years.
Dr Davies and Mr Barratt will continue to attend Council meetings along with other senior executives of the Council.
Yours sincerely
Dear Secretary
Open Meeting: Early Notice
The Council and the Scottish Sports Association are organising the following open meetings to allow governing bodies to share views and experiences and to hear of new developments:
The venue for each meeting is Caledonia House, and they will start at 1830 hours.
Details of the programme will be distributed in good time  beforehand but please make arrangements now to be represented.
Yours sincerely
THE SCOTTISH SPORTS COUNCIL
DRUG TESTING PROCEDURES — INFORMATION SHEET
1988–89
1
Governing bodies drug testing programmes should be returned to the Council by 26 February 1988.
2
Analysis request forms should be completed and forwarded to the Drug Control and Teaching Centre to be received no later than 28 days prior to the event.
3
The duplicate analysis requests form (pink) should be sent to the Scottish Sports Council.
4
After the event the governing body should invoice the Scottish Sports Council for the cost involved in transporting the samples to the Drug Control and Teaching Centre.
The datapost receipt should be enclosed with the invoice.
5
The Drug Control and Teaching Centre will invoice the Scottish Sports Council directly for its transport costs and the costs involved in completing the analysis.
6
Analysis request forms are available from the Scottish Sports Council