

COMMENT
In all diversities of angling there are always problems and people understandably complain.
Some are obviously unavoidable but others could, providing some thought and planning was implemented, be easily overcome.
Match anglers often complain about bad, or should I say thoughtless, pegging.
A classic example of this can be seen in Stu Kilen's article, as he relives his disastrous 3rd match of the Macphersons League.
In all probability thoughtless pegging has cost him at least £1,000, possibly £5,000.
The luck of the draw you may say, but if the match had been pegged out by a considerate, knowledgeable angler the problem would not have arisen.
In future big matches why don't the organisers select, with the approval of the anglers involved, a person to peg all matches.
Obviously he would have the help of the controlling club/association and also consult the top local anglers who I am sure would give sound and thoughtful advice.
It may not be the total solution but it's a step in the right direction.
On the subject of sponsorship it's good to see not only more sponsored teams but also more sponsored matches.
The Macpherson Paints League is a prestigious event as is the John Smiths Championships on the Avon at Evesham.
Calor's continuing sponsorship of the Nationals, which involves over 400 teams in five divisions, has been rewarded with great enthusiasm and some staggering catches.
A new match on the big league calender is the Van Den Eynde team challenge at Holme Pierrepont.
I fished the match and the organisation, facilities and fishing were excellent.
Even greater things are promised for next year which is very encouraging.
Holme Pierrepont is, in many peoples opinion, the match water of the future.
The fishing is not only good, but fair: obviously there are good areas but on the whole a good team can win off any draw.
The facilities are perfect for anglers and spectators alike.
No muddy fields to walk through, no awkward banks, obscured views and the fish do not seem to be bothered by the presence of spectators.
What more could one wish for?
The major problem at this water is boats and the inconsiderable few who seem to use the 10 — 15 metres of water closest to the bank.
I accept that it is called the National Water Sports Centre but from the attitude of some you would think angling was not included.
I have recently received the new Waterways Code produced by British Waterways in which is outlined etiquette for anglers, boaters, canoeists and walkers alike.
It is very informative and I agree with all of the points raised.
It is available from all British Waterways offices.
Details of your nearest one can be obtained by telephoning 01-262-6711.
I think it should be on the counter of every tackle shop in the country — and yes, I will be sending a copy to those inconsiderate Holme Pierrepont users.
The Specialist Angler
by John Bailey Bream, once referred to as the matchman's favourite fish, have seen their popularity amongst specialist anglers rise dramatically over the past few years.
This month John looks at where and how to catch them.
Bream are a very impressive fish and though they might not fight as bravely as tench, carp or barbel, they do look big.
See the impressive hump back and head of a double figure bream and you do not forget it quickly…’ majestic’is the only word, as is’enigmatic’to describe their nature.
Bream are a long-lived species and a six or seven pound fish is likely to be an elderly one.
Like elephants, it seems to me that bream do not forget easily either and experience from the past they learn from carefully.
Of course, this makes fishing for them a challenging business and it is one that absorbs a great many specialist anglers.
In recent years, just as with tench, there has been a’ bream revolution’.
Not simply on Tring Reservoirs or the home counties gravel pits do men now sit for a ten pounder anymore.
The Cheshire Meres, estate lakes everywhere, reservoirs and pits, some of the Broads and even many rivers all now produce excellent fish.
’ Tens’are real possibilities today from many areas as are suggested target fish of eight pounds or above.
These fish are within the grasp of most anglers, quite unlike the 19th century when that great angler J. W. Martin felt seven pounds was anybody's realistic upper limit.
Targets and Locations
Although bream feed pretty well any time of the year, the autumn is my favourite time for them.
The nights are coming on quickly and tremendous feeding sessions take place from dusk till three or four hours into darkness.
Close muggy nights are good, I've found, but a wind is even better, especially from the west and carrying light rain.
Poor are those still, star-spangled nights of high pressure when a frost threatens, but even the bream will feed to some extent.
Sessions need not be long: set up at dusk, fish a further three hours after that and you'll see that after school/work sessions are quite possible on waters not too far distant.
And, my goodness, doesn't a coming bream session give you something to look forward to during an otherwise boring type of day!
Seasons and Conditions
Bream are great roamers and they haunt all the parts of a typical stillwater.
Very often bream have remarkably fixed movements and follow the same watery paths day by day.
Graham Marsden was one of the first people to observe the behaviour and called their movements patrol routes.
By close analysis, he was virtually able to predict where bream would be at a certain time and could put bait in to hold them in his swim.
Swims
Without this detailed knowledge, it is still possible to recognise obvious stop off points.
Personally, I always avoid fishing the corners of waters: I may be wrong but I simply feel that bream avoid such places.
I prefer plateaux and broad bars in pits and generally areas of sparser weed growth, deeper water or the mouths of reedy, shallow bays where there is something of a drop off.
These places on a water that attract casual anglers and, therefore, receive a lot of bait during the daytime often fish well after nightfall.
At all times, it is worth scanning the water for signs of bream activity.
Members of a shoal roll with a peculiar, smooth, porpoise-like movement that is all grace and quietness.
The big, dark backs slice the water and are often a sign that feeding will begin.
When you see the bubbles rise in long trails, get a bait in there if you can.
Something like a worm is often taken at once even if groundbaiting has not been carried out beforehand.
Groundbaiting has always been seen as vital for bream.
They eat a lot and a large shoal does need stopping and holding.
Traditionally right up until the 1970s in fact — bream groundbait consisted of buckets of stodge.
Old loaves and stones of cereal groundbait were mixed together in bucket fulls and piled into the swim.
Sometimes the mixture was eaten by bream: often it was left to rot.
So it was the bait piled in by J.J. and myself the first night of a season in the early 1970s.
Three days later, in the clear water, we could still see all of it, festering slowly.
Obviously, we rethought.
Particles were just in with the carp lads and we decided to transfer the philosophies to bream.
Groundbaiting
At 8.00p.m. one June night we laid a carpet of rice, hemp and casters.
We paddled it all out by boat, put up our gear and at nine left for an hour in the pub.
At 10.15p.m. we cast, and a minute later we were into bream.
That one night revolutionised our bream fishing and now, of course, particle groundbait beds are standard.
Rice, hemp, corn, caster and maggot will make perfect bases and can be spread by boat, catapult or feeder.
Amounts are difficult to specify absolutely.
Bream can and do eat gallons of bait but it is not wise to overdo things if they are finicky.
It pays to be cautious at first and increase the groundbait amount if things go well.
A couple of years ago I witnessed probably the most heavy groundbaiting programme of all time.
A bailiff at a local lake bought ONE TON of DRY wheat and boiled it up daily in huge cauldrons purchased specially.
Each night he brought BY TRACTOR a quarter of a ton of cooked wheat and spread it by boat.
This went on for about ten evenings and at the end of it all he had lost a stone in weight and had attracted the waterfowl from the entire county!
But the bream, too, were there — the whole lake's population — and they stayed there, too, for a further three weeks.
The activity and the catches were outstanding, if never repeatable.
Don't think I'm advising you to try it…but it does show what can be done.
The next things to change were baits for bream.
In the’ old’days it was traditional to fish bunches of maggots or large lumps of flake, both on large hooks.
Fish, obviously, could be caught but bream tended to run with these baits between their lips rather than in the mouth and to strike simply pulled them away.
Particle groundbaiting led, naturally, to smaller baits on the hook: double caster, double maggot, small redworm or a grain of corn are all now favourite baits.
I think it was Kevin Clifford who first pushed another carp development, the flavouring of baits, for bream.
His catches at Tring on flavoured maggot were extraordinary and led me to follow him.
If you haven't tried pineapple maggot for bream that is then you really should!
Baits
Once again this area has changed dramatically in the past 12 years.
Until the mid 1970s I fished for bream like I would any big, fish with stout rod, 5-6lb line straight through to bombs and size 8 hooks.
Bream are not great fighters and if you got one on then you knew it would stay on; the trouble was getting one on in the first place!
I remember writing a feature for the’ Anglers Mail’around 1974 entitled’The Night I Missed One Hundred and Sixty-seven Bites’.
It was all quite true: the bobbin lifted 167 times and I failed to make contact once!
How I blush now: I suppose 140 were line bites and 27 times a bream had a bait gingerly between its lips.
The article led to a lot of discussion: bigger baits, smaller baits, angles of strike and lengths of rod were all discussed.
I had even made up a 19 foot rod with an astronomical test curve and weighing a ton but it made no difference!
Tackle and Methods
As the 1970s progressed we all began to see the error of our ways.
It was the matchman, Tom Boulton, who made me see sense and now I prefer adapted match tackle and tactics.
I like a soft rod of around llb t.c.
I use 3-4lb main line and have either the feeder or the bomb on a very long paternoster link of 4-7 feet.
The hook length will be 2-3lb line and the hook itself will be between a 14 and an 18.
Indication can be quivertip or butt indicator and generally I wait for the reel to revolve slowly so I know it is not a line bite.
With this tackle, the bream suck the bait right in and have it deep in the mouth when I lift into them.
A bite now is hardly ever missed and I am confident of landing even big fish on this gear if I take my time about it.
For very big fish in weedy water the same rigs can be used but the line and hook strength geared up a little.
Providing the principle remains the same, the bream will be caught.
As a postscript, can I recommend river bream?
Everyone today thinks of the great stillwater monsters but the slightly smaller fish of very many rivers fight well, look splendid and can grow more than respectable in size.
I do not fish the big rivers like the Thames or the Trent for bream but I love to get after them on streams the size of the Wensum, Bure or Waveney.
All the deeper holes are worth investigation and if you fish them with flake on a quiver you could well get roach or chub as well.
Indeed, it had been on roach trips that I have found most of my bream swims in the past and although I'm a roach man first and foremost, a splendid, clean seven pound river bream has never given me cause for complaint!
River bream
How's your luch?
When I left you last month I was looking forward to the second round of the Macpherson Paints UK Championships to be fished at Diglis Weir on the River Severn.
It was always going to be a hard match, the venue is basically a big fish or nothing venue.
On the day before the match I travelled the 60 mile journey with Ivan (Marks), this enabled me to walk the sections and try to sort out various methods.
Having walked up and down the river there seemed a simple choice between bleak in the top section and an all out feeder attack on the others.
On the day I drew peg 45 which put me in the private meadow below the Teme mouth.
Apart from peg 40 immediately below the Teme it was definitely going to be a feeder job.
My peg was on a gravel point, it looked perfect for the stick float but as I was fishing for a good weight I opted to start on the feeder.
Just to be on the safe side I also set up a stick float and a bleak whip but I was hoping I wouldn't need them — so much for being positive.
On the whistle.
out went the feeder and after three or four chucks the tip went round.
Fishing 5lb line to a 3lb hook length I dragged in what I thought was a good chub, it turned out to be a 1 ½lb barbel!
Ten minutes later round went the tip again but this time I was into something bigger.
After a short tussle a 5lb barbel was heading towards the landing net and I must admit I had visions of winning the match — 6 ½lb in the first twenty minutes isn't a bad start on any water.
The next fish I hooked eventually snapped me after taking most of my line, but I was not worried.
I thought I would have plenty of other opportunities but nothing could have been further from the truth.
After a fruitless hour I decided to go on the stick.
By this time Keith Hobson on peg 40 was bagging up.
One chub in the following thirty minutes and I was back on the feeder, four good chub and a few bits followed, no more barbel, and I finished with a total weight of 14lb.
This put me second in the section behind Keith who had 20lb, and as he was in the main money I won the £100 section prize by default.
Kim Milson, who won the first match, once again won his section and was leading the series, yours truly in second place and perfectly placed going into the third match which was to be fished on the Grand Union Canal at Slapton.
This stretch of canal holds a large head of fish but there are also a lot of carp and it was decided to be an unfair venue.
The match was moved three sections down to a stretch where carp would not figure quite so much.
To make it even fairer there would he no practising allowed two days before the match.
Lying in second place and sitting on a possible £3,000 I decided that two practice sessions were needed and on the Tuesday, a week before the match, I had a day off work (I left Dek in charge of the shop — yet again) and headed 70 miles down the M.1. to the canal to try to sort it out.
After catching on a short pole and rod and line I was quite happy with the venue but was still convinced I needed another practice session — time was running out and the only day available was the one after the Division 1 National.
I even had to cancel a team match on the Sunday, but I thought it would be well worth it with so much at stake.
Once again i caught on the three methods that I thought would work on the day and to say the least I was more than confident of getting good points.
On the day I travelled down with Stan Piecha, who over the years has been the most consistent angler in the competition.
He had already blown out in the first two matches yet still went for a practice to give me information on a different stretch for which I was grateful.
I drew peg 63 and was informed by Stan that was near the Marina.
His exact words were,’ It's solid up there, if they peg it right you could win the match.’
This was music to my ears and, after dropping him off, headed to the appropriate bridge and then down to the canal.
Sure enough there was the Marina but this was not pegged and after walking under a railway bridge I came to the first peg, number 65.
At the next peg was Bob Nudd, then a big gap in which a barge was moored, twenty yards from a swing bridge was my peg.
Having never seen a swing bridge before I wondered how the boats were going to get under it but I was soon to find out.
Half an hour before the match started two tractors pulled up at the swing bridge, the drivers got out and had a short discussion and proceeded to plough up the field opposite my peg.
Moments later the first boat arrived.
A bloke jumped out of the boat, ran past me, over the swing bridge and opened it up.
Whilst he was on the bridge I asked him if he could leave it open and explained I would shut it when somebody needed to get over.
His reply was,’ How are you going to close it as you're on the wrong side of the canal?’— I hadn't thought of that.
Anyway, he closed the bridge, jumped back on his boat and was soon gone.
I had planned to start on the short pole but just before the whistle sounded another boat came along.
I can only assume that the crew of this barge were new to boating as their attempt to get by the bridge was reminiscent of’ Game for a Laugh’.
He pulled up about three yards from me and stuck the boat into full reverse to stop.
Needless to say this churned up all the water and when I asked him politely what he was doing — he ignored me!
To cut a long story short his mate tried to open the bridge the wrong way and the boat drifted down and hit it.
Both were well and truly stuck.
The match was now underway, yet I was still to wet a line when disaster number two struck.
Another boat came along and not realising the situation overtook the inside boat and, before it could stop, also ran into the bridge.
Both boats then reversed in front of me and two people from each boat set about the bridge, trying to free it.
Eventually the bridge opened, both boats passed and the water settled down.
The short pole was now out of the question so it was out on the long pole.
A few bites followed but so did more boats.
Each time I started to catch, a boat would come through, moor up and open the bridge.
In the meantime the people on the boat moored between Bob Nudd and myself decided it was time for a move.
A bucket of slops was thrown over the edge, I didn't enquire of the contents, followed by a five-point turn, the boat was nearly as wide as the canal!
By this stage I was completely gone.
I couldn't believe what was happening and yet there was still more to come.
One of the tractor drivers (which had been turning in front of me all day) decided it was time for dinner.
He parked his tractor facing me about six feet from the far bank and sat watching me while eating his sandwiches.
After finishing his grub he took out a big spanner and proceeded to check the bolts on his plough, he also knocked off the clods of earth in between the blades.
By this time I wasn't catching anything but I must just mention one more boat as even 1 found this one hard to believe.
On the boat was an old couple and approaching the bridge he got off and left his wife in charge of the boat, He also attempted to open the bridge the wrong way and once again the boat hit the bridge and knocked it off its hinges.
Unable to free the bridge by himself he blamed his wife and cleared off down a dirt track.
Bearing in mind this canal is in the middle of nowhere he returned ten minutes later with a bloke in a Land Rover.
Between them they tied a rope from the vehicle to the bridge and dragged it back into position so it could be opened the correct way.
Come the end of the match my worst fears became a reality.
I finished third from last in the section only beating the three pegs the other side of the bridge, come to mention it the bloke the other side of the bridge never caught a fish.
I have now slumped from second overall and a possible £3,000 — £5,000 to outside the top ten and looking like winning nothing, I think it is fair to say through no fault of my own, but inadequate pegging.
To conclude the story I don't know who pegged the match but afterwards I talked to one of the locals who told me they never peg the stretch where I was.
At worst they put one peg in where we had three.
On a brighter note, there's still a lot of the season to look forward to and besides who needs £5,000 anyway!
To tie up all the loose ends of my previous articles, the Monday night series at Home Pierrepont is now over.
Unfortunately, I couldn't fish the last two but in my side challenge with Simon I didn't need to.
(By the way he hasn't paid me yet).
In the Brittania Floats Wednesday series, also on the same venue, I came fourth overall, it was won by Vinnie Smith with a brilliant performance, he only dropped one point out of a possible fifty.
It has certainly been an up and down season so far and we haven't started the winter league yet — I'll keep you informed as the dramas unfold.
Location of the Fenland Zander
by Mick Brown
Zander, rightly or wrongly shouldered much of the blame for the demise of the Fenland system in the late seventies — early eighties.
They areby nature an easy fish to catch providing you can firstly locate them.
After sixteen years of fishing for zander I still find it a magical absorbing pastime.
The atmosphere of the Fens and the peculiarities of these strange fish, even after all those years, keep calling me back for more.
I often hear and read stories of anglers spending weeks on end in search of Fenland zander with very little to show for it and yet with a little thought they could be catching on a regular basis.
It must have been said a thousand times in angling literature that location is the key to success and in zander fishing this was never more so.
Zander are so easy to catch once the pack has been located that you hardly need worry about any other aspect.
Rods, baits, rigs and methods are all of secondary importance.
Obviously there are ways to improve your efficiency in catching zander, but concern yourself with that once you have found them.
Many anglers arrive for a couple of days fishing and seem quite happy to bivvy up in one swim and wait for the zander to arrive.
Under certain conditions, when the zander are actively hunting, this can pay off.
I've found that when the water is heavily coloured after a rain storm this is often the case and fish will be caught in bursts as they pass up and down the swim.
This not being the case, then a few runs may occur in the dark.
The importance of colour in the water has been emphasised by many successful zander men and I for one rate it as of paramount importance for daytime zandering.
Now we are getting somewhere in our understanding of the behaviour of these fish for at night time they can often be easily caught in very clear water.
It appears that the species has evolved with the ability to hunt well under low light conditions having acute senses of sight and smell.
Zander have no problems sorting out live baits in coloured water in which I would not fancy my chances for pike using that method.
There may be more to this than meets the eye (if you'll excuse the pun) as just once in a while I have taken zander during the daytime in water that has been so clear that I would have rated my chances as zero.
It is only on these rare occasions that I see zander fighting deep down in the water for most are only seen at the netting stage due to the colour of the water that they are generally caught in.
Another theory could be that their eyesight is so exceptional that when the water is clear they can fill their stomachs in a very short time and are therefore, for most of the time, not hungry and ignore anglers baits under these conditions.
Regular zander anglers will be aware of the common occurrence of the twenty minute feeding spell at daybreak and then it's all quiet for the rest of the day.
Who knows what the truth really is?
We can only speculate.
Having discussed coloured water and clear water briefly let us move on to the reality of the situation as we find it when we arrive for a session.
Most of the fen drains for most of the time are somewhere in between these two extremes making the whole business a little undecided.
The degree of colour in the water is, to the angler, a matter of opinion.
But it does not matter what our opinion is but how the zander feel about this relative to other variables.
The colour may not be quite to their liking but they may be very hungry for example.
Conversely, the colour may well be perfect but they may have had their fill before you arrived.
The problem of location can get more complex as you fish bigger and wider drains.
You can do all your homework and be in the right swim during a feeding spell and then still miss the fish if you, for example, put all your baits under the far bank and the pack is moving up and down the centre of the drain or close to the near bank which in my experience is quite common.
Hedge your bets and position baits to meet as many options as is possible.
This is obviously easier if you are fishing with a few friends who are prepared to let you move in if they locate the fish first.
This has to work two ways of course.
If you can find a section of drain that is for most of the time coloured, for any reason whatsoever, then this would be a very good place to start.
I am talking now about daytime zandering.
If I were just starting zandering from the beginning I would not even consider night fishing for them until I had got my act together in the daytime.
Obviously if someone put me onto some good night fishing that would be different.
But let us say that this is not the case and you are off on your own.
You are fishing water with a little colour but not getting any runs.
When this has been the case for an hour or so I pick up my tackle and move.
How far to move is the dilemma.
My initial instinct is to move a couple of hundred yards or so but some of my most memorable catches have occurred when I have moved only a couple of swims further down the drain.
Careful leap-frogging is the answer.
There is a common theme to most of my big hauls of zander and that is that I have started catching almost immediately on starting to fish a swim.
I am convinced that zander often shoal up or gather in great numbers when they are not hunting and to come across one of these occurrences as I have done from time to time is an unbelievably exciting experience.
A bait cast amongst them can often not be resisted.
As I tend to use a float for zander I am convinced that I am not actively feeding fish in these situations as the float shows me that the zander has no intention of leaving the swim.
Once you have found such a spot you can go back time after time and take fish.
I have one or two such places up my sleeve which I save for difficult days but I don't spoil it by going to them too often.
I am always mindful of the fact that 1 may move too far and pass such a spot especially when I know from previous visits that there are good numbers of zander in the area.
If you are on the water just before daybreak you will often get an idea of the cyprinid population of the water especially on the smaller drains.
You may see them dimpling the surface and if they are concentrated along a particular section this must obviously be worthy of attention.
Sit and wait tactics may be your best option here, for a few hours at least.
I found a concentration of priming fish one morning and dropped baits in amongst them.
Nothing happened for about an hour.
Then the pack of zander went through the swim and as they went by I took fish of 6lb 8oz, 8lb0oz, 8lb 6oz, 5lb 15oz and l0lb 11oz as fast as I could reel them in and then they were gone.
Such is zander fishing at times.
Something else you can look for is an unusual feature that may attract fish to it.
On most Fenland drains they are few and far between to the untrained eye for most of the best features are hidden beneath the water.
In a water that is largely featureless it doesn't need to be anything too pronounced to be attractive to fish.
On the rare occasions that the drains run very clear you can see that the dredger has left all sorts of lumps and troughs along the bottom and these would never be found normally except by the most meticulous plumbing.
In this situation it is obviously easier to find the fish than understand what the feature is that keeps them coming back to that swim.
You read a lot about trying bends and pump inlets and other such features but, in my experience, these have not been very exceptional, the holding features often being far less obvious.
Last close season one of the small drains that I fish ran very clear.
I had never seen it other than murky before along that particular section so I decided to walk the far bank and see what I could in the swims where I had been very successful.
I didn't expect to see zander as they don't like clear shallow water on bright sunny days do they?
Oh well, there goes another theory for what did I find in one of my favourite swims but a handful of zander in the four to six pound weight range.
I could only presume that as this was April they were concerned with spawning and were only doing all the strange things that other species do when pre-occupied with that activity.
Occasionally they would get a little wary and move out of the swim but only to return a few minutes later to the area that they had apparently cleared for spawning.
I had walked about five hundred yards and yet only in this one spot, about as big in area as my dining table, had the normally silty bottom been cleared by the actions of the fish and clearly exposing masses of broken mussel shell fragments against which the zander stood out very boldly.
Those incredible eyes were extremely prominent too in the bright sunlight.
I felt very privileged to have stumbled upon such a rare sight.
If I had been fishing that section of the drain from the other bank, as I usually do, that would have been one of the swims where I would have expected to get a run or two.
Another of my theories was strengthened there too for on the bottom of the swim lay two large pieces of rotting heavy timber.
A feature that I would never have known about otherwise.
Well I hope that I've given you enough to get you started on the right tracks.
One thing I must emphasise though is that you will have to put in a lot of leg work and effort to find these places.
When I was getting to know the Fen drains years ago I would fish three or four venues in a day and walk miles and miles to find swims and try things out.
Now I have all that knowledge to fall back on and can go out and catch good zander on a regular basis.
You may not want to go to all this trouble so I'll let you in on another easier method of finding some good swims.
When you visit the Fens spend an evening in a different pub each time.
Ask the landlord who the local anglers are.
Around half past ten when they've got four or five pints inside them get them talking about fishing and before too long I'll guarantee you'll get some good info.
Divide the weights of the fish they tell you about by three but more importantly listen to what they have to say about location.
Seriously though, Fenland people are some of the nicest you could wish to meet and they will often help you if they possibly can.
Good zandering.
All at sea in a spin!
Although in’ Coarse Fisherman’I primarily write about coarse fish to be caught on lures — pike, zander, perch etc. — I do occasionally refer to game fish and in this feature I want to mention sea angling.
Just as game fishermen find lure fishing for pike easy to relate to (as opposed to the somewhat more delicate techniques with size 22 hooks!), the coarse fisherman will find that his lure fishing tackle is perfectly suitable for sea fishing — within reason, of course.
That's why I take a small telescopic rod, a tiny fixed spool reel and lures all over the world with me.
I've fished in the Soviet Arctic and in Argentina for example, but just recently had an enjoyable time with the lures in Australia, in Hobart, Tasmania, to be precise.
The tackle and techniques I used were exactly the same as I use for pike in the UK.
Except that I discovered a new lure…
When I was due to arrive in Tasmania to stay with a geologist colleague, Penny Green, you can imagine that I wasn't too displeased when I was asked if I minded going on the odd fishing trip as the whole family was’ into’it!
I said that I just happened to have my travelling rod with me…though it hardly mattered as they had more than enough gear.
It never ceases to amaze me just how backward we are in this country when it comes to the use of boats and Peripheral equipment.
Everybody knows how forward they are in this regard in North America, but in my experience it's just the same in Australia, Argentina, the Soviet Union and elsewhere: for a rain soaked water girdled nation we really do not come very high in the league of comforts and efficiency.
And the costs would be prohibitive if we even tried.
So it should have come as no real surprise to me to discover that the’ gear’Penny so briefly dismissed included a 17 foot aluminium boat, 24hp outboard, a trailer (obviously), a seine net and a lot of angling equipment.
The arrangements were a joy to any keen angler.
Quite early in the morning we set off.
Ten minutes later we were down on the beach at Taroona, near Hobart (and the mouth of the Derwent River) launching the boat from the beach in traditional manner by reversing the trailer into the surf.
Fortunately it wasn't the usual Aussie surf!
It was also a change for me sea fishing not to have to wear clothes — at least not many.
But we were all kitted out in life jackets.
The plan was for Michael and the children, Kate and Ben, slightly assisted by me, to lay the nets off a point (at right angles to the shore) and then to fish a nearby bay with baits — or in my case lures.
Actually Michael and Ben laid the nets with me’ assisting’by taking photographs.
We then motored rather quickly across to the bay and got the rods into action.
The kind of boat fishing at sea that I've always done has had quite a few fathoms below the boat, but here the water was clear and only a few feet deep, we were certainly less than one hundred yards offshore.
It was rather like a Loch Lomond bay and more like freshwater fishing in terms of comfort.
And the low cliffs, covered in gum trees, were a pleasure to behold.
Using baits Ben, in particular, started catching flatheads, one of the common fish and fine for eating.
I stuck to lures, not because I have anything against bait fishing, but because I was interested to see if they'd score.
They didn't!
I had a knock or two, but that was it.
An hour later we set off back for lunch, planning to bring back Penny in the evening when we'd have another go with the rods and, of course, lift the nets.
The thought of launching/landing the boat several times in one day doesn't seem to bother the Australians at all.
On landing I was able to do my bit by working the winch frenetically.
The same evening, under equally calm and lovely conditions, we had all the rods in operation in slightly deeper water.
On the buzzer I rolled over quite a large flathead, but it missed, and that was a fish much bigger than the flatheads both Kate and Ben were catching with great rapidity on fish portions.
I changed over to a lure I'd bought in Hobart, the aptly named Tasmanian Devil, and I began to get the odd flathead on it and not bad fish either.
Kate, in the meantime, had adopted an infallible routine.
Every so often she handed me her rod, saying,’ Have I got a bite?’
There was invariably a fish on the end!
Anyone who thinks youngsters need coaching to catch fish hasn't seen them at it.
Kids are naturals at pumping, giving line and so on.
Only adults make a pig's ear of it when they first start fishing as adults.
By now other species of fish were falling to Kate's rod and also to Penny's.
These were perch and although quite small are renowned as good eating fish.
Quite a lot of fish were returned to the water and I think we took over seventy in that couple of hours in the afternoon.
But the highlight for me was a thumping take on a buzzer which came adrift after a couple of really powerful lunges.
I changed back to the Tasmanian Devil and had a similar thumping take first cast.
The fish fought as hard as a 10lb summer pike and I was quite staggered to lift aboard a barracuda of about 2lb.
And if you think a pike has teeth, well these fish make them look like toothless gummies!
The line was shredded, literally, for about two feet up the line and parted as the fish swung inboard.
Although I hadn't had as many fish as the bait fishers I was very pleased with the success and the quality and also with being afloat at sea in such idyllic circumstances.
The nets, strangely, didn't produce many fish (I reckon they were all round our boat) and they were mostly leatherjackets.
But we already had plenty for the pan and the freezer too.
My thoughts came back to sea fishing at home: I've always done quite well with lures in the sea, but it's not exactly popular is it?
There must be scope beyond pirks, flounder spoons, mackerel spinners and bass lures.
Finally, the Tasmanian Devil is a plastic, minnow-like, spoon-like, plug-like wobbler.
I have several now and I'll be trying them for pike.
If you want to obtain some you could write to Wigston Lures, 63 High Street, New Norfolk, Tasmania, Australia.
I should allow five Australian dollars for each lure and postage (or write first and ask).
Pike Tackle
With Autumn and Winter rapidly approaching, anglers will soon he turning to pike.
Over the past few years, pike fishing and associated tackle has become more advanced and refined.
Anglers' demands for better quality more choice and innovative ideas have been met, with companies like E.T., Middy, Drennan and Gardner leading the field in accessories.
Gone are the days of the cork gazette and thick nylon covered traces.
But what of the new advanced tackle?
As with rods it is advisable to purchase a reel produced by a reputable manufacturer and the old adage’ you get what you pay for’is certainly true.
Choose a reel that will suitthe majority of your pike fishing.
Above are six examples of reels that should cover any eventuality.
ABU, Mitchell, Ryobi and Shimano all produce excellent products.
The photo includes a Baitrunner and a Custom X, these two reels being used for specific situations, the Baitrunner for trollingand the Custom X, which is high speed, for drifting.
I wouldnot recommend the use of a baitrunner feature for general piking; favouring the open bale arm approach for minimal resistance is, in my opinion, superior.
Reels
This is one area that I have stirred up plenty of controversy with my personal views.
I am blatantly against the use of monkey climbers because small movements can be undetected which in turn could lead to deep hooked pike.
I would recommend an audible drop-off alarm to everyone, but for those who cannot afford separate alarms the use of optonics, as long as they are in conjunction with a drop arm, clipped to the rear rod rest, are acceptable.
The photo showsa selection of drop-off alarms and drop arm indicators which are from E.T.
Products, Gardner Tackle and Middy.
With the introduction of carbon fibre, rod development has come on in leaps and bounds.
There is a considerable choice, with quality rods and blanks to meet everyone's budget.
Companies like Shakespeare and Ryobi produce some excellent rods for the angler with a tight budget whilemore expensive upmarket rods can be purchased from Sportex, Drennan, Graham Phillips and Tricast to name a few,.
Whatever your financial situation make sure you visit a reputable dealer with some pike fishing experience; he will be able to offer you some sound advice and guidance.
Just like every other field of angling there are thousands of floats to choose from.
Thankfully, the days-of big cork gazettes have gone and these have been replaced by various slim shaped sliders which offer the pike less resistance.
Thephoto includes examples from Middy, Drennan and E.T.
and shows (top right) a sight bob which can he useful in choppy conditions.
The drifter shown is the original E.T version although there are now several other makes available.
This method alone has been the downfall of countless' big fish up and down the country, and I foresee its popularity increasing in the coming seasons.
Bite Alarms and Indicators
Rods
Floats
The development in this area has been enormous.
Gone are the days when thick nylon coated wire and barbaric hooks ruled; thankfully these have been replaced by some topclass products.
Traces by Middy and Drennan carry useful information about bait mounting and, more importantly, correct ways of crushing barbs down.
These traces are not necessarily cheap alternatives to making your own, but they do offer a convenient and reliable choice to the angler withvery little time for preparation.
Ready Made Traces
This area is purely down to personal choice with a variety of rucksacks and boxes on offer.
When choosing this item bear in mind that you may have to walk long distances, so check the padding on the harnesses and straps for comfort.
There is a good E.T.
model which has been taken from a camping environment and marketed direct to the angler.
Another version that I'm sure will become a firm favourite is the new rucksack from Wychwood Tackle.
Spend some time looking at various models and choose one that you feel most comfortable with.
Rucksacks
There are many good rod bags on the market now offering practical advantages and protection for today's expensive rods.
The photo illustrates the two basic patterns currently in use.
On the left is a padded holdall which will accommodate six rods (three made up with reels on), umbrella, landing net and rod rests.
On the right is the highly imaginative Challenger rod bag.
This will take four made up rods, landing net and accessories whilst still leaving enough room for several rods in cloth bags to be carried internally.
Both patterns are suitable for today's specialist angler.
Of course any rod bag will do but with the price of some of today's rods it is false economy to make do.
Rod Bags
One item that is invaluable to the angler who does any amount of boat fishing is an electric outboard.
Shakespeare market a very good one through tackle dealers at a price that will not break the bank.
These electric motors are highly reliable and offer excellent advantages over rowing especially on biggish waters where low speed trolling is an effective method.
Up until last year I had managed without one, but since then my motor has proved an invaluable piece of my armoury.
Boat Accessories
The photo may appear a little one-sided but these two chairs cover 100 per cent of my fishing requirements.
The Fox Super Deluxe Bedchair is ideal for long sessions, whilst the Adjusta Level Chair is ideal for the roving angler.
Lafuma also make a wide range of seating which is suitable.
Both of these companies' products should be available through any good tackle dealer.
Chairs
Cats and Carp for everyone
Several months ago I received an invitation for myself and a friend to travel out and fish Carp Fishers Abroad's new addition near Metz, France, near the border with Germany.
Because of a very busy diary and work commitments that invitation could not be realised until early this August when I and tackle manufacturer, Richard Gardner, found ourselves boarding a ferry at Dover bound for Calais.
The drive down was very straightforward until the last few miles (it must have been because up until then we didn't get lost) when we had a slight hitch and had to study the map a little more carefully.
We arrived at the lake at about 7.30a.m. after approximately a four and a half hour drive to find two lovely lakes, one, with a chalet on stilts, about seventeen acres and another smaller lake by its side about four and a half acres.
This was the lake that we were going to spend our time on and although these lakes hadn't been fished much we did have the benefit of some information given to us by Joe Taylor who had been out a few weeks prior to us.
He had caught loads of carp but missed five takes from the cats.
He had left us three mysteries to try to sort out.
Before going he had told us that firstly, all his carp had been caught on sweetcorn and bread and although fishing with boilies on one rod all week he had been able to get a take, in his words they just did not seem to eat them; secondly, although there were plenty of carp on the surface they did not seem the least bit interested in floaters, and thirdly he was at a loss to know what one needed to do to put a cat on the bank.
Armed with this information we had made plans which included a selection of deadbaits, the bulk of which were squid and a modest number of Tropicana boilies, all of which came from Richworth Streamselect.
This was backed up with a mountain of sweetcorn (from the local cash and carry).
At this point I must say that I haven't yet found a carp that didn't eat Tropicanas.
Anyway, I digress, back to the story.
On arrival Rick and I walked around the lake and chose two likely looking swims towards the bottom end near the dam where we proceeded to set up the carp rods.
After sorting out our bases we cut a couple of small gaps in the reeds to our left and right and put in the rests for the cat rods.
Two hours later we were ready to start fishing so we baited the cat rods with squid and cast these out at varying distances to try and locate any patrol routes that were being used.
With all the cat rods out we returned to the carp rods and decided to start fishing with sweetcorn and luncheon meat all on straight running leger rigs, the idea being to get some indication of any activity early on.
I catapulted two beds of corn out, one at about 15 yards, the other of roughly 40 yards and cast the baits on top of these.
Sitting back to enjoy the mid-morning sun the bobbin on the rod with corn on started jumping up to the butt and a quick strike saw the first fish of the session go screaming off up the lake.
After what could only be described as a very spirited fight a small but brilliantly coloured koi of about 7lb came to the net and I remember looking at it with disbelief that such a small fish could have pulled so hard.
A quick photo (well it was very pretty even if it was small) and back into the water with a few quick words something to the effect of’ go send me your grand-daddy’.
Back out with the rod which no sooner hit the water than was away again.
Within the hour Rick and I were both catching plenty of fish.
However, we had not caught a double, so unbeknown to Rick I wound in my right hand rod which had not done much on the meat and switched over to a boilie.
Out went a Tropicana which was soon joined by about fifty free offerings and back on the buzzer the rod went while I returned to my seat.
The activity on the corn had somewhat died so taking advantage of the quiet spell I dozed off (well, it had been a tiring drive).
All of a sudden I was awoken by the sound of a buzzer to my right going faster and faster and bearing in mind Rick was to my left it could be only one thing, the cat rod was away!
Leaping off the bed I hurtled up to the rod which by now was screaming off and picking it up I felt the line pluck nicely through my fingers; knowing that it must be a cat on the other end gave me a real thrill.
Winding down I gave a firm strike only to find that I had missed the take, I was gutted.
Collecting my thoughts I baited up with a fresh squid and cast back out to the same spot, bobbin on the needle and it was back to the bedchair.
No sooner had I laid back down when the sound of the buzzer broke the peace again and to my amazement it was the boilie rod.
Engaging the baitrunner I met a firm resistance which judging by the earlier fish suggested that this might be somewhat better.
After five minutes or so and a few shaky moments in some bankside undergrowth, a huge koi graced my net which when put on the scales went a shade over 15lb.
This was definitely one for the album and after several quick shots back she went — not quite a grand-daddy but getting closer.
At this point I decided to go for broke so I wound in the other corn rod and changed this over to a boilie.
I must have been mad on the strength of one fish, going all out boilies but it was a double and I just had a feeling this was how the better fish might fall.
Both rods back out I piled in the remainder of the bulk bag (about 950 boilies) and sat back in anticipation.
By now it was early afternoon and Rick (who had been catching consistently on the corn) and I decided we were getting peckish, so, being nominated’ chef of the week’I had to sort out the dinner.
Just as I had fired up the cooker the cat rod that had caused me all the grief earlier was off again.
Picking up the rod determined not to make a hash of it this time I engaged the bail arm and belted the take.
To my disbelief I felt a resistance for a second or so and the rod sprung back over my shoulder.
At this point I could have gone home, foreseeing a frustrating week ahead full of missed takes; nevertheless after a few words (all unprintable) from Rick the cat rod was recast for a third time.
After dinner we continued to fiddle around with tackle and were joined by Mr. Ferguson and his son, Paul, who were also booked in for the same week.
He had a potter about and a chat and decided to set up in the far corner to our left.
By now I had almost convinced Rick to change to the boilie when I had another take on the Tropicana; this was all the convincing he needed as I landed a nice mirror around the 12lb mark.
Rick changed his rods to boilies and we continued to catch fish right up until dark, the majority of which were doubles or very close.
As it got dark 1 decided not to fish for the carp at night.
choosing the peace and quiet of the cat rods and a good kip instead.
My sleep was broken around 3.30a.m. by the cat rod nearest to me.
Unsure whether I actually wanted to strike the rod and possibly miss another take or just enjoy the sound of the buzzer, I decided on the latter and leapt out of bed and grabbed the rod.
The line was plucking nicely through my fingers and, with my heart in my mouth, I wound the pick up in and struck.
The next couple of moments were total disbelief as the rod arched over and a powerful fish made a bee-line towards the far bank,’ Cat on,’I shouted to Rick and a bleary-eyed bearded creature emerged from next door!
After five minutes or so both Rick and I were properly awake and using his scoop technique (which incidentally hadn't been quite perfected) my first catfish was on the bank.
It was at this point that I realised (never having even seen one caught before) that I didn't have a clue about how to handle one.
I knew they had teeth but how big and where was a mystery to me.
Anyway treating it with the respect that any fish of unknown toothy potential deserves I knelt across it like a pike and proceeded to unhook it with Rick's help.
My plan was for Rick to open the mouth while I would use the forceps to retrieve the hook, this seeming to be the most sensible approach (from my point of view anyway).
We successfully unhooked her and on the scales she came in at 13lb 4oz, not a monster cat, rather a kitten, but nevertheless a most satisfying experience; at last a cat on the bank.
The next morning when we woke Rick and I were joined by Mr Ferguson and son where we drank that’ life saving’first coffee of the day and then took the photos of the night's conquest.
I was surprised how well behaved the cat was on the bank for it hardly moved, out with the camera, click and back she went none the worse for her mistake.
At this point I found myself wondering how anything so ugly could be so beautiful for believe me that one cat had stirred a new urge in me, the excitement of catching something totally new.
The next two days were fairly similar with plenty of carp falling to boilies, many of these good doubles and a fair head of nice koies of varying colours amongst them.
However, the cat rods lay silent.
Adopting our’ carping during the day only’policy we had a couple of good nights sleep until I was woken in the middle of the third night by Rick shouting,’Max!
Cat on.’
I ran up to Rick, who by how had managed to walk out onto a jetty like affair.
I was informed that this was the third’ clip out’he had had during the night on that rod, the other two having been either aborted or missed.
This was obviously a better fish and after netting it (using a more orthodox approach) I knew he had cracked the twenty barrier.
After a moment's celebration Rick's ambition was fulfilled, as this cat took the scales round to 21lb 12oz.
His first cat and a’ twenty’to boot, it couldn't be all bad.
In the sack with the cat and back to bed for me.
When the sun rose we did all the necessary and then noticed this cat only had one eye.
It hadn't lost one, there was no eye socket on one side of its head, so after the photos and the corny jokes about’ one eye and goes by the name of lucky’back into the water and off she swam.
Out with the carp rods again and straight into fish — we had now caught somewhere in the region of eighty fish between us all on boilies (which wasn't bad considering they don't eat them remember) up to around 17lb.
We now started playing around with different things like pop-ups and double baits trying to sort out some of the twenties that we knew were present, but had man aged to evade capture.
No matter what we did we caught carp but still we found that 17lb was about the ceiling and with the bait situation looking very low and the prospect of the homeward journey the following morning we both decided to pack up the carp rods and fish all out for the cats.
If nothing else, the relative lack of action over the last couple of nights would ensure a good sleep before setting off home.
During lunch we discussed how the water had changed during the week.
When we arrived the carp were present all over from our margin to the far bank but as the time went on the fish moved out and only seemed catchable from the far side.
I had action very quickly on the cat rods in the margin on arrival but that died very quickly.
On top of this the only action Rick had seen was on his furthest rod, away in the corner by the dam out-flow away from our movements.
If the cap had been spooked by our presence could the same be true of the cats?
We decided to spread the baits around into some new areas which could now be comfortably fished due to the removal of the carp rods.
With baits cast into the new areas we settled down to review the week's action over a coffee.
We had taken 120 carp and 2 cats so the trip could hardly be deemed a’ cat-astrophe’(sorry but I couldn't resist it) when suddenly one of Rick's rods was away.
Full of new hope that maybe our rethink might be working he struck into what appeared a solid fish, although this was a little misleading as the cat had picked up a little weed and once freed she quickly surrendered.
No monster at 11lb 5oz but a welcome sight and the first fish landed during the hours of daylight.
As Rick was re-baiting, the clip on his other rod pulled and on checking the line he found he had another take.
Bail arm over, wind down, strike and Rick was soon playing out another cat towards the waiting net.
In first time and a better fish, we even joked it was bound to be another twenty!
Well, joking over, on the scales and sure enough 21lb 12oz again.
A quick check confirmed that with two eyes this was a different fish.
All of a sudden our theories looked as though they may have had some foundation.
At this point we noticed some fry scattering towards the far bank, so I retrieved and cast to the spot.
I don't know what possessed me to do so but I started twitching the squid like I would have done a deadbait piking when suddenly the rod thumped over!
Taking the bail arm off I fed a little line, re-engaged the pick-up and struck into another cat.
I was chuckling away to myself because I couldn't believe the nerve of the fish grabbing my bait.
In the net it was obvious that it was only a small double which took the scales round to 12lb 12oz; never mind it was about to become a film star, like it or not.
I quickly cast back out again to the same spot and to my total astonishment the rod was almost pulled out of my hands before I got it back to the rests.
I proceeded to miss the take — don't ask me how — and the fact that the same thing happened on the following cast really had me cursing.
The next take I didn't miss!
I was met by a slow but very solid resistance moving down the far bank.
It had picked up quite a bit of loose weed which kept jamming in the top ring, but this was periodically removed by Mr Gardner who, by now, knew I had a good fish on and had been warned that any foul-ups at the net would seriously hinder his future fathering capabilities.
Fifteen minutes later, one very tired arm and one very happy angler.
I lifted out what appeared to be a very large catfish.
After the normal speculation that surrounds these events I was put out of my misery as she weighed in at 32lb 4oz — to say I was ecstatic would have been an understatement.
To allow time to sort myself out we decided to sack this fish in the deep margin under some cover while I set up the camera equipment and finished a somewhat cold coffee.
Rick had another take which was quickly hit (we were becoming old hands at catting by now) and he bent into a big heavy fish.
The afternoon was becoming silly and we were now beginning to wish that he had dumped the carp rods sooner.
Anyway Rick spent what seemed like an eternity before he got the fish near the net but when it showed for the first time it soon became apparent why it had been so stubborn, the fish was massive!
Ten more minutes or so went by until she was ready for the net, one scoop followed by some frantic throwing in of excess tail which didn't want to go into the net and she was ours.
Lifting her out of the water we were totally silent, and neither of us seemed to be willing to commit ourselves on a weight so we just put her in the sling and let the scales do the talking.
A scream of delight from Rick, while I was totally speechless at the sheer size, at 41lb 12oz it was the icing on the cake.
We continued fishing and although it went quiet for me Rick did have another two cats at 17lb 12oz and 12lb 8oz, but both seemed a little insignificant in the light of previous events.
Night set in, the action finished.
I'm not sure whether the change in areas was the reason for the last flurry or whether they had just been triggered by instinct and gone on the feed.
One thing we were both sure of was that we would return in the near future with no carp tackle, but to fish purely for the cats, that is if we can get booked of course.
I'm sure the demand for the venue will have greatly increased by the time we return.
For details on bookings contact Carp Fishers Abroad, Max Bond, on 0473 328 147 (daytime) or David Rance on 0952 770771.
No More Heroes
Nothing strange about my match angling upbringing, my heroes, I suppose, were shared with many aspiring anglers of my youth.
Ivan Marks was a great inspiration, not just for his bream fishing prowess either.
He could win on a wide variety of venues on a broad spectrum of methods.
I can remember seeing him on quite a poor peg on the River Trent at Winthorpe, giving a super display of distance stickfloat fishing, still one of the hardest techniques to master.
He finished with a good stone of roach and absolutely murdered the area.
His column in the Angling Times was the first thing that I turned to and what a mine of information.
I taught myself to fish the swingtip through reading Ivan's articles, and from struggling to get a bite on my local stillwater I was able to improve until I actually won open matches there.
Ivan's dictates on balanced tackle were instrumental in my discarding unsuitable ledger rods before I found the right one.
In the end it would have been easier to have gone out and bought a’ Persuader’(remember them?) as used by the man himself, streets ahead of any other shop-bought ledger rod of the day.
However, they were also quite pricey, as they could well afford to be, so I designed my own after a first disaster with one of the Ken Smith ledger rods.
That rod was about afoot too short and had one of the most unforgiving actions I have ever seen.
I eventually converted it into a feeder rod (this was in the era before today's more suitable weapons) and it could throw a heavy feeder with ease.
The rod that I eventually settled with was made from an AFTM 10 reservoir fly rod blank, after an interesting morning inspecting blanks at the Horizon factory at Redditch.
It cost me less than a tenner and for swingtipping and springtipping it was brilliant.
How they ever made any money at the Horizon factory I shall never know.
They would build you a made to measure rod for less than half the price of a shop-bought article.
Archie and his mate were producing super spliced tip rods well before the Shakespeare international came onto the scene.
But I digress; with the new rod I could fish with 1 pound or 1.7 hooklinks without fear of breaking on the strike.
I gave it one of its earliest tests on my first trip to Coombe Abbey at Coventry, where I had sixty pounds of bream (weighed) and only stopped catching when I ran out of groundbait.
Like a lot of the greats of that era, Ivan won on a wide variety of venues, the Severn, the Trent, all of the Fenland rivers, not small matches either.
Some of the Trent opens were massive.
I remember drawing opposite the road stretch when that bank was pegged as well!
I know that Ian Heaps was on that match, drawn on the opposite bank.
In my section I had one of my local heroes, Tony Scott, about four or five pegs away.
Next one downstream to me though was Benny Ashurst, I was totally overawed.
We were on a very poor area and tightly pegged, but Benny was magic.
He caught a good couple of pounds of roach on ledgered casters from bites that were all but invisible.
He reckoned that if any angler ever worked out how to hit all of the bites that came on that method they would win a lot of money.
Being brought up on the fish starved waters of the North West he took no prisoners when he drew on fish on the richer waters in the Midlands.
Of similar vintage I can recall Billy Lane turning up for an open match on the Swadlincote waters, looking as if he had just stepped out of a time warp.
He drew quite a vile peg and tackled it with a float and shotting pattern included in his float fishing encyclopaedia.
A big avon, bulk shotted in only about three feet of racing water.
He caught over a stone of roach, which was about 200 per cent more than any normal angler would have managed.
Even later in life he smacked the bottoms of some of the match angling elite on a gale ripped River Trent at North Muskham.
I think it was the old Gladding Masters match, he didn't win it (Pete Palmer did), but he had plenty of big names behind him (I think the editor might have been one of them) and showed why he must have been greatly feared in his prime.
When you talk of anglers of this calibre it is hard to emphasise just how brilliant they were in their prime.
I saw a documentary programme about the Manchester United team that was destroyed by the Munich disaster.
Naturally Duncan Edwards came under scrutiny.
Bobby Charlton said of him something like,’ People ask you how good was he? and then when you tell them they don't believe you, but yes, he was that good.’
Following this was a small clip of film of Duncan Edwards in action for England against Brazil.
What he did would have looked classy even in today's harder, faster game of thirty odd years later.
These anglers would have been class acts in any era, yes, they were that good.
Who are the heroes of the future though?
Who are the anglers that people will be able to reminisce about?
Perhaps because the average standard of anglers has improved they are not quite held in so much esteem and yet that really is not quite fair, given that it is now harder to achieve a level of consistency with open match results.
Anglers like Dave Harrell cannot be praised too highly, and yet, because the average standard of anglers has gone up, they can appear to do little different, apart from catch loads more fish.
Sure the mechanics are similar, but those tiny little extras mount up to a whole lot more than their actual sum.
On the face of it these trivial little improvements, or plus points ahead of the norm look to be insignificant.
But compare it to darts.
There is only a fraction of an inch difference between hitting the treble twenty consistently and hitting the one, but no-one would deny that the man who hits the treble twenty most often, when he wants to, is the more accomplished player.
Similarly the anglers that can control their terminal tackle, and not only that, but know what it is doing and what they are trying to do with it, with a greater degree of accuracy and confidence, will be winners.
Now, we are reaching a stage where the very top anglers, if not professionals, are living like them.
They live and breathe fishing.
They take jobs that allow them the maximum time at the waters edge, or they do not work at all.
Small points again, like accuracy of feeding when it is needed, become natural to them because they are constantly working at it.
On a large number of matches the extra few fish that this may put in their net will not make any difference between winning or losing, but it may affect the deficit or margin by which they win or lose.
Some days though, it will matter and if it coincides with a very big match…
Because of this excellence of technique their winning chances increase.
We must surely be at a stage now where almost every angler on a given match has the ability to win it, given a draw.
Even if only one peg in a hundred pegger is good enough to give them that chance.
The better the angler though, the higher number of’ chance’pegs there are, possibly as many as 25 in the hundred (although I can't off hand think of too many venues that are quite that good).
Obviously their chance at the draw bag is now four to one instead of one hundred to one, and even allowing for the fact that they will undoubtedly be called lucky so and so's for drawing well all the time, with odds of four to one it is not so surprising.
Today's anglers are fishing in a much more competitive environment than the greats of the past.
That does not mean that they are better, rather that they have to work harder.
Modern tackle has given today's anglers a great advantage and simple things such as float control are now much easier than they must have been in the silk line and gut era.
Modern rods are lighter and easier to control but, every angler is equipped with one, not just the elite or the inventive as was the case in times past.
To see something really special today though requires a discerning nature and to an extent it depends upon which technique you want to see at its best.
Today's stars, which naturally include any of the England squad are all worth a look, but there are a number of other anglers around who are not quite so generally well known but are a joy to watch.
John Allerton is one that springs to mind, a lovely angler to watch and certainly not one who inspires the onlooker to think that he could do just as well.
True, John makes it look easy, but, his tackle control is so good that it is obviously going to be difficult to emulate.
Today's heroes are there, all you have to do is go looking for them.
Why?
It often happens, you fish a particular swim and have a good catch, return a day or two later, fish in the same manner under the same conditions and score a blank.
Graham Marsden recalls such a time and offers and explanation
One night earlier this season I made an excellent catch of bream.
Four nights later, on the same Cheshire mere, in the same swim, I blanked.
Bait, tackle and method were exactly the same.
Conditions, if anything, were better on the night I blanked.
Rolling bream and line bites told me that fish were in the swim.
So why did I fail?
I've been analysing the two sessions ever since.
Let me share my thoughts with you and see what we come up with.
It may not help us to catch more fish, but it could help us to understand why we haven't when we feel we ought to have.
This is what happened on the successful night.
I arrived at the water at 8.00p.m.
It was a warm, still, evening with no cloud.
For several days previously this was how it had been: hot and breezy during the day, warm and still through the night.
I chose the most popular swim on the water.
It had been fishing well and receiving regular bait.
A touch of the chicken and egg situation here I remember thinking; is the swim a good one because it is popular and is baited regularly, or is it popular and baited regularly because it's a good 'un?
The fact is that it is a good swim right from the beginning of the season, before our baits have any influence.
As the season goes on our baits make it a better swim.
The only signs of fish life at that time on the glassy surface of the mere were the odd shower of fry as they all leapt out as one.
It was as though several tiny cloudbursts were traversing the water.
Every now and then a jack pike would rupture the  tranquillity as it marauded the easy pickings.
It was a good sign; if the jacks didn't decimate the fry the water would soon become too populated and no longer produce the big fish me and my ilk were keen to catch.
I dropped a marker into the swim from the boat and fed in about 5lb of groundbait, three pints of casters and a pint of maggots.
Back at the bank I tackled up two rods with 4lb line and 14's hooks in the usual paternoster method, i.e. a yard hook length and nine inch bomb length.
I chose not to use swimfeeders because of the patchy carpet of algae on the bottom.
One rod fished three maggots with three casters on the other.
There is rarely any action before 10.30p.m., more often the first fish comes after midnight.
Yet from 10.15p.m. the line bites began and bream had been rolling steadily along the familiar route for almost an hour.
At 12.15a.m.
I had my first good bite, a two inch lift then the indicator dropping like the clappers on a slack line.
I picked up the rod, wound in the slack and struck.
Yes, it was on.
Bump, bump, it went, not spectacularly, but in the unmistakable manner of a big bream, which any big bream angler will confirm is just as heart-stopping as any run from a harder fighting fish.
I weighed it a few minutes later and was delighted, to say the least, when it pulled the needle round to 10lb 3oz.
I sacked it.
Line bites continued, then at one o'clock I had another bite, again it was a drop bite.
This time, when the hook bit, the fish gave one bump then took off with me back-winding madly to maintain the right amount of bend in the rod.
I turned it and played it to the net, though it didn't come in easily.
This was a bigger fish.
The wrist of the tail was thicker, the belly fatter and it was broader across the shoulders.
The needle stopped at 11lb 15oz.
I pulled at it, jiggled it, checked the zero twice and I think I would have oiled the scales if I'd had oil with me.
I did my best to make it a 12-pounder.
My mate weighed it too and he couldn't make it grow either.
It was 11lb 15oz.
Silly isn't it, that an ounce — another mouthful of bait, or a crap on the way in — should mean so much to us.
That one went into another sack.
Two doubles in less than an hour.
I didn't care now if 1 didn't get another bite.
But I did.
Two eight-pounders — 8lb 2oz and 8lb 10oz — followed in the next hour and a half.
Then I had another double, 10lb 8oz, half an hour before daylight.
Daylight broke, a stiff breeze struck up and the sky clouded over.
Conditions were better for fishing now than they'd been all night.
A flat-calm water, clear sky and a bright quarter moon are not the sort of conditions we associate with good catches.
Yet the onset of daylight, with its much better conditions, brought the kiss of death.
I never had another bite.
Normally this water fishes well from first light for a couple of hours or so.
I could hardly wait for a return match.
I wanted some more of this wonderful fishing, where you can't go wrong, and big fish are queuing to climb up your rod.
Twenty years ago I would have been back that same night, but I've learned since then that it is rare indeed to enjoy a repeat performance.
I've lost count of the times I've made a good catch and returned the next night (or day as the case may be) only to blank or, at best, catch a fraction of the previous night's catch.
So I waited four days, watching the weather, praying that it wouldn't change and when the night arrived to fish again, and the conditions were identical to that wonderful night four moons ago, I felt like I was eight years old again on Christmas eve.
Four of us fished that night and four of us blanked.
I hooked and lost a fish at 12.30p.m. and that was the only fish to feel steel.
As I said at the beginning, conditions were a little better and bream were rolling and giving line bites.
What went wrong then?
My hooking and losing a fish hadn't put them off.
It rarely has before, and anyhow, bream continued to roll and give line bites afterwards.
Rolling bream are not frightened bream, nor do they hang around in the swim if they've been spooked by an escaping fish.
Although conditions were a little better in that there was a bit of breeze at times during the night, the moon had grown to a full half rather than the quarter it had been.
We all know that a full moon is not normally conducive to good fishing, so was that half moon enough to make the difference?
I think not.
On a full moon night when we blank there are usually no signs of fish moving, let alone feeding.
At least the fish were moving well and lots of them too that night.
Four anglers fished the night we blanked; three crowded together and one only 50 yards further along the same bank.
Each angler fed his swim.
Were the fish overfed?
The bream came to the lone anglers swim first and he blanked too.
Surely he would have caught one or two before, the bream became overfed.
The popular swim, at least, had been fished the two nights before our blank one.
The night before one double and four other fish had been caught and I think this could be where the answer lies.
I think the fish were full.
They'd had plenty of bait four nights ago, then another two helpings of bait on another two nights and, although they were moving around the swim as was evidenced by line bites and rolling, they were just not inclined to feed — whatever the conditions.
One thing confused the issue however.
Many times I've prebaited every night for two weeks or more and caught fish and I've prebaited with similar amounts.
My thoughts keep returning to the fact that a session immediately following a good catch the night before is rarely successful.
Apart from the fish being well fed they must also be very edgy.
The ones that were actually caught must be particularly wary and will, no doubt, be conveying their nervousness to the shoal they returned to.
So my conclusion is that we blanked due to a combination of the bream being well fed and very alert to danger.
Tackle Review
RYOBI MASTERLINE MATCH REELS
Somebody once said to me’ a reel is a reel, it holds line, lets it out and retrieves it’.
I suppose this is true to a certain degree but when match fishing it helps to have the right one for the job.
It's no use trying to throw a 3oz feeder with a small light reel unless, of course, you want to ruin it.
Ryobi Masterline have three’ match reels’in the Mastermatch series, these cover all options and situations.
For general float fishing, there is the open faced MM 300, if you prefer they have the closed face CF I, and for feeder/leger fishing, the Mastermatch Leger.
The MM 300 has a manual bail arm with a ceramic line roller for longer life.
The spool is of ideal size, large enough to aid trotting and casting without being over sized.
It is contoured to give excellent line lay and takes 100 metres of 2½lb line.
The reel stem is not too long so the’ short fingered’among you will be able to reach the spool with ease.
The action is perfectly smooth, as you would expect from a top of the range product.
All in all it is a perfect match reel.
There is a rear drag for those of you who use one.
I use the reel for most of my float fishing and a lot of bomb/small feeder work and cannot fault it.
The CF 1 is for those who prefer a closed face reel — personally I only use one on canals when squatt fishing, but I know a lot of good anglers prefer them for all float fishing.
The first thing to say is that the spool is large and ribbed — this helps stop the bedding in of line that can sometimes occur.
It is extremely light and has a sensible gear ratio of 4:1.
The bail arm button at the front is responsive and I found gets better with use.
There is no drag but there is an optional anti-reverse.
A new reel — to me anyway — is the Leger.
Similar in appearance to the MM 300 but larger and ideal for feeder fishing.
The ultimate test for any reel is the’ Trent circuit’.
Constant casting and retrieving with heavy feeders soon sorts out the men from the boys and this reel takes all the pressure with ease.
Although quite a large reel in appearance, it only weighs 10.9oz which compares favourably with small sized reels.
The spool is once again built up and takes 100 metres of 6lb — I use 150 metres of 4lb.
A rear drag is featured and one of the good and important points is that the on/off anti-reverse is easy to reach and operate when fishing fast water.
All the reels retail at £49.95: have a look at them next time you're in a tackle shop — if there's not one to suit, you'll never be satisfied.
MIDDY FLOATS
At the start of the season I was sent a parcel of goodies, courtesy of Middy Sales Director David Middleton.
The first thing to catch my eye were the floats, and in particular the ones that suited my local river — the Trent.
Two styles of pole floats  immediately came to hand, the series X and the series S. Both floats had correctly shaped bodies — reversed pear — and at First glance appear quite similar.
The series X has a plastic tip as seen in the majority of pole floats these days, the tapered cane stem also caught my eye.
A nice touch that shows a lot of thought has gone into the design.
The use of cane makes this float ideal for fishing sag out shot or styles, and also aids casting when using 7 meters plus to hand.
The series S has an alloy stem which makes the float very stable and ideal for holding back.
It works best when using an olivett.
The tip is made out of cane and takes a number 10 to sink, providing you shot the float correctly’ on the drop,’bites are clearly seen.
Both styles are well finished, a satin stain/varnish has been used to good effect, the eye is well placed high on the body and on all of the floats I received was free of varnish.
I have no hesitation in recommending them for steady moving water and out of the two I feel the series X is more versatile.
Also in the’ goodie bag’was a set of Jan Porter wagglers.
Made from peacock these are available in sets of five or individually and come complete with an instruction card — ideal for the inexperienced.
The finish on the floats is’ par excellance’and the big red tips are ideal when dragging on in moving water.
I know Jan uses them which is a recommendation in itself.
The pole floats range from .3 to 1.3 gram and retail at around 90p, the wagglers take between 2BB and 4AAA and retail at around £2.60 for a pack of five or between 50p and 60p individually depending on size.
E.T.
BROLLY-LESS BIVVY DOME
The Bivvy Dome is E.T. 's latest offering to the specimen lads, a shelter that has been used for a couple of seasons by leading anglers like Ritchie McDonald and Pete Springate and whilst it may not be everyone's cup of tea, it certainly has its advantages.
The Bivvy Dome is a proven and firmly established shelter in use throughout the camping world which offers superb protection against the elements but saves the angler the need to carry a umbrella around with him.
Ideally suited to the carp and pike lads who regularly fish long sessions, the’ Dome’can be assembled in minutes and can be moved around quickly and conveniently.
It incorporates a separate fly sheet which can be removed during the day to increase light and help keep the dome cool but he refitted in seconds when night falls.
The space between the fly sheet and inner dome also plays a major part in eradicating condensation, a problem which we have all encountered from time to time.
The dome also incorporates a built-in groundsheet with a 6″ lip around the door, this will ensure no unwelcome creatures can come wandering into your bivvy during the night.
The main frame is constructed out of three shock corded poles which break down for convenient transportation whilst the dome itself fits away compactly.
A well made piece of kit that will  undoubtedly become more apparent on our banks during the coming seasons.
Available through all tackle shops who stock E.T.
Products, it costs £86.45p.
Anglers might be tempted into thinking that they may be able to purchase the Bivvy Dome cheaper direct from camping shops, but they must remember, as with many items, various different qualities exist.
The model marketed by E.T.
is the result of much searching and is deemed as the most suitable for the angler.
Gone Fishin'
Despite the fact that carp, tench and bream, in particular, have’ grown’in recent times causing the old targets for which the average specimen-hunter realistically set his sights to become obsolete, the humble roach at least seems to have retained a quiet dignity making a 2-pounder still the weight most of us want to beat.
Some anglers, of course, ridicule this goal by catching such fish like shelling peas; the name John Bailey and big roach for instance are synonymous, he has a list of two and three pounders to his credit as long as your arm.
To get things in perspective, though, it needs to be remembered that he and his peers are exceptional anglers fishing exceptional waters.
For us lesser mortals a redfin of two-pounds remains the fish to aim for and the capture of just one can be the catch of a lifetime.
Even some respected well-known all-round big-fish anglers have yet to crack it.
I'm sure he won't mind me mentioning the fact, but as far as I know Graham Marsden is still waiting for that elusive’ two’, not that he hasn't had his share of big roach, it's just that the needle of his scales apparently aggravatingly always sticks at around 1lb 15oz!
(Now there's honesty for you!).
A 2lb roach is a big fish, much bigger than many anglers credit.
It is so easy to hold a good roach, deep of body and broad of shoulder in your hands and dismiss it without accurate weighing as’ two pounds’.
I feel sure some of the’ casual’big roach caught by pleasure anglers that appear in the angling press, when not hybrids, have been’guestimated’.
as if to illustrate this point I recently spoke to an angler on the Ribble and judging by the distance he held his hands apart —’ Like this they were!’— his recent catch of’two pounders’could easily have been around the 6lb mark!
To catch a 2lb roach whilst actually fishing for roach is the pinnacle of success.
To catch one accidentally doesn't have quite the same distinction or achievement, even so its capture should count.
What about me, then, have I ever had a 2lb roach?
Years ago Redesmere in Cheshire was a great roach water producing many fish in excess of 2lb.
A chap called Herbert Brough of Macclesfield had the fishing for these fish taped and made some outstanding catches there.
I never caught one in those days of the sixties and seventies myself, though pound to nearly a pound and a half fish graced my net often enough.
More recently the roach seemed to disappear, the bream, tench and carp became more prevalent and grew onto specimen size.
November 2nd 1981 had me arriving at the mere on a calm, mild, dull day that saw hardly a ripple on the surface.
I was going for bream.
I hadn't been to the mere for a week or two so didn't really know if the bream would still be moving or not.
However, conditions for the time of the year seemed favourable and I was in hopeful mood as I rowed carefully out on the meadow side to a drop-off at about 70 yards I knew to be there.
I planted the polystyrene marker, scattered some flake maize, sweetcorn and broken lobs around it, then headed back to shore where my two rods were at the ready for casting out.
I baited a 6's hook to 6lb b.s. line paternostered on a 1½ oz bomb with half a lobworm and sent it out to the marker.
The other rod I baited with sweetcorn.
Almost immediately I experienced a series of knocks and pulls to the worm rod but nothing concrete to strike at.
I was getting rather frustrated abortively striking at these plucks and finding my worm chewed up.
thought bream to be the culprits, but couldn't be sure because so far I had not seen any prime out in the swim to indicate they were, in fact, present there.
Eventually I had a better bite and to my surprise I hauled in a roach of 11b 5oz.
Two more came along in quick succession, 1lb 7oz and 1lb-11, then all activity ceased.
Wondering if my worm had been chewed again, I picked up the rod to reel in and was delighted to find another roach on the end.
An absolute pristine typical Redesmere roach of old, complete with dab of orange under its chin.
It went 2lb 3oz!
A real roach, not one of the roach-bream hybrids of around the same weight the mere began throwing up in numbers later.
How I wished I hadn't left my camera at home.
And wouldn't it have been nice to catch a fish like that on the appropriate tackle for the species?
How ever none of this really detracted from the pleasure of seeing and holding such a splendid fish — I had caught my two-pound roach, nothing could take that away from me.
Nev's Diary
There is very little actual fish catching to report this month, so with things being slow it has given me a chance to read up on fish nutrition, something I have a reasonable knowledge of due to once working in one of the then leading fish culture units at Aston University.
There are plenty of anglers around who have degrees in science and if they have studied a biological science, they will have covered in detail biochemistry.
Well this is a big advantage when it comes to reading the literature, because it means you do not have to at first learn the basics of this science.
What I will write here will be in a language most will understand and, wherever possible, I have thrown out complex biochemical concepts, trying to translate them into simple concepts that everyone will understand.
What I want the reader to do is question some of the theories at present circulating in the carp world.
Some have been around a long time, others are of more recent origins.
Some have been misunderstood!
The fish nutritionist is really the scientist the carp angler needs to talk to for both their aims are similar.
Both the carp angler and the fish nutritionist want the carp to take their bait or diet.
Both want the carp to like it and thrive on it.
Both want to do this at the lowest possible cost.
When such researchers have been doing just this for over 100 years, is it not sensible to take note of what they are saying?
Because I work for a Water Authority which is active in the farming of coarse fish, I have access to some interesting books.
One such book published in 1988 is by Dr. Balfour Hepher.
The book is called simply’ Nutrition of Pond Fishes’and is published by Cambridge University Press.
Dr. Hepher was an Israeli who had studied fish nutrition for over 40 years.
Sadly, he died just before the publication of the book.
This is a pity because his book was one of the most interesting textbooks I have read for a long time.
Reading this book has confirmed what I have always believed and that is that certain concepts in carp fishing are nothing more than the results of misread scientific papers and wishful thinking!
However, first I must define a few basics.
Fish require energy to live; this is provided by food which is digested to allow the energy within it to be utilised.
Nothing earth-shattering in that!
The ingested food is either absorbed or excreted.
Some of what is absorbed may later be excreted.
Some of the food is used for the day to day living requirements of the fish such as movement, breathing and tissue repair.
This part of the ingested food is used to provide the maintenance requirement.
This is the amount of food that it takes for a fish to stay the same weight, i.e. just survive.
This requirement in pike for example amounts to a mere 10lb of food for a 10lb pike.
This shows how efficient fish really are.
In reality no fish has to eat a vast amount of food, though luckily for us some are right pigs!
The need to feed over and above the maintenance requirement is linked to the fish's need to grow and reproduce.
Generally, the bigger the fish, the less vulnerable it is to predation.
So it is to most fish's advantage to grow to their maximum size as quickly as possible.
How a fish decides what is edible and what is not is fairly simply explained.
In many fish, and in particular fish such as carp which frequently live in turbid water, chemoreception is what leads it to food.
It has taste buds on various parts of its fins and body, but particularly on the barbels and lips.
So if it tastes edible it gets eaten.
The nostrils also play a part in finding food.
Now in the carp's case, it matters very little how hard the food is because its pharyngeal teeth are designed to grind the food into a pulp which can then enter the digestive tract or gut.
Now if you think a carp will eat anything then you are wrong.
Experiments in tanks with carp and other species have shown quite clearly that the food must be palatable.
Now there does not seem to be any precise way of telling this in advance, so in the case of the carp angler, it is a matter of trial and error.
When feeding on natural food items there may be free amino acids which the carp can detect.
However, free amino acids which are the building blocks of protein do not get liberated into the water, just for the sake of it!
After all it is wasteful, but there is probably a number of chemicals which are lost from food organisms or released because of some biological function.
These are probably latched onto by carp when digging for food.
One thing is certain, unless the food organisms have been badly damaged or Shed, free amino acids will not be liberated in vast amounts.
So warning number one for the carp bait genius, make sure you can get your amino acid levels down to the levels found in nature!
Otherwise you are wasting your money!
More on amino acids later.
Going back to the carp's insides, once on the way through the carp, the food has to be digested.
Carp have no stomach and digestion proceeds from one end of the gut to the other.
Proteins, lipids (fats) and carbohydrates are all broken down quite easily and absorbed.
This breaking down of the large molecules to smaller ones is the job of enzymes.
Now an enzyme is more than what comes with a pack of washing powder.
It is a biological catalyst, a catalyst being something that encourages a chemical reaction to proceed at a faster rate than it would do normally.
Most catalysts are active at a wide range of temperatures.
This is not so with enzymes.
Because they are made of protein they are rapidly inactivated at temperatures over 50°C and certainly boiling would render any you put in a carp bait totally inactive.
There has been quite a lot of talk recently about adding enzymes to help the carp digest our sophisticated carp baits.
Well it doesn't really make sense, simply because the carp's own enzymes are far more effective than those which we could supply, i.e. those from sheep or cattle.
Also the effect of boiling has been mentioned.
Neither must we forget that most fish can adapt to a particular food source and actually produce more of a particular enzyme to cope with a new food.
If you had any doubts at all about the digestibility of your bait, you would sensibly change it to something that was digestible!
Even foods such as cellulose which forms the cell walls of plants can be broken down by carp, because of the bacteria which live in the gut.
So let's not credit the carp with problems it hasn't got when, in fact, it is a remarkably effective eating machine.
Now we need not go into too much detail about digestion and absorption, but a few basic facts should be noted.
The finer the food particles, the easier it is to digest.
So the ideal carp bait would be hard when on the hook and melt in the carp's gut!
Also did you realise that the absorption of amino acids through the gut is competitive, i.e. if you put a load of neat amino acids into a bait you can prevent the absorption of others that are needed!
I cannot say for sure that there is any risk to the carp's health, but that is a classic case of playing around with things we do not understand!
In the wild, a fish can get around this problem by absorbing much bigger molecules and then breaking them down in the gut wall or bloodstream.
Finally an interesting result of research showed that feeding carp neat amino acids could reduce growth and see amino acids excreted.
One of the things that has puzzled me over the years is the obsession with high protein baits.
We have values of 80 per cent thrown at us for a fish which, when feeding on natural food, ingests about 80 per cent water and around 7 per cent protein!
Hardly a high protein diet in the terms we have come to relate to.
The high protein idea is a deadend, something that many carp anglers already understand.
While there is no doubt that carp can digest and like ingredients such as casein and fishmeal, they do not need such high quality ingredients in their food.
A carp is quite happy on a high protein diet because it utilises some for tissue repair, construction of its own complex molecules such as enzymes and of course growth by addition of new body protein.
The rest, however, it uses as an energy supply.
Now carp can obtain energy from much cheaper foods such as lipid and carbohydrate and this is why the fish farmer provides carp with a protein composition of 30 to 40 per cent.
They grow and feed just as well as carp fed on a much higher protein diet, only it does not cost as much.
It is the same economics that ought to influence the carp angler.
Instead many anglers seem to be dedicated to throwing their hard earned money away on super expensive ingredients.
This is not meant to be a criticism of the many carp bait firms which have for a long time sold baits which catch carp.
However, it is intended to make the average angler sit up and think about what he is spending his money on.
The HNV bait idea is without doubt valid simply on the basis that it is logical to give a carp everything it needs in a bait.
However, while receptor sites have been found in higher animals which provide feedback on the quality of the food, such sites have not been found in fish.
It is not clear whether this is because researchers have looked and failed to find them, or have yet to look.
However, in the absence of factual information, we can only say that there is no scientific evidence for the theory that carp can tell if the food is doing them good and will, therefore, prefer this to what has delightfully been described as a crap bait.
It is sensible to give the carp a balanced diet for we want the carp to do well on our baits.
If they grow, then it is good for everyone.
To feed them on food which does them no good at all even though they like the taste would be irresponsible on waters where carp baits are the major part of the fish's diet.
Anyway there's a lot more to say on this subject, but I'm going to leave it until I'm having another period of poor fishing.
If anyone thinks it's because of the bait I use for my carp fishing, well I'm being out-fished when I'm after carp, pike and zander!
It's just one of those months.
Drifting Thoughts
Nothing much has changed in drift-fishing since we introduced the method with the launch of E.T.
Products back in the early 1980s.
Sometimes this happens with a fishing style, small improvements, slight changes.
but no real leaps forward.
The’ Auto-greaser’made line greasing easier, but apart from that the drifting style is much the same now as in the early days.
So this article is really a resume of previous thoughts and writings on the subject, except for those who have not yet tried drifting for pike (are there any?).
If there are, this little piece could open up a whole new concept.
The basic principle of drifting is to use the wind to fish line or dead-baits at distances greater than those to which baits could be cast.
That's the simple description of the method but there is much more to it than that.
It's the little things that you do, the work that you put in, that makes the difference to your success.
The drifting float, in whatever form, will almost always follow our original design.
All the commercial copies of the E.T.
Drifter and most of the home-made versions incorporate a stem, a buoyancy ball and a brightly coloured vane — for visibility at distance (fig 1 below).
In its simplest form the stem can be a length of plastic tube, some 12″ long through which the main line runs, exactly as a slider float.
The disadvantage of this is the amount of resistance against the vane when striking preventing hook penetration, difficult enough at 200 yards without adding problems.
Advanced drift floats such as the’ E.T.
Drifter’ and’Super Drifter’use a solid fibre-glass stem with top and bottom attachment.
The top eye fixing is designed to pull free on the strike minimising resistance.
This, as any sophisticated method, demands some practice to perfect.
The detachable top ring needs to be set at such a pressure as to stay in for the cast but detach on the strike or more accurately the wind-down.
The basic set up for most drifting situations is a sliding float and stop knot arrangement (fig 2 above).
The main line should he greased to float in 99 per cent of fishing situations.
The exception is when difficult cross-winds tend to put a large bow in the main line dragging the float out of position.
In these conditions a bottom-end fixing can be an advantage as the sunken line is away from the winds effects allowing the float to make progress, often slightly across the wind.
But these are frustrating conditions for a dedicated drifter who doesn't feel entirely happy unless at least one drifting vane is bobbing somewhere out on the horizon.
Perseverance with the drifter, even when conditions are not ideal for the method, often pays dividends.
Many is the time I've taken good fish, working the vane out across the wind by continuous adjustments to the line, holding back on the float etc. when others have sat waiting for the wind to swing around a couple of degrees.
It's always been my philosophy that the first bait out is the one most likely to produce a run and I will try to get a drifting float out in almost any conditions (except flat calms) using balloons to assist the float's passage through calm water and into the wind lanes.
Most anglers that I've seen seem to consider drifting as a one way only method.
By this I mean that the bait is only fished on the outward journey, the retrieve being of such a speed to bounce the bait across the surface and although I've seen pike strike at these surface poppers, it's a very rare occasion.
I once saw a pike, a big one at that, attack the vane of a drifter on a fast retrieve after the bait had been lost and the tackle was being retrieved at speed to recast.
It's worth giving some thought to the retrieve.
It's very rare to have a perfect following wind which will run your float straight out.
It's also very rare that you finish standing on the same position from which you made the cast.
This is especially true of open reservoirs, less so on established pits or lakes where bankside vegetation restricts movement.
Anyway the chances are that the retrieve will bring your bait through an area of unfished water.
A slow retrieve, occasionally stopping to allow the bait to sink back to depth, then speeding up to run the bait to the surface working the bait as a lure or wobbled bait would be, the difference is that on this occasion you could be doing it at 150 yards from the bank and an area never covered by bankside wobblers.
I mentioned earlier that the more work the greater the rewards.
Well, retrieving drifted baits is a good example of this.
The wind is no longer doing all the work for you.
It's you making the decisions and doing the work and although I am not suggesting that you will catch twice as many pike, you will certainly catch some which a fast surface retrieve would have missed.
A quick thought here on bait presentation.
Most people fish drifting baits mounted in the conventional float fished manner.
This is generally okay in light to medium winds where the bait is moving very slowly through the water.
But in strong and blustery winds where the drift speed could be enough to drag the bait unnaturally sideways, it would be better to mount the bait head first (fig 2).
This is also true of baits to be retrieved.
Head first mounting, as you would a wobbled bait, is obviously a better choice although if the wind is light the drift out may present the bait in an unnatural fashion.
There are advantages and disadvantages in both methods.
As with float type there is a choice to be made.
Whilst I have already made clear my preference for the breakaway top eye float, there are times when the simpler tube type drifter works better.
For the retrieved drift the float needs to have a top and bottom fixing, otherwise every pull on the main line will take the float under if it is attached by the bottom end only.
The tube stem version is better in these circumstances as the line will always be coming from the top of the float.
Another situation where I have been prepared to use a tube stem is for short range drifting.
Sounds a bit of a contradiction in terms, but a drifter doesn't always have to be vast distances from the bank.
We have used them to great effect from boats or for getting baits in under trees or undercut banks where casting has been impossible but the wind has helped to carry the bait into inaccessible areas often inhabited by pike.
In these tight little situations I prefer the tube stem for the greater degree of control for mending line or holding back to swing baits in under obstructions and overhangs.
But for big water drifting, catching fish on the drift, having located a holding area, the’ E.T.
Drifter’ or’Super Drifter’with pull-free top eye remains the best tool for the job.
We have tried to develop the drifter further but without much success.
It seems it's one of those things that came right first time and improvement is either impossible or unnecessary.
I experimented for a while with rudders on drifters, working on the principles of sailing crafts where the vane (sail) is set at an angle to the rudder (submerged stem section) so that although the wind would blow the vane at the same angle the offset rudder would make the float cut across the surface carrying it out into the lake even though the wind blew along the bank.
This worked fine in theory, it even worked in our high-tec wind tunnel (bath tub and battery operated fan).
The rudder set at 45 degrees to the vane would make the float cut across the wind or rather from one side of the bath tub to the other.
However, in practice, the bow pushed into the main line by the wind only served to pull the float back into line with the wind minimising the work done by the rudder.
We have a design for a more efficient vane shape but production problems have  stifled that.
No, it seems that the drifter will remain for the time being in the form of the original although we will keep working on it.
Of course, the advent of the remote controlled boat may even put paid to any drifter development.
I, for one, am not sure if I am in favour of remote boats, it may just be me getting older and, therefore, less responsive to new ideas and gadgets.
As some old timers could not accept the hair rig when it first came out, maybe we all have our own point at which progress (?) becomes unacceptable and remote boats maybe my watershed.
It's not the cost (£200+) of a boat that worries me, it's more the mechanisation of a basic fishing skill like working a bait on the wind that niggles.
The advantages that skill and intelligence once gave me are nullified by shop bought electronics and an’ Ever Ready’Power Pack.
The advantages of being able to run baits out to any spot within range of your radio signal are obvious even to an objector and to sit on a reservoir bank as electro-man catches pike on free-lined herrings at 200 yards, whilst my weapon hangs limp in the still air waiting for a stiff breeze has been frustrating.
It's the age old battle of traditional skills versus modern technology.
History shows that the traditionalist in clinging to his past is doomed to extinction, so’ Goodbye cruel world’and could you tell me the way to the nearest model shop.
River Craft and Fish Location
The use of the latest tackle and’ in bai’is no substitute for River Craft and Fish Location, an art that anglers often neglect.
Rivers in Britain vary enormously.
At one extreme the mighty Severn powers its way to the Bristol Channel, while at the other a Yorkshire brook gurgles across moorland.
Every type has a unique charm and each also poses a unique challenge to the angler.
The character of any river is derived from the velocity and volume of the current and the bed rock over which it flows.
Through winter, spring, summer and fall the mood will change from swollen aggressor tearing at the banks to placid waters rustling the rushes and swaying the weed.
Such dynamism means perpetual change and the two processes of bank erosion and sediment deposition are unceasing.
No one fishery will ever be exactly as it was the previous year.
Within each river there are an enormous variety of habitats and this causes fish populations to assume highly localised distributions.
Part of the art of angling is to look at a stretch of water, to analyse the clues of current, depth and cover and to decide, for example, where the roach are likely to lie or where the barbel may be shoaled up.
It is often necessary to look at the water's surface and try to visualise exactly what is happening beneath it — to imagine the fish in their own world and how best it might be to get a bait to them.
And then, once hooked, how to get them out!
Most anglers adopt the following decision sequence when after a particular fish: river, fishery, swim and then precise area of swim.
Quite often a decision has to be made whether to go for quantity or quality.
For example, if you wanted to’ bag up’with barbel a trip to the Severn may be in order, but if you wanted a ten pounder then it's worth driving to one of the hot southern rivers like the Hampshire Avon, Bristol Avon or Kennet.
Sources of information on fish populations abound.
The angling press, tackle dealers and the grapevine all contribute and nowadays it is relatively easy to discover a water with a decent head of quality fish.
Care must be taken because fisheries can vary enormously within a single river.
To take the barbel in the Hampshire Avon as an example, some Middle Avon fisheries contain a small population of big fish and others like the Severals have quite a number to go for.
The harder waters need at least a week of continuous fishing to stand any reasonable chance of success whereas one trip to the Severals is more likely to produce the goods.
Use of information varies.
At one extreme you may wish to ignore all advice and to pioneer your own stretch of water, while at the other you could simply follow a successful fisherman, wait for him to leave his swim and then cast a bait exactly where he did.
Personally, I much prefer the former approach but having said that won't pretend for one minute that I haven't received one hell of a lot of advice from people in the past.
Locating barbel provides a good example of the process of water craft.
When looking for a stretch that may contain them I'm after variety in depth and flow, lots of lovely gravel and plenty of watercrowfoot for shelter.
For winter barbelling potential then it's the deep slacks and eddies that interest me.
Maps are very useful for this initial research and the Ordnance Survey Pathfinder series are excellent.
These have a scale of 1:25000 and have just enough detail to the major river features like sharp bends, shallows and islands.
Such educated guesswork can be eliminated if you can actually see the fish in the first place.
Where waters are quite clear it is worth spending as much time as possible gazing from bridges, the banks or trees.
A small set of binoculars are useful for this work and polarising sunglasses are an absolute must.
The low waters of this summer have provided us with a superb opportunity for fish spotting and also for mapping the contours of the river bed.
Mapping seems to be rather neglected by many people but I reckon that it is vital if you are to get to know a water like the back of your hand.
Cameras and notebooks eliminate the need for a Mastermind memory and confer the vital ingredient of confidence which is so necessary for a concerted attempt at big fish.
Modern compact cameras are ideal for this work because if you are scouting out miles of water the last thing you want is ten tons of equipment dangling round your neck.
Features to include on a map are depth, type of bottom, current, shelter and weed beds.
If the water is very low when you are constructing your map it is worth trying to imagine what the water will be like during a winter flood.
A dry cattle drink in June may be a superb barbel lie in a January flood!
Use your camera.
The old saying’ a picture is worth a thousand words’is very true when it comes to mapping a water.
Careful plumbing will reveal depth and type of bottom.
Analysing the current is more difficult because what you see on the surface may be very different from what is happening near the river bed.
This was brought home to me many years ago when I dived into the River Kennet with an aqualung.
I managed to get into a weir pool where the surface current was vicious but to my amazement found that the water under the surface was almost totally still!
The river bottom will also provide clues about the current.
A sandy or silty bottom indicates slow currents whereas stones and gravel suggest that the current over the bed is quite strong.
To find out what sort of bottom exists in a swim just stick on a heavy leger and drag it back towards you.
Jagged irregular vibrations up the line suggest gravel and stones, small regular vibes mean fine gravel or sand.
A soggy unyielding pull indicates weed.
Lastly it is worth noting any usual features like sunken logs, projecting tree roots and big boulders.
You ‘Il be very glad you did this if you turn up one day to find the river high and murky because if, for example, you know that one swim has a lovely clean gravel bottom and another has half a Morris 1000 and a blackberry bush in it then this may help you decide where to fish and where to stick your mate!
The very last thing I note is which direction a swim faces and for this I carry a small compass.
The benefit of this will be apparent when a force ten westerly has sent your brolly to Holland and is pummelling you in the face.
If you had known that that particular swim faced due west you may well have chosen another.
Having selected your water and turned up for a day's fishing you then have to decide where the fish will be on the day in question.
For barbell take a note of the light, the colour of the water, the speed of current and the temperature.
During daylight most barbel will be sheltering and so I also look for cover in the form of weed beds, deep hollows and undercut banks.
An excellent strategy if you are on an unfamiliar water is to rove about and fish every single swim for ten minutes or so.
Another good idea on waters you know is to spend ten minutes in a swim you have never fished before — I always try and do this and every now and again a post which I have never even considered before has produced the goods.
One Middle Avon swim produced five barbel in consecutive casts!
It is worth mentioning here the new breed of thermometers available to fishermen.
Modern digital types have a sensor on about ten feet of cable.
These are superb and can be left in the river while you fish and also are very much more safe.
Gone are the days when you had to slide down a muddy bank and hold an old mercury one at arms length.
Some have a maximum/minimum facility too which is useful when you are trying to decide whether the temperature is on the rise or fall.
I am certain that it is worth concentrating on a fishery for several seasons.
Then you will be prepared for any conditions that you may encounter and you will brim with confidence.
The best example I can give is one stretch on the Hampshire Avon.
The first season I fished it I caught a solitary barbel, during the second I caught about a dozen and in the third well over fifty.
’ What you achieve and how you achieve it are of equal importance,’so said Gary Player, I think, and never was a saying so relevant to the capture of big fish.
If you locate your own specimens it is worth so very much more than catching one with a name.
There are still plenty of waters with relatively few people on them and some of them contain some eye opening fish.
Memories
When Happiness was a cane rod and a shilling's worth of bait
Looking back to the last war, I can clearly remember arriving at Abbeydale Council School in Sheffield to find it badly damaged by a bomb, having to transfer temporarily to Lowfields and Ann's Road Schools and then to’ home service’, which was simply a teacher in charge of a dozen or so kids in somebody's front room.
There were no A-levels or 0-levels and although I once got a hearty handshake for my English book from a kindly Mr. Pickering at Abbeydale School, I seemed to get the cane for almost everything else.
But mostly I remember the fishing and if it hadn't been for having to carry a gas mask, go without sweets and put up with loud bangs in the middle of the night, I would hardly have known a war was going on.
Actually, the only war I was involved in was on the tramcars on the way to the old Victoria Railway Station in Sheffield.
The conductor would send me round to the front with my fishing box, the driver would send me back to the conductor's end and so it went on.
Sometimes the trams were packed with baskets and home-made seat boxes.
My steelworker Dad (Bill Bartles), Had Blythen and Fred used to take Had's son, David, and myself on the 3.05a.m.’ paper train’to Briggs in Lincolnshire to fish the River Ancholme.
We used to leave home soon after midnight (sometimes in an air raid), fry some black market bacon bits at John Wraggs, the provision merchants, where Harry and Fred worked, then bag a seat on the train.
Sadly, it wasn't the war or the Germans that killed Harry Blythen.
He was struck by lightning while catching roach on the Chesterfield Canal between Retford and Clarborough in Nottinghamshire.
Sometimes we used to go by train to Retford, Torksey or Saxilby.
Often, at Darnall on the outskirts of Sheffield, a fishing character used to get on the train and eat maggots for bets.
You bet him sixpence he could not eat a maggot and he promptly swallowed a live one and grabbed your tanner.
Often when we went to Retford by train, we used to wait for George Hird's bus, if you could call it a bus.
It set off packed from top to bottom with Sheffield area anglers, fishing rods and maggots and dropped you off on the canal at Clayworth where George lived until he died about ten years ago.
Other places we went to by train, coach or bus included Sandiacre, Langley Mill, Trent Lock, Snitterby, Bishop's Bridge, Chapel Hill, Parson's Drove, Welney, Butterley Reservoir, Matlock and Shireoaks.
Often, too, we used to go on the ARP bus, a sort of fishing club for fire fighters in the Heeley Green area of Sheffield, run by local cutler George Sadler.
We were driven by’ Jock’to Stapleford and Bassingham on the Upper Witham and we used to take some tremendous catches of big roach and chub.
Incidentally, the last I heard, that weekly coach to the Upper Witham was still running — under the name of Heeley Angling Club and, even more surprising, I understand that’ Jock’was still driving them up to a few years ago.
No matter which coach you went on in the old days (and the Brightside and Carbrook Co-op ones were the best) there was always a shilling sweep for the biggest fish and another shilling for the best roach.
All the fishing rods in those days were made of cane with a built-cane or green-heart top section.
There were no fixed-spool reels and nylon was not invented.
Hooks were tied onto substitute gut and we used’ Lincoln’brand silk lines which were on 25 yard cards.
Nearly all of the rods, floats and rod rests (idle backs) were home made and I used to attend weekly tackle-making classes in the attic of the Royal Oak Hotel at the bottom of Cemetery Road in Sheffield.
The man in charge of this Sheffield Amalgamated Society junior get-together was called Tom Johnson (not to be confused with the old Sheffield United footballer of the same name).
With food being in short supply, it was illegal to throw bread into rivers.
Even maggots were rationed by the dealers.
To get round the maggot queues, which often formed at Billy Clarke's and John Arthur Broadhead's on Button Lane, Ernest Jowitt's on Fitzwilliam Street and Maurice Jackson's on Asline Road, I used to take my empty Ostermilk tin to the Hide and Skin Company in Sheffield's Pond Hill.
They used to fill it with a mixture of skin, feathers and maggots for a shilling.
Often now when I set off in a fairly posh car and switch on the radio and heater, I think back to those wartime battles to get my little fishing box onto the crowded trams and my long walks from Brigg railway station to catch bream at Cadney Bridge.
I also wonder, seeing that I am not too old in the tooth, how many other wartime fishing kids are still around and as fishing daft as ever.
I can't help wondering, too, if that weekly maggot-eater from Darnall is still living.
Or if he isn't — what did he die of?
Dace
Dace are a perfect fish for the pleasure angler.
Small and gregarious, they shoal in summer in oxygenated shallows rising for insects on the surface.
Find a nice trotting swim on the Dee, Severn, Ribble, or your own river, gradually build the swim up with maggots or casters and, if they're in the mood, the dace will surely respond.
It's relaxing and rewarding when you get ir right, not because dace are big or particularly strong, but for the sheer number you can catch.
Twenty and thirty-pound nets are not uncommon and long ago I lost count of the double-figure nets I've had from the rivers named above and others such as the Vyrnwy and Banwy, two small rivers which feed the upper Severn.
On many rivers dace frequent the type of swim preferred by chub.
In fact, you may catch small chub among your dace, mistaking a 10 oz chub for a specimen dace, in the heat of the moment.
The difference between the two species though is plain.
Dace are a delicate fish.
Its anal fin — the one below the body nearest the tail — is concave, whereas on a chub the same fin is convex.
The colouring is slightly different too.
On a dace they are tinted a faint orange; on chub a deeper orange.
The final proof, or perhaps the first, is the chub's big mouth and thick white rubbery lips.
Even on small chub this feature is obvious, so before you ring the angling press with reports of specimen dace, check.
It could be embarrassing otherwise.
Fishing the smaller rivers and streams gives you the chance to actually watch the fish.
You can see the way all fish behave cautiously, flitting from the cover of one rock or depression to the next and note their holding places.
There's no substitute for this sort of knowledge, gradually accumulated, and when rain has added some depth to your stream you can return to fish in confidence.
This style of fishing requires a lightweight approach.
An eleven foot rod may be too long in many instances and these are not the venues to lumber along loaded to the gunnels with tackle and bait.
If you find a swim where you can trot down you could end up with a good bag of dace as large, individually, as those you may catch from the main river.
For a totally different experience, try legering with a redworm with the minimum of weight on the line.
Dock-grubs — leather jackets I think they're sometimes called — are another fine natural bait.
You find these in the stems of reeds and rushes, their presence usually denoted by a crack in the stem enveloped by a soap-looking bubble.
These sort of venues, naturally, often produce great fishing during periods when the main river is carrying too much water.
Unfortunately, as more and more of our little rivers and streams are converted into drains our fishing opportunities dwindle.
But there are still some available if you're prepared to scout round.
On the rivers, the fishing seems to go in cycles.
Patchy seasons are often followed by bumpers.
During summer and autumn dace are often located in shallower runs between streamers.
If you're casting more than a couple of rod-lengths it's advisable to use a waggler if only to avoid tangles.
How you avoid minnows is another matter and then there is last year's fry.
When you're fishing, all you can do is ignore them.
Sometimes they will murder your bait or play football with the base of your float, but persevere nevertheless.
Once a shoal of respectable dace are attracted in by your feeding, the sprats and minnows will be shouldered out.
There have been many occasions on the Dee when I've used a waggler, not for distance, but to get a bait to move through slow water made worse by abstraction.
On these occasions the river hardly moved and a stick float virtually stands still, especially when an upstream wind combines with the low, slow water.
A waggler enables you to sink the line which, bringing more pressure to bear, is usually enough to coax the float to move through the swim.
In such conditions you can fish the river as if it were a canal, with very little weight either spread equally down the line, or grouped just below half way with a dropper about twelve inches above the hook.
When the river is running at its normal height, suitable trotting swims abound.
What you're looking for is about six feet of water, four or five yards off the end of your rod.
All the swims that have given me good dace fishing seemed to have shared similar features, the main one being their tendency to become shallower towards the tail.
This is not coincidence.
Over twenty years that same feature has become apparent to me, so that I can say confidently that one feature of a perfect trotting swim is that it will shallow up gradually downstream.
Another feature shared by many is how they have been located on the outside of bends.
This means that if you drop your tackle in off the end of your rod the current tends to carry your float away from your bank.
And another, less common, but shared by enough to mean something, has been the feature of a crease.
This means you can actually see a’ crease’on the surface where two currents of different strengths converge.
This is a definite phenomenon which you can prove to yourself easily when you think you've found one.
All you need do is this: Send your float down inside the line of the crease until you have an idea of its speed fixed in your mind.
Then cast a little further out, over the line of the crease, and watch for the difference in speed as the float travels downstream.
Of course we don't carry sub-aqua gear to check out these features before fishing: we can only discover them through practice.
These features are worth remembering if you are currently exploring a new stretch of river.
The most important thing, of course, is the fact that these features change.
Silt and sand shifts, altering the contours of a riverbed.
Banks crumble; trees fall in.
All this is natural transformation, but it usually takes seasons before the consequences of these changes become apparent.
The point, however, is not to lament over the once great dace swims which have changed for the worse, but to think in the opposite way — that some of the swims you tried three or four seasons ago without any success may now have turned into ones where dace congregate.
Two points are worth remembering from all this: perfect swims don't last forever and for every one that declines another will have been changed by the same forces into an excellent one.
It's clear now why these swims, which become shallower downstream, are usually productive.
When you're trotting you tend to loose-feed.
Your maggots or casters are moved along the bottom by the current until, meeting the gradual rise of the riverbed, they stop.
What's more they stop and form an attractive carpet of feed well in range.
Once you begin fishing, keep loose feeding.
It is easy to become disheartened if the dace fail to respond after an hour or so, but stick at it, keeping the feed going in on the same line.
While you are fishing, keep an eye on what's happening near you on the river.
Look for fish rising, try trotting down different lines (but keep loose feeding your same one), don't make any drastic changes until you've made a few bites.
If a swim stubbornly remains dead, take a walk along the bank to see how any other anglers are faring.
Very often you will learn more in an hour sitting behind an angler who is catching than you ever will flogging a dead swim.
The very least you will gain from this is the location of a productive swim.
You may discover that you've chosen to fish a line too close in or too far out.
More than likely you will notice you're as competent as the angler you're watching and return with restored confidence to your swim, which, in the meantime rested, suddenly bursts alive and the dace start feeding so well you're hooking one a chuck.
The advantage of using a stick-float, or any float, for that matter, attached top and bottom, is the control it gives you over your tackle.
Trotting is very pleasant, but it's not an easy option.
It takes concentration and a sort of pride, which makes you want to put the float as neatly as possible through your swim each time.
You keep the line dressed and straight behind the float and a certain tension at the point where the float tip protrudes from the surface so that the slightest movement of your wrist just lifts the float fractionally without interfering with its progress downstream and you watch it lift slightly and settle and feel in your bones — if you've executed the hold-back right — that it will surely sink to a fish before travelling another inch.
The amazing thing is that's usually what happens.
But you have to make the effort to control your tackle through your swim.
Once you have dace feeding, you usually find that bites come from mainly a short section of the swim.
So your actual fishing procedure goes something like this: An underarm or side cast lays out the end tackle neatly at an angle downstream.
Baited hook sinks, stick-float rises, settles down as it travels while you dress the line.
As your float approaches the section where you've been getting most bites, you dress the line again, following the downstream progress of your float with the tip of your rod.
As the float enters this section — call it the killing area if you like — you raise the tip of your rod slightly.
The trick is to keep the line direct to the float, without disturbing the float more than to give it a slight lift.
Now, if you hold this action through the killing area, which is probably no more than two yards long, the baited hook is raised fractionally off the bottom of the river and is, presumably, preceding the slightly held-back tackle downstream.
Presented to them like this, dace can do hardly anything else but accept your bait.
This is the point of control and the time you have to spend perfecting it.
This sort of presentation will always catch fish.
A final point.
Dace are small fish, but they are not overly shy of tackle.
When you get them going they will readily take double caster or three bronze maggots offered on a size 14.
A single caster with a size 16 buried inside seems balanced to me and if, while legering for them, you find yourself missing too many bites, consider the size of your hook before altering anything else.
It's easy to fall into the habit of small hooks.
After sessions using 20s on canals size 16s look huge, but they're not really.
If you're fishing an 18 on the river and missing bites don't swop to one smaller; you'll only end up pulling that one out of the fishes' mouths too.
The time to change to a smaller hook is when a lack of bites suggests you ought to try a smaller bait.
But on the river, when you're getting a bite a chuck, especially on the lead and missing most of them, I'll guarantee the hook size you're using is too small to find a purchase in the fishes' mouths.
Swop to a size 16, or even a size 14 if necessary, and you will soon be hitting the bites and slipping some nice dace into your nets too.