

Part Two
Chapter 7
Clare had led Carolyn along endless humming corridors, whose walls were punctuated by closed doors.
Fluorescent lights shone down on dull red rubbery floors, making a pinkish reflection on the walls, and at intervals the passages were interrupted by  semitransparent plastic flapping doors, like valves in a vein.
At last they emerged into a wide entrance hall, where a porter was loading a trolley, and two receptionists sat like bottled specimens in glass cages by the wall.
On the opposite side, daylight shone through glass doors.
Clare, who was carrying Carolyn's suitcase, leaned against a door to hold it open for her.
Carolyn rushed out, almost falling down a flight of stone steps.
The sharpness of the cold made her cough and brought tears to her eyes.
It took a long time to focus and get rid of the swimming water.
The light.
It was so bright and sharp.
It was spiky as spilt pins.
And the cold air — like getting a different substance into your lungs, water or another element.
She could feel it, thick and cold in her chest, like something she'd swallowed; as if before she hadn't been breathing air at all.
The atmosphere was still and very quiet.
Sounds from specific distances moved across the silence, footsteps in the gravel, voices, traffic.
But the clog of sound she had never noticed in hospital was removed, as if a plug of cotton wool had been taken out; that constant humming buzz of the working building like a machine or a living body around her.
Now she was outside.
Clare was staring at her.
She propelled her to a low wall and sat her down beside her suitcase.
‘I'm going to get a taxi.
You don't look fit to walk.
Wait here.
OK?
Just sit here till I come back.’
Crunch crunch Clare walked quickly over the gravel.
Carolyn  stirred it with her foot.
She could feel the separate movements of hundreds of small pointed stones through the sole of her shoe.
Now the patch she had stirred was darker grey.
The gravel was damp underneath.
Beneath her bottom the brick wall was hard and penetratingly cold, with a sharp edge that cut into her thighs.
On the other side of the path stood a sapling.
It was bare, its straight grey branches raised like arms to the cloudy heavens.
It was as simple as a naked body.
Above the tree, about a quarter of the way up the sky, the sun was an opaque light behind layers of grey cloud, eye-wateringly white.
She stood up carefully, feeling the cold air move across her exposed face and hands, and turned around.
Behind her, beyond a patch of raw dug earth, was a car park full of brilliantly coloured cars, red yellow and blue.
Their shapes seemed as dear and familiar as friends' faces, she wanted to pat their cold metal bonnets.
Then Clare took her by the elbow and led her along the path which suddenly went through a gate and stopped.
There was a lot of noise.
The road.
Clare helped her into a black car that stood by the kerb with its door open.
Meg returned to the hospital early next morning.
It had been Arthur's brainwave in the night; they must know Clare's second name, and address.
Meg went up to the familiar ward hoping against hope to find Carolyn back in her bed again.
She walked past the nurses' cubicle unchecked.
There didn't seem to be anyone around.
It wasn't visiting time.
She walked in and around the corner, and her heart leapt to see someone in Carolyn's bed.
But it wasn't her, she realized, as she stepped nearer and faltered.
It was a little grey-haired old lady, propped up on cushions and staring intently at something Meg couldn't see.
Meg hesitated and turned round, searching for a nurse.
She spotted one just going into the cubicle.
‘It isn't visiting time, you know,’ she told Meg as Meg knocked on the open door.
‘No, I'm sorry, I just wanted to see a nurse.
I'm Mrs Tanner, Carolyn's mother.’
‘Oh yes Mrs Tanner.
How is she?
Getting along all right now?’
‘I — I don't know.
I need — she went-another girl took her home.
Called Clare.
She was in the bed next to her.
Can you tell me, what's her address?
I don't know where she's taken Carolyn.’
The nurse made a funny sucking noise with her lips and stared at Meg.
‘Um, I don't think I can, really.
I mean, a patient's address is confidential.’
‘But—’ Meg was speechless.
The nurse continued to stare disapprovingly.
‘But my daughter's gone.
I don't know where she is.
She could have been kidnapped for all I know.
She didn't even tell me herself — just left a note-anything could've happened to her.’
‘I'm sorry Mrs Tanner.
I don't know what to do.
We're not supposed to give patients’ addresses.
It's confidential — I mean, you wouldn't like it if we gave out your address would you?’
‘But it's my daughter-!’
‘Yes, I know.
Look, let me ask Sister.
Can you wait here?
No, sorry, you'd better wait outside.’
She took Meg out into the ward, and to Meg's humiliation locked the little cubicle before disappearing.
The bossy sister confirmed that it wasn't possible to give an address.
Meg realized she'd been a complete fool.
She could have said it differently.
If she'd said Carolyn had borrowed a book from Clare and wanted to return it, they'd have given her the address.
It was only because they saw how much she wanted it that they weren't telling her.
It had been the hope which had kept her going through the dawn and early morning.
Falling heavily into the one chair in the cubicle she began to cry hopelessly.
The sister watched her for a while, then sent the nurse on an errand.
‘Mrs Tanner — Mrs Tanner, please-’ Sister crouched beside her.
‘We really can't give you her address.
But I'll tell you what I could do, if you like.’
Meg paused in her sobbing.
‘If you wanted to write a letter to your daughter and give it to me, I could address it to Miss — to Clare for you.
How would that be?’
Meg nodded.
She couldn't stop crying now to save her life.
It had been like this last night.
She thought she'd cried herself out.
It was the sense of dread, the awful dropping away with fear of  her stomach, that was worst.
It had happened, something terrible.
After all her vigilance, all her care, still, it had happened.
‘I was always meant to lose her,’ she had sobbed to Arthur, who tried to comfort her with cups of tea and brief, common-sense reassurances.
The chink in the sister's armour now made her cry the more.
Half an hour later the sister had her organized at a table in the day room, with writing paper and pen and a cup of sugary tea.
Meg sat over her letter for nearly an hour, crossing out line after line, and neatly copying her final version like a schoolchild.
The sister wasn't in her office when she went back, so she left it in the middle of the desk: ‘Miss Carolyn Tanner, care of Clare’.
I won't hear from her until the day after tomorrow, she told herself.
Even if she is all right.
She doubted her own ability to survive that long.
The house was an awful place, Carolyn thought.
It was huge and bare and dirty, and smelt of damp plaster and old food.
They all stood around staring at her and smiling awkwardly, as if she was embarrassing.
She asked Clare if she could go to her room.
It was at the top of the house, and very big.
At first she thought it was like a watch-tower, because the roof sloped down to the tops of the two windows, making them the most important things.
If she looked down she could see the wilderness that was this house's garden.
There was a high brick wall around it.
It backed on to a big grey building like an overgrown garden shed, with no windows.
A factory, she supposed.
To the right was a road which she couldn't see because of the height of the wall, but she could see the tops of buses and lorries, travelling along it.
Over the road were roofs — endless rows of  them:Above them, like low cloud, she could see far away, an outline of hills.
She could see for miles.
In the room each bit of furniture seemed to be too far away from the others, as if they had been dropped there as markers, but the space was eroding them.
The bed, tucked in under the corner where the roof sloped down, looked small and safe.
But there was a huge old-fashioned wardrobe marooned against the back wall, and an old armchair with square arms and greyish padding showing through the brown cloth, in the exact middle of the floor.
That was all, except for a little box by the bed covered with a beautiful silky blue and green scarf with long black fringes.
Carolyn sat on the bed, which she noticed was low and very soft, and fingered the silk.
The room made her think of the children's game where the floor is the sea and full of sharks, and you are only safe on the furniture.
In her Mum and Dad's house you were so safe there wasn't much point in playing — there were so many bits of furniture crammed into the room.
Here the game would be terrifying.
The carpet itself, old and threadbare with strange geometric patterns on it (like the flying carpet in one of her childhood story books) floated like an uneven raft on the knobbly floorboards, which it was too small to cover.
The rough boards and window-frames were painted dark blue, and the long walls were clean and white and empty.
It took away her breath, a little.
But the windows were the main thing.
She sat in the armchair and looked out of the window.
She didn't know what.
But it was all right sitting here.
She wanted to sit here, and stare at this view, which was much better than hospital.
She was pleased not to have to do anything.
She didn't have anything to do.
At home — her mother would
She concentrated on the clouds, which moved quickly and smoothly as a train across the top of the hills.
She wanted to sit here all day.
She didn't want Clare or those others to come in.
She wanted to be left alone.
As it got dark in the evening she became scared.
There was something by the shady side of the wardrobe that made a noise.
As darkness intensified it seemed to grow.
It leaned forward to try to reach her.
She had to stay on the chair, to be safe.
If she sat very very still, it would forget she was there, and recede.
But if she got pins and needles and had to move, it woke with a jump and crept forwards again.
There were other things in the room too.
Something under the bed moved softly, rustling like a woman walking past in long skirts — or a soft breeze in high trees.
It wasn't unfriendly.
But it was better not to anger it by sleeping on the bed.
And a more frantic presence was trapped behind the skirting board.
Suddenly in the silence of the small hours its patience would break and she listened rigidly to its scrabbling attempts to break out.
It had claws like an eagle talons; she could hear them shredding and splintering the wood.
The only defence was to sit very still, to be invisible; to fade right into the shadow between the arms of the big square armchair.
As the dawn came she was weak with exhaustion and relief, watching and willing the first barely perceptible lightening of the sky.
But then a different kind of terror came in daytime, starting on the second day.
It was worse.
She could not glare at it or protect herself by clutching at the chair's arms.
She could not hold in a corner of her mind the rational knowledge that this was purely childish.
It was a terror that started in herself, instead of attacking from outside.
It was as if , somehow, she became a telescope.
At first she was closed, then gradually she was pulled open, extended to a great length, leaving an awful hollow giddy sensation in her stomach.
Once extended her own eye was pressed to the lens of the telescope that was herself (was it her own eye's lens she was looking through the wrong way?) and she saw herself at the other end.
But not only did she see herself, small, sitting there; she also saw through herself (because the telescope, with its hollow inside, was her) and she saw that she was hollow.
She was terrified by her own existence.
In a way she saw quite objectively, a person sitting on a chair, afraid of shadows — someone who was probably mental.
‘Get on, get up!
Stop moping!
Get on with something!’ cried the Meg in her.
But it was equally obvious, to the impartial eye at the lens, that there was nothing else to do.
What shall I do?
Here I am, replied the person she could see in the chair.
There she was.
What was she to do?
She was scared.
When it happened, when she was pulled out like this, she felt sick, giddy and unbalanced.
She might even fall into the telescope lens and go crashing down upon herself.
What would happen then?
She tried to think of things to do.
She didn't know what.
She didn't want to meet any of those people.
Wait till they're out.
Go and make a cup of tea.
Look in the paper for a job.
Wash some knickers.
But it didn't seem as if doing any of these things would help.
Clare thought Caro didn't look fit to come out of hospital.
She was pale and unsteady, and moved maddeningly slowly.
Clare got her back to the house, and introduced her to Bryony, Sue, and the kids.
They made her a cup of coffee.
‘Sit down, make yourself at home.’
But Caro stood by the table and didn't move.
She seemed terrified.
‘How do you feel?
It's good to get out, isn't it?’
‘Yes-’ Carolyn's frozen face became animated.
‘It all looks so brilliant-so — like everything's deadened, in there.
Muffled.
It's really — I really-’
‘Yup,’ said Clare.
‘Brave new world.
It's funny how quickly you forget what it's like out here.’
Carolyn nodded but she seemed to have lost interest already.
‘How d'you feel?’
‘OK,’ she said quickly.
‘Do you-’)) They both stopped.
‘Can I-’)
Clare smiled.
‘Go on.’
‘Can I see my room please?’
‘Yes-yes, OK.
Now?’
‘Yes, please.’
Clare got up and went to the door.
She noticed that Caro's coffee was untouched.
‘Don't you want that?
It'll warm you up.’
Carolyn picked it up unsteadily, slopping a pool of coffee across the table.
‘Oh, sorry,’ she said, and put the mug down.
Clare waited, but Carolyn did not pick it up again.
She seemed pleased with the room.
As Clare went out Carolyn quickly and unexpectedly closed the door behind her and said’ Thankyou ,’ as if she'd been shown her hotel room by a maid.
And there she stayed.
When they asked her down for meals she didn't come.
Clare took snacks up to her — poached eggs, milky drinks — thinking she was probably exhausted by the change, and needed a couple of days in bed to recover.
She looked shocking: absolutely white, with huge purple bags under her eyes.
She said nothing, and replied to questions monosyllabically or not at all.
It was impossible to find any pretext for remaining in her company.
She very obviously wanted to be left alone.
But after a few days Clare began to worry.
Carolyn looked no better.
Sue (who was at home most of the day) confirmed her suspicion that Carolyn never came out of her room.
She was hardly eating anything.
Bryony attacked on the third night.
‘What are you going to do about her?’
‘Caro?’
‘This is a communal house.
It's ridiculous, we can't have someone like that here.
No wonder you didn't bother to ask us, you know what we'd have said.
We have to live with her as well as you.
She's hopeless — she doesn't do anything.
She doesn't speak to anyone.
She can't take a share in child-care.
She's a nervous wreck.
Didn't you ask her anything before she came?
Didn't you tell her it was a shared house?’
Bryony, on occasions like this, was always self-righteous: the problem and answers were obvious, why hadn't she been consulted?
‘For God's sake, the girl's ill.
She's just come out of hospital.’
‘Well it's deeply wonderful of you to offer this as a convalescent home — but you've got no right to do it without consulting me and Sue.
You're not the only person who lives here.
Have you considered the kids?
Has it occurred to you that she might disturb or upset them?
She doesn't even bring her dirty cups down.
Does she think it's a hotel?
Why doesn't she go home to her Mum?’
Clare did think it odd that Carolyn's Mum hadn't been.
Ironic that that was originally the reason she'd hesitated to invite Carolyn: fear of her Mum hovering round the house all the time.
She went up and knocked on Caro's door.
There was no reply.
She looked at her watch, it was nearly ten o'clock.
Would she be asleep already?
Clare opened the door quietly and looked in.
Carolyn was sitting in the dark looking out the window.
‘Shall I put the light on?’
She didn't reply.
Clare switched it on.
The room looked uninhabited.
‘You all right?’
Carolyn nodded.
‘Why don't you unpack?
D'you want some help?’
Carolyn shook her head.
‘Caro, does your Mum know where you are?’
‘No.’
Despite herself, Clare was shocked.
‘Where does she think you are?’
‘I told her I was coming here.
But I didn't know the address.’
Instinctively, Clare glanced out of the window.
It was amazing they hadn't been invaded by detectives and policemen already.
Carolyn's Mum wouldn't leave a stone unturned.
‘Look, shall I tell her?
Shall I ring her up for you?’
‘No.’
The voice was the same tight voice that had told Clare the hospital ceiling was coming down.
‘Can I — why don't-’ Clare stopped.
‘She'll be terribly worried — frantic.’
Carolyn continued to stare rigidly through the window.
‘I think we should tell your Mum where you are,’ said Clare firmly.
‘No.’
‘Why not?’
‘She'll come and get me.’
Clare thought this was probably true.
She also quite hoped it would happen.
She had thought Carolyn needed a space in which to pull herself together, not to crack up.
Jesus Christ, she told herself angrily, the hospital's discharged her.
There can't be that much wrong with her.
‘Look, Caro, if you want to stay here, you've got to make a bit of an effort to fit in.
The others aren't very happy about you.’
‘Why?
What have I done?’
For the first time, Carolyn looked away from the window and at Clare, an expression of anxiety on her white face.
‘Nothing.
It's just-well, it's a shared house, we all do things like cooking and cleaning, you know — and usually we eat together.
They just think it's a bit odd because you hide in your room all the time.’
She hesitated.
‘I mean, there's no need for you to bother with cooking or anything, yet.
But I don't think it's doing you any good, sitting up here on your own.
I just think you'll get depressed.
I think you should come down for meals.’
There was a silence.
‘OK,’ said Carolyn.
Clare waited to see if she would say anything else.
She felt clumsy and awkward; but irritated too.
Carolyn was ignoring her like a sulky child.
She's so young, that's the trouble, Clare told herself.
Basically, this is a teenage crisis.
Well, I'm not her mother.
Carolyn came down to tea next day.
She grimaced a smile at each of them, and nodded hurriedly at any remark directed at her.
She radiated tension and embarrassment, so that after the meal Clare  went immediately to watch TV in the sitting room, Sue took the children to bed and Bryony went out to a meeting.
Carolyn cleared the table, washed up, dried up, took everything out of the cutlery drawer and cleaned and tidied it, cleaned the cooker and swept the floor.
She was about to start washing the floor at five to ten when Clare went back into the kitchen to get her cigarettes.
‘What on earth are you doing?’
‘Just cleaning up.’
‘Well look — that's splendid — there's no need to go mad.
Stop, for heaven's sake.
D'you fancy a quick drink?’
Carolyn shook her head and continued to squeeze and soak the dried, shrivelled mop.
‘Caro, when I said about helping — I didn't mean-’ Carolyn ignored her.
Clare shrugged and left the kitchen.
She felt very angry.
She had tried to help Carolyn, and now the bloody girl was acting as if Clare was a bossy teacher.
Damn her.
Next day, a white-faced Carolyn with horrible silent determination dusted and vacuumed the landings, stairs and hallway, washed down the woodwork in the kitchen, and cleaned out the fridge and food cupboards.
Bryony and Sue were appalled.
‘Can't you stop her?’
Sue asked Clare when she got home.
‘She'll have to go.
It's impossible to live in the house.’
‘D'you want me to tell her to go?’ asked Bryony.
‘Why don't we phone her Mum?’
Reluctantly, after supper, Clare mounted the extra six stairs to Carolyn's room.
She knocked and there was no reply.
So she opened the door cautiously.
It was dark.
She made out the shape of Caro squatting in the armchair, rigidly still.
‘Caro?’
The figure didn't move.
‘You all right?’
Carolyn appeared to be staring at something horrible in the corner.
‘What is it?’
Clare stepped into the room, and some of Carolyn's terror communicated itself to her.
Quickly she stepped back and switched on the light.
She couldn't see anything in the corner.
Carolyn shifted abruptly on her seat, turning her head away.
‘What is it?
What did you see?’
Clare ran round the chair to face her.
Carolyn lifted her head sightlessly, tears and snot streaming down her face.
Much later that night, Clare lay in her bed staring at the ceiling.
They should never have let Carolyn out of hospital like that.
She was settled for the night; Clare had put her to bed and given her a mug of warm milk and two sleeping tablets.
But tomorrow?
She wasn't in a fit state to be on her own.
Before she finally fell asleep, Clare decided to contact the mother.
It wasn't fair not to.
They couldn't handle a nervous breakdown.
After she had swallowed the sleeping tablets, Carolyn slept for fourteen hours.
Her sleep was black and absolute, as if she had been dropped into a bottomless pit.
Waking meant rising, as a diver surfaces from deep water, to a lightening of colours, navy blue, aqua blue, turquoise, pale blue, clear light-day light! with a shocked gasp at the change.
It was the first time she had escaped consciousness properly for days.
She lay relaxed and dizzy on the bed, with the lingering sense of floating on top of the depths she had plumbed in her sleep.
Her white room was full of light.
Through the open window came a breeze which separated and fluttered the curtains, which in turn made moving watery patterns of light and shadow on the white ceiling.
She felt peaceful.
She remembered…different feelings and flavours.
Memory was a great open channel she could float down.
Had it been blocked before this morning?
Had she forgotten it?
She remembered going to the seaside.
They had gone once with school.
She remembered the coach ride, and having no one to sit next to because Mandy was ill.
They went to a strange place, with no piers or fun-fairs or candy floss.
By the sea the empty beach was wide, and the dunes were dotted with bristly little bushes.
Then the sand dunes flattened out and there were pine trees.
They were quite far apart, it was light but still felt enclosed: you could look up and see the high tops of the pines swaying in a wind that you couldn't feel down on the ground.
The air smelt sweet and sticky, and there were those big wide-open pine cones lying on the sand, with their little woody layers  peeled back like petticoats.
Mr Marshall told them you could forecast the weather with pine cones.
After lunch they all trooped back down to the beach with plastic bags and jars for specimens, and Carolyn lagged behind.
Following the tidy path through the pines, past a picnic site with slaked wooden tables and large litter bins, she was soon out of sight of any other people.
There was the sound of the sea, at a distance, like regular quiet breathing.
There was the secretive rustling of the wind in the tops of the pines.
There were sudden sharp sounds, a fir cone dropping to the ground, a seagull.
Mainly there was silence, in still greenish light, as if she were at the bottom of a pool.
She sat and held her breath, and felt that she could hear the trees growing around her and that she was part of the same quiet measured progress, in a world devoid of people.
Carolyn began to get better.
Although Clare had decided to call in Meg, she didn't; at first because in the morning things weren't so pressing as they had been at night, and then because she was too busy at the Refuge, and then because it really didn't seem fair.
She could see that Caro was trying very hard.
Gradually these impressions, and the passing of time, merged with her observation of Caro's improvement to wipe all thought of Meg from her mind.
Chapter 8
As Carolyn got better, she stopped hearing her other story.
She no longer needed it; didn't have time for it.
The story, once started, continued though, as stories will — quite unknown to Carolyn.
It featured a Carolyn no less real than herself: her double, her living image, separated from her only by a second's timing in a  rainsoaked dash across Leap Lane.
A Carolyn who led another life, with no more than the ghost of a thought that things could have been different.
Carolyn never really understood Alan's reaction to her being pregnant.
Two days after the scene in the pub, he rang her up.
His voice sounded forced and sulky, as if someone was telling him what to say.
‘I'm sorry if I upset you.
Let's get married.’
There was a silence.
She couldn't think of any reply.
‘All right?
Carolyn?
We'll get married at Christmas.
I'll come back again next weekend and we can plan it.’
When she had put the phone down she went and sat in her bedroom.
She was very relieved, so much so that she felt weak.
It would be all right at the weekend.
They would be able to talk and explain.
But she was disappointed.
Alan remained distant and slightly sullen.
He insisted on discussing practical details, as if they were planning a sale of work or an expedition.
At last she lost patience.
‘You don't have to marry me.’
‘I know,’ he said evenly.
‘Well why are you?’
‘Because I want to.’
‘Well why are you being so horrible about it?’
‘I'm not.’
‘You are.
Why are you being so distant and unfriendly?
Anyone  would think someone was standing behind you with a gun.’
‘It is a shot-gun wedding,’ he said and grinned, making it, briefly, all right.
‘No one is.
We don't have to.’
‘Look I'm OK.
I've decided — unless you don't want to?’
She hesitated.
‘I don't want you to do me a favour.’
‘Well I'm not.
Now let it drop.’
Carolyn knew that he was angry with her, for some reason which she couldn't fathom, and that the more she pressed him for an explanation the more he clammed up over it.
She knew that it was to do with her being pregnant, but that it wasn't the simple fact of her pregnancy.
She remembered vividly the sight of him crying in the car that night, and she still didn't understand what that had been about.
But he refused to let her get near the subject.
‘Forget it.
I don't want to discuss it.’
She could see that he would lose his temper if she pressed him any further, and so she left it.
But it made her miserable that they were not open with one another.
Her position in relation to him had slipped.
He was forcing her to be careful of what she said; setting up areas which were not to be talked about.
It made her feel that he wanted her to be grateful to him for marrying her.
But confusingly, he seemed sincere enough in wanting to (almost the more sincere, because of his grimness about it).
His mood wasn't consistent.
Often they were just on the edge of being happy.
She thought it would come right when they were married.
Alan was very unhappy.
He hadn't imagined being married, or having children, for years.
It was like discovering you have a disease; something permanent but liveable-with, like diabetes.
It altered the shape of his life.
He liked Carolyn well enough.
Almost certainly, he was in love with her.
And on the basis of that, he was prepared to marry her, and even wanted to.
The fact that she was pregnant was forcing both their hands in a way which was nearly amusing.
Everyone they knew was so amazed —‘I never thought it would happen to you!’
Grimly, he could have enjoyed the sudden notoriety and muted sympathy.
He could have felt superior and thought them all fools for pitying him for getting what he wanted.
Almost certainly, nearly, quite, he could.
But for Carolyn.
She had betrayed him.
When she knew she was pregnant she did not tell him, she kept it secret.
They had made love, and it had been so utterly different from his other experiences of sex that he thought something wonderful had happened.
He thought it was to do  with passion and love.
And it turned out to be simply because she knew she was pregnant; a mechanical trick she was turning on him.
The revelation had devastated him, eroding his confidence and his desire for her.
It hit at the root of his male pride, but also at the basis of his love for her.
What had attracted Alan to Carolyn initially, and reinforced his interest as he got to know her, was her painful honesty.
At school he had always found it easy to get women.
He was tall and reasonably good-looking, with a slightly sad, very reserved look which could melt into a charming smile, so intimate that it unbalanced almost any girl he cared to direct it at.
He was bright and articulate, the son of a successful doctor and a concert cellist.
His home was a four-bedroomed house standing in its own large garden on the outskirts of the town.
He had the usual run of furtive sexual fumblings and persuaded three of his girlfriends (whom he then held in contempt) to go all the way.
Carolyn, who had been in his English class for years, had always been quite insignificant.
With the thinning of numbers to an A-level class of fifteen, she was brought to his attention.
She had become rather  wispishly beautiful, thin with light hair and quick nervous movements.
He decided she was as clear and pure as water, against the other girls' coarseness.
She also started speaking in class, which she had never done before.
Everyone was amazed when she first did, interrupting the teacher with a series of incoherent stammers which seemed to insist on being articulated, against her will.
She would blush furiously, her pale complexion flooding red so that he actually imagined her blood flowing in a hot tide to the surface of her flesh; a thought he found exciting.
The things she said were always in disagreement, with the teacher or another member of the class, and cost her so much, in terms of physical anguish, that they carried great conviction.
Some people laughed at her, but after a while they began to take her seriously.
She had an odd, idiosyncratic way of looking at things — he felt she had some standards which he wasn't familiar with, against which she matched the things they said.
Often she had to work so hard to overcome her paralysing shyness that what she had to say burst out in a shout, or in a tone of great fierceness.
After a term, she was grudgingly admitted by the flyers in the group to be worth reckoning with — though very odd.
Alan's charming smile fell on stony ground with her.
She was uncompromisingly hostile to him, which piqued and fascinated him.
She was unreceptive to any of the signals he sent out.
She moved away when he sat near her, went into town to change her library books instead of going home when he invented a string of excuses that would enable him to  walk in her direction.
She displayed no interest in any of the social events he said he was going to and wondered if he might see her at.
She was prickly and sharp with him, and only too obviously relieved to make her escape.
He sought her out more pointedly, and was rewarded by, ‘Why are you following me about?’
The charming smile.
He still couldn't quite believe it didn't work with her.
‘Because I like you.’
He watched her blush, and imagined he could actually feel a little glow of heat on his own skin, radiating off her warmth.
‘I-I-I thought you were laughing at me,’ she said.
‘Why?
Why should I laugh at you?’
‘You all do, in English, I know you do.’
‘No we don't.
’ Suddenly he was embarrassed too, and at a loss.
They stared at each other for a moment.
‘Will you go out with me?’ he asked, blushing himself.
‘I-I-I — all right.’
Alan had his own reasons for liking her desperate honesty; reasons that went beyond his contempt for the other girlfriends of his youth.
Trevor and Lucy Blake were slightly unusual parents, although it was years before Alan and his sister Pamela realized this.
They thought it normal for Daddy to get them up and dress and breakfast them, before he went down to morning surgery, and for Lucy once she was up to spend ages talking excitedly and gesticulating on the telephone, before consigning them (with a kiss on the head) to Nissy while she disappeared to the study to practise, and the house was filled with the cello's dismal squeaks and groans, which always recovered eventually, into more or less of a tune.
They thought it was normal for Lucy (they had never called her Mummy) to fly from room to room looking for her watch, keys, diary, gloves, scarf, and blow a kiss to them from the garden path as the taxi-driver carried her cello out to the car, while Nissy held them up to the window to wave.
They thought it normal for tea to come out of the fridge or the oven in a tinfoil box with a peel-back lid, although they did remember for weeks afterwards Lucy's occasional cordon-bleu phases, when the house had been filled with heart-warming smells, and different kinds of food had appeared out of saucepans on top of the oven, and other dishes inside it.
She had a repertoire of all-time favourites, culled from these various phases, which the whole family loved, and knew that no one could make better: coq au vin, boeuf Stroganoff, lasagne with home-made pasta, duck with orange, tandoori chicken.
Alan loved his mother hopelessly.
He loved the way she looked, with her glossy chestnut hair which reached below her waist when she let it loose, and her tinkle of necklaces and trails of silk scarves, and her neat slender legs in their high-heeled shoes, reminding him of gazelles' legs or gazelles reminded him of her, he supposed, since he must have seen her first.
He loved the way she smelt, the atmosphere with which she surrounded you, the way she gestured, the ear-rings that sparkled in the light when she turned her head quickly.
He loved the music that she made on her cello, and the way she sat curved around it, seeming to listen to its inner voice as she played.
He hated the way people were always ringing her up, and she was always saying, ‘How lovely!’ and ‘I'll be there by two, I promise, darling.’
He hated the way she was always, always, on her way out and late.
He hated the way she said to him, ‘Tell me tomorrow darling, I must fly now,’ and the way that when she'd waved Bye-bye and got into the taxi, she immediately opened her bag and took out her mirror and comb, and didn't look at you again, even if the taxi didn't move for ages, because the man was changing the meter or talking into his radio.
He longed to please her.
At school he laboured to make himself better than all the others.
‘You clever boy!’ she would cry, throwing her arms around him, and sending him into a transport of joy.
‘Let's have a look at your book then.’
Quickly she would flick through his exercise books, glancing from page to page as they flew by.
‘Oh, this is very good, Alan.
What a brainbox you are!’
A kiss on the head and she was off, leaving him the more deprived for his brief spell in the full sunny glow of her attention.
She always had so many places to go and so many people who wanted to see her that he felt cruelly his own stolid  boringness , and was not surprised that she did not spend more time with him.
She wanted them to be musicians like her, and both he and Pam were learning instruments, he the violin and Pam the clarinet.
But he wasn't very good, and even to please her (which was his only motive for practising) he could not make himself into a musician.
Pam was better at it.
She seemed to get along quite well.
In the evenings his mother was out, and Dad would read them stories and put them to bed.
Sometimes, amid great excitement, his mother was in, with guests who drank wine and laughed loudly and spoiled him and Pam.
He was ashamed of the way his father sat in his armchair staring at them without joining in the conversation, or even rudely reading as they talked.
Everyone always wanted to talk to Lucy and listen to what she had to say, everyone was always looking at her.
As he grew older his own life began to have more centre to it and he gave up yearning so hungrily after his mother's attention.
He began to find his own satisfactions in doing well at school, in his friends, in his drawings.
Sometimes Lucy would seize on one and cry, ‘But darling, this is marvellous!
I've bred an artist!
This must go up on the wall!’ and stick his latest painting up with Sellotape alongside the daubs by the mentally handicapped group she had played for at Christmas, and the postcards from her friends all over the world.
Despite the fact that she seemed rarely to be in it, the house reflected her taste.
It had a breathless untidiness, with an underlying stratum of solid good things: expensive carpets and curtains in dark plain colours, antique furniture ranging from valuable to junk, but having in common a charm or whimsicality that had made each piece claim her attention originally.
She and Trevor went to auctions together.
It was the only pleasure they seemed to share.
And there were always flowers.
Lucy would laugh and wave her hand when people said, ‘How lovely they are.’
‘Flowers are my weakness!’ she said.
‘I must have flowers, I can't bear it without them.
Flowers are my vice.’
Trevor bought her a huge bunch every Friday, the florist made it up specially for him, and she often bought them herself as well, when something caught her eye: carnations, roses, freesias, lilies, pockets of scented air in the corners of rooms — and flashes of colour, violet iris, scarlet tulip, golden mimosa shining on the dark polished furniture.
Most of her guests brought flowers when they came, knowing how she liked them, and how she loved to arrange them in tall glass vases on the kitchen table while people gathered around her, chatting in a tight excited crowd.
As Alan grew older he noticed that when his mother promised ‘Tomorrow’, she always forgot.
And he caught himself thinking, as she spoke sometimes, ‘She doesn't mean that.’
When he reached sixteen he was ready to condemn her as superficial and a hypocrite.
He judged her the more harshly, and was the more hurt by his judgement, because he still worshipped her.
He would have given anything for her unadulterated attention and approval.
It was Pam, much more worldly-wise than he, who told him about the affair.
‘I feel sorry for Dad,’ she said casually one day, as they sat in the kitchen after school, helping themselves to a packet of chocolate digestives.
‘Why?’ he said crossly, already knowing she was going to say something stupid.
‘The way Lucy carries on.’
‘What d'you mean, carries on?’
‘You know.
’ She was scraping the chocolate off the biscuit with her top teeth, and pretending to be absorbed in it.
‘Stop being so thick!’ he shouted angrily.
‘I'm not thick, you are.’
‘Why?’
‘Because you don't know.’
‘What?’
‘That she's got a boyfriend.’
Alan stared at the  noticeboard on the opposite wall, pretending to read something but seeing nothing but a blur of the leaflets, notes, scraps of ribbon and withered buttonholes which Lucy had pegged up there.
‘Who?’ he said finally.
‘Jeremy.
The double-bass.’
‘How d'you know?’
‘It's obvious, as soon as you start to think about it.
But anyway, I saw them.’
‘When?’
‘You're not cross-questioning an enemy spy, you know,’ she flared, and turned her attention back to her revolting biscuit.
‘Go on.
Tell me.
When?’
‘'Please.’
You are the rudest person I ever met.’
‘Please.
Tell me.’
‘Last night.
I woke up and it was late — after two.
I was starving so I thought I'd come down to the kitchen.
When I got downstairs I could see the drawing-room light was on so I thought they must still be up, I'll go and see if they want a snack.
Anyway, it was dead quiet and I felt a bit funny as I opened the door-’ She stopped.
‘And?’
‘And there they were.’
‘What d'you mean?’
‘On the sofa.
Lucy and Jeremy.’
‘Doing what?’
‘What d'you think?’
‘TELL me.’
He was so angry with the stupid little brat he wanted to smash her face in.
‘All right, if you must know every disgusting detail.
She was lying on the sofa and he was — I don't know — doing something to her.
I couldn't see properly.’
‘With no clothes on?’
‘I don't know.
I shut the door quick, before they saw me.’
He imagined opening the drawing-room door.
The sofa faced the fire, at a slant.
You would just see one end of a person lying on it.
‘How d'you know it was Jeremy?’
‘His jacket was on the floor.
And his double-bass was in the hall,’ she said smugly.
Alan stared at Pam, fighting back the tears which welled in his eyes.
How could she?
How could she?
‘Hadn't you guessed?’ said Pam in her chirpy voice.
‘I've known for ages there was something going on.
I mean, she's always out, and she's not at that many concerts.
She's probably been at it for years.’
‘Shut up!’
Blindly, Alan ran to his room, where he beat and punched his bed and cried aloud in a rage like a child.
Pam was right, of course.
He realized afterwards that he had known for years, that there were a hundred fine details that he had chosen to ignore about her behaviour, her phone conversations, the times of her comings and goings.
Dad must know.
Unless he was wilfully blind too.
But if he knew — why did he let it go on?
They were obscene, disgusting.
He started going out with Carolyn soon after Pam made her announcement.
Carolyn, he knew, would never behave like his mother.
Meg was shocked when Carolyn told her about the baby.
She couldn't believe that Carolyn had done that.
It just wasn't like Carolyn.
But she was diverted from her own reaction by Arthur.
‘That bloody lad.
I'll kill him.
I will, I'll kill him.
Who does he think he is?
I'll bloody kill him.’
It was only the second time Meg had seen Arthur really angry.
The first was some eight years ago when he'd been accused of shoddy workmanship on a car which had been involved in a crash two days after he'd MOTed it.
He had had a fight with the insurance inspector and ended up in court charged with Assault.
He was such a quiet, retiring man.
‘He's never had a cross word for me or Carolyn — never,’ Meg told Jean ruefully.
When he was angry like this he went berserk, she knew.
She argued and pleaded with him, and warned Carolyn to keep Alan away from the house.
‘He's a nice lad, Arthur, honest he is, a really decent lad.
I wouldn't wish for anyone better for our Carolyn, myself.
And it's not as if — I mean, he wants to marry her.
There's no sense in it now, come on.
What's done is done.
No use crying over spilt milk.’
Arthur could have been deaf, for all the effect this had.
‘You can't blame it all on him, anyway.
It takes two you know.
You can't blame him and not her.
You're behind the times, Arthur, you're old-fashioned.
They all do it now, look at the papers — look at the telly.
It's not like it was when we were young.’
In the silence in which Arthur received this, Meg reconsidered.
‘Well, it wasn't so different when we were young, for that matter.
Look at our Bertha, she was three months gone with Harry when she married Jim.
And you know as well as I do Jim wasn't the father.
It happens all the time.
It's not as if they've done anything very unusual now, is it?’
He glared at the Cosiglow, ignoring her.
‘And she's not a child any more, she's over eighteen.
Lots of girls are married by eighteen.
And he's a sensible lad, with good prospects, he'll do well enough when he's finished studying at that university.
He's going to be an architect, Carolyn tells me.
His Dad's a doctor, you know, they live up on Quickedge, in ever such a nice house.
Four bedrooms, Carolyn says they've got.’
To Jean at work, she said wonderingly, ‘I know they all do, these days, I know that.
But she does seem young.
It doesn't seem more than a few months since I was knitting clothes for her dolls — and now —’ She held up her needles, speared through the left front of a pearly-white matinée jacket.
Alan's parents were perfectly civilized about the marriage, and Alan took considerable satisfaction in the fact that he knew they were rather shocked.
Serve them right.
Lucy insisted on not taking it seriously for days.
‘It's too absurd, getting married at your age, you're far too young.
Come on darling, be sensible.
You'll meet thousands of girls before you find the one you like.’
She ruffled his hair.
‘You're so romantic and silly there's nothing to an abortion these days.
It'll be awfully sad if you marry her and find you don't like her later.’
Like you, Alan said to himself.
You hypocrite.
Meg, who thought things ought to be done properly, invited Alan's parents round for tea, just before Christmas.
Lucy accepted, but Alan knew they wouldn't go.
She rang up on the morning with breathless excuses about having to practise a particularly beastly new piece for a concert tomorrow.
‘Why don't you go?’
Alan asked her when she put the phone down.
She pulled a face, and ran her outstretched fingers through her long hair, pulling it out sideways from her head  to that it fell back softly in the  shape of a folding fan.
‘It's very sweet of them, Alan, but I really think it would be a bit of a disaster.’
‘Why?’
‘Well darling — because I don't think we've got very much in common.’
‘Isn't your children getting married something in common?’
Alan said venomously.
‘Why are you so angry, my love?
Do you really want us to go?
If you really want us to, we will.
I don't suppose it'll be that bad!’
He was astonished that she had backed down.
She phoned Meg again and told her she was so silly, she'd made a muddle with the dates of two concerts, and it would be perfectly all right for them to come tonight but only if Meg was absolutely sure it wouldn't be too much trouble, it was so sweet of her…
Alan was repelled by the ease with which she lied.
He had harboured for months the idea of telling her that he and Pam knew about Jeremy.
But he knew that he never actually would.
He dreaded her reaction: seeing her wriggle and flick her tail and swim away in a sea of lies — or seeing her pop like a burst balloon.
Either would be terrible.
Carolyn came round to his house that evening, and told him about her mother's preparations for tea.
He realized he hadn't warned them what sort of meal tea was.
Lucy took afternoon tea at about four o'clock, and dinner at eight.
Carolyn's parents had tea at six p.m.
‘Mum was awfully nervous about it.
She thinks your parents are terribly posh.’
‘Huh.’
He had told her everything about his mother.
Her reaction had been quietly puzzled.
She had not condemned Lucy, as he half hoped, yet feared she would.
‘She thought they'd better have something to drink so she got some sherry, then she was worried because she's only got those little glasses you know, little tumblers, and she says they're only for whisky.’
Carolyn's parents never drank in the house.
Occasionally Arthur would go for a pint at the local, but that was it.
Alan was pleased.
Lucy would find nothing more disgusting than a tumbler of sweet sherry with her dinner.
Tea.
‘They don't like me, do they?’
Carolyn asked, as they sat picking at some smoked ham and coleslaw Alan had found in the fridge.
‘Don't know.
It doesn't matter.’
He realized from Carolyn's face that it did.
‘Dad does.
Lucy's hardly met you, has she?’
‘But they don't want you to get married.’
He shrugged.
‘None of their business, is it?’
‘I feel —’ she hesitated, looking round —‘I don't know, frightened, when I look round this house.
I mean, it's all so — rich and everything.’
‘It's just junk,’ he said angrily.
‘Antique junk.’
‘No but it's like — like a stately home or something.
And all these beautiful flowers —’
‘I hate them.
It's like living in a chapel of rest.’
‘Don't you want to live in a house like this when you grow up?’
‘When I grow up,’ he said, smiling at her phrase, ‘I don't want my life to be anything like theirs.
They are a pair of hypocrites.
I don't like the games they play.’
She got up from the table, the food hardly touched on her plate.
‘But it is nice.
There's so many strange little things-’ She was staring at the shelves of the dresser, where various antique plates (prized by Lucy for the colour of their glaze, or the intricacy of their design) vied for attention with two corn dollies, a brass frog, some Victorian bottles and two tall feathery maidenhair ferns.
‘We haven't got anything like this at our house.
These are beautiful, you know.’
She touched one of the old plates, which was covered in a dense pattern of tiny blue flowers, a brilliant deep Victorian blue.
‘Really lovely.’
Alan made a farting sound through his lips.
‘Clutter and junk.
Don't you like this?’ pointing to her untouched coleslaw.
‘I don't like the dressing much.’
‘Shouldn't you eat, for two and all that?’
She shrugged.
‘I don't know how to cook this sort of stuff either.’
‘Stop it, Carolyn.
I don't care if we live on chips and fish fingers for the rest of our lives.
Here, have a bit of cheese.’
They went out to the pub, and when Alan came back Trevor and Lucy were at home.
He found them, most unusually, sitting either side of the fireplace having a drink together.
Pam had been out at a friend's all evening.
‘Did you have a nice time?’
His mother giggled.
‘Have you been into their house?
You must have been-isn't it sweet?
I don't think I've ever seen so much furniture in one little room.
You should have seen our tea: ham, salad, cheese, crackers, potatoes, hard-boiled eggs, bread-and-butter, trifle — all at once, mind you — cream cake, sherry, cups of tea —’ She counted them all off on her fingers, smiling innocently as she spoke.
‘It was perfectly wonderful.’
Alan asked his father, ‘Did you like them?’
‘The mother seems a kindly soul.
I don't know about the father.
He hardly said a word.
Is he very shy?’
‘He wants to kill me, Carolyn said.’
They stared at him in silence.
At last Lucy said, ‘What on earth for?’
‘Getting his daughter up the spout.’
There was another shocked silence.
His father cleared his throat.
‘I — well, I hadn't realized he felt like that.
It was all — it was all very civilized and friendly.
There wasn't really any difficulty over it.
I wonder if — I wish you'd told me that, Alan.
Perhaps I could have had a bit of a chat to him.’
Alan shrugged.
‘Don't think it would make any difference.’
His mother took a swig of her brandy.
He could see she was recovering.
‘The detail in that house really is splendid, isn't it?’
She turned to Trevor.
‘Did you notice what they had above the fireplace?’
‘No — horses, something like that.’
‘Yes,’ she enthused, ‘exactly.
That famous one from Woolworth's with the horses charging out of the sea.
I've never seen it on a wall in a real house before.
It was worth it just for that.’
‘It's on more walls in more houses than any other picture in the country,’ Trevor said mildly.
‘That and Tina.’
‘And the carpets!’ she cried, getting into her stride now.
‘They are so wonderful!
Who on earth designs them?
With patterns like — like giant sputniks, and about twenty colours in them.’
She smiled at Alan.
‘They positively assault you, don't they?
I bet you could keep thieves out with a carpet like that.’
‘You mean, they'd know there was nothing worth stealing?’ said Alan.
His mother looked at him for a moment without an expression on her face, then she smiled and waved her glass at him.
‘All I can say is, I hope young Pam shows a bit more taste and discernment when she chooses her parents-in-law.’
She said it as if it was a joke, but Alan knew perfectly well that she meant it from the bottom of her heart.
He went to the door.
‘Alan?’ she said.
‘Come on darling, can't you see the funny side?
We liked her parents, they were loves.
I expect they'd have a giggle about our house, if they came round here.’
‘Goodnight,’ he said, and shut the door.
He hated her.
Carolyn and Alan did not make love again until they were married.
It was Alan's idea.
He made a sour kind of joke out of it, that they must wait until their wedding night.
Carolyn agreed because she could see he meant it, although she didn't understand why.
On their wedding night he was drunk, and she was affectionate and clinging, and it was as hopeless as he had been predicting to himself.
He felt, when he woke the next morning, that his life was at an end-a complete disaster.
Alan's term began again on January 20th, and he returned to university with a guilty sense of relief.
Carolyn, who still had her job at the ‘Craft Basket’, stayed at home.
‘I do think you're sensible, love, doing it like this,’ said her mother.
‘It's far better.
He can get on with his studying, without getting distracted, and you can be earning your little bit and putting it away towards a house.
And your Dad and I can keep an eye on you and make sure you're not overdoing it, for the sake of the little one.’
Carolyn nodded.
She had not been given any choice in the matter.
Alan had obviously expected to return to university alone, once the fuss was over.
And there certainly wasn't any point in her moving out of her Mum's to live alone at a time like this.
It was as if she wasn't married; just as it had been before, going to bed in her pink and white room, setting off for the ‘Craft Basket’ at half-past eight in the morning, just as she used to set off for school, home by five thirty, tea, telly, and some needlework to keep herself occupied.
She was making a patchwork quilt for the baby's cot.
Meg had already knitted a whole drawerful of matinée jackets and bootees, in white, pink and blue.
(‘I'll put whichever colour it doesn't need in the shop window, love.
They'll all get used, don't you worry.’)
Alan came back most weekends, and they went out for long drives in his father's car.
At Easter Carolyn went to stay with him at university for a week.
He was borrowing a house that two of his student friends rented.
They had both gone home to their parents'.
It was a dingy, poorly furnished little terrace, reminding Carolyn of the old house on Railway Street.
But it was the first time they had ever lived privately together.
This week was a revelation to both of them.
They could do what they liked — go to bed, get up, eat, bath, go back to bed — there were no rules.
No one to notice or be offended.
It was a week lifted out of real life.
Carolyn's pregnancy added to the strangeness.
There was a neat solid bulge where her flat belly had been.
The baby was kicking, at night Alan lay with his hand on her side and felt the repeated thrusting movements.
He found it almost repulsive to think of it in there, kicking at the walls; but it roused  him sexually as well.
It made her strange.
Sex was in the air all the time.
Each was constantly aware of the other's movements, the other's body.
Even if they were reading or washing up, there seemed to be rays of heat running in the air between them.
Pregnancy made Carolyn aware of her body in a way she had never been before; her small breasts had become heavy and almost painfully sensitive, and when Alan stroked her, or breathed close with his hot breath on her nipples, she felt giddy and weak.
‘Will it be like this when we live together, do you think?’
Carolyn found it suddenly possible to talk about the future, which she had not dared to do before.
It was the middle of a dim afternoon.
Outside the rain pattered lightly on the window, and in the room there was a great sense of tranquillity.
They were lying on the bed after making love, every trace of lust scoured out of them, their bodies clean and abandoned.
‘I don't know,’ Alan said slowly.
‘I hope so.’
‘What are we going to do?’ she asked.
She felt that everything between them was clear now, so that speech was like dropping pebbles into clear water and watching them sink to their resting place.
The friction of their bodies had rubbed away all the untidy mess of misunderstanding, and they could speak directly.
‘I could rent a place like this next year.
In September.’
‘September,’ she repeated, and listened to the rain.
‘You'll have to stay at home till the baby's born, won't you?’
‘Yes.
We could move before September, though.
We could move in the summer.’
‘Yes.
We'll do that.’
They lay quietly, fingers just touching, Carolyn watching the lightshade sway in a slight draught, Alan watching the gentle rise and fall of her ribcage as she breathed.
Chapter 9
Carolyn began to notice the household around her.
She came downstairs for all her meals.
She was still very quiet and unapproachable, jumping and stammering if a remark was addressed to her, but self-contained.
Disciplined.
Able to sit, composedly, eating and listening while they talked.
She was still an awkward presence because she was never relaxed; there was an unnatural quality of alertness in her posture, in the intent way she stared at you as you spoke, in her sudden jerky movements.
They soon gave up trying to draw her into conversation.
The first advances she herself made were to Sylvia, Sue's four-year-old daughter.
Sylvia was pestering her mother for a story one morning after breakfast.
Clare had gone to work, and Bryony was deep in the newspaper.
Carolyn was picking up on the movements of the three women, which had seemed so mysteriously random at first.
She knew that Sue worked as a nurse four nights a week, going on duty some time after the children had gone to bed in the evening, and returning at seven in the morning.
On these mornings her freckled face was blanched, and she sat motionless at the breakfast table, staring sightlessly into a cup of cold, wrinkle-skinned coffee, while her long red hair gradually slithered out of the nest of twists she had knotted it into, and hairgrips pinged out over the floor and the table around her.
After she had gone upstairs Carolyn collected them and put them in a jar on the mantelpiece.
She was surprised by the extent of Sue's gratitude, when she came looking for them the following evening.
‘Shall I read it, Sylvia?’
The little girl leaned back against her mother's knee, staring at Carolyn.
‘Let me read it.
I don't know that story.
Can I have a look — please?’
Dragging her feet reluctantly, as if she was being pushed from behind, Sylvia took her book to Carolyn, standing well back and handing it to her at arm's length.
Carolyn opened the book on her knee and studied it.
‘This looks interesting.
What's it about?
The Snow Queen?
Who's she?’
Sylvia put her thumb in her mouth.
‘Where does she live, Sylvia?’
‘In the North Pole.’
‘Does she?
What does she look like?’
Sylvia suddenly moved forwards and grabbed the book.
‘In a picture —’ she riffled the pages’— there!’
‘She doesn't look very nice, does she?
Shall we find out what she does?’
Sylvia nodded, and leaned her weight against the side of Carolyn's chair.
As Carolyn started to read a look of absorption came over the child's face, and her thumb slotted into her mouth.
She gazed at the pages as Carolyn read, as if she could see the events unfolding there.
Soon Carolyn was the favourite story reader, both with Sylvia and her older brother Robin.
They liked her because she didn't put the book down in the middle to go and do something else, and because she read stories properly, as if she wanted to know what happened too.
Carolyn was cautious about the times when she came downstairs.
She knew Sue's movements.
She felt all right coming down when Sue and the children were there, or when the kitchen was empty, although the suddenly-abandoned look of the room always gave her a shock.
There was always the odd dirty plate or mug on the table, and a tub of margarine (open) and milk (in its bottle) lying around, not put away in the fridge.
She tried to avoid Bryony, which was difficult because she could not work out her routine.
If their paths crossed Bryony usually ignored her, but with contempt, as if she was behaving stupidly.
Carolyn found everything about Bryony so alien that she could not begin to guess what she was doing that Bryony didn't like.
Bryony was squat with a cropped bristly head, reminding Carolyn of a wrestler on television.
She wore enormous shapeless  skirts which looked as if they were made from old curtains or bedspreads, and baggy sweatshirts which she had dyed herself in dingy shades of rust, snot-green and pale mouldy purple.
She described colours which appeared to Carolyn to be faded, dirty, or both, as ‘subtle’, and Carolyn realized that her clothes were not these shades by dismal accident, but by the most painstaking design.
She had tie-dyed various instantly recognizable T-shirts and scarves for Sue, Clare and the children too, and was obviously pleased by the blotchy and imperfect (in Carolyn's view) results.
She wore the strangest shoes Carolyn had ever seen.
They had thick flat soles, to each side of which was stitched a straight flap of leather.
The flaps stood up on either side of her ankle, and were laced together where they met in a stiff ridge over her foot.
Through the gap at the end her thick grey sock protruded.
Carolyn commented on them, and for once incurred Bryony's pleased attention, as she explained how a friend had made them for her to an ancient design, and that unlike any shoes you could buy, they were made to last a lifetime, were completely healthy and natural, and did not threaten to deform the foot or posture in any way.
Bryony also had an enormous bag which she took with her everywhere, a great soft shapeless thing which looked as if (Carolyn's guess was later verified) it had been home-made out of wash-leathers.
There were odd jagged seams all over the place, and the pale soft chamois leather had effectively polished dirt off every surface it came into contact with, so that it was now as grimy as the leathers Carolyn's Dad used at the garage.
There were things embroidered in red wool on the top flap of the bag; in time Carolyn recognized them as feminist symbols.
She thought that by far the most apt symbol of women's liberation was the beautifully simple clenched red fist-in-a-bag, which Clare and Sue also wore in their lapels.
When she later read (at Clare's instigation) the Pankhursts' story, with the exhortation to suffragettes to be ‘an iron fist in a velvet glove’, she immediately linked that image with the symbol of ‘fist-in-a-bag’.
Most of the conversation at meal times made little sense to her.
She was content to let it wash over her, occasionally noticing, like someone with a different first language, the way they laughed at things she didn't see the humour of, were made angry by perfectly innocent-sounding newspaper articles, discussed  people she had never heard of as if they were better known than the Royal Family.
She was still concentrating on surviving, each day presenting its own series of obstacles; she was content simply not to appear too odd or ignorant.
She began to piece together what it was that Clare did.
There was a house somewhere near, where women who had been beaten up by their husbands stayed.
There was a ‘Refuge Rota’ pinned by the house telephone, with six different names filled in for different times in the week.
Clare's and Bryony's names were on it, and they were at home at those times (unless the phone rang for them).
Otherwise, Clare was mainly out.
Carolyn gathered that she spent a lot of time at the Refuge.
She always looked in on Carolyn, when she came home; gradually Carolyn came to realize how kind this was, and how many other claims Clare had on her time.
Clare was the only one she wasn't nervous of.
She liked the way Clare called her ‘Caro’.
She began to ask questions, about the other two women, the Refuge, even some of the mysterious topics she had picked up from meal times.
Half jokingly, Clare assumed the role of teacher-guide, and fed Carolyn a steady supply of reading material on the Women's Movement, ranging from Spare Rib magazine to the lives of suffragettes; from The Female Eunuch to pamphlets on Consciousness Raising.
Carolyn was made glaringly aware of her own ignorance, a looming space which grew rather than diminished, as she was able to define its area by reading more.
It was as if a balloon was being blown up inside her head, and the space in the balloon needed to be filled with knowledge.
She was in turn confused, amused, horrified by the things she read — and sometimes had that closer reaction, recognition of something suddenly true something she absolutely identified from her own experience, but had never put a name to.
The mixture of incomprehensible lunacy and clear truth was as surreal as the life she was living; treading a thin line between the sharks in her room and Bryony, waiting for those times of distant peace, when she could watch the moving clouds through her window in simple tranquillity; descending nightly into drugged black sleep, and carefully, anxiously behaving herself as inconspicuously as possible in front of the inhabitants of the house.
Once or twice when she crept down to the turn in the stairs to see if it was safe to go and  get something to eat, she was scared back by the murmur of unfamiliar voices, and saw three or four bicycles parked in the hall, leaning together with their pedals tangled in each others' spokes, forming an intricate barrier to outside.
She could not help noticing the untidy grime of the house, and because she wanted to please the women who lived there, she began to clean.
She started in the bathroom, where she washed down years of dust from walls and ceiling, scoured the toilet so that it sparkled, and dug out the thick dusty webs behind the pipes and wash-basin, disturbing a colony of frantic spiders.
She scrubbed the old lino floor until it revealed a pleasant geometric pattern of tan, brown and yellow diamonds; poured bleach, then caustic soda, and then her own physical energy into the stained hideous bath, succeeding in restoring it in several places to snowy whiteness.
With a nail brush she scrubbed persistently at the frosted glass of the small window, where something black (dirt? or some kind of growth?) spread all along the indented patterns on the glass.
It was particularly difficult to remove from the corners.
She took her time over it, waiting until she was sure no one wanted to use the bathroom, and going downstairs a couple of times for drinks and stories with Sylvia.
The gradual transformation from squalor to cleanliness gave her satisfaction, and she was pleased to think that the others would be pleased too.
She was nearly finished — polishing the taps — when Bryony poked her head around the half-open door.
‘Thought it was you,’ she said contemptuously.
Carolyn put down her cloth.
‘Sorry — d'you want to come in?’
‘No.
Haven't you got anything better to do?’
‘What?’
‘Haven't you got anything better to do with your time?’
‘I — I mean, I thought — it was — it could do with a clean so I-’
‘Proper little housewife, aren't we.’
Bryony withdrew her head and shut the door sharply, leaving Carolyn bewildered.
She wondered whether Bryony was offended; perhaps she thought Carolyn was criticizing them for not keeping it cleaner.
That night Clare commented on the bathroom when she brought Carolyn her sleeping pills.
‘Looks nice.
Take you long?’
‘All day, on and off.’
Clare nodded.
‘Rather you than me.
Cleaning's quite therapeutic sometimes though, isn't it?
I cleaned the whole apartment when I was pregnant — Jesus, I was at it from morning till night, you could've eaten your breakfast off of the john.’
‘When were you pregnant?’
Clare hesitated.
‘Oh — a long time ago.
The kid's six now.’
‘I — wh — I mean, where is he?’
‘He lives with his father.’
Clare bit off a torn fingernail.
‘In Mexico.’
‘Mexico?’
‘Yeah.’
She shifted impatiently.
‘It's a long story.
I married a Mexican guy when I was at college.
He got a teaching job at the University in Monterrey-huh — and I got pregnant.’
She made it sound as if the two things should have been similar.
‘I — then — what happened?’
‘It didn't work out.
I had to leave.’
‘Don't you ever see him?’
‘Who?
Juan?
My son?
No.’
She moved to the window, looked down at the wasteland garden.
‘No.
His Grandma looks after him.
It's better for him.
More settled.’
She turned abruptly, holding out her hand.
‘Here.
I'm going to bed.’
Carolyn took the two pills.
‘Why don't you give me the bottle, instead of two-at-a-time?
Don't you trust me?’
Clare smiled.
‘Yeah, I trust you.
The goblins'll eat you before you OD.’
She went to the door.
‘Gives me an excuse to come and put you to bed, I guess.
Thwarted maternal instincts, that's what it is.’
She laughed.
‘Now you know.
Sleep well.’
The door shut behind her.
Carolyn sat on her bed and swallowed the sleeping tablets, washing each down with a mouthful of water.
She did not understand Clare's sense of humour.
It was OK to clean, though.
Clare didn't mind it.
Whatever Carolyn did wouldn't please Bryony, that was plain, so she might as well get on with it.
She tackled the TV room.
It was called the TV room because all it was used for was to watch television.
The kids sat in there before they had their tea, and sometimes the women went in there to watch some particular programme, for an hour on a certain night.
Otherwise they used the kitchen.
This made it an easy room to clean, no one would want to come in while she was  working.
Bryony might not even notice.
It would be nice for the children when it was done, she thought.
It was a bare square room with ugly yellow paint, and a sofa and three armchairs all pushed against the walls like a doctor's waiting room.
In one corner were three big cardboard boxes full of filthy old jam jars.
The open grate was choked with rubbish, and on the mantelpiece stood a stack of unopened mail, election leaflets, circulars and letters for people who'd moved.
Gasping at the weight, she staggered out to the dustbin with the jam jars.
Then she flopped on the sofa to sort through the letters.
The third one was  addressed her .
‘Miss Carolyn Tanner.’
She stared at it in confusion.
Her mother's handwriting.
The address was by someone else.
‘It's for me,’ she said aloud.
Why hadn't they given it to her?
She ripped it open and saw the date in her mother's neat childish writing.
October 31st.
My dear Carolyn,
Your father and I are worried sick about you.
Please you must ring us up as soon as you get this to tell us if you are alright.
I will be waiting by the phone.
I was so upset and shocked when I came to the hospital and you were gone I could of died.
I did not sleep a wink last night for worrying about you and if you are alright.
I know you were down when in hospital but you will feel a different girl when you get home again, I know you will feel better.
I'm sure it would be better for you to be in your own room in your own home again with your Mum and Dad who love you to look after you, than amongst strangers.
Please please please my darling girl come home you are breaking your mother's heart.
All our love,
Mum & dad 
Carolyn put the letter down on the arm of the chair.
What had she done?
For days (was it weeks? she had no idea of the date) her mother had been worrying about her.
Every time it had crept into Carolyn's head, she had pushed it out again.
Night after sleepless night, her mother had been thinking about her, while Carolyn slept deep black sleeps and tried to keep her head empty.
She began to cry, both at her own guilt, and at  the awful net of her mother's concern which was coming down over her.
‘What are you playing at?’ the Meg-voice in her head cried.
‘Living in this dirty house with weird people, with nothing to do, no plans, what are you playing at?’
She didn't know.
But her mother's letter introduced into her head again that debilitating pressure she had felt in hospital — the feeling which was the opposite of sitting in her watch-tower and gazing at the sky.
Suddenly the door banged open, and Bryony burst in.
‘What the fuck are you doing?’ she shouted.
‘What have you done with my jam jars?
It's incredible — you didn't even ask me.
You can fucking well go and bring them back again.’
Keeping her head lowered, Carolyn made for the door, and hurried out to the dustbin.
She picked up the first box of jars and went back to the room.
Bryony was sitting on the sofa glaring at her.
‘Why are you so obsessed with cleaning?’ asked Bryony.
‘And throwing stuff away?
Don't you ever stop to think?
Why d'you think those jars're here?
Doesn't it occur to you that they could be used again?
Oh no — throw it away, never mind when the whole of the earth's covered in rusty cars and broken glass as long as my little house is spick and span.’
She stamped out of the room.
Teeth gritted, Carolyn went and fetched the other two boxes.
Then she took her letter up to her room.
Bryony had effectively dried her tears.
She stayed in her room all day, going down at quarter-past six to telephone her mother.
Over the exclamations and tears at the other end she mechanically repeated her message.
‘I'm sorry, I didn't get your letter till today.
I'm sorry, I've been ill.
I couldn't ring you.
I'm better now Mum, I'm fine, don't worry.
I'll come and see you on Saturday.
I'll come and see you on Saturday, Mum.
I'm sorry.’
Clare came to her room later that evening.
‘Why didn't you come down to supper?’
‘I had a letter from my Mum.’
‘When?’
‘I don't know.
I found it in the TV room.
It came ages ago.’
‘Oh God — oh Caro, I'm sorry — I don't know how that could've happened.’
She paused.
‘Yes I do — I guess one of the others  picked it up and it was just an unfamiliar name.
I'm terribly sorry.
What does she want?’
Carolyn looked down at her hands.
‘Me to go home.’
There was a silence.
‘D'you want to?’
‘Bryony does.’
‘Bryony?
Why?’
‘Because I threw away her jam jars.’
Clare started to laugh.
Then she said, ‘Well you could've asked her.’
‘I didn't know anyone was saving them.
They were filthy.
They must have been there for years.’
Clare nodded.
‘Bryony recycles them.’
‘She what?’
‘Keeps them to use again.’
‘What for?’
‘Oh — jam, or pickles, something like that.’
‘Does she make jam?’
‘No.
Not yet.’
‘She hates me.’
‘No she doesn't.
She's just-maybe she's jealous.’
‘Why?’
‘Because — I don't know.
I don't know why.
What are you going to do about your Mum?
You don't want to go, do you?’
Carolyn got up and walked to the window.
‘I don't know.
I'm going to see her on Saturday.’
Clare didn't speak.
Carolyn turned to her.
‘I mean — what am I doing really?
I'm not doing anything here — and it's making her upset that I don't go home.
Bryony hates me — I suppose I should go.’
Clare shrugged.
‘Up to you.
But you're not going to know what to do at home any more than you do here, except for what your Mum bullies you into.
And Bryony'll come round.
She's very territorial.
She's angry because I didn't consult her before you came.’
There was a silence.
‘I don't mind what you do.
If you stay here, though, you eat.
I'm not having an anorexic on my hands.
Come down now, and feed.’
The next morning Carolyn stayed in her room and read, dipping in and out of Clare's books and staring out of the window, feeling surprisingly content.
In the evening there seemed to be a lot of noise and excitement downstairs.
Carolyn went down to tea slowly, feeling apprehensive.
As she went into the kitchen it seemed to be alarmingly full of people and commotion, though when she sat down and worked them out it was only Clare, Bryony, Sue and the kids, and a strange man in a duffle coat.
Sue and Bryony were busy cooking, and the kids were chasing each other round the table, squealing and pushing chairs in each other 's way.
The table was pretty, with a red cloth and a pot of golden chrysanths in the middle, and all the places neatly laid.
There were bowls of salad, vegetables, sauces and pickles, and things she did not recognize.
Carolyn noticed that there were little green tissue-wrapped parcels by all the places too.
She was confused.
Was it a day she had forgotten?
Not Christmas, yet-what was it?
She wished she could go back upstairs.
Clare put a glass of wine into her hand and smiled at her, opening the door to show the strange man out.
Carolyn sipped it awkwardly.
Sue and Bryony were carrying dishes from the oven to the table, filling the table with steaming food.
When Clare came back everyone took their places.
The children started to clamour for different kinds of food.
Clare was talking to Bryony about the leaflets the printer had brought (that man?).
‘Yes, you can start,’ Sue told Robin.
‘We'll leave the presents till after, shall we?’ she appealed to Clare.
Everyone helped themselves to food.
The conversations buzzed on around Carolyn: the new worker at the Refuge, Bryony's dealings with a woman called Margaret.
Carolyn kept her face down over her plate, picking over the unfamiliar food.
She recognized curry, but not the strange things which accompanied it, a pale beige paste with a dusty yet lemony flavour, and bits of cucumber chopped up in a bitter white sauce.
In the middle of this strange house's celebrations she felt much more of an outsider than she had done sitting on her own in her room.
Sue filled her glass.
‘OK?
You look a bit stunned.’
‘I'm — I didn't — what's this for?’
‘Oh, I thought you knew.
It's our house birthday.
It's the date Bryony and Clare moved in, but not the same year.
Bryony moved in two years ago, then I came with the kids, and a year later to the day, Clare moved in.
Bryony thought of a house birthday-to celebrate the household.’
Sue filled her mouth with  houmus and chewed silently for a moment.
Clare and Bryony were arguing excitedly about something.
‘Caro?’
Carolyn looked up at the quiet tone of Sue's voice.
‘Clare said you might be thinking of leaving.
If you — well, as far as I'm concerned I'd like you to stay.
If you want to —’ Sue turned back to give Sylvia some unnecessary help with her food.
When everyone had finished the plates were cleared and Clare produced a big chocolate cake with two candles, sending the children wild with excitement.
There was much relighting and blowing out of candles, and finally the opening of the presents.
The children were first.
They each had a big rainbow packet of felt pens, and a Dinky car.
They began to race each other around the edge of the table, making loud zooming noises.
Carolyn watched Bryony pick up her green parcel and shake it.
She tore the tissue paper off and held up a little polythene envelope, with two silver fist-in-a-bag ear-rings inside.
Carolyn noticed that everyone was watching Bryony, and Bryony smiled and threaded the ear-rings through the holes in her ears, and they must all have a look and comment.
Carolyn shrank from opening hers.
Then it was Sue's turn, and she opened up a shimmering square of silk scarf, which had been flattened to the size of an envelope and now expanded and billowed across the table like the sail of a brilliant ship.
Clare unwrapped her package quickly, and three small screwdrivers fell out.
She burst out laughing, and jumped up and hugged Bryony, who was laughing so much that she couldn't catch her breath and had to be thumped on the back.
The noise and excitement in the room was deafening.
Carolyn's face ached with smiling, trying to join in.
Now Sylvia picked up Carolyn's present and waved it under her nose.
Carolyn took it quickly and inserted her index finger under one of the flaps of folded-over, Sellotaped paper.
In her nervousness she used too much force, and her hand, released by the tearing of paper, flung out and knocked over the wine.
Everyone jumped up and ran about moving things and mopping up.
Carolyn was near to panic.
Putting the parcel  down and making herself breathe calmly, she unpeeled the paper and took out two flat paper envelopes — packets of seeds — and a little wooden block with wire on it.
It was a mousetrap.
She turned it over in bewilderment.
Clare was laughing.
‘I — th-thank you,’ said Carolyn, not knowing what to do.
‘I'm sorry about that,’ said Clare, still laughing, leaning across the table to her.
‘It's just me being silly.
I figured out — you know that noise in your room — that ghost or whatever you thought it was —’
Carolyn sat rigidly still, appalled that Clare was talking about this in front of the others.
‘Well it's a mouse — it must be — you know, under the skirting board.
I thought you might think it was funny, to catch your spook in a mousetrap —’
Carolyn smiled automatically and ducked her head down to study the seed packets, waiting for them all to start talking again.
It was a joke, she realized, they were being kind to her; celebrating, welcoming her.
Sue's kindness — Clare's kindness — the meal itself, confused her, sharpening her awareness of the differences between herself and them, but making her want to belong.
She envied them the sense of occasion and togetherness that they had.
When she went up to her room that night she sat in her chair not listening for ghostly rustlings, but to the rise and fall of their conversation downstairs, punctuated with bursts of laughter.
And finally, as she went to bed, she heard them singing softly, shushing each other and giggling, as one clear voice (Sue's, she recognized) carried on the melody.
Next morning it was Friday.
One day till she went home.
Outside the sky was cold and steely.
The house, after Sue and Sylvia had taken Robin to school, was quiet.
She could hear the wind in the chimney.
Carolyn paced her room.
The sense of pressure was mounting.
She should have taken Clare up on her offer of going to work with her one day.
She should have done something to keep herself distracted.
Idly she picked up her packets of seeds.
Wallflowers and Slipper Flower.
She turned them over.
‘Calceolaria (Slipper Flower).
Half-hardy.
These attractive flowers are generally grown for greenhouse decoration, but C. Rugosa is useful for bedding outdoors in the summer.
Sow in the greenhouse from December to February, harden off in April.’
Something in that reminded her of Clare and she stared out of the window, frowning, as she tried to think what it was.
Hadn't Clare been repairing a greenhouse when she fell?
Where was it?
Carolyn leaned to the far side of each window, but there was no greenhouse to be seen.
If there was one she could plant these seeds.
She put on her anorak and went down to the TV room.
The french windows were damp and warped in their frames, and she had to heave with her shoulder against the door to get one open.
She stepped out on to a narrow cement path.
There was a biting wind from the right which made all the dead winter stems rattle and rustle feverishly.
Shivering, she pulled up her anorak zip and turned to the left.
Under and among the brambles was litter of all kinds, half bricks, broken bottles, sodden sweet papers.
In front of her was a heap of bottles in the soggy remains of an old cardboard box — presumably also being saved by Bryony.
She made her way as best she could along the overgrown path, following the house wall.
When she turned left around the corner of the house, a dilapidated building came into view.
It was more sheltered on this side.
She walked towards it, pulling back and ducking under the prickling runners of a giant bramble that had overspread the path.
Close to, she saw that the building had a brick base, up to about three feet, and a metal framework above it.
The door faced the path.
She pushed it open; it was an old wooden house door drooping on one hinge.
It stuck, only a third open, wedged on broken glass on the floor.
She eased herself in.
The place was wrecked.
Broken glass lay scattered over the cement floor, along with pieces of brick, broken flowerpots, dead leaves.
Above her the metal framework of the roof made an unbroken tracery of lines against the grey sky, but many of the panes were cracked or broken, or entirely missing.
Where had Clare fallen?
She half expected to see bloodstains.
Along either side of the glasshouse at waist height ran a wide ledge, littered with broken glass, old flowerpots, a bucket and tins full of slimy green water, clods of dried earth.
There were dried sticks and brown leaves everywhere.
As she stepped, slivers of glass cracked and crunched beneath her feet.
Using a wide piece of wood as a scraper, she cleared the glass and rubbish from a section of ledge, and sat down.
She noticed a pile of yellowed newspapers under the opposite ledge, and a rusty trowel and fork, and a ball of green twine wound in criss-cross pattern around a stick.
The lower windows were covered with cobwebs.
It was not warm, but it was sheltered from the wind outside, and the stillness and randomness of the tools and litter gave it an almost religious significance, made it seem as if it was waiting.
The brambles of the garden had forced their way through one pane, and stretched in over the ledge, curling upwards like long scrawny fingers.
How long had it been like this, untouched by people, gradually decaying and changing with the wind and the weather?
She picked up a small flowerpot-shaped lump of earth.
It retained its pot-shape although the pot was gone.
It was dry and light to the touch.
Squeezing her fist together she crumbled it into fine powdery dust.
In the centre was a small wizened bulb like a tiny onion.
Carolyn worked in the greenhouse for the morning.
Awkwardly and delicately, as if her own arms and hands were unfamiliar tools, she gathered flowerpots on a cleared area of ledge, took a bucket outside and poured away the green standing slime.
Using the trowel she chipped at the ground outside the door, prising cold earth from among the prickly stems and broken bricks, gathering it with her hands and putting it into the bucket.
It was hard to get, and she filled the bucket by crumbling into it some of the clumps of dried earth that were still inside old flowerpots.
Then she mixed it up and ladled the soil back into the flowerpots, tore open her seed packets and hastily poked the seeds into the soil.
Someone would come home and wonder what she was doing.
She didn't want them to know she was out here.
She patted down the earth in each pot, watered them from a slimy tin, arranged them in a row on the ledge, and darted back along the path to the house.
That night she couldn't sleep, despite Clare's tablets.
Her brain raced over and over what her mother would say, how awful she would feel, what she ought to do, until she felt that the movement in her head would spin her off the bed and send her whirling round the room.
Outside it began to rain heavily.
The wind was still strong, and the rain lashed against the roof, increasing, with its persistent sound, her sense of frenzy.
Dawn came late and sluggishly.
When she went downstairs to make herself some toast it was still very dark, although it was eight  o'clock and she could hear the children talking in their room.
When she'd finished she got her bag and anorak, checking that she had enough in her purse for bus fare, and let herself out the kitchen door.
She wasn't taking her suitcase.
It would be deciding the issue in advance, if she took it.
She did not admit to herself that to leave it was also to decide the issue in advance.
Chapter 10
Carolyn lay on her side, spine curved, head right on the edge of the bed so that she could stare down on the baby in its cot beside her.
The cot was a transparent box (like a vegetable compartment in a fridge, she thought) and it was filled with a parcel of neat white blankets.
From one end of the parcel emerged the living head and shoulders of her new baby.
It was impossible not to stare at him all the time.
He was breathtakingly beautiful.
Breathtaking, literally; she felt her breaths trembling and coming short in her throat, seeming to make her whole body float and quiver.
He was so perfect.
His head was long.
She knew, before the talkative nurse had told her so, that it would have been squeezed to that shape by her own body giving birth.
The shape would change.
On his head was a fuzz — a fluff of pale downy hair, almost transparent.
Through his translucent skin showed the blue veins, his insides as visible and vulnerable as a tiny transparent shrimp.
His face moved continually, different expressions rippling and flowing across it as if he really were a sea creature, moved and swayed by the changing tide and currents in water, in continual motion — flickering from smile to grimace to pain to peace, eyelids half rising to reveal a sea-shell sightless crescent of pearly blue-white, lips parting then closing, breaths shuddering and shivering him as if air were too strong and coarse a medium.
It seemed to Carolyn that there must be a vividly speeded up life flitting through the infant's dreams, as if it skimmed in the air like a bird over the facts of its life and they were reflected as changingly and as unknowingly on its face as the moving bird would be in seas, rivers, lakes, in stagnant puddles on flat roofs, and silted-up canals.
Each expression was as swiftly melted into the next as a tiny wave lapped by a faster following.
His hands were moving too-constantly, with that same undersea random motion.
Open-palmed they waved with no  more sense of the use of hands to touch grasp or hold than a water plant; infinitely gentle trailing things, the blind tendrils of a sea-anemone.
Carolyn's eyes swam with tears as she watched the baby, though she could not tell why.
Her emotions were as confusingly mingled as the child's expressions laid one over another.
She had been quite unprepared for his beauty and his otherness.
He was nothing to do with her and Alan.
He was a visitor from another, undersea world; an innocent, transparent, perfectly gentle alien.
Babies she had seen before had fat fleshy faces that spread from a central dummy.
They grinned or bawled, prefiguring the fixed expressions of their adult lives, solid features emerging from rolls of fat to express the hideous fixity of adult character.
She had not known they started clear, clear of expression, transparent and mobile.
She would protect it.
Save it from that coarsening.
It would not need to thicken and curdle, and become dully opaque to defend its tender insides from the preying eyes of the world.
But even as she vowed to protect she was filled with terror at the unhappiness the fleeting expressions rehearsed; pulled up against the staggering independence of this creature to experience its own ranges of reaction, its life, quite separate from and  un-understood by her.
She was faced starkly by the absolute wonder of life, and enfolded in that double-edged knowledge was the taste and imminence of death, which would be quite simply the absence of movement in the baby: stillness.
From an infant's fluttering speed it would go through the thickening slowness of adult life to the full stop of a corpse.
Because it was alive it would die.
She had never understood that fact before.
It was miraculous that so tender and fragile a creature had emerged from the violence of the preceding day.
She could believe that this was the creature that had floated inside her — yes, like a starry astronaut in his liquid capsule, attached to his red life-support cable — she had pored over photographs of embryos and imagined him a hundred times.
But surely only his perfect oblivious innocence of all evil including pain had enabled him to survive the journey down.
The labour had been a nightmare.
She remembered it in vivid violent snatches punctuated by haze or darkness.
The beginning, a long time ago, was quite clear: sitting up in bed at home, swinging her feet round to the floor, standing up — and a warm flood spilling down her legs so that she cried out in fright.
Looking down she expected to see blood, awfulness, something dead.
Then her mother was in her room, wrapping her up, sitting her down, kissing her.
‘Hush love, it's all right, it's just your waters — you're ready, love.’
She sat her on a towel and they had a cup of tea, huddled together like  conspirators on the edge of Carolyn's bed.
‘I had a feeling when I went to bed last night,’ her mother told her.
‘But it's early,’ said Carolyn, still shivering with fear and surprise.
‘It's not due till July the eighth.’
‘Only two days.
It knows when it's ready, don't you worry.
Everything's going to be all right.
Your father's telephoning Alan.’
Through the opened curtain Carolyn saw the dawn dimness light up as the rising sun emerged over the rim of the world and the quiet undertow of bird clatter rose to a crescendo of calls and squawks.
‘I wish you were coming with me.’
Meg looked up, through the window.
She could not help thinking of her own first labour.
She wanted and did not want to be there, fearing that her very presence would create complications as if they were contagious, but also that if she were not there, there would be no one to control events and protect Carolyn.
She had been Carolyn's protector for so long.
It was not a role her heart could relinquish.
When they heard the car they went carefully downstairs, and her mother settled her in while her father held the door and Alan put her bag in the boot.
Then they drove away and Carolyn carried with her the sight of her mother's tense white face leaning down to look through the window at her.
In the car the contractions had started and suddenly she had felt excited.
It would be all right.
Then the dim increasingly blotted memories of different doors, different faces peering, being naked, shaved, enemaed, injected, while it went on hurting her repeatedly, relentlessly.
They left her alone with a great heavy belt strapped round her belly pressing her and making green and yellow lights wink on the huge machine by the bed, and she couldn't move and her back was aching and they put a tube into her wrist and she couldn't move and she began to panic.
Then she was sick, they gave her an injection, they wouldn't let her-it went to pieces, black fragmented with pain.
At last she felt clear and a kind woman smiled at her among the machines and said, ‘Nearly ready now.’
They wheeled her bed down a corridor, and put her in a huge bare room with blazing lights.
She remembered the way the midwife had bent her knee so that Carolyn's calf pressed against her thigh, and held it pinned with her own bare arm.
The woman's skin was wonderfully warm and smooth and her hold was completely firm.
That touch was one of the clearest sensations.
There were a series of impossible pains like knife cuts, but she could also see distantly how the women were  skilful and trustworthy.
There was a head, they'd been telling her.
She felt it splitting her in half, then slipping back.
A head, a head.
It must be true.
Born, they held it like a long skinned thing and for a moment she stared at it hanging in the air not knowing if it was alive or dead, good or bad, not believing it was over.
They wrapped it up and gave it to her, and it did have a head like a baby.
It was alive.
And now it was here.
It had survived the squeezing and pushing and pulling, the drugs and the pain, protected by its ignorance, it had survived to blink its grey eyes and wave its underwater hands, and turn its small blind mouth instinctively to her nipple, seeking food with the determined accuracy of an animal that intended to live.
Chapter 11
Carolyn did not move back to her mother's, as Bryony (who perhaps would never stop being jealous; Clare's mistakes were as often with women as men) had hoped, and as Clare herself had half expected.
She returned from that visit almost sprightly (desperate?) in her attempts to please and to ingratiate herself into the household.
Clare watched her listening, taking note, modifying her language and behaviour as carefully as an animal adapts its camouflage to fit into a new environment.
She helped Bryony to fold and deliver the January Women's Paper.
She accompanied Clare herself to the Refuge and looked after the children while the women had a meeting with some councillors.
She marched with them on International Women's Day.
She came to the C.R. group the three of them belonged to, and looked, and listened, and said nothing.
Clare was not fooled by any of this, although Sue certainly was, and Bryony seemed to be coming round.
Caro's silences were too deliberate, pregnant with disagreement and criticism.
She asked for explanations which she received without comment, as if listening to someone who had just incriminated herself.
She was exhausting company, not because she argued but because there was a constant play of restless nervous energy in her.
She remained as thin as a rake, although she was eating properly now.
Clare couldn't concentrate on anything else when Caro was there.
She found herself self-conscious under Carolyn's exhaustive scrutiny, and caught herself trying to measure and examine the things she said from the girl's point of view.
Carolyn made her physically uncomfortable.
She wanted to stroke and hold still Caro's skinny nervous arms and legs.
She made herself spend less time with Carolyn, monitoring her own contact with her.
Gradually, what Clare had sensed as Carolyn's critical watchfulness began to be apparent in more obvious ways.
The first was the February Women's Paper.
She refused to help with folding again.
‘I'm sorry, I don't think I — I don't think that I know enough about some of the issues, to go along with it completely.’
Bryony was exasperated.
‘What don't you know about?
That women are badly paid?
That there aren't enough nurseries?
That abortion should be available on demand?’
‘Yes.’
‘Yes — yes what?’
‘Yes, I'm not sure about abortion.’
There was a silence.
‘What d'you mean?’
‘I'm — I'm not sure I agree with abortion.’
‘What?
Any abortion?’
‘Yes.
I think-I think women should have babies if they get pregnant.
I think those children want to be born.’
‘Jesus Christ.’
Bryony was genuinely staggered.
She appealed to Clare.
‘You talk to her.
I can't cope with this.’
Clare looked at Caro, who was bright red and agitated with the effort of arguing.
‘You really think a woman should be forced to have a baby if she doesn't want it?’
‘Not to keep it — of course not.
Have it and give it away.
Plenty of people want new babies.’
‘You think she should be pregnant for nine months and go through all the agonies of giving birth, and then give it away?’
‘I — I'm not sure — yes, I think so.’
Carolyn hesitated.
‘It seems — to me-the least she can do, really.
She's started the child off — it didn't ask to be born.
Once she's started it she should let it grow in her-until it can survive on its own.’
‘For fuck's sake!’ screamed Bryony.
‘What d'you think she is?
An incubator?
What if she doesn't want to be swollen to the size of an elephant with a bleeding parasite kicking her in the guts day and night?
She didn't make it on her own.
What about the man?’
Carolyn shrugged.
‘I don't know.
I mean, he can't do anything can he?
You can't make him responsible, at that stage.’
‘If it's aborted early on,’ said Clare, ‘you really couldn't call it human.
There's hardly anything there.’
‘But — it's — but-’ Carolyn stammered and stopped.
‘But it's got a will to live.
That's what's there.
A decision to live.’
‘But Caro — carry that to its logical conclusion and you don't believe in contraception.
Because every time someone screws they could make something with a will to live.
If you've got a coil you're just making your womb into such an uncomfortable place that the little things with a will to live can't actually live there.’
‘Yes,’ said Carolyn simply.
‘Yes what?’
Bryony was nearly apoplectic.
‘Yes, I don't know about contraception.
I'm not sure about abortion.
I need time to think about it.
That's why I don't want I'd better not fold the paper-until I've worked out my ideas a bit more.’
And she went out of the room, leaving Clare and Bryony facing one another over two thousand five hundred sheets of paper that had to be folded by Friday.
Not only did she not help; in the time when she could have been helping she did things like lining the kitchen cupboards with flowery paper, polishing the brass door knocker, ironing tea-towels and shampooing the TV room carpet.
Clare was relieved to be able to share Bryony's anger.
‘Caro, for God's sake, if you haven't got anything better to do why don't you help us?
There's no point in cleaning that carpet, it's covered in coffee stains — nobody minds it.
It won't look any better when you've finished.
You're wasting your time.’
But Carolyn carried on.
Not only doing unnecessary jobs, but actually creating work by transferring cooked food out of saucepans into dishes before serving it, decanting milk into a jug and margarine on to a saucer.
She discovered a tablecloth which she started to use.
On a Formica table it was so patently stupid that they left the shaking and washing and ironing of it to her in contempt.
The winter was long and hard work.
Carolyn tried to get on with them; listened to them, read their magazines, had things explained by Clare.
But it was not easy to fit in, as she had hoped.
She was alive.
She had survived the accident, and all that mess afterwards.
She had made a change in her life, broken away from her mother.
She wanted to fit in here more than anything, to be part of their household.
But she was not the same as them, she could not pretend to be.
As time went by, she seemed to be more  and more different.
The things they believed — and did — were so complicated: she had to stop, and think, and ask questions — and still she wasn't sure…
She saw shades of grey where they seemed to see none — complications, contradictions.
It was exhausting and she did not know enough to analyse each problem properly.
And she knew she was annoying them whenever she questioned their assumptions.
If she did not do what they wanted then they managed to make her feel wrong or stupid.
How was it her point of view was never right?
And they were very untidy.
The house was always littered with things, papers, books, children's toys, piles of clothing on their way to or from the launderette — it was terrible.
They didn't seem to mind at all.
Carolyn remembered the way her mother would whizz round the room with a can of spray polish and a duster, after tea, and say, ‘Well I just can't settle if the place isn't tidy.’
Here, you were lucky if you could see any surfaces to dust.
She didn't know where half the things went, but she tidied them up and put them in piles on the stairs so people could taken them up to their rooms when they went, and the kitchen looked nice and tidy.
Sylvia tripped over some clothes as she was coming downstairs one day and Sue went mad.
‘Can't you leave our stuff alone?
You've made a bloody death trap on the stairs.
It's our mess, we live in it.
For God's sake stop fussing around and find something sensible to do.’
It was always with a sense of relief that Carolyn escaped to the greenhouse to water her seedlings.
Nearly all of them had germinated, although it had taken them weeks and weeks to do so.
When she had watered them she often sat on the ledge, simply staring at their thin greenness and absorbing the peace of the place.
It was secure there.
Gradually she came to realize that it was reminding her of her father — her father and the allotment.
It wasn't just the smells of dug earth and the friendly shapes of garden implements which she associated with him; it was the sense of escape the place gave her.
Patiently she examined her memories.
It was years since she had spent time alone with her father.
Yes, literally, years.
When she was too little to be anything but a nuisance on shopping expeditions, her mother had left her with her father on Saturday mornings.
Carolyn had always resented being left behind, and clamoured for the shops with their sweets, toys and new clothes.
Her mother talked and  instructed and bustled until the minute she left the house.
Then suddenly it would be very quiet.
It seemed to Carolyn (perhaps her memory exaggerated) that her father never spoke at all.
But it was a warm peaceable silence.
They would put on their old trousers and wellingtons, and go down to the allotment, to the damp-smelling shed where her father kept his gardening things.
She would play in the dark shed, where there were millions of daddy-long-legs, or stand about watching him while he dug.
Sometimes he would call her over.
‘Want to see this worm Carrie?
He must be near nine inches long.’
‘Hold this twine for us lass, will you?’
Yes.
She would hold the end of the twine while he walked away from her backwards across the freshly dug earth, unwinding the ball of twine slowly and deliberately, crouching at the other end to peg it into the earth, then coming back to stake her end too.
‘Thanks lass.’
She remembered the smell as he tipped out the bag of manure he got from Tandy's every now and then, and the way she would hold her nose and shout ‘Pooh!’, and he would laugh and call her Miss Dainty Socks.
In summer he let her cut a bunch of flowers at the end of the morning, to take home for the table.
She was allowed to fetch the scissors herself from the drawer in the shed.
She remembered hesitating, choosing, picking the biggest and bluest cornflowers, and him looking up from his planting and saying quietly, ‘If you pick the ones as aren't quite open yet, they've a chance of lasting longer, maybe.’
She remembered with strange clarity the concentration she had put into cutting the flowers; how she had hoped her father would think she had chosen the right ones.
Peace.
Peace from the frenzied pressure of her mother's attention.
She had not valued it.
She had leapt joyfully at the chance of going shopping, when she reached the magic age of usefulness.
Sitting in the greenhouse with her seedlings, she was safe from the frantic activity in the house.
But it was childish really, she told herself.
It was high time for practical things, it was time to get a job.
Her mother had had a fit when Carolyn admitted that she was living on social security.
‘Scrounging off the dole — after all those years of schooling — it's wicked, that's what it is, wicked.’
It  wasn't wicked, Carolyn knew — but she couldn't hide in here forever.
Then Lisa, one of the support group for the Refuge, moved away.
The phone rota was redrawn so that the week was divided between five, not six.
Clare asked Carolyn, casually, if she was interested in taking on a few hours a week.
Carolyn was dismayed; she had found the place very frightening on her previous visits.
It was a dilapidated terraced house, the only one in its row that wasn't boarded up.
Inside it was overcrowded and primitive, with no hot water and an outside toilet.
The seven children there had seemed more like seventeen.
Although Clare spoke lightly about it, Carolyn understood that it mattered, and that Clare wanted her to get involved.
She had discovered that it wasn't a proper job (as she called it to herself) since none of them was paid for going there or being on the rota.
It was only much later that she came to understand that the place was in its infancy.
Clare, Bryony and the others had squatted the old council house and campaigned for support for battered women through their Women's Paper.
The Council had just agreed to rehouse women who stayed there, and had promised larger, more permanent premises for the Refuge itself.
The idea was that the women should run the house themselves, but there was a series of crises (husbands discovering the address, a fight between two of the women, harassment from a gang of local kids — and the children themselves to be looked after) which meant that a couple of the support group had to be around most of the time.
It would have been difficult for the women to explain their cases to DHSS officials and lawyers, with screaming children in tow.
Carolyn did not want to go, but felt miserably self-critical for her reluctance.
On the first morning when she went with Clare the place was very quiet.
The older kids were at school and two of the women had taken the younger ones to the park.
A new woman with two children had been brought in by Jacky in the night.
She was sitting on the sofa holding a baby, with her little daughter beside her.
She was thin, with a bony face and bulging, frightened eyes.
Clare and Jacky conferred briefly in the kitchen while Carolyn stood awkwardly smiling at the woman.
Then she heard Jacky calling goodbye, and Clare came back into the room with some mugs of coffee.
‘Hello, Maria,’ she said to the woman, and ‘Hello,’to the little girl.
She handed out the coffee and sat down.
‘Would you like to tell us what happened, Maria?’ she asked.
‘Jacky's told me a bit of it- and then we could think about what to do next.’
‘I'm not going back,’ said Maria.
‘No, all right, you don't have to.
Would you like — d'you think your little girl wants to go and play with —’
‘No,’ Maria interrupted her, ‘she's staying with me.’
The child, who looked terrified, was clinging on to her mother's arm.
Clare nodded quickly ‘All right love — look, you don't have to do anything you don't want to do, now.
Would you like to tell me about it?’
Clare seemed completely different, motherly and unselfconscious.
It was the first time Carolyn had heard her without that note of irony in her voice.
Maria glanced around the room with her scared eyes.
Carolyn noticed that her thin white legs were bare, and that she had a pair of fluffy pink mules on her feet.
The skin above her heels was purple.
‘He came home after closing time.
He said — he —’ Maria stopped.
‘Is he your husband?’ asked Clare.
‘Are you married?’
Maria nodded, staring straight at Clare with her bulging eyes.
‘He gets mad when Gary doesn't sleep, he says it's my fault, he says I make him do it — and —’ She stopped again.
‘How old's Gary?’ asked Clare, after the silence had lasted a little while.
Maria looked down at the baby.
‘Eleven months.
He doesn't — he's never — he doesn't sleep nights, I can't help it.
I can't do anything with him, only hold him.’
‘So what happened?’ said Clare gently.
‘Was Gary awake when your husband came in?’
‘He gets pissed and he doesn't —’ She started to cry, weakly.
‘He's all right.
He's been good to me.
He's a good man.
Only when he's been drinking he just — he —’
‘Did he ask you to put Gary to bed?’
Maria shook her head convulsively.
‘He was shouting at me.
Calling me.
I asked him — I told him ‘Shut up or you'll wake Cathy too’ and he got madder — he — he thinks — he says I keep them awake so — so — so I don't have to go to bed with him.’
She  stopped speaking abruptly and stared at Clare with a look of fixed terror in her eyes.
‘He thinks you don't want to sleep with him, so you keep the kids awake as an excuse?’
Maria nodded.
‘He — I knew what would happen — last time he — he started — he got Gary off me and left him — in his cot, he was screaming, he were scared-he was rough you see he gets rough when he's drunk, he doesn't think —’
Clare nodded.
‘So I was upset I said I didn't want to, I was crying and it made him madder.’
She stopped.
‘Did he hit you?’ asked Clare.
Maria nodded, almost impatiently.
‘Oh yeah, he hit me.
But he — he —’
‘Did he force you?’
‘Yeah.’
She turned her face away from Clare, looking down at Gary who was sleeping peacefully enough now.
Carolyn could see that she had her right hand clasped around the fingers of her left, and was squeezing so tightly that the finger ends were white and bloodless.
She looked up apologetically at Clare.
‘I was scared.
I never thought he would — would've done that.
He was calling me all the time-awful things.
He put his hand over my mouth so I couldn't breathe —’
‘That was before, did you say?
Last time?
What happened last night?’
‘I didn't want him — I didn't want him to come near me — so I locked myself in the bathroom, with Gary-I didn't know what else to do.
He was shouting.
I didn't know what to do, he was banging on the door and Gary were crying — then I heard Cathy —’ She shook her head desperately.
‘He started shouting at her, I could hear her crying, so I unlocked the door.
I didn't know what to do — I opened the door and he got Gary.
He was pulling him, trying to get him off me — he threw him — he just threw him at the bed — I knew he was all right, he were screaming but I couldn't — they were both screaming, Cathy and Gary both, and he got me by the throat.
He was shaking me calling me a slut and a whore and saying they weren't his kids everything, I don't know, I couldn't breathe — he were choking me —’
‘And did he let you go?
You were afraid he was going to rape you again?’
She nodded quickly.
‘He were choking me.
I must've blacked out.
When I looked then at first I couldn't see, it was all — you know — black like inside my eyes, but I knew they were open and I could hear the kids yelling — and when I got up he was lying on the sofa, snoring — he must've just dropped me and let me where I lie-’ She stopped and Clare sat quietly waiting.
‘So I just — I got the kids out of the house —‘n’ I rang this number.’
She gave a shaky little laugh, holding out her skinny forearm to display the number written there in blue biro.
‘I saw it at the doctor's on the board — an’ I wrote it down after last week — I didn't know what else to do.
It was two o'clock in the morning.’
‘And Jacky came to fetch you.’
‘Yes.
I'm not — he can't come here, can he?
I'm not going back again.’
‘It's all right,’ said Clare.
‘He can't come here.
He can't find out the address.
You can stay as long as you need to.’
She hesitated.
‘Can I — do you mind, Maria, if I just look at your neck — to see if he's left bruises?
You see, we might need a doctor to testify that you've been hurt.’
Maria gave the baby to her daughter.
She gathered her straggly hair into a bun at the back of her head, holding it with her left hand while she pulled down the polo neck of her thin jumper.
Her neck was mottled with bruises: several that Carolyn could see were the exact shape and size of thumb prints, yellow, dark purple and red.
The woman sat quite still, displaying her neck without embarrassment.
Carolyn felt sick.
‘Thank you,’ said Clare gently.
‘I think you ought to be examined by a doctor, Maria.
Shall I make an appointment for you?’
Maria nodded.
She seemed limp now — exhausted.
‘How old is Cathy?’
The little girl was still holding the baby, cradling it and smiling into its face.
‘Five.’
‘Does she go to school?’
Maria nodded.
‘Well we'll get her into school with the children here, for the time being.
We'll get her started tomorrow.
Have you got enough clothes for them, Maria?
What did you bring with you?’
She shook her head.
‘Nothing.
I were afraid of him waking — I didn't bring anything.’
‘Does he work?’
She nodded, yes.
‘So he'll be out today?
You could get what you need — pack a case.
It's all right, I'll come with you —’ as Maria started to protest.
‘You'll need some clothes for you and the children, some things of your own…’
As Clare went on arranging things in her calm quiet voice, Carolyn lost concentration.
She heard Clare talking about the DHSS, a lawyer, an injunction, all sorts of different things, while Maria sat silent in front of her, head drooping slightly on her injured neck.
Carolyn found the days at the Refuge terrible.
She felt quite inadequate to help anyone there — and almost scared of them, as if the pain and horror of their lives were contagious.
It was so ordinary.
They all took it for granted; men hitting their wives and children, men raping their wives and trying to kill them.
The women lived with it — some of them came here for a week and then went back to it.
Often when women rang the beds were full and no more could come in.
There was nowhere else for them to go.
Although Carolyn told herself she respected Clare, and the others, for the work they were doing, she was repelled by it.
She hadn't known…
The women's stories and miseries haunted her, filled her dreams; the desperation of their situations made Carolyn herself feel trapped and frantic, so that she dreaded going to the Refuge and was tongue-tied when her help was most needed.
Their injuries seemed to violate her.
She tried to hide her feelings by concentrating, as she had done at the Red House, on the children.
The younger ones needed looking after while the mothers were busy, and the distress of the children, although more naked than that of their mothers, was less terrible.
Because they could still be comforted or distracted, by a sweet and a story.
She could try, with them.
She hated going to the Refuge and she dreaded letting Clare know that.
She felt she could no longer trust her own ideas, the disagreements she had had with Clare, Bryony and Sue must be due to her own ignorance.
How could she presume to argue with them when she knew nothing — nothing — and they lived and  worked in situations like this?
She was humiliated by her own ignorance, felt herself losing control completely over the ideas she had begun to hammer out and grasp.
Either side of the Refuge, time closed in, with meetings, the children to be looked after, books to be read, until she felt light-headed with the sense of not coming to grips with anything, of being forced to spin like a top.
In between feeling guilty and inferior to the other women, she felt resentful.
Her resentment saved her.
She had been forced to go to the Refuge.
They expected her to do it.
She knew she didn't want to.
And she had made a choice; she had chosen not to go home, she had chosen to live here and cope with sharks between the furniture and Bryony's contempt, in order to purchase a freedom…to choose what she would do next.
At times this was crystal clear.
At others, she despised herself for being selfish, even wicked, for not being able to help people who needed her support so much.
Her discontent came to a head with the beginning of spring.
During the winter there had been near-continual snow and rain, then in late March there was a week of mad blustering winds, with racing cloud and fitful sun.
‘March showers bring April flowers,’ Carolyn recited to herself.
Or was it April showers that brought May flowers?
She was restless, full of ineffectual undirected anger.
After being at the Refuge on Saturday she woke early on Sunday morning, head crowded with things that needed thinking about and sorting out.
Her windows were rattling in the wind, patches of sunlight and shade sped across the view.
Up in the hills it was like a searchlight, like the revolving beam from a lighthouse moving on then reappearing, light, shade, light.
The hugeness of the world out there only served to increase her sense of confinement and frustration.
She went down to make a drink, and as she turned the light on in the dingy kitchen a dark thing shot across the floor to disappear under the dresser.
Mice.
Carolyn froze.
Then she stepped quickly on to the nearest chair and stood there, listening.
Silence.
It was waiting for her to go.
She jumped down and ran out of the kitchen, shutting the door carefully behind her.
Why should they stay in the kitchen, though?
They're probably in all the rooms.
Running over our beds at night.
She remembered the  mousetrap Clare had given her.
She'd thought it was a joke!
Hurriedly she unbolted the french windows and pushed them open.
The sun was shining brilliantly, for a moment, and the wind rushed full in her face.
She ran to the hall for her coat, then went out, crossing the poor battered garden.
The wind and sun seemed to make everything race, to make her excited about something she didn't know, like a child.
The winter rain and snow had beaten down the weeds to a mulch of sodden brown stems, through which the bricks and rubbish on the ground protruded.
Striding away from the house, Carolyn stubbed her toe badly on a brick end and had to sit down to nurse it.
There was a log beside the blackened site of an old bonfire.
As she sat rubbing her foot a sense of the ground around her intruded on her anger; a sense of the garden as a place, with its own shape and past.
How had it got like this?
There were bricks and stones everywhere.
Something must have been demolished.
An old outhouse, perhaps.
Bits of broken glass sparkled in the sunlight.
She picked up a piece of pottery and turned it over.
It was a long sharp fragment of a willow-pattern saucer, three little blue figures crossing the hump-backed bridge.
Idly she began to stab at the wet ground with it, but it struck something hard straight away.
She scraped the earth back and saw something very dark blue — china or glass, buried there.
The wind in her face was good.
As sunlight moved over she closed her eyes and put her head back.
What am I going to do?
She felt as if she never wanted to go back into the house, as if it had tied her with a million cobweb fine lines, as the Lilliputians had trapped Gulliver, and that she could not get free.
The piece of saucer, scratting and scraping, had cleared a length of blue glass.
It was an unusually deep blue.
Abandoning the saucer, she scrabbled at the moist earth with her fingers.
The gritty soil filled the cracks behind her fingernails, and the smell of newly uncovered earth reminded her of her father.
It was a bottle, an old-fashioned one.
She prised it out of its little grave and wiped it clean.
It was very dark blue, quite perfect, about six inches long.
The soil clung to one side, stuck in the roughness of the design.
Letters.
NOT…
TO…
BE…
TAKEN.
She cradled it between her palms with satisfaction.
How nice to discover.
How long has it been here?
Twenty years?
Fifty?
It was full of earth.
She turned it upside-down and shook it.
But it was packed.
‘NOT TO BE  TAKEN.’
Like Alice in Wonderland.
Why should they sell bottles of NOT TO BE TAKEN?
It must be for murderers, she thought, and smiled at the house.
Three spoonfuls in everybody's tea.
There's probably more under the soil.
She started to scrape again with the shard of pottery.
The feeble sun was almost warm when it came out.
I'll gouge the soil out of it with a knitting needle, when I go in.
I don't want to go in.
The clear day stretched before her; when she walked back into the house her day would be filled.
Stay here, then.
Stay here.
Stay here and dig the garden.
Make a place to plant those seedlings.
It was such a good idea that she couldn't think anything for a moment-as if someone else had suggested it to her, and she needed to digest it.
I could stay out all day.
I'd have an excuse.
It's worth doing — it needs doing.
I could grow more things.
I could stay here.
They'll laugh at you.
Well let them.
She flung the fragment of saucer as far as she could, watching it spinning against the sky.
Then she balanced the bottle on the log, and went to the greenhouse.
Taking up the big garden fork in the corner, she went straight out again.
Where to begin?
Instinctively she headed for the fence at the far end, wanting to be as far away from the house as possible.
Selecting a clear-looking spot she jabbed the fork into the earth and stood on the crossbar.
It stuck, shivering in the ground, the prongs buried to a depth of about three inches.
Then it wobbled under her weight and tilted forwards.
She jumped off and tried again-same effect.
It felt as if the prongs were meeting solid stone.
Using the fork like a pick she chipped away at the soil.
Brick.
She scraped away trails of earth to reveal the dark orange rectangle of a whole brick.
She knelt and prised it from its bed.
In the damp earth its indentation was like a casting mould, clear and sharp-cornered, composed of earth and living things, tiny translucent snails and a pale slug.
She threw the brick over to the bonfire site and attacked with the fork again.
Again, it struck something solid.
After unearthing four bricks, a milk bottle, and an unidentifiable piece of metal, it was possible to turn over a forkful of earth on that spot.
If the whole garden was covered in such a layer of rubbish, she would be mad to dig it.
She walked a few feet and  stabbed at the earth with the fork.
It hit something hard.
A few yards further-again.
Each random spot she tried was the same.
The ground was solid with rubble.
Bitterly disappointed, she sat on the log.
It would take weeks of back-breaking work.
Crawling round on your hands and knees, prising up brick ends.
Mad.
There are enough bricks to build a house.
And the soil's probably useless anyway.
The french windows banged and Clare came out into the garden, holding a piece of toast.
She walked quickly over the uneven ground.
‘Hello.
Nice day.
Have you taken leave of your senses?’
Carolyn nodded.
‘How long've you been up?’
‘Don't know.
Since eight.’
‘Two hours.
Well, at that rate-’ she indicated the square foot of dug earth, and the fork abandoned beside it, ‘I guess it'll take you — ooh-three years?’
‘Ha ha,’ said Carolyn sourly.
‘Look, I found this.’
She passed the bottle to Clare.
‘That's nice.
Victorian blue.
Lovely.
Want some toast?’
She handed it to Carolyn, who ate in silence.
‘What's the matter?’
‘I don't know.’
Carolyn chewed a mouthful of toast, then said, ‘There's mice in the kitchen.’
‘I like mice,’ said Clare.
‘They're dirty.
They carry diseases.’
‘No more than a dog or cat.’
Clare watched her eating for a moment.
‘I'm going to clean up this morning.
I've been busy.’
‘I know.’
Carolyn was consumed with guilt.
Silence.
‘What's the matter?’
Carolyn gouged some earth out from under her nails.
‘I don't know what to do.’
‘I can suggest lots of things.’
Suddenly, unaccountably, Clare reminded her of her mother.
‘But I don't want to do what you suggest.’
Clare blew a raspberry and stood up.
‘Dig the garden then.’
She went back into the house.
Carolyn worked in the garden all that day.
It was slow, backbreaking work, but it gave her great satisfaction.
She enjoyed uncovering a corner of brick enough to insert the trowel blade  beneath it and twist, and prise it slowly out of its bed.
She enjoyed picking the loosened brick up and weighing it in her right hand before swinging her arm to sling it on to the rubble pile.
She liked scraping the dirt away from unknown objects, trying to guess what they would be.
She worked like an automaton, and her mind was as drowned out by it as her speech would have been in a noisy factory.
Scratch, clear, scrape; stick, twist, heave; lift, weigh, sling.
A large blister came on the heel of her right palm, from forcing the trowel handle down to prise bricks up.
Her spine, neck and shoulders ached dully, but after a while she could almost relish the aches, as if each physical pain was another blotter for the press of ideas in her head.
She worked crouching down, and the infinitesimal pace of her labours made her feel like an ant, toiling away earnestly at a microscopic task.
It was satisfying to be an ant.
She wasn't thinking at all; hands preoccupied with textures, grainy soil and rough brick, smooth stone, slimy wetness of the odd slug or worm.
By the evening there were two damp heaps of rubble and a cleared row of just over five yards.
A sharp cold wind had sprung up with the fading light, removing the sweaty warmth of her exertions and letting her know that she was cold and exhausted.
Her back ached, her hand was blistered.
She was starving.
She felt light-headedly happy.
She had escaped — for a whole day she had escaped even the thought of the Refuge.
Next morning she was up at seven.
She wasn't expected at the Refuge till lunch time.
She could busy herself in the garden till then.
She'd been digging for a while when she looked up to swing the stone in her hand on to the pile, and saw Clare standing there.
‘Smells nice.’
‘Yes — it's the soil.’
‘Aren't you cold?’
Carolyn shook her head.
‘You get warm working.’
‘Are you coming to the Refuge today?’
Clare asked quietly.
Carolyn watched Clare's feet.
It hadn't occurred to her that she had a choice.
‘Don't you need me?’
‘Yes.’
Clare grimaced.
‘But if you'd rather do this-’
There was a silence.
‘You don't like coming to the Refuge do you.’
It was a statement.
Carolyn shook her head, still not looking up.
‘Well —’
‘I would rather do this.
If you don't mind.’
Clare laughed.
‘You must really hate the Refuge!’
‘No — no — I mean —’
‘Why are you doing this?
Isn't it an awful waste of energy?’
‘I — no.’
Again she felt that stubborn anger.
‘Perhaps I want to waste energy.’
Clare watched her in silence, then asked, ‘Why?’
‘I don't know.’
She scraped at the earth covering a brick.
‘OK,’ said Clare briskly.
‘Shall we go for a drink tonight?’
‘Who?’
‘You and me.’
Carolyn just stopped herself from saying why.
‘I — yes, that would be nice.’
‘OK.
I'm at the Refuge for tea.
Meet you at the pub on the corner, at nine?’
Carolyn nodded.
‘See you then.’
Clare walked quickly back to the house.
Carolyn wanted to leap with joy.
You don't have to go!
You don't have to go to the Refuge!
The reprieve had been so quick and sudden and she had been dreading the conversation so much…
She was afraid that Clare would try to make her feel guilty that evening.
But it was done.
She'd told her she didn't like going.
She'd escaped.
She worked in the garden every day, from then on, unless the rain was torrential.
She cleared the sills in the greenhouse and planted more seeds in flowerpots, repairing the holes in the glass with sheets of polythene.
With the bricks she had unearthed she started to build a path around the perimeter of the garden.
The slowly growing clear patch, the sprouting seeds in the greenhouse, the peace of the garden and spring unfolding around her were all marvellous.
And the miserable hotchpotch of confused ideas and pressures was quietly buried in the depths of her mind, just as a wilderness of plants dies down and goes underground for the winter.
On July 7th the sun was already hot by seven-thirty, shining through veils of mist rising like steam from the drying earth.
Carolyn let herself out of the french windows and made her way  along the trodden track to her garden, now a dug rectangle of some eight by twelve yards, backing on to the wall of Keswick's warehouse.
The low sun made the street wall cast a long black shadow over half the garden, but it stopped just to the right of her patch.
The morning air was vibrant with memories of similar mornings.
She stood still, savouring the accumulation of days of her life behind her like beads on a string, something tangible.
The wet garden was alive with smells: damp earth, the dry smell of bricks, faint smoke from yesterday's bonfire.
Drops of dew shone in the weeds and grass, and sparkled like diamonds in the centres of the dark green upturned palms of her nasturtium leaves.
The nasturtiums were flowering, brilliant and ragged across the soil, orange as flames.
All their trumpets tilted up from the ground, as if together they were sounding a blast to the sky.
She squatted at the edge of the dug soil, experiencing pleasure in her own body's supple movement and the warmth of the sun on her skin, and looked along the rows of plants.
Pale lettuce seedlings, dark pansies, sweet peas, hopeless carrots, runner beans showing two blood-bright flowers today.
Across the earth between rows shone dry silver trails, sticky to sight, where the slugs had been.
Behind the beans, onions, no lupins (it must be two months now — they must be dead) and love-in-a-mists on impossibly frail stems curved and gyrated toward the ground, bearing slender eyelid-blue buds.
She had not planted very sensibly, she thought.
The tall beans should have gone at the back.
Trowel in hand Carolyn stooped over the dense lettuce seedlings and carefully removed a clump of them.
The leaves were cool and wet.
She picked off two pale sticky little slugs and flicked them away into the weeds, then crouched over a clear patch of soil and started to pull apart their tangled cotton-thread roots.
Working quickly, she planted out the lettuces at ten-inch intervals, abandoning the trowel in favour of her fingers for hole boring and soil patting.
Her mousy hair had been bleached by the sun to a more nearly-blonde than it had been since her childhood, and her skin was very brown.
Squatting in the soil, knees bent double either side of her head, intent on her hands working between her legs, Carolyn could have been taken for only half her age.
She was painfully thin.
The road behind the tall wall was still quiet, but the birds were making up for it, their incessant repeated sounds rising to sudden random crescendos as they all chirped fiercely together.
She kept noticing the birds, here; always before she had thought of them as ‘singing’.
They didn't sing, they squawked and chattered like a jungle.
June had been a lush warm month, drawing her seeds from the ground with charmed fingers, stretching the runner beans a full four feet from their first green sprouts, and winding them neatly up their bamboo canes.
Do beans always curl around sticks in the same direction? she wondered.
Or are there rebels?
And can you fool them, by planting them back to front?
The soil was dark and friable between her fingers.
She had commented on its goodness to Clare, who guessed at how many years it had lain fallow; five — six?
Long enough to gather fertility from the winters of dead leaves, the rotting vegetation and the passage of cats, birds and dogs, shrews and voles, caterpillars and slugs.
Suddenly she heard Sue calling her name.
‘Yes!’ she shouted.
‘Here.
At the bottom.’
She straightened, looking towards the house.
From among the grass and high weeds appeared her father.
She was so surprised she couldn't think of anything to say and just stood for a moment staring at him.
‘Hello Carolyn.’
She put down her trowel and went towards him.
He kissed her awkwardly on the head, and patted her shoulder.
‘Is Mum —?
’ She could think of no other reason for his appearance.
‘Don't worry.’
He nodded gravely.
‘No one 's dead.’
‘Oh.
D'you — d'you want to come in and have a cup of tea?’
He glanced back at the house and she wondered who was in the kitchen.
Sue and Sylvia — too early for Bryony.
How strange the place must look, to him.
‘No,’ he said, ‘let's stay out here.
I'd like to have a little talk with you.’
Automatically she turned back towards her garden, and he followed her.
‘This is very good,’ he said, as they stopped at the edge of the bare earth.
‘Is this your handiwork?’
‘I — yes.
It was an awful job to clear the ground.’
He walked along the edge of the plot, naming her plants to himself.
‘Well done,’ he said.
‘Those beans are further on than mine.
You've an ideal spot here, haven't you?
Sunny and sheltered — ideal.’
He crouched, and picking up a handful of soil, rubbed it through his fingers.
‘Soil's not bad.
Did you use anything on it?’
‘No — no I didn't.
I didn't know what.’
‘Well, never any harm in a bit of manure.
It's not so easy to come by these days though.
They're all these chemical things now — I dare say they're just as good really.
It's a bit heavy, isn't it?
You could do with a spot of sand in it.’
He stooped over the sweet peas and examined them.
Carolyn watched him, caught between her astonishment at his presence here, and the sudden absolutely natural way they were talking.
At home, before the accident, he hadn't said so much to her for years.
She hadn't really thought about him, she realized.
About him missing her or worrying.
It had all been Mum.
He came back and crouched by her side, staring at the garden as he spoke.
‘I took the liberty of calling,’ he said.
‘Dad!’ she interrupted him.
‘You can come any time.
You or Mum —’
‘Yes,’ he said.
‘It's about your Mum I wanted a word with you.
She's taken all this badly, Carolyn.’
He spoke slowly and deliberately, almost maddeningly slowly.
Adjusting her position and half closing her eyes against the sun, she too stared out over the garden, waiting for him to get to the point.
‘She's had a lot of disappointments in her life.
She lost the first two babies, you know that, and she's always done her best for you.
She's always worked hard and thought of you.
She's not —’ He hesitated.
‘She's taking it badly now.
She doesn't understand, you see, why you've never been home.’
‘I did,’ Carolyn said quickly.
‘I came for that weekend.
Then I came, oh, a couple of Saturdays ago.’
‘Last month,’ he said.
‘Yes.
But it's a shock, you see, after expecting you home all that time you was in hospital — it's not what she expected, that you would be off somewhere else.
She's — well, you're important to her.
Girls are, aren't they, to their mothers.
I don't want…
She's worried about you.
Of course she is — it's only natural.’
There was silence.
‘What do you want me to do?’ asked Carolyn.
‘Well,’ he said slowly.
‘I don't want you living in our pockets.
When it's time for you to go, then you must go.
But she broods, you see.
At the weekends she broods.
She sits and thinks about you.
It would cheer her up if you came for your tea.’
He paused.
‘Children do grow up, I know,’ he said, staring at the bean poles.
‘They do grow up.’
It seemed inconclusive.
He straightened his knees.
‘You do what you like, lass.
I'm glad to see this, you've done well here.
You can have some carnation slips next time you come home.’
He turned to go.
‘Dad — Dad — don't you want a drink or —’
‘No lass, I'm on my way to pick up a radiator.
I'm on garage time already.’
He glanced at his watch.
Suddenly he looked awkward, she saw his shoulders tense and his head duck slightly as they neared the french windows.
‘Here, you can get out this way Dad, there's a side gate.’
She led him round and past the greenhouse.
‘Right then,’ he said, ‘Thanks,’and hurried away without kissing her goodbye.
She wandered slowly back to the garden.
He must remember those days well she thought.
Yet he had come here on her mother's account, not on his own.
He was content to let it go.
Childishly, she wished she could still go gardening with him.
She could have asked him about the carrots.
Substantial memory melted suddenly to consciousness of present loss.
As she grew up, her father had been of no account to her.
Whose fault was it?
Her mother's?
But he had always chosen to stand back; to be busy.
He believed that children were the woman's affair.
She felt that between them, they had cheated her.
Chapter 12
Alan, Carolyn and Christopher moved into a flat the September after he was born.
It was the converted first floor of a large terraced house, within walking distance of the university.
Alan continued to work hard at his course, and Carolyn looked after the baby and kept house.
Christopher was a slight child, with rather too thin arms and legs, and little flat wrists which always gave Carolyn a stab of apprehensive fear when she noticed them.
His face was elfin, with wide grey eyes and a fuzz of pale hair, more like the fluff on a duckling than human hair.
He was a demanding baby, and rarely slept through the night, even when he was a year old.
When she heard him, Carolyn got up quietly, pressing the blankets down again to stop the cold air getting at Alan's back.
She crept into Chrissy's room, shutting the door silently behind her.
She was usually able to rock him back to sleep quite quickly.
He fell asleep with one arm curled around her head, clutching a handful of her hair, his other thumb in his mouth.
The only moment of danger was as she laid him in his cot again.
Sometimes then he would wake and start to cry.
She dreaded Alan waking up.
He would roll over heavily and sigh and say, ‘Oh that damned child,’ and then, ‘I'll go, I'll go — you stay here.’
He would get up and blunder about falling over shoes and unable to find his dressing gown, until at last the light had to be turned on to sort him out, and Chrissy had worked himself into a frenzy.
When he went into Chrissy's room he said, ‘Well, what's up then?’ too loudly.
She listened, shrinking under the blankets, for Chrissy's angry wail at the sight of him, and the ‘Mu — Mu — Mu!’ that he chanted when he wanted her.
Alan always came back defeated, sooner or later, and then it took her twice as long to settle the child.
It was so much better if she could slip out quietly and not let Alan know.
Sometimes Alan said, ‘He didn't wake at all last night, did he?’ with such pleased pride that she smiled and shook her head.
What did it matter, a little white lie like that?
Anyway, Alan needed  his sleep, he had books to read, plans to draw, and essays to write.
You can't think clearly on four hours' sleep.
It was better not to let him know that Chris woke regularly two or three times every night.
When he was twenty months old he became ill.
The doctor examined him cursorily and told Carolyn that it was some kind of viral infection.
‘Keep him warm and give him plenty to drink.
His temperature may well go up before it goes down.
Nothing to worry about.’
He left two prescriptions.
Chris was plagued by a dry ticklish cough which kept him (and Carolyn) awake for the best part of three nights, and on which the cough medicine had little effect.
He refused all food and she could hardly get him to drink.
Within a few days he was a pitiful sight, white-faced with huge puffy red-rimmed eyes, his thin hair plastered to his head with sweat and the comfortable roundness of his baby tummy melted away.
He cried on Carolyn's shoulder, through pure discomfort and weariness, she believed, rocking him automatically and feeling like crying too.
Meg gave lots of good advice down the phone.
It was she who suggested feeding drinks by the spoonful, and bathing his poor red eyes in a weak solution of bicarb. of soda.
She offered to come down for the weekend to help, and Carolyn wanted her badly enough to hesitate before putting her off.
There wasn't a spare bed, for a start — but the main thing was that she knew it would annoy Alan.
He was working hard to complete a special project for Friday, and had already told her he would give her a hand at the weekend.
He would be angry if she preferred her mother's help to his.
On Thursday night Chris came out in dark red blotches.
Carolyn, appalled, called Alan to look.
After a moment's shocked silence, he said triumphantly-’ Measles!’
Of course it was, she realized.
Measles, nothing worse.
All children caught it.
He didn't have meningitis, or scarlet fever.
He wouldn't die.
She felt light-headed with relief.
‘Of course!’ cried her mother, on the phone.
‘I should have realized when you told me about his eyes.
I am a fool.
I was lucky with you, you didn't get it till you were at school, so you were that much older.
But you were bad with your eyes all the same, I remember you were in a darkened room for days.
Eh —’ she laughed’— I remember, I put a headscarf over the lamp, and your Dad gave me such a telling off.
It was singed — you know, scorched, when he took it off.
Could have had the whole place up in flames.’
When they had finished talking, Carolyn crept into Chrissy's room with two kitchen chairs, and draped her shawl over them like a tent, and put the lamp underneath.
On Friday night Alan had met his project deadline, and spent the evening in the pub, celebrating with a few others from his course.
When he went to bed he fell into a dead sleep.
He woke in the small hours, feeling cold, and moved over to be closer to Carolyn's warm body.
But she wasn't there.
He groaned, and curled himself into a ball.
Then he poked his head out from the covers to listen.
He couldn ‘t hear anything.
He recurled and waited, for what seemed ages.
There was still no sound.
Perhaps she'd fallen asleep in Christopher's room.
She'd be getting cold.
He reached for his watch.
Quarter to four.
He put on his dressing gown and opened the bedroom door.
He could hear her voice talking softly now, from inside Chrissy's room.
He moved to stand by the door, his head an inch from the wood.
Her voice was clear and light, its pitch was always a shock to him, when he heard her without seeing her.
She was crooning to the child.
‘Chrissy, Chrissy love, bumble-face, listen — just have a spoonful my sweet, just a little taste — open wide, come on love, open wide…
Good boy, good boy.
That was nice, wasn't it?
Oh my lovely, look at your little eyes, they look like bee-stings.
Sweetest bird, my sweetest love, oh, oh, it'll soon be better.
D'you want a drink?
Chrissy?
Here, try it, just a little, come on.’
The child coughed and began to cry half-heartedly.
‘All right, never mind, hush, hush — listen Chrissy, what sort of a noise does a bee make, hmmn?’
There was a silence, then she laughed.
‘That's what he does, that's what he does, bzz, bzz.
Ooops-a-daisy, up he comes, bzz, bzz, he's coming, he's coming —’ The child made a noise which sounded like a mixture of laugh and cry.
‘Here he comes, no, no Chrissy, hush — listen, what does he do then?
Mmmn?
Off he goes, bzz, bzz, look-till he comes to the dog's house.
And he knocks on the door, tap tap tap with his little feet and he says, Bzz bzz, Mr Dog, have you got any flowers for me to eat?
And the dog says —?’
After a pause Chrissy's high voice sounded pathetically, ‘Woo, woo.’
‘Very good! and oh! up jumps the bee and goes buzzing over to the other side — to — to Max's book, and he says to Max, bzz, bzz Mr Max, have you got any flowers for me to eat? and Max says — ssh, can you hear him…?’
Her voice trailed off and started up again after a minute, in a whisper.
‘So the bee picked up his flowers and flew back home to his friend Christopher, and said, night night, Christopher.’
There was silence.
After a long while Alan opened the door a crack.
The room was very dim, he saw that she had suspended a shawl over the light, so that it shone dappled on walls and ceiling above.
Although it was so dark, it reminded him of summer, being under thick leafy forest trees in sunlight.
She was  sitting in the armchair with the baby curled over her left shoulder, his head buried in her neck, and both his hands clasped around her head.
Alan saw that her eyes were closed.
She had not heard the door as it softly brushed the carpet.
Christopher's outstretched right hand was running slowly through her hair, touching her head at the roots and pulling the hair outwards so that it fell back like a fan.
Alan saw that she herself stroked the back of the child's head rhythmically with her right hand.
Her face was relaxed.
He stepped forward, then stopped uselessly.
He wanted to tell her to come back to bed, to put the child down now he was quiet.
Something in the syncopated rhythmic movement of their two stroking hands stopped him though.
In the uneven forest-dappled light, the mother and child were quite self-contained.
He stood staring for another minute, then turned and, shutting the door silently behind him, went back to the cold bed.
Alan was having his breakfast when Carolyn came into the kitchen in her dressing gown.
‘Want some tea?
I was just going to bring you some.’
‘Please.
He's asleep, I don't know how long for.’
She slumped in a chair and folded her arms across her chest.
‘You look awful,’ Alan observed, pouring boiling water on to a teabag.
‘So does he.
It's horrible — it's really pathetic.
His little eyes are completely raw, he can hardly open them.’
She paused.
‘Thanks.
It's not just the spots, he's all puffed up and swollen with it.
I just feel as if there's nothing I can do.
He won't drink, hardly at all.’
She fell silent, sipping at her tea.
Alan watched her, noticing the pallor of her face and deep rings under her eyes.
‘When did you last go out of the house?’ he asked suddenly.
‘What?’
‘When did you last go out?’
‘I don't know.’
‘You didn't go out yesterday or the day before, I know.
Or Wednesday.
Did you go out on Tuesday?’
‘Alan, I don't know.
I don't even know what day it is.
Of course I can't go out while he's got a temperature.’
‘You'll make yourself ill.’
‘I'm all right.
I'm just tired.
I wish it was over, that's all.’
‘Why didn't you wake me?’
‘When?’
‘Last night.
When he woke up.’
‘Alan —’ she looked up at him, laughing disbelievingly.
‘What's the point?
He's not sleeping for more than two hours at a time at the moment.
I know what he needs.
I know where his medicine and his drink are, when I last changed him, everything.
There's no point in both of us being awake all night, it's not going to make him get better any quicker.’
‘In other words, you can do without me.’
‘Oh for God's sake, Alan.
You have to go to college don't you?
What am I supposed to do?’
There was silence while Alan turned the pages of the paper mechanically.
‘Well I'm at home today.
What needs doing?’
‘I don't know.
Do what you want.’
Speechless with weary anger, she cut herself two crooked slices of bread and put them under the grill.
‘Why are you so angry?’
‘Because — because it's just so unfair.
I'm up all night for nights and you don't thank me, you act as if I'm trying to exclude you from something.
All you think about is yourself.
It's incredible.’
‘All right!’ he shouted, jumping up and slapping the paper down on the table.
‘Sssh — shut up, don't wake him!’
Alan sat down again, knotting his legs around one another so that he made a dangerously tight parcel.
‘All right,’ he said quietly.
‘I'm selfish.
I go out all day to college having a lovely time while you stay at home making yourself ill.
I don't have to go.
I don't have to pass exams or get a job, we don't need the money — oh no, I do all this purely for my own amusement.’
‘I'm not talking to you.’
She stood by the oven, rubbing one bare foot against the other, glaring at the toast which was already burnt.
‘Carolyn!
It's on fire!’
He jumped up and tipped the flaming toast into the sink.
‘Sit down.
I'll make you some.’
When she was eating her toast he said, ‘What d'you want me to do today, then?
Why don't you go and have a sleep for a couple of hours while I keep an eye on Chris?’
‘I — no, he's — I want to — can you go to the chemist's for me?
He needs some more fruit juice.
Delrosa, get the orange and the rose-hip, and some disposable nappies?
I'm not — they're all dirty, I didn't do them yesterday, they won't be dry.
And something for dinner —’
‘OK.’
Alan went into the bathroom.
Carolyn sat with her eyes closed listening to the water running and the traffic outside.
Alan came in again.
‘No.
You go.’
She looked up blankly.
‘Look Carolyn, this is ridiculous.
You haven't been outside that door for days.
Ever since he got ill — for nearly a week, I bet.
If I can't look after my own son for a couple of hours while you go shopping, heaven help us.’
‘But Alan, he'll wake up soon.’
‘Good.
Why can't I give him his breakfast?
Get dressed and go, go on.’
Carolyn went slowly to the bedroom.
When she came back, tears were running down her face.
‘What's the matter?’
‘I don't want to go.
Alan, you go.’
‘Carolyn, you're becoming unhinged.
You know what you want to buy better than I do anyway.
What d'you think's going to happen?
D'you think I'll let him die?
Come on lass, pull yourself together.’
Kindly, he dried her face on a tea-towel, helped her on with her coat and shepherded her down the stairs.
‘I haven't looked at him,’ she wailed.
‘Carolyn, I'll go and look at him as soon as I shut the door on you.
Go on.
I'll see you soon.’
He stood for a moment listening to her standing still on the other side of the door, then heard her footsteps moving slowly away.
Running upstairs to the sitting-room window, he was in time to see her cross the road, staring up and down vaguely like a blind person.
It was ridiculous.
She was a nervous wreck, and all that was wrong with the child was measles.
He went quietly into Chrissy's room, stopping inside the door for a minute until his eyes adjusted to the dimness.
She had rigged up an old green bedspread over the thin cotton curtains, so the room was very dim with a murky greenish light.
Chrissy's breathing was fast and rasping in his throat.
He slept with his mouth open, lips pouting like a pig's snout.
His face was puffy and covered in dark blotches.
It looked  mishapen in this light, almost as if something was eating away at it.
His hair was like streaks of dirt on his head.
Alan put his fingertips close, touched the top of the head lightly.
Heat was radiating off it.
He crept back into the kitchen and made himself another cup of tea.
As he was stirring it he heard Christopher cough and start to cry.
Quickly he went to pick him up.
‘Hello Christopher, hello old mate.
Well, what's up then?
Would you like a drink, eh?’
He lifted the child gently from the cot.
Christopher's feeble complaining  cry continued.
Alan wrapped one of his cot blankets round his shoulders and took him to the kitchen to make a drink.
As they entered the kitchen Christopher let out a wail, ducking his head in towards Alan's body.
‘What's up?
What's the matter?’
The next scream was louder, Christopher's fist gouging at his eye sockets.
‘Oh God, the light.
I'm sorry Chris, I'm sorry.
All right, come on, let's go back.’
Alan took him back into his bedroom and walked up and down with him mechanically, trying to soothe him.
The crying diminished to a monotonous weary complaining level.
Alan sat in the armchair, setting Chrissy on his knees.
‘Would you like a drink, Christopher, eh?’
‘Dink! dink!’
The crying stopped a moment.
‘Good boy.
Good boy.
I'll get you one.
Look, you'll have to sit here and wait for me, all right?
You wait here while Daddy gets you a drink.’
‘Dink — DINK!’
As Alan sat him in his cot and left the room, Christopher began to howl in earnest again, interrupted by spasms of coughing which left him breathless.
Frantically, Alan searched the kitchen for the feeder cup.
It wasn't in the cupboard, the sink, on the draining board — was it in his room?
‘Hush, Christopher, drink's coming, coming in a minute.’
He found it on the floor by the armchair, rinsed it, poured it  halffull of milk.
‘All right Chrissy, here we are, here we are, it's coming now.
’ The child was still crying as Alan sat down with him, but he grasped greedily for the milk.
‘Here you are then.
Hold it yourself.
Steady — steady now —’
Christopher gulped at it and started to choke, spluttering milk all over both of them.
‘Oh Christopher!
Here, give it to me.
Come on, hey, hey, steady now.’
He patted the little boy gently on the back.
Chris started to cry again for the drink.
Alan gave it back to him, but when he had had two mouthfuls he let it drop.
‘Christopher?
Come on, drink up.
Don't you like it?
Come on old boy.’
With a peevish cry Christopher pushed it away.
‘Well what do you want?
What are you going to drink, Chrissy?
D'you want some juice?’
Christopher wriggled around on his lap, rubbing fiercely at his eyes.
Alan remembered that Carolyn had mentioned bathing them.
‘Shall we wash your eyes — hmmn?’
The blanket was useless, as Christopher wriggled and threshed.
‘Stop it — look, you'll get chilled.
Better put a jumper on — here, come on.’
It was a fight to get Christopher into the jumper.
He struggled and cried, his arms as bendy as rubber.
Alan left him howling in the cot again while he went for a bowl of water.
With water, cotton wool and towel laid ready on the chair arm, he lifted the hot screaming creature out of the cot and sat it on the chair.
‘Christopher — shush.
I'm going to make your eyes better, stop crying.’
He dipped the cotton wool in the water and dabbed at the livid puffy eyes.
The cries changed in tone, rising, terrified.
Christopher jerked back and kicked, and the bowl of water spilt into the chair, over his legs and over Alan.
Alan dabbed hurriedly at him with the towel and picked him up.
‘Hey-ey, I'm sorry Chrissy, shush, shush —’ He joggled him up and down, but the in-earnest high screams, punctuated with shuddering gasps for breath, continued remorselessly.
‘Would you like — look, here's your teddy, look, d'you want him to do a dance-Christopher?’
Alan tried in vain for the ensuing limbo of time to distract and comfort Chrissy.
The little boy was settled into a continuous breath-jerking crying, his eyes no more than slits now.
Alan imagined Carolyn detained; lost, run over.
What would he do?
Christopher hadn't even had any breakfast.
He hadn't been changed or taken his medicine.
Alan thought of the little scene he had witnessed the previous night.
He even tried repeating the bee.
‘Bzz, bzz, what did he say to the dog?
’ But the slit-eyes looked through him as if he did not exist.
Which he didn't, he realized sharply, for Chrissy.
Chrissy's howls were those of someone abandoned, utterly desolate.
Alan could be of no use to him.
All he wanted was Carolyn.
‘Christopher!
Stop it!
I'm here, what d'you want?
A drink? sweet?’
The screams continued unchanged.
‘I'm going to put you back to bed if you don't stop it.
D'you hear?’
Alan put him back in his bed and Chris continued to scream hoarsely, with no increase or lessening of force.
Alan stood outside the door, arms by his side, fists clenched, listening.
Gradually the intensity of sound diminished.
There was a moment's silence, broken by sucking noises.
He was sucking his thumb.
Within a few minutes of shuddering breaths, hiccups, and desperate sucking sounds, silence fell.
At last Alan gently pushed the door open, to see that Chris was slumped against the bars of his cot, bent double, his thumb rammed into his mouth.
Bitterly Alan pulled the blanket up around him, and went to the kitchen.
What had settled his son at last was sheer exhaustion, and Alan's absence.
Chris was still asleep when Carolyn came home, and she was relieved to hear that he had been fine while she was out.
Over the next few days he made a remarkably swift recovery.
Soon they were laughing over the  melodrama of it; how quickly he had seemed to arrive at death's door, and how absurdly soon afterwards he was stuffing his face and bouncing with health.
‘It's like a speeded-up version of an adult illness,’ said Carolyn, who still looked white and exhausted, two weeks after Chris was fully recovered.
They were in the kitchen, sitting over cups of coffee, reluctant to move to do the washing up.
Chris was asleep, and outside in the dark, snow was falling silently.
They found themselves both staring out, at the flakes which fell within the window's patch of illumination, large and white against the blackness.
‘It's so soft,’ Carolyn said after a long silence.
‘The flakes are almost floating.’
Alan moved to the window.
‘Soft it may be, but it's sticking.
It's already covered the lawn.
I bet you roads'll be blocked in the morning.’
‘It seems incredible,’ she said dreamily, hypnotized by the slow constant motion.
Staring out at the dim white lawn, through the close-up falling lines of black and white, Alan said quietly, ‘You love him more than me, don't you?’’
Christopher?’
She did not seem surprised.
‘Yes, I suppose I do.’
There was a silence.
‘He needs me more than you do,’ she said, as if that was an explanation.
Alan waited.
Outside, the snow blotted out the last irregularities in the flowerbed, making it one with the lawn.
‘You don't mind, do you?’ she said, rousing herself.
‘Surely it's natural-don't you feel the same?
He's completely dependent on us.
It's nature's way of making sure we look after him properly, I suppose.’
She stood up, beginning to stack the plates.
‘After all, you'd survive if I disappeared, wouldn't you?
It would be harder for him.’
‘Yes,’ said Alan.
‘I suppose so.’
A snowflake touched the glass, stuck there for a moment then melted.
He turned to help her clear the table.
Chapter 13
Caro got off the near-empty Sunday bus and walked quickly through the light drizzle towards her parents' house.
She was laden with presents from the garden: lettuce, spring onions, radishes, and a large bunch of sweet peas.
There was not a lot of point in bringing these gifts, since her father's allotment kept them well supplied with fresh vegetables (although he did not grow sweet peas, considering them more trouble than they were worth).
But she brought them because it salved her conscience to bring something, and she had not been for two weeks now.
In the three years since her father had first called so unexpectedly at the Red House, she had made an effort to see her mother most Sundays.
It was rare for her to have missed two in a row, as now.
She had had to work the first Sunday.
There had been the usual final frenzy to get the parks ready for festival week, and various people had been smitten with untimely summer flu.
She had ended up, ludicrously enough, supervising the planting out of the county coat of arms in tiny flowering plants.
And last Sunday had been Clare's birthday, and Clare's only day off that week.
They had got up early and gone for a swim in the reservoir, which was deserted and silk-smooth, with a pearly mist hovering a clear foot above its surface.
She had planned to get over to her mother's by the afternoon, but the day had been so rare that neither of them could bear to finish it.
Only three or four times, in the whole of the past three years, had they actually had the luxury of a whole day together.
Both of them (for different reasons) were anxious about seeming to exclude the rest of the household, each of them still (even after so long) unsure of her claims on the other.
Fear, on Clare's part, and a natural fastidiousness on Caro's, kept them from ever spelling out their relationship.
As she flicked over memories of the day — embracing in the cold silken water, under that mysterious layer of white mist which cut off the sky above yet gave clear vision to the other side, a quarter of a mile away — the sense of wicked escape, as they laughed together in the empty lunch-time pub…she decided that she would tell her mother she'd been working both Sundays.
There were many things it was not possible to discuss with her mother.
The estate seemed small and sad in the rain.
How she hated these arid little gardens with their square yard of grass and ugly bare borders, the nasty little brick wall surrounds.
The design and planning that had gone into these places was minimal.
And yet people were glad to live here.
Grateful for ‘a garden’.
She would sweep the lot away; if no more land was available, at least knock down all the petty walls and create a line of planting to lead the eye along the (not unpleasing) curve of the road; use shrubs and bushes, plan for mature growth on a large scale.
Lined with trees, shaded by trees, how different this road might look.
She narrowed her eyes to send the close out of focus, and painted in broad splashes of border colour — a bank of lupins there, clumps of huge red poppies over here.
She sighed as she turned in at her parents' tasteful wrought-iron gate.
They wouldn't like it anyway.
They were all happy to have their own tiny enclosed plot of garden, and to labour to keep it nice and bare.
That was really seen as the crowning achievement, keeping your garden clear of weeds — not what you managed to grow in the space.
Even her father, for whose gardening abilities she now had a deep respect, did not deviate from the norm.
Although he grew beautiful flowers for competition in his tiny greenhouse on the allotment, he was content for the front garden to consist of a small shaved lawn and empty flower bed with two statutory rose bushes and a border of tedious alyssum.
She caught a glimpse of her mother watching for her through the window, before the net curtain dropped.
But she knew Meg would wait for her to knock, and then take her time coming to the door — pretending, of course, that Carolyn's arrival was a complete surprise.
‘Hello Mum!’
‘Haven't you got an umbrella?
Your hair's soaking wet.’
Meg wished she hadn't said it before it was out of her mouth.
‘Come  in, come in.
How are you love?
We've missed you these last two weeks.’
‘I know, I'm sorry Mum.
I've been working.
It's been really frantic this summer.
But things should quieten down a bit now, that's the end of the festival fuss.’
Meg nodded.
Caro knew she wasn't listening.
She handed over her bag of vegetables, which Meg put away in the kitchen without examining.
She took them for granted, of course.
Arthur brought them every week.
But Caro couldn't help feeling snubbed that her mother had not given the lettuce a little squeeze, to see how good and hearty it was, or commented on the size and perfect shape of the radishes.
Caro began to arrange the sweet peas in a vase.
‘Here, dry your hair, you'll catch your death.
Leave those, they can wait.’
Meg fussed around her with a towel and hairdryer.
‘Haven't you got any better shoes than that?
They're not very practical for this weather, are they?’
Caro looked down at her battered pumps and wished she'd remembered to change them.
‘Take them off and let's get them dry, you can borrow my slippers for the time being.
Eeh, I'm beginning to think those legs of yours have disappeared, it's so long since I saw them.
Haven't you got any skirts any more?’
Caro had ironed a clean pair of jeans especially for this visit.
‘Skirts aren't very practical, in my line of work, Mum.’
‘No, I don't suppose they are.
Funny sort of thing for a girl to be doing.
But when you start your course you won't be grubbing about in the soil all the time, will you?
Shall I buy you a skirt for the beginning of term?
Would you like that?’
Caro turned on the hairdryer and saved her answer for a couple of minutes, which gave her time to make it tactful.
‘You know what I'd really like, Mum?
Remember that big sloppy jumper you knitted me when I was in the sixth form — that maroon one?
Would you make me another?’
Her mother's face lit up.
‘Well that's easy enough.
Of course I will.
Just plain?
What colour would you like?’
‘Oh — the same — or, is there anything nice in green?
A sort of deep green, bottle-green?’
Meg reflected.
‘There might be, in the new chunky that's just come in.
I'll have a look on Monday.
What size are you now?’
Caro repressed a sigh.
‘I'm just the same size I've always been, Mum.
Thirty-two.’
Meg shook her head decisively.
‘You're never a thirty-two now, my girl.
I don't know what you eat but it's certainly not very nourishing.
You look as if you've been in a concentration camp you do! and that's the truth.
You've never got up to your proper weight again since the — since — since you — you know.’
Caro had noticed before the way her mother always avoided referring to the accident and Caro's time in hospital, almost as if it were something obscene.
‘Come along now and get some dinner inside you, if that hair's dry.
It's on the table waiting.’
Caro went into the dining area.
‘Dad at the allotment?’
‘Mmn.’
‘I'll pop down and see him after dinner.’
‘He'll be up for his tea.’
Meg's tone was injured.
But he doesn't say anything when he comes in here, Caro told her mother silently.
I like to go to the allotment.
We can compare the growth of our peas and beans, and moan about the weather.
‘We could both wander down, perhaps, if the rain stops.
It'll be nice and fresh.’
‘Hmph.’
Her mother put a huge shepherd's pie on the table.
It was a bad idea, her mother would complain about the mud and her father would say nothing.
‘Now, get some of this inside you and you'll look a bit more like.
What do you eat for your dinners?’
‘I eat a lot, Mum.
Stews, curries, salads, all sorts.
Honestly.’
Meg said nothing, but continued to ladle more food on to an already impossibly large helping.
‘Stop — stop, please, that's enough.’
After they had eaten, her mother let Caro make them both a cup of tea.
‘Tell me a bit about this course of yours, love.
Jean was asking me the other day, and really, you've told me next to nothing.
I felt a bit of a fool.’
Caro clenched and unclenched her toes in her mother's too warm slippers.
‘Well, it's just what it says, landscape architecture.
Learning  about landscape design, you know — using natural features, hills or rivers or whatever — and improving on it.
Like — you've heard of Capability Brown?’
Meg had heard of him, and Caro saw it was what she wanted to hear.
Her mother so much wanted her to be doing something prestigious, Caro thought bitterly, something she could boast about to her  woolshop cronies, after all that dreadful ‘grubbing about in the park’.
She had been appalled by Caro's first job, lowly assistant gardener in Limetree Park, riding across the lawns on a great smelly mower, digging out dead bedding plants and dragging pruned branches to bonfires.
‘It's no sort of job for a girl,’ she had complained.
She said she wouldn't go in the park any more, she would be too ashamed if she met Carolyn, covered in muck and wearing dirty overalls, doing some filthy job.
Caro had been so delighted by the job (spotted by Sue, an advert in the local paper) that she could feel no sympathy for her mother's whinings, and the Sunday visits had been stiff with hostile silences.
Caro supposed her mother had got used to it, as Caro got better at the job and was given a spell of greenhouse work, then offered day release to improve her qualifications.
She'd been taken on by Harman almost as — well yes, his protégé really.
He'd encouraged her to look with his eyes — a planner's eyes — at the scope of the whole thing; to raise her sights from the individual plant in the bed, to the design of the whole park, and the needs and expectations it must fulfil.
So she had applied, at last, for the course.
With Harman's blessing they were seconding her.
She had been lucky.
And at last her mother was coming round, seduced by ‘landscape’ and ‘architect’, nice clean professional words, nothing to do with grubbing around in the earth.
Let her enjoy it, Caro told herself; seldom enough you please her.
Outside, the drizzle continued.
The afternoon was passing appallingly slowly.
Caro washed up and her mother dried, making her usual little jokes about how Carolyn couldn't dry because she must have forgotten where everything went, by now.
Then came the routine questions about the household, and ‘those poor children’, by which her mother meant Robin and Sylvia.
She had visited the Red House once only, at Caro's invitation.
Caro had spent the preceding day cleaning and tidying, but her mother had come determined to disapprove and  did so easily.
She pretended (Caro was sure it was pretence) to be particularly worried about the two poor fatherless children, and always asked after them.
And yet she's jealous if I want to see Dad on my own, Caro thought.
She would have been quite happy to have fatherless children.
Was that fair?
It was certainly hard to see much in her parents' relationship; it seemed to Caro now a sad empty thing.
They looked after each other, that was all, as each of them might have cared for a pet and been solicitous for its well-being.
When Caro made her escape after tea it was with all the usual feelings of guilt and frustration; with her mother suggesting brightly, ‘Just let me measure you for that new jumper before you go, Carolyn,’ and, ‘Did I show you the new suite we were thinking of getting, in the catalogue?
Just a minute…’ and finally, ‘Well, I expect we'll see you when you've the time,’as if she only visited them twice a year.
Her father looked up from the newspaper and nodded.
He had not said a word.
Her mother came out and stood at the gate waving until Caro had walked out of sight, and Caro had to force herself not to run to escape that imploring cloying gaze.
Sitting in Clare's room late that night, Caro and Clare talked about Caro's mother.
‘She always manages to make me feel guilty.
Every aspect of me is wrong: the way I look, how I dress, what I eat, what I do…
I can't do anything right.’
‘Uh huh,’ said Clare, who was lying on the floor smoking, with her eyes closed.
‘That's because she made you.
How would you feel if you knitted yourself a nice little doll, out of the most expensive yarn you could buy, and spent the best years of your life working on it to make it as perfect as you could — then it suddenly got up and walked away and turned into something different?’
There was a silence.
She had been at a Women's Aid conference in London all weekend, and she was tired and depressed.
‘You always oversimplify,’ Caro said softly.
‘What a world you live in — all mothers are possessive predators — all men are potential rapists.’’
Yeah,’ said Clare without opening her eyes.
‘Tell me how the  world's different.
You missed out that mothers are also oppressed sisters.’
‘Well how do you resolve that?’
Caro asked innocently.
‘I don't know.
I don't resolve it.
I don't oversimplify.
But it helps you make sense of the world, you know, if you have an analysis to hang things on.’
Clare let herself get angry.
She sat up.
‘It's so easy, isn't it, to condemn us?
It's so nice and easy to say we oversimplify, and there are all these examples that disprove this and disprove that — all these nice men, all these women with great careers — isn't it?
If it was left to your subtlety and refinement, nothing would change, ever.
You'd never get it together to say ‘this is unfair’, ‘this should be changed’, because you'd be too busy counting the exceptions.
You're not the only person who's noticed that the world's complicated and everyone's different, Caro.
But you appear not to have noticed a few glaring facts like that women in general don't rape men, or beat them up, or design weapons or make the laws and enforce them or hold enough jobs of influence and authority to make an iota of difference to the way this bloody patriarchal shit-heap is run.’
There was a long silence.
Clare lit another cigarette and lay down slowly, closing her eyes.
‘All right,’ said Caro.
‘I'm sorry.’
After a long pause Clare opened her eyes and looked at Caro.
‘No you're not.’
There was an edge of humour in her voice.
‘You're a self-opinionated self-righteous little turd.’
‘Yes,’ said Caro.
‘I am.
Have you stopped being angry?
Can I explain about my mother?’
‘If you must.’
Clare closed her eyes again.
‘Well, what I was going to say is, look at her good points.’
‘What are they?’
‘There are lots.
She is a kind and thoughtful provider — of home comfort, food, clean sheets, ironed shirts, fresh bread — all the things you take for granted at home.’
‘Yeah.’
‘She cares about me and Dad more than anyone else in the world.
She'd do anything for us — and we both know that, which means I suppose that we have a sort of shell of security which goes with us everywhere.’
Clare blew a smoke ring.
‘She's prepared to adapt her life to ours in any way.’
‘Is she?
Isn't that bad?’
Caro hesitated.
‘I don't know.’
She paused.
‘What I was thinking about was Mrs Ramsay.’
Clare rolled over on her stomach.
Always (and she always forgot it) came this moment of poignancy with Caro.
She wondered if it was how she would define love.
When she was most irritated by Caro's holier-than-thou, most nearly offended by how stupid/insensitive Caro must think her, with her ‘what a world you live in’, and was thinking ‘How young, how predictable, how limited you are,’ came the twist in the conversation, the unexpected note, that looking back along the line of the conversation, was the note Caro had been heading for all the time.
But it almost hurts, she thought, it's sharp like a knife.
You can think you know someone as well as yourself, but then you are caught up, surprised, by something they say.
You love them because they're different, they say the thing you don't expect.
But why is it so poignant? she wondered.
Because you see with her eyes for a moment, share her vision, escape yourself — it renews and twists the love, because it reminds you you don't know her, don't own her.
So in the moment of escape from self comes the reminder of isolation.
All our lives, she thought, we are after union; join me, love me, fuck me.
Let us be one.
And at each instant of its happening, its bitter-sweet wonder is that you know it can't last.
We are all, for nearly always, single.
She was very tired; an uncharacteristic wave of sentimentality — of pity, almost, for all living things, brought tears to her eyes and made her want to clasp her arms round Caro.
‘Mrs Ramsay,’ she said.
‘I thought you'd gone to sleep.’
‘No.
I was just thinking.
Tell me about Mrs Ramsay.’
‘To the Lighthouse.
You must have read it.
You lent it me.’
‘Yes, I've read it.’
‘Well — look at her.
She comes across as wonderful, doesn't she?
She's the heart of the book — her presence brings order and happiness.
She's kind to everyone, puts everyone before herself, is all things to all people — mother to James, wife to her husband…
And I was thinking, do you remember, the wonderful bit about the sheep's skull in the children's bedroom?’
‘Yes,’ said Clare drily.
‘She covers it up and tells the little girl it's full of fairies and pretty make-believe so she mustn't be  scared, and she tells the boy it's really there, dead, under the shawl.’
‘I — oh Clare, surely it's to do with the ages they are, not the sexes?’
Clare shrugged.
‘Little girls can't cope with nasty reality.’
She was both satisfied and angry with herself for having tripped Caro so neatly.
‘Go on, anyway.’
‘All I wanted to say was — her life is devoted to serving and servicing others — and the book shows that by playing that role that that role adds more to human happiness and richness than anything else.
And what is it — what is it but, to a better degree, the qualities of my mother?
Or anyone's mother; loving, giving, selflessly…’
There was a silence.
Caro thought Clare had not understood her.
‘They're all motherly and wifely things — thinking of others, wanting people to get on together, wanting to provide nice food and pleasant surroundings and calm everyone's fears…’
‘Yes, yes, I know.’
Clare sounded impatient.
‘Are you sure it's all good?
What about Lily Briscoe?’
‘I knew you were going to say that,’ said Caro.
Did you, Clare thought, did you?
Don't I ever surprise you, and twist a knife in your heart?
She spoke harshly.
‘All right: firstly, she survives Mrs Ramsay and paints a picture which catches the whole thing.
She's the artist.
It's the book.
She makes the thing that lasts.
What is it she says —‘Time stand still’ something like that —?’
She stood, groping along the shelves for the book.
‘It's here, at the end.
I only put it back on Friday.
Yes, you're right.’
‘But also — she herself loves Mrs Ramsay, doesn't she —’
‘Yes.’
‘But she criticizes her.
Doesn't she say — doesn't she imply it's selfish, the way Mrs Ramsay gets everyone to need her so much?
Isn't that the heart of it?
That those kinds of women make everyone need them and rely on them, so they foster an array of — of emotional cripples around them.
Look at her husband.
He's an emotional cripple.
She bolsters him up and feeds his ego and tells him he's wonderful — is it kind?
Is it right?’
Clare was turning  the pages of the book furiously.
‘Here,’ she said at last.
‘Remember when she's dead?
Ramsay's organizing the trip to the lighthouse at last and Lily's trying to paint, and he comes up demanding sympathy.
Remember?
Listen — Lily thinking: ‘That man, she thought, her anger rising in her, never gave; that man took.
She, on the other hand, would be forced to give.
Mrs Ramsay had given.
Giving, giving, giving, she had died — and had left all this.
Really, she was angry with Mrs Ramsay.’’
She looked up at Caro.
‘Once she's dead they fall to pieces.
She made herself indispensable.
Isn't that an amazingly selfish thing to do?’
‘But —’ Caro stammered.
‘You twist it Clare.
You do —’
‘No.
I don't think so.’
Clare was suddenly full of energy again, harsh, intent.
She hated Mrs Ramsay and all she stood for.
She thumbed the pages quickly, her eyes running up and down over the print.
‘Listen — here, she's condemned out of her own mouth — going up the stairs after dinner: ‘They would,[Mrs Ramsay]thought, going on again, however long they lived, come back to this night; to this moon; this wind; this house; and to her too.
It flattered her, where she was most susceptible of flattery, to think how, wound about in their hearts, however long they lived she would be woven —’ See?
And anyway —’ Clare sat again, holding the book still before her face but looking over it at Caro’— It's all very well isn't it, being the gracious model of womanhood, with a tribe of servants around you.
What about the woman who does the cooking?
And the one who cleans?
And the poor little nanny who spends the whole book upstairs crying for her dying father?
Of course Mrs Ramsay can be bloody gracious and beautiful, on the back of everyone else's hard work.
What if she had to do it all herself, like your Mum and mine?’
‘Then she'd be that much less gracious and beautiful, as they are!’ said Caro, with a triumphant laugh.
‘You've just come out on my side of the argument.
All I'm saying is that those motherly qualities are good, and necessary, when you're dealing with children.
Maybe with men too, God knows.
And it seems a bit much to suddenly turn round when you're grown up and say to the mother, ‘No, you shouldn't be like that.
You should put yourself first and not care or be possessive about your children, or about making your husband the breadwinner happy, or making the home a nice place to be.’’
Clare seemed to be studying the cover of the book.
Then she let it fall open, and began to read immediately, as if she had known it, ‘'Why,[Mrs Ramsay]asked, pressing her chin on James’ head, should they grow up so fast?
Why should they go to school?
She would have liked always to have had a baby.
She was happiest carrying one in her arms.’’
Caro looked down.
‘I think you have to be like that, to be a good mother,’ she said.
‘It comes back to where I started.
My Mum.
What I hate in her now, I needed then.
But why should I expect her to change just because I have?’
Clare laughed shortly.
‘If I were you, I should provide her immediately with a clutch of grandchildren to look after, and she can go on being happily the same until the day she dies.’
‘I'd like to have children, I think.’
Caro was ignoring Clare's tone.
She didn't want the conversation to end.
‘I would like to, I think — but I'm afraid I might be like that — I think I would want to be like that.
If you care about changing women's lives you've got to consider that Clare, you can't just throw Mrs Ramsay out —’
‘No,’ said Clare.
‘I know, Caro.
It's complicated.’
Her tone was suddenly flat and weary.
Looking at her Caro nearly jumped with the shock of remembering that Clare had a child, that Clare had thrown it out.
‘Clare?’
‘Yes?’
‘I'm sorry.
I wasn't thinking — I was being awful —’
‘No.
It's all right.
My son, you mean?
I think the trouble is, perhaps, people think Mrs Ramsay is the way to be a mother.
And I'm not really prepared to be that…
But —’ she said, her voice suddenly bitter, ‘I'm not in a position to talk, since all I could do was run — eh?
You should be talking to Sue.
I'm tired, Caro.
Are you going to bed?’
‘Clare — I'm sorry.’
‘OK.
Goodnight.’
Clare's voice was light, brittle.
When she was hurt she put herself out of reach; Caro knew that by now, and she would have given a lot to undo the conversation.
She hesitated on the stairs, knowing it would be difficult to sleep then went down to the kitchen.
Bryony was there, making toasted cheese under the grill.
‘D'you want a bit?’
‘OK.
Thanks.’
‘What's the matter?’
‘Nothing.
What's the time?’
‘Half eleven.’
Bryony took the toast out and began to smear it with tomato chutney.
The jars had been recycled at last; Caro's tomatoes had ripened all at once , last September, and she and Bryony had filled sixteen jars with chutney.
‘Aren't you working tomorrow?
What time d'you start?’
‘Six.
It's OK.
I'm getting good at walking in my sleep.’
Bryony had finally found a job she liked, after various bizarre false starts, and months on social security.
She was a postwoman, walking on a round that actually included their own street.
It seemed to Caro that she had probably discovered the only job in the world which was suited to her strange requirements.
She wanted to be out in the open air, but excluded farming and gardening because of the evils of chemical fertilizers, pesticides, and hybrid animals/plants which deviated from nature's intentions.
(‘Nature intended them all to be small and prickly,’ Clare had pointed out unkindly in one animated discussion.)
She did not want to be responsible for the reckless consumption of any of the earth's resources in the shape of fuel, and so a round on foot suited her perfectly.
She did not want to be employed by a private, capitalist firm; the GPO was at least nationalized.
She did not want to find herself in a hierarchical situation in relation to others at work, thereby creating false barriers and reinforcing the capitalist class structure.
Since she did her round alone, this was not a problem.
She wanted to wear what she liked, or at least sensible clothes and her everlasting shoes, which she could do.
She wanted to have some measure of control over her own productivity — which she could exercise by walking more quickly or slowly.
And she wanted to be doing something manifestly useful.
Which it was.
There were problems about being the carrier of bills, final demands, and offensive advertising material, but as far as Caro knew Bryony overcame her scruples sufficiently to deliver all mail except for a succession of very obvious plain brown envelopes, which were frequently sent to one particular address on her route.
These she threw away, rightly assuming that whoever had requested such filthy pornography would be too embarrassed to complain about its non-arrival.
Caro liked Bryony very much, now.
It had taken a long time for the initial hostility and suspicion between them to wear off.
Bryony was the most definite, dogmatic, and (in the defence of her own ideas) fierce person Caro had ever met at close quarters.
She was also absolutely open and honest; her integrity blazed through all the details of cranky behaviour which the execution of her principles in her daily life demanded of her.
She was intolerant and contemptuous of the majority of the human race, whom she saw as wasteful, deluded, and politically ignorant.
In particular she disliked men, because her political analysis revealed them to be oppressors, and responsible as a sex for many of the worst aspects of our civilization (war, the arms race, the stock exchange, rape, science, motor cars, additives to food, defoliants, hospital management of childbirth, competitions, multinational companies, cosmetics, pornography and vivisection).
Because she disliked men, she did not cultivate their friendship.
She was intensely loyal and endlessly kind to those (women) she knew well and respected.
They ate their toast in silence.
When they had finished Bryony put the kettle on and asked again, ‘What's up?’
‘Oh — I don't know.
I've been talking to Clare.’
Bryony nodded.
‘It was my fault.
I was talking about children.
I always forget — it just doesn't seem to go with her, having a kid.’
‘No.
It does seem odd.’
There was another silence, then Bryony said, ‘Do you want kids?’
‘I don't know.
Maybe.
Do you?’
‘No.
Oh no — I wouldn't want to be responsible for landing someone else in this mess.’
‘Well — it's not — like that, is it?
In practice?
I mean, you look after it and protect it…’
‘For a bit.
You're not going to be able to protect it from radiation, are you? or brain damage caused by lead in the atmosphere? or cancer caused by preservatives in food?’
‘No.
I suppose not.’
Bryony busied herself making coffee.
Her voice softened.
‘In a way I would like to very much.
But — what right have we got?’
‘None.
But people do.’
‘Yes.
People do.’
She sat down again.
‘There are-’ Carolyn hesitated’— there have always been external dangers, anyway.
I mean, children used to die of diseases which are stamped out now.
Children used to have to work in dreadful conditions, in factories and mines.
There have always been wars.
If everyone had waited until they could promise their children a safe life, the human race would be extinct.’
‘Yes.
But — some situations are worse than others.
People stop having children when the future they face is too appalling.
Look at the Red Indians.
If you have a child, OK, you know it may die of illness or accident — but isn't it different, if you know the whole world might be blown up and poisoned?’
‘But you can't be responsible for the world, Bryony.’
‘Who will be then?’
‘I don't know.’
‘Even on a small scale — all right?
Even the things that are within your scope.
A child's education — they would teach it things I didn't want it to learn, at school.
It would pick up all sorts of violent, sexist ideas from TV —’
‘You'd want to control its life.’
‘Yes.’
‘But people have to make their own choices.’
‘It's not a choice, though, is it?
If you grew up in a certain kind of society, you adopt its values.’
‘You didn't.’
‘No.
But I'm a freak.’
‘Well, you might have a freakish child.’
Bryony laughed.
‘I might.
Better not to have one, I think.’
She put her mug in the sink and said goodnight.
Caro waited in the kitchen till she heard Bryony's heavy tread going from the bathroom to her bedroom.
Then she went upstairs herself.
Caro dreamed she was driving along a straight empty road.
The grassy countryside was flat on either side, stretching away as far as the eye could see.
The bare road bisected it like a parting.
There were no other cars.
She pressed her foot down and the car leapt forwards along the road.
She was going faster than the wind but nothing moved, there were no landmarks, simply more of the same scenery.
It was like running on the spot.
Then there was a  dot in the distance, on the left side of the road.
It grew bigger with incredible speed, she was whizzing towards it.
She must slow down or she'd miss it.
She took her foot off the accelerator and put it on the brake, and as the car slowed she could see now that it was a child, a toddler with a red woolly hat on.
His back was to her, he was toddling along purposefully in the same direction as her, across that bleak empty landscape.
She stopped next to him but he ignored her and kept on walking.
She moved on and pulled up in front of him.
‘I'll give you a lift,’ she called, and opened the passenger door.
The child looked at her and climbed up on to the seat.
He did not say anything.
She leaned across to pull the door shut after him and felt his warm breath on her cheek.
‘Where are you going?’ she asked, but he didn't answer.
She thought, he's too young, he can't talk yet.
He sat leaning against the back of the seat with his legs stretched out straight in front of him.
His feet in their little red shoes just reached the edge of the seat.
He was tiny.
He was wearing blue trousers and little white socks.
He stared ahead through the windscreen, his hands clasped in his lap, and she started to drive again.
On and on they went, and the scenery never changed.
She didn't know if they had been driving for minutes or days.
The little boy sat still and never moved.
But each time she glanced at him she felt a shock.
He was so small.
He's getting smaller, she thought, and she tried to watch him as she drove.
But she couldn't see him getting smaller, any more than you can watch a plant growing.
She was convinced he was shrinking.
He was staring at the glove box now, he was too low to see out of the window.
But his clothes must be shrinking too, she thought, that's not possible.
His little red hat and shoes still fitted him.
But he was tiny now, his feet only reached to halfway across the seat, he was only about twelve inches tall.
What if he vanishes? she thought.
Oh no, he couldn't, how silly.
How silly I am.
She felt relieved and pressed her foot down again.
In the distance now she could see a big silvery building.
It was the hospital.
Not long now, she thought, they'll soon see if there's anything wrong with him.
As the hospital grew bigger and nearer, she glanced again at the little boy and saw with horror that he was tiny.
He was nestling in the crack at the back of the  seat, he was smaller than a doll, he was no more than five inches long.
Desperately she pressed on but she knew with an awful certainty that he would vanish before she got there.
She picked him up with her left hand and held him clasped in her palm.
She could feel him shrinking by the second.
Only one thing to do, she told herself, to make sure he's safe.
And she opened her mouth and put him inside, on top of her tongue.
He'll be quite safe now.
Carefully she turned in through the wide hospital gates.
She was so relieved that she had saved him.
She jumped out and ran through the swing doors and over to a desk where a nurse in a white uniform sat waiting.
‘It's a baby,’ she said, ‘he's shrinking but I think he can be saved.’
She put her fingers into her mouth to take him out — There was nothing there.
He'd gone.
She cried and rammed her fingers down her throat.
‘I've swallowed — I must have swallowed him —’ There was a bitter taste in her mouth, a dusty lumpy bitter taste of lemons and ashes dissolving, dissolving…
The nurse looked at her calmly and smiled.
‘You've got to get him out!’ she screamed, and the nurse smiled and shook her head.
‘I'm sorry we can't help you dear,’ she said.
Caro woke up covered in sweat, the bitter taste still in her throat.
Chapter 14
When Alan and Carolyn had been married for four years, Alan's grandmother (Lucy's mother) died, leaving him and Pamela £20,000 each.
Everyone was surprised.
Lucy and her mother had fallen out years before, and the children hardly knew her.
She had lived alone, with a housekeeper and gardener, ever since her husband died of a heart attack thirty years before.
To Lucy, her only child, she left nothing.
Coinciding as it did with Alan's trainee appointment to the firm of Lark and Clarkson, Architects, back in the city where he was born, the money marked the beginning of a new era in Alan and Carolyn's married life.
Suddenly they zoomed up the social scale.
Or rather, Alan bobbed back, to float again at that level from which (in his family's eyes at least) Carolyn had dragged him down.
They bought a house in the wealthy area to the south of the city some twenty miles away from their parents.
It was ‘respectable semi-detached Victorian gothic’, according to Alan.
A palace, Carolyn told herself, a dream house.
The roof sloped steeply, and the front of the house was ornamented with mock-Tudor black and white beams.
There were four bedrooms.
In the back garden, the oval lawn was surrounded by beautifully tended flowering shrubs and bushes, giving complete privacy.
Alan lay on his back on the grass, hands clasped under his head, eyes closed.
The sun was pleasantly warm on his skin.
From the garden around him came murmurs of sound which were as soothingly constant as the sunshine.
He could hear Carolyn reading a story to Annie, the words coming clear at certain points then fading back to a murmur.
‘UP jumped the troll…
I want to eat you up.
No!
No! mmmm mm mmmm…’
He could hear the constant rapid clicking of Meg's knitting needles, and her erratic conversation with Christopher, who was lying on the grass at her feet, drawing.
‘What's that, Chrissy?’
‘It's a rocket.’
Long pause.
‘Ninety-two.
Is it?
That's very good.
Will you do me one to take home with me and put on the wall?’
Rustle of paper.
‘Of — what?’
Christopher's serious childish voice, making that odd little pause between words, as if he still needed to think of them.
‘Um — just a minute love — a hundred and ninety-four, good.
Um, do one of your Mummy and Daddy for me, will you?’
Further away, intermittent, came the sound of Arthur's clippers.
He was having a go at the privet hen.
The privet hen had been a joke ever since they moved in; a piece of topiary of which the house's previous owner had been inordinately proud.
Very quickly it grew ragged and dishevelled.
Carolyn had had a couple of goes at it and made it into — well, more of a privet dodo than a hen.
Now at her request Arthur tackled it, serious and silent as ever.
Alan was glad he was busy.
There was, even now, a strain between the two men.
‘We must be going, Carolyn,’ Meg raised her voice to interrupt.
‘You're sure you won't stay for tea?’
‘No love, we'd rather get back before it's late.
Your Dad'll want to pop down and see his blessed allotment before we go to bed anyway.
We've had a lovely day, haven't we Arthur?
And I've got a piece of ham that'll spoil if we don't eat it tonight.’
‘There's plenty of food.’
‘I know there is love, I know there is.’
Annie started to clamour for the story to go on.
‘Stand up a minute, Christopher, and let me measure this.’
The clicking stopped and Meg muttered to herself.
‘There's a good boy — oh yes, that's plenty long enough.
Carolyn —?’
Carolyn stopped reading again.
‘I'll get this finished this week.
Will you be coming over next weekend?’
‘No, it's all right Mum.
He won't need it for a bit if this weather goes on.
Anyway, I'll be seeing you before long.
I think Alan's got a weekend course coming up.
Alan?
Oh, is he asleep?’
Alan pretended to be.
‘I'll find out when it is, anyway.
I think it might be the week after next.
I'll bring the children over to see you then.’
‘On the train?’
‘Yes, if Dad'll meet me at the station —’
‘Of course he will.
We shall look forward to that.
Will you come and stay at Nana's house, Chrissy?
Well, let's get ourselves sorted out.’
He heard the garden chair squeak and sigh as she heaved herself out of ‘I'll just give you a lift with these pots before we go.’
‘Oh no, it's all right Mum, leave them.
I'll do them later, it won't take long.’
‘Well at least I'll get them into the kitchen for you, I can't leave you with all this mess, can I Chrissy?’
Christopher didn't reply, sensibly enough, thought Alan, and he listened to the clink of china and cutlery as the two women cleared the coffee cups and last few lunch things.
‘It is nice,’ Meg was saying, ‘to sit out here.
Like being on holiday, isn't it?
It makes a lovely change, it's so nice and private here.
You couldn't eat outside on our street, you'd have all the neighbours counting the peas on your fork…’
Her voice and the rattle of pots faded away into the house, and he heard, close to, Annie's uncontrolled chortle as she approached him with some wicked intent.
He could hear her becoming still next to him, trying to decide how best to attack, and he grinned in readiness.
Then she flung herself on to his stomach, squealing with delight, and he began to tickle her.
At last Meg and Arthur took their leave.
Carolyn was just sitting down again, with her ‘thanks-for-putting-up-with-them-and-that-wasn't-too-bad-was-it?’ smile, when the doorbell rang.
Alan raised his eyebrows and smiled at her.
‘What've they forgotten?
Knitting needle?
Spectacles?
False teeth?’
‘Alan!’
She indicated Chris with a quick nod of the head, and ran up the garden to the house.
He hoped they wouldn't come back outside.
It would be pleasant to lie and chat now, for a quiet half-hour or so, while the shadows lengthened over the lawn.
He felt completely lazy and relaxed.
But then the sound of different voices came to his ears, and Carolyn called him from the french windows.
‘Alan!
Al-an!
Come on out,’ he heard her say, ‘would you like a drink?
Would you like a cup of tea, or something cold?’
She stepped into the garden uncertainly, followed by two tall people.
Mike and Sarah, he recognized suddenly.
Mike and Sarah from the office.
He jumped to his feet.
‘What a nice surprise!’ he cried, hurrying towards them.
Mike was laughing embarrassedly.
 'Thought we'd look you up — in your little Garden of Eden — hope we're not intruding.’
‘Of course not.
Carolyn, let me introduce Sarah — and Mike.
Mike's the other half of my office, yes?
You've heard me talk about him.’
Mike pulled a face.
‘And Sarah, well, Sarah has an office all to herself.’
Sarah smiled charmingly at Carolyn.
‘Just shows you how much more important I am than them, doesn't it?’ she laughed.
‘Come and sit down — come and sit down.’
Alan ushered them down towards the table.
He was surprised and rather flattered that they'd called.
When he had found out that Mike lived in a flat he'd invited him to come and enjoy their garden any time, but without really expecting to see him.
He was intrigued that Sarah was with Mike.
He'd suspected them of having an affair for a while, but they had both kept their tracks well covered.
Sarah, he seemed to remember, was married.
After the routine admiration of children, garden, and so on, they began to chat about the office.
Carolyn came out and served them tea and cake.
When they all had what they needed she turned her attention to Annie.
‘D'you want to wee, Annie-pod?
Come here —’ She felt the little girl's knickers.
‘Annie!
Why didn't you ask me for the potty?
Eh?
Come on, leaky sieve, let's go and find some clean ones.’
She led her into the house.
It wasn't surprising, Carolyn thought, with all this coming and going.
On the whole she was pleased with Annie's progress on the potty, she seemed to have got the hang of it much earlier than Christopher had.
Annie trotted obediently beside her, chanting to herself, ‘Wanta-wee wanta-wee wanta-wee,’ in a sing-song voice.
Carolyn put her on the pot in the downstairs toilet, and laughed at her.
‘Come on then, Miss Wanta-wee, get on with it.’
‘Mummy wee,’ demanded Annie imperiously, and Carolyn obliged her, listening for Annie's echoing tinkle in the pot.
It never failed.
‘Good girl — who's Mummy's best girl?
’ She emptied the pot and gave Annie a hug.
It was all so much easier, somehow, than it had been with Christopher.
Annie was so solid and content, she was like a shiny red apple.
Carolyn never experienced the same sort of anguished worry about her as she had with Chris.
Annie buried her face in Carolyn's shoulder.
She was tired, Carolyn reflected, she'd missed her sleep that morning because of Mum and Dad.
‘Early bed for you tonight, my lady.’
How warm and soft she was — and heavy too!
Leaning their combined weight against the wall at the top of the stairs for a moment, Carolyn felt she would be content to stay there always.
I must go down, she thought, and meet Alan's friends.
She took a pair of pants from Annie's drawer and hurried downstairs.
Christopher was coming through the dining room, drawing book dangling from his hand.
‘What's the matter Chrissy?’
‘Nothing,’ he said despondently, and threw the book on the floor.
‘Hey, hey, hey, what's up, Mr Moody?’
‘I'm — sick — of — drawing,’ he said.
The way he paused between words made her smile, it made his speech seem foreign, an inadequate translation of his thoughts.
She mimicked him with an Italian accent which always made him laugh.
‘Ees-a — seek-a — of-a — drawing, ah?
What shall we do?’
He wrapped his arms around her knees, grinning up at her.
‘Can we watch telly?’
‘Can we watch telly please?’ she said automatically, glancing out through the windows at Alan.
They seemed to be deep in conversation.
‘Pease!
Pease!’ crowed Annie.
For Annie, ‘please’ was a magic password, whose sure prospective effectiveness overwhelmed her with delight.
As she said it she grinned from ear to ear, physically contorted by her joy into a sort of bow, arms out stiff behind her like someone about to fly.
Carolyn laughed.
‘All right, all right .
I'll turn it on for you.
But no touching the knobs, do you understand?’
She left them side by side on the sofa, intent on a cartoon, and hurried out to the garden.
‘Ah!
At last,’ Alan smiled at her.
‘Come and drink your tea, lass, it'll be stone cold.’
Carolyn smiled and nodded to them, sitting down quickly.
‘Johnson's another one with his nose in the trough,’ said the woman, who was talking to Alan.
‘Haven't you noticed how often he takes his dear friend Councillor Waverly out to lunch?’
Alan smiled and shook his head.
‘I'm naive, aren't I ?’ he said.
‘Is it the same with all the council contracts we get?’
‘Damn near,’ said the man.
‘Waverly's chairman of Housing and Benson's chairman of Policy and Resources; and Benson's like this —’ he made an expressive gesture’— with Fielding.
The whole thing's rank, once you get down to details —’ he laughed, ‘but I'm not selling the story until I've got a job with another firm.’
He turned to Carolyn.
‘The corruption goes from top to bottom, like a cheese, you know.
Did you know what a nasty business your husband's got himself into?’
Carolyn smiled, sipping at her tea and putting it down because it was, in fact, cold.
‘I thought he was designing better places for people to live.’
They laughed, although she had not meant it as a joke.
‘Are you going away on holiday this year?’ the woman asked her.
Carolyn was aware that the woman was making conversation with her.
She stood up.
‘Yes, we're going to St Davids.
I'm just going to add some hot water to this tea.’
She made her escape from the table, boiled the kettle and looked in on the children.
When she returned with her teapot, Alan waved it aside.
‘Why not have a proper drink?’ he asked the visitors.
‘Scotch?
Gin and tonic?
It's nearly six.’
He consulted his watch.
‘In fact, why don't you stay to eat, if you ‘re at a loose end?
I don't know what there is but I'm sure we can rustle something up —’ He looked at Carolyn.
‘Yes — oh yes, why don't you stay?’ she said.
They demurred politely, but finally succumbed to Alan's persuasion.
Carolyn stood by the table, sipping her new tea and wondering what she could cook.
The conversation continued.
‘It's not the worst place to work, by any means,’ said the woman.
‘Look at Jays — I'm amazed by what they get away with there.
You know they did the plans for that community college?’
‘Sedgemoor?’ asked Alan.
‘Yes.
And now the roof's leaking so badly they've had to close the gym completely.’
‘Yes,’ said the man.
‘But the council's so embarrassed about that one that they're just leaving them to put it right as quietly as they can.
Everyone knows it should never have been passed.
It's the most terrible design I've ever seen.’
‘Some of these councillors are so thick!’ said the woman.
She turned to Carolyn with a laugh.
‘Politics, politics, politics — we seem to end up there every time, don't we?’
Carolyn smiled quickly.
‘I-I- don't pay much attention to politics, I'm afraid,’ she said.
‘What would you like to drink?’
‘It's all right, Carolyn, I'll get them in a minute.’
as if Alan had excused her, Carolyn made her way to the house.
What could they eat?
The children were watching TV peacefully, but Annie saw her as she bobbed her head around the door, gave a pleased gurgle and started to scramble down.
‘No Annie, stay there love, stay with Chrissy.
Mummy's got to do some cooking.’
They had had a big Sunday lunch, with Mum and Dad being there.
She hadn't planned to cook tonight.
She opened the fridge and stared inside.
There was plenty of salad stuff at least, her father had brought a lot with  him.
But there's no meat, she thought, and started to unwrap the various packages which she already knew contained cheese, a couple of kippers, some liver pâté.
No, there was no meat.
Eggs.
Yes, there were plenty of eggs.
Omelette?
Quiche?
Souffle.
She was pleased to have remembered it.
It was still half a game, this cooking business — learning to make the sort of food they had when they went out to dinner.
For years they had eaten the shepherd's pie, cauliflower cheese and Lancashire hot-pot that she had learned from her mother.
Alan, who liked buying food, occasionally bought things which she didn't know what to do with (aubergines had stumped her completely) but on the whole he seemed content with his diet.
It was when they started being invited out for dinner, or going to restaurants for special occasions, that she remembered he knew about different kinds of food.
She made coq au vin on his birthday, painstakingly following a recipe (a thing she'd not done since basic cookery lessons at school) and he was so pleased he bought her a Cordon Bleu cookbook.
Sometimes her common sense still told her it was nothing but an invention for dirtying three times as many dishes, this business of frying and parboiling, and moving things from plate to plate.
But the results were good; people praised her cooking lavishly, and she began to take a pride in doing it well.
She looked up cheese soufflé.
It took longer to cook than she had expected.
She had to wash up the lunch things before she could get started.
Then she put the salad greens to soak.
There was only half a loaf left.
Oh, too bad, she decided to cook some new potatoes and they could take them or leave them.
Alan would eat them, anyway.
She started to grate the cheese.
Annie came into the kitchen.
‘I dough lak cartoo!’ she announced.
Carolyn stopped and stared at her.
‘Say that again, Annie.
What did you say?’
‘I dough lak cartoo!’
‘Well!
Who's a clever creature, eh?
You don't like the cartoon —’ She abandoned the cheese and picked Annie up, laughing.
It was the first complete sentence Annie had said.
Carolyn went into the sitting room.
‘Chrissy — Chrissy, did you tell Annie this?
Listen —’
Obligingly, Annie repeated her triumph.
Christopher shook his head and returned his attention to the box.
Back in the kitchen, Carolyn gave Annie a saucer of currants to eat (she ate them so beautifully, one by one, held painstakingly pincered between thumb and index finger, her other fingers cocked like a tea-sipping lady) and carried on with the food.
She was stirring milk into the roux over a low heat when Annie finished her currants and announced, ‘Wanta-wee, wanta-wee.’
‘Oh good God, child, you choose your times don't you-’
‘Wanta-wee, wanta-’
Carolyn turned off the gas.
She still had half the milk to add.
It would go lumpy.
She hurried Annie to the toilet, but once there Annie didn't seem to want to do anything but giggle at her.
After coaxing her and turning on suggestive taps, Carolyn brought the pot back into the kitchen and left Annie knickerless.
‘Sit on the pot if you want to wee, all right Annie?’
The sauce was thin with a layer of sediment over the bottom of the pan.
She stirred it vigorously, but it remained ominously thick in places, as if it would go into lumps as soon as it were heated.
Sighing, she held the pan under the tap and rinsed it out.
She melted another lump of butter and stirred in the flour.
Now the milk
‘Wanta-wee!’
‘Then sit on the pot now — go on!’
Annie weed down her leg and started to wipe it up with her hands.
‘Annie!
No!
Stop it now!
Chris — Chrissy!’
She wouldn't leave the sauce again.
Christopher appeared, looking put upon.
‘Please love, be a good boy, just wipe Annie's hands for her on that flannel and take her to watch telly, will you?
I'm trying to cook something.’
Chris wiped Annie in a surly, businesslike manner, and dragged her from the kitchen.
They left two trails of wet footprints.
Alan appeared in the doorway.
‘Hello, what's going on?’
‘I'm cooking, what does it look like?’
‘All right.
You've been gone so long I thought someone had run off with you.’
‘Alan — don't stand there.
Look, Annie's just weed.’
‘Oh —’ he tutted with annoyance, and lifted his feet one after the other.
‘Can't you wipe it up?’
‘I can't leave these eggs now.’
‘Where's the floorcloth?’
‘Under the sink.’
You've been living here as long as I have, she thought.
Alan wiped up, leaving the dirty floorcloth in the dishrack, and looked over her shoulder.
‘What is it?’
‘Soufflé.’
‘Why's it taking so long?’
‘It's not.
I just keep getting interrupted.’
‘Can I do anything?’
‘Well, what do you want to do about the kids?
They'd better eat before us, hadn't they?
This'll take an hour to cook.’
‘I suppose so.
I didn't think it would be a major operation — couldn't we just rustle up something quickly?’
‘There isn't anything, Alan.
The fridge is nearly empty.’
‘OK.
What shall I do then?
Feed the kids? I can't leave Mike and Sarah for too long-’
‘No.
Tell the kids to wash their hands and come in here when the programme's ended.
I'll give them some cheese on toast.
You go back out.
It's all right.’
‘Right then.’
He went to the cupboard.
‘I'm just getting a refill.
What would you like?’
‘Um — nothing yet, thanks, I'll wait a bit.’
The soufflé was in the oven, potatoes boiling with mint, salad chopped and ready, dressing mixed.
She had thought they could have fruit for dessert but the bananas looked a bit black and sorry, and there were only two (bruised) peaches left.
She decided to make a fruit salad, and sat peeling and chopping as the children ate their tea.
Chris described to her in painstaking detail the story of the cartoon they'd been watching.
She smiled at him.
He had a quizzical, earnest little face, whose lines moved easily into unhappiness.
But he's not unhappy, she told herself, just serious.
He loved being read to, and having things explained.
He was overjoyed when Alan showed him his plans, and told him what the different symbols meant, so that the lines on the paper became a living world of houses, roads and trees.
He leant right across the table now, to push Annie's spoon back to her, and Carolyn put down the apple she was peeling to stroke the hollow in the back of his neck.
It was still hardly wider than her finger.
The backs of their necks are so vulnerable, she thought.
Frail but strong, like the stems of flowers.
There weren't really any flowers in the garden that would look good on the table.
The sweet williams wouldn't be out for a few days.
What about those little pink things on the hedge?
The bees think they're marvellous.
Yes, and you'll have a tableful of bees if you don't watch out.
I should buy some flowers, really.
But Alan says he doesn't like them…
Annie threw her spoon away again, it landed on the floor this time.
Carolyn wiped their hands and faces.
‘Right — now you can watch telly again for ten minutes while I lay the  table — or you can go out and see Daddy and his friends if you want.’
She set the table and checked the soufflé.
It seemed all right.
Just time to put Annie to bed before they ate.
Alan reappeared holding a child's hand in each of his.
‘Shouldn't these two be heading for bed?’
‘Annie's going in a minute.
Chris can stay up till we've eaten, can't he?’
‘Well, I'll take her if you want to go out and have a drink.’
‘I-I-’ She rather dreaded it.
‘No thanks, Alan, I'll do it, because I need to keep an eye on the soufflé anyway.
It won't be long now.’
He shrugged.
He was looking at her oddly, she thought.
‘What's the matter?
Have I spilt something-?’
‘That skirt makes you look dumpy.
Middle-aged.
It's all bulky round the waist.’
She looked down at her skirt.
He'd never said anything about it before.
‘It's all right,’ he said quickly.
‘It just doesn't suit you very well, that's all.
Have a drink this time?
I'll leave a gin and tonic on the side here, OK?’
He went out quickly.
She knew he was embarrassed because he'd criticized her.
She took Annie up and put her to bed, then went to their bedroom to change herself.
Her blouse had a splash of egg on it anyway.
She put on the black and white dress, hesitating a moment as she looked at herself and thought, it's too smart.
She had nothing in-between.
She combed her hair, looking at herself in the mirror.
She hadn't got many clothes she liked at the moment.
It was so impossible taking Annie shopping, it was easier not to bother.
The dress really wasn't right, though — Remembering the souffle, she hurried downstairs.
It was dark brown at the back, nearest the gas flames — not exactly burnt, but very crusty.
She turned the oven off and went to call them.
A wave of tiredness swept over her once they were served.
There were a few minutes of silence as everyone concentrated on their food.
The soufflé was hard on top and quite runny underneath, but they said it was delicious.
The belt on her dress was too tight.
as if he had read her thoughts, the man turned to her with his glass raised.
‘Congratulations — Alan tells us you're expecting an addition to the tribe.’
She laughed and nodded, embarrassed.
Funny, she had forgotten about it all afternoon, even to putting this dress on.
She remembered from last time how quickly it got too tight.
Good God, how long have I had it? she asked herself.
Did I really have it before I was expecting Annie?
Alan had noticed the change of dress and was irritated by it.
The dress didn't suit her, it was too stiff and smart, it looked as if she was trying too hard.
Her clothes never seemed to be quite right.
And why had she changed just to please him, anyway?
If she liked her skirt, why hadn't she stuck to it?
‘Do you look forward to having a baby again?’ asked the woman intently, ‘or do you prefer them when they're older?
It's the one thing that puts me off breeding — I love children, but I can't stand babies.’
Alan laughed.
‘They eat, they sleep, they shit, they cry.
They wake you at three-hourly intervals all night long.
What more can you ask for?’
The woman pulled a face.
‘Exactly.’
‘You're right,’ Carolyn said, ‘but — I know it's corny — but it is different when it's your own.
It does the same tedious things that all the other babies do, but it manages to do them — uniquely —’ She laughed with them, at herself.
‘Really.
I never thought I would like babies till I had one.
Now it makes me sad to think of them growing up.’
She hesitated a moment.
Sarah and Mike were listening attentively.
‘They seem pathetic, when you compare them to adult humans, and expect them to do human things — because obviously they can't.
They can't do anything much.
But I remember with Chris especially — he didn't seem human —’ she smiled quickly, forestalling Alan's amused interruption’— but like something from another planet.
So you weren't aware of what he couldn't do, so much as what he could do and did do, and how little of it you could understand.
Do you see what I mean?
That a baby's behaviour and perception are completely other than ours, and that maybe we know less-understand less — than them.’
She stopped uncertainly, flushing crimson.
Alan felt a wine-tinged surge of affection for her.
He was sorry that he had criticized her to himself, for hiding in the kitchen, for not being attractive.
He felt as if he had only just remembered, after a long time, why he valued her.
When Mike and Sarah had gone, they flopped on the sofa.
It was midnight.
‘I haven't ironed your shirt for tomorrow.’
‘Never mind, I'll do it in the morning.
Did you like them?’
Carolyn shrugged, then nodded.
‘You didn't say much.’
‘Alan, I don't know half of what you're talking about — people at work and all that-’
‘You could listen, then you'd know.’
‘But I've got other things to do, love, everything doesn't stop, just because your friends come round.
The children still need looking after, the meals still have to be made —’
‘You're turning into a mousy little housewife.’
He was half joking.
There was a silence.
‘Am I ?’
‘No.
I didn't mean it.
Only-’
‘Yes?’
‘Sometimes it seems as if you're only interested in the children.’
She considered this seriously.
‘I am mainly interested in the children.
At this stage.
But isn't everyone mainly interested in something?
Aren't you mainly interested in work?
That was what you wanted to talk about.’
‘Not just work — politics, things that are happening in the world —’ He felt the argument slipping away, was conscious of the contradictions in his own feelings.
He wanted her to stay at home and look after the children as much as she did; he wanted her to be mainly interested in them.
He wanted her to be a real mother, not like Lucy.
‘Oh, I don't know.’
He stood up abruptly and pulled her to her feet.
‘Can I take your dress off?’
She laughed in his face.
‘Why take the dress off a middle-aged frump?
What poor taste you have — your friends would be shocked.’
It was all right.
With a leap of joy he saw that she understood, could read his mind and arrive before him.
Laughing, she fought him off till he'd got the dress off her by brute force, and wooed her consent with practised skill.
Afterwards they lay on the floor, his head resting on her stomach.
She gazed at the ceiling, feeling her heartbeat and breathing slowing to normal, her body quietening.
His eyes were closed, and she was surprised when he suddenly said, ‘Are you happy?’
She laughed and patted him on the head, but he sat up and frowned at her impatiently.
‘I don't mean that, I know that.’
‘Modest.’
He ignored her, pursuing his question.
‘In general, are you happy?’
‘I think so.
’ There was a silence.
‘Yes,’ she repeated.
‘Aren't you?’
He sighed.
‘I don't know.
Let's go to bed.’
He got up and went to the bathroom before she had time to move.
In bed she was vaguely troubled by it, and examined her own answer.
Yes.
She remembered sitting on the garden step, early that morning, before her parents arrived.
Alan was sitting down at the end of the lawn, his back to the house ‘so you don't distract me’, finishing off some work for Monday.
Chrissy, on the step beside her, was choosing which story she should read to him, and Annie was in the sandpit, trailing sand through her clenched fist into a yoghurt carton.
Carolyn could hear the hissing of the sand as it fell on to the plastic and then, when it had covered the bottom of the carton, the way it fell almost silently, with a whisper of its former sound.
She loved the way the children absorbed themselves in activities.
They were, in the garden, the points of focus for her own attention; and the fact that they themselves were concentrating intensified her satisfaction.
Alan was concentrating too, his shoulders hunched, his head moving slightly as he read.
She remembered looking down the sunny garden and feeling content.
Her life was contained like an egg in its shell, within the oval garden; her son, her daughter, her husband.
She did not fear that she would lose it, because it was the world — her world, the reality that encased her.
She worried that Chris might fall and break his leg, that Annie might swallow a stone and have to go to hospital, that Alan might give himself an ulcer through working too hard.
But for the framework, she no more feared nor doubted it than she did the position of the stars in the sky.
Looking back on that moment now, she felt it tremble before her, round and perfect as an overfull drip, and she caught her breath at the thought of its transitoriness, its shimmering beauty, and suddenly whispered to herself, ‘I am happy,’ as if she feared it might not last forever.
Alan must be happy too.
He must be.
She would ask him what he had meant tomorrow.
When she fell asleep, she began to dream.
She was driving along a motorway.
It was a bright sunny day, and there was very little traffic.
She drove in the middle lane, skimming past lorries.
Her window was open and warm fresh air blew in her face and made her hair stream out behind.
She felt light and free.
She was happy, but she felt immediately that it was threatened.
It was as if menacing music had been played in a film, accompanying a scene of innocent happiness.
She wanted to warn herself, who was driving the car without a care in the world, but she couldn't get through.
The sun went in, and gradually there were more cars on the road.
They kept going just as fast — faster — but there were more and more of them.
She was trapped in the middle lane, there was a solid wall of lorries to her left, and to her right a blur of fast cars.
Ahead there was space, but her foot was pressed down to the floor and the car wouldn't go any faster.
There was a lorry coming up behind her, a huge one, coming  fast.
It filled up her mirror and made the car dark inside, it was bearing down on her.
Closer and closer — it was touching her car, thundering in her ears…
There was a gap; blackness.
She found that she was driving again.
The lorry had gone, but she was tense and nervous.
She could feel that the muscles in her stomach were clenched into a tight ball.
She glanced down and saw to her horror that her stomach was growing.
It was the shape of a football.
She tried to concentrate on driving, she got the car into the slow lane and looked down at her stomach again.
It was swelling like a balloon being blown up, expanding by the second.
She knew she must get out of the car quickly, or it would get stuck behind the steering wheel.
Already it was pressing against it, jamming the wheel, making it difficult to steer.
She slowly forced the wheel to the left and the car moved on to the hard shoulder and stopped.
She was squashed between the seat and the wheel, the seatbelt was cutting into her like a rubber band around a swelling finger.
She struggled to free herself, and rolled out of the car and on to the ground.
Her belly was growing huge, it overshadowed her.
She was suffocating, it was squashing her, pinning her to the ground.
She could hear cars and lorries swooshing past and tried desperately to call for help but she had no breath.
The belly continued to grow, blocking out the light.
She felt the skin on it stretched to bursting point, the pain was awful.
She knew she would burst — she was going to burst.
She opened her eyes.
It was dark.
The belly was gone.
She was all right, she was awake.
Alan sighed and turned over, and she curled herself around his curved back, and waited for a more friendly sleep to claim her.
Part Three
Five years later
Chapter 15
Early in January Caro and Bryony drove to Heathrow to meet Clare, who was returning from a year in the States.
It was a Friday and bitterly cold.
The heating in Clare's car was not working; Caro sat in the passenger seat wrapped in a blanket, and Bryony drove in a Balaclava, enormous army surplus gloves and two coats.
Bryony had picked Caro up from work.
It was dark, and had been since mid-afternoon.
‘It'll snow.’
Caro peered up to the black sky.
‘No.
It's too cold.’
‘Did you check if the flight was on time?’
‘Of course.
God, I can hear your teeth chattering.’
‘It's that building.
I hate it.
They keep the temperature so high you can't adjust when you come out, and everyone gets ill.
I'm going to start doing some outside work again next week, thank God.’
‘The new park?’
‘No — oh no.
Everything's seized up while the ground's frozen — there won't be much happening there till spring now.
No, I'm going to fill in for Jim on the Canal project.’
Bryony nodded.
‘Did you have a nice day?’
‘Mmm.
I gave in my notice.’
‘Did you?’
‘Yup.’
There was a silence, broken at last by Caro.
‘When did you decide?’
‘Not until this morning.
I was pretty sure I would, but I just needed something to give me an extra push.’
‘What did?’
‘Well — when I was at the camp on Saturday night, we were talking about dreams.’
Bryony had spent the weekend at the Women's Peace Camp at Greenham Common.
‘It seemed as if quite a lot of people had had the same dream — or a similar one, at least— there were similar elements in all of them.
About after the bomb had dropped — you know, people running about and screaming, great fires and heaps of rubble — looking frantically for children and friends-obvious things, really.
I was thinking about it yesterday, I suppose — and then I had a dream last night.
It's not — I don't know.
I mean, I probably dreamt it because I'd been hearing all their dreams and thinking about them.
I don't think it's some great subconscious warning or anything.’
Caro nodded.
‘Was your dream the same?’
‘No — no.
It was like — almost as if I was trying to answer them, in my mind.
I was sitting in a large cinema, with a lot of other people, and there was an American guy talking about the effects of nuclear war.
He sounded terribly smarmy and  reasuring — you know, a real politician's voice.
Telling us all how we would have to adapt in various minor ways to changing circumstances, but that basically our lives would carry on very much as normal — and it was weird, I was wanting them all to believe him, and him to be telling the truth.
I kept saying to them all in my mind, ‘You see?
It'll be all right.
There's nothing to panic about.
It's under control.’
He said, naturally there would be some changes amongst plant and animal life, but species would adapt to suit the changes in climate and atmosphere and so on.
The film was black at first then it turned a sort of brownish colour, getting lighter but still weird colours, browny yellow, till we could see it was water, a river or something, and its bank.
And there were some birds swimming-floating down towards the camera, they were brown.
They were ducks — ordinary mallard ducks.
But they didn't have any heads.’
After a silence Caro said, ‘Is that it?’
‘Yes, I woke up.’
‘Headless ducks.’
‘Yup, maybe I was half awake.
But it's a fairly strange thing to invent.’
‘Yes.’
‘So there we are.
There I am.’
‘What d'you think will happen?’
‘I don't know.
Even if they evict us, or break up the camp or deliver the fucking things — it'll go on.
A group of women will go on protesting.
That's why it's taken me so long, I think.
Because I'll be doing it for the rest of my life now.
I mean, it's not like waving a banner at a demo on Sunday afternoon and going back to work on Monday.
It's the most important thing — that's what we're saying by being here.
The most important thing is to stop them building, storing and using these weapons.’
‘Was it good at the weekend?’
Bryony laughed.
‘It was filthy.
It was bloody freezing, with a wind like a knife.
The sheeting — you know, the polythene sounded like whips cracking when the wind got into it.
It was bloody horrible.
I'm going to get a thermal bodystocking before I go back.’
‘I'll buy you one.
I'm glad you're going.’
‘Why?’
‘Because — it's good.
It's what you should do.’
‘You could come too.’
‘It's not — it's not my sort of thing.
I've got my park to do, anyway.’
‘Your park won't be worth having when the bomb's dropped.’
Bryony spoke with the contemptuous sharpness which had so alienated Caro at the beginning.
She recognized it now as a mark of Bryony's own conviction, rather than an attack upon herself.
‘You can buy me a bodystocking if you like,’ Bryony went on after a pause.
‘Considering your salary.’
One of the customs officers decided to do a thorough job on Clare's luggage.
She folded her arms and leant back against the rail, watching while he tipped out and examined the contents of her sponge bag, and spread her socks, knickers, T-shirts and jeans across the counter.
Everything looked worn and grubby.
She tried to remember if she had brought anything illegal.
He picked garments up and turned them over with his fingertips, gingerly, as if they were disgusting.
What an awful job.
For a moment Clare felt like telling him not to bother, just chuck the whole lot away.
They were old.
She needed new ones.
Glancing up as someone walked out, she recognized Caro waiting out there.
It gave her a jolt.
She was really here then.
Back in England.
At last the officer finished.
He confiscated two apples that she had in her handbag, and warned her about penalties for importing plant and vegetable matter.
She stuffed everything back into her bags, and made for the door.
After the huggings and kisses they stood back.
‘Are you all right?’
Bryony asked.
‘You look like death.’
‘I'm tired.
Incredibly tired.
You, on the contrary, both look disgustingly healthy.’
They did.
Bryony's cheeks were flushed and her eyes bright and excited.
Caro's face was paler, but still fresh and absurdly youthful.
Clare noticed that her hair had been cropped shorter than before, so that it was almost like fur on her head.
‘And how's Sue?’
‘All right,’ said Bryony shortly.
‘I think she's working tonight,’ Caro explained.
‘We don't see much of her really.
She spends a lot of time at Jack's now — most weekends.
The kids are around more than she is.’
Clare nodded.
Sue had met Jack before Clare left England.
He was large and boring.
Clare wondered whether Sue would move out.
‘Let's go then,’ said Caro and picked up the big carpet bag.
She moved away in front of them.
Her face hasn't changed since I met her, Clare thought, as she and Bryony followed.
The only thing that's changed in ten years is the way she moves.
Caro's stride was long and loose and graceful.
Clare remembered how she had seemed at first to be constrained in all her movements and jerky, almost as if her stammer manifested itself through her body as well.
It might have been the accident.
But no — she's more confident, that's all, Clare thought.
She herself felt old and stiff and unspeakably weary.
Next morning Clare knocked at Caro's door at eight.
‘What are you doing?
I thought you would sleep for hours.’
‘I can't.
It's lunch time in New York.
Are you awake?’
‘Well, I am now.
Have you had breakfast and everything?’
‘Yes.
Can we go for a walk?
Why don't you show me this wondrous park of yours?’
‘It's not mine.’
Caro sat up in bed.
‘If it was mine it would be wondrous.
As it is, it's a mess.
Nothing's been planted yet, anyway.
It's all bald.’
‘Never mind.
The rest of the earth isn't exactly verdant at the moment, is it?
I need some exercise.’
Clare stood in the doorway, as if unsure whether to come in or go out.
‘I'll make you a cup of tea then,’ she said, and went back downstairs.
It was difficult to talk.
There was the solid wall of a year apart standing between them, with not a loose brick in sight.
Clare had been an erratic correspondent, and several of Caro's neat, carefully written letters had been delivered to addresses Clare had moved on from.
They had covered the easy areas of quick gossip last night, and now they both felt constrained.
They walked down the street in silence, each sharply aware of the other's presence, of the cold, of the greyness of the street and the claustrophobically low cloud.
As they turned the corner, the first flakes of snow fell.
Clare pulled her fur coat more tightly around her (it came from a jumble sale and lacked any conventional form of fastening) and complained.
‘But you had something like two feet of snow in New York, you said!’ laughed Caro.
‘Their snow is warmer than ours.’
‘It's because you're tired.
You should have stayed in bed.’
Clare shook her head.
‘I'm full of cramp and junk food.
I need to move around and get some fresh air inside me.’
‘Didn't you sleep at all?’
‘No.
Bryony's looking good.’
‘Yes, she is.
I think she's much happier now.’
‘Like a nun who's had the call.’
‘What d'you mean?’
‘She's found her mission in life.’
‘I — I suppose so.
Isn't that good?’
Caro was surprised by Clare's cynicism.
There was no reply.
‘Do you know where you are?’
Caro asked suddenly.
‘Of course I do.
We've only been out five minutes.’
Clare looked up, and realized that the terraced rows either side of the road had disappeared.
Ahead, through a high wire-mesh fence, the landscape looked blitzed.
‘Sweet Jesus, it's the end of the world!
It's so near —’
‘Yes!
Yes!’
Caro started dancing on the spot beside her.
‘Come with me.
The canal's over that-a-way, but if we head over towards the old brickworks-’ She unlocked a huge padlock  which fastened the gates.
‘Has that gone too?’ asked Clare.
‘Yup.
There's a bit of a hill so you'll get more of a view —’
‘But there's nothing,’ Clare repeated in amazement, as she followed Caro over the raw uneven ground, and looked back at the truncated ends of the streets they were leaving behind them.
‘It was all empty.
Derelict.
You know it was.
I think they had a bit of juggling to do, moving people out of the odd house in rows they demolished, and into the empty spots in ones they're keeping — like filling decaying teeth-but most of it was just rotting where it stood.
All the factories were derelict.
Look, you can see St Thomas's over on the other side now —’ They were climbing a fairly steep mound.
Gradually the shape of the cleared area began to emerge distinctly.
‘The park's at its widest point here,’ Caro said, stretching her arms to demonstrate.
‘But it follows the line of the canal right through, gradually getting narrower towards the east.
To the west it gets narrow quickly, then there's a big bulge where the river runs in, at Tandown Primary School, then it ends fairly sharply.’
‘It looks huge,’ marvelled Clare, revolving slowly on the spot to take in the empty landscape.
‘Twenty-eight hectares, not big really — except in so far as it's in a totally built-up area.’
‘And completely horrible,’ Clare continued.
‘It's like the Russian steppes.
There's not a single tree.
Anything less like a rural retreat —’
‘Clare — use your imagination!
This'll be wooded eventually.
They'll grass it this September — and down there-’ she pointed to a wide area of churned up ground, where frozen water stood in ruts’— the adventure playground, with swings and slide and all that stuff, but a nice climbing frame and fort too.
Over there the leisure centre/sports fields thing.
My poor little blind garden, what's left of it, just up over here, near the top gate — and —’ she turned in the opposite direction’— down by the river, in the old primary school building, which is in fairly good nick, they're setting up a field study centre, and strips of land for school gardens.
They've done the lake — you can see.
We planted some trees along the canal in the autumn — as soon as it unfreezes we'll be putting more in, it'll be an avenue…’
Clare was nodding and smiling in a half amused, half indulgent manner.
‘I know why you do this now, Caro my sweet.’
‘Why?’
‘It's like being God, isn't it?
‘Lo, and let there be — water!’’
Clare stretched out one regal hand across the whitening wasteland. ‘'Yea, and let there be also a shady spot, with trees; and let there be small yellow flowers, with crimson centres.
Let there be grassy slopes with swings on, and litter bins clearly labelled.’’
Caro shrugged and ran down the hill.
At the bottom she turned, her face serious.
Clare walked down slowly to meet her.
‘It is power-yes.’
‘You take it so seriously,’ laughed Clare.
‘Yes, I do.
Look Clare — look what was here; fil-filthy mean little houses not far enough apart for the wind to blow between them; derelict factories with slates slipping off them and armies of rats — not a blade of grass in sight.
And people, leftover people like — like grubs that've been kept in the dark.
Now there'll be grass and water and light.
The kids from the houses up there-’ she waved her arm in the direction of home —‘will come and play on the grass-the old people from the council place will come pottering down and sit on the benches by the flowerbeds.
Women will bring little kids to the adventure playground and talk to each other instead of screaming over the walls of their backyards — oh, piss off!’
Clare's smile was wide and ironical.
She patted Caro on the shoulder.
‘You'll change the world, my love.’
‘Yes,’ said Caro.
‘I will.
Starting with a blind garden and lots of trees in Millside.’
‘What will you do when kids root it all up and carve obscenities on the trees?’
Councillor Bellamy had asked the same question, Carolyn recalled.
They had held a site meeting on Thursday and he had turned up instead of the committee chairman they were expecting.
He was the new leader of the Council.
He was a broad-chested, powerfully built man, with manners like a bulldozer.
‘What happens when kids start breaking in here, eh?
What's your security like?’
‘It — it's not a prison,’ she replied.
‘I'll tell you something, young lady, and I'll tell you straight.
If it'd been down to me, this park would never've been sited here.
It's a mess — the whole area's a mess.
You mark my words — within twelve months of it opening, it'll be a wreck.’
‘Why?’
He shook his head irritably, as if she was stupid.
‘Wrong area for a park.
Waste of money, here.
They won't appreciate it.
A prison'd be more useful, if you want my opinion.’
Ron had winked at her and steered Bellamy away, down towards the foundations of the leisure centre.
The answers Caro wished she had given him were still boiling and bubbling inside her.
‘P-plant again.
When they see the trees come back — and come back again-they'll stop eventually.
They haven't lived near anything worth preserving before.’
She turned round slowly on the spot, critically examining the contours of the park's three little hills (like molehills, Clare told herself) against the grey sky.
‘It's not wonderful — I know that — there's hundreds of things wrong.
I would have done it differently — OK, you know about the blind garden.
But the point is, at least it's here — it's a start.
No matter how badly designed it is, it's a thousand times better than what was here before.
And I've salvaged some of the blind garden, and I've got the tree planting.
And next time I'll have more — and more — till I finally do have the power to do something big, make something big.’
They walked on across the cleared area in silence.
Snow was settling thickly on the raw earth, now, and on the blacker areas which had already been topsoiled.
When they reached the canal Caro turned right to walk along it.
On the opposite side the canal's former contents, removed by dredger, made a barricade of frozen mud and rubbish six feet high.
Bicycle frames, pram wheels, parts of cars, and nameless slimy objects protruded from the frozen mud like the jumbled contents of a newly excavated grave.
Clare stopped and folded her arms, facing it.
‘Caro, this is wonderful.
This makes me glad I flew three thousand miles to see it.
Millside's answer to Guggenheim.
All the galleries of New York do not contain its equal-’
Caro linked her elbow through Clare's arm and turned her homewards.
‘Shut up.
Tell me what you've been doing, while I've been moving mountains.’
‘Oh — exercising my cynicism on the American Women's Movement; falling hopelessly in love; visiting my mother; failing to see my son.
That sort of thing.’
The summary did not invite closer questioning.
Caro nodded, consciously slowing herself down to Clare's pace.
Clare was more brittle and self-contained than Caro could remember ever having seen her.
They walked on home in silence.