

Research Defence Society
Grosvenor Gardens House, Grosvenor Gardens, London SW1 OBS
The membership of the Research Defence Society includes scientists, clinicians, dentists, veterinary surgeons and also members of the public, who believe that the pressure from the antivivisection movement to stop all animal experiments presents a fundamental threat to progress in biomedical and biological research and in the development of new treatments for diseases.
The Aims and Activities of the Research Defence Society
The Research Defence Society aims to: 1.
increase the public understanding and appreciation of the benefits of biomedical research and the essential role of research involving animals in medical advances.
2. provide information and educate the public about research involving animals and the conditions and restrictions under which this research is conducted.
3. monitor and respond to anti-vivisection propaganda, provide information to the media about the use of animals in research and train speakers to take part in debates, discussion programmes, interviews, etc.
4. maintain a liaison between industry, academia and government on issues relevant to biomedical research involving the use of animals.
5. monitor and, where appropriate, seek to influence any proposals to vary relevant legislation, codes of practice, etc likely to impede biomedical research.
6. advise its members regarding any problems associated with the use of animals in research and on any matters relating to applications for Home Office licences under the Animals (Scientific Procedures) Act 1986.
7. stimulate improvements in the conditions in which laboratory animals are maintained and the standards of the research in which they are used.
The Research Defence Society seeks to relate the benefits accruing to mankind and animals from scientific research with the necessary use of animals.
It does this in an objective manner devoid of cant and emotion, in the belief that the case for the responsible use of animals in research is both valid and strong.
The Research Defence Society was founded in 1908 by Stephen Paget, to educate the public in the facts about the use of animals in research and the importance of such research to the welfare of mankind.
Almost immediately, the Society came into confrontation with the antivivisection movement and threatening letters began to be received.
The minutes of a meeting in 1909 record that one antivivisection activist, a Mrs Cowan, had produced a circular recommending prayers for the sudden death of persons making experiments on animals.
The History of the Research Defence Society
The membership of the Society was originally composed mostly of biological and medical researchers.
In 1922 the membership was expanded to include the medical and veterinary professions.
Today, membership is open to all individuals or organisations who share the aims of the Society.
The offices of the Research Defence Society were originally located in the premises of the Medical Society of London, near Harley Street, where they remained until 1981.
The need for more space lead to the move to the present offices at Grosvenor Gardens House, where a small secretariat serves to administer the affairs of the Society.
The Society consists of the President, a number of honorary Vice-Presidents, ordinary, society and company members.
Individuals are appointed as Vice-Presidents to honour their distinguished service in furthering the aims of the Society.
The Structure of the Research Defence Society
The activities of the Society are controlled by a Council of nineteen members, representing each of the various categories of membership.
An Executive Committee and an Education Sub-committee oversee activities within their respective areas of responsibility.
The Council appoints an Executive Director to control of the day-to-day running of the Society.
Individual membership of the Society is open to any person who approves of its aims.
The subscription for full membership of the Society is currently fixed at five pounds per annum.
Student (non-voting) membership is available at a subscription of one pound per annum to anyone studying for biological, medical or veterinary degrees or diplomas.
The details of membership schemes for organisations are available on request.
Membership of the Research Defence Society
The Society produces a Journal "Conquest" , in which is published the annual Paget Lecture sponsored by the Society, and regular Newsletters which are sent to all members free of charge.
Applications for membership must be signed by two referees, who should be either members of the Society or professional colleagues of the applicant.
The referees must have personal knowledge of the applicant and consider that he or she supports the aims of the Society.
The Council of the Research Defence Society reserves absolute discretion as to who shall be elected to membership.