

Executive Courses in Business English
Length of courses
Courses are for a minimum of 2 weeks with the exception of Executive Course IV which is for a minimum of 1 week.
Those wishing to study for more than 6 weeks may do so providing they begin their course on any of the above dates.
NB: Those under 21 years of age are not accepted on these courses.
1-3 January 1988 1 April 1988 34 April 198 17-31 December 1988
The school is closed
Courses will take place on all weekdays except the above, including public holidays.
NB.
Students who lose one or two days tuition because of the Easter holiday weekend will receive a pro-rata reduction in tuition fees.
Value Added Tax (VAT) is not payable as the school is part of a non-profit making educational charity trust (no. 270860).
Course fees
Tuition fees include recommended book(s), registration fees, certificates, tests, welfare service, etc.
A large and varied Social Programme including visits, debates, workshops, parties, etc., is arranged for students.
Many activities are available at no extra cost but some, e.g. theatre trips and excursions, must be paid for in London if the student wishes to participate.
Fees are non-refundable and subject to change at the school's discretion.
A cancellation fee of 25% of tuition fees will be made unless the school receives notice of cancellation, in writing, two weeks before the course is due to start.
Accommodation can be arranged by the school from a list of Private Homes.
By living in a private house the student can be independent while having the opportunity to meet British people and to live in a British environment.
Executive Course homes provide high standard accommodation in single rooms with either breakfast or breakfast and evening meal (half board), and are within normal commuting distance of central London.
Accommodation
International House can also assist with hotel reservations in London.
If you wish to live in central London, you should choose to stay in a hotel.
Please let us know at the time of booking if you would like us to make a hotel reservation on your behalf.
The course consists of a 3-hour afternoon session (13.00-16.00).
It is designed with the business or professional person in mind and will deal with English language relevant and useful to those engaged in day-to-day business life and will aim to provide a high degree of professional competence in English.
Details of Courses
Executive Course I — 6 hours daily tuition in Business English (Maximum group size 6 persons)
The course takes place from either 09.00-12.00 or 13.00-16.00 and covers the same kind of work as Executive Course I but is less intensive.
It is suitable for those wishing to combine a serious business oriented course with a holiday in London.
Executive Course II — 3 hours daily tuition (mornings or afternoons) in Business English.
(Maximum group size 6 persons).
It is also possible to add 10 hours per week of one-to-one tuition to either Executive Course I or Executive Course II.
The cost for these extra hours will be £500 per two weeks in addition to the course fees given for Executive Course I or Executive Course II.
3 hours daily Business English (09.00-12.00) 2 hours daily General English (13.00-15.00) Plus 10 hours organised activities accompanied by a teacher.
Executive Course III — 60 hours per 2 weeks tuition.
(Maximum group size 6 persons).
The course is divided into two sections: 3 hours specialised tuition, where students will cover the same work as outlined for Executive Court I. The other 2 hours will be classes taken with students on our Short, Intensive General English Courses (Maximum 6 students per class).
These courses are based around short projects and topics of general interest such as: the mass media, life styles, social problems, the arts, etc., and concentrate on language functions and usage to enable the student to achieve a higher level of fluency and accuracy.
Class hours are supplemented with 10 hours of visits or activities per two weeks accompanied by a teacher, which are relevant to the projects/topics worked on in the classroom.
This course would be suitable for those wishing to improve their English for both business and more general purposes.
This course consists of 6 or 8 hours daily individual one-to-one tuition.
The major advantage of this type of course is the flexibility it offers to the student who wants to improve his/her English in specific areas at greater speed than would be possible on a group course.
It is possible to attend this course from a minimum of one week to as many weeks as the student wishes.
Executive Course IV — 6 or 8 hours daily private specialised tuition in Business English (09.00-12.00 and either 13.00-16.00 or 13.00-18.00 daily).
One-to-one tuition can also be arranged in General English or English for Special Purposes.
For those attending Executive Course IV who wish to gain the most from their course but have a very limited time in London, we can also arrange for the student to have lunch every day with a teacher and to attend a range of social/cultural activities in the evenings with a teacher.
This guarantees students the maximum opportunity to use their English outside the classroom in a social context which is sometimes difficult to achieve on short courses.
Where possible social/cultural visits will be arranged to include something of special professional interest to the individual.
Prices and further details for this option are available on request.
The course covers writing business letters, reports, telexes, telegrams, memos, summaries, minutes, encoding graphs and note taking.
This course is often taken in addition to the morning session of Executive Course II.
In this case a reduction of £30 is made to the total fees.
Alternatively the course can be taken in combination with private tuition or separately.
Executive Course V — Business Writing Skills 2 hours daily (13.00-15.00) tuition in business writing skills.
(Maximum group size 6 persons.)
International House offers a series of specially designed 2 week courses for members of certain professions.
These courses are based on the highly successful format of our Executive Course I. The topics and vocabulary areas are taken from the various specialised fields; functional language is presented in relevant contexts and related to professional needs.
The following courses will be run in 1988: 23 May-3 June English for Engineers 6 June-17 June English for Doctors 29 August-9 September English for Lawyers 24 October-4 November English for Journalists 2l November-2 December English for Engineers
Specialised courses
We can organise specially designed courses for groups from companies, government departments, etc. to meet exact requirements.
Please contact Mr Joe Wiersma, Director Executive Courses, for further details.
Those attending Executive Courses are offered the regular opportunity (the second Thursday of every 2 week course) to take the London Chamber of Commerce Examination in Spoken English for Industry and Commerce (SEFIC) at Intermediate or Advanced level.
The registration fee for the examination is approximately £20.
Arrangements for taking the SEFIC Examination are made on arrival at the school.
Examinations
In order to make certain that a place is reserved for you on the Executive Course of your choice (Executive Course I, II, III, IV or V), please ensure that we receive your application form at least 4 weeks before the course is due to start.
Enrolment
While every effort is made to offer those who book late the course they have requested, the school reserves the right to offer an alternative Executive Course in the case of applications not received within the specified time.
If you are paying for your course and accommodation yourself you should pay the total amount in advance as soon as your place has been confirmed by bank transfer in £ sterling to: INTERNATIONAL HOUSE, Account Number 26953390, Bank Code 60-07-24T, National Westminster Bank, 2 Eastcheap, London EC3M 1AH.
All bank or exchange charges must be paid in advance by the sender.
In special cases, such as late enrolment, arrangements may be made for payment on arrival.
Payment of fees
If your employer is responsible for payment of your fees a letter from your employer stating this must be enclosed with your application form.
An invoice for the fees will then be sent direct to your employer.