

Learn the language in the country
english french german hungarian italian portuguese spanish
International House
Our schools are part of the International House group, a world-wide organisation of language schools and teacher-training centres, linked together through a non-profitmaking Educational Charity Trust which has its head-quarters at 106 Piccadilly, London.
The IH group has a 25-year reputation for high quality and expertise in language teaching, and is now the largest British-based organisation of its kind in the world.
learn with the experts
International House
We believe that effective language learning is a partnership between school, teacher and student, with the school providing the best possible conditions and environment for learning — high academic standards, well-equipped buildings and classrooms, up-to-date teaching materials and aids, well-organised course programmes, and a wide range of extra-curricular facilities and services.
For most of our students, the main objective is to be able to communicate confidently in the language of their choice, so practice in listening and speaking are our first priorities.
A sound training in reading and writing skills is also given.
Our schools offer a wide variety of courses throughout the year, both for groups and individuals, and specially tailored courses can be run on request.
All our teachers are highly qualified native speakers.
OUR METHODS
There is no better way of practising the language one is learning than using it outside the classroom.
We organize family accommodation and, as classes take place in schools where English is taught to local inhabitants, there is every opportunity for making friends and for conversation exchange.
Accommodation can be arranged in residences or hotels if required.
ACCOMMODATION
These form an important complement to classroom teaching and include a wide range of excursions, cultural visits and various social activities.
They enable the student to practice the language outside the classroom and at the same time learn more about the country.
ACTIVITIES
We feel that this is the ideal opportunity for students to study as well as enjoy a holiday visiting new places and meeting new people.
at International House — 106 Piccadilly — London W1V 9FL Telephone: 01-491 2598 — Telex 299811 ENGINT G.
ENGLISH In London
Right in the centre of London, the school overlooks Green Park.
All of London's main tourist attractions and shops, theatres, cinemas, etc., are within easy reach.
THE SCHOOL:
The school is open all year round and occupies two large buildings with 37 classrooms, language laboratories, videos, computers, library, listening centre and bookshop.
There is also an accommodation and welfare office, restaurant, bar and large social programme.
General English Courses: start every 4 weeks from 5 January 1987, 15, 10 or 25 hours per week.
It is an official centre for Cambridge, Oxford, ARELS, etc.
TUITION:
Executive Courses in Business English: small group (maximum 6 persons) highly intensive courses for business and professional people.
One-to-one tuition also available.
at International House — White Rock — HASTINGS — East Sussex TN34 1JY — Telephone:(0424) 44577 — Telex: 95403 INHOUS G.
ENGLISH In Hastings
Hastings (population 77,000) is a historic seaside town 99 km south of London.
THE TOWN:
International House Hastings is centrally located and occupies two spacious buildings with over 40 classrooms, two language laboratories, two self access centres, videos and computers, bookshop.
Accommodation and Welfare Department.
It is an official centre for Cambridge, Oxford, ARELS, etc. examinations.
THE SCHOOL:
International School: General courses start every week.
Intensive courses start every 4 weeks.
TUITION:
Executive School: Very intensive courses for professional people with tuition in small groups or one-to-one.
Summer School: All inclusive vacation courses start every week.
June to September.
Junior Courses: All inclusive vacation courses for students aged 10 to 17 in several centres.
Accommodation can be organized in families and hotels.
FOR BOTH SCHOOLS:
ACCOMMODATION:
Social and cultural programmes are organized by the school on a regular basis.
ACTIVITIES:
at International House — 24, Northumberland Rd., NEWCASTLE-ON-TYNE NE1 8JZ — Telephone:(091) 2329551 — Telex 537681 ALWRLD att: INHOUSE.
ENGLISH In Newcastle
International House — Northumbria is one of the smaller schools in the International House Organisation.
Newcastle is a university city in the North of England.
It has access to beautiful, unknown countryside and excursions to Edinburgh and the Lake District are arranged.
Ideal for students wishing to spend their time at a different location away from their fellow countrymen.
Easy connections from London.
Groups and private courses throughout the year.
Summer Holiday Courses in June, July and August.
at International House — Jesus y Marla 9 — 38004 SANTA-CRUZ DE TENERIFE — Canary Islands — Telephone: 22-287009 — Telex 92230 COCINE
SPANISH In the Canaries
Tenerife is easily accessible from all the major airports of Europe and is famous for its wonderful climate, spectacular scenery and its Carnival and local festivities.
THE TOWN:
The school is situated in the Garden District of Santa Cruz (pop 195,000), a city of contrasts which retains much of its colonial charm and is only a short drive away from the nightlife of the resort of Puerto de la Cruz.
THE SCHOOL:
Regular courses will be run from January 1987.
Private and closed-group courses can be run at any time.
TUITION:
Accommodation can be organized in hotels or with families.
ACCOMMODATION:
We organise excursions as part of our courses and participants have ample opportunity to meet the hospitable local people and practise Spanish.
Local speech is easy to understand and has the advantage of being halfway between Castillan and South American Spanish.
ACTIVITIES:
at International House — Calle Zurbano 8 — MADRID 4 — Telephone 1410 13 14
SPANISH In Madrid
As a meeting point for the many cultures that make up modern Spain, Madrid is a bustling city in the middle of the central plain known as the Meseta.
THE TOWN:
Sheltered by the impressive Sierra de Guadarrama, the capital of four million inhabitants provides an open window on the life of the country, just the place to learn the language of Cervantes!
I.H. Madrid, set in a thriving centrally located area of Madrid, offers a pleasant and lively language school for adults with a wide range of activities both in and out the classroom
THE SCHOOL:
It is in this atmosphere that you will be learning Spanish, one of the most important languages of today.
As is usual at I.H., classes are given by native speaking, highly qualified teachers with suitable experience in the teaching of Spanish.
Students new to I.H. should take a test, both oral and written, before the course to determine their levels, except beginners.
The emphasis of the courses is on speaking and oral comprehension and priority is given to communicating in Spanish.
Maximum of 10 students per group and minimum of 4.
TUITION:
Course information: Three types are offered: * Regular classes: Duration: 1 term, 10 weeks from October to June.
Hours 4 1/2 hours a week, 45 hours total.
* Intensive courses: Duration 2-4 weeks, all year round.
Hours: 3 hours a day, 30 hours two week course.
* Individual Classes: Students interested in private or special classes should send details of their requirements and the school will try to organise suitable classes for them.
Timetable: Morning, afternoon and evening classes.
Levels: All levels, covering 8 different levels of language.
Family accommodation is available throughout the year, generally in single rooms.
Bed and breakfast or half-board.
ACCOMMODATION:
Accommodation is available throughout the year in 2-star hotels close to the school.
Bed and breakfast or half-board.
3, 4 or 5 star hotels can also be arranged on request.
University residence: accommodation is in individual rooms including full board.
This type of accommodation could only be arranged in July and August.
at International House — c/, Trafalgar, 14 ENTLO — BARCELONA 08010 — Telephone:(93) 3188429 — Telex:97391 IHIHE.
SPANISH In Barcelona
Barcelona (pop.
3,000,000) is the capital of Catalonia, the most important industrial and commercial area in Spain.
It is a beautiful port city located on the slopes of Mt.
Tibidabo, with a fascinating medieval quarter, and within easy reach of the Costa Brava and the Pyrenees.
THE TOWN:
There is plenty to visit: numerous museums, including the Gothic Art and Picasso, its two cathedrals (the Gothic and Gaudi's Sagrada Familia), the Spanish Folk Village, the mountain of Montjuich with its castle and Tibidabo with its fun fair, or just wandering along its tree-lined boulevards, of which the most famous is the Ramblas.
At night the city throbs with life, and bars, restaurants, clubs, discos and cinemas operate into the early (and late!) hours of the morning.
An exciting place to be in!
The school is located 5 minutes walk from Plaza Cataluna which is the hub of the city's communication system (metro, bus, etc.); it is within easy walking distance of the Ramblas and the medieval quarter.
THE SCHOOL:
Located on two internally connected floors the school has 16 classrooms, auditorium, students study area, bar and sitting room and a small patio.
We have around 1,500 students of English per year and several hundred students of Spanish; we also run our own teacher training courses (ESA TEFL Preparatory and Diploma), so there are plenty of students to practise your Spanish on!
Intensive (3 hours a day) courses are started every two weeks throughout the year.
The courses have a highly practical content and aim to get you listening and talking as much as possible.
All our teachers are native and trained.
Optional extra classes on specialised topics are also available in summer.
TUITION:
In addition, we offer less intensive termly courses and private group classes on demand; these can be tailored to suit the requirements of the client concerned.
We want you to enjoy the delights of this beautiful part of Spain.
Accompanied visits are made to a variety of historic areas, museums, and local points of interest.
On most courses longer trips are also made, i.e. to Montserrat, Ampurias/Costa Brava, Poblet Monastery/Costa Dorada, etc.
ACCOMMODATION:
And if you still have time to spare you can spend a weekend in Andorra (beautiful and taxfree) or jump on the train to Sitges or the Costa Brava.
There'll never be a dull moment!
at International House — Rua Marques Sa de Bandeira 16 — LISBON 1000 — Telephone 35 11 534054 — Telex: 14866 INTHO-P.
PORTUGUESE In Lisbon
Lisbon is situated on the north bank of the River Tagus.
Like Rome it is built on seven hills which provides unexpected and quite spectacular views of the estuary and the city.
THE TOWN:
The school is a totally independent building with three floors containing sixteen classrooms, resources room, video room and bar.
THE SCHOOL:
at MS Jane Periera.
International House, rua Antero de Quental 135 — 3.000 COIMBRA
PORTUGUESE In Coimbra
Coimbra is, for many reasons, the most romantic of all Portuguese cities.
Situated on the banks of the River Mondego, on an important crossroads, it has for centuries played a vital role in the life of the centre of the country.
THE TOWN:
The school is situated in the student area of the town, near the university and close to the centre of town.
It is housed in a semi detached house consisting of nine classrooms, teacher's room, resources room, small bar and garden.
THE SCHOOL:
Minimum 6 students, maximum 10.
These courses have 4 hours tuition daily for a period of four weeks and are aimed specifically at people who for reasons of trade or technical co-operation require sound practical Portuguese to work efficiently in Portuguese-speaking Africa or Brazil.
TUITION FOR BOTH SCHOOLS:
Small Group Intensive Courses:
These courses have a minimum of 2 weeks duration with between 4 and 6 hours of daily tuition given by a team of two or three experienced teachers, each of whom works on a specific language area.
Intensive Individual Courses:
In Lisbon this can be arranged in pensoes or hotels within easy reach of I.H.
ACCOMMODATION:
In Coimbra, accommodation can be arranged either in pensions, hotels or with a family where opportunities to practise are plentiful.
On all courses we include a programme of extra-curricular activities either of a tourist nature or professionally orientated.
ACTIVITIES FOR BOTH SCHOOLS:
at the International Language Institute, World Trade and Convention Centre — 1800 Argule Street, Suite 800 — HALIFAX — Nova Scotia B3J 3N8 — Canada.
Telephone:(902) 429-3636 — Fax:(902) 429-2900 — Telex (via New York): 7601005.
New Scotia is known as Canada's Ocean Playground.
It is famous for its scenic coastline, quiet fishing villages, and friendly inhabitants.
The province enjoys an international reputation as a prime tourist destination with fine accommodation, restaurants, modern services, major cultural events, and an endless array of outdoor activities.
FRENCH In Halifax
THE TOWN:
Halifax is the capital of Nova Scotia and the commercial, governmental and educational centre of Atlantic Canada.
Located in a metropolitan area of 300,000, it combines the advantages of a major city with the best personal qualities of a small town.
In Halifax, European and North American elements blend their influences to give the city a distinctive maritime character.
I.L.I. is an integral part of the World Trade and Convention Centre, the focus of international economic development in Atlantic Canada.
At the W.T.C.C. you will find an international trade library, computerized data bases, market research and analysis services, and the computerized communications system of the World Trade Centre Network.
I.L.I. has a modern self-access language laboratory; audio, video and computer resource materials; a reference library; and a bookshop.
The SCHOOL:
I.L.I. offers full and part-time French and English instruction to individuals and groups throughout the year.
Full-time university preparatory programmes begin on the first Monday of January, April, July and October.
Special short courses are available in July and August.
TUITION:
Accommodation can be organized in hotels or with families.
ACCOMMODATION:
Social and cultural programmes are organized by the school.
ACTIVITIES:
at International House — Centre d'Anglais et de Francais — 61, bd St-Michel — 49000 ANGERS — Telephone: 41 43 56 21 and 41 60 26 75.
Angers, a university town with a population of 175,000 is situated in the beautiful Loire Valley, famous for its fairytale chateaux and fine wines.
The town is proud of its cultural reputation, it boasts a philharmonic orchestra, a modern dance company, an annual summer music and theatre festival, and of course its medieval tapestries of the Apocalypse.
FRENCH In Angers
THE TOWN:
Anjou was once the home of the Plantagenets and today the tomb of Henri II of England, Eleanore of Acquitaine and Richard the Lion Hart can be seen in the magnificent abbey of Fontevraud near the town.
Angers is within easy reach of Paris (2 and a half hours by train), Brittany and the Mont-St-Michel, perhaps France's most beautiful monument.
The school is situated in a modern bright building overlooking the Jardin des Plantes.
It has 4 classrooms, a large student room and it is equipped with a self-access centre containing video machines, computers and a mini-language laboratory.
THE SCHOOL:
Group Vacation Courses are run in the month of July, starting any Monday for the number of weeks requested.
The courses are adapted for all levels except total beginners and include 3 hours lessons a day, an active social and cultural programme, family accommodation and 3 meals a day.
The minimum age requested is 16 years old.
TUITION:
Private courses can be organized at any time of the year for 1 to 4 weeks with 3, 5 or 8 hours lessons.
These courses are aimed specifically at people who for reasons of trade or technical co-operation require sound practical French to work efficiently.
The courses have a highly practical content and aim to get you listening and talking as much as possible.
All our teachers are native and trained.
Accommodation with breakfast and dinner can be arranged with french families or in hotels.
ACCOMMODATION:
Windsurfing, yachting and tennis are included in the summer programme.
In July, one of the plays of the famous Festival d'Angers is studied and seen by all the students.
Visits to local chateaux and places of interest (Saumur and Fontevraud) are organized twice a week as part of the summer group vacation course, and a party and a disco evening are held during the course.
ACTIVITIES:
All these activities can be included in a private course if requested.
at Di.L.It.
International House — Via Marghera, 22 — 00185 ROMA — Telephone: 492592, 492593, 492602.
Wandering through the vibrant streets of Rome, one is constantly reminded of the widely differing historical periods.
From the Roman Forum, once the city's most important political and social centre, to the Colosseum, perhaps the city's best known monument, to the soaring Baroque dome of St-Peter's and the Vatican city with its superb collection of paintings and sculptures, to the Trevi Fountains and the Spanish steps through to the twentieth century Victor-Emmanuel monument built to commemorate the unity of Italy — the list is endless and no amount of reading about the Eternal City can substitute a visit there as Rome speaks for herself.
ITALIAN In Rome
THE TOWN:
Three minutes walk from the central station, the school houses 12 classrooms, a language laboratory, a video/ projection room, a self-study centre, a snack bar and a disco.
THE SCHOOL:
In class: * Intensive: all levels; 3 hours a day Monday to Friday, morning or afternoon.
New courses start every 2 weeks throughout the year.
* Non-intensive: all levels; 2 x 2.5 hours per week.
* Superintensive: 5 hours a day; short duration (2 or 4 weeks); only for beginners; only during summer and at Easter.
TUITION:
Individual: * Intensive: 7 hours a day * Private lessons: on arrangement
Hotels, flats, and in-family accommodation can be arranged on request.
ACCOMMODATION:
Fortnightly seminars are held on the following subjects: History of Art, Literature, History, Pronunciation, Italian Cooking, Italian Wines.
ACTIVITIES:
Regular social activities include: films, excursions, guided tours, parties, etc.
at Lehrgemeinschaft fur Sprachen, Language Tutors — Bismarckalle 4 — D-7800 FREIBURG — Telephone (0761) 34751.
The university town of Freiburg enjoys the reputation of being one of Germany's most attractive and well loved cities.
Its ideal location at the foot of the Black Forest, with France to the west and Switzerland to the south contributes all the more to Freiburg's distinct charm.
GERMAN In Freiburg
THE TOWN:
The market place and its world renowned gothic cathedral in the old part of the town, the numerous wine-bars, restaurants, pubs and cafe  e s all add to a warm and friendly atmosphere.
Sports-fans are also well-catered for with Freiburg's many sports facilities, the lakes and skiing slopes of the Black Forest.
The school is excellently situated in the centre of town.
It is well equipped with modern teaching aids including video, portable language laboratory sets, etc.
At the moment, there are 5 classrooms, but the school is about to acquire a whole new floor with about 7 more rooms.
THE SCHOOL:
Intensive Group Courses: They are offered throughout the year for executives and for serious students of all professions and institutions of learning, who enjoy the challenge of quick progress in a small group of an average of 5 and a maximum of 7 participants.
Duration: minimum stay 2 weeks.
A whole term would be 12 weeks.
25 lessons of 45 minutes each per week.
The course is designed for adults; the students should be at least 18 years old.
TUITION:
Summer Holiday Courses: This course is designed for younger students who want to improve their German and at the same time enjoy a good holiday.
Duration: the course is offered from the second half of June to the middle of August.
This period is divided into three-week courses.
The students may stay between 3 and 9 weeks.
15 lessons of 50 minutes each per week.
Average number of students in class, 12.
Age group: 10-13 and 14-18 years old.
Accommodation the first three weeks of the period in families; the rest of the period in an excellent, spacious and beautifully located residence.
One-to-one courses: Each student has a  personal tutor and 2–3 teachers, who programme the course to his particular needs and language-learning aptitude.
The course includes video-sessions and project work.
Start any Monday of the year, 30 lessons per week an one full hour assigned self study with video or portable language laboratory sets.
Accommodation in selected families, on request in hotels or student houses during university holidays.
at International House — Language School — CHC — PO Box 95 — BUDAPEST — H-1364 — Hungary Telephone: 36 1 111 306 — Telex: 22 46 79.
HUNGARIAN In Budapest
Budapest is the capital of Hungary, and perhaps the most popular city on the Danube — especially in the summer, with many cultural events, including the celebrations on August 20th, St.-Stephen's Day, in honour of the first Hungarian king.
THE TOWN:
The college, founded in 1985, is housed in a beautiful building, on the slopes of the Gell  e rt Hill, which is in the heart of the city on the Buda side of Budapest.
THE SCHOOL:
Accommodation is organised in the school itself.
Each room has three beds and a wash-basin.
 Bathrooms are shared.
There are kitchen facilities.
ACCOMMODATION:
Students share rooms with native Hungarians who learn a foreign language at the same time.
Breakfast and lunch are taken at the school too.
Off-campus accommodation can be organized if application is made sufficiently in advance, reservations can be made in hotels (single or double rooms), bedsitters with Hungarian families, small one-bedroom flats.
Group courses for all levels for a duration of 3 or 6 weeks are run in July and August.
TUITION:
On Campus there is a well equipped gymnasium with facilities for handball, basketball, etc., table tennis, jogging, hard tennis courts.
For a small extra charge: tickets to swimming pools, thermal baths, etc. are available on request.
ACTIVITIES:
In the summer there are many open-air concerts, theatre performances, Hungarian folk-dance performances, etc.
One concert or theatre ticket is included in the price, other tickets are available on request.
The College has a very good and, incidently, quite famous library, which is free of charge.
Excursions: sightseeing tours of Budapest during first weekend, one-day excursion organized py Pegazus Tours on request, 2 day weekend trips — riding tours, tours to the Danube Bend, to Lake Balaton, etc. on request, and one long weekend tour of the Hungarian countryside on request.