

What Makes Champagne Special?
All Champagne is sparkling wine but not all sparkling wine is Champagne.
Champagne is a designation used only for sparkling wine produced in the limited area of Northern France around the towns of Reims and Epernay.
It is produced by a special secondary "bottle fermentation" method from only the following three permitted grape varieties:
This gives Champagne delicacy and finesse and imparts the distinctive "biscuity" bouquet.
The Grapes
CHARDONNAY (WHITE)
This noble grape variety, renowned for producing elegant red burgundies, lends weight and body to the wine.
PINOT NOIR (BLACK)
This grape gives a roundness and fuller balance to the wine.
PINOT MEUNIER (BLACK)
Rosé Champagne is achieved either by blending or by allowing the black grape skins (Pinot Noir and Pinot Meunier) to stay in contact with the juice long enough to impart a pale rose colour.
What the Label Means
ROSE
Champagne made from grapes grown in the particular year printed on the label.
VINTAGE
Champagne made exclusively from Chardonnay grapes.
BLANC DE BLANCS
A style of Champagne that has slightly softer bubbles and marginally less "fizz" than ordinary Champagne.
CREMANT
Dry.
BRUT
Just off dry, infact.
EXTRA DRY
Medium Dry.
SEC
Translated as "semi-dry" , this style of Champagne is actually medium sweet.
DEMI-SEC
Traditional fine quality house with excellent non vintage wines and the superb "RD" (recently disgorged) vintage wines.
The Major Champagne Houses
BOLLINGER
Recent investment in production facilities and reserves of quality wines have led to a new lease of life for this long established house.
CHARLES HEIDSIECK
The "Widow Clicquot" is credited with inventing the "Pupitre" a slanting rack used in the making of champagne to settle the sediment in the neck of the bottle after fermentation.
This allows the unwanted sediment to be expelled with relative ease.
VEUVE CLICQUOT PONSARDIN
A very traditional Champagne house using wooden barrels during production and producing a fuller bodied style of wine.
KRUG
Very popular wines from the UK's second largest selling Champagne producer.
Soft attractive style.
LANSON
Fine quality wines with lightness and delicacy of balance.
LAURENT PERRIER
The largest and most renowned house.
In addition to the famous Moet label Moet & Chandon also offer the superb "Dom Perignon" , and the popular Mercier brands.
MOET & CHANDON
A full range of styles are produced by this fine house including their elegant prestige cuvée "Diamant Bleu" .
HEIDSIECK & CO MONOPOLE
The Cordon Rouge (dry) and Cordon Vert (medium) are well known for their distinctive striped labels, whilst the Crémant de Cramant is a lighter delicate wine produced only from Chardonnay grapes grown around the village of Cramant.
G.H. MUMM & CO
producer of the famous "Belle Epoque" prestige cuvée.
A stylish wine in the equally stylish painted bottle.
PERRIER-JOUET
Good consistent quality wines produced by this mainstream highly popular house.
PIPER HEIDSIECK
Family owned champagne house which enjoyed the patronage of Sir Winston Churchill, after whom their première cuvée is named.
POL ROGER
With its dramatic buildings dominating the architecture of Reims and its ancient cellars, this house receives thousands of visitors each year.
Pommery wines are well balanced and of high quality.
POMMERY & GRENO
Excellent quality wines of superb elegance and great finesse.
 "Cristal" is the Roederer prestige cuvée, easily recognised by its clear glass bottle.
LOUIS ROEDERER
The oldest of all the Grandes Marques, Ruinart are renowned for their top cuvée "Dom Ruinart" .
RUINART
Great tradition and a fine reputation are the hallmarks of this producer, from their fine Non Vintage right through to the superb "Comtes de Champagne" prestige cuvée.
TAITTINGER
The following are also represented in our range for their fine quality wines and tremendous value for money.
Other Producers
Caves de Chouilly*, Marne et Champagne*, Jeanmaire*, Besserat de Bellefon, Ayala, Mercier, "Deutz, Joseph Perrier." 
* Suppliers of Tesco's much acclaimed own-label wines.