

AFRICA
SOUTH AFRICA
Release of Nelson Mandela
De Klerk's speech to opening of Parliament
President F. W. de Klerk, in a radical speech at the state opening of Parliament on Feb. 2, surprised supporters and critics alike by announcing not only the impending release of Nelson Mandela, the long-imprisoned leader of the country's principal liberation movement, the African National Congress (ANC), but also the unbanning of the ANC, the Pan Africanist Congress (PAC — the ANC's smaller rival) and the South African Communist Party (SACP).
He also lifted some of the restrictions imposed on media reporting and personal freedoms under the state of emergency regulations, and said that the 1953 Reservation of Separate Amenities Act would be repealed during the current session of Parliament.
De Klerk signalled that the government now acknowledged the need to begin talks with leaders of South Africa's majority black population.
Announcing that "the time for negotiation has arrived" , de Klerk invited representative black leaders to "walk through the open door" and take their place at the negotiating table "together with the government and other leaders who have important power bases inside and outside Parliament" .
An increasing number of South Africans now realized, he said, that "only a negotiated understanding between the representative leaders of the entire population can ensure lasting peace" , the alternative to which was "growing violence, tension and conflict" .
The government now sought agreement on "a totally new, just constitutional system in which every inhabitant will enjoy equal rights, treatment and opportunities in every sphere of endeavour: constitutional, social and economic" .
The principal topics covered in his speech are outlined below.
Relations with southern African states.
 "The season of violence is over [and]the time for reconstruction and reconciliation has arrived," he declared, and proposed the formulation of a joint regional development plan.
De Klerk said that in his recent meetings with the Presidents of Zaïre, Mozambique, Côte d'Ivoire and Zambia, all had agreed that South Africa should play a positive part in regional co-operation and development.
Human rights within South Africa.
The South African Law Commission would be asked to report on the protection of the rights of citizens, "as well as all collective units, associations, minorities and nations" , in a future constitution, by examining a variety of constitutional models; this investigation would be used in support of negotiations on a new constitution [see below; see also p. 36915 for recommendations of Law Commission working paper of March 1989].
The death penalty.
In acknowledgement of the urgent need for reform in this area, de Klerk proposed initially that henceforth:(i) the death penalty would be limited as an option of sentence to extreme cases, and the area of judicial discretion in the imposition of sentence would be broadened (currently the death sentence was mandatory for certain crimes);(ii) all those sentenced to death would be granted automatic right of appeal — up till now there had been no appeal against this sentence;(iii) no further executions would be carried out until Parliament had decided on the proposals.
[For executions in 1988 see p. 36913; for September 1989 executions, see p. 36881.]
Negotiation with black leaders on a new political order.
Affirming that "practically every leader agrees that negotiation is the key to reconciliation, peace and a new and just dispensation" , and in support of the government's "declared intention to normalise the political process…without jeopardizing the maintenance of good order" , de Klerk announced changes which he said removed some of the most important obstacles to negotiation, namely (i) the lifting of the ban on the ANC, the PAC, the SACP and a number of subsidiary organizations;(ii) the release of those imprisoned for membership of one of these banned organizations (but not members imprisoned for politically motivated crimes involving violence);(iii) the abolition of the media emergency regulations and of the education emergency regulations, although restrictions would remain on "visual material pertaining to scenes of unrest" ;(iv) the removal of restrictions imposed on 33 organizations under the state of emergency, including the National Education Crisis Committee, the United Democratic Front (UDF), the Congress of South African Trade Unions (COSATU) and an extreme right-wing group, Die Blanke Bevrydingsbeweging van Suid-Afrika;(v) the lifting of personal restrictions imposed on 374 people already released from detention; and (vi) a six-month limit on detention without charge under the emergency regulations, with detainees henceforth being entitled to legal representation and their own choice of medical attention.
De Klerk was now able to claim that there was no longer any justification for violent protest, in view of his invitation "to all leaders who seek peace" , along with the lifting of restrictions on political groups, which he said now placed everybody in a position to pursue politics freely.
Responses
While this was generally hailed as an historic reforming speech, observers noted first that de Klerk did not lift the state of emergency, and indeed justified its continuing existence, and second that he made no reference to the repeal of legislation (apart from the Separate Amenities Act) which formed the so-called "cornerstones" of the apartheid system, notably the Population Registration Act and the Group Areas Act.
Likewise the main provisions of the Internal Security Act remained unchanged.
Commentators agreed that the legalization of the black nationalist groupings was a move which would transform the political landscape; in recent weeks, however, both the ANC and the UDF had largely ignored the restrictions on their activities [see p. 37176].
The director-general of the South African Chamber of Business said that as a result of the speech, there would be a shift in overseas perceptions of South Africa, which was an essential first step towards a resumption of foreign investment.
The changes were greeted with dismay by extreme right-wingers, giving rise to fears of a right-wing backlash in response to de Klerk's attempts at reform.
The Conservative Party (CP), which won 31 per cent of the vote in white elections in September 1989 [see p. 36880], declared that de Klerk had no mandate to carry out the changes he had predicted and therefore should resign.
Later, in a demonstration in protest at Mandela's release, the CP leader Andries Treurnicht accused de Klerk of sacrificing the Afrikaner volk ( "nation" ).
Membership or support for the CP and other white supremacist groups was disproportionately prevalent within the police and security forces; this, it was suggested, could jeopardise the successful implementation of any significant reforms.
Black reaction was mixed: the UDF's initial reaction was to welcome the boldness of de Klerk's initiatives, while COSATU representatives declared them to have fallen far short of expectations.
The PAC said that de Klerk had not conceded enough to persuade the movement to bring its exiled cadres home.
Mandela himself, on the day of his release, described de Klerk as "a man of integrity who is acutely aware of the dangers of a public figure not honouring his undertakings" , and who had "gone further than any other Nationalist president in taking real steps to normalise the situation" .
Release of Nelson Mandela
Nelson Mandela walked free from the Victor Verster prison (Cape Province) in the early afternoon of Feb. 11.
The date of his release had only been announced by de Klerk at a news conference on Feb. 10.
Biography of Mandela
1918 Born July 18, Umtata, now in Transkei homeland
1942 Articled to firm of Johannesburg solicitors; enrols for law degree at Witwatersrand University
1944 Joins ANC; first marriage to Eveline, cousin of Walter Sisulu; founds ANC youth league with Sisulu
1952 Elected president of Transvaal branch of ANC and becomes deputy national president
1953 Sets up country's first African legal firm with Oliver Tambo; receives suspended sentence for organizing defiance campaign of 1952
1956 Arrested and charged with high treason, but discharged in 1961 after five-year trial
1958 Second marriage, while on trial, to Winnie Madikizela, daughter of Transkei politician; PAC splits from ANC
1960 Police kill 69 in Sharpeville; ANC and PAC banned
1961 Goes underground to organize mass stay-away of May 1961 and to help set up ANC armed wing Umkhonto we Sizwe
January 1962 Leaves South Africa illegally; tours Africa, meeting heads of state; visits UK
November 1962 Convicted of inciting people to strike in May 1961, and of leaving the country illegally; receives five-year sentence
October 1963 Brought from prison to stand trial for treason in "Rivonia trial" with other ANC leaders
1964 Receives life sentence; imprisoned on Robben Island
April 1982 Transferred to Pollsmoor prison in Cape Town
January 1985 Refuses conditional offer of release
1988 Transferred to prison warder's house in grounds of Victor Verster prison in Paarl
Speculation that Mandela's release was imminent had heightened in preceding weeks [for meeting between Mandela and de Klerk on Dec. 13, 1989 see p. 37116].
As the world's most famous political prisoner, his emergence at the age of 71 after 27 years in prison was a moment of jubilation for black South Africans, who poured into the streets for prolonged celebration once news of his release was confirmed.
Similar reactions were reported throughout Africa, where Mandela was already seen as a people's hero at the time of his imprisonment in 1962.
The moment of his release, and his subsequent statements were observed with intense interest inside South Africa and throughout the world.
De Klerk's action in freeing Mandela at this time, after years of international pressure for his release (particularly around the time of his 70th birthday in 1988) was seen as an acknowledgement of the urgent need for the government to open negotiations with legitimate black leaders, in response to the ANC's Harare Declaration of August 1989 when it set out its own proposals for political change in South Africa [see p. 36837; see p. 37176 for recent communications between Mandela and de Klerk on this issue].
The government's commitment to a new constitutional dispensation which would include blacks had been indicated in de Klerk's speech of Feb. 2.
Observers suggested that a programme of negotiated, "rolling reforms" would now ensue, probably over a considerable period of time, and that de Klerk would face strong opposition from some elements of the white electorate who sought to maintain protected political rights for the white minority.
Mandela's first public address, Cape Town
Accompanied by his wife Winnie Mandela, Nelson Mandela was driven from the prison 60 km to Cape Town along a route lined by thousands of supporters.
On the steps of the City Hall he spoke to a crowd of 50,000 who had waited for hours for his appearance.
His first words were a salute to the people of South Africa, to whom he declared: "I stand here before you not as a prophet but as a humble servant of you, the people.
Your tireless and heroic sacrifices have made it possible for me to be here today — I therefore place the remaining years of my life in your hands."
He expressed gratitude to "the millions of my compatriots and those in every corner of the globe who have campaigned tirelessly for my release" .
He went on to pay tribute to the ANC president, Oliver Tambo (currently recovering in Sweden from a stroke), to the rank and file members of the organization, to the fighters of Umkhonto we Sizwe (the ANC's armed wing), and to the SACP "for its sterling contribution to the struggle for democracy" .
Mandela also acknowledged the part played in the anti-apartheid movement by, among others, the Mass Democratic Movement, the Black Sash and other white pressure groups, the churches, the youth of the townships, and the "mothers, wives and sisters of our nation" , whom he described as "the rock-hard foundation of our struggle" .
The apartheid system, Mandela stated, had wreaked "incalculable" destruction.
 "The fabric of family life of millions of our people has been shattered,…our economy lies in ruins and our people are embroiled in political strife." 
He went on to justify the ANC's resort to armed struggle in 1960, describing it as "a purely defensive action against the violence of apartheid" , and declared: "The factors which necessitated the armed struggle still exist today.
We have no option but to continue.
We express the hope that a climate conducive to a negotiated settlement can be created soon so that there may no longer be the need for the armed struggle."
He strongly reaffirmed his own position as "a loyal and disciplined member of the ANC…in full agreement with all of its objectives, strategies and tactics." 
On the subject of negotiations with the government, Mandela emphasized that he himself had at no time entered into negotiations about the future of the country — thus attempting to calm black fears arising from his various meetings with government ministers and the then President P. W. Botha.
He also strongly reaffirmed his own position as a "loyal and disciplined member of the ANC" , in full agreement with the movement's "objectives, strategies and tactics" .
Noting that "negotiations cannot take place behind the backs of our people" , he implicitly reaffirmed the ANC demand for a one person one vote system, declaring: "It is our belief that the future of our country can only be determined by a body which is democratically elected on a non-racial basis." 
In conclusion he quoted directly from his statement from the dock at the opening of the defence case in the Rivonia trial in 1964 [see pp. 20245-46]: "I have fought against white domination, and I have fought against black domination.
I have cherished the idea of a democratic and free society in which all persons live together in harmony and with equal opportunities.
It is an ideal which I hope to live for and to achieve.
But if needs be, it is an ideal for which I am prepared to die."
Return to Soweto
On Feb. 12 Mandela held his first press conference for the world's media in Cape Town, and on the following day he returned to his home in Soweto, where he addressed a crowd of over 130,000 at a football stadium.
Here he spoke of the privations of township life, referring to poor housing, unemployment and the crisis in black schools.
He urged pupils disaffected with the system to return to school.
He spoke of high levels of crime, and of violence perpetrated by the security forces against peaceful demonstrations, but also called for an end to "mindless violence" between township factions.
He acknowledged black workers' longstanding campaign for a "living wage" and for fair labour legislation.
All commentators agreed that Mandela's commanding performances at the huge rallies which followed his release, the statesmanlike handling of his encounters with senior political figures and the international media, and not least his grasp of the complex issues of the day, gave hope to those for whom he was a long-awaited, natural leader.
Visit to ANC headquarters in Lusaka
On Feb. 27, after a gruelling schedule of rallies, meetings and interviews, Mandela began a 17-day foreign visit, his first since 1962.
His first destination was the headquarters of the ANC in Lusaka (Zambia), where he met the exiled ANC executive committee, and other leaders of the Frontline states and Commonwealth representatives, and was greeted with the ceremony normally reserved for heads of state.
[For principal ANC leadership personnel and January 1990 policy statement, see p. 37176.]
Rejecting a suggestion from Zambia's President Kenneth Kaunda that the ANC should suspend its armed struggle in order to encourage further reforms on the part of the Pretoria government, Mandela said the ANC would make no concessions at the present time.
The controversial issues
The ANC had confirmed on Feb. 16 that a high-level delegation was expected to meet the government soon, in order to discuss the ANC's preconditions for formal negotiations.
Among the controversial issues which any negotiations would have to address were the following [see also p. 36837 for so-called "Harare declaration" on ANC proposals for future negotiations, and p. 36912 for earlier policy guidelines]:(i) nationalization: in press interviews in the days following his release, Mandela had reasserted the ANC's stated policy of nationalizing certain sectors of the economy, including mines — this immediately provoked sharp falls on South African financial markets [see also p. 37176];(ii) the armed struggle: Mandela had refused to renounce this policy, repeating on Feb. 14 that government installations were legitimate targets for sabotage [ibid.];(iii) power-sharing: the government and the ANC still appeared to be a long way apart on interpretation — the ANC for its part was not prepared to accept an arrangement similar to the current tri-cameral parliament;(iv) sanctions: Mandela had already stated that "the conditions for which sanctions are being applied still exist" and thus there was no need for a review of the question [for UK Prime Minister's unilateral decision to break EC agreement on voluntary sanctions see below].
Meanwhile a summit in Zaïre of African leaders, to which de Klerk had been invited, was postponed in late February.
The ANC had expressed its opposition to the Zaïre summit in a message to the Organization of African Unity (OAU) on the grounds that it conflicted with OAU resolutions on contacts with South Africa.
EC Foreign Ministers' meeting on sanctions
The UK on Feb. 23 formally lifted its voluntary ban on new investment in South Africa and the promotion of tourism, unilaterally breaking EC agreements on sanctions, on the grounds that this would encourage further internal reforms in South Africa.
The UK government would thus no longer discourage businesses from forging links in these areas.
The decision was announced by the UK Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd on Feb. 20 at the end of an EC Foreign Ministers meeting in Dublin, in spite of a resolution by other EC Foreign Ministers not to reconsider lifting sanctions until the state of emergency in South Africa had been revoked and all political prisoners released.
The action was described as a "very dangerous precedent for European political co-operation" by the Irish Foreign Minister and current President of the Council of Ministers, Gerry Collins.
The other 11 states had agreed only to allow South Africa to "re-engage in cultural and scientific co-operation" as a gesture of encouragement to de Klerk.
The UK Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher had already announced on Feb. 2, immediately after de Klerk's speech, that the UK would drop its commitment to discourage cultural, academic and scientific contacts.
Following the Dublin meeting, it was expected that an EC fact-finding mission would visit South Africa in the near future.
This mission was criticised by Hurd as a "delaying tactic" which would give no immediate support to de Klerk.
Black disunity
Mandela's release focused renewed attention on the deep divisions within the black communities.
The task of reconciling the various movements and factions was considered one of the most difficult he would face in the months ahead.
The split between the ANC and the PAC was re-emphasized during Mandela's visit in early March to Harare (Zimbabwe), where the PAC had a base.
Here its leader, Zephania Mothopeng, rejected outright appeals by Mandela and Zimbabwe's President Robert Mugabe (who had previously shown preference for the PAC policy of black rule over the ANC multiracial philosophy) to join the ANC in a broad anti-apartheid coalition for discussions with the Pretoria government [see p. 37033 for November 1989 meeting between Mandela and a PAC leader; p. 37177 for PAC attitude to negotiations].
In Natal, fighting between rival political groups for control of townships around Pietermaritzburg and Durban grew more intense, with more than 100 people being reported killed up to mid-February.
The upsurge in violence was partly attributed to the unbanning of the ANC, and its implications for the ANC's rival, the predominantly Zulu movement Inkatha.
An estimated 3,000 people had been killed in the protracted Natal faction fighting between Inkatha and the UDF, which grouped together pro-ANC organizations.
Mandela on Feb. 25 addressed a large rally of ANC supporters in Durban, and in a bold peace initiative urged his followers to throw away their weapons, while commending the Inkatha leader and Chief Minister of the KwaZulu homeland, Chief Mangosuthu Buthelezi, for his part in opposing apartheid.
However, Mandela reaffirmed the need for a "single, united stand against oppression" , and emphasized that the ANC was the principal political movement.
He also signalled that he hoped to have talks with Zulu leaders, including Buthelezi, in the near future.
SADF "death squad" allegations
The political credibility of the Defence Minister, Gen. Magnus Malan, was severely tested over evidence implicating a secret unit of the South African Defence Force (SADF) in the assassination of anti-government activists.
The activities of the so-called "hit squad" , officially known as the Civil Co-operation Bureau (CCB), came to light during police investigations into the murders in 1989 of (i) David Webster, an anthropologist and human rights campaigner; and (ii) Namibian lawyer Anton Lubowski [see pp. 36647; 36885].
Malan ignored calls in Parliament for his resignation from both the Democratic Party (DP) and the CP — the latter on the grounds that right-wing organizations had been blamed for what had in reality been the activities of the CCB.
Death squads identified in a Jan. 12 article in Vrye Weekblad were responsible amongst other things for the Paris killing in March 1988 of ANC representative Dulcie September [see p. 36073].
The Harms Commission, set up in January 1990 to investigate earlier allegations made by ex-police officer Dirk Coetzee [see p. 37033], was authorized by de Klerk to investigate the latest allegations, including claims that Lubowski, a prominent member of the South West Africa People's Organization (SWAPO), was a paid agent of the SADF; in early March the commission began hearing evidence from senior SADF commanders.
Cutting short of rebel cricket tour
A rebel team of English cricketers led by Mike Gatting played in South Africa during late January and February, under contract to the South African Cricket Union and in defiance of an internationally approved sporting boycott of South Africa [see pp. 36862; 36915].
However the players encountered hostility and protests from the black communities of the towns they visited, and on Feb. 13 it was agreed to cut the tour short by two weeks.
In return the National Sports Congress, which had organized a campaign against the tour, agreed to call off demonstrations at the remaining four games.
The players flew home on Feb. 23.
EUROPE
SOVIET UNION
Communist Party proposal to renounce monopoly of power
President Mikhail Gorbachev, in his capacity as general secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (CPSU), won backing at a meeting of the party central committee on Feb. 5-7 for a new draft party platform.
If endorsed by the forthcoming 28th party congress (brought forward from October to June or July 1990), the new platform would renounce the party's constitutionally guaranteed monopoly of power.
This would clear the way for the creation of a multiparty system in the Soviet Union.
Preparations for plenum — Pro-reform demonstration in Moscow
The plenum had been postponed from the end of January after a meeting of the central committee politburo on Jan. 22 had failed to endorse the draft platform (reported to be largely the work of politburo member and staunch Gorbachev ally Aleksandr Yakovlev) and had entrusted Gorbachev with the task of revising it.
This heightened expectations that the plenum would be confrontational.
Observers speculated that it offered Gorbachev's conservative opponents probably their last chance to influence policy as a credible force in the central committee: in recent weeks a grassroots party revolt had toppled the conservative leaderships in several regions and cities, including Tyumen in West Siberia, Chernigov in the Ukraine, and Volgograd in southern European Russia, while conservatives were facing a rout in the forthcoming local soviet (council) elections (in which party leaders had been encouraged to stand) and in elections to party posts ahead of the 28th CPSU congress.
On the eve of the start of the plenum various radical pro-reform groups organized a huge demonstration in the centre of Moscow to call for an end to the communist monopoly, for the removal of conservatives from the CPSU leadership, and for an end to privileges for the nomenklatura (party functionaries).
[Further large demonstrations in Moscow and other cities on Feb. 25, organized by pro-reform groups as part of the campaign for the forthcoming local and republican elections, will be covered in the next News Digest.]
Up to 150,000 people joined the march in the city centre on Feb. 4, making it the largest unofficial demonstration in the city since the immediate post-revolution period; members of unofficial groups of almost every political persuasion joined in, from anarchists and separatists to right-wing Russian nationalists and monarchists.
The march was allowed by police to pass into the vast Manezh Square beside the Kremlin walls after it had overspilled the intended venue for its concluding rally, outside the Moscow city soviet building on Gorky Street, but a heavy police cordon prevented the marchers from entering nearby Red Square.
There was unprecedented Soviet media coverage: Moscow Radio had announced the march in advance and had urged "all democratically minded Muscovites to take part" , while Soviet television news showed close-up shots, not just of banners with slogans attacking the communist monopoly and party conservatives, but even of isolated placards which called for Gorbachev's resignation.
Among the groups involved in the demonstration was the "Democratic Platform of the CPSU" , formed at a conference on Jan. 20-21 of more than 1,200 representatives of "party clubs" comprising reformist communists in more than 100 Soviet cities.
Advocating a full multiparty democratic system and the CPSU's abandonment of "democratic centralism" , this was effectively the first faction openly to have emerged in the CPSU since the 1920s.
Plenum proceedings
The draft platform formed the basis of Gorbachev's opening report to the plenum, but he began by announcing that the politburo was proposing to bring forward the 28th CPSU congress from October to late June or early July, to be preceded by a "report-and-election campaign" during which "overdue personnel issues will be resolved and new elected party bodies will be formed" .
He announced that after adopting the draft platform, designed "to give clear political guidelines" in the light of the "crystallization of both the conservative and left-radical tendencies" , the central committee would reconvene within weeks to consider new draft party rules.
Gorbachev noted that perestroika ( "restructuring" ) was bringing about rapid and unforseen changes which placed "new demands on state and public institutions" , especially the CPSU, which needed "drastically to restructure itself" , to rid itself of authoritarianism, bureaucratism and ideological dogmatism, and to "master the art of political work in present-day conditions" .
He also said that the party was "rethinking the principle of democratic centralism" .
On the issue of abandoning the guaranteed communist monopoly Gorbachev announced: "The party in a society undergoing renewal can exist and play its role as vanguard only as a democratically recognized force.
This means that its status should not be imposed through constitutional endorsement."
He continued: "The CPSU, it goes without saying, intends to struggle for the status of ruling party.
But it will do so strictly within the framework of the democratic process by giving up any legal and political advantages, presenting its programme and defending it in discussions,[and]co-operating with other social and political forces…
"
On the creation of a multiparty democracy he stated: "The extensive democratization currently under way in our society is being accompanied by mounting political pluralism…
This process may lead at a certain stage to the establishment of parties."
Gorbachev touched on proposals in the draft platform to restructure the party leadership.
These featured the abolition of the post of general secretary and its replacement by that of party chairman (this proposal appeared to be the basis of a rumour broadcast by the United States television network CNN on Jan. 30, producing a brief panic in world financial markets, that Gorbachev was about to resign); replacement of the politburo with a new body more broadly representative of the Soviet Union's federal structure; and reduction in the size of the central committee, which would become a permanent working body.
The draft platform produced a furious response from conservative speakers at the plenum.
The depth of divisions during the debate and the strength of the opposition was apparently responsible for the plenum overrunning its original two-day schedule.
Anatoly Kornienko, first secretary of the Ukrainian Communist Party (CP) committee in Kiev city and the first speaker after Gorbachev, complained that the platform had no ideological foundation and gave the impression that "the central committee does not know which way to turn" .
Valentin Mesyats, the first secretary of the CPSU committee in Moscow oblast (region), said that the platform ignored the fact that besides the CPSU no other force was "capable of uniting the people, capable of coming through the difficulty of this transitional period and bringing the country out of the crisis" .
One of the most hardline speeches was by V. Shabonov, a factory foreman from Saratov, who told the plenum: "A few scientists, informal groups, various nationalities and black marketeers have led the country down the road to bourgeois reforms, restoration of private property, political anarchy and the destruction of the party as a workers' vanguard.
A real party man does not question Marxist-Leninist ideas."
Other speakers criticized the implementation of perestroika.
Fiercest in his assessments was Vladimir Brovikov, the Soviet ambassador to Poland, who accused Gorbachev of being obsessed with democratization "without discipline or order" and concluded: "It is said that the people back perestroika.
But what perestroika?
The one that for the past five years has brought us into crisis, anarchy, and economic decay?"
Boris Gidaspov, the Leningrad city and oblast first secretary who had emerged recently as one of the most prominent party conservatives, said that "complete disorganization of the executive mechanism" was responsible for growing destabilization in the country.
Despite the vehemence of the opposition, when a final version of the draft platform, retaining intact the proposals outlined by Gorbachev, was put to a vote by a show of hands on Feb. 7 it was adopted with only one vote against and one abstention.
The vote against was that of Boris Yeltsin, the central committee's leading radical, who had argued during the debate that the reforms did not go far enough.
Observers attributed the almost unanimous endorsement primarily to the united stand taken by the politburo; even the leading conservative politburo member Yegor Ligachev had made a cautious speech at the plenum giving his backing for reform and democratization of the party.
Central committee statement on Lithuanian Communist Party independence
The plenum was also the occasion for the central committee to make its final assessment of the December 1989 independence declaration by the Lithuanian Communist Party [see pp. 37128-29; 37168].
On the basis of a report delivered by Gorbachev on Feb. 7 a resolution was adopted which ruled that the independence declaration should be "regarded as having no standing" , and urged the Lithuanian communists to suspend their decision to break with the CPSU until the matter could be debated at the 28th party congress.
The resolution also instructed the politburo to give all necessary support to the rump of the Lithuanian CP which had remained loyal to the CPSU.
AMERICAS
NICARAGUA
Sandinista defeat in elections
Against most predictions the presidential and legislative elections held on Feb. 25 were won by the National Opposition Union (UNO), whose presidential candidate, Violeta Barrios de Chamorro, obtained (according to preliminary returns) 55 per cent of the vote.
The incumbent President, Daniel Ortega Saavedra, won 40 per cent of the vote as the candidate of the Sandinista National Liberation Front (FSLN).
The electoral campaign
The electoral campaign, which had begun on Dec. 4, ended on Feb. 21, and was attended by an estimated 2,500 international observers including representatives of the United Nations, the Organization of American States and the European Parliament and a United States team led by the former President, Jimmy Carter.
Both sides fought intensive and costly campaigns and most opinion polls showed the FSLN well ahead of the UNO right up to the last minute.
One UNO activist was shot dead by police on Feb. 18 in the last rally of the campaign.
At the end of his campaign Ortega announced that it was time to "put away the olive green" (the colour of the Sandinista Army uniform) and expressed the hope that the electoral process would "open a new chapter in co-operation between the USA and Nicaragua" .
US President George Bush said on Feb. 25 that relations could improve if the elections were judged to have been free and fair.
The conduct of the elections was universally praised by international observers as free and fair.
The total number of registered voters was 1,732,000 aged 16 and over.
Registration was obligatory but voting was optional.
The President was elected by simple majority, while members of the National Assembly were elected on a regional proportional basis, each party or alliance presenting a list of candidates in each of the nine regions and the number of deputies elected depending on the population of the region (for example 25 for Managua, five for the Atlantic coast region).
Defeated presidential candidates who won at least 1 per cent of the total vote were entitled to an extra seat for their party in the National Assembly so that the final overall number of deputies could exceed 90.
The election results
Ortega conceded the defeat of the FSLN, after 10 years in power, in a dignified speech on Feb. 26, after the Supreme Electoral Council had declared the results with 80 per cent of returns counted.
The greatest victory for the Sandinistas, he said, was that a new path was opening for the Nicaraguan people without war and where national interests would prevail over interventionist policies.
 "We, the Sandinistas," he said, "have given Nicaragua this democracy and peace." 
Chamorro, who was due to take office for a six-year term on April 25 together with her Vice-President, Virgilio Godoy, asserted that there were "no victors and no vanquished" and that the elections showed the desire of Nicaraguans to live in democracy, peace and liberty.
She promised that there would be "no more political prisoners, no more exiles, no more land confiscations" and also to respect the will of the 40 per cent who had not voted for her.
Chamorro, 60, was the widow of Pedro Joaquín Chamorro, whose murder in 1978 had sparked off events which led to the Sandinista revolution and the overthrow of the Somoza regime in July 1979.
Her own family of four children was divided along ideological lines: one daughter was editor of the newspaper La Prensa, which Violeta herself owned and which was openly critical of the Sandinista government; the other daughter was a Sandinista diplomat; one son was editor of the Sandinista party newspaper Barricada; and the other son, Pedro Joaquín Chamorro, was formerly a leader of the contra directorate.
She herself had been a member of the original revolutionary junta formed in 1979.
In the simultaneous elections to the 90-member National Assembly, the UNO won (according to preliminary results) 52 seats with 54.8 per cent of the vote.
Voting also took place for 140 municipal councils and two new 45-member autonomous regional councils in the Atlantic Coast region.
The UNO consisted of 14 parties with widely differing ideologies ranging from conservatives and Christian democrats to and communists, formed in 1989 to oppose the Sandinistas [see p. 36681].
They included the Social Democratic Party (PSD) led by Alfredo César, the Popular Conservative Alliance (APC), the Nicaraguan Communist Party (PCN) and the (Marxist) Nicaraguan Socialist Party (PSN), and were supported by Yatama, the rebel organization of Indians from the Atlantic coast region.
Eight other parties outside the UNO also contested the elections.
These were the Nicaraguan Social Christian Party (PSCN) and the Democratic Conservative Party (PCD), whose presidential candidates were respectively Erick Ramírez Benavente and Eduardo Molina; the Marxist-Leninist Popular Action Movement (MAP-ML); the Social Conservative Party (PCS); the Independent Liberal Party for National Unity (PLIUN); the (Trotskyist) Workers' Revolutionary Party (PRT); the moderate Movement of Revolutionary Unity (MUR) with Moisés Hassan as its presidential candidate; and the Central American Unionist Party (PUCA).
US response — The contra issue — Problems over power transition
Bush said on Feb. 26 that Nicaraguans had chosen "democracy and hope over totalitarianism and despair" .
He congratulated Ortega on his conduct of the elections and called for a ceasefire in the contra war, stating that "given the clear mandate for peace and democracy there is no reason for further military activity from any quarter" .
The USA also announced that the economic embargo imposed by President Reagan in May 1985 [see pp. 33970-71]would be lifted following Chamorro's inauguration.
A communiqué issued by National Resistance (RN), the contra umbrella organization, from Honduras on Feb. 26 declared that it would observe the ceasefire nominally in force since March 1988 (which Nicaragua had ended on Nov. 1, 1989, following the resumption of contra military activity — see p. 36972).
President Ortega himself on Feb. 28 ordered Sandinista forces to observe an immediate unilateral ceasefire so that the 12,000 contras based in Honduras could demobilize immediately, otherwise, he asserted, power could not be transferred on April 25.
President-elect Chamorro added her call for a ceasefire, stating in a broadcast on Feb. 28 that the causes of the war had disappeared, that there was thus no more reason to fight, and that Nicaraguans should return home.
The contras' new military commander, Israel Galeano (who replaced Enrique Bermúdez, the organization's nominal head, in early February), said, however, that the contras intended to wait for the formal handover of power before disbanding.
A transition team to negotiate the handover of power from the FSLN to the UNO was formed after the elections, headed by (for the UNO) Antonio Lacayo, Chamorro's brother-in-law, who had run her election campaign, and (for the FSLN) Cdr.
Humberto Ortega Saavedra, the Defence Minister and brother of the President.
One of the major problems facing the incoming government was that of FSLN domination of the Army, the police, the civil service and the trade unions.
Chamorro on Feb. 28 announced her intention of reducing drastically the size of the armed forces (currently numbering about 70,000 plus militia); she had earlier promised to abolish conscription.
Ortega also aroused considerable anxiety by declaring on Feb. 28 that the FSLN intended to defend the irreversibility of the basic achievements of the revolution, including the nationalization of the banking system, foreign trade, natural resources and the public sector, and that the FSLN would continue to rule "from below" .
Many of these achievements were protected by the 1987 constitution [see p. 35444], and constitutional changes required the votes of 60 per cent of the members of the National Assembly.
Pre-election amnesty
Under an amnesty agreed by the National Assembly on Feb. 7 by 76 votes to four, the government on Feb. 9 freed 1,151 contras and 39 former National Guards and asserted that there were no political prisoners.
Most of the former National Guards were high-ranking figures from the Somoza regime who had been in prison for much of the last 10 years.
ASIA — PACIFIC
JAPAN
LDP victory in general election
The Liberal Democratic Party (LDP), which since its formation in 1955 had ruled Japan, was returned to power on Feb. 18 in elections to the House of Representatives, the lower chamber of the bicameral Diet.
Despite its recent problems, the LDP won 46 per cent of the vote and took 275 of the 512 seats, only 20 fewer than the party had controlled in the outgoing Diet.
The result was seen as having strengthened the somewhat precarious position of Prime Minster Toshiki Kaifu within the party.
The 1990 elections were held against an unfamiliar background of uncertainty within the Japanese political system.
The effects of the Recruit scandal, the enforced resignation of two Prime Ministers and the introduction of an unpopular consumption tax meant that 1989 had been one of the LDP's worst years.
The opposition parties, led by the Japan Socialist Party (JSP) and its charismatic female leader Takako Doi, had benefited from the problems of the ruling party and had captured enough seats in the Upper House elections in July 1989 to deny the LDP an overall majority [see p. 36800-01].
Election campaign
The election campaign formally opened on Feb. 5, but was preceded on Feb. 2 by a nationally televised debate involving the leaders of all of the main parties.
During the three-hour debate, the first to have been held since 1960, Doi and the other leaders assailed Kaifu over the consumption tax.
The Prime Minister responded by citing the collapse of communist regimes in Eastern Europe and claiming that the opposition's socialism was "going against world trends" .
Unlike the occasion of the 1989 upper house contest, the LDP fought an accomplished election campaign.
It fielded 325 official candidates (not one of whom was a woman) and supported some 40 independents, several of whom were adopted by the party during the course of the campaign.
As the traditional champion of the small farmer the LDP also benefited from the electoral system's tendency to give votes in rural constituencies up to three times the value of urban votes.
The spectre of an opposition victory also enabled the LDP to raise a huge quantity of funds from the business sector.
Notwithstanding the party's post-Recruit commitment to reduce the influence of money within the electoral process, some analysts estimated that total LDP spending during the course of the campaign was in excess of 210,000 million yen (approximately US$1,450 million).
The country's strict laws controlling election advertising meant that much of this sum was spent on hosting public events and on the tradition of giving gifts of cash or consumer goods to constituents.
By comparison, the highest spending opposition party was the JSP which was reported to have used 2,000 million yen during the course of the campaign.
The JSP campaign was generally felt to have been less effective than that which it had fought in 1989.
The party was criticized for not fielding more candidates and for not smoothing out policy differences with other opposition parties in order to offer voters a coalition which could be a credible alternative to the LDP government.
Doi was known to have wanted to field at least 180 JSP candidates but was opposed by many local party organizations on the grounds that having more than one JSP candidate in each of the country's 130 multi-member constituencies might split the socialist vote and endanger the position of JSP incumbents.
The two most irreconcilable differences between the JSP and the other opposition elements (excluding the Japan Communist Party — JCP — which all parties eschewed) were the JSP's opposition to nuclear power and its commitment to revise the terms of the Japan-US Security Treaty.
Among the smaller opposition parties the JCP fought a largely defensive campaign in which it attempted to dissociate itself from the discredited communist regimes of Eastern Europe.
A similarly defensive approach characterized the campaigns of the right-wing Democratic Socialist Party (DSP) and Komeito (Clean Government Party), both of which suffered from the legacy of having had their leaders resign in 1989 (in February and May respectively) in connection with the Recruit scandal [see pp. 36464; 36654].
Election results
The turnout on Feb. 18 was 73.3 per cent of the 90,000,000 electorate, the highest in a lower house election since 1976.
The LDP's share of the vote fell by more than 3 per cent compared with the 1986 lower house elections, and the party won 20 seats fewer than it had possessed at the dissolution (although 11 independents were later reported to have joined, thereby bringing its total strength to 286).
Although the JSP increased its representation in the lower chamber by 53 seats and its share of the vote by more than 7 per cent, much of its success was won at the expense of the other opposition parties, all of which suffered a loss of support.
A total of 12 women were elected, seven of them JSP candidates; this was the third largest group of women elected to the lower house since 1945.
Party Candidates Percentage of votes Seats won Pre-election strength LDP 325 275 46.1 295 JSP 148 136 24.4 83 Komeito 58 45 8.0 54 JCP 131 16 8.0 25 DSP 44 14 4.8 26 Minor parties 77 5 1.4 5 Independents 170 21 7.3 7 Vacant ——— 17 Total 953 512 100 512
Elections to House of Representatives
Feb. 18, 1990
Most of the politicians implicated in the Recruit affair were re-elected, including former Prime Ministers Noboru Takeshita and Yasuhiro Nakasone (the latter standing, nominally, as an independent) and senior LDP members Shintaro Abe and Kiichi Miyazawa.
Nakasone declared himself "purified" by his re-election, although the faction which he had founded in 1965 lost more heavily than any other within the LDP and was reduced in relative importance from second place to fourth, behind those led by Takeshita, Miyazawa and Abe.
On Feb. 21 Nakasone stepped down as the faction's leader in favour of Michio Watanabe.
(Although Nakasone had theoretically resigned as faction head when he had been forced to leave the party in May 1989 because of the Recruit scandal — see pp. 36462-64, he had continued to exercise de facto control of the faction.)
LDP members who lost their seats included Sadanori Yamanaka, former chairman of the party's research commission on the tax system and architect of the widely hated consumption tax, and Hisao Horinouchi, the former Minister of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries, who, during the July 1989 election campaign, had suggested that women were useless in politics and that Doi was unfit to be Prime Minister because she was unmarried and childless [see p. 36800].
Following the election victory Ichiro Ozawa, the LDP's key campaign strategist, was reappointed as secretary-general of the party on Feb. 21.
Takeo Nishioka, a former Education Minister, was named as chairman of the party's general council, and Mutsuki Kato, a former Agriculture Minister, was appointed chairman of the LDP's policy research council.
All three men were considered to be representatives of the party's younger generation.
Appointment of new Cabinet
Following the election Kaifu spent several days negotiating with Takeshita and the other LDP faction leaders over the composition of the new Cabinet.
Kaifu insisted on the continued exclusion from government of those tainted by either the Recruit affair or the 1974 Lockheed scandal.
To this end he eventually succeeded in rejecting ministers proposed by Abe and Watanabe, but did so only with the support of Takeshita and Ozawa.
The effect of this bout of prolonged, semi-public, post-election wrangling, however, was to give further credence to the popular belief that Kaifu was dependent upon the continued patronage of Takeshita.
Both of the female Cabinet members appointed in 1989 (in an effort to counter the popularity of Ms Doi) were dropped from the government, and no women were included in the new Cabinet which was sworn in by Emperor Akihito on Feb. 28.
The outgoing Cabinet Secretary, Mayumi Moriyama, who had occupied the most senior post ever held by a woman, was reported to have been furious at her summary dismissal.
Toshiki Kaifu Prime Minister *Shin Hasegawa Justice Taro Nakayama Foreign Ryutaro Hashimoto Finance *Kosuke Hori Education *Yuji Tsushima Health and Welfare *Tomio Yamamoto Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries *Kabun Muto International Trade and Industry *Akira Ono Transport *Takashi Fukaya Post and Telecommunications *Shunpei Tsukahara Labour *Tamisuke Watanuki Construction *Keiwa Okuda Home Affairs
New Japanese Cabinet
appointed Feb. 28, 1990
Ministers of State *Misoji Sakamoto Chief Cabinet Secretary *Jun Shiozaki Director-General of Management and Co-ordination Agency *Shigetami Funada Director-General of Hokkaido and Okinawa Development Agencies *Yozo Ishikawa Director-General of Defence Agency *Hideyuki Aizawa Director-General of Economic Planning Agency *Tomoji Oshima Director-General of Science and Technology Agency *Ishimatsu Kitagawa Director-General of Environment Agency *Moriyoshi Sato Director-General of National Land Agency *New appointment.
While most commentators were agreed that the LDP's election performance was sufficiently good to ensure Kaifu's short-term survival as Prime Minister, many felt that the manner in which he handled forthcoming trade negotiations with the United States would be crucial to determining his standing within the party by the time of the next scheduled leadership contest in October.
AFRICA
LESOTHO
Stripping of King's powers by military ruler
Maj.-Gen.
Justin Metsing Lekhanya, the leader of the ruling six-member Military Council, appeared to gain the upper hand in a power struggle when he announced on Feb. 21 that the powers of the head of state, King Moshoeshoe II, would "for the time being" be vested in himself, assisted by the other members of the Council, although Moshoeshoe remained head of state.
There were reports that the royal palace in the capital, Maseru, had on that day been surrounded by armed troops, and that the Army was patrolling the town, but Lekhanya on Feb. 22 denied that the King had been placed under house arrest.
The crisis was sparked off by the arrest and dismissal on Feb. 19 of three Council members, namely Col. Thaabe Letsie, Lt.-Col. Joshua Sekhobe Letsie (both cousins of the King) and Col. Aloysius Kethang Mosoeunyane, and of the Minister of Transport and Telecommunications, Maj. Philip Moyani Mokhanto.
Moshoeshoe refused to sanction the appointment of replacement Council members, and in a letter to Lekhanya (leaked to journalists) he demanded an explanation for the arrests.
Reports suggested that Lekhanya might have successfully forestalled a coup attempt — Radio Lesotho reported that a large cache of arms had been found at the home of Lt.-Col. Sekhobe Letsie.
A source of tension in government was Lekhanya's perceived conciliatory attitude towards South Africa, whereas Moshoeshoe and some officers on the Council were said to be themselves sympathetic to the South African liberation movement, the African National Congress (ANC).
South Africa had in 1986 engineered the downfall of the previous regime by imposing an economic blockade against the country [see pp. 34786-88], and Lekhanya had reversed the policy of his predecessor as head of government by expelling ANC cadres.
The arrested officers were replaced on the Military Council by Brig.
Benedict Lerotholi, former commander of the Defence Force, Col. Jacob Jane and Lt.-Col. Molise Mokete.
In a major Cabinet reshuffle on Feb. 22, Lekhanya dismissed the Ministers of Planning and Economic Affairs, Health, Foreign Affairs, Information and Broadcasting, Justice and Prisons, Employment, Social Security and Pensions, Agriculture, Marketing and Co-operatives, and Highland Water and Energy.
A number of ministries were merged as a cost-cutting measure.
On Feb. 23 Lekhanya announced the formation of a partly military "Political Committee" , to be chaired by the new Minister of Foreign Affairs, Tom Thabane, which among other things would recommend a timetable for a return to a democratic system by 1992.
AFRICA
BENIN
Kerekou's acceptance of Conference decisions on reform
In a rare if not unique development in Africa, President Mathieu Kerekou, who had wielded power since a coup in 1972, agreed to abide by decisions taken by the "National Conference of Active Forces of the Nation" , which in a bold move on Feb. 25 had proclaimed itself to be a sovereign body and its decisions to be "mandatory" .
The decisions included a declaration that the Constitution was "null and void" and that existing state institutions were henceforth suspended.
The 488 delegates, including representatives from about 50 opposition groupings, met in Cotonou on Feb. 19-28.
The conference had been called by Kerekou following the ruling People's Revolutionary Party (PRPB) agreement in December 1989 to abandon Marxism-Leninism as the country's official ideology [see p. 37115], in response to mounting social dissent and with the country on the brink of economic collapse.
Nicephore Soglo, a former World Bank administrator, was elected by the delegates as interim Prime Minister, with a brief to steer the country through an 11-month transitional period to elections in 1991.
A commission was appointed to draw up a new constitution which would be put to a referendum in mid-1990.
This was expected to provide for a President and National Assembly, to be elected for a five-year term under a multiparty system, with the President eligible for re-election once only.
The future role of the PRPB — currently the sole legal party — remained unclear.
The conference proceedings generated intense public interest and were closely followed in the media.
In the early stages it became apparent that the conference would go further than Kerekou had anticipated in discussion of future political reforms.
At first it seemed that he intended to resist the radical proposals put forward by delegates, when during radio broadcasts of the debates he was heard angrily to interrupt the speakers, declaring on Feb. 27 that the proceedings constituted a "civilian coup d'état" .
On the last day, however, he endorsed all the decisions, declaring: "This is not a defeat.
It is not a capitulation.
It is a question of national responsibility."
Accordingly, the Constitution was on March 1 revoked and the Revolutionary National Assembly (legislature) was dissolved.
The National Executive Council resigned but was re-appointed on an interim basis pending the selection by Soglo of a transitional government.
Kerekou was to remain head of state during the transitional period, but with the defence portfolio removed from his responsibilities.
Legislative power was to be vested in a 50-member (of which 25 would be elected) High Council of the Republic, to include three former civilian presidents from the 1960s who had recently returned from exile — Hubert Maga, Justin Ahomadegbe and Emile Zinsou.
The country's official name was changed from the People's Republic of Benin to the Republic of Benin.
AFRICA
CAPE VERDE
Party reforms
An extraordinary congress of the ruling party, the communist Partido Africano da Indepêndencia de Cabo Verde (PAICV), was called for the latter part of 1990, after the introduction of a multiparty system had been agreed in principle by the national council — the party's policy-making body between congresses.
In a reference to reforms in other communist-led states, President Aristides Maria Pereira told the council at its Feb. 13-17 meeting, held in Praia (the capital), that Cape Verde could not be "indifferent to current changes in the world" .
Legislative elections were scheduled for December 1990.
At the meeting the 41-member council recommended constitutional and party statute amendments which would delete references to the party as the "ruling political force of society and of the state" .
A revision of the electoral laws was also envisaged, enabling the participation of candidates belonging to alternative groupings and of independent candidates.
[For 1985 elections, when non-party members had been included in the single list of party-approved candidates, see p. 34216.]
The proposals were expected to be endorsed by the special party congress.
Reports indicated that dissatisfaction with the single-party system had been mounting among the (largely Roman Catholic) population.
AFRICA
MAURITANIA
New Interior Minister
Col. Djibril Ould Abdullah, the Interior Minister, who was generally considered to be second in the political hierarchy after President Moaouia Ould Sidi Mohammed Taya, lost his post in a Council of Ministers reshuffle on Feb. 4, being replaced by the Fisheries and Maritime Economy Minister, Col. Mohammed Sidina Ould Sidya, a southerner.
Four days later he was also dropped from the ruling Military Committee for National Salvation (CMSN).
In 1986 Abdullah had vigorously suppressed unrest among black Mauritanians who claimed they were discriminated against by the Arab population [see p. 35234].
More recently he had been seen as an impediment to the resolution of the continuing ethnically based dispute with Senegal, in the course of which at least 40,000 black Mauritanian nationals had been forcibly expelled by the Mauritanian authorities [see pp. 36579-80; 36840].
No tangible improvement in the situation had resulted from a meeting of the Foreign Ministers of Senegal and Mauritania in Paris in early January 1990, and later that month an exchange of heavy artillery fire took place across the Senegal river boundary.
AFRICA
KENYA
Death of Foreign Minister
The partially burned body of Robert J. Ouko, Minister for Foreign Affairs and International Co-operation since March 1988 [see p. 36137], was discovered in the bush on Feb. 16, some 6 km from his home at Koru, near Kisumu in western Kenya.
He had been shot through the head.
A firearm found near the body was identified as belonging to Ouko, who had last been seen alive on the night of Feb. 12.
According to President Daniel arap Moi, initial findings suggested a possible murder, and at the request of the Kenyan government two UK Scotland Yard detectives and a pathologist were sent to assist the Kenyan police in an investigation.
Ouko was a long-serving cabinet minister and the most prominent member of the Luo ethnic group in government.
He had twice held the Foreign Affairs portfolio since 1979, and was generally considered loyal to Moi.
The authorities on Feb. 21 banned demonstrations following large-scale protests by students who claimed that the government was attempting a "cover-up" of the circumstances surrounding his death, and had demanded Moi's resignation.
In spite of the ban there were violent clashes between police and 15,000 mourners at a funeral service for Ouko in Nairobi on Feb. 23.
AFRICA
ETHIOPIA
EPLF capture of Massawa — Famine situation — Cabinet appointment
Capture of Massawa
The Eritrean People's Liberation Front (EPLF) staged a major attack on the strategically vital port of Massawa on Feb. 9, overrunning much of the town and the surrounding area, although fighting in the vicinity continued for several weeks.
The loss of Massawa (known by the Eritreans as "Mitsiwa" ) effectively reduced Ethiopian presence in Eritrea to an isolated enclave including the provincial capital, Asmara, and the town of Keren, and to a narrow corridor leading to the port of Asab.
Ethiopian military strength in the area had been sapped by the need to pull back crack units to stem the advance on Addis Ababa, the Ethiopian capital, by the EPLF's allies, the Tigrean People's Liberation Front (TPLF — see p. 37173).
The EPLF claimed to have destroyed 24 tanks in the assault, and captured 75 intact, together with a large quantity of arms and ammunition.
In the weeks following the battle, Ethiopian aircraft made repeated bombing raids on Massawa, which included the use of napalm, according to foreign aid workers.
The raids also destroyed over 50,000 tonnes of grain, recently shipped in as relief supplies in response to impending famine [see p. 37113].
It effectively halted all plans to transport aid from the port, although the EPLF's aid arm, the Eritrean Relief Association, asked for shipments to be resumed under its control.
Elsewhere, the TPLF on Feb. 26 claimed to have recaptured the town of Debre Tabor, in Gondar province, seized by government forces the previous month [see p. 37173].
Government pleas for airlift assistance
The head of the government's Relief and Rehabilitation Commission, Yilma Kasaye, announced on March 1 that Ethiopia was seeking monthly assistance of $14,000,000 to enable it to mount an airlift to Asmara from the port of Asab.
Aid workers, however, warned that such a move, coupled with the government's inability to transport the aid deep into the countryside, would merely create a "food magnet" , drawing thousands of people to the city.
AFRICA
SOMALIA
Cabinet and party appointments
A new Cabinet, selected by Prime Minister Lt.-Gen.
Mohammed Ali Samater, was sworn in on Feb. 17 by President Mohammed Siyad Barre, replacing that dismissed by the President in January [see p. 37174; for previous full listing see p. 36757].
Lt.-Gen.
Mohammed Ali Samater Prime Minister **Col.
Ahmed Mohammud Farah Deputy Prime Minister *Abdulkadir Haji Mohammad Interior *Ahmed Jaba Abdulle Foreign Affairs **Brig. -Gen.
Mohammed Ghelle Yusuf Finance and Treasury Hussein Abdurahman Matan Defence Mohammed Ali Munasar Health *Farah Dahir Afey Information and Tourism Abdullah Mohammed Mireh Education *Sheikh Mohammed Guled Justice and Religious Affairs *Mohammed Sheikh Osman Jawar Land and Air Transport *Mohammed Godah Barre Planning *Bashir Farah Kahiye Commerce and Industry *Abdulrahman Jama Mohammed Livestock, Forestry and Ranges *Mohamoud Mohammad Ulusow Agriculture *Mohammed Saed Gees Marine Transport and Fisheries Abdi Warsame Isak Labour and Sports *Mohammed Said Morgan Public Works and Housing *Abukar Hassan WeheliyehPosts and Telecommunications *New appointment.
**Changed portfolio.
New Somali Cabinet
Of the new appointments, Abdulle was formerly ambassador to the UK, Yusuf was formerly a national planning director and Mohammad was assistant secretary-general of the ruling Somali Revolutionary Socialist Party (SRSP).
His replacement in this post was Brig. -Gen.
Ahmed Suleiman Abdulle, as announced on Feb. 19.
Maj.-Gen.
Hussein Kulmie Afrah, Planning Minister in the Cabinet dismissed in January and one of the five SRSP politburo members, succeeded Said Mohammed Ibrahim Ahmed as chairman of the People's Assembly (parliament).
AMERICAS
UNITED STATES
Iran-contra proceedings
Testimony of former President Reagan in Poindexter trial
Former US President Ronald Reagan attended a Los Angeles court on Feb. 16 and 17 in order to answer questions concerning his role in the Iran-contra scandal, which had involved the clandestine sale of arms to Iran and the illegal diversion of profits to the Nicaraguan contra rebels.
Reagan gave replies which were videotaped to 159 questions put to him by the lawyers of his former National Security Adviser, Rear Admiral John Poindexter, whose trial was due to open in Washington DC on March 5.
Poindexter, the last of the central figures in the Iran-contra scandal to be brought to trial, faced five counts of conspiracy, obstructing congressional inquiries and making false statements to Congress.
Although during the 1987 congressional inquiry into the affair Poindexter shielded Reagan (then President) from any responsibility for the operation, his defence strategy against the criminal charges rested upon the claim that he had believed that he was acting with the President's authority.
In view of Poindexter's claim that Reagan had authorized some of the activities for which he was indicted, District Judge Harold H. Greene had allowed the defendant to subpoena extracts from Reagan's diaries and personal papers to assist in his defence.
Reagan's lawyers, supported by the US Justice Department, requested that this order be quashed on the grounds that it would involve making public "intimate and confidential communications" and would establish a precedent which could hamper the ability of future presidents to conduct foreign policy.
In December 1989 Greene postponed the beginning of Poindexter's trial and ordered Reagan to provide the court with the documents in question so that he (Greene) could assess their relevance to Poindexter's defence.
After reviewing the subpoenaed material Greene ruled on Jan. 30, 1990, that much of it was not relevant but that a number of diary entries for dates in 1985 and 1986 should be made available to the defence because they "may show what types of aid President Reagan thought could legally be provided for…the contras" .
Although in 1974 the Supreme Court had ordered President Nixon to surrender tapes in connection with the Watergate affair (when Democratic Party premises had been broken into by Nixon's supporters with his knowledge), no court had ever ordered a former President to surrender personal notes, and Greene's decision was a departure from a ruling in the case of Oliver North, where requests for such material had been denied.
Reagan refused to abide by the ruling and on Feb. 5, the deadline for the release of the diaries, the former President invoked executive privilege — the principle that a President's communications should remain confidential.
(The precise scope of executive privilege was unclear: the only Supreme Court ruling on the doctrine — the 1974 decision against Nixon — found it to have a basis in the Constitution but adjudicated that it should not provide an impediment to criminal prosecution.)
The move led Greene to undertake a second review of the material in question.
Also, as the claim of executive privilege involved constitutional issues, Greene ordered Poindexter's lawyers to disclose their defence strategy for the forthcoming trial to Reagan and the Justice Department so that they could decide whether to proceed with their objections.
With the issue remaining unresolved, Greene delayed the starting date of the trial from Feb. 20 to March 5.
Whilst the conflict over Reagan's diaries was in progress, a parallel struggle was being fought over Poindexter's efforts to subpoena Reagan as a witness and to force him to testify in person at the trial.
At a hearing on Jan. 23 Greene ordered Poindexter's lawyers to submit specific questions which they wished Reagan to answer.
On Feb. 5 the judge produced a 54-page ruling which noted that there were very few instances in US history of a President testifying in judicial or congressional proceedings, but nevertheless concluded that Poindexter had met the extensive requirements for demonstrating that Reagan's testimony was "material" to his defence.
He therefore ruled that Reagan should testify, but rejected a request that he should appear in person, and instead allowed him to give videotaped evidence.
On Feb. 9 Reagan agreed to testify on videotape and, on Feb. 12, Greene agreed to allow the testimony to be recorded in Los Angeles, where Reagan lived, rather than in Washington DC as requested by Poindexter.
Details of Reagan testimony
Reagan underwent five hours of questioning on Feb. 16 and a further three hours on the following day.
The press and public were excluded from the hearing, although Greene had given earlier assurances that the tape would be released after it had been edited in order to excise any classified information which might be disclosed inadvertently.
Reagan's testimony was released on Feb. 22 after the Justice Department ruled that it contained no classified information.
The transcript departed from aspects of the evidence which Reagan had given to the Tower Commission in 1987, and suggested that he had returned to his earliest explanations of the Iran-contra affair, insisting that he did not trade arms for hostages and had seen not "one iota" of evidence that profits from the operation had been diverted to the contras.
He claimed that he had not acted illegally, nor authorized others to do so, but also stated that he believed Poindexter to be innocent of the charges against him.
The 79-year old former President had repeated difficulty in remembering specific decisions, meetings, dates, and even the identities of some members of his administration, and his evidence included instances where his recollections were at variance with documentary evidence and with the sworn testimony of other participants in the Iran-contra affair.
Reagan confirmed that he had approved efforts to help the contras between 1984 and 1986 (when US aid to the rebels had been prohibited by Congress), but had insisted that his instructions were that this must be done "within the law" .
He also confirmed that he had authorized US aid to Honduras in return for Honduran assistance to the contras, a quid pro quo arrangement first revealed during the trial of Oliver North [see p. 36649], but he claimed that the linkage within the arrangement had not been made explicit.
Other Iran-contra developments
Albert Hakim, the overseer of the Iran-contra financial network, was sentenced to two years' probation and fined $5,000 on Feb. 1.
He also agreed to hand over to the US government $7,300,000 which was frozen in a number of Swiss bank accounts.
Hakim, who had pleaded guilty in November 1989 to a misdemeanour charge (helping to supplement the salary of North by arranging to pay for a security system at North's home) in return for the dropping of five felony counts [see p. 37037], was praised by the judge for the assistance which he had given to the Iran-contra investigation.
The judge also ordered that Lake Resources Inc., the largely defunct Hakim corporation which had operated as a conduit for Iran-contra funds, should be placed on probation prior to its dissolution.
In November the corporation had pleaded guilty to the felony charge of "unauthorized use of government funds" .
Former Central Intelligence Agency officer Thomas Clines, the chief arms broker in the Iran-contra operation, was indicted by a grand jury in Baltimore on Feb. 22 on four charges arising from false income tax returns for 1985 and 1986 and his failure to report the existence of foreign bank accounts.
It was widely believed that the financial records supplied by Hakim were instrumental in supplying evidence for the charges against Clines.
Appeal by Oliver North
Oliver North made a formal request to the Federal Appeals Court on Feb. 6 to overturn his three convictions arising from the Iran-contra scandal.
North's lawyers claimed that his 1989 trial had been marred by the absence of key witnesses, including former President Reagan, and by the prejudicial effect upon prosecutors, jurors and witnesses of the highly publicized testimony which North had given to the 1987 congressional inquiry, and for which he had been granted immunity from prosecution.
Ruling against anti-flag desecration legislation
The Flag Protection Act, passed by the US Congress in October 1989 [see p. 36969], was declared unconstitutional on Feb. 20, 1990, by federal Judge Barbara Rothstein.
The ruling was made when four protesters were prosecuted for burning a flag outside a Seattle post office shortly after midnight on Oct. 28, the day that the new Act came into force.
Rothstein deemed that the Act violated the First Amendment's guarantee of freedom of expression, and stated that "in order for the flag to endure as a symbol of freedom in this nation, we must protect with equal vigour the right to destroy it and the right to wave it" .
The Supreme Court had already found, in a June 1989 decision, that flag burning was a form of self-expression and, therefore, was protected by the Constitution.
President George Bush had then favoured amending the Constitution in order to prohibit the practice (and withheld his signature from the Flag Protection Act to emphasize his support for a constitutional amendment).
The Democratic majority in Congress, however, had opposed any such tampering with the Bill of Rights, preferring to demonstrate its opposition to flag burning by enacting the Flag Protection Act, even though it was widely anticipated that the Act would be declared unconstitutional in the courts.
The Felix Bloch case
The State Department announced on Feb. 7 that Felix Bloch, a US diplomat suspected of spying for the Soviet Union, had been informed that he was being suspended without pay with immediate effect.
It was also suggested that a proposal had been made to terminate Bloch's employment.
Bloch had been suspended in June 1989, when the spying allegations against him were first made public, but had continued to draw his annual $80,000 salary.
An intensive investigation failed to uncover evidence sufficient to warrant his prosecution, and unconfirmed news reports had claimed on Jan. 22 that the government had decided to abandon the Bloch investigation.
Indictment of Marion Barry
The mayor of Washington DC, Marion Barry, was indicted on Feb. 15 on three felony counts of lying to a federal grand jury and on five counts of cocaine possession.
Each of the perjury charges carried a maximum penalty of five years' imprisonment and a fine of $250,000, while the possession charges carried maximum sentences of one year and a fine of $100,000.
In a written statement Barry claimed that the charges represented a further stage in his "political lynching" , but further claimed that he would be "exonerated" at his forthcoming trial.
Barry had entered a Florida alcohol abuse centre on Jan. 22, four days after being arrested in the Vista International Hotel, Washington, where he was filmed smoking crack cocaine in the room of a former girlfriend, Hazel "Rasheeda" Moore [see p. 37180].
His arrest was part of a longstanding FBI investigation; four of the charges on which he was indicted dated back to December 1988 when he had been discovered by police in a hotel room with a convicted drug dealer, Charles Lewis.
The grand jury was also understood to have begun investigating allegations that city contracts had been granted to friends of Barry in return for drugs and other payments, and the possibility that further charges would be filed was not ruled out.
The substitution of the eight-count indictment, in place of the single possession charge filed immediately after his arrest, appeared to result from Barry's adamant refusal to resign as mayor, a prerequisite for the negotiation of a plea bargain with the authorities.
Barry made a four-minute court appearance in Washington on Feb. 28 during which he pleaded not guilty to the eight charges and was ordered to stand trial on June 4.
Despite his difficulties Barry did not indicate that he had revised his decision to seek a fourth consecutive term as mayor in the November 1990 elections (although conviction on a felony charge would automatically debar him).
In this respect his position was strengthened on Feb. 26 when the Rev. Jesse Jackson announced that he would not run for mayor.
Opinion polls showed that the charismatic Jackson would have won the contest easily, and thus removed the frequently heard criticism that he had never held elected office, but he stated that he preferred to concentrate his efforts at national level "to change the direction of this country" .
Money-laundering plea bargain by international bank
US District Judge William Hodges on Feb. 5 ordered two subsidiaries of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International (BCCI) to forfeit more than $15,000,000 for their role in the laundering of huge cocaine profits from Colombia's Medellín drug cartel.
The subsidiary banks were also ordered to implement internal reforms and were placed on probation for five years.
The sentence followed an arrangement with the federal authorities whereby the banks had pleaded guilty to reduced charges on Jan. 16, in return for their co-operation in ongoing investigations which were believed to include the case of Gen. Manuel Noriega, the former ruler of Panama currently awaiting trial in the USA [see p. 37179].
This was believed to be the first time that an international bank indicted on US money-laundering charges had agreed to co-operate in an investigation against specific individuals.
Six former BCCI employees continued to face individual criminal charges in Florida, arising from the laundering operation.
One of these, Amjab Awan, claimed that he was once Noriega's banker and had managed a secret account for him.
Acquittal of alleged Mafia boss
A New York jury on Feb. 9 acquitted John Gotti, the "godfather" of the Gambino "family" , the largest old-style Mafia family in the USA, of assault and conspiracy charges.
The charges, filed in January 1989, had accused him of ordering the shooting in 1986 of John O'Connor, an official of the United Brotherhood of Carpenters and Joiners of America [see p. 36680].
His co-defendant, Anthony Guerrieri, was also acquitted.
The verdict, after a three-week televised trial, was seen as a serious setback for the authorities.
Considerable resources had been deployed to bring charges against Gotti since 1986, when he had become Gambino godfather following the assassination of his predecessor, Paul Castellano.
Gotti, known as "Dapper Don" because of his extravagant sartorial tastes, had been acquitted on federal racketeering and conspiracy charges in March 1987 [see p. 35504].
His brother, Gene Gotti, had been sentenced to 50 years' imprisonment on July 7, 1989, after being found guilty of running a multimillion-dollar drugs ring.
The prosecution's case against Gotti was hampered by reliance on evidence based on inconclusive and largely inaudible tape recordings, and by the reluctance of witnesses to testify against him.
Even O'Connor testified for the defence, claiming that he had no idea who had ordered the attack upon him.
The chief defence lawyer, Bruce Cutler, denounced the prosecution as a further episode in an unwarranted vendetta against his client by the US government.
On Feb. 14 the US government filed fresh corruption charges against Gotti, several other alleged Mafia leaders and six branches of the International Longshoremen's Association.
Ending of coal strike
The United Mine Workers' Union (UMW) announced on Feb. 20 that 2,000 striking miners in Virginia, West Virginia and Kentucky had voted to accept a settlement negotiated on Jan. 1 between union officials and the Pittston Coal Company [see p. 37180].
Of those participating in the ballot on Feb. 19, 63 per cent voted to end the bitter nine-month strike by accepting a four-year contract which guaranteed the continued subsidized health care for workers — a central issue of the strike — whilst giving the employers increased flexibility in production.
Labour Secretary Elizabeth Dole, whose mediation was credited by both sides with having brought a resolution to the dispute, described the outcome of the vote as "a joyous day for everyone" .
The strike had involved at least 44,000 of the country's miners in wildcat sympathy actions and had resulted in 3,700 arrests and 71 casualties.
The UMW was fined more than $65,000,000 for strike-related activities; the bulk of this sum remained unpaid at the time of the resolution of the dispute.
AMERICAS
CANADA
Cabinet reshuffle — Resignation of Leader of Opposition
Brian Mulroney, the Prime Minister, reshuffled his 39-member Cabinet on Feb. 23 in an effort to bolster the waning popularity of his Progressive Conservative Party (PCP) government.
An opinion poll published a few days before the changes had indicated that support for the PCP had fallen to 19 per cent among the electorate, the party's worst opinion survey result.
Brian Mulroney Prime Minister Joe Clark Secretary of State for External Affairs John Crosbie International Trade Donald Mazankowski Deputy Prime Minister; Minister of Agriculture; President of the Privy Council Elmer MacKay Public Works Jake Epp Energy, Mines and Resources Robert De Cotret President of the Treasury Board Perrin Beatty National Health and Welfare Michael Wilson Finance *Harvie André Minister of State; Leader of the government in the House of Commons Otto Jelinek National Revenue **Thomas Siddon Indian Affairs and Northern Development Charles Mayer Western Economic Diversification; Minister of State for Grains and Oilseeds William McKnight Defence **Benoît Bouchard Industry, Science and Technology Marcel Masse Communications **Barbara McDougall Employment and Immigration Gerald Merrithew Veterans' Affairs Monique Vézina Minister of State for Employment and Immigration; Senior Citizens **Frank Oberle Forestry Lowell Murray Government Leader in Senate; Minister of State for Federal-Provincial Relations Paul Dick Supply and Services **Pierre Cadieux Solicitor General Tom Hockin Minister of State for Small Businesses and Tourism Monique Landry Minister of State for External Relations *Bernard Valcourt Fisheries and Oceans Gerry Weiner Minister of State for Multiculturalism and Citizenship **Douglas Lewis Transport **Pierre Blais Consumer and Corporate Affairs Lucien Bouchard Environment John McDermid Minister of State for Privatization and Regulatory Affairs **Shirley Martin Minister of State for Indian Affairs and Northern Development **Mary Collins Associate Minister of National Defence; Minster responsible for Status of Women Allen Redway Minister of State for Housing William Wineguard Minister of State for Science **Kim Campbell Justice; Attorney General Jean Corbeil Minister of Labour; Minister of State for Transport Gilles Loiselle Minister of State for Finance *Marcel Danis Minister of State for Youth; Fitness and Amateur Sport *New appointment.
**Altered portfolio.
Reshuffled Federal Cabinet
Resignation of Leader of Opposition
John Turner stepped down as Leader of the Opposition on Feb. 7, in favour of his Liberal colleague Herb Gray.
Turner, 59, had announced his intention to resign as federal leader of the Liberal Party in May 1989 [see p. 36651]in order to resume his career as a Toronto lawyer.
He was due to remain as leader of the party until a successor was chosen at a leadership convention in Calgary on June 23, 1990.
NDP by-election victory in Quebec
The left-wing New Democratic Party (NDP), Canada's second-largest opposition grouping, scored a spectacular success on Feb. 12 by winning its first federal parliamentary seat in the province of Quebec.
Phil Edmonston won 69 per cent of the votes cast in the Chambly constituency, south-east of Montreal.
Although the NDP had committed considerable resources to Quebec during the 1988 federal elections, it had failed to win any seats east of Ontario [see pp. 36425]and had remained dogged by its image as a party of the more rural western provinces.
The victory of Edmonston, a bilingual anglophone, was also indicative of a degree of linguistic tolerance within the predominantly French-speaking province at a time when there was growing opposition to bilingualism within some of the English-speaking provinces.
The Chambly seat had been held by a member of the ruling Progressive Conservative Party (PCP) who had resigned after pleading guilty to charges of fraud.
Despite active campaigning within the constituency by Prime Minister Brian Mulroney and members of his Cabinet, the PCP candidate polled less than 10 per cent in the by-election and finished third, behind the Liberal candidate who won 17 per cent of the vote.
NXR> REFERENCES.
Reference article pp. 36425-27; December 1989 election of NDP leader p. 37120.
AMERICAS
MEXICO
Debt financing agreement
A debt reduction agreement was signed in Mexico City on Feb. 4 by representatives of the Mexican government and its 450 foreign commercial creditor banks.
The accord marked the first application of the so-called "Brady plan" designed to encourage voluntary debt reduction schemes [see pp. 36541-42; 37016-17].
Pedro Aspe Armella, the Mexican Finance Minister, estimated that it would save the country around US$4,710 million in debt servicing each year over the four-year period of the agreement.
The Mexican Finance Ministry had announced on Jan. 10, 1990, that only about 10 per cent of the banks had chosen the new loans option, one of three choices under the four-year commercial bank debt refinancing agreement reached in July 1989 with 15 major banking creditors.
[See p. 36812 for outline of this agreement, which covered medium- and long-term debt — equivalent to over half the total foreign debt.
Further details of the package had been disclosed on Sept. 13.]
The option to convert existing loans into par bonds was chosen by 49 per cent of banks, and conversion to discount bonds was chosen by the remaining 41 per cent.
Because of the lack of new lending and the resulting shortfall in financing to provide collateral to support the bonds, the US Treasury eventually agreed in January to issue the bonds at a higher effective interest rate.
The remaining shortfall would be covered by investment of the financing provided (by Mexico itself and by the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the US Export-Import Bank) and by Mexico's own resources.
AMERICAS
COSTA RICA
Presidential and legislative elections
In presidential elections held on Feb. 4 Rafael Angel Calderón Fournier, the candidate of the opposition Social Christian Unity Party (PUSC) was elected with 51.4 per cent of the vote.
Carlos Manuel Castillo, 61, an economist representing the social democratic National Liberation Party (PLN) which had held power for the past eight years, came second with 47.3 per cent.
There were five other candidates.
About 85 per cent of the electorate of 1,692,000 went to the polls, all those aged 18 and over being eligible to vote.
Calderón was due to assume office on May 8, for a four-year term, succeeding President Oscar Arias Sanchez.
Calderón, 40, a lawyer and former Foreign Minister (1978-80), had been the PUSC's presidential candidate twice previously, in 1982 and 1986.
He was the son of Rafael Calderón Guardia, whose presidency of Costa Rica in 1942-44 was followed by a brief civil war, precipitated by his defeat in the elections of 1948, and exile in Nicaragua, where his son was born.
Calderón campaigned on a populist platform with support and advice from the US Republican Party.
He was expected to continue to pursue the broad objectives of the outgoing government, including regional peace in accordance with President Arias's 1987 peace plan (Esquipulas II — see p. 35441-42), to which he had initially been opposed.
The other candidates, none of whom won more than 1 per cent of the vote, were Daniel Camacho (United People), Fernando Ramírez (National Alliance), Isaac Azofeifa (Progressive Party), Edwin Badilla (Trotskyist PRTL), and Rodrigo Cordero, an independent.
In elections to the Legislative Assembly held at the same time, the PUSC won an absolute majority, winning 29 of the 57 seats against 25 for the PLN and three for smaller parties (one left-wing, two regional).
The PLN had previously held 29 and the PUSC 25.
AMERICAS
EL SALVADOR
Death of former president
José Napoleón Duarte, 64, President of El Salvador in 1980-1982 and 1984-1989, died on Feb. 23 after suffering for a long time from cancer.
A co-founder of the Christian Democratic Party (PDC) in 1960, and three times mayor of the capital San Salvador between 1964 and 1970, Duarte campaigned for democratic reforms as candidate of the National Opposition Union in the February 1972 presidential elections, but was defeated amid allegations of massive electoral fraud and launched an abortive coup in March.
Exiled in Venezuela for seven years, he returned to join a military-civilian junta in March 1980 [see p. 30323]formed in October 1979 as a result of the threat of full-scale civil war.
Under United States pressure following the murder of three US nuns by the security forces, the junta appointed Duarte as President in December 1980 [see p. 30685]; he stood down in April 1982 when an interim administration succeeded the civilian-military junta.
On his election as President in May 1984 [see pp. 33204-05], his government relied on the support of the military and was heavily dependent on the USA for military and economic aid.
It failed to produce the necessary democratic and economic reforms needed to pacify and modernize the country.
By the time of the PDC's election defeat by the right-wing National Republican Alliance (Arena) in March 1989 [see p. 36520]Duarte had become an isolated political figure.
AMERICAS
LATIN AMERICA
Inter-American summit on drugs issue
Amid tight security the Presidents of the United States, Colombia, Peru and Bolivia met in the Colombian Caribbean resort of Cartagena and signed on Feb. 15 the Cartagena Declaration, pledging their governments to intensify and co-ordinate efforts to curb the consumption, production and trafficking of cocaine.
Thousands of workers and students were reported to have staged protest marches in cities throughout Colombia in opposition to the visit of US President George Bush.
The joint declaration was based on a 14-page draft document drawn up by the participating countries at a preparatory meeting in Bolivia on Jan. 10 [see p. 37182].
Its general provisions emphasised the need to (i) reduce the illegal consumption of drugs in industrialized countries;(ii) control the manufacture and sale of arms to reduce their availability to drug terrorists, as well controlling aircraft and ships used for drug trafficking;(iii) control the demand, production and marketing of chemicals used to process cocaine.
In addition it was agreed that intelligence and incriminating evidence on drug traffickers would be exchanged between the four countries, which would share any proceeds from seizure or confiscation of drug cartel property.
Further bilateral and multilateral agreements were also envisaged to ensure that each country's armed forces participated in joint anti-drug initiatives.
The need for complementary judicial and legal procedures to be used against drug traffickers was also recognized; the question of their extradition from one country to stand trial in another was not resolved, although Colombia's President Virgilio Barco reiterated his government's resolve to continue extraditing suspected drug traffickers to the USA.
In order to reinforce the Cartagena Declaration, Bush stated that he would ask the US Congress to sanction increased aid to the three Andean countries for the period 1991-94, to help them deal with the social and economic problems resulting from drug eradication programmes.
He also confirmed that there would be increased US co-operation in equipping and training their security forces in combating drug production and trafficking without insisting on the direct intervention of US military forces.
In addition he promised new loans to support broad-based rural development, infrastructural improvements and the substitution of new crops for coca.
He also promised to undertake negotiations with multilateral financial institution for additional funding [for details of the previous US Andean aid programme see p. 36889].
Peruvian President Alan García Pérez had warned that unless such social and economic alternatives were available, all efforts to reduce the coca harvest and drug trafficking would be ineffective.
He asked the US government for favourable trade concessions for Colombia, Peru and Bolivia in US internal markets in order that they could successfully develop and promote non-traditional exports.
[For UN General Assembly anti-drug programme adopted on Feb. 23 see p. 37268.]
Bolivian President Jaime Paz Zamora stated that the major achievement of the summit had been the change in US policy and the recognition that drug production and trafficking were not simply criminal activities requiring police and military action, but products of the economic, social and legal problems of the Andean countries.
The four countries were to convene a further meeting in six months to evaluate the progress of the agreement, and to host in 1991 an international conference on the control of illegal drugs.
AMERICAS
COLOMBIA
New political alliance
An electoral alliance, the Nationalist Action for Peace (Acción Nacionalista por la Paz), was unexpectedly announced on Feb 7 by Carlos Pizarro Leóngómez, leader of the left-wing guerrilla April 19 Movement (M-19), and José Joaquín Matallana, a former Army general who as Director of the Department for the Administration of Security (DAS) in the mid-1970s had been responsible for combating the activities of the M-19 and other guerrilla groups.
Composed of the M-19, the Christian Democrats and an organization named United Colombia, the alliance was formed to contest the March 11 congressional and municipal elections, but solely for seats in the capital Bogotá and the surrounding province of Cundinamarca.
In the remaining 11 provinces, M-19 was to present its own list of candidates.
Pizarro stated that he and Matallana had agreed on the need to construct a true democracy for Colombia.
In order to achieve this, both would campaign for a national referendum and a National Constituent Assembly in the elections.
Matallana, who emphasized that he was not a communist and had no regrets for his past anti-guerrilla role, stated that the M-19 had proved itself to be politically honest and now shared his belief that Colombia could only achieve change via the polls.
The new alliance would support a slate of candidates including Pizarro's candidature for the mayorship of Bogotá and Matallana's candidature for the Senate.
M-19 was participating in the elections despite the fact that it had yet to sign a final peace agreement with the government of President Virgilio Barco.
A joint communiqué released on Feb. 7 by Pizarro and government peace negotiator Rafael Pardo Ruedas had announced that a pact would be signed on Feb. 14 conferring a general amnesty on the guerrillas in return for the M-19 relinquishing their arms and returning to civilian life.
However, as of Feb. 14 no such agreement had been confirmed.
[For details of preliminary peace pacts signed by both sides in January and March 1989 see pp. 36393; 36519.]
AMERICAS
PERU
Shooting of presidential candidate
The Interior Minister, Augustín Mantilla, was reported to have resigned on Feb. 7, the day on which a police officer shot and wounded Henry Pease, the United Left Coalition (UI) candidate for the April 1990 presidential election.
Pease had been taking part in a march through the capital, Lima, when the officer shot him at close range with bird shot.
Two congressional candidates, a UI supporter and one of Pease's bodyguards were also wounded.
Mantilla ordered the dismissals of the officer concerned and of his commander.
President Alan Garcia Pérez, who apologised to Pease for the incident, was reported to have accepted Mantilla's resignation.
However, as of late February, the latter was still in his post.
AMERICAS
ARGENTINA
Proposals for political pact — Economic crisis
Eduardo Angeloz César, the Governor of the province of Córdoba and unsuccessful Radical Party (UCR) candidate in the May 1989 presidential elections [see pp. 36651-52], rejected on Feb. 23 an invitation to join the Cabinet of President Carlos Saúl Menem.
Instead, Angeloz proposed a pact among all political parties under which a concrete plan of government would be drawn up to preserve and consolidate a system of democracy at a time of acute economic crisis and increased social tension.
Argentina was suffering from spiralling inflation (prices rose by 79.2 per cent in January with a similar figure projected for February), while the currency, the austral, was collapsing against the US dollar (from US$1=1,000 australs at the beginning of January to US$1=5,000 australs as at Feb. 23).
The resultant social unrest was highlighted by episodes of looting of supermarkets.
An estimated 500 people, 27 of whom were reportedly arrested, looted supermarkets on Feb. 21 in Rosario, the country's third largest city [for May 1989 lootings in Rosario see p. 36652].
Similar incidents were reported from the western city of Córdoba on Feb. 19 and in the province of Buenos Aires.
On Feb. 23 Menem ruled out a national state of emergency, describing the looting as "isolated incidents" encouraged by "extremists" .
However, the government was reported to have sent food supplies and food coupons to areas most affected by the crisis.
Thousands of state-sector bank and railway employees also demonstrated in the capital, Buenos Aires, on Feb. 21 against government plans, announced on Feb. 18, to halt subsidies to state-owned companies and to accelerate their privatization.
Suspension of IMF loan
As reported in late February, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) had suspended a US$230,000,000 payment due for disbursement that month.
This was judged to be in response to the government's failure to honour conditions of the US$1,400 million standby arrangement negotiated with the IMF on Nov. 10, 1989 [see p. 37040].
Resignation of Health Secretary
The Secretary of State for Health and Social Welfare, Rubén Cardozo, resigned on Feb. 8 following the disclosure that he had made a secret payment of 40,000 money vouchers (bonos solidarios) to a Peronist congressional deputy, Dante Camaño.
The vouchers, redeemable from public funds, were meant to alleviate social hardship among the most needy of the population.
The leader of the Peronist congressional bloc, José Luis Manzano, claimed to know nothing of the payments which another Peronist deputy, Luis Saadi, described as "odious" as well as being illegal.
AMERICAS
ARGENTINA-UK
Restoration of diplomatic relations
Two days of high-level bilateral talks, held in Madrid, the Spanish capital, on Feb. 14-15, ended in an agreement signed by the United Kingdom and Argentina to restore full diplomatic relations, which had been broken off at the beginning of the Falklands (Malvinas) war in April 1982.
The UK Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd stated that the agreement had been achieved without "any sacrifice of sovereignty" over the Falkland (Malvinas) Islands and he hoped that it would be a turning point leading to a "new relationship" between the two countries.
Argentinian President Carlos Saúl Menem, speaking in the Argentinian capital Buenos Aires, stated that he believed that the agreement "eliminated for good the possibility of armed conflict" between the UK and Argentina and would grant Argentina "broad possibilities" in the European Communities (EC).
However, he confirmed that Argentina's claim to sovereignty over the Falklands, set to one side during the negotiations, would continue to be pursued in international forums.
The Argentinian Deputy Foreign Minister, Mario Campora, was named as the new ambassador to the UK and visa restrictions between the two countries were to be abolished.
Sir Crispin Tickell, UK permanent representative at the UN, who led the UK delegation in Madrid, additionally agreed with Menem's special envoy Lucio García del Solar, who led the Argentinian delegation, a package of measures building on bilateral agreements concluded in August and October 1989 [see pp. 36846; 36973].
The new measures provided for (i) the lifting of the 150-mile exclusion zone around the Falkland Islands and its replacement on March 31, 1990, by mutually agreed security arrangements (backed up by a direct radio "hotline" between the commander of the Falklands garrison and Argentina's military high command) giving each country advance warning of the military manoeuvres of the other, and allowing Argentinian warships and aircraft to come within 50 miles and 70 miles respectively of the Falklands without prior permission;(ii) co-operation on air and sea rescue, safety procedures and air and maritime navigation;(iii) an investment promotion and protection pact to encourage investment in the Falklands, and negotiations on possible Anglo-Argentinian investment promotion and protection agreements;(iv) shared information on fishing in the South Atlantic, although a 150-mile conservation zone around the Falklands would be maintained, within which Argentinian vessels were denied the right to fish [see p. 37001];(v) a working group on South Atlantic affairs and arrangements for further talks to improve contacts between the mainland and the Falklands;(vi) visits by Argentinian relatives to Falkland war graves by arrangement with the International Red Cross;(vii) co-operation on environmental protection; and (viii) co-operation against drug trafficking.
This entire agreement would become an official document of the UN General Assembly.
Gerard Robson, a member of the Falkland Islands' Legislative Council, was quoted in the Financial Times of Feb. 16 as stating that Falkland Islanders would not be "overjoyed" by the Madrid agreement but recognized that matters of defence and foreign affairs were the responsibility of the UK government.
ASIA — PACIFIC
INDIA
State elections
The right-wing Hindu-revivalist Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) was the principal beneficiary of a massive swing against the former ruling Congress (I) Party in state elections held in northern India in February.
The results confirmed that anti-Congress feelings in the north had not waned since November 1989, when northern voters had turned against the central government of Rajiv Gandhi, electing in its place a National Front coalition led by V. P. Singh [see pp. 37030-31].
Unlike the November general election when the BJP and the Janata Dal (the main component of the National Front) had generally agreed on seat adjustments in the Congress heartlands, the two parties competed against each other in many of the February state elections, often creating a three-cornered contest.
At the central level, the BJP currently supported the National Front from the "outside" , as did the Left Front parties.
The elections were held on Feb. 12 in Manipur and on Feb. 27 in Arunachal Pradesh, Bihar, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, Orissa and Rajasthan.
Pondicherry, a union territory, also voted on Feb. 27.
(Elections in five states, Uttar Pradesh, Sikkim, Goa, Andhra Pradesh and Karnataka, had taken place at the same time as the general election in November — see pp. 37124-25 for results.)
Although Congress (I) had gone into the February elections controlling all the state assemblies, they retained power in only Arunachal Pradesh and Maharashtra.
The BJP, which had won 86 seats in the November general elections, headed new governments in Himachal Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan.
Janata Dal gained control in Gujarat and Orissa and was part of the alliance which formed a new state government in Manipur.
Over 40 per cent of India's total electorate of 489,000,000 were entitled to vote in the February state elections and a turnout of over 70 per cent was reported.
Voting was accompanied by widespread electoral violence, in which at least 80 people died and hundreds were injured.
The worst of the trouble occurred in Bihar, a state with a long record of political violence.
State Assembly results
The results of February's State Assembly elections are given below, with the number of seats at stake shown in parenthesis; resulting resignations and appointments are also noted.
Arunachal Pradesh (60).
Congress (I) 37, Janata Dal 11, others 12.
Gagong Apang was re-elected leader of the Congress (I) legislative party on March 5 and was sworn in for his fourth term as Chief Minister on March 7.
Bihar (322).
Janata Dal 119, Congress (I) 67, BJP 36, others 86 (14 seats undeclared as of March 5).
No party gained an absolute majority in the Bihari Assembly, and as of early March uncertainty prevailed over the composition of a coalition ministry.
Gujarat (181).
Janata Dal 70, BJP 66, Congress (I) 33, others 12.
Chimanbhai Patel was sworn in as the Janata Dal Chief Minister on March 5.
He replaced Madhavsinh Solanki of Congress (I), who had held the post since early December 1989 [see p. 37125].
Himachal Pradesh (65).
BJP 44, Janata Dal 11, Congress (I) 8, others 2.
Shanta Kumar of the BJP took the oath of office as Chief Minister on March 5, replacing Virabhadra Singh of Congress (I).
Maharashtra (288).
Congress (I) 142, Shiv Sena 51, BJP 42, Janata Dal25, others 28.
On March 5 Sharad Pawar was sworn in for a further term as Congress (I) Chief Minister.
Madhya Pradesh (319).
BJP 219, Congress (I) 56, Janata Dal 28, others 16.
Sunderlal Patwa was sworn in as the BJP Chief Minister on March 5, replacing Shyama Charan Shukla of Congress (I) who had held the post since early December [ibid.].
Manipur (58).
United Legislature Front (ULF) 32, Congress (I) 26.
The ULF comprised the Manipur People's Party (10), Janata Dal (10), Congress (S)(6), the Communist Party of India (3), the Kuki National Assembly (2), and the National People's Party (1).
Repolling had been ordered in 12 seats after ballot papers had been burned on polling day (Feb. 12).
Eventually, on Feb. 23, a non-Congress (I) government was sworn in for the first time in 10 years.
The new Chief Minister, Raj Kumar Ranbir Singh of the Manipur People's Party, replaced R. K. Jaichandra Singh of Congress (I).
Orissa (147).
Janata Dal 123, Congress (I) 10, BJP 2, others 12.
Biju Patnaik of Janata Dal was sworn in as Chief Minister on March 5, replacing Hemandanda Biswal, who had held the post for Congress (I) since early December.
Rajasthan (199).
BJP 85, Janata Dal 54, Congress (I) 50, others 10.
Bhairon Singh Shekhawat of the BJP was sworn in as the new Chief Minister on March 3, replacing Harideo Joshi, Congress (I) Chief Minister since early December.
Pondicherry (30).
Congress (I) 11, Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (DMK) 9, Janata Dal 4, All-India Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam 3, others 3.
D. Ramachandran of the DMK was sworn in as Chief Minister on March 8, replacing M. O. H. Farooq of Congress (I).
Continuing unrest in Kashmir — Deterioration in Indo-Pakistan relations
Demonstrations and violence in Kashmir — Dissolution of State Assembly
The violent anti-Indian demonstrations which had engulfed the Kashmir Valley in late January [see p. 37184]abated in the early part of February.
However, on Feb. 12 an inspector of the Indian Intelligence Bureau was one of three people shot dead by secessionist militants in Srinagar, the summer capital of Jammu and Kashmir state.
The next day, Lasa Koul, the head of the state television, was assassinated in the city.
Jagmohan, the Governor of Jammu and Kashmir, on Feb. 19 dissolved the State Assembly, which had been suspended since Jan. 19 when the state was placed under Governor's rule [see pp. 37183-84].
Jagmohan described the Assembly's dissolution as a "firm and positive step" towards the attainment of normality in the state.
The action would, he said, make redundant the complaint that certain elements had resorted to violence because of allegations that elections held in March 1987 had been rigged [see p. 35203].
As many as 400,000 people participated in a peaceful demonstration in Srinagar on Feb. 23.
The demonstrators delivered a letter to the offices of the UN Military Observers Group monitoring the 1949 ceasefire line, calling for a UN-supervised plebiscite to be held on Kashmir's accession to India in 1947.
Hostilities between India and Pakistan over Kashmir had ended in a ceasefire from Jan. 1, 1949.
Since that time, and despite further hostilities in 1965, the 1949 ceasefire line or "line of control" had separated Azad Kashmir ( "Free Kashmir" — the northern Pakistani-controlled sector) from Indian-administered Kashmir, which together with Jammu further to the south made up the Indian state of Jammu and Kashmir.
A resolution calling for the holding of a plebiscite had been adopted by the UN in January 1949.
Increased tension along Indo-Pakistan border
The Hindu of Feb. 24 reported that United States officials had intervened in late January to dissuade the Pakistani Army from intervening in Kashmir.
The report said that US officials had advised the Pakistani military that plans to man forward defences along the Kashmiri line of control were "extremely foolish" .
Subsequently, the Indian Army headquarters contacted their Pakistani counterparts and "cautioned them against their decision to man their forward defences in the plains area of Jammu and Punjab" .
Contact was then maintained between the two headquarters to ensure that military movements and actions were not misinterpreted.
At least three Pakistani civilians were killed and 15 others injured late on Feb. 5 when Indian border guards opened fire to repel Pakistani demonstrators who had crossed into Indian-administered territory near Jammu (the predominantly Hindu winter capital of Jammu and Kashmir).
Some 4,000 demonstrators had congregated at a border point near the Pakistani Army encampment at Sialkot.
The demonstration coincided with the observation throughout Pakistan of a government- and opposition-sponsored "Kashmir Solidarity Day" .
In late January political leaders in Azad Kashmir, including its President, Sardar Abdul Qayyum Khan, had threatened to send 10,000 people over the line of control in support of Kashmiri self-determination.
On Feb. 10 the Prime Minister of Pakistan, Benazir Bhutto, addressed a joint session of parliament on events in Kashmir.
Although Bhutto stressed that Pakistan was not seeking military confrontation with India, she reiterated that her government would continue to be "steadfast" in its support for the right of self-determination by the people of Kashmir.
Indian border guards again opened fire on Pakistani civilians on Feb. 11 after a small group had crossed the line of control at Chakhoti, in the Uri sector.
According to a report in the London-based India Weekly of Feb. 16, Pakistani soldiers fired 200 rounds intermittently across the line of control after the incident.
Some reports in the Western press claimed that six Pakistani civilians were killed at Chakhoti.
However, the Madras-based Hindu newspaper of Feb. 12 reported that "India was not aware of any fatalities" .
On Feb. 12, the Indian government presented "documentary details" of Pakistani interference in Kashmir and Punjab to Pakistan's high commissioner in India, Basheer Babar.
ASIA — PACIFIC
PAKISTAN
Violence in Karachi — New Chief Minister of Sind province
Violent anti-government demonstrations on Feb. 7 in Karachi, the capital of Sind province left at least 60 people dead and over 100 injured.
An indefinite curfew was imposed on seven police districts in the city and troops were called in to restore order.
The demonstrations broke out in response to a general strike call issued by leaders of the Muhajir National Movement (Muhajir Qaumi Mahaz — MQM — representing Urdu-speaking migrants originally from India) in protest at the alleged abduction of MQM members by supporters of the ruling Pakistan People's Party (PPP).
The MQM and the PPP had been at loggerheads since October 1989, when the MQM ended its 11-month old alliance with the PPP and joined the Combined Opposition Parties [see p. 37043].
In Sind province itself the MQM was the principal opposition party, having ended its alliance with the PPP in May 1989 [see p. 37150], and was also in control of Karachi's municipal government.
Qaim Ali Shah resigned as Chief Minister of Sind province on Feb. 25 and was replaced by another PPP member, Aftab Shahban Mirani.
The Independent of Feb. 26 reported that the armed forces had lobbied for political changes in Sind in the aftermath of the Karachi violence earlier in the month.
The report further claimed that the deteriorating security situation in Sind had led to a large flow of capital and industry out of Karachi, Pakistan's largest city and a major port, during January and February.
ASIA — PACIFIC
NEPAL
Pro-democracy campaign
The Movement for the Restoration of Democracy (MRD), a coalition of the banned Nepali Congress Party (NCP) and seven communist factions, launched a peaceful pro-democracy campaign from Feb. 18.
Inspired by events in Eastern Europe and popularly known as the "stir" , the MRD sought the ending of the panchayat (council) system and the reintroduction of multiparty politics (banned since 1960).
On Feb. 4 the Press Trust of India had reported the arrest of over 150 NCP activists and leaders of its student wing, the Nepal Vidyarthi Sangh, including three members of the party's central working committee.
On Feb. 13 the police had arrested two senior MRD leaders, Sahana Pradhan and Bishnu Bahadur Manandhar.
By the middle of the month, over 350 arrests had been made and six newspapers banned in government moves to disrupt the opposition campaign.
The launching of the "stir" on Feb. 18 was marked by demonstrations and a mass meeting in the capital, Kathmandu.
According to a government spokesman, three people including a police constable were killed and 175 people taken into custody; opposition leaders claimed a higher total of casualties.
Three NCP leaders, Krishna Prasad Bhattarai, Ganesh Man Singh and G. P. Koirala, were placed under house arrest.
Clashes also took place with pro-panchayat supporters, and several government ministers were reported to be among those throwing stones at the protesters.
The opposition called a general strike for Feb. 19, leaving the capital virtually deserted with shops closed and very little traffic on the roads.
In nearby Bhaktapur, traditionally a communist stronghold, police killed five demonstrators and wounded at least 20 others.
On Feb. 20 Nepali Radio reported that three people died when attacking a police station in the village of Jaddukuha in south-eastern Janakpur.
The same day, Nepal's 1,800 lawyers went on a 24-hour strike in support of the campaign.
The government responded forcefully on Feb. 25 to prevent a second attempt by the movement to take its campaign on to the streets.
Constant police patrols and random arrests combined with widespread fear to upset opposition plans for two big "Black Day" street protests.
The first rally did not take place, while at the second four prominent leaders, including Haribul Bhattarai, a former mayor of Khathmandu, and Padma Rana Tuladhar, a dissident member of the Rashtriya Panchayat (National Assembly), were immediately arrested.
The MRD later claimed that small crowds had assembled in six places without confronting the police and that 1,500 had been detained.
It admitted that the protest had been "disappointing" but noted that the movement was still only eight days old and people were "very shy" of the police.
By the time of the second national strike, called on March 2, the government had acknowledged 12 deaths during the past month.
It faced growing dissatisfaction with certain members of the royal family, in particular Queen Aishwarya, who as a former commoner considered to have undue influence was more vulnerable to criticism than King Birendra.
ASIA — PACIFIC
MONGOLIA
Strengthening of opposition movement
MDU congress — Statement by Premier Sodnom on multi-party system
The Mongolian Democratic Union (MDU) held its first congress in Ulan Bator on Feb. 18.
Described by the authorities as an "informal organization" , the MDU had been formed in December 1989 [see p. 37124]and had subsequently organized a series of peaceful demonstrations in Ulan Bator to press for political and economic reforms, including the introduction of a multi-part system [see p. 37186].
The MDU congress was held in a hall provided by the government and was transmitted live on Mongolian television.
Delegates adopted a petition calling for the mass resignation of the Council of Ministers, the People's Great Hural (parliament) and the central committee of the ruling Mongolian People's Revolutionary Party (MPRP).
The congress also confirmed Sanjaasurengiyn Dzorig as the MDU's chief co-ordinator and elected a general co-ordinating council and a presidium.
In an interview with Japanese reporters on Feb. 17, the Chairman of the Council of Ministers, Dumaagiyn Sodnom, indicated that the MDU demands were being taken very seriously by the leadership; according to the Japanese news agency Kyodo, Sodnom said: "I cannot say that the monopoly over the political system is right.
The MPRP needs to improve itself and at the same time if new parties are formed for the interest of the people and the country, they should be competing on equal terms."
Formation of opposition parties
On Feb. 17, the day before the MDU congress opened, some 300 MDU members had founded the Mongolian Democratic Party (MDP).
According to a Feb. 18 report by the Soviet news agency Tass, the MDP would be "backed" by the MDU in its struggle to establish a multiparty system in Mongolia.
The Independent of Feb. 20 reported that the MPRP general secretary, Jambyn Batmönh, had effectively granted the MDP recognition by sending a message to its inaugural meeting.
The Independent of March 5 reported that three more opposition groups had recently been formed in Mongolia: the New Progressive Association (whose members were believed to include members of the armed forces), the Social Democratic Party and the Mongolian Students Association.
ASIA — PACIFIC
SOUTH KOREA
Inauguration of new ruling party — Treatment of dissidents
Inauguration of Democratic Liberal Party
The new ruling Democratic Liberal Party (DLP), controlling 216 of the 299 seats in the South Korean legislature, was formally inaugurated at a merger convention held in Seoul on Feb. 9.
The plan to create the new party, composed of the ruling Democratic Justice Party (DJP) and the country's second- and third-largest opposition groupings (the Reunification Democratic Party — RDP — and the New Democratic Republican Party — NDRP), had been announced on Jan. 22, after a series of secret negotiations [see pp. 37187-88].
The convention named President Roh Tae Woo and opposition leaders Kim Young Sam and Kim Jong Pil as joint leaders of the new party.
It also agreed that a new constitution for the DLP would be adopted, and a single leader appointed, at an inaugural national convention to be held in April.
The launch of the DLP, which registered its inauguration with the Central Election Management Committee on Feb. 15, took place earlier than expected.
There was widespread speculation that this was an attempt to curtail growing opposition to the merger within all three of the constituent parties, and particularly amongst members of the RDP, the most radical of the three.
News of the inauguration sparked small but violent protests in Kwangju — the stronghold of the Party for Peace and Democracy (PPD), the only remaining opposition party of any significance — and among students on campuses in Seoul.
In its inaugural declaration the DLP promised to achieve a "new national history of democracy, prosperity and national reunification" , and to operate as a "reform-oriented democratic party which protects and promotes the liberal democratic political system and free market system" .
Among the office holders named by the three leaders were: as secretary general Park Jun Byung, a DJP legislator since 1985 and before that an Army general who as commander of the 20th Division had been involved in the violent suppression of the 1980 Kwangju rebellion, a continuing source of bitterness within the South Korean political system; as floor leader Kim Dong Young, former floor leader of the RDP and one of Kim Young Sam's closest confidants; and as chief policy maker Kim Yong Hwan, who had been elected to the National Assembly in 1987 and was one of the most experienced members of the NDRP.
Sentencing of dissidents — Announcement of prison amnesty
A 21-year old university student, Lim Su Kyong, was sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment on Feb. 5 for making an unauthorized trip to North Korea to promote Korean reunification by attending the 13th World Youth and Student Festival held in Pyongyang in July 1989 [see p. 36816].
Fr Moon Gyn Hyon, a Roman Catholic priest who travelled to North Korea to escort Lim home, was sentenced to eight years.
The two were prosecuted under South Korea's controversial National Security Act which prohibited any unauthorized contact between the two Korean states.
The severity of the punishments, together with the recent sentencing of an artist, Hong Song Dam, to eight years for alleged contact with North Korean agents in West Germany and for sending a slide of a painting to North Korea, fuelled international concern that the Roh government's record on human rights was deteriorating.
In January 1990 the international human rights organization, Amnesty International, issued a report which alleged that there were more than 800 political prisoners in South Korea and which claimed that the government had "deliberately disregarded" constitutional guarantees and other reforms introduced in 1987-88 designed to protect detainees from mistreatment or torture.
The South Korean government announced an amnesty on Feb. 26 under which it would release 22 "leftists" , most of whom had been convicted of spying for North Korea, and 1,089 other prisoners.
ASIA — PACIFIC
HONG KONG
Approval of final draft of Basic Law
A final draft of the Basic Law, the proposed "mini-constitution" by which Hong Kong would be ruled as a Special Autonomous Region (SAR) after sovereignty reverted to China in 1997, was adopted by the ninth, and final, plenary session of the Basic Law Drafting Committee (BLDC) meeting in Beijing on Feb. 13-16.
The draft was to be submitted to the Chinese legislature (the National People's Council — NPC) for approval in late March 1990.
The 59-member BLDC had been appointed by the NPC in June 1985 [see p. 33660]and had published a first draft of the Basic Law in May 1988 and a second draft in February 1989 [see p. 36763].
A four-month "consultation period" set after the publication of the second draft was extended after the mid-year political upheavals in China [see pp. 36587; 36640-42; 36720-22].
In mid-January 1990 the BLDC's political subcommittee had approved details of Hong Kong's post-1997 governmental framework [see p. 37185].
The United Kingdom government, however, reacting to the widespread criticism of the subcommittee's proposals, had then made a last attempt to secure concessions towards increased democratization in post-1997 Hong Kong.
Sir Alan Donald, the UK ambassador to China, reportedly met Chinese Foreign Ministry officials on an almost daily basis in the weeks before the final BLDC plenum, but few concessions were made by China.
Details of final draft
A total of 24 proposed revisions to the draft Basic Law were approved at the final BLDC plenum.
The political model codified in the Basic Law proposed that one-third of the Hong Kong Legislative Council (Legco) be directly elected in 1997, rising to half in 2003.
A referendum after 2007 would decide the future formation of the Legco; however, any changes approved by referendum would require the endorsement of a two-thirds majority of the Legco, the consent of the chief executive, and the approval of the NPC standing committee.
The model differed slightly from that approved in January by the BLDC political subcommittee, which had proposed a 30 per cent starting point [see p. 37185].
Foreign nationals would be permitted to hold a maximum 20 per cent of the 60 Legco seats (a 5 per cent increase over the political subcommittee's recommendations).
1997-1999 1999-2003 2003-2007 Direct election 20 24 (40%) 30 Election committee 10 6 (10%) 0 Functional constituency 30 30 (50%) 30 Total seats 60 60 60
Composition of Legislative Council, 1997-2007
The draft proposed that the chief executive (a position comparable with that of the current Governor) be elected for a five-year term by an 800-member "broadly represented" election committee.
No details were released of selection procedures for this committee, members of which were to be represented in the Legco until 2003.
During the term of office of the third chief executive, a referendum would be held to decide whether the chief executive should be selected by general election.
However, as with the proposed Legco referendum, the vote would only go ahead after approval by the Legco, the chief executive and the NPC standing committee.
Anyone with the right of residence overseas would be debarred from becoming chief executive, or from holding other top government posts.
Any legislation "submitted by individual legislative council members" (effectively private members' bills) would require the endorsement of "more than half of two groups of members, one selected by the functioning organizations and the other by various constituencies and by the election committee" .
Government-proposed bills, however, would require endorsement only by a majority of Legco members present.
In its January report, the BLDC political subcommittee had recommended that all legislation be submitted to a two-tier voting system.
The debate over the political model claimed most public attention, but the draft also included a controversial anti-subversion clause, added to Article 23 which covered treason, secession and sedition; this clause prohibited "political organizations and groups in the Hong Kong SAR from establishing contacts with foreign political organizations or groups" and also prohibited "foreign political organizations or groups from carrying out political activities in the Hong Kong SAR" .
Response to final draft
Deng Xiaoping, China's "elder statesman" leader, said on Feb. 17 that the final draft was a "creative masterpiece" which had "historic and international significance" .
In Hong Kong itself, the response was largely negative, although some members of the business community expressed satisfaction that the uncertainty caused by the drafting process had ended.
During the final BLDC session in Beijing, seven members (presumably part of the minority Hong Kong contingent) had voted against the draft.
On Feb. 16 several thousand Hong Kong university students marched to the Hong Kong office of Xinhua (or New China News Agency — the unofficial "Chinese embassy" ) and burned a copy of the draft Basic Law.
The combined Hong Kong Executive and Legislative Councils (Omleco) issued a bland statement asserting that the future political system outlined in the Basic Law "falls short of the pace recommended by Omleco" (i.e. 50 per cent directly elected Legco seats by 1997, rising to 100 per cent in 2003).
Dame Lydia Dunn, one of Hong Kong's senior politicians, urged the community to "work together" to ensure successful elections in 1991.
Martin Lee, a leading member of Hong Kong's "liberal lobby" who had been expelled from the BLDC in October 1989 [see p. 36974], condemned the draft and accused the UK government of conducting a "policy of appeasement" .
Douglas Hurd, the UK Foreign and Commonwealth Secretary, acknowledged in the UK House of Commons on Feb. 16 that the draft was "not ideal" , and that the rate of progress towards democracy in Hong kong would not be "as rapid as people in Hong Kong, or we ourselves, would have liked to see" .
(The House of Commons select committee on foreign affairs had proposed in June 1989 that a fully directly elected legislature should be introduced in Hong Kong by 1997 — see p. 36815.)
Hurd confirmed to the House that 18 of the 60 Hong Kong Legco seats would be filled by direct election in 1991.
Vietnamese-UK talks on boat people issue
Francis Maude, Minister of State in the UK Foreign Office, visited Hanoi on Feb. 18-21 in an unsuccessful attempt to persuade the Vietnamese government to accept a policy of involuntary repatriation from Hong Kong of those Vietnamese "boat people" screened out as "economic migrants" .
The Hong Kong authorities had carried out the first involuntary repatriation operation on Dec. 12, 1989 [see pp. 37121-22].
In late January 1990 only Vietnamese and United States opposition had stopped the UK from winning international approval for the start of a concerted programme of involuntary repatriation [see p. 37185].
An agreement was reached during Maude's visit to increase the rate of voluntary repatriation of boat people from Hong Kong.
On Feb. 13 a group of 78 boat people had voluntarily returned to Hanoi, bringing to 1,225 the total number of voluntary returnees since the scheme was introduced in March 1989.
New arrivals — Unrest in refugee camps
The Independent of Feb. 19 reported that 163 boat people had arrived in Hong Kong during January 1990, 40 per cent more than in January 1989.
Most of the new arrivals were ethnic Chinese from southern Vietnam (in contrast with the 1989 arrivals, the majority of whom were northern Vietnamese).
Although widely described as boat people, a large number of the January arrivals had made most of the journey to Hong Kong aboard Chinese buses, only boarding boats for the last leg of their journey.
Hong Kong police used tear gas on Feb. 13-14 to stop fighting between rival Vietnamese gangs in Whitehead detention centre in the New Territories [see p. 37122 for December unrest].
The first Vietnamese boat person to commit suicide in Hong Kong died in hospital on Feb. 18, two days after hanging himself with his belt and four days after he had officially been refused refugee status.
In a suicide note Nguyen Van Hai said that he was killing himself in protest at Hong Kong's refugee screening policy.
ASIA — PACIFIC
TAIWAN
Opposition protests
The opening ceremony on Feb. 19 of the National Assembly, which had convened for a 35-day session to elect Taiwan's President, was disrupted by opposition Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) members protesting at "mainland" domination.
(The Assembly was dominated by elderly "life-term" members of the ruling Kuomintang (KMT) originally elected to represent mainland Chinese constituencies.)
Describing the disturbances, the Financial Times of Feb. 20 reported that "rampaging opposition members smashed windows, overturned furniture and scuffled with police" .
Lee Teng-hui (who had succeeded to the presidency in January 1988 — see p. 35715) had been nominated as the KMT's presidential candidate at a party plenum held on Feb. 11.
On Feb. 20 the DPP forced the first-ever postponement of the election of a new Legislative Yuan Speaker.
The DPP, which held 21 seats in the 276-member Yuan [see pp. 37122-23 for December 1989 elections], used procedural points to delay the election of veteran KMT mainlander Liang Shu-jung.
Meanwhile, DPP supporters congregated outside the Legislative Yuan in an attempt to prevent KMT legislators entering the building.
Fighting eventually broke out between the demonstrators and police in which at least 80 people were injured.
ASIA — PACIFIC
CAMBODIA
Third Jakarta informal meeting — Other diplomatic activity
Diplomatic activity increased in February among the various parties involved in efforts to end the 11-year civil war in Cambodia.
The ailing peace process had been revived by an Australian plan for large-scale UN involvement in Cambodia, which had been approved by the five permanent members of the UN Security Council in mid-January [see pp. 37186-87], who met again in New York to discuss this plan on Feb. 12-13.
At the start of their meeting the UN Secretary General, Javier Pérez de Cuéllar, announced the formation of an intra-secretariat task force on Cambodia.
Jakarta informal meeting — Further details of Australian peace plan
The third Indonesian-sponsored informal meeting of the conflicting factions took place in Jakarta on Feb. 26-March 1.
The second Jakarta informal meeting (JIM 2) had been held in February 1989 [see p. 36464].
The meeting was attended by Hun Sen, Premier of the Phnom Penh government, and by the leaders of the three Cambodian rebel groups: Khieu Samphan, nominal head of the Khmers Rouges; Son Sann, leader of the Khmer People's National Liberation Front (KPNLF); and Prince Norodom Ranaridh, son of Prince Norodom Sihanouk and military leader of the Sihanoukist forces.
Also in attendance were delegations from the UN, Vietnam, Laos, France, Australia and the six ASEAN countries.
Gareth Evans, the Australian Minister of Foreign Affairs and Trade and architect of the Australian peace plan, presented a 150-page "Red Book" to the Jakarta meeting, outlining a timetable for the holding of UN-supervised elections in Cambodia [see table]and various cost options for the plan.
The cost option favoured by Evans (the "mid-range scenario" ) involved the stationing in Cambodia of 5,500 UN peacekeeping forces and 2,000 officials at an estimated cost of US$987 million over 12 months, increasing to a total of US$1,300 million over 18 months.
Timetable for Australian peace plan
March 1990: Voluntary ceasefire becomes effective.
April/May 1990: Paris peace conference reconvenes.
July 1990: UN Secretary-General acquires full executive powers in Cambodia; formation of Supreme National Council of prominent Cambodians.
November 1990: Voter registration begins.
April 1991: Elections take place.
September 1991: UN withdraws and new Cambodian government takes power.
Breakdown of Jakarta meeting
The Jakarta meeting came to an end early on March 1, after the four Khmer factions had failed to agree on the wording of a final statement.
The disagreement was centred on what Evans described as "essentially peripheral issues" .
In particular, the Khmer Rouge delegation had strongly objected to demands by the Phnom Penh government and the Vietnamese delegation that a sentence be included in the final statement referring to the "non-return of the genocidal policies and practices of the Pol Pot [Khmer Rouge]regime" .
Although the meeting ended without a statement being signed, a general consensus on UN involvement in Cambodia appeared to emerge at Jakarta.
Only Khieu Samphan failed to react positively to the Australian plan, and the Far Eastern Economic Review of March 8 described as a hopeful development the fact that the Khmers Rouges did not openly dismiss increased UN involvement.
Hun Sen-Sihanouk meeting
The Jakarta meeting was preceded by talks in Bangkok (Thailand) on Feb. 21 between Hun Sen and Prince Sihanouk [for their meeting at Paris conference on Cambodia in August 1989 see p. 36848].
At the end of their Bangkok meeting Hun Sen and Sihanouk signed a joint communiqué upholding the main principles of the Australian peace plan.
The two sides agreed that a UN presence "at appropriate levels" in Cambodia was essential and should be encouraged, and that the establishment of a Supreme National Council was essential "in order to symbolise Cambodia's sovereignty and national unity" .
 "Dissolution" by Sihanouk of CGDK and his return to "liberated" Cambodia
Prince Sihanouk had announced on Feb. 3 that the tripartite Coalition Government of Democratic Kampuchea (CGDK) would henceforth be called the "National Government of Cambodia" [see p. 37187 for Sihanouk's resignation as CGDK president in late January].
By renouncing the CGDK label, Sihanouk was effectively distancing the tripartite resistance from the Khmer Rouge "Democratic Kampuchea" regime of the mid- to late 1970s.
In an interview on Feb. 4, the Prince said that the Khmers Rouges had finally accepted the change "because they are aware they have become more and more isolated and hated on the international level" .
On Feb. 23, Sihanouk arrived in a "liberated zone" (controlled by Sihanoukist forces) of western Cambodia to take up what he said would be permanent residence.
Since 1979, he had led his resistance forces from exile, mainly in China and North Korea.
ASIA — PACIFIC
PAPUA NEW GUINEA
Ceasefire in Bougainville
The government of Papua New Guinea announced on Feb. 22 that it was about to hold peace talks with the Bougainville Revolutionary Army (BRA) aimed at ending the secessionist rebellion which began in 1988 and had claimed at least 100 lives.
The move followed the failure of "Operation Footloose" , an Army offensive launched in January 1990, and was widely seen as an acceptance by the government that the escalating conflict could not be resolved by military means.
It was announced on Feb. 25 that a ceasefire had been agreed in principle as a prelude to full peace negotiations.
The truce, which became effective on March 2, involved a government commitment to withdraw military units from the island and to release some 80 detainees.
Prime Minister Rabbie Namaliu stated that, if the peace talks progressed satisfactorily, all of the 800 troops and riot police currently deployed in Bougainville would be withdrawn by March 16.
ASIA — PACIFIC
PHILIPPINES
Arrest of Enrile
Senator Juan Ponce Enrile, the leading conservative opponent of President Corazon Aquino, was arrested on Feb. 27 on charges of murder, rebellion and the harbouring of criminals.
The charges against Enrile arose from the abortive coup attempt of December 1989, the most serious military insurrection Aquino to date.
One of the leaders of the coup attempt was believed to have been the renegade colonel, Gregorio "Gringo" Honasan, a close associate of Enrile, whom the Senator was accused of having harboured in his home on the day before the coup attempt.
Following his arrest Enrile was held in a Manila prison without bail pending a preliminary court hearing in early March, and troops were placed on alert throughout the capital to guard against the possibility of retaliatory action by Enrile's supporters.
Enrile, 66, a former Defence Minister in the Aquino government, had played a crucial role in forcing President Marcos from office after his 1986 election defeat by Aquino [see pp. 34297-302].
Relations between the two deteriorated quickly thereafter, however, and Enrile was dismissed from the Cabinet in November 1986 [see pp. 34870-72].
His links with pro-Marcos supporters and right-wing elements within the military meant that he was frequently accused of involvement in the repeated coup attempts against the Aquino government.
Aquino's estranged Vice-President, Salvador Laurel (a close ally of Enrile), denounced the arrest as an attempt to stifle legitimate political opposition, a view supported by Enrile's Nacionalista Party, which accused the government of fabricating the charges for political reasons.
Aquino gave assurances that Enrile would receive a fair trial "from our democratic system and Constitution, which ironically he and his co-accused are charged with having sought to overthrow and destroy" .
ASIA — PACIFIC
AUSTRALIA-SINGAPORE-THAILAND
Soviet Premier's tour
Nikolai Ryzhkov, the Soviet Prime Minister, visited Thailand, Australia and Singapore during mid-February.
Thailand (Feb. 11-12).
Ryzhkov's discussions with his Thai counterpart, Maj.-Gen.
Chatichai Choonhaven, centred on trade and investment issues.
Documents signed during the visit included a protocol on scientific and technical co-operation, an accord providing for the construction of embassies and a programme for cultural and scientific exchanges.
Australia (Feb. 13-15).
During his discussions with Bob Hawke, the Australian Prime Minister, Ryzhkov stated that the Soviet Union regarded the aim of expanded co-operation with Australia as one of its priorities in Asia and the Pacific.
Towards this end, agreements were signed on fishing, trade, environmental protection and the peaceful use of nuclear energy.
Singapore (Feb. 16-17).
In a report on Feb. 20, the Soviet news agency Tass stated that Ryzhkov's discussions with his Singaporean counterpart Lee Kuan Yew had concentrated on the future structure of bilateral relations.
On the Asia-Pacific Economic Co-operation Council inaugurated in November 1989 [see p. 37044], Ryzhkov said that the Soviet Union would like to be part of the consultative arrangement.
ASIA — PACIFIC
AUSTRALIA
New Premier of Western Australia — Calling of federal elections
Carmen Lawrence became state Premier of Western Australia on Feb. 12, after being elected unopposed to the leadership of the Australian Labor Party (ALP) within the state.
Lawrence, 41, who had been elected to the legislature in 1986 after an outstanding academic career, was the first woman ever to hold the office of Australian state premier.
She succeeded Peter Dowding who, together with his Deputy Premier David Parker, had resigned on Feb. 11 after pressure from within the ALP at state and federal level.
Although Dowding's administration had been narrowly returned to office in February 1989 [see p. 36466], its popularity continued to decline in the face of ongoing allegations concerning its financial competence and its relationship with beleaguered Australian entrepreneur Alan Bond.
In the first week of February, while Dowding was at the World Economic Forum at Davos, Switzerland [see p. 37268], influential members of the state ALP apparently decided that he should be replaced by Lawrence, then State Education and Aboriginal Affairs Minister.
Bob Hawke, Prime Minister and leader of the ALP at national level, was visiting Perth, the capital of Western Australia, at the time and assented to the change.
Within three days of Lawrence's succession Hawke announced that federal elections, due by the end of May 1990, would be held on March 24.
Despite continuing economic problems, Hawke's chances of achieving a fourth successive election victory were improved by the government's decision to ease its restrictive monetary policies and to allow a reduction in the country's high level of interest rates.
The timing of the election was also influenced by disarray within the opposition Liberal-National Party coalition arising from what were considered to be ill-conceived policies regarding health care and labour relations, and continuing problems within the leadership.
In mid-February an opinion poll suggested that Liberal Party and official opposition leader Andrew Peacock had been overtaken in popularity by John Howard, whom Peacock had replaced in May 1989 [see p. 36658].
Austin Lewis, deputy opposition leader in the federal Senate, responded to the poll by criticizing Peacock's leadership and was promptly dismissed from the shadow Cabinet.
ASIA — PACIFIC
NEW ZEALAND
Announcement of new Governor General — Celebration of Treaty of Waitangi
Prime Minister Geoffrey Palmer announced on Feb. 11 that the mayor of Auckland, Dame Cath Tizard, would become New Zealand's next Governor-General on Nov. 20, 1990, the first woman to hold the office.
Tizard, a former university lecturer who was elected mayor in 1983, was the former wife of senior Labour Party politician and (until January 1990) Defence Minister Bob Tizard.
Celebration of anniversary of Waitangi Treaty
The 150th anniversary of the signing of the Treaty of Waitangi was celebrated on Feb. 6, in the presence of Queen Elizabeth II.
The celebrations passed off peacefully amid an unprecedented level of security, although the Queen's speech was disrupted by Maori hecklers, and a wet T-shirt was thrown at her by a woman who was later charged with disorderly conduct.
The 1840 Treaty, signed between the British Crown and the Maori chiefs, marked the formal establishment of British sovereignty over New Zealand, and was seen by many modern Maoris (who comprised more than 10 per cent of the current population of 3,200,000) as the symbolic beginning of a process whereby their culture and status had been systematically undermined.
The Labour government elected in 1984 was the first to recognize the scale of Maori discontent, and extended the powers of the Waitangi Tribunal which had been set up in 1975 to act as an arbiter of Maori grievances.
The result was a flood of Maori claims, many of them demanding the return of large areas of land.
This, together with the greater militancy displayed by Maoris in pursuit of such claims, had resulted in a growing backlash among some white landowners.
ASIA — PACIFIC
BELAU
Seventh referendum on compact of free association
Almost 69 per cent of the electorate of the Republic of Belau (formerly Palau — see p. 30756) took part on Feb. 6 in a seventh referendum on the issue of the country's compact of free association with the United States which had been negotiated in 1982.
The compact was on this occasion approved by 4,633 votes (59.8 per cent) to 2,988 (38.6 per cent ) but, as on previous occasions, the level of approval fell short of the 75 per cent necessary to amend the Constitution as required by the terms of the compact.
The USA had negotiated compacts of free association with Belau, the Federated States of Micronesia and the Marshall Islands as a means of providing limited self-government for these three elements of the UN Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands, a trusteeship comprising 5,000,000 sq km of the western Pacific, which had been administered by the USA since its establishment in 1947.
The fourth element of the trust territory was the Mariana Islands (excluding Guam), which had opted in 1978 for status as a self-governing commonwealth of the USA known as the Northern Marianas.
The compacts of free association offered internal sovereignty and pledges of substantial US aid in return for the provision of facilities for the US armed forces, and continuing US control of their defence and foreign relations.
In the case of Belau, the provision of facilities to US forces was in direct conflict with the country's Constitution, which prohibited the entry, storage or disposal of nuclear, chemical or biological weapons or waste.
Therefore, whilst in theory the compact could be approved by a simple majority, in practice it required the removal of the anti-nuclear clauses from the Constitution, a process which required a 75 per cent vote in its favour.
In December 1989 President George Bush had given final US approval of the 50-year compact whereby the US would provide $1,000 million in aid to the heavily indebted Pacific country.
The only remaining impediment to the implementation of the deal was its approval by the Belauan population of approximately 15,000, spread between the territory's eight inhabited islands and Guam, Saipan, Hawaii and the USA.
Prior to the vote President Ngiratkel Etpison lobbied key individuals and groups within the country and, on Dec. 27, initiated the formation of a Council of Joint Leadership to campaign on behalf of the compact.
After the vote Etpison expressed his disappointment over the result which he attributed to a weariness towards the issue by the voters, a sentiment apparently underlined by the comparatively low turnout.
Although he stated that the government had not yet decided how to respond to the setback, he indicated that the Council of Joint Leadership might seek to alter the Constitution in order to allow amendments to be passed by a simple majority.
Pending further developments, Belau continued as the last UN trusteeship under US administrative authority.
ASIA — PACIFIC
TONGA
General election
A general election was held in Tonga on Feb. 15 and resulted in an unexpected victory for members of the island's dissident pro-democracy movement.
The movement's unofficial leader, Akilisi Pohive, and his ally, Laki Niu, were among the four commoners re-elected to the Legislative Assembly, and their supporters were among the five new members elected to the nine seats reserved for commoners.
Despite the unexpected results, however, there was little prospect of immediate change within Tonga as the elected commoners remained a minority within the 29-member legislature, and the conservatives appeared to have strengthened their grip on the nine elected seats reserved for (and elected by) the country's 33 hereditary nobles.
The remainder of the Legislative Assembly was composed of members of the Privy Council (which also functioned as the Cabinet) appointed directly by King Taufa'ahau Tupou IV.
During the course of the election campaign the King had criticized the aims of the pro-democracy dissidents, claiming that it was only himself and the nobility who were keeping Tonga free from communism.
EUROPE
ROMANIA
Creation of power-sharing Council of National Unity
On Feb. 1, following three days of round table talks, representatives of 29 opposition parties agreed to proposals from the ruling National Salvation Front (NSF) to share power in a new 180-seat provisional Council of National Unity (CNU).
The CNU was intended to serve as a transitional "mini-parliament" to govern the country until the holding of a general election on May 20 [see p. 37191 for background to political crisis which provoked the round-table talks].
After heated debate, the allocation of seats on the CNU was fixed at three seats for each political party irrespective of size.
However, the fact that 90 seats were to be reserved for workers, peasants, scientists, intellectuals, artists, students and ethnic minorities "active in the revolution" (all of whom were expected to be NSF supporters drawn from its 145-member Council) led to opposition accusations that the NSF meant to retain power.
Silviu Brucan, a leading NSF member, was reported on Feb. 3 as stating that it was impossible to share executive power among so many parties.
However he confirmed that the NSF executive bureau would dissolve itself; some of its members were redeployed to direct a separate political wing of the NSF (formally registered on Feb. 6 as a "political organism" ) to contest the May elections, while the rest would join NSF president Ion Iliescu in the CNU.
This decision, ratified by the NSF Council on Feb. 3, raised opposition fears that the NSF would use its dominant position in government to further its election campaign.
Resignation of Brucan — Dismissal of Tourism Minister — Resignation of Director of Romanian Television and Radio
Brucan resigned from the NSF Executive Bureau on Feb. 4, claiming that the revolution was being reduced to power struggles between political opportunists in an atmosphere of public apathy.
Brucan's additional claim that public opinion was being formed by a one-time Ceausescu collaborator was taken to be a reference to one of the NSF's most public critics, Octavian Paler, editor of the newspaper Romania Libera, who had published an interview given by Brucan to the Independent which quoted him as saying that only intellectuals were fit to run the country.
However, the fact that Brucan chose to retain his seat on the NSF Council raised speculation that his withdrawal from the leadership was a tactical manoeuvre.
On Feb. 6 the Minister of Tourism, Maj. Mihai Lupoi, was dismissed for allegedly protesting at the transfer of buildings used by his ministry to other bodies.
He accused the NSF leadership of using "dictatorial methods" .
An NSF Council statement of Feb. 8 stated that Lupoi had failed to "fulfil certain tasks" , had "overstepped the mandate entrusted to him" and had used "abusive methods" in the running of the ministry.
Aurel Dragos Munteanu, appointed director of Romanian Television and Radio during the first days of the December revolution, resigned on Feb. 9 after widespread public criticism that he had manipulated broadcasting to benefit the NSF.
On Feb.8 1,000 television workers had protested in Victory Square at the alleged NSF control of the media.
Munteanu's successor, Razvan Teodorescu, was appointed on Feb. 12 by NSF decree.
First CNU session
During a reportedly stormy first plenary session of the CNU on Feb. 9, the NSF agreed to opposition demands that more seats be created for new parties and groups established since the Feb. 1 agreement.
The subsequent expansion of the CNU to 253 members gave the (by now 37) political parties 111 seats, nine organizations of ethnic minorities 27 seats and the Association of Former Political Prisoners three seats, 111 seats going to the NSF Council and one seat to interim president Iliescu.
This assured NSF dominance of the Council.
It was also decided that political parties set up in the future should only be granted "observer" status.
The second meeting of the CNU on Feb. 13 elected a 21-member Executive Bureau, confirming by consensus its president, Iliescu, and five vice-presidents, Cazimir Ionescu and Ion Caramitru (both members of the NSF Council), Radu Campeanu (general secretary of the National Liberal Party), Ion Minzatu (a representative of the Republican Party) and Karol Kiraly (an ethnic Hungarian, representing the national minorities).
Sixteen standing commissions were also created to advise on domestic and foreign affairs.
Military unrest
On Feb. 12, in the first military challenge to the NSF since the December Revolution, protesting junior officers appeared on television and 49 others (Air Force officers from Timisoara) began a three-day occupation of NSF headquarters in the capital Bucharest.
They called for the resignation, and the replacement by civilians, of Defence Minister Gen. Nicolae Militaru and Interior Minister Gen. Mihai Ghitac, both considered tainted by association with the Ceausescu regime, and the purging of ex-members of Ceausescu's Securitate secret police allegedly still running both ministries.
They also demanded an investigation into the Army's role in Timisoara on Dec. 16-20, 1989 [see p. 37104], and claimed to have video evidence proving Ghitac's direct involvement in the massacres that took place there.
Their other demands included (i) the removal of 12 generals appointed by Militaru and identified with the former regime;(ii) the right to resign their commissions; and (iii) the non-involvement of the military in politics.
Fellow officers from the three services, along with 200 cadets from the Bucharest military academy and hundreds of soldiers based in the southern Jiul valley region, converged on Victory Square to support the officers.
This peaceful demonstration, swollen by students, was estimated at 2,000-strong by Feb. 14, with reports of similar demonstrations taking place in Timisoara and the Black sea port of Constança.
On Feb. 8 about 500 conscript soldiers from Topraisar on the Black Sea had demonstrated in Victory Square about their living conditions.
Prime Minister Petre Roman pledged on Feb. 14 to investigate the backgrounds of Militaru and Ghitac.
The officers' occupation was called off on Feb. 15, with an agreement that the appointment of a civilian Defence Minister should be postponed until after the May general election.
Petre also promised to set up government commissions (i) to investigate alleged military counter-revolutionary activity during December 1989, especially in Timisoara; and (ii) to "solve" the military's problems.
He also conceded that a legal framework could be established allowing officers to resign their commissions.
However the agreement failed to quell military unrest and further demonstrations were reportedly planned to take place on Victory Square from Feb. 17 onwards.
Resignation of Militaru
Iliescu, in an emergency television news bulletin on Feb. 16, announced Militaru's resignation, stating that he had accepted a "request to remove the General" .
Col.-Gen.
Victor Atanasie Stanculescu, hitherto National Economy Minister and once a First Deputy Defence Minster under Ceausescu, was immediately appointed as the new Defence Minister.
Further protest demonstrations — Storming of NSF headquarters — Pro-NSF counterdemonstration —
On Feb. 18 an estimated 3,000 demonstrators, mainly young civilians but with military officers and soldiers also in evidence, gathered in Victory Square to demand Iliescu's resignation, chanting the slogan "the final solution is another revolution" .
About 250 of them, later branded by the government as paid extremists, broke through a cordon of soldiers to rampage through the NSF headquarters, cornering Deputy Prime Minister Gelu Voican-Voiculescu in his office for four hours before soldiers managed to restore order.
Twenty soldiers were reported injured and 102 people were arrested.
The number of demonstrators outside on Victory Square had grown, meanwhile, to about 8,000.
On Feb. 19 an estimated 5,000-8,000 miners from the Jiul Valley area arrived in Bucharest to show their support for the NSF and promised Iliescu that they would get rid of the "hooligans" .
On the same day the CNU Executive Bureau issued a decree banning spontaneous demonstrations and designed to protect state offices and those of opposition political parties.
Officials of the National Liberal Party and National Peasant Party, who denied organising the Feb. 18 demonstration, called on the NSF to put an end to the systematic "terrorism" shown against them in recent weeks.
Corneliu Copsu, the leader of the National Peasant Party, announced on Feb. 21 that the murder on Feb. 8 of a party official, Vasile Valescu, in the Moldavian town of Bacau was the most graphic proof of this.
Of those arrested for forcing their way into the NSF headquarters, 38 were convicted on Feb. 23 of public order offences; 11 were imprisoned for up to six months and the rest were fined.
Economic reforms — Devaluation
The NSF issued decrees on Feb. 6 allowing for the establishment of small business enterprises free from much of the highly centralized system of state controls.
The NSF's position on the creation of a market economy remained cautious, however, and it favoured a "diverse property state" including state, co-operative, participative and private property ownership.
With effect from March 7, small businesses with up to 20 staff could operate within a largely free-enterprise regime, precise rules for which were to be formulated by a new National Committee for Small Enterprises.
They could engage in foreign trade, and retain 50 per cent of export earnings in foreign currency, but would require Ministry of Foreign Trade approval if they sought foreign capital investment.
Decree laws on Jan. 31 provided (i) for the assignment of co-operative land for farmers, for their own long-term use, up to 0.5 hectares;(ii) for farmers' houses to become their own property; and (iii) for an incentive system whereby the incomes of co-operative and state farms would relate to their sales.
A major devaluation of the leu on Feb. 6, described as in line with International Monetary Fund (IMF) policy, unified the tourist and commercial rates (previously respectively US$1.00=8.74 lei and $1.00=14.23 lei) and created a single exchange rate at $1.00=21 lei.
Money reportedly changed hands on the black market at approximately $1.00=60-90 lei.
Start of trials of Ceausescu henchmen
The first of what promised to be a long series of show trials of former senior officials of the ousted Ceausescu regime ended on Feb. 2 when a military tribunal in Bucharest found Emil Bobu, Manea Manescu, Ion Dinca and Tudor Postelnicu guilty of "co-authorship of genocide" in connection with the killing of demonstrators in Timisoara, Bucharest and elsewhere at the start of the December 1989 revolution [see pp. 37104-05].
The five-member tribunal sentenced each of them to life imprisonment with hard labour, and also stripped them of all property, civil rights and military rank.
The trial had begun on Jan. 27, when the four men had each been charged with "complicity to commit genocide" (Bobu, Manescu and Dinca in their capacity as members of the former permanent bureau of the Romanian Communist Party executive political committee (EPC) and Postelnicu in his capacity as a candidate member of the EPC and former Minister of the Interior) for failing to oppose at meetings on Dec. 17 and 22 Nicolae Ceausescu's orders to fire on demonstrators.
The more serious charge of "co-authorship of genocide" had been substituted at the request of the prosecution on Feb. 1 on the strength of evidence which had emerged during the trial, notably an eyewitness account of Dinca personally calling for troops to be ordered to shoot demonstrators in Bucharest on Dec. 22.
All four pleaded guilty to the "conspiracy" charge, but not to that of "co-authorship" .
During cross examination Bobu, Dinca and Postelnicu at times wept openly, Bobu in particular confessing to "contemptible" conduct as the most senior member of the RCP leadership after Nicolae and Elena Ceausescu (he had been with them during the first stage of their attempted escape on Dec. 22, by helicopter from the central committee building in Bucharest, as had Manescu, who was a former Vice-President and Nicolae Ceausescu's brother-in-law).
For his part Dinca, a former First Deputy Prime Minister, claimed that he had not opposed Ceausescu for fear of being dismissed and even executed.
Currently in prison awaiting trial were numerous other senior officials of the Ceausescu regime, including many members of the former Council of Ministers and all but one of the 21 full members of the RCP executive political committee.
Among the Ceausescu family members in detention were the three children of Nicolae and Elena Ceausescu.
AIDS and other health problems
The results of the demographic policies of Nicolae Ceausescu's dictatorship began to emerge in February.
Rompres, the Romanian press agency, reported on Feb. 8 that the death rate had been increasing annually from 1965, and stood at 11 per 1,000 in 1988, and infant and child mortality rose 36 per cent between 1964 and 1988.
Under Ceausescu, accurate statistics on birth and death rates, and on perinatal, infant and maternal mortality were suppressed, contraception and abortion were outlawed, and Romania was declared AIDS-free.
Official statistics published on Feb. 5 revealed that out of a group of 1,025 sick children aged under three years, 367 were HIV positive, with 60 per cent showing symptoms of full-blown AIDS.
This situation had been caused by multiple needle use and by giving underweight newborn babies microtransfusions of unscreened blood.
On Feb. 5-8 a World Health Organization team visited Romania at the request of the government to give advice on a situation described by Dr Jacques Lebas, a leading AIDS expert, as more serious than any in the world, including Africa.
EUROPE
BULGARIA
Communist Party congress — New all-communist government
The Bulgarian Communist Party (BCP) held its 14th (extraordinary) congress between Jan. 30 and Feb. 2.
The congress was preceded by reports of growing factionalism and by speculation that the vast majority of the around 2,800 delegates were conservatives who would block the reform proposals of the party leadership.
The proceedings featured acrimonious debate, but the congress ended with the endorsement of a reformist manifesto, albeit affirming that the party would remain Marxist rather than go the social democratic way of other former ruling East European communist parties as they prepared, like the BCP, to compete in free elections.
The congress elected a restructured party leadership headed by Aleksandur Lilov, who, having spent six years out of favour with Bulgaria's hardline former leader Todor Zhivkov, had been rehabilitated to the top party ranks only in December 1989 [see p. 37109].
Congress debate — Adoption of new statute and manifesto
At the opening congress session the outgoing BCP general secretary Petur Mladenov (responsible for ousting Zhivkov in November 1989 — see pp. 37027-28) delivered a report entitled On restructuring the party and building a democratic socialist society.
The basis for a new statute and manifesto to be adopted by the congress, it was followed by a heated debate which illustrated the division between reformers and conservatives, but the documents approved on Feb. 1 showed that moderate reformers had been victorious.
The new manifesto confirmed the party's commitment to multiparty democracy and to the separation of the BCP and the state.
It announced that the BCP was being "de-Stalinized" and transformed into "a new type of modern Marxist party" committed to "human and democratic socialism" .
The manifesto advocated a "socially oriented market economy" , a term which appeared to imply that the BCP sought to temper the introduction of market mechanisms by retaining a degree of state economic control and regulation.
The new statute called for democratic election of party officials and an end to authoritarianism and nepotism.
 "Democratic centralism" was renounced in favour of the formula "democratic unity" .
Election of new party leadership
As a result of stormy negotiations conducted behind closed doors the congress in the early hours of Feb. 2 approved a new party leadership structure which featured the replacement of the 195-member central committee with a 131-member supreme council (subsequently another 22 members were co-opted).
Around 90 per cent of members of the new body had not served in its predecessor, and the outcome of the negotiations was characterized by observers as the most thorough purge of hardliners since Zhivkov's departure.
A presidium led by a chairman replaced the central committee politburo and secretariat.
To the dismay of radical reformers, the congress had voted to have this presidium, i.e. the senior party leadership, elected by the supreme council rather than by the full congress.)
Lilov was elected chairman of the supreme council presidium.
Mladenov had announced, in keeping with the commitment to separate state and party functions (and possibly reflecting his rumoured ill-health), that he would not be a candidate for the post of party leader, but he remained Chairman of the State Council (de facto head of state).
In its election of the supreme council members the party renounced monolithic leadership unity, Lilov commenting later that "different political tendencies are now well formed and all are reflected in the leading bodies" .
The congress also elected as editor-in-chief of the BCP daily newspaper Rabotnichesko Delo Stefan Prodev, a reformist who in November 1988 had been dismissed as the editor of the newspaper Narodna Kultura for his association with the unofficial Club for the Support of Glasnost and Perestroika in Bulgaria [see p. 36771].
Prodev replaced Radoslav Radev, whom he had also replaced a week earlier as president of the Union of Journalists.
Chairman *Aleksandur Lilov.
Deputy Chairman Aleksandur Strezov, Georgi Pirinski.
Secretary Rumen Serbezov.
Members *Andrei Lukanov, Vasil Nedev, *Gen.
Dobri Dzhurov, *Ivan Stanov, Yordan Radichev, Nadya Asparukhova, Nenko Temelkov, *Petur Mladenov, Petur-Emil Mitev, Petya Yordanova, Stanka Krustenova, Filip Bokov, Chavdar Kyuranov. *Member of outgoing BCP central committee politburo.
BCP supreme council presidium, Feb. 2, 1990
The BCP supreme council, meeting on Feb. 23, decided to hold a ballot of all party members in May on a proposal that the party should be renamed the Bulgarian Socialist Party.
The council, apparently bowing to opposition pressure at "round table" negotiations under way since January [see p. 37193], also proposed a legal ban on the existence of BCP and other political party cells in workplaces and colleges.
The dissolution of BCP cells in the armed forces had already been ordered by the former politburo on Jan. 24 and had been accomplished by Feb. 15, while at the end of January a congress of the Union of Journalists had banned party cells from newspapers and publishing houses.
Dissolution of communist youth organization
The BCP-affiliated Dimitrov Young Communist League dissolved itself at an extraordinary congress on Feb. 24-25, and an independent Bulgarian Democratic Youth Social Organization was constituted in its place.
Formation by BCP faction of Alternative Socialist Party
The adoption by the BCP congress of a moderate reformist manifesto did not dissuade members of a BCP faction calling itself the Alternative Socialist Organization (ASO — the most radical of several pro-reform factions which had emerged in the party in January) from carrying out a threat to split from the BCP and form a new social democratic party.
At an ASO conference on Feb. 11 attended by some 3,000 people a group of 30 intellectuals renounced their BCP membership and announced the formation of the Alternative Socialist Party.
Other ASO members opted, however, to remain a faction of the BCP.
Opposition refusal to join coalition — Formation of new all-communist government
In his speech on Jan. 30 at the BCP congress Mladenov invited the political opposition to participate in a transitional coalition government until the holding of free multiparty elections (now scheduled for May).
This was immediately rebuffed by leaders of the opposition alliance Union of Democratic Forces (UDF).
They assessed that the BCP leadership was interested in opposition participation in government only in order to demonstrate Bulgaria's commitment to democratic reform to Western bodies which might offer financial support, and to burden the opposition with some of the responsibility for tackling the current economic crisis, but that the BCP in practice would still retain control of all the levers of power.
The BCP-dominated government of Prime Minister Georgi Atanasov resigned on Feb. 1.
While appearing to be a tactical move by the BCP to try to force the UDF to agree to a coalition, this also reflected strong criticism voiced at the BCP congress of Atanasov's failure to tackle economic problems.
On Feb. 3 the National Assembly elected as Prime Minister Andrei Lukanov.
The opposition again spurned an invitation to participate in a coalition government when round table talks resumed on Feb. 6, and on the following day the leadership of the Bulgarian Agrarian People's Union (BAPU — the junior coalition partner in every government since the 1947 imposition of communist rule) said that it would only join a new government of "national consensus" .
Ironically, given the state of collapse of communism across Eastern Europe and the avowed reformist intentions of the BCP, when Lukanov's proposals for the composition of his government were approved by the National Assembly on Feb. 8 Bulgaria acquired for the first time in its history an all-communist government.
Andrei Lukanov Chair Chudomir Aleksandrov Deputy Chair **Belcho Belchev Deputy Chair; Minister of Finance Konstantin Kostev Deputy Chair; Minister of Education Prof. Nora Ananieva Deputy Chair *Gen.
Dobri Dzhurov National Defence *Boyko Dimitrov Foreign Affairs *Col. -Gen.
Atanas Semerdzhiev Internal Affairs Ivan Tenev Economy and Planning Krustyu Stanilov Industry and Technology Petur Bashikarov Foreign Economic Relations Ekaterina Marinova Trade and Services ***Asen Khadzhiolov Science and Higher Education Prof. Ivan Chernozemski Public Health and Social Welfare Prof. Todor Pandov Agriculture and Forests Ivan Krustev Construction, Architecture and Amenities Pencho Penev Justice Veselin Pavlov Transport ****Prof.
Aleksandur Aleksandrov Environmental Protection ****Prof.
Krustyu Ankov Culture Stefan Stoilov Without Portfolio, in charge of economic reform issues *Georgi Georgiev Chairman of the Committee for State and People's Control *No change.
**Additional responsibilities.
***Changed responsibilities.
****Appointed Feb. 21.
Council of Ministers
Feb. 8, 1990
Most notable among the new appointees was Chudomir Aleksandrov.
As a BCP politburo and secretariat member until mid-1988, he had been widely regarded as the person most likely to lead political reform in Bulgaria, but he had been dismissed abruptly from the party leadership in July 1988 [see p. 36304].
Renewed opposition demonstrations against BCP
The UDF on Feb. 25 staged its largest show of strength to date when it rallied as many as 200,000 supporters in central Sofia (the capital) to protest against what it labelled as BCP efforts to "torpedo" the work of the round table.
The UDF claimed that the BCP was refusing to give the round table a valid role in political decision-making, including discussion of bills being submitted to the National Assembly.
EUROPE
POLAND
By-elections
A Solidarity candidate defeated a representative of Poland's ethnic German minority in a Senate by-election in the Silesian province of Opole on Feb. 18.
Dorota Symonides polled 67 per cent in the second round of voting compared with 32 per cent for Henryk Krol, the leader of the Silesian German Minority Cultural Association, after a campaign during which conflicting Polish and German nationalist sentiments had been expressed.
Solidarity had also won the only other Senate by-election since the June 1989 general election [for which see pp. 36722-24], in Piatrkow province in October.
Both by-elections had been made necessary by the deaths of the sitting Solidarity senators.
A Sejm by-election was held on Feb. 11 in Gdynia for one of the 23 seats reserved for Roman Catholic groups.
There was a choice of two candidates.
Green victory in Krakow mayoral election
A candidate of the environmentalist Green Party, Jerzy Rosciszewski, was elected mayor of Krakow on Feb. 9 by the city council, heavily defeating the Solidarity candidate.
The city of Krakow and the surrounding area suffered severe atmospheric pollution from local heavy industry such as the giant Nova Huta steelworks [see p. 36792; for July 1989 US grant to fund Krakow anti-pollution campaign see p. 36829].
IMF agreement — Debt rescheduling
Poland's agreement with the International Monetary Fund (IMF)— to draw standby credits up to 545,000,000 special drawing rights (equivalent to US$723,000,000) over 13 months — was formally approved on Feb. 5.
Based on the letter of intent signed by the Polish government on Dec. 23, 1989 [see p. 37130], it was backdated to allow drawings as from Jan. 1, 1990.
It was Poland's first IMF credit agreement since joining the Fund in June 1986 [see p. 34687].
On Feb. 6 the World Bank for the first time made major loans to Poland for structural adjustment purposes, totalling $360,000,000, while indicating that loans in the pipeline could total five times that amount in 1990.
World Bank President Barber Conable called for a "broad-based international effort" to help Poland.
Prime Minister Tadeusz Mazowiecki on Feb. 9 appealed to Western creditor governments for a rapid agreement on debt rescheduling, and for consideration of measures to reduce Poland's overall foreign debt (some $41,000 million, including $27,000 million to Western countries belonging to the so-called "Paris Club" ) by partial write-off.
(The extension to Poland of some debt reduction arrangements, hitherto restricted to specific categories of developing countries under the "Brady plan" , was supported explicitly by Eugenio Lari, a senior World Bank official dealing with Eastern Europe, at a seminar on Jan. 23.)
A major rescheduling package was concluded after a three-day Paris Club meeting on Feb. 16, covering a total of $9,000 million including some $3,4000 million in arrears outstanding from 1989, but not including debt reduction.
Payments due in 1990 and up to March 1991 were rescheduled over 14 years with an eight-year grace period, and the Paris Club governments called on commercial banks to make an equally exceptional response to Poland's needs, as well as to keep closely under review the country's likely rescheduling needs for the period after March 1991.
EUROPE
YUGOSLAVIA
Independence declaration by Slovene communists
The Slovene League of Communists (LC), which at the end of January had plunged the federal League of Communists of Yugoslavia (LCY) into crisis by abandoning the 14th extraordinary LCY congress [see p. 37172], on Feb. 4 held a party conference at which it renounced its links with the LCY.
The conference adopted a resolution which stated that "for the Slovene LC the 14th extraordinary congress of the LCY has ended, and the LCY, in the form which it had up to the congress, has ceased to exist" .
Henceforth, the Slovene LC would no longer be represented in the LCY leadership or have any further financial or material obligations towards the LCY, and would function as "an independent political organization with its own membership, programme and statute" .
The resolution stated further that the Slovene LC was prepared to discuss co-operating with "all democratic organizations in Yugoslavia" , including LC organizations in other republics.
It was also decided to draw up a new party programme along social democratic lines in advance of multiparty elections in Slovenia in April.
The conference decided to rename the party the LCS — Party of Democratic Renewal.
Cyril Ribicic, the party central committee presidium president (elected at the 11th Slovene LC congress in December 1989 in succession to Milan Kucan), stated that having renounced its constitutionally guaranteed leading role the newly independent party was "equal to its political competition" in the forthcoming elections.
The rejection of "a specific centre of decision-making outside the republic" and of the principles of "democratic centralism" meant, he said, that the LCS — Party of Democratic Renewal would "affirm even more consistently the interests of the Slovene people and of all the citizens of Slovenia" , but would not seek Slovenia's secession from Yugoslavia.
Slovene retaliation for Serbian economic blockade
In retaliation for the economic blockade of Slovenia imposed by Serbia at the beginning of December 1989 [see p. 37131], the Slovene government on Feb. 22 decided to withhold payment of 15 per cent of the republic's contribution to the federal budget, representing the amount designated for subsidies to the Serbian economy.
Contributions to federal funds for the development of Kosovo and for disaster relief in Serbia proper and Vojvodina were also to be withheld.
Deployment of Army in Kosovo
The Yugoslavian authorities announced on Feb. 20 that Army units stationed in the province of Kosovo had for the first time been given specific orders to quell a renewed wave of unrest among ethnic Albanians in the province.
Hitherto, only police had been used against the demonstrators who were demanding free elections, the resignation of the provincial leadership of the League of Communists (LC), the release of political prisoners and the lifting of "special measures" which had been imposed amid the earlier riots of February 1989 [see pp. 36470; 36514-15].
As reported on pp. 37172-73, ethnic Albanians in Kosovo had begun the current wave of strikes and protests on Jan. 24, and by Jan. 30 at least 20 people had been killed, mostly in clashes with police.
A further five people died on Jan. 31 in demonstrations at Glogovac and Stanovac, and six were reported killed on Feb. 1 in Podujevo and Magura.
The official death toll, however, as reported on Feb. 6, was given as 26, with 94 civilians injured and three police seriously hurt.
Troops were deployed in the province for the first time on Feb. 1, and on Feb. 2 the government used low-flying jets over Pristina in a show of force; at this time no military action had been taken against the demonstrators.
The situation quietened somewhat in the following days, as Serbia despatched 2,000 police reinforcements to the province; at the same time, however, the neighbouring republic of Slovenia withdrew its police contingent on Feb. 4.
The tension rose again on Feb. 5, as Slobodan Milosevic, the hardline Serbian nationalist and leader of the Serbian LC, called for a "mobilization for Kosovo" , entailing a mass Serbian "settlement" there (some 400,000 Serbs and Montenegrins having left the province since 1967).
On Feb. 16 the Serbian LC further demanded that what it termed "illegal immigrants" from Albania should be repatriated, and that those who had been granted Yugoslavian citizenship should be stripped of their rights if they had acted against the constitutional order.
Amid renewed protests aroused by the Serbian LC statement, the Serbian minority in Kosovo appealed on Feb. 19 for army protection against what they claimed was a threatened massacre by ethnic Albanians.
On Feb. 20 the Yugoslavian Collective State Presidency approved the "specific engagement" of army units in Kosovo, meaning that they were given orders to quash any unrest they found, using force if necessary.
Meanwhile, a curfew was imposed in Pristina, the provincial capital.
EUROPE
CZECHOSLOVAKIA
Abolition of State Security secret police
Richard Sacher, the federal Minister with responsibility for internal security, on Feb. 1 announced the total abolition of the Statni Bezpecnost (StB — State Security, or secret police).
The Internal Intelligence Service within the StB, which dealt with political and religious dissidents, had been abolished earlier.
Sacher stated that all StB agents and officers had been ordered to hand in all weapons and identity cards, and to remain at home on standby.
Flats "used for conspiracy [by the StB]" were to be handed over to local government bodies.
A "totally new structure of the security apparatus" had been formed, including the Czechoslovak Intelligence Service, the Office for the Protection of the Constitution and Democracy and the Rapid Deployment Unit.
Sacher said that the StB had been "a product and at the same time an instrument of the former totalitarian power" .
He added: "Merely to take over this apparatus would therefore profoundly contradict the ethics and very nature of our revolution." 
He invited television cameras into the headquarters of the StB on Feb. 5 to prove to the public that the organization had been closed down.
The action followed widespread rumours in late January of a planned coup attempt by StB members with the help of hardline elements in the Army; the authorities on Jan. 26 reinforced the police force with Interior Ministry troops, while denying the coup rumours.
New Premier of Czech Republic
Petr Pithart (49), hitherto spokesman of the Civic Forum co-ordinating centre, was appointed Prime Minister of the Czech Republic on Feb. 6, replacing Frantisek Pitra, who had resigned on Jan. 31, referring in his letter of resignation to the "justified criticism" levelled against those like himself who had worked in political life in the past few years.
The resignation of Miroslav Toman, the Czech First Deputy Prime Minister, was also accepted on Feb. 6.
Two new first Deputy Prime Ministers, Frantisek Vlasal and Antonin Hrazdira, were appointed.
Expulsion of Husak and other former leaders from CPCz
A session of the Communist Party of Czechoslovakia (CPCz) central committee on Feb. 17 decided to expel from the party 22 former members of the party and state leadership for erroneous political decisions while in office.
The group included Gustav Husak, general secretary of the CPCz from 1969 to 1987 and President of the Republic from 1975 to 1989; Lubomir Strougal, federal Prime Minister from 1970 to 1988 and a former member of the CPCz presidium; and Jan Fojtik, Karel Hoffmann, Alois Indra, Jozef Lenart and Miroslav Zavadi, all former members of the CPCz presidium.
President Havel's visits to USA and Soviet Union
Vaclav Havel, the Czechoslovak President, on Feb. 17 departed for official visits to Iceland, Canada and the United States, accompanied by Marian Calfa, the federal Prime Minister.
Havel was received at the White House on Feb. 20 by President Bush, whom he invited to visit Czechoslovakia.
On the same day US and Czechoslovak officials began talks on a bilateral trade agreement, aimed at giving Czechoslovakia most favoured nation (MFN) status.
On Feb. 21 Havel addressed a joint session of the US Congress.
He denied reports that he sought a swift dissolution of NATO and the Warsaw Pact, but said that future developments in Europe might allow US troops to withdraw from the continent.
He called for a peace conference to create a new pan-European structure with its own security system.
He also said that the best way for the USA to help Eastern Europe would be to aid the Soviet Union on its path to democracy.
James Baker, the US Secretary of State, had visited Czechoslovakia on Feb. 6-7, holding talks with Havel and Jiri Dienstbier, the Czechoslovak Foreign Minister.
Havel visited Moscow on Feb. 26-27, holding talks with President Gorbachev on bilateral relations and developments in Europe, including the unification of the two German states (on which the two leaders were reported to hold a very close position).
Gorbachev expressed regret over the "unfounded invasion of Czechoslovakia" in 1968, according to Soviet reports.
The two leaders signed a declaration on bilateral relations, which Havel said placed relations on a footing of equality and sovereignty of both states.
During the visit Dienstbier and the Soviet Foreign Minister, Eduard Shevardnadze, signed an agreement on the complete withdrawal of Soviet troops from Czechoslovakia by July 1, 1991 [see p. 37258].
It was reported on Feb. 14 that Rudolf Slansky, a former member of the CPCz and subsequently of the dissident movement between 1969 and 1989, had been named Czechoslovak ambassador to the Soviet Union.
His father, also named Rudolf Slansky, had been general secretary of the CPCz and had been executed in 1952 after a show trial at which he was accused of being an agent of imperialism.
EUROPE
SOVIET UNION
Unrest in Central Asia and Transcaucasia — Inter-ethnic problems in Moldavia
Central Asia
As the Soviet authorities were still trying to restore order in the Transcaucasian republic of Azerbaijan following the violence there in January [see below; pp. 37168-70], nationalist rioting erupted on Feb. 11 in Dushanbe, the capital of the Central Asian republic of Tadjikistan, which had hitherto been largely untouched by the nationalist or inter-ethnic unrest afflicting much of the southern Soviet Union.
Shortly afterwards ethnic violence was also reported in the nearby city of Samarkand, across the border in Uzbekistan, and there was a resurgence of attacks against the minority Meskhetian community in the Uzbek capital, Tashkent.
Outbreak of violence in Dushanbe — Alleged coup attempt against Tadjik government
The immediate cause of the rioting in Dushanbe was a rumour that Armenian refugees from the violence in Azerbaijan were to be resettled there, taking priority over local people in the allocation of already scarce homes and jobs.
A protest rally by around 3,000 people on the evening on Feb. 11 became violent as protesters clashed with militia units, overturned buses and cars, and looted shops.
On Feb. 12 the Tadjik Communist Party (CP) headquarters was besieged by rioters who succeeded in setting part of the building on fire; the Tadjik Supreme Soviet Presidium declared a state of emergency and a night-time curfew in Dushanbe; and, fearing a pogrom, Armenians were reported to be fleeing the city.
On Feb. 13 up to 50,000 demonstrators outside the CP headquarters called for the deportation of Armenian refugees from Dushanbe (the authorities insisted that fewer than 40 Armenians had arrived in the city, not thousands as rumoured, and that all had been housed with relatives), for the dismissal of the republic's leadership, and for better job prospects and housing and environmental protection.
According to Moscow radio reports there followed a renewed rampage by rioters through the city resulting in extensive damage.
Interior Ministry troops, who had come under fire from rooftop snipers, later succeeded in throwing a cordon around the CP headquarters to protect it from further attack, but Moscow radio reports said that by the evening of Feb. 13 the violence had spread from the city centre to numerous locations in the suburbs, and that automatic gunfire could be heard.
The violence reportedly included not just clashes between rioters and security forces but attacks by Tadjiks on people from minority groups, including Russians.
By the time bloodshed had been stopped in Dushanbe on Feb. 15, by the 5,000 Interior Ministry troops in the city assisted by "citizens' self-defence groups" , official casualty figures spoke of 22 people killed and 565 people injured.
On Feb. 14 it was reported that the three most senior Tadjik leaders had all offered their resignations at a meeting with the unofficial Vaadad ( "Unity" ) People's Committee, formed shortly after the outbreak of the Dushanbe violence and uniting government representatives and activists from the Popular Front-style Rastokhez ( "Revival" ) organization.
However, on the following day the Tadjik CP first secretary Kakhar Makhkamov, Supreme Soviet Presidium President Gaibnazar Pallayev and Prime Minister Izatullo Khayeyev all announced that they would remain in office until the Tadjik CP and Supreme Soviet released them from their duties.
At an extraordinary plenum of the Tadjik CP central committee on Feb. 16 Makhkamov's resignation was refused and Vaadad was criticized for contributing to the destabilization of the situation in Tadjikistan; indeed a special commission was set up to investigate allegations that a group of Tadjik communists allied to Vaadad had plotted at the height of the Dushanbe unrest to seize power from Khayeyev's government and install as Prime Minister Buri Karimov, currently a Deputy Prime Minister but also the Vaadad chairman.
Meanwhile, Dushanbe remained tense as residents observed three days of officially sanctioned national mourning, ending on Feb. 17, for those killed during the rioting.
Unsanctioned rallies on Feb. 15-18 to renew calls for economic reform and leaders' resignations attracted up to 15,000 people.
Holding of republican elections
Although the state of emergency remained in force, elections to the Tadjik Supreme Soviet went ahead on Feb. 25 as scheduled.
[A roundup of local and republican election results from throughout the Soviet Union, including the dramatic victory in Lithuania on Feb. 24 for candidates of the pro-independence Sajudis movement, will be given in a forthcoming article.]
Reports of demonstrations in Frunze
It emerged after the first reports of the Dushanbe violence that there had been a demonstration on Feb. 10 in Frunze, the capital of Kirghizia, likewise sparked off by rumours of the resettlement there of Armenian refugees.
Reports suggested that the demonstration, which had led police to seal off the city centre, had followed a series of unsanctioned rallies in Frunze against high local unemployment.
Apparently mindful of events in Dushanbe, the Kirghiz Supreme Soviet Presidium on Feb. 22 issued a decree prescribing legal penalties for making written or verbal statements containing "a threat to public order or calls for pogroms" .
Reports of unrest in Samarkand — Renewed anti-Meskhetian violence in Tashkent
There emerged on Feb. 16-17 confused reports that the violence in Dushanbe had spilled across the border to Uzbekistan's second largest city, Samarkand.
Official Soviet media reports from Moscow on Feb. 16 said that Tadjik and Azerbaijani "militants" had been actively promoting rumours, in areas of Uzbekistan bordering Tadjikistan, that Armenian refugees were to be resettled there.
According to these reports, the ensuing intercommunal clashes had prompted the imposition of a curfew in Samarkand and the despatch to the city of Interior Ministry troop reinforcements.
The reports differed, however, as to whether the clashes had been between Uzbeks and Armenians, Tadjiks and Armenians, or Uzbeks and Tadjiks.
Moreover, on Feb. 17 the Moscow media reports were retracted on the basis of a denial by officials in Samarkand that any unrest had taken place.
There was a resurgence on Feb. 20-21 in and around Tashkent of Uzbek violence against the minority Meskhetian community (anti-Meskhetian pogroms in June 1989 had claimed nearly 100 lives in Uzbekistan — see pp. 36744-45).
It was reported that Uzbeks had demonstrated on Feb. 20 in Tashkent to demand the immediate eviction of Meskhetians, prompting the authorities to begin evacuating Meskhetian residents from the city for their own protection, and that on the following day Uzbek demonstrators had broken through police cordons protecting several Meskhetian-run collective farms outside Tashkent and had set fire to around 50 Meskhetian homes.
There were no reports of casualties.
On Feb. 22 the Uzbek Supreme Soviet Presidium issued a ban on all unauthorized rallies and demonstrations "pending the stabilization of the socio-political situation in Uzbekistan" .
Azerbaijan and Armenia
There was optimism at the beginning of February that the violence which had been waged in Azerbaijan and along its borders with Armenia with such ferocity in the previous month [see pp. 37168-70]might be ended by peace talks between the leaders of the Azerbaijan Popular Front and Armenian Pan-National Front which began in Riga (the Latvian capital) on Feb. 1.
The talks produced agreement in principle on Feb. 3 to work for a ceasefire by Feb. 15 and for the release by March 1 of all hostages taken by rival Azerbaijani and Armenian militias, and to establish permanent relations between the two organizations.
However, the agreements broke down almost immediately, the Armenian side on Feb. 4 declaring them null and void and suspending its participation in further talks in protest at what it described as attempts at "forced deportation" of Armenians from villages in Azerbaijan's Khanlar region on the pretext that their security remained under threat.
Throughout February isolated violent incidents were reported from various parts of Azerbaijan.
The situation in the Azerbaijan capital, Baku, remained generally quiet, however, and there was a return to work at the majority of enterprises closed since January's general strike.
Mass rallies commemorating Azerbaijanis killed in Baku in January were permitted to take place by the military authorities controlling the city.
Meanwhile, on Feb. 13 rail freight traffic resumed from Baku to Yerevan (the Armenian capital); the whole Azerbaijan railway network had been paralysed during January, leading to food, fuel and raw materials shortages in Armenia as critical as those of September 1989 [see pp. 36899; 36978-79].
The situation in Azerbaijan and Armenia was discussed by a closed joint sitting of the two chambers of the USSR Supreme Soviet on Feb. 19, but deputies reportedly failed to agree on a policy to resolve the conflict there.
Azerbaijani deputies staged a walkout during a speech by Defence Minister Gen. Dmitry Yazov, and shortly afterwards Armenian deputies followed suit when President Mikhail Gorbachev stressed the inviolability of Azerbaijan's borders.
Moldavia
It was reported on Feb. 2 that an emergency session of the Moldavian Supreme Soviet Presidium on Jan. 31 had declared a six-month moratorium on "all political events which are likely to cause interethnic strife" .
This meant a ban on all unauthorized rallies, marches and ballots, and greater legal supervision of registered public organizations such as the nationalist Moldavian Popular Front and rival groups representing the Russian and other minority populations in the republic.
According to the Soviet central government newspaper Izvestiya, the session had been held in response to a "sharp deterioration in the sociopolitical situation" in Moldavia because of interethnic tension which had continued to mount.
The report singled out three recent incidents: a demonstration in Kishinev (the capital) on Jan. 8, when a funeral procession for a Moldavian youth who had died in suspicious circumstances had turned into a rally by up to 10,000 people protesting against Soviet and communist rule, and fights had ensued between rival gangs of Moldavian and Russian youths; a picket of the district Moldavian CP committee building in the town of Chadyr Lunga by members of the Gagauz minority demanding creation of their own autonomous republic; and a referendum on Jan. 28 called by the city soviet in Tiraspol, Moldavia's second largest city, in which the predominantly Russian population had voted overwhelmingly (over 96 per cent of a 92 per cent poll) to declare greater autonomy for the Tiraspol district and to support the possible declaration of Tiraspol and neighbouring Russian-populated towns as an autonomous republic (Tiraspol had been one of the main centres of strikes by Moldavia's Russian and Ukrainian population in August-September 1989 against greater Moldavian language rights — see pp. 36855; 36898).
The Moldavian Supreme Soviet Presidium session on Jan. 31 declared the Tiraspol referendum invalid.
Apparently signalling a drop in tensions in the republic, however, the Moldavian Popular Front was authorized to hold a pre-election rally in Kishinev on Feb. 11 which attracted some 50,000 people [elections on Feb. 25 to the Moldavian Supreme Soviet and local soviets will be covered in a forthcoming article].
The organizers had invited representatives of the rival Yedinstvo Internationalist Movement [described on p. 36855 as the "Inter-Front" group]and the Gagauz Khalky movement [see p. 37047], and of workers' committees in Tiraspol.
Speakers included the Moldavian Supreme Soviet Presidium President Mircha Snegur and Moldavian CP first secretary Pyotr Luchinsky.
Access across Moldavia-Romania border
The Moldavian State Security Committee (KGB) chief, Georgy Lavranchuk, had announced on Jan. 9 that border controls were being eased along Moldavia's frontier with Romania, including simplified crossing procedures at seven crossing points and the removal of barbed wire border fences.
This easing of border controls appeared to be an attempt by officials on both sides of the frontier to take the heat out of demands, expressed since the December 1989 Romanian revolution most vociferously by radical supporters of the Moldavian Popular Front, for Soviet Moldavia's reunification with Romania.
(Soviet Moldavians were ethnically Romanian, most of their republic having formed the Romanian region of Bessarabia prior to its annexation by the Soviet Union in 1940.)
Previously, the most radical members of the Moldavian Popular Front had been advocating independence from the Soviet Union, but none had wanted to rejoin Romania while it was under the oppressive rule of the Ceausescus.
Resolutions on Baltic independence — Estonian endorsement of multiparty system
Estonia
On Feb. 2 a mass rally was held in Tallinn (the Estonian capital) to mark the 70th anniversary of the Tartu peace treaty, whereby Soviet Russia had recognized Estonia's independence.
The rally was attended by over 3,000 deputies to soviets at all levels (from rural soviets to the USSR Supreme Soviet), and these met subsequently to adopt overwhelmingly a declaration calling on the USSR Supreme Soviet to enter into negotiations "on the restoration of Estonian state independence" .
[For November 1989 Estonian Supreme Soviet resolution declaring illegal the republic's annexation by the Soviet Union see p. 37045.]
There was an immediate countermove, however, by a group of deputies representing Estonia's large Russian minority, who announced the establishment of a committee "for the defence of Soviet power" which would work for either a restructured Soviet federation or else for the creation of a new "state territorial formation" for Estonia's Russians (i.e. separating from Estonia those areas of the republic with a majority Russian population).
The declaration calling for talks on Estonia's independence was endorsed on Feb. 22 by the Estonian Supreme Soviet, which on Feb. 23 elected its Presidium President, Arnold Rüütel, to head a commission to conduct these talks.
At its session on Feb. 23 the Estonian Supreme Soviet, emulating Lithuania and Latvia [see pp. 37129; 37168], decided to abolish the clauses in Article 6 of the Estonian Constitution guaranteeing the "leading role" of the Communist Party.
Lithuania and Latvia
The Lithuanian and Latvian Supreme Soviets, emulating the vote by their Estonian counterpart in November, adopted on Feb. 7 and 15 respectively declarations condemning the votes taken in July 1940 by their predecessors, the parliaments of independent Lithuania and Latvia, to join the Soviet Union.
Both declarations also called for negotiations on the restoration of their republics' independence, although the Latvian Supreme Soviet foresaw "a free and independent State of Latvia" being part of a reformed Soviet Union (the formula favoured by President Gorbachev for restructuring the Soviet Union as a confederation of sovereign states — see pp. 36883; 37168).
Also on Feb. 15 the Latvian Supreme Soviet finally passed a law, awaited since October 1988 [see p. 36487], on restoring to official use the flag, state emblems and national anthem of independent Latvia in place of the those of Soviet Latvia.
The old flag was raised over the Supreme Soviet building in Riga for the first time on Feb. 27.
Condemnation by Congress of People's Deputies of Soviet annexation of Baltic republics
The USSR Congress of People's Deputies had adopted on Dec. 24, 1989, a resolution whereby the secret protocols of the August 1939 Nazi-Soviet non-aggression pact, diving Eastern Europe into spheres of influence and providing the pretext for Soviet annexation of the Baltic republics, had been condemned as having been "in conflict with the sovereignty and independence of a number of third countries" and in violation of the Soviet Union's treaty obligations towards independent Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania.
The resolution, which had deemed the protocols to be "legally invalid and null and void from the moment of their signing" , was based on findings by a Congress commission set up in June [see p. 36743].
EUROPE
WARSAW PACT
Soviet troop withdrawals from Eastern Europe
In response to demands by the new governments of Czechoslovakia and Hungary [see p. 37195]and in line with the Soviet undertaking given in December 1989 to bring home all its foreign-based troops by the year 2000 [see p. 37225], the Soviet Union agreed during late February and early March to withdraw its troops from Czechoslovakia and Hungary by mid-1991.
During President Havel's visit to Moscow on Feb. 26-27 [see p. 37256], an agreement was signed providing for the departure of all 73,500 Soviet forces from Czechoslovakia by July 1991.
The withdrawal would take place in three stages, with most of the troops leaving by the end of May 1990.
Discussions were also under way with Hungary on a similar agreement, not actually signed until March 10, providing for the withdrawal of most of the 52,000 Soviet troops from Hungary by the end of 1990 and the remainder by July 1991.
Both the Czechoslovak and Hungarian governments had initially sought a complete withdrawal by the end of 1990, but the Soviet side had claimed that logistical and other technical problems, in particular concerning the resettlement of large numbers of troops and families in the Soviet Union, made it impossible to meet such a deadline.
Some 10,000 Soviet troops had already left both Hungary and Czechoslovakia in 1989 under a gradual withdrawal of 50,000 troops from Eastern Europe announced by President Gorbachev in December 1988 [see p. 36440].
The troops had originally been sent into Hungary in 1956 and Czechoslovakia in 1968 to crush reformist regimes.
On Feb. 11 the Soviet government offered also to begin negotiations on the withdrawal of the 40,000 Soviet troops stationed in Poland.
In response, President Jaruzelski of Poland declared that while he approved in principle the removal of Soviet forces from Poland, this should be deferred until agreement on a new European security system had been reached and specifically until the position of a united Germany had been clarified.
On the other hand, at a meeting with the Soviet ambassador in Gdansk on Jan. 18 the leader of Solidarity, Lech Walesa, had called for Soviet forces to be recalled by the end of 1990.
EUROPE
HUNGARY-VATICAN
Restoration of diplomatic relations
Full diplomatic relations were re-established between Hungary and the Holy See on Feb. 9 (for the first time since 1949-50) in an agreement signed in Budapest by Miklós Németh, the Hungarian Prime Minister, and Cardinal Agostino Casaroli, the Vatican Secretary of State.
Hungary had adopted a multiparty Constitution guaranteeing freedom of conscience and religion in October 1989 [see p. 36960-61].
There had been a "partial agreement" with the Vatican since 1964 [see p. 20341], which itself had helped improve relations following the conflicts of 1949-50 over the secularization of schools and enforced closure of certain religious orders [see pp. 9721-22; 11259].
During his visit Cardinal Casaroli attended a ceremony in Esztergom, the seat of the Hungarian Primate, to commemorate the (posthumous) rehabilitation of Cardinal Jozsef Mindszenty, the former Primate of Hungary, whose 1949 life imprisonment sentence had been revoked in November 1989 [see also p. 36535].
EUROPE
EAST-WEST GERMANY
Growing pressure for reunification
Modrow's proposals for a united, neutral Germany
On Feb. 1, on his return from a 24-hour visit to Moscow, Hans Modrow, Prime Minister since November 1989 of the German Democratic Republic (East Germany or GDR), announced proposals for "overcoming the division of the German nation" by creating a united, neutral Germany.
Modrow entitled his proposals "For Germany, united fatherland" , using a slogan often chanted by East German demonstrators.
The four-stage plan envisaged (i) concluding a co-operation treaty including economic, currency and transport union and legal alignment;(ii) forming a confederation of East Germany and the Federal Republic of Germany (West Germany or FRG) with joint bodies and institutions;(iii) transferring sovereignty to the confederation; and (iv) creating a German Federation or Alliance after elections to a unified parliament which would decide on a constitution and government with its seat in Berlin.
[For Stalin's 1952 proposals for a united, neutral and demilitarized Germany see pp. 12121-12.]
Modrow's precondition of military neutrality in order to "safeguard" other countries' "rights and interests" was "strictly reject[ed]" by West German Federal Chancellor Helmut Kohl, who declared: "We will come to an understanding about the steps on the road to German unity with an East Germany that emerges from free elections." 
Le Monde of Feb. 3 described the "sudden conversion" of Modrow (who had previously stressed that reunification was not on the agenda) as a response to rising popular pressure for reunification and to the continuing exodus of East Germans to West Germany.
Kohl's call for immediate negotiations on economic and monetary union
In West Germany, where a general election was due in December 1990, arrivals of East Germans had reached 85,000 in 1990 alone, according to a statement by Kohl on Feb. 13, and they increasingly strained resources.
Kohl, who initially opposed either a rapid currency union or negotiation with the existing East German government, announced on Feb. 6 his readiness "to open immediate negotiations on economic and monetary union" in advance of the elections in East Germany on March 18 [see p. 37172].
The same day he set up a Cabinet committee to investigate such a union and Helmut Haussmann, the West German Economics Minister, presented a three-stage plan to introduce economic and monetary union by the end of 1992.
Warnings made at this time of the imminent collapse of the East German economy were described by the Guardian of Feb. 10 as "designed to justify Dr Kohl's abrupt reversal of policy" .
On Feb. 7 Karl Otto Pöhl, president of the West German Bundesbank (central bank), agreed to join the committee.
The day before, after a meeting in East Berlin with his East German counterpart, Horst Kaminsky, Pöhl had criticized such plans as a "fantastical illusion" .
At this time Pöhl's decision, and uncertainty at the prospect that higher interest rates and inflation could result from monetary union, led to unease on the otherwise buoyant West German financial markets.
On Feb. 5 at the East German round table discussions (held also on Feb. 12, 19 and 26 — see pp. 37108; 37170 for December and January discussions) Christa Luft, the East German Economics Minister and a Deputy Prime Minister, had warned that an immediate introduction of the West German deutschmark in East Germany would not narrow wage differentials or stem the exodus of people, would result in the closure of enterprises and in job losses, and would mean the loss of currency sovereignty and the possible devaluation of savings.
Statements by Gorbachev on German unity
During a visit to Moscow on Feb. 11-12 by Kohl and Hans-Dietrich Genscher, the West German Foreign Minister, President Gorbachev of the Soviet Union declared that "the unity of the German nation must be decided by the Germans themselves" .
Hailing this "historic result" , Kohl declared: "The road to reunification is open." 
In an interview on Feb. 21 in Pravda, the organ of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (CPSU), Gorbachev reiterated that "the Germans should themselves decide on the ways, forms and time-frame of their unification" .
He also stressed, however, that "the unification of Germany concerns not only the Germans" .
Unification, he said, should avoid disrupting the existing strategic balance between NATO and the Warsaw Pact and should centre on "the formation of a fundamentally new structure of European security which will replace the one based on blocs" .
Modrow's visit to Bonn
Modrow visited Bonn, the West German capital, on Feb. 13-14 (Kohl having visited Dresden in December — see pp. 37108-09).
He was accompanied by 17 ministers representing all 13 parties in his government [see below].
Modrow did not return with more than a commitment to set up a joint commission of experts to consider monetary union (which first met on Feb. 20 in East Berlin).
Modrow's request on behalf of the round table talks for a "solidarity contribution" of up to DM15,000 million was unanswered.
West German government sources declared that the offer of a common currency based on the strength and stability of the Deutschmark was a "more far-reaching" offer.
After the visit the East German government spokesperson declared that "unity must not and cannot be a simple annexation" .
On Feb. 18 the West German President, Richard von Weizsäcker, warned that making access to the Deutschmark the benchmark of German unity would lead to East Germany being "swallowed" .
(Article 23 of West Germany's Basic Law — its constitution — was used in 1956 by the Saarland to join West Germany — see pp. 15303-04; 14331.
The Article defined the Basic Law's area of jurisdiction as the existing Länder or states, but provided that it could subsequently be applied "in other parts of Germany after their accession" .
There was much speculation that the likely formation of five Länder in East Germany after the election could lead individual Länder to accede to West Germany by this route.)
Wartime allies' "two-plus-four" formula to discuss unification
On Feb. 13 the four major victorious allied powers of the Second World War — France, the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom and the United States — and the two German states agreed on a formula for dealing with the security implications of the impending unification of Germany.
Meeting at the Ottawa conference on the proposed "Open Skies" agreement [see p. 37267], the Foreign Ministers of the six countries issued a short statement declaring that once the two Germanies had negotiated their economic, political and legal unification, the four powers would then discuss with them "external aspects of the establishment of German unity, including the issues of security of the neighbouring states" .
Although not explicitly referred to in this statement, issues such as the size of a united Germany's armed forces and its relationship to NATO were expected to be discussed under this umbrella, dubbed the "two-plus-four" formula (that is, the two Germanies plus the four allies).
With this announcement the powers which had occupied and divided Germany after the Second World War effectively accepted the inevitability of early German unification, although the statement contained no indication of the four powers' preferred timetables for unification or for the two-plus-four negotiations.
The first preliminary talks by lower-level officials of the six governments were held in Bonn on March 14.
According to newspaper reports, the two-plus-four formula was first devised by the US administration in response to growing pressure within the two German states for unification after the opening of the Berlin Wall in November 1989 [see pp. 37024-26].
At the conference in Ottawa the Soviet government appeared to soften its position on the question of a united Germany's military alignment.
With Western countries insisting that it should be part of NATO, the Soviet Foreign Minister, Eduard Shevardnadze, on Feb. 14 declared that although his government would prefer a united Germany to be neutral and demilitarized, he was not sure how "realistic" this would be.
He also reiterated his proposal made in early February that an international referendum on German unity be held.
The UK and French governments had initially expressed a preference for "four-plus-zero" (that is negotiations among the four allies without German involvement), but had subsequently agreed to the US proposal.
The Soviet government, which had repeatedly warned of the destabilizing effects of rapid unification, accepted the formula when, on behalf of Polish government, the phrase concerning "issues of security of the neighbouring states" was added.
The West German government accepted the plan after having been assured that the two German states would be allowed to negotiate the details of unification without outside interference.
(In talks between Baker and Genscher in Washington on Feb. 1 Baker appeared to agree with Genscher's proposal that a united Germany should belong to NATO without NATO forces advancing into erstwhile East German territory.
Later differences emerged within the West German Cabinet between Genscher (of the Free Democrats — FDP), who by then was reported to favour the demilitarization of territory between the Elbe and the Oder rivers in a united Germany, and the Defence Minister, Gerhard Stoltenberg (of the Christian Democrats — CDU), who envisaged that German but not NATO troops could be stationed in the area, which would nevertheless come under the jurisdiction of the NATO treaty.
However, both Ministers, when called to account by Kohl, agreed that no German troops, including those not under direct NATO command, should be deployed on what was once East German territory.)
Polish and EC reactions
Some European governments which had not been consulted expressed considerable concern over the European security implications of a united Germany.
In particular the Polish government (supported by the UK government, with which Prime Minister Tadeusz Mazowiecki had talks in London on Feb. 14, and by Modrow, who visited Warsaw on Feb. 16) sought to participate in the second phase of the two-plus-four talks.
On Feb. 21 Mazowiecki called for a Polish-German treaty guaranteeing the post 1945 Oder-Neisse border, to be negotiated between Poland and both German states.
According to newspaper reports other governments privately demanded an extension of the scope of the negotiation to deal with the security interests not only of Germany's neighbours but of Europe as a whole.
The Italian government proposed in late February that a special NATO summit on German unity be held.
At a meeting of European Community (EC) Foreign Ministers in Dublin, Ireland, on Feb. 20, Genscher sought to reassure those governments which had not been consulted about the two plus four agreement.
 "Nothing," he said, "will happen behind the backs of our European partners." 
As suggested by Jacques Delors, the President of the European Commission, to the European Parliament on Feb. 13, ministers convened for April a special EC summit (similar to that in November 1989 — see p. 37028).
Kohl-Bush talks
On a visit to the USA Kohl met President Bush on Feb. 24-25 at Camp David for informal talks.
Bush announced afterwards that they "share[d] a common belief" that a unified Germany should remain a full NATO member, but declared: "The former territory of East Germany should have a specific military status that would take into account the legitimate security interests of all interested countries, including the Soviet Union." 
(In addition to the numerous foreign minister-level discussions held during this time, Kohl also visited Paris on Feb. 15 and was to visit the UK for talks with Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher in March.)
The Oder-Neisse border
Kohl was again criticized for his reluctance to give an unequivocal commitment to the inviolability of the Oder-Neisse border with Poland.
Bowing to pressure from within his coalition and from abroad Kohl advocated on Feb. 28 that the Bundestag (West German lower house of parliament) and the Volkskammer (East German unicameral parliament) make a joint statement after the East German elections confirming their respect for the border.
Formation of East German government of national responsibility
As agreed on Jan. 28 [see pp. 37171-72]eight opposition leaders joined Modrow's government on Feb. 5 as Ministers without Portfolio.
As a result, for the first time in the history of East Germany the Communists were in a minority in the Council of Ministers [for initial composition see p. 37025; for January 1990 changes see pp. 37170-71].
New East German Ministers without Portfolio: Tatjana Böhm (Independent Women's Association); Rainer Eppelmann (Democratic Awakening); Sebastian Pflugbeil (New Forum); Matthias Platzek (Green Party); Gerd Poppe (Initiative Peace and Human Rights); Walter Romberg (Social Democratic Party — SPD); Klaus Schlüter (Green League); Wolfgang Ullmann (Democracy Now).
East German election campaign
Although the round table voted to oppose foreign participation in the campaign for the March 18 election, West German party political support rapidly assumed a high profile.
Electoral alliances created groupings corresponding to the West German parties, and West German politicians from all the major parties appeared at election rallies.
Kohl, for instance, made the first of six planned visits on Feb. 20 to address a rally of the Alliance for Germany [see below]attended by 100,000 in Erfurt.
Both the round table and the Volkskammer voted on Feb. 5 to ban activities of the West German neo-Nazi Republicans, whose leader had already repeatedly been denied entrance to the country in recent months.
Also on Feb. 5, after months of largely peaceful protest, the weekly demonstration in Leipzig was marred by violence when neo-Nazis smashed shop windows and two people were injured.
On Feb. 20 the Volkskammer approved a new electoral law to have immediate effect.
As amended the Constitution stated: "Elections will be held under public control and administered by democratically elected electoral commissions…
The People's Chamber consists of 400 deputies, who are elected for a term of four years by the people in a free, general, equal, direct and secret election."
Electoral congresses and formation of electoral alliances — Change of SED-PDS name to PDS
Alliance for Germany.
The East German Christian Democratic Union (CDU — one of the governing National Front parties — led by Lothar de Maizière — see pp. 37108; 37024), Democratic Awakening (led by Wolfgang Schmur — see p. 37108) and the German Social Union (DSU, led by Hans-Wilhelm Ebeling — see p. 37171) agreed on Feb. 5 in West Berlin to conduct a joint campaign under the name "Alliance for Germany" (Allianz für Deutschland).
Kohl, who was present, promised his party's full support.
Electoral Alliance"90.
In East Berlin on Feb. 7 the three left-wing citizens' movements (New Forum, Democracy Now and Initiative for Peace and Human Rights — by then all represented in the government) agreed to campaign together as the Electoral Alliance "90 (Wahlbündnis" 90).
Their joint candidates and programme, with the slogan "Alliance" 90: citizens for citizens", would favour gradual reunification leading to a demilitarized Germany and the transformation of NATO and the Warsaw Pact into political blocs.
League of Free Democrats.
This new liberal grouping (Bund freier Demokraten) was set up in West Berlin on Feb. 12.
Count Otto Lambsdorff, the West German FDP chair, who was present, declared that its formation would avoid a split in the liberal centre vote.
It brought together the Liberal Democratic Party (LDP), members of the German Forum Party (DFP — some of whom had earlier joined the DSU — see p. 37171), and the East German Free Democratic Party (Freie demokratische Partei — FDP).
The LDP was the new name of the LDPD (Liberal Democratic Party of Germany — one of the governing National Front parties) as decided by an extraordinary congress in Dresden on Feb. 9-10, and was chaired by Rainer Ortleb, elected in place of acting head of state Manfred Gerlach.
The FDP, which had first emerged in November 1989 [see p. 37025], was formally constituted at a congress on Feb. 4 as a sister party to the West German FDP, with Bruno Menzel as acting party chair and Jürgen Neubert and Dieter Tietz as deputy chairs.
SPD.
At the national electoral congress of the Social Democratic Party of Germany (SPD, founded in October 1989 — see pp. 36962; 37171) near Leipzig on Feb. 22-25 Ibrahim Böhme was elected party chair.
Böhme, a 45-year-old historian, joined the former SED at the age of 17 but left it in 1976 in protest at the persecution of intellectuals.
Imprisoned for his views, he was banned from teaching history, and earned a living by teaching German to Vietnamese guestworkers, before becoming a founder member of the SPD.
Delegates also elected Markus Meckel and Angelika Barbe as deputy chairs and former West German Chancellor Willy Brandt, as honorary chair (a post he also held in the West German SPD).
The SPD programme, with the slogan "The future has a name again: the SPD" , envisaged a social market economy which protected the socially disadvantaged.
It called for the formation of a joint parliamentary commission in April, when the two-plus-four talks would also begin.
A joint German Unity Council, chaired by Brandt, would draw up a new German constitution.
Böhme advocated the introduction of the Deutschmark in East Germany no later than July 1, 1990, with personal savings exchangeable at a one-to-one rate.
PDS.
The Socialist Unity Party of Germany-Party of Democratic Socialism (SED-PDS — as the former ruling SED had been renamed in December 1989 — see p. 37108) announced on Feb. 4 that in future it would be known as the Party of Democratic Socialism (PDS).
An election congress on Feb. 24-25 confirmed this.
Also on Feb. 24-25 Modrow agreed, despite earlier statements to the contrary, to stand as the party's leading candidate.
An election programme entitled "For democratic freedoms — for social security" was approved.
EUROPE
SWITZERLAND
Kopp trial
In a controversial decision on Feb. 23, Elisabeth Kopp, who had stepped down as Justice Minister in January 1989 [see p. 36473], was acquitted by the criminal law division of Federal Supreme Court (Bundesstrafgericht) on charges of violating professional secrecy.
The five-day trial centred on a telephone call she had made on Oct. 27, 1988, to her husband Hans Kopp, who was then vice-president of the Shakarchi Trading Company.
She warned him that the company was to be investigated for alleged laundering of drug money through Swiss banks in the so-called "Lebanon connection" case, and he resigned his position later that same day [ibid.].
Kopp testified that she had thought at the time that the information was based on "rumours from banking circles" .
The information had actually been passed to her personal assistant, Katharina Schoop, by an aide in the Justice Ministry, Renate Schwob.
The Supreme Court could find no proof that Kopp had known this at the time she made the call.
Schwob, who had been given the information by the federal prosecutor's office, was also acquitted of violating official secrecy and awarded 30,000 Swiss francs in damages.
Schoop was, however, found guilty on the same charges because she gave further details to Hans Kopp when he telephoned her later the same day at his wife's suggestion.
Although no sentence was imposed on Schoop she was ordered to pay 10 per cent of the costs, while Kopp was to pay 40 per cent.
The case was the first in which a former government minister was brought before a Swiss criminal court.
Its outcome was criticized by Helmut Hubacher, leader of the Social Democratic Party (one of the four governing coalition parties), who declared that "everyone is not equal before the law" .
EUROPE
UNITED KINGDOM
Ambulance workers' dispute
Trade unions representing ambulance workers and National Health Service (NHS) management agreed on Feb. 23 on a phased pay increase for ambulance workers, who since September 1989 had been taking varying degrees of industrial action [see p. 37160].
NHS management officially described the Feb. 23 deal as representing an increase of 13.3 per cent over the full two-year period.
It did not include any formula for the future determination of pay, a principal element of the unions' original claim, and ambulance workers on Merseyside declared an all-out stoppage from Feb. 26 until the results were known of a national membership ballot, in which, however, 81 per cent supported acceptance of the deal (as announced on March 13).
Earlier in the dispute, calls for all-out national strike action had been rejected on Jan. 23 by national union leaders.
The chief union negotiator Roger Poole indicated repeatedly during the dispute that the unions were prepared to make concessions, but NHS chief executive Duncan Nichol insisted that these concessions should be specified in advance of any meeting.
On Feb. 14, however, Nichol met representatives of the Association of Chief Ambulance Officers, and on Feb. 20 management and unions met for the first time since October in a session with the Advisory, Conciliation and Arbitration Service (ACAS).
Throughout the dispute Kenneth Clarke, the Secretary of State for Health, declared the government's determination to adhere to its original offer of a 9 per cent increase over 18 months (up to 16.3 per cent for the most highly qualified personnel).
Clarke refused to concede an automatic pay system for the future, or linkage of ambulance workers' pay with that for other rescue services.
His confrontational attitude caused controversy, notably when he suggested that some ambulance personnel were little more than professional drivers.
Widespread sympathy for the ambulance workers was reflected in the flow of public contributions of financial support.
Throughout the dispute, unpaid ambulance staff suspended for their action remained at their posts in order to provide emergency cover.
Some local authorities established a publicly funded non-NHS ambulance service run in conjunction with unions and crewed by suspended ambulance staff, while others used Army and police personnel and equipment.
Dispute over Channel Tunnel
A bitter dispute erupted in February 1990 between Eurotunnel, the company engaged in financing and overseeing the construction of a rail tunnel between France and the United Kingdom, and Trans-Manche Link (TML), the 10-member consortium of companies engaged in the actual construction.
The trouble followed a management restructuring at Eurotunnel, in which Alastair Morton, hitherto a co-chairman of the company, was appointed as chief executive while André Bénard, the other co-chairman, became sole chairman.
Morton had been strongly critical of the construction companies because of the cost overruns being encountered: originally costed in 1987 at £4,870 million, the probable total was estimated in February 1990 at £7,200 million.
TML objected to Morton's "abrasive" personal management style, and refused in mid-February to sign a document which would have allowed Eurotunnel to start drawing down some £400 million of additional funding for the project.
The crisis brought on severe misgivings on the London stock market, where the shares fell sharply.
They recovered somewhat on Feb. 20-21, however, following a compromise in which John Neerhout was appointed as Eurotunnel's director for construction contracts, thus avoiding the need for direct contact between Morton and TML.
Meanwhile it was planned to raise some F15,000 million (£1,600 million) of additional funds, of which three-quarters were to be in bank loans with the remainder being raised in a share issue.
Bénard claimed on March 5, however, that even this would prove insufficient.
It was reported on March 1 that, although the construction of the tunnel was behind schedule, geological problems relating to the chalk seabed had now been overcome, and digging was now advancing at twice the speed of a year earlier.
It was hoped that the two ends of the tunnel would meet in November 1990.
EUROPE
SWEDEN
Resignation and re-formation of Social Democratic government
The minority government formed by the Social Democratic Labour Party (SAP) in October 1988 [see pp. 36357-58]resigned on Feb. 15 after being defeated in the Riksdag (parliament) on a package of stringent austerity measures.
The measures were designed to combat the economic crisis, rising inflation and industrial unrest, but failed to win the backing of the Green Ecology Party and the Communist Left Party (VpK), on whose support the Social Democrats depended in parliament.
Recent industrial unrest had included selective strikes in key public services, among them banks, where union members were locked out during a three-week strike which began on Jan. 29.
The package, on which voting was 190 to 153 with six members absent, consisted of an immediate freeze on wages and prices, dividends, rents and local taxes until the end of 1991.
A ban on strike action which was also proposed for the same period, with heavy fines for offenders, had been dropped by the parliamentary labour committee when it became clear that it would receive no support, but fines for unofficial strikes were increased.
The proposals also shifted the burden for payment of sick pay from the government to the employer in an attempt to combat high absenteeism.
The Prime Minister, Ingvar Carlsson, who was asked on Feb. 19 to form a new government, on Feb. 23 announced details of a more moderate economic package acceptable to most parties, and on Feb. 26 he was reappointed Prime Minister at the head of a new Social Democratic government.
The package no longer contained a wage freeze but retained the freeze on prices, rents and dividends, and the sick pay proposals, and allowed for the appointment of a special mediator to intervene in industrial disputes.
Carlsson was confirmed as Prime Minister by parliament on Feb. 26 by 175 votes to 101 with 59 abstentions and 14 members absent.
The new government was sworn in on Feb. 27 and contained only three new members, Odd Engstrom as Deputy Prime Minister (a post which had not hitherto been filled under Carlsson), Allan Larsson as Finance Minister, and Eric Asbrink who entered the Cabinet as Deputy Finance Minister.
Engstrom had been Deputy Finance Minister until 11 days previously when he became interim Finance Minister on Kjell-Olof Feldt's resignation from the caretaker government.
Larsson was a journalist and until the end of 1989 head of the Labour Market Board responsible for employment and training services.
Asbrink was a Finance Ministry official.
EUROPE
NORTHERN IRELAND
Possibility of devolution talks — First meeting of British-Irish Inter-Parliamentary Body
Peter Brooke, the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland, held talks on Feb. 19 with James Molyneaux, leader of the (Official) Ulster Unionist Party, and the Rev. Ian Paisley, leader of the Democratic Unionist Party.
Afterwards Molyneaux and Paisley said that further talks would be held in March, and that Mr Brooke would then respond to Unionist demands that the government should consider an alternative to the Anglo-Irish Agreement.
The Northern Ireland Office, however, warned later that day against reading too much into Brooke's promise to consider the Unionists' demands and on Feb. 27 Brooke made a statement ruling out a full-scale suspension of the Agreement to enable Unionists to take part in interparty talks on political progress.
On Feb. 20 Brooke had held talks with John Hume, the leader of the Social Democratic and Liberal Party, and the next day had met Gerry Collins, the Irish Foreign Affairs Minister, to brief him on the earlier meetings.
Meeting of British-Irish Inter-Parliamentary Body
The first meeting opened in London on Feb. 26 of the British-Irish Inter-Parliamentary Body, comprising 25 members each from the United Kingdom and Irish parliaments.
However, the two seats reserved for Unionist MPs were not taken up because of Unionist opposition to the 1985 Agreement (provision for the existence of the Body, first mooted in 1980, having been made in the Agreement); Molyneaux dismissed the meeting as a "social occasion" .
There was widespread acknowledgement that the absence of the Unionist parties had created a partial vacuum.
James Tunney, the Deputy Speaker of the Irish Dáil, commented that "our deliberations will be the weaker for their absence" .
EUROPE
ITALY
Resignation of Christian Democratic Party president
Ciriaco De Mita resigned on Feb. 20 as president of the Christian Democratic Party (DC).
His, left, faction of the party had decided on Jan. 24 to "go into opposition" by withdrawing from all leadership posts after centre-right elements of the DC within the Palermo administration had caused the mayor of that town, Leoluca Orlando, to be removed from office.
Four Cabinet ministers belonging to the left faction, however, remained in their posts.
De Mita had been replaced as party secretary-general by Arnaldo Forlani in February 1989 [see p. 36472]and had resigned as Prime Minister on May 19 [see p. 36667].
His faction now claimed that Forlani and the Prime Minister, Giulio Andreotti, were acting with Bettino Craxi, leader of the Socialist Party (PSI) which with the DC formed part of the governing five-party coalition, to destroy the basis for "unified leadership" established at the February 1989 DC congress.
They also objected to Craxi's alleged domination of the government.
Death of Sandro Pertini
The former state President from 1978 to 1985, Sandro Pertini, died in his sleep on Feb. 24 at the age of 93.
The most popular president in post-war history, Pertini was revered for his complete integrity, his identification with the Italian people, and his commitment to democracy.
Pertini, a life-long socialist, was born near Stella in Liguria, trained as a lawyer and served in both World Wars.
He was deeply opposed to fascism and fought with the partisans in the Second War, having spent several years in prison in the 1920s and 1930s.
A parliamentary deputy since 1953, he was elected Speaker of the Chamber of Deputies in 1969 and from this post was elected President in 1978 at the age of 81.
Taking on the presidency at a low point in Italian political life (his predecessor, Giovanni Leone, had resigned over the Lockheed scandal, and Prime Minister Aldo Moro had recently been assassinated by the Red Brigades — see pp. 29053-55), Pertini was credited with restoring the country's confidence and self-respect.
He refused to live in the President's official residence, and was particularly remembered for his outspoken opposition to terrorism and the Mafia, his support for human rights, and his personal presence at times of national disaster as well as of celebration.
EUROPE
FRANCE
RPR leadership challenge
The Gaullist Rally for the Republic (RPR) held its national congress on Feb. 11 in Le Bourget, just outside Paris, assembling for the first time delegates who had been internally elected under party reforms.
Jacques Chirac was unanimously re-elected unopposed as the RPR's leader but only narrowly won the support of two-thirds of the congress for the official party motion, without which he had threatened to resign.
The motion, elaborated by Chirac and Alain Juppé (who was reappointed secretary-general of the RPR at the congress), was approved by 68.6 per cent of the delegates.
The right-wing faction of the party, led by Charles Pasqua, and the Renovator faction, led by Philippe Séguin, put forward their own joint motion which obtained 31.4 per cent of the vote.
This motion advocated a revival of nationalist Gaullist traditions to distinguish the RPR electorally from other right-wing parties, and called for more party independence, asserting that in its present state, still demoralized by the defeat of Chirac in the 1988 presidential elections, the RPR was incapable of forming an effective opposition.
Particularly opposed by the dissident RPR factions were proposals for the dilution of the traditional role of the party leader by establishing a confederation with other pro-Gaullist groups outside the RPR (including dissidents), for the formation of a joint shadow cabinet with centrist and right-wing parties including the Union for French Democracy (UDF), and the proposal by another Renovator, Michel Noir, a potential presidential candidate, for the actual merger of the RPR with other elements of the opposition into a single party.
EUROPE
SPAIN
Decision over contested election results
The narrow parliamentary majority won by the ruling Spanish Socialist Workers' Party (PSOE) in the Oct. 29 general election remained in jeopardy, following a Constitutional Court ruling on Feb. 15 which confirmed the election results in eight of the nine seats still at issue in the south-eastern constituency of Murcia, but "suspended" the results regarding the ninth seat pending fresh elections in two polling areas.
The seat in question had already been reallocated from the PSOE to the United Left (IU) in a recount on Nov. 11, and appeals had been made to the Constitutional Court against the Murcia court's decision of Dec. 1 to hold fresh elections.
The Constitutional Court on Feb. 19 also annulled the electoral results in the North African enclave of Melilla and ruled that fresh elections should take place there within six weeks.
At the same time it ruled that in the case of Pontevedra in north-western Spain, where eight seats were at issue as the result of apparent polling irregularities, elections would have to be repeated in about 30 polling areas.
The results of the elections in Melilla and Pontevedra would not affect the government's majority.
Election of Fraga as Galician leader
The Galician parliament on Jan. 31 elected by 38 votes to 37 Manuel Fraga Iribarne, leader of the Popular Party (PP) which won the regional elections on Dec. 17, as head of the government (Xunta).
Fraga took office on Feb. 5.
Truce offer by ETA — Basque resolution on self-determination
The Basque separatist movement ETA on Feb. 17 offered to end violent activities and kidnappings if the government agreed to resume negotiations in the spirit of the Algiers talks (broken off in 1989 — see pp. 36627-28) and to establish what it called a "bilateral truce" .
The previous night a Pamplona industrialist kidnapped on Nov. 24, Adolfo Villoslada Martín, had been freed by ETA after 84 days in captivity, apparently after payment by his family of a ransom of 300,000,000 pesetas (approximately US$2,800,000).
In response the Interior Minister, José Luis Corcuera, on Feb. 24 challenged ETA to suspend violence for a six-month period as proof of its new willingness to talk.
He added that in order to find a reasonable solution to the situation ETA had to recognize the Basque parliament as representing the will of the Basque people and accept certain conditions attached to possible peace talks.
The Basque parliament on Feb. 15 passed by 38 votes to 23 a resolution proclaiming the right of the Basque people to self-determination and to decide freely and democratically on its political, economic, social and cultural status.
Voting for the resolution were the three moderate parties which had drafted it — the Basque Nationalist Party (PNV), the Basque Left (EE) and Basque Solidarity (EA).
The Democratic and Social Centre (CDS) and the PP voted against, United People (HB) abstained, and there was one blank vote.
The resolution noted that self-determination, either in a purely Basque framework or sharing sovereignty partially or fully with "other peoples" , could only come about gradually and democratically and with due regard to "historical context" .
A commitment was made to respect the will of the people and democratic procedures.
Guerra scandal
A scandal involving Juan Guerra González, the brother of the Deputy Prime Minister, Alfonso Guerra González, erupted in January and February.
The former was alleged by the press to have enriched himself substantially during the PSOE's term of office by using the influence of his brother to buy property and obtain loans, and to have run a private business from a government office in Seville.
The opposition CDS called on Alfonso Guerra, a close friend of the Prime Minister Felipe González, to accept "political responsibility" for the affair and resign.
Addressing a special session of the Cortes (parliament) on Feb. 1, Alfonso Guerra, who at no time condoned his brother's alleged activities, acknowledged that Juan had used the government office but said that this was because he was helping him as deputy secretary of the PSOE, and he denied that private activities had been carried out in the office in his presence or with his knowledge.
The Attorney General, Leopoldo Torres, on Feb. 14 brought calumny charges against five journalists on the daily El Mundo which had reported the scandal, but a Madrid High Court judge on Feb. 20 dismissed the case without a hearing.
EUROPE
TURKEY
Resignation of Foreign Minister
Mesut Yilmaz resigned on Feb. 20 as Foreign Minister because, he said, of differences within the Cabinet.
On the following day the portfolio was taken on by Ali Bozer, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of State currently responsible for Turkey's relations with the European Communities.
Ankara diplomats saw his resignation as a way of distancing himself from an unpopular government.
Yilmaz had held the post of Foreign Minister since December 1987 [see p. 35910], having held various other Cabinet posts since the Motherland Party (Anatavan Partisi — ANAP) came to office in December 1983.
He was regarded as a popular rival of, and possible replacement for, the Prime Minister and current ANAP leader, Yildirim Akbulut.
ANAP had suffered serious losses in the March 1989 local elections [see p. 36528]; Akbulut remained overshadowed by its former leader and founder Turgut Özal, whom he had succeeded following Özal's election as Turkey's President in October 1989 [see pp. 36985; 37051].
Mine disaster
More than 60 miners died in a methane gas explosion and subsequent underground fire at a coalmine near Merzifon in north-eastern Turkey on Feb. 7.
The following day, after two survivors and the bodies of eight dead had been recovered, vents to the affected mineshaft were blocked with concrete to control the fire.
The Financial Times of Feb. 12 reported that four senior company officials at the pit were to be tried for negligence.
More than 100,000 miners held lighting strikes the following week to protest at inadequate safety precautions in Turkish mines; the official 1989 accident statistics were 26 dead and 7,433 injured.
EUROPE
GREECE
Appointment of caretaker Cabinet following collapse of coalition
The interim coalition government, formed in November 1989 following an inconclusive general election, collapsed on Feb. 12 when all three component parties withdrew their ministers.
The right-wing New Democracy (ND) was the first to act, followed by the Pan-Hellenic Socialist Movement (Pasok) and the communist-dominated Coalition of the Left and Progress.
The three parties had disagreed on major issues and the coalition had been undermined by national discontent over recent austerity measures.
A 24-hour general strike called by the General Confederation of Greek Workers (GSEE) in support of 19 per cent pay rises — state and private employers were offering about 9 per cent— mobilized more than 1,000,000 workers and disrupted public transport, flights, hospitals and electricity services on Jan. 25.
A further wave of strikes caused similar disruption on Feb. 6.
Following mediation by the Prime Minister to avert more strikes, increases of up to 3.5 per cent above the guaranteed four-monthly index-linked rises were agreed for various sectors on Feb. 20.
On Feb. 13 Xenofon Zolotas was reappointed Prime Minister at the head of a non-party caretaker government — similar to that formed to oversee the general election of Nov. 5 — which would hold office until a general election already scheduled for April 8.
All three parties undertook to support the caretaker government until the elections.
Xenofon Zolotas Prime Minister Nikos Themelis Minister to the Prime Minister Prokopis Pavlopoulos Deputy Minister to the Prime Minister Theodoros Deliyannis Defence Antonis Samaras Foreign Affairs Theodoros Katrivanos Interior Georgios Kondogeorgios Economy and Tourism Georgios Agapitos Finance Georgios Liapis Agriculture Yannis Koukiadhis Labour Georgios Merikas Health, Welfare and Social Security Konstantinos Stamatis Justice Konstantinos Despotopoulos Education and Religions Georgios Milonas Culture Dimitris Manikas Public Order Yannis Deliyannis Macedonia and Thrace Antonis Foussas Aegean Konstantinos Liaskas Environment, Town Planning and Public Works Pavlos Sakellaridis Industry, Energy and Technology Theodoros Gamaletsos Commerce Georgios Mitsopoulos Transport and Communications Nikos Pappas Merchant Marine 
New Greek caretaker Cabinet
Failure to elect new President
On Feb. 19 Parliament held its first round of voting to elect a new state President, with the incumbent head of state, Khristos Sartzetakis, as the sole candidate.
Konstantinos Karamanlis, a former state President and founder of New Democracy, had on Feb. 10 turned down ND's request to stand for the presidency.
The 148 New Democracy deputies accordingly abstained from voting and, with only 151 members voting in his favour (128 Pasok, 21 Left Coalition and two others) Sartzetakis failed to win the required two-thirds of the vote.
A second round of voting was held on Feb. 25 for two candidates, Sartzetakis and Yannis Alevras (proposed by Pasok), the Speaker of the Greek parliament in 1981-89.
New Democracy again abstained so that neither candidate was able to win a two-thirds majority, Alevras receiving 127 votes and Sartzetakis 21.
A third and final round requiring only a three-fifths majority of 180 votes was due on March 3.
In the event that the current Parliament was unable to select a new President, the task would fall to the new parliament emerging from the April 8 general election.
Sartzetakis's term was due to expire on March 30.
EUROPE
EUROPE
Storms and flooding
Storm winds of around 160 km per hour swept across Europe during February, killing more than 110 people.
Avalanches in the French Alps cut off ski resorts on Feb. 14-15; on Feb. 26-28 storms broke sea defences in Towyn, north Wales, and in Lemwig, Denmark; high tide levels in the Netherlands were the highest for 37 years; and the Thames barrier was raised to prevent flooding in London.
In the first two months of the year a total of 4,000,000 trees were uprooted in the United Kingdom and France, and in the latter fires in late February on the Côte d'Azur and in Corsica destroyed over 1,500 hectares of forest.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
LEBANON
Serious fighting between rival Christian forces
During the first half of February, rival Christian forces fought a sustained and bloody battle in the shell-shattered Maronite enclave in and around Beirut.
Forces loyal to Gen. Michel Aoun, the former Army C.-in-C. and self-declared interim Premier of Lebanon, sought unsuccessfully to eliminate Samir Geaga's Lebanese Forces (LF), the armed militia of the Phalangist Lebanese Front.
Even the most hardened commentators appeared shocked by the scale of the devastation.
The military contest between Aoun and Geaga, former brothers-in-arms, had long been expected.
A fragile alliance between them had crumbled in February 1989, and fighting ensued when the LF were forced to relinquish control of the ports whose operations they had hitherto controlled [see pp. 36476; 36538].
Geaga's tacit approval of the October 1989 Taif accords [see p. 36986]provoked further condemnation from Aoun.
In late November 1989, Geaga offered to give military support to Aoun if Syrian troops attacked the latter's Baabda headquarters [see p. 37030], but as the likelihood of a Syrian offensive diminished, relations between Aoun and Geaga again deteriorated.
By early January 1990 minor clashes between the LF and the Army were commonplace.
Outbreak of hostilities
Small-arms skirmishing between LF and Army troops started on Jan. 30 in the Furn Al Shebbak suburb of East Beirut.
The fighting had started after Gen. Aoun had effectively ordered the LF to disband, declaring that no-one was permitted to bear arms or carry a military identity card except for Army soldiers.
On Jan. 31 Aoun's forces launched a full-scale tank-led assault on LF positions in the Christian enclave (an 800-sq km district comprising East Beirut and lands to the east and north of the capital).
According to some commentators, Aoun seriously miscalculated the LF's level of preparedness, and was surprised when Geaga's forces counterattacked and overran numerous Army installations in the LF-controlled northern provinces of Jbeil and Kesrouan.
According to the Economist of Feb. 24, deployed within the enclave were"15,000 soldiers loyal to Aoun with 250 tanks, 100 armoured fighting vehicles, 200 guns and 200 heavy mortars.
Against them were 10,000 militiamen…with only about half the equipment the Army has".
At least 52 people were killed and 190 wounded on Jan. 31.
On Feb. 1 Aoun and Geaga agreed to a ceasefire, but this collapsed early the next day when Army units launched heavy artillery attacks on LF strongholds in the Qarantina and Ashrafieh districts of East Beirut.
Three days later Army tanks also started to attack LF positions in Ein Rumaneh, a district situated immediately south of Ashrafieh.
Capture of Dbayeh by Army — The question of West Beirut's involvement
On Feb. 4 (the day before the Army began its push into Ein Rumaneh) Aoun's forces began advancing north out of Beirut towards the LF-controlled coastal village of Dbayeh, some 10 km from the centre of the capital.
After two days of heavy fighting, Army units succeeding in capturing LF barracks in and around Dbayeh.
The capture of Dbayeh (a strategically important village straddling LF supply lines) constituted Aoun's first significant military advance.
Elias Hrawi, the West Beirut-based (Christian) President, sent a message to world leaders on Feb. 6 asking them to "support any effort or step which I may find myself compelled to take as head of the legitimate [Lebanese]government" .
Hrawi's message was widely interpreted as a warning to Gen. Aoun that forces in West Beirut might be preparing to offer support to Geaga's forces.
Soon after his election as President in late November [see p. 37029], Hrawi had announced that he intended to remove Aoun from the presidential palace at Baabda.
Hrawi not only had a portion of the regular Army at his disposal (under the command of Gen. Emile Lahoud) but also had the added option of Syrian support in the event of a military expedition across the "green line" which separated East Beirut from West Beirut.
After Aoun's capture of Dbayeh, there was little heavy fighting until Feb. 10 when Army units launched attacks on LF bases near Jounieh port and in the Kesrouan mountains.
Army success in East Beirut
Aoun's forces launched a fresh tank-led assault on LF controlled areas of East Beirut on Feb. 15, and the next day Gen. Aoun claimed that his troops had "liberated" Ein Rumaneh and Furn Al Shebbak districts.
At least 60 people had been killed in the fighting, bringing the total number of dead since late January to just under 600, with more than 2,000 injured.
Witnesses entering Ein Rumaneh on Feb. 16 described the district as looking like a "cemetery hit by an earthquake" .
LF success at Adma — Ceasefire
Gen. Aoun suffered a serious setback on Feb. 17 when LF militiamen overran Adma base (north of Jounieh), the sole Army-held pocket in the northern LF territories.
A ceasefire came into force late on Feb. 17 allowing Army troops to be evacuated from Adma.
The ceasefire, arranged by the Maronite Patriarch, Mgr Nasrullah Sfeir, was the 12th since fighting started in late January.
On Feb. 19, Aoun and Geaga agreed a six-point pact to end the fighting.
The pact, mediated by a Maronite committee, endorsed Aoun's supremacy in the Christian enclave but guaranteed the continued existence of the LF.
The ceasefire was still intact at the end of February, despite intermittent shooting and shelling.
However, through their various media organs, Aoun and Geaga offered contradictory interpretations of the peace pact and a number of press reports claimed that both sides were using the ceasefire as a means of consolidating their defensive lines.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
ISRAEL
Resignation of Ariel Sharon
Ariel "Arik" Sharon, the Israeli Cabinet's leading "hawk" , resigned unexpectedly on Feb. 12 in protest at the government's Palestinian policy.
Sharon, a former Defence Minister and the architect of Israel's invasion of Lebanon in 1982 [see pp. 31914-20], had been assigned to the Trade and Industry portfolio in September 1984 [see p. 33244].
Attack by Sharon on Shamir's policies
Sharon announced his resignation at the start of a meeting of the central committee of the Likud party (the principal component of the country's ruling coalition).
As chairman of the central committee, Sharon opened the meeting by reading the text of his resignation letter to the Prime Minister, Itzhak Shamir, and the other 3,000 assembled delegates.
Sharon claimed that under Shamir's premiership "Palestinian terrorism is running wildly rampant inside all of Eretz Yisrael [the whole of the biblical" Land of Israel ", including the West Bank, Gaza and the Golan Heights]" .
The government's policies had "resulted in Jewish life becoming a free-for-all" and had "placed Israel on the road to the establishment of a second Palestinian state in Eretz Yisrael" .
On the issue of the Palestinian intifada (uprising), Sharon claimed that it was possible to "eradicate…terrorism" and "reinstall law and order" within a relatively short period of time.
Shamir's speech to Likud delegates — Confusion over confidence vote
Shamir began his speech to the Likud delegates by expressing surprise at Sharon's resignation.
He went on to discuss the immigration of Soviet Jews to Israel [see p. 37199], before reviewing his plan for elections among Palestinians in the occupied territories [see pp. 36599; 36670; 36834; 36904; 36986-87; 37051-52].
Moreover, the election plan, Shamir said, was aimed only at the "inhabitants of Judaea, Samaria [the West Bank]and Gaza" ; PLO representatives and East Jerusalem Arabs could not be participants.
The election plan, he claimed, would not be implemented "as long as the violence against the State of Israel and its residents continues" .
After speaking for some 40 minutes, Shamir set aside his prepared text and proposed a motion that the central committee approve the political contents of his speech and express confidence in him as Likud chairman and Prime Minister.
He told the delegates that he was "tired of the impossible state of affairs in which I suffer bitter attacks from the outside…while I am also attacked by colleagues at home who sing the daily chorus of slander and besmirching" .
As Shamir called for a show of hands, Sharon sprang to his feet and called upon delegates to vote against the inclusion of deportees from the West Bank and Gaza Strip in a Palestinian delegation to enter into pre-election talks with Israel.
According to the Middle East International of Feb. 16, delegates were then "treated to the unedifying sight of their party's two most prominent leaders simultaneously screeching conflicting proposals into the loudspeaker system" .
After a few moments of pandemonium, Shamir thanked the delegates for their show of confidence, declared the convention closed and walked out of the hall, followed by most of his Cabinet colleagues.
Sharon remained on the podium and attempted to complete voting on his proposals.
Sharon formally submitted his resignation to the Cabinet on Feb. 18, and it became effective two days later.
At a press conference on Feb. 18, Sharon announced his intention to challenge Shamir's position as Likud leader before the next general election, which was due before the end of 1992.
Resulting Cabinet changes
On Feb. 20, Moshe Nissim, hitherto Minister without Portfolio, replaced Sharon at Trade and Industry; David Magen was brought into the Cabinet to replace Nissim.
Magen and Nissim were both Likud members and were considered Shamir loyalists.
According to a report in the Financial Times of Feb. 21, David Levi, the Second Vice Prime Minister and a supporter of Sharon, was "furious" that he had not been consulted about the appointments.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
MIDDLE EAST
Attack on Israeli tour bus in Egypt
A grenade and machine-gun attack on a bus carrying Israeli tourists near Ismailiya in Egypt on Feb. 4 left eight people dead, including two Egyptians; three more died later and more than 20 others were injured.
Initial Egyptian investigations into the attack revealed little concrete information about the perpetrators of the attack, and on Feb. 7 the authorities imposed a news blackout.
Before the introduction of the blackout, the Egyptian Interior Minister, Mohammed Abdel-Halim Moussa, announced on Feb. 7 that the attack had been committed by non-Egyptians and had been plotted abroad.
The attack had the effect of stalling the already sluggish Middle East peace process.
A meeting between Israel, Egypt and the United States to have been held in preparation for a possible Israeli-Palestinian dialogue was apparently postponed after the attack.
The Middle East International of Feb. 16 commented that the attack had "managed to threaten the tenuous trust Egypt has carefully nurtured with both Israel and the PLO [Palestine Liberation Organization]" .
Claim of responsibility by Islamic Jihad
The Islamic Jihad Movement — Bayt al-Maqdis (Jerusalem) claimed on Feb. 5 that a unit from its Katibat Ushshaq al-Shahadah (Martyrdom Lovers' Battalion) had carried out the attack.
A statement broadcast on Al-Quds radio said that a "lightning attack" had been launched on a "Zionist bus carrying a number of Jewish reserve officers, soldiers and spies sent to Egypt in order to sow corruption and trickery" .
Al-Quds was a Syrian-based station controlled by Ahmed Jabril's Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine — General Command (PFLP-GC).
The PFLP-GC was one of a number of "rejectionist" Palestinian groups strongly opposed to the PLO-endorsed efforts to arrange talks with Israel ahead of elections in the occupied territories.
However, a PFLP-GC statement broadcast by Al-Quds on Feb. 7 pointed out that it had never claimed responsibility for the attack.
Responsibility for the attack had also been claimed on Feb. 4 by a hitherto unknown group, "The Organization for the Defence of the Oppressed in Egypt's Prisons" .
PLO reaction
The mainstream Palestinian news agency Wafa broadcast a statement on Feb. 6 which said that the attack should be viewed in the context of the daily killing or wounding of hundreds of Palestinians by Israeli officials.
By contrast, Wafa stated, the killings in Egypt had been carried out by people "who have nothing to do with the PLO" .
Addressing a news conference in Baghdad on Feb. 11, Yassir Arafat, the PLO Chairman, denied Palestinian involvement in the bus attack, which he claimed had been carried out by extremists, "whatever their form, colour or nationality" .
Arafat went on to urge the world to take action to halt "the massacre Israel is currently committing against the Palestinian people in Rafah" (a town and camp lying at the southern tip of the Gaza Strip).
Arafat claimed that four people had been killed and 231 injured in the town by Israeli forces "as a result of the erroneous announcement that the driver of the bus carrying Israeli tourists in Egypt was of Palestinian origin and came from Rafah" .
Egyptian and Israeli reaction
The Egyptian government responded to the attack with dismay, claiming that it had been "primarily directed against the efforts aimed at advancing the peace process in the region" .
Soon after the attack, President Hosni Mubarak telephoned the Israeli Prime Minister, Itzhak Shamir, to convey his condolences.
The Middle East International of Feb. 16 reported that coverage of the attack in the Egyptian media contained strong anti-PLO and anti-Arafat sentiments.
In Israel itself, the attack was condemned by all parties.
The attack led Likud, the principal component in the ruling coalition, to postpone a central committee meeting scheduled for Feb. 7 until Feb. 12 [see p. 37265].
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
IRAN
Confirmation of Rushdie death sentence — Relations with UK and USA
The Iranian spiritual leader, Ayatollah Seyed Ali Khamenei, confirmed on Feb. 9 the death sentence imposed by his predecessor on the British novelist Salman Rushdie for apostasy.
Rushdie's book The Satanic Verses had been widely condemned as blasphemous by the Moslem community.
The original sentence took the form of a religious decree, a fatwa, issued by Ayatollah Khomeini on Feb. 9, 1989 [see pp. 36450-51; see pp. 36537-38 for resulting tension between Iran and the United Kingdom and severance of diplomatic relations].
The anniversary of Rushdie's condemnation was also marked by a statement of support for the novelist issued by the International Committee for the Defence of Salman Rushdie.
This was signed by 160 writers, including the Czechoslovak President, Vaclav Havel.
In what appeared to be an attempt to play down the affair, President Hashemi Ali Akbar Rafsanjani, widely regarded as a "moderate" , commented in a sermon on Feb. 16 that "if the West deal with the issue logically, the result will be that the Imam's sentence will be regarded as an issue of Islamic expertise, not anything else" .
He added that "if an expert offers his opinion, it should not need to produce such a scandal" .
Deportation of Iranians from UK — Reported Iranian "terrorist" threat against US targets
Nine Iranians were on Feb. 1 ordered to leave the UK by Feb. 9, on the grounds that their conduct was "not conducive to the public good" .
Among them was the London bureau chief of the Iranian state news agency, IRNA.
In reprisal, the Iranian government announced on Feb. 20 that it was "closing the BBC [British Broadcasting Corporation]office" in Tehran.
A BBC spokesman subsequently pointed out that the corporation did not maintain an office in the Iranian capital, but employed an Iranian journalist on a part-time basis.
The US State Department announced on Feb. 8 that it was concerned about the possibility of a terrorist attack directed against US citizens or installations to mark the Feb. 11 anniversary of the 1979 Iranian revolution.
Later the same day an Iranian spokesman rejected the warning as a "baseless" attempt to discredit Iran.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
NORTH-SOUTH YEMEN
Progress on unification
Preparations for unification of the two Yemens, which had received major impetus from the summit meeting in December 1989 following publication of a draft joint constitution [see p. 37138], moved forward with the opening of the border (announced on Jan. 22 following a three-day meeting at Prime Ministerial level) and a visit to Aden, capital of South Yemen (the People's Democratic Republic), by the President of North Yemen (the Yemen Arab Republic), Col. Ali Abdullah Saleh, on Feb. 18.
Discussions on the merger of the various government ministries were also pursued during February, and South Yemen's Supreme People's Council on Feb. 25 began its 12th session by discussing a report on the unity moves.
Saleh visited Saudi Arabia on Feb. 25 and held talks there with King Fahd, who said that he backed Yemeni unity "absolutely and without any reservations" and gave it his personal blessing as well as that of the Saudi people and government.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
MOROCCO
Amnesty International report
A report published by the human rights organization Amnesty International on Feb. 20 accused the Moroccan authorities of engaging in the "systematic torture and ill-treatment of people held in police custody" , particularly in Casablanca.
Some detainees had died in detention, the report added, among whom were prisoners of conscience who had been detained "for the non-violent exercise of their fundamental rights" .
The report followed a visit by an Amnesty delegation to Morocco on Feb. 13-14, during which they were received by King Hassan and senior government officials.
Following its publication, Moroccan Prime Minister Azzedine Laraki wrote to Amnesty, insisting that those referred to as "political prisoners" were "mere common law criminals" .
He also accused the organization of demonstrating a "lack of objectivity" by failing to publish a report on human rights in Morocco presented to it by the government.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
ARAB CO-OPERATION COUNCIL
Amman summit meeting
A summit meeting took place on Feb. 24 in Amman, the Jordanian capital, of the heads of state of the four countries which together composed the Arab Co-operation Council (ACC), the organization set up in February 1989 under an agreement between Egypt, Iraq, Jordan and North Yemen [see p. 36474].
This summit, officially known as the "fourth ACC Supreme Council meeting" , was attended by Presidents Hosni Mubarak (Egypt), Ali Abdullah Saleh (North Yemen), Saddam Hussein (Iraq) and by King Hussein of Jordan.
On regional affairs, the summit agreed that the prospect of Israel settling emigré Soviet Jews in the occupied territories was "an extremely serious development…containing the seeds of a new expansionist aggression" .
It stressed the "special responsibility" of the United States and the Soviet Union and urged them "to end this emigration" .
The summit also called for an end to the deadlock in Iran-Iraq peace talks, which it blamed on the "persistently negative stance and intransigence" of Iran.
A number of draft agreements drawn up at a meeting of the ACC Ministerial Council, held in Baghdad on Jan. 16-17, were ratified including accords covering co-operation in industry, oil and gas, health, air transport and tourism.
INTERNATIONAL
DISARMAMENT
Superpower agreements on troop reductions and chemical weapons
The Soviet Union and the United States in January and February concluded three preliminary agreements on the levels of their forces stationed in Europe, the phasing out of chemical weapons and the inspection of each other 's nuclear arsenals.
In a related multilateral development, the NATO and Warsaw Pact countries agreed in principle on a plan, known as "open skies" , to allow unarmed reconnaissance flights over each other 's territory [see below].
Troop reductions in Europe
On Feb. 13 the Soviet Union and United States announced their intention to reduce the number of their troops stationed in Central Europe to 195,000 each, while the United States would be allowed to station an additional 30,000 troops in other European countries (primarily Italy, Turkey and the United Kingdom).
The agreement, which would be incorporated into the multilateral negotiations on conventional forces in Europe (CFE) currently taking place in Vienna [see p. 37224], was in line with a proposal made by US President Bush on Jan. 31.
The Soviet side had initially responded with a counterproposal involving ceilings for both sides of either 225,000 or 195,000 troops for Europe as a whole (thereby calling on the United States either to accept an imbalance of 30,000 troops in Central Europe or to withdraw some or all its forces from the other countries), but accepted the original proposal after the US side had rejected this alternative formula.
Under the agreement the United States would eventually withdraw around 80,000 troops primarily from West Germany, while the Soviet Union would withdraw around 380,000 troops from Eastern Europe.
(The Soviet Union subsequently reached agreements with Czechoslovakia and Hungary to withdraw all its troops from those countries — see p. 37258.)
Baker visit to Moscow — Agreement on chemical weapons
During a four-day visit to Moscow on Feb. 7-10, US Secretary of State James Baker held talks with Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard Shevardnadze, and had a meeting with President Gorbachev on Feb. 9.
The discussions covered arms-control issues as well as the prospects for resolving the regional conflicts in Central America and Afghanistan.
While no progress was apparently made on the issue of ending nuclear testing, both sides reported "solid progress" on the (bilateral and multilateral) negotiations to reduce long-range nuclear weapons, phase out chemical weapons and reduce conventional forces in Europe.
However, both sides cautioned against over-optimistic hopes that treaties on all three issues could be ready for signing at the planned "superpower" summit in Washington in June.
The main concrete result of the discussions was a preliminary agreement on chemical weapons.
In a joint statement both sides undertook to work out an agreement for the early destruction of a "significant part" of their chemical arsenals.
Both sides would further cut stocks to "a very small fraction" of current arsenals over an eight-year period once a worldwide ban (currently under negotiation at the UN Conference on Disarmament in Geneva — see p. 37224) on the development, production, use and possession of chemical weapons had entered into force.
The remainder would then be destroyed over the following two years provided that no third country refused to comply with the ban.
The agreement in principle was expected to be signed at the Washington summit.
START agreement on inspection of warheads
The US-Soviet strategic arms reduction talks (START — see p. 37223) resumed in Geneva on Jan. 22 with the signing of a new agreement allowing both sides for the first time to inspect each other 's nuclear warheads.
This was the fourth interim "trial measure" agreed at the talks; the three measures already agreed covered notification of manoeuvres, procedures to identify bombers carrying air-launched cruise missiles (ALCMs), and provisions for reciprocal demonstration of missile identification techniques.
Acceptance in principle of Open Skies
At a joint conference in Ottawa, Canada, on Feb. 12-13 the 16 NATO and seven Warsaw Pact Foreign Ministers agreed to the basic elements of a plan under which unarmed military or civilian reconnaissance aircraft from each bloc would be allowed to fly legally over the territory of the other [for January 1990 Open Skies test flight see p. 37201].
The "Open Skies" plan, first proposed by President Eisenhower in 1955 (and at the time rejected out of hand by the Soviet Union), was resurrected by President Bush at the NATO summit in May 1989 [for which see pp. 36642-44]as a means of enhancing trust and building confidence between the two military blocs as well as monitoring compliance with arms-control and disarmament treaties.
Although not formally linked to other current multilateral negotiations, the signing of an Open Skies treaty was widely regarded as an important means of facilitating agreement on verification questions at the Vienna CFE negotiations.
Baker described it as "potentially the most ambitious measure to build confidence that we have ever taken" , and Shevardnadze declared that "it can build confidence and predictability" .
The ministers agreed four key points:(i) minimal restrictions would be placed on surveillance flights;(ii) a quota system would be devised to ensure equitable surveillance of all signatory states;(iii) unarmed aircraft would be used, carrying surveillance equipment capable of operating under all circumstances and weather; and (iv) other countries, in particular the European neutral and non-aligned countries, would eventually be invited to participate in the project.
Unable to agree on Warsaw Pact proposals to share aircraft, surveillance equipment and information, and to extend the concept to include surveillance of the oceans and space, the ministers referred these for discussion to working groups.
As the first round of the lower-level negotiations closed on Feb. 28 it became clear that these and other technical issues were still unresolved, and a second round of negotiations was due to commence in Budapest, Hungary, on April 23.
The timetable approved by the foreign ministers provided for the signing of a treaty on May 12.
INTERNATIONAL
LEAST DEVELOPED COUNTRIES
Bangladesh meeting
A ministerial meeting in Dhaka, the Bangladesh capital, attended by representatives of 30 of the world's least-developed countries (LDCs), ended on Feb. 12 by urging that the 42 countries in this category be given special treatment, including a write-off of all outstanding debt, doubling of official development assistance, and special preferential access for their commodity exports to the developed world.
Some 500,000,000 people lived in the 42 LDCs (110,000,000 of them in Bangladesh), where population growth averaged 2.6 per cent.
Their average annual per capita income was about $200, or a quarter of that in the developing world as a whole.
A programme of meetings on the problems of LDCs was to follow the Bangladesh session, including a meeting in Moscow at the end of the month with the Soviet Union and East European countries, meetings in Geneva in late March with Western donor countries, and an international conference scheduled for Paris in September 1990.
The LDC category had first been given prominence nine years earlier, by the September 1981 UN Conference on Least Developed Countries in Paris [see p. 31352], when the UN had drawn up its list of (then 31) LDCs, but little had been achieved in implementing a Substantial New Programme of Action adopted by that meeting.
Least Developed Countries
Africa (28 countries): Benin, Botswana, Burkina, Burundi, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Comoros, Djibouti, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, The Gambia, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Lesotho, Malawi, Mali, Mauritania, Mozambique, Niger, Rwanda, Sao Tomé and Príncipe, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Sudan, Tanzania, Togo, Uganda.
Americas: Haiti.
Asia (nine countries): Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Bhutan, Burma, Laos, Maldives, Nepal, North Yemen and South Yemen.
Pacific (four countries): Kiribati, Tuvalu, Vanuatu, Western Samoa.
INTERNATIONAL
WORLD ECONOMIC FORUM
20th session
The 20th session of the World Economic Forum, a meeting of senior economists from some 60 industrialized countries, was held in Davos, Switzerland, on Feb. 1-6, when the discussion was attended for the first time by representatives from Eastern Europe.
Czechoslovakia, East Germany and Bulgaria were represented by their respective Premiers, Marian Calfa, Hans Modrow and Andrei Lukanov, Hungary by Vice-Premier Peter Medgyessy, and the Soviet Union by Deputy Premier Leonid Abalkin and by Eduard Shevardnadze, the Foreign Minister.
President Wojciech Jaruzelski represented Poland.
All the East European countries stressed their commitment to the construction of market economies which could eventually replace their existing centralized systems, and all appealed for increased assistance while changes were in progress.
There was general agreement that no new money could easily be found for heavily indebted African or South American countries at present; meanwhile United States delegates told the conference that US monetary policy would be kept tight in order to combat inflation, which was currently around 4.5 per cent .
INTERNATIONAL
ENVIRONMENT
IPCC working group meeting
At a meeting on Washington on Feb. 9 climatologists reached agreement for the first time on the assessment of likely climatic effects of the increased burning of fossil fuels and deforestation.
If current trends continued unchecked, they foresaw that the amount of carbon dioxide (CO2 — the most important "greenhouse gas" ) in the atmosphere would double by the year 2030; global temperatures would rise by 1o-2o centigrade by 2030 and by 2o-4o centigrade by 2050, while sea levels would rise by around 30 cm by 2030.
The conclusions were reached by the working group studying the scientific evidence on global warming, one of three working groups of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climatic Change (IPCC).
The IPCC had been set up under United Nations auspices following the November 1988 world climate conference [see p. 36784]and was due to meet again in August 1990 in Stockholm.
A second world climate conference was to be held in November 1990 in Geneva.
INTERNATIONAL
POPULATION
Projections of population increases
The UN Fund for Population Activities on Feb. 21 published its revised estimate of future world population.
Because of slow progress in birthrate reduction, the projection for world population at the beginning of the 22nd century was raised from 10,200 million to 14,200 million.
The Washington-based Population Crisis Committee on Feb. 26 detailed a 10-year programme aimed at achieving a stable level of about 9,000 million by the middle of the 21st century.
This programme involved a threefold increase in family planning expenditure, with a greater proportion contributed by developed countries which currently provided less than half of the total.
INTERNATIONAL
UNITED NATIONS
First international plan to combat drugs
The UN General Assembly approved by consensus on Feb. 23 the first international plan to combat illegal drug production and consumption (estimated by the UN to be worth US$500,000 million a year) and declared the period 1991-2000 the UN Decade Against Drug Abuse.
The plan, which built on the 1988 Vienna Convention against drug trafficking [see also p. 36780], contained proposals to reduce the growing of coca and poppy plants in the Third World by developing alternative legitimate exports and guaranteeing these products access to international markets.
Industrialized countries in which illegal drugs were consumed agreed to limit the supply of chemicals used to manufacture such drugs and to control the flow of arms to drug cartels.
Under the plan mechanisms would be established (i) to prevent the laundering of drug money by banks and other financial institutions;(ii) to treat and rehabilitate drug addicts; and (iii) to co-ordinate information and educational programmes against the use of drugs.
INTERNATIONAL
AVIATION
Indian Airbus crash
An Indian Airlines Airbus 320 crashed when attempting to land at Bangalore airport, south India, on Feb. 14; 92 of the 146 people aboard were killed.
The airliner struck the ground some 50 metres short of the runway, turned over and burst into flames.
The aircraft was one of a fleet of 14 purchased the previous years from its European manufacturers, Airbus Industrie, at a cost of US$38,000,000 each.
Indian Airlines grounded its remaining Airbuses following the crash, and the head of the airline, Raghunandan Prasad, resigned on Feb. 17, taking "moral responsibility" for the accident.
The crash had occurred at a time of clear visibility and good weather conditions.
Airbus Industrie rejected any suggestion that the aircraft itself was to blame, but its sophisticated "fly by wire" computer system had been criticized by some experts as over-complicated, and Indian Airlines staff complained that pilots and maintenance crew had received insufficient training on the Airbus.
An additional factor was Bangalore airport's lack of the instrument landing system in operation at most major airports to facilitate landings.
In the days following the crash controversy arose over the Indian authorities' refusal to allow European investigators access to either the "black box" cockpit voice recordings or the digital flight recorder.
The sole previous Airbus crash had occurred at an air show in France in 1988 [see p. 36230].
AMERICAS — CARIBBEAN
CENTRAL AMERICA
Key accords and stages in Central American peace process
The Arias peace plan, also known as Esquipulas II or the Guatemala Accord, was drafted at the instigation of President Oscar Arias Sánchez of Costa Rica and signed on Aug. 7, 1987, at a two-day summit of the Presidents of Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras and Nicaragua in Guatemala City [see pp. 35440-42].
The 10-point plan outlined broad proposals for regional peace via measures to be taken at national level to resolve conflicts in individual countries, notably in Nicaragua and El Salvador.
The International Verification and Monitoring Commission (Comisión Internacional de Verificación y Seguimiento — CIVS) was to be established, and in each country a national reconciliation commission was to be set up to monitor compliance with internal aspects of the plan [see pp. 35890-95].
The Sapoá agreement was signed by representatives of the Nicaraguan government and the anti-government United States-backed contra rebels at a meeting on March 21-23, 1988, in Sapoá, Nicaragua [see p. 35894].
It provided for (i) a provisional 60-day ceasefire and the restriction of contra forces to designated zones;(ii) high-level negotiations on democratic reforms and a permanent ceasefire; and (iii) certain concessions by the Nicaraguan government including an amnesty.
Progress made at follow-up talks between the two sides to implement the agreement was minimal [see p. 35950].
The US Congress at the end of March 1988 allocated humanitarian aid to the contras which enabled them to continue as a force, but Nicaragua from May 1988 unilaterally extended the Sapoá ceasefire on a monthly basis throughout 1988 and for most of 1989 [see pp. 36421-22; 36681; see also below].
The Costa del Sol agreement emerged from a meeting of the Central American heads of state in El Salvador on Feb. 13-14, 1989 [see p. 36460], in an effort to give fresh impetus to the Arias peace plan [see above].
Nicaragua agreed to bring forward its general election, to release political prisoners and to make further concessions on internal reform, in return for an undertaking by the heads of state to elaborate within 90 days (i.e. by May 15) a plan for the demobilization, voluntary repatriation or relocation of contras and their families from camps in southern Honduras.
A plan drawn up to this end by Foreign Ministers at a meeting on May 5 in Guatemala City was later embodied in the Tela agreement [see below].
Meanwhile, however, the peace process received a further setback with the renewed approval by the US Congress of humanitarian aid to the contras at the end of March 1989.
The Tela agreement was signed at a meeting of Central American heads of state in Tela, Honduras, on Aug. 5-7, 1989 [see p. 36847].
It covered the demobilization, repatriation or relocation of the contras over a 90-day period beginning on Sept. 8 (i.e. by Dec. 5).
It also called on the guerrillas in El Salvador to cease hostilities and to begin peace talks.
Some controversy arose over whether the adjective "voluntary" in the Spanish text of the agreement (desmovilización y repatriación voluntaria) applied to the contras' demobilization or to their repatriation.
The Mexico City agreement emerged from talks on Sept. 13-15, 1989, between the Salvadorean government and the main guerrilla organization in El Salvador, the Farabundo Martí National Liberation Front (Frente Farabundo Martí de Liberación Nacional — FMLN)[see p. 36890], in response to an appeal made in the Tela agreement [see below], and allowed for monthly talks to take place between the two sides.
Nicaragua unilaterally declared an end to the 19-month ceasefire on Nov. 1, 1989, on the grounds that contras were renewing their attacks inside Nicaragua, and that insufficient efforts were being made to disband them.
Fighting resumed on the following day [see pp. 36972; 37038].
A UN Observer Group in Central America (ONUCA) was established following a UN Security Council vote on Nov. 1, 1989 [see p. 37038], to monitor compliance with the Tela agreement [see above]and to patrol borders.
Progress on regional parliament
The establishment of a proposed Central American parliament as envisaged in the Arias peace plan [see pp. 35440-42]was hindered by Costa Rica's failure to ratify the treaty of adherence on the grounds that it would compromise the country's sovereignty.
In a declaration signed in Cuenca (Spain) on April 3, 1989, political, parliamentary and other representatives from Europe and Central America (including the Vice-Presidents of Honduras and El Salvador, but not Costa Rica), stressed that Central American integration was essential economically, socially and politically for peace and development in the region, and that the formation of a regional parliament was part of this process.
Conference on refugees
The first International Conference on Central American Refugees (CIREFCA) was held in Guatemala City on May 29-31, 1989, under the auspices of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR).
A declaration and a three-year concerted plan of action were adopted to assist nearly 2,000,000 Central Americans affected in Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Mexico, Nicaragua and Belize.
These were defined as 146,400 refugees, 893,000 undocumented Central American immigrants, 872,000 displaced persons and 61,500 repatriated citizens.
Overall the 32 projects in the plan were expected to cost $400,000,000, the financing to be provided by Western and Central American governments, humanitarian organizations and aid agencies.
AMERICAS — CARIBBEAN
EL SALVADOR
BASIC DATA
Area: 21,393 sq km(incl. inland water).
Population: 5,124,931 (1989).
Capital: San Salvador.
Language: Spanish.
Religion: Christianity (80% Roman Catholic).
Av. life expectancy: 67 yrs (women), 58 yrs (men)(1989).
Armed forces: 56,000 (incl. 12,500 civil defence force)(1989).
GNP per capita: US$860 (1987).
Currency: Salvadorean colón (US$1.00=6.3848 colones as at Feb. 5, 1990).
The Republic of El Salvador was ruled by Spain until 1821 and gained separate independence in 1839, since which time the country's history has been one of frequent coups and political violence.
Under the Constitution of December 1983 executive power is held by the President, who is directly elected for a five-year term, while legislative power is vested in the unicameral Legislative Assembly (which replaced the National Constituent Assembly in March 1985) with 60 members similarly elected for a three-year term.
The President is assisted by a Vice-President and a Council of Ministers.
Presidential elections held on March 19, 1989 [see p. 36520], were won by Alfredo Cristiani Burkard of the right-wing Nationalist Republican Alliance (Alianza Republicana Nacionalista — Arena).
Cristiani took over as President from José Napoleón Duarte of the Christian Democratic Party (Partido Demócrata Cristiano — PDC) on June 1 [see pp. 36731-32].
In elections to the Legislative Assembly held on March 20, 1988, Arena had won 30 seats compared with 23 won by the PDC [see pp. 35952-53].
Gen. Rafael Humberto Larios Lopez Defence and Public Security José Manuel Pacas Castro Foreign Affairs Oscar Alfredo Santamaría Justice Juan Antonio Martínez Varela Presidency Mirna Liévano de Márquez Planning, Co-ordination of Economic and Social Development Rafael Alvarado Cano Finance Arturo Zablah Economy René Hernández Valiente Education Mauricio González Dubón Labour and Social Security Col. Lisandro Vásquez Sosa Public Health and Social Welfare Antonio Cabrales Agriculture and Livestock Mauricio Stubig Works Mauricio Sandoval Secretary of Information in the President's Office 
Council of Ministers
POLITICS/SECURITY
Armed forces appointment
Gen. Rafael Antonio Villamariona was appointed Commander-in-Chief of the Air Force in place of Gen. Juan Rafael Bustillo who had held the post for a decade according to the Latin American Weekly Report of Feb. 1, 1990.
Casualty figures — Proposed increase in US military aid
According to Army figures released on Jan. 3, 1990, a total of 1,079 soldiers and 3,697 guerrillas had been killed since the beginning of 1989 in the war against the Farabundo Martí National Liberation Front (Frente Farabundo Martí para la Liberación Nacional — FMLN).
The United States foreign aid appropriations bill signed into law by President Bush on Nov. 21, 1989, allocated US$85,000,000 in military aid to El Salvador in fiscal 1990.
Progress of peace talks
As laid down in the Mexico City agreement reached in September 1989 [see p. 36890], the first of a series of monthly meetings between high-level representatives of the government and the FMLN began in Costa Rica on Oct. 15-18, with two bishops as mediators and with representatives of the UN and the Organization of American States (OAS) as observers.
Two colonels and three US advisers, one of them military, attended the talks for the first time.
Little real progress was achieved, however, and the FMLN broke off peace negotiations on Nov. 2 after a trade union headquarters was blown up by a car bomb [see pp. 37037-38].
Soon afterwards the FMLN launched a major offensive in San Salvador on Nov. 11 [ibid.].
In the Costa Rica talks the government called for an immediate cessation of hostilities on both sides and the total demobilization of all FMLN forces before reforms and the integration of the FMLN into political life could begin.
Joaquín Villalobos, the FMLN's military commander, described these proposals as amounting to unconditional surrender.
The FMLN demanded agreement on political, economic, social and military reforms before any provisional ceasefire could enter into force, and the implementation of some of these reforms before the installation of a definitive ceasefire.
In particular the FMLN demanded the retirement of senior officers from a particularly influential graduation year (the tandona or 35th promotion) which included the Defence Minister, Gen. Rafael Humberto Larios Lopez, the chief of police and the military Chief of Staff [see also below].
Tension surrounding the talks was heightened when the daughter of the commander of the military training school, Ana Isabel Casanova, 23, was shot dead in Santa Tecla, just outside San Salvador, on Oct. 17.
The FMLN denied claims that its urban commandos had carried out the murder.
Renewed prospect of peace talks — Lifting of curfew
Apparently in response to an appeal made at the Central American summit held in San José, Costa Rica, in December 1989 [see p. 37119], the FMLN on Jan. 11, 1990, agreed to reopen within 30 days peace talks with the government under the mediation of the UN Secretary-General, Javier Pérez de Cuéllar.
President Cristiani, who at the beginning of February flew to New York for meetings with UN representatives, agreed to the meeting but requested that while Pérez de Cuéllar could be present he should not participate.
Before his departure to the USA Cristiani announced on Jan. 30 that the curfew imposed on Nov. 12 [see p. 37037]would be lifted on Feb. 1.
The state of siege imposed at the same time was, however, extended by 30 days by a vote of the legislative assembly on Feb. 8.
Human rights
The Salvadorean Human Rights Commission (CDHES) stated at the end of September 1989 that since Cristiani took office on June 1, 1989, 296 people had been found murdered, 416 had been detained and 48 had disappeared.
In mid-1989 expulsions and arrests increased, and church and relief workers in general became the target of intensified military repression later in the year.
Fifteen people including church workers were arrested on Dec. 1 in connection with an attack on Oct. 30 on the military high command [see p. 37038], and a US church worker, Jennifer Casolo, was held for 18 days accused of stockpiling weapons for the FMLN, before being released on Dec. 13 under intensive pressure from the USA.
A group of about 20 human rights activists occupied the Salvadorean embassy in the Costa Rican capital, San José, on Oct. 5 in protest against human rights abuses.
They freed their hostages, including the ambassador, and left the embassy peacefully on Oct. 7.
On the following day, under a temporary amnesty, a group of 167 wounded guerrillas was allowed to leave El Salvador for medical treatment and were flown to Cuba via Mexico.
They included a group of guerrillas, ultimately numbering 46, who had occupied the Metropolitan Cathedral in San Salvador since Aug. 20 and who at the beginning of October had sought political asylum in the Mexican embassy.
The home in Santa Tecla of Saúl Suster, a close friend of Cristiani, was attacked with machine-gun fire on Jan. 25, 1990; two security guards were killed and two others wounded.
The attack was believed to have been the work of right-wing elements opposed to Cristiani's investigation into the murder on Nov. 16, 1989, of six Jesuit priests [see p. 37038], which had already resulted in the arrest of nine soldiers [for charging of soldiers with murder of Jesuits see p. 37181].
Moves towards military change
The Commander of the Air Force since 1979, Gen. Juan Rafael Bustillo, was appointed military attaché to Israel at the beginning of January 1990 in what was seen as the first step in reducing the power of senior right-wing officers.
The move followed the completion of a report, commissioned by Col. René Emilio Ponce, the military chief of staff, and drafted by junior officers, which criticized the conduct of the military operations against the FMLN and attacked what they described as corrupt practices by senior officers, the vagaries of the promotion system and the lack of accountability of commanders.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth 1% (1988) -1% (1989 est.)
Trade balance -US$520 m. (1989 est.)
Budget deficit US$458.45 m. (1989 est.)
Total external public debt US$1,825 m. (1989 est.)
Debt service ratio (as % of export earnings) 14.5% (1989 est.)
Gross domestic product US$4,100 m. (1988)
Inflation rate 21.2% (1989)
Unemployment 19% (1988)
Principal trading partners USA, EC, Japan 
Economic measures and national rescue plan
Cristiani on July 21, 1989, announced economic measures to resolve the problems of the fiscal deficit (estimated at $458,450,000 for 1989) and the lack of international reserves, and to reduce inflation, create jobs and encourage exports.
Price controls were to be eliminated on 230 products including some basic foods, certain transport sectors were to be deregulated, and electricity rates were to be increased, with concessions for low-income households.
Import tariffs were to be changed and income tax reforms implemented.
On Aug. 25, 1989, Cristiani outlined a "national rescue plan" .
It would provide 20,000 temporary jobs per month, especially in rural areas at times when there was less work, and would include a low-cost housing programme, a national food programme, an urban community development programme, and a project to bring help to eastern El Salvador, which he said had suffered most in the last 10 years.
A food import programme was aimed at reducing and stabilizing prices, and in 1990 more low-income groups were to be exempted from income tax.
By the end of 1989 El Salvador had been declared ineligible for World Bank lending, having accumulated arrears of $6,500,000 on loans of $110,000,000 from this body.
AMERICAS — CARIBBEAN
PANAMA
BASIC DATA
Area: 77,082 sq km.
Population: 2,373,053 (1989).
Capital: Panama City.
Language: Spanish (official).
Religion: Christianity (majority Roman Catholic).
Av. life expectancy: 75 yrs (women), 71 yrs (men)(1989).
GNP per capita: US$2,240 (1987).
Currency: balboa (the balboa's value is fixed at par with the US dollar).
The Republic of Panama seceded from Colombia in 1903.
As a result of constitutional reforms adopted by referendum in April 1983, legislative power is vested in a unicameral Legislative Assembly (which replaced the National Assembly of Community Representatives in 1984) consisting of 67 members elected for five-year terms by universal and compulsory adult suffrage.
Executive power is held by the President, also directly elected for a five-year term, assisted by two elected Vice-Presidents and an appointed Cabinet.
In elections to the Legislative Assembly held on May 6, 1984 [see p. 33151], the National Democratic Union (Unión Nacional Democrática — Unade) won 40 of the 67 seats.
In simultaneous presidential elections the declared winner, by a margin of 1,713 votes, was Unade candidate Nicolás Ardito Barletta.
Following Ardito Barletta's resignation, Eric Arturo Delvalle took office as President on Sept. 28, 1985 [see pp. 33975-76].
On Feb. 25, 1988, declaring unconstitutional an earlier call by the President for the resignation of Gen. Manuel Antonio Noriega Moreno as the Commander of the Defence Forces, the Legislative Assembly resolved to dismiss both Delvalle and Vice-President Roderick Esquivel; the Education Minister, Manuel Solís Palma, was installed as Minister in charge of the Presidency of the Republic on Feb. 26 [see p. 35818].
Following the presidential elections on May 7, 1989, the result of which was annulled by Noriega on May 10 [see p. 36645], Francisco Rodríguez, a close friend of Noriega and former comptroller general of the treasury, was sworn in as provisional President on Sept. 1 [see p. 36846].
However, following Noriega's formal assumption of power on Dec. 15 as head of state, a United States military invasion of Dec. 20 led to the overthrow of Noriega and the immediate installation of Guillermo Endara Galimany (widely believed to have won the May elections) as President [see pp. 37112-13].
Ricardo Arias Calderón Minister of Government; Justice Rene Orillac Public Works Mario Galindo Treasury and Finance Ada L. De Gordon Education Jorge Ruben Rosas Labour and Social Welfare José Trinidad Castillero Health Juan B. Chevalier Industry and Commerce Raúæ Figueroa Housing Ezequiel Rodríguez Agricultural Development Guillermo Ford Boyd Planning, Economic Policy Julio Harris Presidency Julio E. Linares Foreign Affairs 
Cabinet
POLITICS/SECURITY
Reopening of newspapers and Chamber of Commerce — Moves towards abolition of Army
The newspaper La Prensa, which had been closed down in February 1988 [see p. 35818], reopened on Jan. 7, 1990, its editor, Roberto Eisenmann, having returned from exile on Jan. 5.
Panamá América, a newspaper which had been closed by the military authorities 21 years earlier, also resumed publication on Jan. 5.
Also in January President Endara reopened the Chamber of Commerce which had been closed in February 1988 for opposing Noriega.
La Prensa, one of the most influential newspapers in Panama, immediately began to campaign in support of a referendum on Endara's proposal (made public on Jan. 23 during his visit to Costa Rica — see p. 37181) that the Army should be abolished and Panama become a neutral and demilitarized country.
After the US invasion the Panamanian Defence Forces (FDP) had been remodelled into a new Public Force, currently numbering about 12,000 men.
With the highest ranking officers of the old FDP under arrest or in hiding and about 150 other senior officers dismissed from their posts, the government placed a two-year limitation on the new commander's term of office, ordered retirement after 25 years' service and made regional commanders subject to civilian authority.
Various branches of the former FDP were demilitarized and placed under the control of the Justice Ministry.
A total of 27 refugees including Noriega's wife and daughters remained in the Cuban embassy and the former President, Manuel Solís Palma, was reported to be in the Venezuelan embassy.
Only Capt. Asunción Eliecer Gaitán, Noriega's chief of personal security, was still in the papal nunciature.
The leader of the pro-Noriega Dignity Battalions (armed civilian gangs) surrendered to the US authorities on Jan. 11.
New Canal administrator
Fernando Manfredo assumed the post of acting administrator of the Panama Canal on Jan. 1, 1990, in succession to Gen. (retd) Dennis P. McAuliffe, who had held the post since 1979.
The appointment fulfilled a requirement of the 1977 Panama Canal Treaties that a Panamanian should take over the post from a US citizen at the beginning of 1990.
However, the appointment was made unilaterally by the USA, which during the last days of the Noriega regime had rejected a Panamanian proposal to appoint Tomás Altamirano Duque.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth 0.0% (1989 est.)
Current-account balance +US$342 m. (1987)
Trade balance -US$690 m. (1989 est.)
Total external public debt US$5,500 m. (1989 est.)
Gross domestic product US$4,200 m. (1988 est.)
Inflation rate 2% (1988)
Unemployment 28% (1988)
Principal trading partners USA, Central America, Caribbean
On July 3, 1989, the executive board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) declared Panama ineligible to use the IMF's general resources since its overdue payments had reached 129,300,000 special drawing rights at the end of the previous month.
By the end of 1989 Panama had also been declared ineligible for World Bank lending because of arrears of $150,000,000 which had accumulated on loans of $337,000,000 from that body.
FOREIGN
Relations with USA
The US Vice-President, Dan Quayle, visited Panama on Jan. 27-28, 1990, and declared that the USA wanted to withdraw its troops from Panama as quickly as possible.
[For Jan. 31 announcement by US President Bush in his state of the union address to the effect that US troops would be withdrawn "well before the end of February" see p. 37177.]
Quayle, who was in the region to attend the inauguration of the new Honduran President, was also reported to have urged Endara to hold an election or national referendum to gain international recognition of the government.
The USA and Panama on Jan. 10, 1990, signed an outline agreement on combating drug-related crimes, and on Jan. 29, during Quayle's visit, Endara announced that banking regulations were to be amended to prevent money laundering.
A US decision announced on Nov. 30, 1989, to refuse vessels with Panamanian flags access to US ports as from Feb. 1, 1990, was reversed on Jan. 6.
Panama earned an estimated $100,000,000 annually from its flag of convenience registry.
The US Defence Secretary, Richard Cheney, confirmed on Dec. 26, 1989, that the F-117A Stealth light attack aircraft, one of the newest fighter aircraft, had been tested in a combat role for the first time in the Panamanian invasion.
Relations with Peru
Relations with Peru had been severely strained over the invasion, and over the presence in the Peruvian ambassador's residence of 12 members of the Noriega regime.
Peru had strongly denounced the US invasion, and had joined Venezuela, Colombia and Mexico in calling for early elections to be held.
On Jan. 16, 1990, the Peruvian chargé d'affaires, Luis Sandiga, was given 72 hours to leave the country after making statements which "questioned the legitimacy of the democratic government" of Endara; the Panamanian ambassador was also recalled from Peru.
AMERICAS — CARIBBEAN
NICARAGUA
BASIC DATA
Area: 120,254 sq km.
Population: 3,503,103 (1989).
Capital: Managua.
Languages: Spanish (national); some English.
Religion: Christianity (majority Roman Catholic).
Av. life expectancy: 63 yrs (women), 61 yrs (men)(1989).
Armed forces: 80,000 (1989).
GNP per capita: US$830 (1987).
Currency: new córdoba (US$1.00=3,9970.5014 córdobas as at Feb. 5, 1990).
Although the Republic of Nicaragua gained separate independence in 1838 it was subjected to US military intervention in 1912-25 and 1927-33, after which the country was left in the control of the Somoza family until the overthrow of the right-wing regime of Gen. Anastasio Somoza Debayle by a popular revolutionary movement, the Sandinista National Liberation Front (Frente Sandinista de Liberación Nacional — FSLN), in 1979.
Under a new Constitution approved by the 96-member National Constituent Assembly on Nov. 19, 1986, and signed into effect on Jan. 9, 1987 [see p. 35444], legislative power is exercised by a unicameral National Assembly composed of 90 representatives (each with an alternate representative) directly elected for a six-year term by a system of proportional representation and, in addition, those unelected presidential and vice-presidential candidates (as representatives and alternates respectively) who receive nationally votes at least equivalent to the average of the winning percentages in each regional electoral district.
Executive power is vested in the President (currently Daniel Ortega Saavedra), who is the head of state and Commander-in-Chief of the Defence and Security Forces and who governs with the assistance of a Vice-President and an appointed Cabinet.
Both the President and the Vice-President are directly elected for a six-year term.
Fr Miguel d'Escoto Brockman Foreign Affairs Cdr.
Humberto Ortega Saavedra Defence Cdr.
Tomás Borge Martínez Interior Cdr.
Luis Carrión Cruz Industry and Commerce Cdr.
Henry Ruiz Hernández Foreign Co-operation Cdr.
Jaime Wheelock Román Agriculture, Fisheries, Forestry, Livestock and Agrarian Reform René Núñez Téllez Presidency Cdr.
Mauricio Valenzuela Sotomayor Transport and Construction William Hupper Argüello Finance Cdr.
Dora María Téllez Argüello Health Fernando Cardenal Martínez Education Benedicto Meneses Fonseca Labour Herty Lewites Rodríguez Minister, Director of the Institute of Tourism Reinaldo Antonio Téfel Minister, Director of the Institute of Social Security Welfare Alejandro Martínez Cuenca Secretary for Planning and Budgets Joaquín Cuadra Chamorro President of the Central Bank 
Cabinet
POLITICS/SECURITY
Preparations for elections — Formation of UNO
In anticipation of presidential elections planned for Feb. 25, 1990, the ruling FSLN announced on Sept. 24, 1989, that President Daniel Ortega and Vice-President Sergio Ramírez Mercado would stand for re-election.
Meanwhile the National Opposition Union (Unión Nacional de Opositora — UNO) had on Sept. 2 in the fifth round of voting selected Violeta Barrios de Chamorro (the owner of the opposition newspaper La Prensa) and Virgilio Godoy as its presidential and vice-presidential candidates.
The United States President, George Bush, on Oct. 21 signed a congressional bill allocating US$9,000,000 in aid for the opposition's electoral campaign.
The UNO had been formed in June 1989 by 14 opposition parties in anticipation of the elections, following talks with representatives of the anti-government contra rebels in Guatemala in April [see p. 36681].
UNO's platform, announced early in September, included plans to expand the market economy, to extend social freedoms and guarantees including trade union freedoms, to revise the Constitution to provide for a strict separation of the state, the Army and the ruling party, to abolish compulsory military service, to reduce radically the size of the armed forces, to reorganize the police under civil authority and to grant an amnesty for political prisoners.
New electoral legislation
A new electoral law, passed by the National Assembly on April 18, 1989, and signed by Ortega on April 22, provided for elections to be overseen by a new Supreme Electoral Council comprising five members elected by the National Assembly from among candidates proposed by the President, including two from opposition parties.
The Council would be responsible for naming nine regional councils, each comprising three members including one opposition member.
As confirmed on June 7 by the National Assembly, two of the Council's members belonged to the FSLN and two to the UNO, while one was unaffiliated.
Mariano Fiallos, president of the old Council, was re-elected to the post.
The opposition objected to the law, saying, among other things, that it did not provide for "equitable participation" of both sides on the electoral bodies, and that the FSLN would receive most of the money from a government campaigning fund to be distributed to the parties which won the most votes in the 1984 elections (which the opposition had boycotted).
They also protested that under the law half of any funds received from abroad were to be placed in a special "fund for democracy" .
UN legal experts noted at the end of July, however, that Nicaragua's electoral legislation was democratic and comparable with the laws in force elsewhere in Latin America.
The government and the opposition on July 4 signed an agreement on electoral guarantees, regulating access to the media and the presence of foreign observers.
Observers from the UN and the Organization of American States (OAS) began arriving in Nicaragua in August to oversee the electoral process as requested by Nicaragua.
A special UN body, the UN Observers for the Verification of the Elections in Nicaragua (ONUVEN), began work on Aug. 25.
Contra developments
A number of leaders and former prominent members of the US-backed contra movement, officially known as the Nicaraguan Resistance (Resistencia Nicaragüense — RN), returned to Nicaragua from exile in 1989 to participate in the electoral process, being required to sign a statement renouncing armed activities.
They included three members of RN's directorate — Azucena Ferrey, Roberto Ferrey and Adolfo Calero Portocarrero — as well as Alfredo César (now a member of the Social Democratic Party — Partido Social Demócrata — PSD) and Alfonso Robelo Callejas, former leader of the Nicaraguan Democratic Movement (Movimiento Democrático Nicaragüense — MDN).
Following their return, the contra leadership remaining in exile announced on Nov. 9 the formation of a new commission, dominated by young military commanders, to replace the directorate.
Its military members were Israel Galeano Cornejo, Marcos Orlando Navarro and Oscar Manuel Sobalvarro, while Arístides Sánchez, a member of the old directorate, was the only civilian.
The civilian contra leaders deprived of their posts in the reorganization described the move as a coup, and the 54-member RN assembly maintained that the original seven-member directorate which it had appointed should remain in charge of political decisions.
The former overall contra leader, Col. Enrique Bermúdez, was reported to have been already effectively deprived of power at a meeting in September with younger contra officers who, however, allowed him to keep his nominal title of military commander.
Eden Pastora Gómez, the former leader of the Democratic Revolutionary Alliance (ARDE) contra group, returned to Nicaragua on Dec. 3, 1989, after eight years in exile.
He aligned himself with the Social Christian Party for the 1990 elections, saying that Nicaragua should be free from the influence of the superpowers.
Two nuns — one from the United States and the other a Nicaraguan — were killed and a priest and several others were wounded during a contra attack in the north-east on Jan. 2, 1990.
Agreement with Indian rebels
During a visit to Nicaragua on Sept. 16-18, 1989, the former US President, Jimmy Carter, who had agreed to lead an international delegation to monitor the elections, acted as mediator between the government and Indian rebels from the Miskito coast area.
As a result, an agreement was signed that about 50 rebel leaders could return to Nicaragua on condition that, like the returning contras, they renounced the armed struggle and illegal activities and agreed to incorporate themselves into the political system.
Leaders of the Yatama Indian rebel alliance (including Brooklyn Rivera, Wycliffe Diego and Steadman Fagoth Müller) at the end of September signed a document confirming that they renounced the armed struggle (although their fighters remained in the mountains) and requested safe conduct to Nicaragua, at the same time announcing the formation of a new political party, and their support for Chamorro in the presidential elections.
Human rights
The human rights organization Amnesty International said in a report released on Nov. 9, 1989, that the human rights situation in Nicaragua had recently improved but that government troops continued to kill, maltreat and cause the disappearance of peasants who collaborated with the contras.
Various soldiers had, it said, been tried and imprisoned for such crimes.
The report also confirmed that contras had reinfiltrated Nicaragua and had committed atrocities against the civilian population, often executing people.
On the positive side, however, Amnesty International noted improvements such as the restoration of the right of habeas corpus and the repeal of the 1982 national security legislation.
Representatives of the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) in late August 1989 visited prisons at the request of the government, which claimed that organizations such as the permanent human rights commission (CPDH) and the support group for families of political prisoners were falsely estimating that there were between 6,000 and 7,000 inmates.
The ICRC confirmed that political prisoners numbered 1,268, although their representatives did not have access to prisons run by the state security services.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth -3% (1989 est.)
Trade balance -US$285 m. (1989 est.)
Total external public debt US$7,570 m. (1989 est.)
Debt service ratio (interest due as % of exports) 56.1% (1989 est.)
Gross domestic product US$2,100 m. (1988)
Inflation rate 3,452.4 (1989 est.)
Unemployment 22% (1987)
Principal trading partners (1988) Exports: COMECON (40%), OECD (39%); Imports: COMECON (52%), EC (12%), Mexico (10%)
Presenting the 1989 budget to the National Assembly in January 1989, the Finance Minister, William Hupper, revealed that the public-sector deficit for 1988 had been equivalent to 27 per cent of gross national product (GNP), and that inflation had risen to 50,000 per cent.
In 1989 it was planned to reduce the deficit to 13 per cent of total budgetary expenditure (at an unspecified exchange rate) with the assistance of the Central Bank, which would call in loans and foreign donations.
There would be a drastic reduction in spending, the tax base would be broadened and measures would be taken against tax evasion.
A 52.5 per cent devaluation of the córdoba to a new official rate of US$1.00=20,000 córdobas was announced on June 12, to be followed by the suspension of periodic adjustments until the end of July.
The devaluation followed a steep rise in the rate of the dollar in the parallel market, to 20,475 córdobas on June 8.
A price freeze on nine basic staple goods was announced on June 14, and at the same time the government announced pay rises of 36-50 per cent for public employees.
A further 5.1 per cent devaluation against the US dollar took place on Dec. 9, concurrent with the issue of a new 100,000 córdoba note.
By the end of 1989 Nicaragua had been declared ineligible for World Bank lending because of arrears of US$150 million accumulated on loans of $160 million from that body.
FOREIGN
Relations with USA
The first high-level contact since January 1985 took place between the USA and Nicaragua in September 1989 when the US Deputy Assistant Secretary of State, Janet Mullins, met Ortega.
Two US diplomats (out of a total of 55) had been expelled from Nicaragua on May 25 for allegedly inciting an opposition teachers' trade union to public disturbances, and in retaliation two (higher ranking) Nicaraguans (out of a total of only 15) were expelled from the USA on May 31.
Nicaragua on June 2 called on the USA to take part in talks to establish norms of diplomatic behaviour and visa regulations, and later in June asked Cardinal Miguel Obando y Bravo, the Archbishop of Managua, to arrange talks, but this idea was rejected by the spokesperson for the US administration, Marlin Fitzwater.
On June 17 Nicaragua made it obligatory from July 1, in the interests of "strict reciprocity" , for all US citizens visiting Nicaragua to apply for visas.
Following the US invasion of Panama on Dec. 20, 1989 [see pp. 37112-13], US troops surrounded and entered the residence of the Nicaraguan ambassador in Panama City on Dec. 29.
Nicaragua retaliated on Dec. 30 by ordering 20 US diplomats to leave the country forthwith, and US President George Bush admitted on the same day that the action was a "screw-up" .
AMERICAS — CARIBBEAN
MEXICO
BASIC DATA
Area: 1,958,201 sq km(incl. inland water).
Population: 86,366,019 (1989).
Capital: Mexico City.
Languages: Spanish; indigenous languages.
Religion: Christianity (96% Roman Catholic).
Av. life expectancy: 73 yrs (women), 67 yrs (men)(1989).
Armed forces: 141,500 (1989).
GNP per capita: US$1,830 (1987).
Currency: Mexican peso (US$1.00=2,694.0117 pesos as at Feb. 5, 1990).
The United Mexican States achieved independence from Spain in 1821.
Under the 1917 Constitution (as revised) Mexico is a federal republic comprising 31 states and a Federal District around the capital.
Executive power is held by a President who is elected for a six-year term and who appoints a Cabinet including the Governor of the Federal District.
Legislative power is vested in a bicameral National Congress consisting of a 400-member Federal Chamber of Deputies elected every three years (300 by majority vote in single-member constituencies and the remaining 100 by proportional representation from minority parties' lists) and a 64-member Senate (comprising two senators from each state and two from the Federal District) elected at the same time as the President.
Each state has its own constitution and is administered by a governor who, with the exception of the Governor of the Federal District, is elected for a six-year term, and a Chamber of Deputies elected for a three-year term.
All elections are by universal adult suffrage.
In elections held on July 6, 1988 [see pp. 36367-69], the ruling Institutional Revolutionary Party (Partido Revolucionario Institucional — PRI) polled 50.36 per cent of the vote, thereby retaining the presidency but winning a reduced number of seats in Congress (260 out of 500).
Carlos Salinas de Gortari took office as President on Dec. 1, replacing Miguel de la Madrid Hurtado.
Fernando Gutiérrez Barrios Government Fernando Solana Morales Foreign Relations Gen. Antonio Riviello Bazán Defence Adml.
Mauricio Scheleske Sánchez Navy Pedro Aspe Armella Finance and Public Credit Ernesto Cedillo Ponce de León Planning and Federal Budget María Elena Vásquez Nava Comptroller-General Fernando Hiriart Balderrama Energy, Mines and Public Industries Jaime Serra Puche Commerce and Industrial Development Carlos Hank González Agriculture and Water Resources Andrés Caso Lombardo Communications and Transport Patricio Chirinos Calero Urban Development and Ecology Manuel Bartlett Díaz Education Jesús Cumate Rodriguez Health Arsenio Farell Cubillas Labour and Social Welfare Victor Cervera Pacheco Agrarian Reform Pedro Joaquín Codwell Tourism Maria de los Angeles Moreno Iruegas Fisheries Manuel Camacho Solís Governor of Federal District Enrique Alvárez del Castillo Attorney General Ignacio Morales Lechuga Attorney General of the Federal District Brig. -Gen.
Arturo Cardona Marino Chief of the Presidential Staff José Córdoba Montoya Director-General of the Technical Cabinet Secretariat Andrés Massieu Berlanga Presidential Secretary Ruben Valdés Abascal Director-General of Legal Affairs of the Presidency
Cabinet
POLITICS/SECURITY
Cabinet changes
The Agriculture and Water Resources Minister, Jorge de la Vega Domínguez, resigned on Jan. 4, 1990, and was replaced by Carlos Hank González, hitherto Minister of Tourism, who was himself replaced by Pedro Joaquín Codwell.
Reallocation of seats to PRD in Michoacán — New governor of Baja California Norte
Following the allegations of fraud in the July 1989 legislative and municipal elections in five states [see p. 36811]an independent tribunal ruled in September that the left-wing nationalist Democratic Revolutionary Party (Partido de la Revolución Democrática — PRD) had in fact won 14 of the 18 seats in the state legislature in Michoacán, as opposed to the six initially conceded to the PRD against 12 for the ruling PRI, and that there had been widespread voting irregularities in the other four states.
Ernesto Ruffo Appel, of the centre-right National Action Party (Partido Acción Nacional — PAN), was sworn in on Nov. 1, 1989, as Governor of the state of Baja California Norte, the first opposition party member to hold such office for 60 years [for this election in July see p. 36811].
Passage of electoral reform bill with PAN support
On Oct. 17, 1989, the PAN voted with the PRI for the first time to pass an electoral reform bill.
A majority of two-thirds was required to pass constitutional modifications, and the result was 364 votes to 70.
As a result of bargaining between these two main parties the PRI secured the preservation of the "governability" clauses which granted the party winning most votes in the legislative elections an absolute majority, even with a vote of less than 50 per cent; the PAN ensured that the threshold at which these clauses became applicable was raised from 17 per cent to 35 per cent of the vote.
A new electoral commission was to be established which would include five non-party members, who would be nominated by the President to be approved by Congress.
PAN and PRD developments
Relations between the PAN and the PRI deteriorated following simultaneous state legislative and municipal elections in Sinaloa on Oct. 8, 1989.
The PAN disputed the results after being awarded only three of the 20 seats in the Sinaloa Chamber of Deputies, and accused electoral officials of failing to recognize the victory of its candidate for mayor in Mazatlán.
The government in January 1990 agreed to set up an investigation into political murders in the states of Michoacán and Guerrero.
The PRD said that 52 of its activists had been killed since the July 1988 general election but that most of the murders had taken place since the municipal elections in December 1989, the results of which were still in contention in many towns.
Sentencing of drug traffickers
Two leading drug traffickers, Rafael Caro Quintero and Ernesto Fonseca Carrillo, were on Dec. 13, 1989, sentenced to 116 and 144 years' imprisonment respectively and deprived of their assets for the murder in 1985 of Enrique Camarena Salazar, a United States Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) official, and his Mexican pilot [see pp. 33967; 36371].
The previous day Rubén Zuño Arce had been arrested on charges of organizing the torture and murder of Camarena.
Five men including the former head of the federal judicial police, Manuel Ibarra Herrera, and the former head of the Mexican branch of the International Criminal Police Organization (Interpol), Miguel Aldaña Ibarra, were on Jan. 31, 1990, indicted by a federal grand jury in Los Angeles, USA, in connection with the murder.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth 3% (1989 est.)
Current-account balance -US$3,200 m. (1988 est.)
Trade balance -US$200 m. (1989 est.)
Budget surplus (as % of GNP) 10.8% (1988)
Total external public debt US$99,000 m. (1989 est.)
Debt service ratio (as % of exports) 29.8% (1989 est.)
Inflation rate 18.2% (1989)
Unemployment 19% (1988)
Principal trading partners USA, EC, Japan 
Signing of debt reduction agreement
The President of the World Bank, Barber J. Conable, and the Mexican Finance Minister, Pedro Aspe, on Jan. 24, 1990, signed agreements under which Mexico would receive loans from the World Bank worth US$450 million.
Conable said that Mexico would be eligible for further loans worth $3,000 million in 1990, two-thirds of which would be devoted to debt reduction.
Economic outlook
In his state of the nation address (informe) on Nov. 1, 1989, Salinas undertook to continue with the political, electoral and economic reforms introduced by his government.
He noted that inflation had fallen from 159 per cent in December 1987 to 17 per cent as at September 1989, the lowest level for over 10 years.
He also pointed out that gross domestic product (GDP) grew in the first six months of 1989 by 2.4 per cent in real terms compared with the same period in 1988, and that the 1.5 per cent growth target for 1989 would therefore be surpassed.
The peso had, he asserted, become more competitive, undergoing a gradual devaluation of 13 per cent over January-September 1989 while producer prices had increased by only 10.3 per cent.
Wage rises, including increases in the minimum wage, had grown faster than the price index.
1990 budget
According to the draft budget for 1990 which was presented to Congress on Nov. 15, 1989, real expenditure was projected to increase by 4.7 per cent(to be financed by a 13.4 per cent increase in public revenues) and external debt interest payments would be reduced from 3.8 to 2.6 per cent of gross domestic product (GDP).
Investment in sectors including infrastructure electricity and oil was to rise by 14.4 per cent, to be made possible by a foreseen 13.4 per cent increase in public revenues.
Extension of economic pact
The Pact for Economic Stability and Growth [see p. 37078], which had been due to expire on March 31, 1990, was on Dec. 4, 1989, extended until July 31, 1990.
As agreed on Dec. 1, 1989, there would be a further 10 per cent rise in the minimum wage with immediate effect (to 10,102 pesos), and a 5 per cent increase in the prices of petrol, electricity and other goods and services.
The steady devaluation of the peso would continue.
Moves towards liberalization of financial sector
Legislation approved by the Chamber of Deputies on Dec. 13, 1989, allowed a degree of foreign participation in state-owned commercial banks through ownership of non-voting shares.
The government would retain control through ownership of 66 per cent of voting shares; private Mexican investors would remain eligible for ownership of the remaining 34 per cent of voting shares, as had been the case since the partial privatization of the banking system in 1987 [see pp. 35635-36].
FOREIGN
King Juan Carlos and Queen Sofía of Spain began a six-day official visit to Mexico on Jan. 9, 1990.
During their stay the Juan Carlos and Salinas presided over the signature of a five-year treaty of friendship and co-operation in the context of which Spain was to provide aid to Mexico of 4,400 million pesetas (about US$40,000,000 at current exchange rates) over five years in the form of credits and investment in the private sector.
[For visit by Salinas to Spain in July 1989 see p. 37079.]
Salinas visited Portugal, the United Kingdom, West Germany and Belgium in late January 1990 when he expressed the concern that the dramatic changes in Eastern Europe should not disadvantage Latin American countries in terms of aid from West European countries and from the European Communities.
AMERICAS — CARIBBEAN
HONDURAS
BASIC DATA
Area: 112,088 sq km(incl. inland water).
Population: 5,103,772 (1989).
Capital: Tegucigalpa.
Language: Spanish.
Religion: Christianity (mainly Roman Catholic).
Av. life expectancy: 67 yrs (women), 63 yrs (men)(1989).
Armed forces: 19,200 (13,200 conscripts)(1989).
GNP per capita: US$810 (1987).
Currency: lempira (official rate is fixed at US$1.00=2.00 lempiras).
The Republic of Honduras gained independence from Spain in 1821.
Power has alternated in the present century between civilian, military and coalition civilian-military governments, mostly involving the Liberal Party of Honduras (Partido Liberal de Honduras — PLH) or the conservative National Party (Partido Nacional — PN).
Under the provisions of the 1982 Constitution executive power is exercised by a President elected for a four-year term by a simple majority of votes.
In elections held on Nov. 26, 1989 [see pp. 37038-39 and below], for a new President and National Assembly, the right-wing PN presidential candidate, Rafael Leonardo Callejas, was victorious.
Mario Carías Zapata Foreign Affairs Ramón Medina Luna Economy Benjamín Villanueva Tábora Finance Manlio Martínez Planning Col. Francisco Zepeda Andino Defence Rodolfo Rosales Abella* Labour César Castellanos Health Jaime Martínez Guzmán Education Mauro Membreño Communications, Public Works and Transport Sonia Canales de Mendieta* Culture and Tourism Mario Lucio Gamero Natural Resources Ricardo Maduro Central Bank President Juan Ramón Martínez** National Agrarian Institute *PLH members.
**PDC member.
Cabinet
POLITICS/SECURITY
Official results of the legislative elections on Nov. 26, 1989 [see pp. 37038-39], were announced on Dec. 22. 1,799,146 votes were cast representing 76 per cent of the electorate.
Pre-election allegations that large numbers of citizens had been excluded from the electoral roll led to an agreement allowing citizens to vote with an identity card if their name were not on the register.
These 70,000 "special votes" were taken to the capital and checked by a special fraud commission before being included in the result.
[For 1985 legislative and presidential elections see pp. 34288-89.]
Nov. 26, 1989 1989 1985 Percentage of votes* Seats Percentage of votes Seats PN 50.98 71 46 63 PLH 43.19 55 51 67 Pinu** 1.89 2 1.5 2 PDC*** 1.41 0 1.5 2 *2.53 per cent of votes cast were invalid.
**Innovation and Unity Party (Partido Innovación y Unidad).
***Christian Democratic Party (Partido Demócrata Cristiano).
Legislative election results
Inauguration of Callejas
Rafael Leonardo Callejas was inaugurated as President of Honduras for a four-year term on Jan. 27, 1990.
Callejas, the PN candidate, had been elected on Nov. 26 with about 50 per cent of the vote.
The inauguration was attended by the US Vice-President, Dan Quayle, who had a brief meeting with Callejas and the heads of state or their representatives of Belize, Costa Rica, Guatemala, El Salvador and Venezuela, centring on the situation in Panama.
Of Callejas's new Cabinet, also sworn in on Jan. 27, Benjamin Villanueva Tábora was Economy and Commerce Minister in 1977-79 and Finance Minister in 1981; Ramón Medina Luna had been a Deputy Economy Minister; Manlio Martínez had served on a previous occasion as Planning Minister; Col. Francisco Zepeda Andino had served as Commander-in-Chief of the Air Force; and Rodolfo Rosales Abella of the opposition PLH had served briefly as Labour Minister in the last few months of the presidency of José Simeon Azcona.
Strike by banana workers
A two-week strike staged by the 9,000 workers at Honduras's largest banana producer, the Tela Railroad Company (an affiliate of the multinational company United Brands), ended on Oct. 15, 1989, with an agreement between union leaders and the management.
The strike had erupted on Oct. 3 over the interpretation of a collective labour contract, and a general strike had been planned for Oct. 16 by 100,000 other banana workers affiliated to the Confederation of Honduran Workers in support of those on strike.
The strikers had defied a decree issued by President Azcona on Oct. 8 to end the strike, which he said was causing irreparable damage to the economy.
Border incidents with El Salvador and Nicaragua
At intervals during 1989 there were clashes between Honduran and Salvadorean soldiers in the border areas, as well as mutual violations of airspace and territorial waters.
According to an Army communiqué Salvadorean "subversives" (i.e. guerrillas of the Farabundo Martí National Liberation Front — Frente Farabundo Martí para la Liberación Nacional — FMLN) had on May 27, 1989, entered a small Honduran town in the border area but had been forced back to El Salvador by a patrol; Salvadorean aircraft and a helicopter gunship had fired into Honduran territory in pursuit of the rebels; and a Salvadorean aircraft had flown over Honduran territory on May 29.
The FMLN, however, claimed on May 31 that soldiers from El Salvador and Honduras had engaged in "heavy clashes" on May 27 in the border area, in which four Honduran soldiers and one Salvadorean had been killed and nine Honduran and six Salvadorean soldiers wounded, and that the Salvadorean Air Force had strafed and bombed hamlets in the area.
Furthermore, Radio Venceremos (the FMLN radio station) claimed on May 29 that "special" Honduran troops had entered San Miguel department in El Salvador on May 27 and had engaged in a four-hour clash with Salvadorean forces, inflicting "numerous casualties" before being forced back into Honduras.
On May 30 Honduras protested officially to El Salvador over an attack on a Honduran patrol in Honduran waters on May 23 and the violation of airspace on May 29 when, it said, a Salvadorean aircraft had dropped propaganda leaflets on refugee camps in the border area.
Relations with Nicaragua were tense over the presence in Honduras of United States-financed Nicaraguan contra rebels who, although technically confined to border camps by international agreements, had again stepped up their attacks in Nicaragua at the end of 1989 [see p. 37038].
A Nicaraguan soldier was killed and another injured on April 9, 1989, when, according to Radio Sandino (Nicaragua), a Honduran border patrol attacked a Nicaraguan border patrol.
Later in the year the Honduran Foreign Ministry protested to Nicaragua that Nicaraguan Army forces had attacked several Honduran Army posts on the eastern border on Sept. 9.
The head of Nicaraguan Army intelligence, Maj. Ricardo Wheelock, replied on Sept. 13 that military attacks from Honduran territory had increased over the past two weeks.
Honduras denied on Sept. 30 that Honduran aircraft had attacked Nicaraguan territory earlier that day.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth 2.5% (1989 est.)
Current-account balance -US$183 m. (1987)
Trade balance -US$20 m. (1989 est.)
Budget deficit US$250 m. (1988)
Budget deficit (as % of GNP) 6.3% (1988)
Total external public debt US$3,260 m. (1989 est.)
Debt service ratio (as % of export earnings) 19.4% (1989 est.)
Gross domestic product US$3,530 m. (1987)
Inflation rate 10.8% (1989 est.)
Unemployment 14% (1989)
Principal trading partners (1987) Exports: USA (50%), Japan, Italy; Imports: USA (42%), CACM (15%), Venezuela (11%)
By the end of 1989 Honduras had been declared ineligible for World Bank lending because of having accumulated arrears of US$80,000,000 on loans of $400 million from this body.
FOREIGN
Presidential visit to Spain
Azcona paid an official visit to Spain on May 7-8, 1989.
An agreement was signed for Spanish loans to Honduras totalling US$70,000,000 over the next four years, and Spanish financial participation in the building of a new airport near Tegucigalpa was confirmed.
AMERICAS — CARIBBEAN
GUATEMALA
BASIC DATA
Area: 108,889 sq km.
Population: 9,116,877 (1989).
Capital: Guatemala City.
Languages: Spanish (official); more than 20 indigenous languages.
Religion: Christianity (majority Roman Catholic, 25% Protestant).
Av. life expectancy: 63 yrs (women), 59 yrs (men)(1989).
Armed forces: 42,200 (1989).
GNP per capita: US$950 (1987).
Currency: quetzal (US$1.00=2.8433 quetzales as at Feb. 5, 1990).
The Republic of Guatemala gained independence from the Federation of Central American States in 1838, since when its political history has involved periods of dictatorship and of occasional democratic government, interspersed with revolutionary upheavals.
In December 1984 a Constituent Assembly (elected the previous July in preparation for a return to civilian government) drafted a new constitution based on that of 1965; this was approved in May 1985 and came into effect in January 1986.
Legislative authority is now vested in a unicameral National Congress, with 100 members elected for five years by universal adult suffrage.
Of the total seats, 75 are filled by direct election and 25 on the basis of proportional representation.
Executive power is held by the President (also directly elected for five years), assisted by a Vice-President and an appointed Cabinet.
In elections to the National Congress on Nov. 3, 1985, the Christian Democratic Party (Partido Democracia Cristiana Guatemalteca — PDCG) of Mario Vinicio Cerezo Arévalo won 51 of the 100 seats.
Cerezo was elected President in two rounds of polling on Nov. 3 and Dec. 8, 1985, and took office on Jan. 14, 1986 [see pp. 34285-86].
Ariel Rivera Irias Foreign Affairs René Armando de León Schlotter Development Francisco Pinto Casarola Public Finance Carlos Armando Soto Gómez Public Health Catalina Soberanis Labour and Social Provision Elmar René Rojas Culture and Sport Rodolfo Estrada Agriculture Eduardo Meyer Maldonado Education Rolando Castillo Contoux Energy and Mines Mario López Estrada Communications Oscar Humberto Pineda Robles Economy Gen. Carlos Morales Villatoro Interior Gen. Héctor Alejandro Gramajo Morales Defence Alfonso Cabrera Hildago Special Affairs 
Cabinet
POLITICS/SECURITY
Cabinet changes
In Cabinet changes effected in mid-October 1989, Ariel Rivera Irias was appointed Minister of Foreign Affairs in succession to Mario Palencia Laínfiesta, Francisco Pinto Casarola replaced Rodolfo Paíz Andrade as Minister of Public Finance, and Gen. Carlos Morales Villatoro replaced Roberto Valle Valdizán as Minister of the Interior.
Extreme right-wing activities
Following an increase in violence during 1989, President Vinicio Cerezo on Sept. 18 publicly blamed the extreme right which he said was trying to destabilize his government.
Admitting that the security forces were involved in a recent wave of kidnappings and murders of students, he said that his government did not have the means to combat the activities which had taken place over the past few months, aimed at creating a climate of terror and instability in order to justify an attempt to return to the past or the installation of a president who would promise a tough policy.
On Sept. 22 he dismissed the chiefs of the police and of the criminal investigations directorate Cerezo further claimed in early December that members of the ruling Arena party in El Salvador (in particular Maj. Roberto d'Aubuisson, the founder of Arena) were supplying arms to violent right-wing elements in Guatemala.
A series of bombings had taken place in July, and the extreme right-wing White Hand group (La Mano Blanca) had become active again, circulating a death list at the end of September.
The extreme anti-communist Officers of the Mountain (Oficiales de la Montaña — ODEM) were also reportedly involved in the violence as well as in the last two attempted coups (in May 1988 and May 1989 — see pp. 35956; 36653-54) and in drug trafficking.
A former general secretary of the ruling PDCG, Danilo Barillas, was murdered on Aug. 1, and Ramiro Castillo, president of the Banco Industrial, on Aug. 25.
Human rights
According to statistics provided by human rights and business organizations, 1,598 Guatemalans had been murdered, 2,517 had suffered bodily harm and 906 had disappeared in the first six months of 1989.
Presenting his annual report to the legislature on Jan. 31, 1990, Ramiro de Léon Carpio, the country's human rights attorney, stated that the human rights office had been asked to intervene in 2,974 cases in 1989, 1,181 more than in 1988.
Victims included members of the Council of Indigenous Communities-We Are All Equal (CERJ) and the Mutual Support Group (Grupo de Apoyo Mutuo — GAM).
The Mexico-based Human Rights Committee of Guatemala (CGDH) also said that its members had been threatened with death for participating in a "national dialogue" involving members of the exiled opposition, held in March 1988 [see pp. 36927-28].
Coup rumours and trials
Following unusual activity in the vicinity of one of Guatemala City's main garrisons on Sept. 28, 1989, the Army denied that another coup had been attempted.
In November two former Army officers, Adolfo Padilla and Gustavo Díaz, were sentenced by a civilian court to seven years' imprisonment each for participation in a failed coup attempt on May 9, 1989 [see p. 36653-54].
Both had been dismissed from the Army for involvement in a previous attempt in May 1988.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth 3.5% (1988 est.)
Current-account balance -US$464 m. (1987)
Trade balance -US$150 m. (1988 est.)
Total external public debt US$2,400 m. (1988)
Debt service ratio (as % of export earnings) 42% (1988)
Gross domestic product US$9,600 m. (1987 est.)
Inflation rate 12% (1988)
Unemployment 12% (1987 est.)
Principal trading partners (1988) Exports: USA (41%), El Salvador, West Germany; Imports: USA (39%), Mexico, Japan 
New economic programme
Cerezo on Aug. 25, 1989, announced the "500-Day Programme" , an economic plan designed to "renew government efforts to consolidate Guatemalan democracy" .
Envisaging a 4 per cent real growth in 1990, it provided for a 10 per cent reduction in public expenditure, a wage increase for public employees, and the establishment of shops to sell basic items at low cost.
It also envisaged changes in the tax collection system.
AMERICAS — CARIBBEAN
COSTA RICA
BASIC DATA
Area: 51,100 sq km(incl. inland water).
Population: 2,953,908 (1989).
Capital: San José.
Language: Spanish.
Religion: Christianity (Roman Catholic).
Av. life expectancy: 78 yrs (women), 74 yrs (men)(1989).
Armed forces: 7,700 (1989).
GNP per capita: US$1,610 (1987).
Currency: colón (US$1.00=C84.4601 as at Feb. 5, 1990).
The Republic of Costa Rica achieved independence from Spain in 1821.
The 1949 Constitution established Costa Rica as a democratic state with an executive President directly elected for a four-year term.
The President, assisted by two Vice-Presidents (or, in extraordinary circumstances, one Vice-President) appoints and presides over the Cabinet.
Legislative power is held by a unicameral Legislative Assembly similarly elected for a four-year term.
In the presidential elections held on Feb. 2, 1986 [see p. 34350], Oscar Arias Sánchez of the social democratic National Liberation Party (Partido de Liberación Nacional — PLN) won 52.3 per cent of the vote and duly took office on May 8.
In legislative elections held at the same time the PLN won 29 of the 57 seats in the Legislative Assembly.
Rodrigo Arias Sánchez Minister at the Presidency Rodrigo Madrigal Nieto Foreign Affairs Antonio Alvarez Desanti Interior and Police Rodrigo Bolanos Finance Edgar Mohs Villalta Health *Luis Llach Public Works and Transport Hernán Garrón Salazar Public Security José María Figueres Olsen Agriculture and Livestock *Jorge Urbina Information Francisco Antonio Pacheco Education Antonio Burgues Industry, Economy and Commerce Alvaro Umaña Quesada Energy, Mines and Natural Resources Carlos Francisco Echeverría Salgado Culture, Youth and Sports Edwin León Villalobos Labour and Social Security Fernando Zumbado Jiménez Housing and Urban Development Rodrigo Zeledón Araya Science and Technology Luis Diego Escalante Vargas Foreign Trade Luis Paulino Mora Justice Jorge Monge Aguero National Planning and Economy Eduardo Lizano Fait President of Central Bank 
Cabinet
POLITICS/SECURITY
New Finance Minister — Arms and drug smuggling
The Finance Minister, Fernando Naranjo Villalobos, resigned on Sept. 1, 1989, and was replaced by Rodrigo Bolanos, hitherto president of the stock exchange.
A special congressional committee investigating arms and drug smuggling recommended in late 1989 that certain prominent politicians and officials should be excluded from public life or dismissed, or barred from entering the country, because of their alleged connections with such activities.
They included former President Daniel Oduber (1974-78), and three United States citizens — Lewis Tambs (a former ambassador to Costa Rica), Oliver North (former member of the US National Security Council staff involved in the Iran-contra scandal) and his superior, Adml.
John Poindexter, the former US National Security Adviser.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth 5.0% (1989 est.)
Current-account balance -US$225 m. (1987)
Trade balance -US$405 m. (1989 est.)
Budget surplus C230 m. (1988)
Total external public debt US$4,500 m. (1989 est.)
Debt service ratio (as % of export earnings) 21.6% (1989 est.)
Gross domestic product US$4,300 m. (1987)
Inflation rate 25.3% (1988)
Unemployment 5.6% (1988)
Principal trading partners (1987) Exports: USA (40%), West Germany, Guatemala; Imports: USA (35%), Japan, Guatemala 
Debt restructuring
Following four months of negotiations, agreement in principle was reached in October for the restructuring of Costa Rica's US$1,500 million debt with commercial banks, which would reduce the debt by $1,000 million and the annual interest payments from $150,000,000 to $50,000,000.
President Arias announced the deal on Oct. 27 as delegates arrived in Costa Rica for a Pan-American summit meeting [see p. 36972], and he acknowledged the support of the USA in reaching the agreement, which came under the auspices of the Brady plan [see pp. 36541-42].
ASIA — PACIFIC
JAPAN
BASIC DATA
Area: 377,815 sq km.
Population: 123,220,129 (1989).
Capital: Tokyo.
Language: Japanese.
Religion: Shintoism and Buddhism; Christianity (minority).
Av. life expectancy: 82 yrs (women), 76 yrs (men)(1989).
Armed forces: 247,000 (1989).
GNP per capita: US$15,770 (1987).
Currency: yen (US$1.00=145.2802 yen as at Feb. 5, 1990).
Under the Constitution adopted in 1947, Japan is a constitutional monarchy.
Legislative authority is vested in a popularly elected bicameral Diet which is composed of a 512-member House of Representatives (or Lower House, elected for up to four years) and a House of Councillors (or Upper House, whose 252 members are elected for six years, with half being due for re-election every three years).
The Liberal Democratic Party (LDP), which has been in office since its formation in 1955, was returned to power in the general election of July 1986.
In November 1987 Noboru Takeshita became Prime Minister following the retirement of Yasuhiro Nakasone, who had led the LDP since 1982.
A series of scandals forced the departure of Takeshita in June 1989 [see pp. 36732-33]and that of his successor, Sosuke Uno, in July [see pp. 36800-01].
Toshiki Kaifu was elected as LDP leader and Prime Minister in August 1989 [see pp. 36849-50].
Toshiki Kaifu Prime Minister Masae Goto Justice Taro Nakayama Foreign Ryutaro Hashimoto Finance Kazuya Ishibashi Education Saburo Toida Health and Welfare Michihiko Kano Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries Hikaru Matsunaga International Trade and Industry Takami Eto Transport Senpachi Oishi Post and Telecommunications Joji Fukushima Labour Shozo Harada Construction Kozo Watanabe Home Affairs Ministers of State Mayumi Moriyama Chief Cabinet Secretary Kiyoshi Mizuno Director-General of Management and Co-ordination Agency Fumio Abe Director-General of Hokkaido and Okinawa Development Agencies Juro Matsumoto Director-General of Defence Agency Sumiko Takahara Director-General of Economic Planning Agency Eizaburo Saito Director-General of Science and Technology Agency (vacant) Director-General of Environment Agency Hajime Ishii Director-General of National Land Agency 
Cabinet
POLITICS
Announcement of election date — Renew of LDP support
On Jan. 24, 1990, the Prime Minister and LDP president, Toshiki Kaifu, announcing that elections for the House of Representatives would be held on Feb. 18, dissolved the Diet.
Markets reacted nervously to the announcement, with both yen and share prices registering significant falls in anticipation of a possible defeat for the LDP following the scandals of 1989 [see pp. 36589; 36733; 37041-42].
The prospect of a coalition government led by the Japan Socialist Party (JSP) resulted in increased financial support and funding for the LDP from the business community, the Economist of Dec. 23, 1989, reported that, in a bid to ward off a possible LDP defeat, 13 national and commercial banks had provided US$104,000,000 in emergency finance to the LDP's electoral campaign funds, repayable at 1 per cent over the prime rate.
Following its defeats in municipal elections and in elections to the House of Councillors in July 1989 [see pp. 36800-01], the LDP had embarked upon a programme aimed at reasserting and regaining the political influence which had been damaged not only by the scandals but also by the imposition of an unpopular 3 per cent general consumption tax [GCT — see p. 36618, where it is wrongly referred to as a value added tax]and by the liberalization of import controls in the agricultural sector [see p. 36800].
Political commentators noted in September 1989 that, under the leadership of Kaifu, some measure of public support had been regained [for LDP success in House of Councillors by-election in October 1989 see p. 36976].
The Far Eastern Economic Review of Dec. 14 reported that a poll gave the Prime Minister a support rating of over 40 per cent, suggested that, after registering a one-off protest in July, voters were "returning to the fold" , being wooed with promises of political reform, a slowdown in agricultural liberalization and a pledge to reform the consumption tax.
Nevertheless, continuing discontent with the ruling party led commentators to predict that, despite the party's current gains, the LDP would almost certainly lose seats at the forthcoming election.
Unveiling of JSP policy review
In an attempt to formulate a credible political platform from which the JSP might successfully contest the forthcoming elections, a foreign, defence and economic policy review was unanimously approved during a meeting in August 1989 of regional JSP officials, and was made public during a press conference on Sept. 10 by JSP leader Takako Doi.
It was acknowledged that some of the party's previous policies had been potentially divisive, and the review was widely seen as both an attempt to attract new voters and as a means of attracting potential coalition partners from among the opposition parties.
Of key importance in the review was a commitment by the JSP to a free market economy and its support of the bilateral security treaty with the United States.
Doi emphasized the party's policy of maintaining the alliance "for the time being" , but she stated that a Socialist-led coalition would "restrict" the country's defence forces and suspend joint US-Japan military manoeuvres, with the intention of reducing and eventually removing all US bases from Japan.
Despite calls to the party to maintain "balanced ties with North and South Korea" , Doi gave no indication that the party's existing policy of normalizing relations with South Korea by recognizing the 1965 treaty (under which Japan established diplomatic relations with South Korea) would change.
The party would continue to adhere to the three non-nuclear principles enshrined within the country's Constitution which prohibited the production, possession or siting in Japan of nuclear weapons.
Although she acknowledged the contribution to the nation's power supply of existing nuclear power stations, Doi stated that the party would promote energy conservation to render the country free of nuclear-generated power in the future.
She added that the party would not approve the construction of nuclear waste disposal facilities.
Reaction to the policy review was mixed.
Although the USA stated that it "welcomed an adjustment of socialist thinking on the US-Japan Security Treaty" , it added that "there were many questions left unanswered" .
No timescale was placed on the proposals to limit US military influence and the USA called on the JSP to clarify its position.
Military strategists noted that should a JSP-led coalition come to office and implement its stated defence policy (particularly the application of the nuclear prohibition to US forces stationed in Japan), the effect on the balance of power in the region would be "incalculable" .
Komeito, the "Clean Government" Party and a possible coalition partner with the JSP, published a policy statement in October in which it maintained that the JSP was still a Marxist-Leninist party.
The paper commented that the four main opposition parties (the JSP, Komeito, the Democratic Socialist Party (DSP) and the United Social Democratic Party (USDP)) should agree on a common philosophy for a coalition.
Of principal importance, it continued, was an acceptance by the JSP that Japan was a member of the Western community, this acceptance being forthcoming on Nov. 2.
However, giving as a reason a greater degree of compatibility with the LDP's conservative line on defence and foreign policy a Komeito spokesperson, Akira Kuroyanagi, told foreign journalists in late November 1989 that it would "make sense" for his party to start supporting the LDP on a "case by case" basis.
Political commentators noted that by aligning tactically with the LDP at this stage, Komeito anticipated holding the balance of power in the Lower House after the elections, a position it already enjoyed in the Upper House.
The Japan Times of Jan. 8, 1990, reported that, notwithstanding political advances towards the LDP by Komeito, Komeito and the DSP had agreed to increase co-operation in advance of the elections and to make the "utmost effort" to facilitate meetings and discussions between leaders of the four non-communist opposition parties.
Japan's security treaty with the USA was reported as being one of a number of issues upon which full agreement had yet to be reached.
Passage of anti-GCT bill by Upper House
On Dec. 11, 1989, the opposition-dominated Upper House passed by 136 votes to 111 a package of bills for the abolition of the 3 per cent GCT.
All major opposition parties voted for the bills, whose adoption marked the first time since 1945 that an opposition bill had been passed in the Upper House.
The LDP's continued control of the more powerful Lower House, however, ensured that the opposition's initiative would be defeated.
SECURITY
Review of defence policy
As Japan neared the end of its current five-year (1986-1991) defence programme, the debate over whether "growth" or "consolidation" should form the basis of the country's future defence programme intensified within military and political circles in 1989.
Analysts noted that a review of the country's security policies was needed, since much of the strategic reasoning behind previous defence plans had been negated by events, both domestic and international, during the year.
Government civilians were reported to have urged that a forthcoming policy review of Japan's defence programme should take account of and reflect "present conditions" , namely the dramatic improvement in East-West relations and a reduction of the military threat to Japan posed by the Soviet Union.
The Economist of Dec. 23 noted that an opposition majority in the Diet's Upper House and the prospect of some form of power-sharing with smaller opposition groups after the Lower House elections in mid-February, would undermine the traditionally close relationship between the LDP and the military.
The magazine commented that a narrow electoral victory by the LDP would entail some degree of compromise with major opposition parties and, in addition, the anti-war sentiment prevalent within the JSP meant that demands for further increases in the defence budget would not be viewed in a favourable light, especially expenditure concerning the acquisition of "future generation" weapons systems.
The Director-General of the Japan Defence Agency (JDA), Juro Matsumoto, commented, however, that because "the international situation was unclear due to the developments taking place in the socialist bloc" , the need to maintain the JDA forces was just as great.
The Far Eastern Economic Review of Dec. 21, 1989, reported Lt.-Gen.
Atsushi Shima, commander of the Ground Self-Defence Forces' Northern Army in the province of Sapporo, as saying: "The Soviet threat is real and growing.
Modernization of their military capabilities is offsetting any quantitative reduction in forces."
The JDA annual report of 1989 saw little change in the Soviet military posture in the Far East and its potential threat to Japan, despite President Gorbachev's announcement earlier in the year that its forces stationed in the Far East would be cut by 120,000 [see p. 36642].
In 1989, with a defence budget of $27,150 million, Japan was rated third behind the USA and the Soviet Union in terms of overall defence expenditure.
Military analysts reported, however, that only 28 per cent of the budget was used for equipment purposes, the remainder being spent on salaries, the maintenance of US bases and the service support infrastructure.
With ammunition stockpiles only sufficient to sustain combat for a few days, a lack of the requisite support crafts to service warships and insufficient wartime defence contingencies analysts said that future five-year plans needed to consolidate the qualitative rather than quantitative aspect of the Defence Forces.
The Economist of Dec. 23, 1989, reported that Japan's Self-Defence Agency (SDA) had requested around 25,000,000 million yen for the forthcoming five-year defence programme, compared with 18,400,000 million yen for the present five-year plan.
The Economist reported that, although it was more likely that the SDA would receive just 22,000,000 million yen, a 6.1 per cent increase to 4,159,000 million yen had been allocated for defence spending in the draft budget unveiled in January 1990 for the forthcoming 1990 fiscal year.
Commentators noted that for the first time since 1986, the 1990 defence budget would fall below 1 per cent of Japan's gross national product (GNP)— the decline being due more, however, to rapid economic growth rather than budgetary restraint.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth 5.1% (end March 1989)
Current-account balance +US$78,000 m. (1988)
Trade balance +US$94,790 m. (1988)
Overall balance of payments +US$87,000 m. (1988)
Budget surplus US$36,000 m. (1986/87)
Budget surplus (as % of GNP) 1.1% (1986/87)
Total external public debt US$85,130 m. (1989)
Debt service ratio (as % of export earnings) 3.1% (1987)
Gross domestic product US$2,864.1 bn (1988)
Inflation rate 1.2% (1988)
Unemployment 1.55% (1988)
Economic situation
The Japanese economy continued to expand throughout 1988, recording a gross domestic product (GDP) growth rate of 5.1 per cent(in the 12 months to March 1989).
Government economists predicted that the economy would experience a slight dampening in overall performance during fiscal 1989 (partly due to the imposition of the 3 per cent GCT) and forecast a GDP growth rate of about 4.5 per cent.
Nevertheless, 1988 marked the second year of strong recovery from the growth recession of 1986.
Increase in domestic demand — Inflation risk
The continued buoyancy of domestic demand, which grew by 7.7 per cent in 1988 and by 6 per cent in the first half of 1989, was cited as the principal factor behind the economy's broad-based expansion.
During the course of 1989 private consumption growth levels were by no means uniform, rising prior to the introduction of the new tax and dipping sharply after its imposition.
Despite a concomitant drop in household disposable incomes, some sectors did report significant increases in spending — during the third quarter of 1989, new car registrations recorded 20-30 per cent rises above levels in previous years.
The labour market also continued to improve with a substantial rise in employment, and a reported increase in the number of foreign workers.
In the first half of 1989 the unemployment rate reportedly fell by half a percentage point.
A tightening labour market, coupled with higher productivity growth, was reflected in higher wage settlements (in the first quarter of 1989 wages increased by an average 5.2 per cent— one point higher than the previous year), with the accompanying risk of an increase in the inflation rate.
Despite registering a minus year-on-year growth in the first quarter of 1989, the inflation rate was over 2.5 per cent by the third quarter.
The Bank of Japan signalled its determination to protect the economy from inflationary trends and to strengthen the value of the yen by raising the key official discount rate — the rate charged by the Bank of Japan on overnight loans to commercial banks — three times during the year, including from 3.57 to 4.25 in December 1989.
The yen remained relatively weak throughout the year, at one point in December dipping to $1.00=143 yen.
Despite the impact of the discount rate rise, which caused the dollar to fall in value, concerns were expressed on the international markets that a weak yen and high rates of domestic investment would mean an increase in Japan's export capacity which would detrimentally affect global trade balances.
In fact, Japan's trade surplus registered declines for nine consecutive months during 1989 and recorded an overall 17 per cent drop for the whole year, from $77,600 million in 1988 to $64,400 million.
Economists noted, however, that the downward trend was unlikely to be carried over to 1990, and in December 1989 the Ministry of International Trade and Industry (Miti) announced a package of measures designed to encourage "drastic" imports into the country.
US goods would be targeted in an incentive scheme providing tax credits to the value of 5 per cent for Japanese companies which increased their imports of manufactured goods.
According to figures released by Miti in January 1990, Japan's industrial output increased by 5.9 per cent during 1989, compared with a 9.5 per cent rise in 1988.
Miti stated that during 1989 the production index of mining and manufacturing industries rose to 119.7 (1985=100).
Union merger
On Nov. 21, 1989, the two largest confederations of non-communist trade unions, Sohyo (the General Council of Trade Unions) and Rengo (the Japan Private Sector Trade Union Confederation) merged to form a new group with an estimated membership of 9,000,000.
Called Shin-Rengo (the Japan Trade Union Confederation) it claimed membership of over 80 per cent of the country's organized labour.
FOREIGN
Visit by Kaifu to Europe
While on a 10-day visit to seven countries in Eastern and Western Europe on Jan. 8-18, 1990, Kaifu announced an aid package worth $1,950 million for Poland and Hungary, in so doing committing Japan to granting almost as much aid to Poland and Hungary as Europe's biggest aid donor, West Germany.
During his visit Kaifu met the leaders of the United Kingdom, France, West Germany and Poland, among others, and, as in later discussions with Jacques Delors, President of the Commission of the European Communities (EC), impressed upon them his resolve to strengthen mutual trade relations.
US initiative to open Japanese markets
On Jan. 8, 1990, Japan's Minister of International Trade and Industry, Hikaru Matsunaga, paid a six-day visit to the USA for talks on trade matters with Carla Hills, the US Representative for Trade Negotiations, and Robert Mosbacher, the US Secretary of Commerce.
Among the issues discussed was the problem of Japan's trade and current-account surplus with the USA, and, in a broader context, Japan's international strategy to increase its imports in fiscal 1990.
Analysts commented that Matsunaga's visit was partly an attempt to defuse growing animosity towards Japan by the US business community, upset over the perceived use of Japan's "corporate raider" tactics.
Press reports in late November 1989 had stated that more than 200 US members of Congress were expected to sponsor renewed moves to erect protectionist measures against Japan.
On Oct. 12, 1989, Hills paid a four-day visit to Tokyo, in which she argued in favour of long-term "blueprints" outlining concrete proposals for opening Japan's markets.
During her visit reporters noted that Hills raised almost every trade complaint which the USA had against Japan, including market entry restrictions, discrimination against foreigners in certain service sectors and an insufficient use by the government of anti-monopoly laws against construction companies involved in cartels and bid-rigging.
Hills's visit to Tokyo was described by observers as a precursor to a second round of talks known as the Structural Impediments Initiative (SII)— a series of theoretical discussions designed to change the broad economic characteristics responsible for the USA's huge trade deficit with Japan [for September 1989 SII talks see p. 36892].
At the close of the November SII talks the USA expressed disappointment at the outcome and accused the Japanese of displaying "very little flexibility" in acknowledging "market access problems embedded in the Japanese economy" .
The Japanese insisted that talk about barriers was also applicable to the USA, and cited a number of other factors which, they claimed, impeded exports, including a high ratio of consumption to savings and the huge US budget deficit [see for example, pp. 37036; 37177-78].
Japanese government economists reported in January that Japan's trade surplus with the USA remained almost static, edging down to $45,000 million in 1989 from $47,600 million in 1988.
A third round of SII talks was reported to be scheduled for February 1990 following the elections.
Veto by Bush of restriction on FSX development
US President George Bush on July 31, 1989, vetoed a bill passed by Congress which would have set restrictions on the joint development of the FSX fighter, Japan's next generation of attack aircraft [see p. 36619; 36651], on the grounds that joint development would have enabled the Japanese to overtake US technological superiority in aerospace and would have provided the means whereby Japan could develop its own commercial aircraft.
Bush stated that such proposed restrictions would cause "substantial injury to the USA-Japan security relationship" ; he did, however, order measures to safeguard US technology.
The then Director-General of the JDA, Taku Yamasaki, welcomed the veto and stated that "…the environment has been further improved for smooth promotion of the joint development of the project" .
The US Senate on Sept. 13 failed by one vote to secure the two-thirds majority needed to override Bush's veto.
Abe's visit to Soviet Union — Kurile issue
On Jan. 15, 1990, the LDP secretary-general and former Foreign Minister, Shintaro Abe, visited the Soviet Union for talks with the Soviet President, Mikhail Gorbachev, concerning Japan's demand for the return of the four southernmost Kurile islands (known in Japan as the "Northern Territories" ) which had been occupied by the Soviet Union since 1945.
[For Kurile issue see p. 36619-20; 37042.]
After the meeting Abe reported that Gorbachev had stated that Japan "as a sovereign nation" had the right to voice its claim to the Kurile Islands.
On the following day, however, both Soviet and Japanese diplomatic sources denied that the discussions had included any degree of Soviet acceptance of Japan's claim on the territory.
Observers in Tokyo commented that Abe's visit was as much an attempt by Abe, who still hoped to succeed Kaifu as Prime Minister if the LDP was successful in the elections, to upstage Kaifu's European tour as to improve relations with the Soviet Union.
Soviet and Japanese delegations, led by Deputy Foreign Ministers Igor Rogachev and Hisashi Owada respectively, had met on Dec. 18, 1989, in Tokyo, for talks on the Northern Territories dispute [for November 1989 talks see p. 37042].
Official Soviet reports at the close of the talks stated that the meeting ended on "a sour note" with neither side able to reach common ground or agreement over the territorial issue.
The Soviet Union "flatly" refused to accept any degree of Japanese sovereignty over the territories and called on Japan to heed the "results of World War II regarding Soviet-held lands off Hokkaido" .
ASIA — PACIFIC
NORTH-SOUTH KOREA
Red Cross talks
The recently reopened channels of communication between North and South Korea (Red Cross talks, sports talks, preliminary negotiations for holding high-level political and military talks and joint legislative talks) remained active in late 1989 but failed to achieve any significant progress.
They were hampered in early 1990 by the annual "Team Spirit" joint South Korea-United States military exercises of which North Korea vehemently disapproved [see p. 36465].
An agreement on family reunions and the exchange of art troupes which was reached at Red Cross talks in October 1989 [for which see p. 36975]broke down Nov. 27 when the South Koreans refused to allow the revolutionary opera "The Flower Girl" to be performed in Seoul, the South Korean capital, saying that its content was political and contrary to Red Cross principles [see p. 37041].
The North refused to accept the South's demand for a change in the repertoire, and a full Red Cross meeting scheduled for Dec. 15 was called off.
The team heads remained in telephone contact, but hopes of agreement had faded by the end of January 1990 when the North called off all dialogue until the annual Team Spirit military exercises were concluded.
Sports talks
On Dec. 1, 1989, it was agreed that athletes for a joint Korean team at the 11th Asian Games (to be held in Beijing, China, in 1990 — see p. 37041) would be selected and trained in open competition and that each side would bear half of the costs.
On Dec. 22 the North grudgingly gave way to the South's proposal for two secretariats (based in Seoul and Pyongyang, the North Korean capital), rather than one in Panmunjom (in the Demilitarized Zone (DMZ) constituting the border between North and South Korea), and for a single team leader from the side fielding the most athletes instead of joint leaders.
The negotiators failed to sign the formal agreement on Jan. 18, 1990, however, because the South insisted on the inclusion of supplementary items aimed at guaranteeing the implementation of the agreement.
The talks collapsed on Feb. 7, Seoul radio commenting that the idea of a single team had "gone up in smoke" .
Joint parliamentary talks
Preliminary discussions on holding joint legislative talks [see p. 37041]made little progress on Nov. 29, 1989, when delegates were drawn into arguments about "openness" , reform in North Korea, the withdrawal of US troops from South Korea and the abolition of the South's National Security Law.
A further meeting on Jan. 24, 1990, failed to make any progress.
High-level talks
During a meeting on Nov. 9, 1989, to prepare for a high-level summit aimed at reducing confrontation, the North's proposal for tripartite talks (to include the USA) was rejected.
On Dec. 20 it was agreed to call the summit a "South-North high-level conference" , and that the delegates should include Prime Ministers, officials at ministerial and vice-ministerial level, and military officers at chief-of-staff level from both countries.
No further progress was made on Jan. 31, 1990, and the North indicated that it would only attend a meeting set for March 7 if the Team Spirit exercises were called off.
Proposed conference on reunification
The North Korean President, Kim Il Sung, rejected later the same month a proposal for a Korean commonwealth put forward on Sept. 11, 1989, by the South Korean President, Roh Tae Woo [see p. 36892], saying that it would perpetuate division.
Instead he proposed a Consultative Conference on Reunification in Pyongyang in February 1990 when representatives of both governments, mass organizations and political parties would discuss Kim Il Sung's idea first put forward in October 1980 [see p. 30991]for a confederal state.
The South Korean government rejected the proposal as containing nothing new, and was unwilling to agree to the participation of opposition parties or to allow the conference invitations to be delivered directly to Seoul.
In January 1990 Roh said that the opposition might have a limited say in discussions on reunification, but invitations delivered to Panmunjom on Jan. 15 were nevertheless turned down.
Kim Dae Jung, the leader of the South Korean opposition Party for Peace and Democracy (PDP), expressed a willingness to visit Pyongyang in 1990 if permitted.
Setting up of fund by South Korea
The South Korean government remained optimistic that reform would take place in North Korea, and on Jan. 16, 1990, announced the setting up of an economic co-operation fund of up to 300,000 million South Korean won (approximately equivalent to US$440 million as at Jan. 15, 1990) to subsidize companies which traded with North Korea or entered into joint-venture agreements.
Proposed changes in South Korean law to facilitate exchange visits and bilateral trade were set to continue in 1990.
ASIA — PACIFIC
NORTH KOREA
BASIC DATA
Area: 120,538 sq km.
Population: 22,521,223 (1989).
Capital: Pyongyang.
Language: Korean.
Religion: Buddhism, Confucianism, Daoism, Shamanism, Chondogyu.
Av. life expectancy: 73 yrs (women), 67 yrs (men)(1989).
Armed forces: 1,040,000 (1989).
GNP per capita: US$910 (1988).
Currency: North Korean won (US$1.00=0.9678 won as at Feb. 5, 1990).
The Democratic People's Republic of Korea was established as an independent communist state in September 1948.
Under the terms of the 1972 Constitution nominal political authority is held by a unicameral Supreme People's Assembly (SPA), the 615 members of which are elected every four years from a single list of candidates.
The SPA, which elects a standing committee to represent it when not in session, also elects a President who is head of state and who holds executive power and governs in conjunction with a Central People's Committee and an appointed Administrative Council (Cabinet).
Effective political control is exercised by the (communist) Korean Workers' Party (KWP), established in 1946 by Kim Il Sung, who was re-elected President of the republic most recently in December 1986 [see p. 34943].
Yon Hyong Muk Premier Kim Yong Nam Deputy Premier; Foreign Affairs Kim Pok Sin Deputy Premier; Chairman of Light Industry Commission Kim Chang Chu Deputy Premier Kim Hwan Deputy Premier; Minister of Chemical Industry Hong Song Nam Deputy Premier; Chairman of State Planning Commission Kim Yun Hyok Deputy Premier Chong Chun Ki Deputy Premier Kang Hui Won Deputy Premier Vice-Marshal Oh Jin Wu People's Armed Forces Paek Pom Su Chairman of Agriculture Commission Cho Chang Tok Chairman of Mining Industry Commission Yi Kil Song Chairman of Transport Commission Yi Chi Chan Chairman of Power Industry Commission Kim Tal Hyon Chairman of External Trade Commission; Foreign Trade Choe Pok Yon Chairman of Fisheries Commission Kong Chin Tae Chairman of People's Service Commission Kim Ung Sang Chairman of State Construction Commission Yi Cha Pang Chairman of State Scientific and Technological Commission Choe Ki Chong Chairman of Education Commission Lt.-Gen.
Paek Hak Nom Public Security Kim Se Yong Natural Resources Development Cho Hak Kun Atomic Industry Chu Yong Hun Construction and Building Materials Yi Sok Shipbuilding Industry Kye Hyong Sun Machine Industry Choe Man Hyon Metal Industry Pak Yong Sok Railways Kim Chang Ho Communications Cho Chol Chun Construction Chong Song Nam External Economic Affairs Kim Chae Yul Forestry Choe Hui Chong Joint-Venture Industry Yi Chae Yun Labour Administration Yun Ki Chong Finance Kim Ni Kyong Coal Industry Kim Pil Hwan Mining Industry Chang Chol Culture and the Arts Yi Chong Yul Public Health Han Chan Kun Commerce Yi Chol Pong Urban Management Yong Sung U President of Central Bank Kim Kyong Pong President of Academy of Sciences Yi Pil Song President of General Central Materials Firms Kim Yu Sun Chairman of Korean Central Physical Education Guidance Commission 
Cabinet
POLITICS
Cabinet changes
Several minor Cabinet changes took place during 1989.
In June 1989 Yi Chol Pong was appointed to the new Ministry of Urban Management and Pyong Yong Nip was replaced by Choe Ki Chong as Chairman of the Educational Commission.
Kim Chang Chu was replaced by Paek Pom Su as Chairman of the Agriculture Commission in October.
Deputy Premier Cho Se Ung was dismissed in October for undisclosed reasons and demoted to regional party work; he was not replaced.
Following Kim Il Sung's call in his New Year speech for increased production [see below], Kim Ni Kyong and Kim Pil Hwan were on Jan. 30, 1990, appointed to the newly established ministries of the Coal Industry and the Mining Industry.
Local elections
Elections for provincial, city and county assemblies took place on Nov. 19, 1989.
As was customary in North Korea the authorities reported that 99.73 per cent of the electorate had voted, in each instance for the sole candidate of the ruling KWP.
SECURITY
Reported existence of concentration camps
It was reported that in 1989 North Korea had 12 concentration camps (four more than in 1982) holding 152,000 prisoners undergoing forced labour and re-education.
Former Premier Li Gun Mo (in 1986-88 — see p. 36937) and other disgraced officials were rumoured to have been detained for having opposed the planned succession of Kim Jong Il, the son of Kim Il Sung.
Alleged discovery of nuclear reprocessing facility
Calls for an inspection by the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) of the Yongbyon nuclear power complex came after the alleged discovery by United States monitoring services, reported in the Washington Post in August 1989, of an apparent new reprocessing facility, capable of producing enough plutonium to manufacture one atomic bomb per year.
North Korea denied the allegation but, since signing the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) in 1985 [see p. 34269], had refused to allow an IAEA inspection.
North Korea also denied United Kingdom press allegations of stockpiling chemical weapons.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
Trade balance -US$1.170 m. (1988)
Total external public debt US$2,500 m. (1988)
Gross national product US$20,600 m. (1988)
Unemployment Officially none
Principal trading partners (1988) Soviet Union, China, Japan
North Korea's economy continued to suffer shortages in raw materials, energy and new technology and was unable to fulfil its commodity agreements with the Soviet Union in 1989.
Nevertheless, an estimated US$4,500 million was spent on the 13th World Youth and Student Festival in July [see p. 36816].
Kim Il Sung's New Year slogan "Speed of the 1990s" called for increased production through harder work and material savings with little promise of improved living standards.
Emphasis was placed on the production of electricity, coal and steel.
Major construction projects included the second stage of the Sunchon Vinalon complex, the first stage of which was commissioned in October 1989, the Sariwon potash fertilizer complex, a steel works, and power stations.
Agriculture was to be improved by west-coast land reclamation and technological innovations.
A recently introduced system to be applied to factories functioning in related areas, similar to the East German kombinat, reduced bureaucracy in enterprise management and allowed more autonomy in decision making.
Otherwise the government denied the need for economic reform, retaining the Stalinist system established in the 1960s.
There was some prospect for change in foreign economic relations, however, and West German businesspeople who visited Pyongyang in September said that the North Korean government was eager to attract foreign investment in high technology and might resume debt interest repayments when the Olympic stadium, costing $5,000 million, had been paid for.
Trade with South Korea amounted to $21,485,000 between October 1988 and November 1989, mostly comprising exports of coal, iron and steel but also oriental medicines, pottery and artifacts.
Imports consisted mainly of clothing [for proposed South Korean economic co-operation fund see p. 37280].
Although the North Korean government officially denied it, representatives of the Taiwanese Importers' and Exporters' Association claimed that arrangements for a planned visit in April 1990 had already been confirmed by North Korea.
The two countries had had unofficial commercial contact for two years.
FOREIGN
Relations with China
While North Korea found itself increasingly isolated by the momentous changes which occurred in Eastern Europe in 1989, its relationship with China remained close [for unofficial visit to Beijing by Kim Il Sung, politburo member Ho Dam and Foreign Minister Kim Yong Nam in November 1989 see p. 37041].
Eastern Europe
The party-controlled media of North Korea reported little of the 1989 reforms in Eastern Europe, and most of the country's 1,700 students were withdrawn from Eastern bloc countries except the Soviet Union.
South Korea's improving relations with Eastern Europe [see for example p. 37089]also caused tension.
North Korea denounced Yugoslavia's recognition of South Korea in December as an "act of betrayal" , while Hungary was accused of selling its "national pride to the imperialists" when the South Korean President, Roh Tae Woo, visited Budapest, the Hungarian capital, in November [see p. 37041].
No comment on the opening of consular relations between the Soviet Union and South Korea was made.
Premier Yon Hyong Muk and Kim Yong Nam paid an official visit to Romania in November, but after the overthrow of the Ceausescu regime in December [see pp. 37014-15]the Romanian National Salvation Front (NSF) was promptly recognized by North Korea.
Relations with USA
North Korean and United States diplomats held several sessions of talks in Beijing in 1989.
In October Gaston Sigur, a former Assistant US Secretary of State, visited Pyongyang for talks with Ho Dam and Kim Yong Nam.
ASIA — PACIFIC
SOUTH KOREA
BASIC DATA
Area: 99,222 sq km.
Population: 43,347,231 (1989).
Capital: Seoul.
Language: Korean.
Religion: Mahayana Buddhism, Christianity; Confucianism, Daoism and Chundo Kyo.
Av. life expectancy: 73 yrs (women), 66 yrs (men)(1989).
Armed forces: 650,000 (1989).
GNP per capita: US$4,045 (1988).
Currency: South Korean won (US$1.00=686.8908 won as at Feb. 5, 1990).
Formerly an independent monarchy, Korea was in 1905 occupied and in 1910 annexed by Japan.
Following Japan's defeat in 1945, Korea was divided; South Korea was occupied by United States forces until it became independent as the Republic of Korea in August 1948.
Under the Constitution of the Sixth Republic, adopted in February 1988, legislative authority is in the hands of a National Assembly whose 299 members serve for four years.
Executive power is held by a President, who is popularly elected for a five-year term, and who governs with the assistance of an appointed State Council led by a Prime Minister.
The new Constitution was adopted following sustained popular unrest during 1987.
Amid allegations of fraud and electoral malpractice, Roh Tae Woo, a candidate of the ruling Democratic Justice Party (DJP), was elected President on Dec. 16, 1987, and was formally inaugurated on Feb. 25, 1988 [see pp. 35768-71].
In elections to the National Assembly on April 26 [see p. 36019], the DJP emerged as the largest single party but failed to retain an overall majority for the first time since its formation in 1981.
In 1990 the DJP merged with two opposition parties: the resulting Democratic Liberal Party (DLP) controlled two-thirds of the seats in the National Assembly [see pp. 37187-88; 37247].
Kang Young Hoon Prime Minister Cho Soon Deputy Prime Minister; Economic Planning Board Choi Ho Joong Foreign Affairs Kim Tae Ho Home Affairs Lee Kyu Sung Finance Huh Hyung Koo Justice Lee Sang Hoon Defence Chong Won Sik Education Kim Chip Sports Kim Sik Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries Han Seoung Soo Commerce and Industry Lee Bong Suh Energy and Resources Kwon Yong Gack Construction Kim Chong In Health and Social Affairs Choi Young Choul Labour Kim Chang Keun Transport Lee Woo Jae Communications Choe Byung Yul Public Information Kim Yong Nae Government Administration Lee Sang Hui Science and Technology Lee Hong Koo National Unification Lee O Young Culture Hyun Hong Choo Director of Office of Legislation Lee Sang Young Director of Patriots' and Veterans' Affairs Agency Suh Dong Kwon Director of Agency for National Security Planning Cho Kyung Shik Director of Environment Agency Park Chul On First State Minister for Political Affairs Kim Young Chong Second State Minister for Political Affairs 
State Council
POLITICS
South Korean politics was transformed in late 1989 and early 1990 by two unexpected developments.
The first was a reconciliation between President Roh Tae Woo and the leaders of the three main opposition parties in December 1989, which addressed the legacy of the discredited Fifth Republic and forced former President Chun Doo Hwan to testify in public about the Kwangju incident of 1980 [see p. 37123].
The second, even more surprising development, was the announcement on Jan. 22, 1990, of a merger of the ruling DJP with Kim Young Sam's Reunification Democratic Party (RDP) and Kim Jong Pil's New Democratic Republican Party (NDRP) to form the Democratic Liberal Party (DLP), ensuring that, for the first time in his presidency, Roh had a secure legislative majority [see pp. 37187-88].
Indeed, the DLP's control of two-thirds of the seats in the National Assembly gave it the option of amending the Constitution of the Sixth Republic from a presidential to a Cabinet-based system.
Revision of local autonomy law and of Family Law
A bill revising the local autonomy law was passed in December 1989, enabling political parties to field candidates for local parliament elections; political parties soon agreed to hold such elections in the first half of 1990.
According to the new law local parliaments would be empowered to conduct inspection and auditing of local governments.
Also in December 1989 a revision of the Family Law was passed after 30 years of campaigning by women's groups.
From January 1991 divorced women would have the right to a share in family property, and child custody would be decided by the courts instead of automatically being granted to the father.
However, the head-of-family system and the ban on marriage between people of the same surname remained unchanged.
SECURITY
Student unrest
During 1989 student demands became more radical, and demonstrations against the government often resulted in violence.
On Oct. 14 a student, Sol In Jong, was found dead at Yonsei University in Seoul after being beaten and interrogated by other students who believed he was a police informer.
The attackers gave themselves up and the incident so shocked the student fraternity that further protests were muted for a time.
On Nov. 3, the 60th anniversary of Student Day, 15,000 students staged another violent demonstration in Seoul calling for the resignation of Roh and for the repeal of the National Security Act (NSA).
On Nov. 26 there were further riots in 10 cities.
Riot police arrested 1,058 in Seoul, most of whom were later released.
On Dec. 18, 1989, Im Chong Sok, chairman of Chondaehyop — the National Council of Student Representatives — and wanted by police since February, was arrested while giving a media interview at Kyunghee University in Seoul.
Im was charged under the NSA in connection with Chondaehyop's support of Lim Su Kyong, a student who had represented the Council at the 13th World Youth and Student Festival held in Pyongyang, the North Korean capital, in July [see pp. 36852; 37247-48].
When Im was arrested, 200 Kyunghee students and 400 from Im's own university, Hanyang, attacked police with stones and firebombs.
Developments regarding NSA
The government consistently refused demands from many quarters to reform the NSA but in October 1989 the DJP did agree to support a revision of the law as it related to the Agency for National Security Planning.
The agency would be compelled to limit its surveillance activities to sedition and subversion involving North Korea, and would not be used to suppress opposition activities in general.
On Jan. 31, 1990, Kim Young Sam announced that the NSA and the law in relation to the Agency for National Security would be revised or repealed.
The government also considered dropping charges which were brought under the NSA against Kim Dae Jung, the leader of the opposition Party for Peace and Democracy (PPD), for alleged involvement in a visit to North Korea in August 1988 by one of his party colleagues, Suh Kyung Won [see pp. 36851-52; 37123].
An amnesty of political prisoners who had renounced communism was also expected.
Defence
In spite of reassurances by the United States President, George Bush, that there would be no reductions in the 43,000 US forces in South Korea, bilateral defence talks to this effect took place in December 1989 and January 1990.
Defence Minister Lee Sang Hoon reported in January that by 1992 some 2,000 US forces would be withdrawn and three air bases would be closed.
Roh said that such reductions were "inevitable" , and that South Korea must assume a progressively larger share of the cost of its national defence.
The South Korean Defence Ministry announced plans to buy F/A-18 Hornet jet fighter aircraft from the USA in a deal reported to be worth US$4,200 million.
It was also announced that the country's domestic defence industry was to be developed in the 1990s so that by the year 2000 it would be able to produce its own military aircraft, warships and submarines.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth 6.6% (1989 est.)
Current-account balance +US$5,000 m. (1989 est.)
Trade balance +US$4,300 m. (1989 est.)
Budget surplus (as % of GNP) 2.1% (1988)
Total external public debt US$30,300 m. (1989 est.)
Debt service ratio (as % of export earnings) 9% (1988)
Gross domestic product US$121,300 m. (1988)
Gross national product US$204,000 m. (1989 est.)
Inflation rate 5.2% (1989 est.)
Unemployment 2.3% (1989)
Principal trading partners (1988) Imports: Japan (31%), USA (25%); Exports: USA (35%), Japan (20%)
On Nov. 15, 1989, the government announced steps to strengthen South Korean industry and its economy [see pp. 37088-89 for difficulties caused by among other things rising labour costs, high interest rates and the strength of the won].
The Bank of Korea (central bank) was to cut interest rates on loans from 8 per cent to 7 per cent; a $1,480 million loan fund was set up to assist investment in high technology and export-related sectors.
Restrictions on foreign borrowing were relaxed and about 30 companies were permitted to issue convertible bonds and bonds of warrant in the international capital markets.
The business sector was disappointed that the cut in interest rates was not larger, however, and they continued to press for a devaluation.
In December the Economic Planning Board announced further measures to attract foreign investors in preparation for 1992 when the South Korean stock market was to be opened to foreigners.
The ban on loans to institutions for buying shares was also lifted.
Companies hit by labour disputes were to be granted emergency loans and allowed to postpone tax repayments for up to nine months.
There were fears that inflation, attributed to big wage settlements and the expansion of the money supply in 1989, would rise above 10 per cent.
On Feb. 1, 1990, therefore, the government announced a package of anti-inflationary measures.
Gas, electricity and telephone charges were to be reduced and there would be restriction on increases in school fees, fares and food prices.
More food was to be imported and there would be continuing efforts to boost exports.
GATT pressure to lift import restrictions
In October 1989 the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) ruled that from January 1990 South Korea would not be permitted to restrict imports on grounds of an adverse balance of payments and that import restrictions on all goods were to be lifted by the end of June 1997.
Restrictions on 243 agricultural items had already been lifted in 1989 and further goods were to be added to the list shortly.
Following protests from the USA, Australia and New Zealand about South Korea's beef import quotas, GATT ruled that these should be replaced by tariffs by 1992.
The government was unwilling to comply within so short a time, however, because it relied upon the rural vote, and farmers had demonstrated twice in 1989 against the level of agricultural imports.
1990 budget
The 1990 budget of 22,689,000 million won was passed by the National Assembly on Dec. 19, 1989 [see also p. 37123].
This included a 40 per cent increase in welfare spending, including housing and the provision of domestic water supplies.
There was also assistance for the low-paid, including farmers and fishermen, and development of the west coast region in the form of industries and roads, to create 515,000 new jobs.
A high-speed rail network planned between Seoul and Pusan in the south-east and between Seoul and Mokpo in the south-west was expected to encourage regional development in the relatively underdeveloped south.
Repair of storm damage, foreign debt repayments and aid to small businesses were to be funded from the 1988 tax surplus.
Fiscal reforms
A bill to tax profits on land sales and to ban trading under false names was put before the National Assembly in November 1989.
The opposition supported the bill because in principle it narrowed the gap between the rich and the poor, but many members of the ruling DJP opposed it, and speculation in land and securities was extremely common in South Korea.
A second bill, to revise the audit law, was also under consideration; at present companies selected their own auditors and so were able to hide their assets and evade taxes.
If the bill became law the neutrality of auditors would be guaranteed.
The government was also considering a capital gains tax and income tax reform in 1990.
FOREIGN
Relations with Eastern Europe
South Korea's "northward diplomacy" , which had come into being during late 1988 as part of its strategy for achieving a closer relationship with North Korea, was pursued assiduously during 1989 and with notable success towards the end of that year [see also pp. 37041; 37089].
On Dec. 8, 1989, the governments of South Korea and the Soviet Union agreed to open consular offices in their trade offices in Moscow and Seoul respectively.
Economic and cultural relations with the Soviet Union had improved steadily during 1989, with the setting up of new joint ventures and improved shipping and air links.
Diplomatic relations with Yugoslavia were established on Dec. 28, 1989, and ambassadors were expected to be exchanged in 1990.
South Korean officials expressed the hope that the link would help to improve contacts with other members of the Non-aligned Movement.
The government on Dec. 26, 1989, revised regulations governing the Economic Development Co-operation Fund (EDCF), among other things allowing loans to be extended to East European companies.
The loans would be repayable over a period of 20 years at 3.5 per cent interest.
Relations with Western Europe
In addition to Hungary, a European tour in November 1989 took Roh to the United Kingdom, West Germany and France [see also p. 37041].
He had talks with West German Chancellor Helmut Kohl, UK Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher and French President François Mitterrand in particular regarding technology transfer and joint ventures.
Roh also asked for trade barriers on certain Korean imports to the European Communities (EC) to be removed, while agreeing that the current trade imbalance in Korea's favour should be rectified.
ASIA — PACIFIC
MYANMA
BASIC DATA
Area: 676,552 sq km.
Population: 40,451,732 (1989).
Capital: Rangoon (Yangon).
Languages: Burmese (official); tribal languages.
Religion: Buddhism (85%); animism, Islam, Hinduism and Christianity.
Av. life expectancy: 56 yrs (women), 53 yrs (men)(1989).
Armed forces: 200,000 (1989).
GNP per capita: Not known.
Currency: kyat (US$1.00=kyat6.3587 as at Feb. 5, 1990).
Annexed to British India in the 19th century, Burma was made a separate dependency in 1937 and became independent, outside the Commonwealth, as the Union of Burma in 1948.
On Sept. 18, 1988, the country's armed forces under the leadership of Gen. Saw Maung assumed power [see pp. 36224-25]after two months of continuous mass protest centred on Rangoon, which had effectively rendered the country ungovernable.
Once in power, the armed forces immediately abolished all state institutions and established in their place the non-military State Law and Order Restoration Council (SLORC) and a Cabinet, most of whose members were also SLORC members, both of which were headed by Saw Maung.
On Oct. 19 the military broadcast details of a new law outlining new state names and terms.
According to the new legislation the principal organs of power were:(i) the SLORC, headed by a Chairman (currently Saw Maung); and (ii) the government.
However, most commentators were agreed that the ageing Ne Win, the country's leader from 1962 until September 1988 who now held no official position, remained the supreme source of political power.
On May 27, 1989, the government announced that the name of the country, which had been changed in October 1988 from the Socialist Republic of Myanma to the Union of Myanma, was henceforth to be rendered in its vernacular form of Myanma Naingngan (Union of Myanma) for all official purposes [see p. 36867, where the date is wrongly given as June 18].
Gen. Saw Maung* Prime Minister; Defence; Foreign Affairs Rear Adml.
Maung Maung Khin* Energy; Mines Maj.-Gen.
Tin Tun* Transport and Communications; Labour and Social Welfare Maj.-Gen.
Phone Myint* Home and Religious Affairs; Information and Culture Brig. -Gen.
Aung Ye Kyaw* Construction; Co-operatives Maj.-Gen.
Sein Aung* Industry (I) and Industry (II) Maj.-Gen.
Chit Swe* Fisheries and Livestock Breeding; Agriculture and Forests Col. David Abel Trade; Planning and Finance Pe Thein Health; Education *Members of SLORC.
Cabinet
POLITICS/SECURITY
Announcement of election date
The SLORC and the Election Commission decided on Nov. 6, 1989, that a general election would be held on May 27, 1990.
However, observers questioned its likely fairness, considering the inability to participate of three leading opposition figures: Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, the secretary-general of the main opposition party, the National League for Democracy (NLD), under house arrest since July 1989 [see p. 36816]and on Jan. 16, 1990, banned from participating in the elections [see p. 37188]; Gen. (retd) Tin U, the NLD chairman, imprisoned in December 1989 [see p. 37123]; and former Prime Minister U Nu, leader of the League for Democracy and Peace (LDP), in December 1989 placed under a restriction order and banned from participating in the elections [see pp. 37123-24].
An NLD spokesperson announced on Jan. 29, 1990, that a recent NLD conference had decided that the NLD would participate in the forthcoming elections, contesting 452 of the 492 constituencies.
Altogether 117 political parties (out of 207 registered parties) had been approved by the SLORC to contest the elections, including the NLD, LDP and the National Unity Party — the sole legal political party until September 1988.
Establishment of military tribunals — US allegations of torture
The SLORC on July 17, 1989, conferred on certain military commanders administrative and judicial powers, and on the following day announced that these military commanders could impose, "regardless of the provisions under existing laws" , one of three sentences on those who violated or defied SLORC orders — the death sentence, life imprisonment or imprisonment with hard labour for not less than three years.
Rangoon radio reported that Lt.-Cdr. (retd) Ba Thaw, a former naval officer, was on Oct. 5, 1989, sentenced to life imprisonment for allegedly inciting about 30 naval personnel to leave their posts and to join pro-democracy demonstrations in early September 1988.
Also on Oct. 5 Nay Minh, a prominent lawyer, was sentenced to 14 years' imprisonment for allegedly giving false information to the British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) during the 1988 uprising [for arrests in November 1988 see p. 36868].
A report in The Nation (Bangkok, Thailand) of Oct. 28 quoted a Myanma government official as saying that 1,087 people had been detained for political offences since the military takeover on Sept. 18, 1988, and that 100 people had been sentenced to death during the previous three months by both military tribunals and civilian courts.
Rangoon-based diplomats were reported as saying that the number of political detainees was much higher than the official figure.
A declassified message from the United States embassy in Rangoon dated Aug. 22, 1989, alleged that political prisoners had been tortured with burning cigarettes and electric shocks and that in some cases detainees had been tortured to death.
Allegations of communist plotting and foreign interference
In a six-hour speech on Aug. 5, 1989, Brig. -Gen.
Khin Nyunt, director of the Defence Services Intelligence and secretary of the SLORC, accused the Burmese Communist Party (BCP) of conspiring to destabilize the country and to seize power.
He also alleged that "communists are at the periphery of the NLD and that the thinking of the NLD is being influenced by the BCP" .
The Far Eastern Economic Review reported on Sept. 28 that Myanma sources and diplomatic observers had dismissed these allegations as an attempt to discredit the NLD and as an attempt to bolster unity in the Army which had fought the insurgent CPB for many years.
[See p. 36869 for BCP mutiny in early 1989 which, according to some observers, had rendered it "defunct" .]
In a seven-hour speech on Sept. 9 Khin Nyunt accused "certain diplomats" of "the violation of diplomatic norms" ; observers suggested that he was alluding to alleged activities by US and United Kingdom diplomats in Rangoon.
He also accused "right-wing elements" , some foreign journalists, "overseas anti-government elements" and the international human rights group Amnesty International of interference in Myanma's internal affairs.
Hijacking of Myanma aircraft
Two dissident Myanma students hijacked a Myanma aircraft on a domestic flight and forced it to land at U-tapao military air base in Thailand on Oct. 6, 1989.
The hijackers, who had threatened to blow up the aircraft, surrendered to Thai authorities in the early hours of Oct. 7; none of the 79 passengers or four crew was injured.
The Thai Deputy Prime Minister, Gen. Thienchai Sirisamphan, announced on Oct. 9 that the two hijackers would be tried in Thailand and would not be sent back to Myanma.
The hijackers, who told reporters that they had been attempting to gain publicity for the pro-democracy cause in Myanma, pleaded guilty in Bangkok Criminal Court on Jan. 30, 1990.
Allegations of official involvement in narcotics
The government-controlled Working People's Daily reported on Jan. 29, 1990, that police and Army units had seized illegal drugs worth US$14,000,000 in 1989.
The Nation (Bangkok) reported on Jan. 30 that "two leading Western narcotics experts based in Thailand" had commented that these claims seemed exaggerated and that the military government had been doing little to try to reduce opium production since it seized power in 1988.
One of the narcotics experts was reported as saying that there was evidence that provincial Army commanders were involved in trafficking heroin and that some senior military figures in Rangoon also had an interest in the drugs business.
US senator Daniel Moynihan told a US Senate foreign relations subcommittee hearing on Sept. 13 that Ne Win was "nothing more than an Asian Noriega" , a reference to the then Panamanian leader, Gen. Manuel Noriega, whom the US government accused of involvement in the illegal drugs business.
Moynihan said that between 1974 and 1988 the USA had given more than $80,000,000 in aid towards opium eradication in Myanma "to absolutely no avail" .
SECURITY/INSURGENCY
Banning of insurgent groups
The government formally banned four ethnic minority insurgent groups — the Karen National Union (KNU), the Kachin Independence Organization (KIO), the New Mon State Party (NMSP) and the Karenni National Progressive Party (KNPP)— on Nov. 3, 1989.
The banning declaration added that "organizations under these organizations and other organizations which have contacts with these organizations" were also unlawful.
On the same day martial law was lifted in eight townships — one in Shan state, three in Magwe division and four in Chin state.
Continuing military campaign against KNU — KNU offer of political settlement
Government forces, suffering heavy casualties in their attempts to break through the KNU's defences, on Dec. 28, 1989, finally overran the KNU's Phalu camp, located 25 km south of the border town of Myawadi, in a loop of the Moei river (known in Myanma as the Thaungyin river) forming the border with Thailand.
In a statement released to journalists after the camp fell the KNU said that the government forces had crossed into Thailand and attacked the camp with artillery and ground forces from the rear: "If the Myanma soldiers had not crossed the border into Thailand and attacked the camp from the rear they would never have taken it" .
A Thai Army official admitted on Jan. 2, 1990, that Myanma soldiers had crossed the Moei river but denied that they had been given permission to do so.
[See p. 36870 for changing Thai attitude towards the KNU.]
The KNU president Gen. Bo Mya, in a letter to Saw Maung dated Nov. 30, 1989, said that after 40 years it had been "proven beyond doubt that the civil war, which is basically a political problem, cannot be settled by military means" , and that "the most correct and suitable means of achieving [the KNU's]political goals is the settlement of the civil war politically, in a just and rational manner" .
However, Brig. -Gen.
Maung Hla, a Myanma military commander in charge of border operations, was reported to have told a Thai delegation in Myawadi on Jan. 3, 1990, that the Myanma government was determined to "wipe out" insurgents operating along the Thai-Myanma border.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth 2.2% (fiscal year 1988)
Trade balance -US$307 m. (fiscal year 1988)
Overall balance of payments +US$200 m. (1986)
Total external public debt US$4,257 m. (1987)
Debt service ratio (as % of export earnings) 59.3% (1987)
Gross domestic product US$9,300 m. (fiscal year 1988)
Inflation rate 17.8% (fiscal year 1988)
Unemployment 10.4% in urban areas (1986-87)
Principal trading partners USA, Japan, EC 
Continuing price rises
Rangoon military commander Brig. -Gen.
Myo Nyunt in a speech on Aug. 15, 1989, accused traders who failed to cut the price of rice, meat and fish of "aiming at political and economic instability" .
The Far Eastern Economic Review reported on Aug. 10 that the government had started distributing rice to urban residents at one-third of the free market price, which had risen by 30-50 per cent over the previous year.
Foreign investment
In late September 1989 the US Coca-Cola Corp. signed an agreement to co-operate with Myanma Foodstuffs Industries, a state-owned enterprise, to manufacture soft drinks in Myanma.
In October and November foreign oil companies, including Yukong of South Korea and Shell Exploration of the Netherlands, were awarded production-sharing contracts for oil and gas exploration and production in Myanma.
FOREIGN
Relations with Thailand
The Thai Deputy Prime Minister Pong Sarasin led a 30-member delegation to Myanma on Feb. 1-3, 1990, to discuss trade and economic issues.
A general agreement to increase the volume of bilateral trade was signed as well as a memorandum of understanding to establish a joint fishing company.
Pong met Saw Maung, who was reported to have reiterated Myanma's readiness to increase co-operation with Thailand on trade, fishing and tourism.
It was reported on Feb. 5 that a Thai mining company had recently become the first foreign company to be awarded an offshore tin-prospecting concession in Myanma.
The Thai-Myanma Regional Co-ordinating Committee, made up of senior military officers from both countries, held its first meeting in the northern Thai town of Chiang Mai on Sept. 18-20, 1989.
Problems along their common border were discussed.
Relations with China and Singapore
A 24-member Myanma delegation led by Army Commander-in-Chief Gen. Tan Shwe visited China on Oct. 18-27, 1989.
The delegation, which included SLORC secretary Khin Nyunt, Home Minister Maj.-Gen.
Phone Myint, deputy director of Myanma's defence industries Lt.-Col. Sein Tun, and Trade Minister Col. David Abel, met, among others, the Chinese Prime Minister, Li Peng, and the Defence Minister, Qin Jiwei.
A report in the Far Eastern Economic Review of Nov. 16 noted that China's strategic interests in Myanma had "undergone a fundamental change" since the 1970s when China had supported anti-government insurgents operating near the China-Myanma border, and that there had been a shift towards greater economic co-operation.
China was one of the first countries to recognize the SLORC after it took power in 1988.
In what was described as an extension of the cross-border trade agreement signed in October 1988 [see p. 36870], the Far Eastern Economic Review reported on Dec. 21 that Myanma and China's Yunnan province had agreed to open department stores to market each other 's goods, to market Chinese goods in Myanma, to promote tourism and to form joint ventures to mine tin and market coal in Myanma's Shan and Kachin states respectively.
After leaving China the Myanma delegation visited Singapore on Oct. 27-30.
At this time Singapore was reported to be one of Myanma's main suppliers of arms and ammunition.
Relations with Japan and other Asian countries — EC statement
During a visit to Japan on Nov. 17-22, 1989, Abel was told by Japan's Foreign Minister, Taro Nakayama, that Japan was "closely watching how Myanma deals with opposition leader Aung San Suu Kyi…while not meaning to interfere in Myanma's internal affairs" .
A total of 38 Japanese MPs submitted a petition to the Myanma embassy in Tokyo on Dec. 22 expressing deep concern "about the military's suppression and murder of those who were demonstrating for democracy, freedom of speech and the enforcement of a general election next year" .
[See p. 36870 for Japanese suspension of aid to Myanma in October 1988 and the partial resumption of aid in February 1989.]
The European Parliament released a statement on Sept. 8, 1989, expressing concern "at the worsening of the policy of repression in Myanma" and requesting the Myanma authorities to "bring repression to an end and to respect the deep desire of the Myanma people for the establishment of a democratic society through free election" .
ASIA — PACIFIC
LAOS
BASIC DATA
Area: 236,800 sq km.
Population: 3,935,786 (1989).
Capital: Vientiane.
Languages: Lao or Laotian (official); French and tribal languages (incl.
Meo).
Religion: Buddhism; also Christianity and animism.
Av. life expectancy: 51 yrs (women), 48 yrs (men)(1989).
Armed forces: 55,500 (1989).
GNP per capita: US$170 (1987).
Currency: new kip (US$1.00=711.4041 new kip as at Feb. 5, 1990).
The Lao People's Democratic Republic (LPDR) was proclaimed by a National Congress of People's Representatives in December 1975 following victory by the (communist) Lao Patriotic Front in a 25-year civil war.
The National Congress installed a President and a Council of Ministers.
A 45-member Supreme People's Council, chaired by the President (currently Phoumi Vongvichit — acting), was appointed to draft a constitution, as yet unfinished.
Effective political power is exercised by the leadership of the sole legal political organization, the Lao People's Revolutionary Party (LPRP).
The LPDR's first central-level elections, to a 79-member Supreme People's Assembly (SPA), were held on March 26, 1989 [see p. 36523].
Principal members Kaysone Phomvihane Chairman Sisomphone Lovansay Vice-Chairman Gen. Khamtay Siphandon Vice-Chairman; Defence Gen. Phoune Sipaseuth Vice-Chairman; Foreign Affairs Saly Vongkhamsao Vice-Chairman; Economics, Planning and Finance 
Council of Ministers
LPRP political bureau
Kaysone Phomvihane, Nouhak Phoumsavan, Souphanouvong, Phoumi Vongvichit, Gen. Khamtay Siphandon, Gen. Phoune Sipaseuth, Sisomphone Lovansay, Gen. Sisavat Keobounphanh, Saly Vongkhamsao, Maychantane Sengmany, Lt.-Gen.
Saman Vignaket.
Alternate members.
Oudom Khatti-gna, Brig. -Gen.
Choummali Saignakong.
POLITICS
SPA session — Legislation on criminal and judicial proceedings
During an SPA session convened in Vientiane on Nov. 20-24, 1989, four draft laws were approved concerning criminal and judicial procedures which came into effect in early January 1990.
Nouhak Phoumsavan, the SPA president, stated that the legislation had to be introduced in order to "stabilize the political situation and social order" .
At the closure of the session he suggested a number of measures to be undertaken to "promulgate and propagate the essence of the new laws" , including the nationwide education of party cadres and the people through study classes, and increased media coverage.
Decrees and resolutions on tourism and forestry
The Council of Ministers endorsed and promulgated a resolution on tourism on Oct. 4, 1989, placing the management of the tourist industry under the control of the Ministry of Foreign Trade and Economics Relations.
A national fund for the promotion of tourism was established.
On Oct. 5 the Council of Ministers issued a decree on the preservation and use of forests and forest land.
Among other things, the decree proposed propaganda campaigns to "teach every Lao citizen to love nature and to develop a sense of responsibility for the preservation of forests" .
Within weeks of the decree being issued, Laos hosted an international symposium on forestry and the environment [see p. 36794].
SECURITY
Claims by resistance
Vang Shur, the secretary-general of the rebel United Front for the National Liberation of the Lao People (ULNLF), announced to reporters on Dec. 15, 1989, that his resistance forces, claimed to number 10,000, had scored many military successes "against the Vietnamese-backed Kaysone government" and now controlled many villages and remote areas in northern Laos.
Thai intelligence sources confirmed the existence of several small resistance groups in Laos but could not confirm the extent of Vang's claims.
On Dec. 21 the Lao ambassador to Thailand, Khamphan Simmalavong, denied claims by rebel forces that on Dec. 13 Gen. Vang Pao, who had commanded a force of Hmong tribesmen financed by the US Central Intelligence Agency until he had fled to the USA in 1975, had returned to Laos.
Vang Pao had earlier told the Bangkok Post newspaper of the formation of a "revolutionary government of Laos" which had established itself in Laos and which he had visited on certain occasions.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth 5.2% (1988 est.)
Current-account balance -US$95 m. (1985)
Trade balance -US$170 m. (1987)
Budget deficit US$45 m. (1987)
Total external public debt US$884 m. (1987)
Gross domestic product US$551 m. (1987)
Inflation rate 19% (1988)
Unemployment 17% (1987)
Principal trading partners (1987) Exports: Thailand, Malaysia, Vietnam; Imports: Thailand, Soviet Union, Japan 
Economic situation
Despite moves progressively to restructure the economy following the ruling LPRP's fourth congress in 1986 [see pp. 35006; 36291-92], a January 1990 edition of the government journal Pasason noted that during 1989 Laos had encountered "numerous difficulties" in the economic field, including problems of inflation, trade imbalances, and the insufficient regulation of industrial production.
Promulgation of standardizing regulations — Announcement of new trade laws
On Aug. 4, 1989, the government announced details of the registration regulations for Lao enterprises, the objectives of which, it stated, were to direct the business sectors along "party and state lines" .
Economists noted that the regulations were part of a broad-based plan to standardize commercial practices in the country.
In September 1989 a report by Vientiane home service stated that after the promulgation in July 1989 of a law on foreign investment, "hundreds of businesspeople" had applied for permission to invest in different sectors of the economy.
International aid programmes
It was announced on Nov. 3, 1989, that the Asian Development Bank (ADB) had granted a US$39,000,000 loan to Laos under an agreement signed in Vientiane on Oct. 26.
The loan would assist in the construction of a 230-km highway from Vientiane province to Luang Prabang province.
An agreement on unconditional aid to Laos from the UN Development Programme (UNDP) and the UN Equipment Fund (UNEF) was signed in Vientiane on Nov. 2.
It was reported that the aid, worth $15,000,000, would be used for housing construction, irrigation and road-building projects in the Vientiane prefecture.
FOREIGN
Laos and Thailand formed joint co-operation committees on Oct. 6, 1989, headed by Gen. Chaovalit Yongchaiyut, the Thai Army C.-in. -C., and Gen. Sisavat Keobounphanh, the Chief of General Staff of the Lao People's Army and Minister in the Office of the Chairman of the Council of Ministers.
A report on Vientiane home service on Oct. 6 described the formation of the committees as an "important basis for promoting and expanding co-operation in the economic, trade, cultural, scientific and technical fields between the two countries" .
On Oct. 3 a Thai-controlled Joint Development Bank had opened in Laos, the country's first foreign-controlled private commercial bank.
Following an appeal by Laos the Thai Cabinet agreed on Nov. 10, 1989, to lift the ban on "strategic goods" exports to Laos, in order to help "boost relations" .
It was hoped that the decision, which would allow exports of certain chemicals, "non-lethal" military hardware and electronic goods, would also reduce smuggling across the joint borders.
The Lao-Thai joint border committee (formed in December 1988 — see p. 37090), which convened in Vientiane on Jan. 4-6, 1990, heard the report on the results of a survey and inspection of the disputed Ban Rom Klao region, carried out by a technical group appointed by the committee in April 1989 [ibid.].
The two sides "informed each other of the border situation" and discussed means whereby the "problem could be settled" .
The technical group was to continue the study of legal aspects of the disputed region and to report back.
Souban Salitthilat, the Vice-Foreign Minister of Laos, visited Washington on Sept. 12-15, 1989.
According to Vientiane home service on Sept. 28, the Lao delegation discussed with United States officials "the narcotics problem, problems relating to US soldiers missing in action [MIAs]during the [Vietnam]war and the normalization of relations between the two countries" .
In early November a US delegation visited Laos for further discussions on MIAs.
On Jan. 11, 1990, Nouhak Phoumsavan met Charles Rangel, the Chairman of the Narcotics and Drugs Control Committee of the US House of Representatives, in Vientiane.
During the one-day visit Laos informed the USA of its subsidiary crop promotion programme and the construction of a communication structure, both designed to curtail the cultivation and refining of opium-based drugs.
In May 1988 a US State Department report to Congress had accused the Lao government and military authorities of active involvement in the narcotics trade network [see p. 36293].
Kaysone Phomvihane, Chairman of the Council of Ministers and LPRP general secretary, on Nov. 8, 1989, on the second day of a five-day visit to Japan, met the Japanese Prime Minister, Toshiki Kaifu.
It was announced in a joint press statement that Japan would increase its assistance to Laos in various fields, including forestry, communication and transport, and hydroelectricity, and a memorandum signed by officials on the same day provided additional Japanese aid worth 400,000,000 yen (approximately $2,800,000) for agricultural projects.
Japan was one of Laos's most substantial aid donors, assistance having totalled 1,800 million yen in 1988 (compared with 1,000 million yen in 1983).
Kaifu stated that Japan would send a mission to Laos in early 1990 to assess future possibilities for economic co-operation.
During an official visit to France in December 1989 Kaysone confirmed for the first time the death of the former King of Laos, Savang Vatthana.
The King, who had been compelled to abdicate in 1975 at the age of 69, apparently had died in 1984 of malaria contracted in a detention centre [for former denial of King's death see p. 36293].
ASIA — PACIFIC
VIETNAM
BASIC DATA
Area: 329,566 sq km.
Population: 66,820,544 (1989).
Capital: Hanoi.
Language: Vietnamese.
Religion: Buddhism; Daoist, Confucian, Hoa Hoa, Caodaist and Christian minorities.
Av. life expectancy: 66 yrs (women), 62 yrs (men)(1989).
Armed forces: 1,249,000 (1989).
GNP per capita: Not known.
Currency: new dong (US$1.00=4,489.9115 dong as at Feb. 5, 1990).
The Socialist Republic of Vietnam was proclaimed on July 2, 1976, after North Vietnam-backed communist insurgents had effectively reunified the country in April 1975 by overthrowing the United States-supported government of South Vietnam.
Legislative power is vested in a 496-member National Assembly, to which elections were held on April 19, 1987 [see p. 35255].
The Assembly elects a Council of State (the collective presidency) and a Council of Ministers headed by a Chairman.
Major political power in Vietnam is concentrated in the political bureau of the Communist Party of Vietnam (CPV), which is described in the 1980 Constitution as "the only force leading the state and society" .
Do Muoi, hitherto a Vice-Chairman, became Chairman of the Council of Ministers on June 22, 1988, following the death on March 10 of Pham Hung.
Senior Gen. Vo Van Kiet, who had been acting Chairman since Pham's death, was reappointed First Vice-Chairman.
Do Muoi Chairman Senior Gen. Vo Van Kiet First Vice-Chairman Nguyen Co Thach Vice-Chairman; Foreign Affairs Senior Gen. Vo Nguyen Giap Vice-Chairman Senior Gen. Dong Sy Nguyen Vice-Chairman Nguyen Khanh Vice-Chairman; General Secretary of Council of Ministers Tran Duc Luong Vice-Chairman Pham Vam Kai Chairman of State Commission for Planning Doan Duy Thanh Foreign Economic Relations Ho Ngoc Nhuong Director of Office of Council of Ministers Phan Ngoc Tuong Minister in charge of Organization of Council of Ministers Huynh Cong So Chairman of State Inspectorate Maj.-Gen.
Mai Chi Tho Interior Senior Gen. Le Duc Anh National Defence Hoang Truong Minh Chairman of Nationalities Council Dang Thi Chairman of State Commission for Economic and Cultural Co-operation with Laos and Kampuchea Dang Huu Chairman of State Commission for Science and Technology Phan Van Tiem Chairman of State Pricing Commission Vo Dong Giang Chairman of State Commission for Co-operation and Investment Hoang Quy Finance Nguyen Cong Tan Agriculture and Food Industry Luy Minh Chau Director-General of State Bank Ngo Xuan Loc Building Bui Danh Luu Communications and Transport Pham Minh Hac Education Phan Thanh Liem Engineering and Metals Phan Xuan Dot Forestry Tran Hong Quan Higher Vocational Education and Job Training Hoang Minh Thang Internal Trade Phan Hien Justice Nguyen Ky Cam Labour, War Invalids and Social Welfare Vu Tuan Light Industry Nguyen Tien Trinh Marine Products Vu Ngoc Hai Energy Pham Song Public Health Hoang Duc Nghi Supply Nguyen Canh Dinh Water Conservancy Tran Van Phac Culture Tran Hoan Information 
Council of Ministers
POLITICS
Rejection by CPV plenum of "political pluralism" — Response to events in Eastern Europe — Government moves to curb press
Progress towards political diversity under Vietnam's, primarily economic, Doi Moi or "rejuvenation" campaign [see p. 36696]suffered a number of setbacks during the latter half of 1989, as CPV leaders reacted with some unease at the trend towards pluralism among their communist allies in Eastern Europe.
In a speech delivered to the seventh plenum of the sixth CPV central committee, which convened in Hanoi on Aug. 15-24, 1989, CPV secretary-general Nguyen Van Linh announced that the party had found a "very high level of unanimity" in rejecting "bourgeois liberalization, political pluralism and multi-opposition parties aimed at denying Marxism-Leninism, socialism and the party's leadership" .
Speeches made by other CPV leaders criticized the West for undermining world socialism; Poland and Hungary were also denounced for allowing non-communists to gain a share of power.
However, mass meetings organized in Vietnam to condemn "counter-revolutionaries in Poland" were called off after the Polish government formally protested at Vietnam's "interference" in Poland's internal affairs.
Since the inception of the Doi Moi campaign in 1986, the press had been granted a limited "freedom to comment" , which it had used to highlight corruption and the failures of government.
Observers noted, however, that after the seventh party plenum, the government had stepped up its efforts to rein in the country's increasingly outspoken journalists, especially after a conference of writers in October defied the party's attempt to dictate proceedings and demanded more democracy in the country [see p. 37123 for approval of a new restrictive press law at the sixth session of the eighth National Assembly in late December 1989].
Reformist speech by Vo Chi Cong at December National Assembly
Despite the passage of the new restrictive press laws, observers noted a significantly positive attitude towards democratization in a speech delivered by Council of State Chairman Vo Chi Cong at the sixth session of the eighth National Assembly held on Dec. 18-28, 1989 [see also p. 37123].
Vo stated that in order to ensure the success of the Doi Moi campaign, "the party needs to renovate the contents, as well as the methods, of its leadership" .
He further stated that the party should not exert pressure or impose its will in any way and that the elected people's councils should be "really democratic" .
Municipal elections
Municipal elections for deputies of people's councils at provincial, district and village level were held throughout Vietnam on Nov. 19, 1989.
Under a new law, proposed during the fifth session of the eighth National Assembly (which convened in Hanoi on June 20-30, 1989), non-CPV members were allowed to stand as candidates for the first time.
Although the turnout was high (Hanoi radio reported that 89 per cent of the electorate voted) a number of "violations and irregularities" were reported, especially in the municipality of Hanoi.
Death of Huynh Tan Phat
Huynh Tan Phat, a veteran National Liberation Front (NLF — "Viet Cong" ) leader, died in Ho Chi Minh City on Oct. 1, 1989, aged 76.
Phat became NLF secretary-general in 1964, and after the defeat in 1975 of the US-backed South Vietnam regime, Phat was named President of the short-lived South Vietnamese Provisional Revolutionary Government.
In 1982 he was appointed a Vice-Chairman of the State Council, a position which he held until his death.
SECURITY
Anti-crime campaign
On Dec. 4, 1989, Hanoi radio announced that as part of the nation's anti-crime campaign, "all provinces, cities and special zones" throughout the country had begun to suppress vigorously all types of crimes by encouraging "the masses to participate in maintaining social order and security" [see p. 36697 for reports of increased crime levels during 1988].
One week after the campaign was launched, it was reported that "all localities" had arrested 9,800 criminals, including 1,340 "caught in the act" .
Observers noted that a large number of those involved in racketeering and smuggling were among the estimated 500,000 troops demobilized since 1987.
Unemployment (running nationally at 20 per cent) was recorded as running at 65 per cent among former service personnel.
Capture of Vietnamese resistance forces in Laos
Laos radio reported that, on Aug. 25, 1989, 68 "fully armed exiled Vietnamese reactionaries" of the National United Front for the Liberation of Vietnam (NUFLVN — see pp. 32674; 33154; 35902) had been captured by local militia while crossing from Thailand into Laos.
Vietnam formally protested to the Thai authorities in late September for "fostering and condoning" the NUFLVN, the largest of many Vietnamese resistance groups.
However, on Oct. 5 the Thai Foreign Ministry stated that Vietnam's allegations were "groundless" and added that Thailand still operated under the principles of a joint communiqué signed in September 1978 [see p. 29473], which provided for "mutual respect for sovereignty and non-interference in each other 's affairs" 
A total of 38 rebels were reported to have been extradited to Vietnam on Jan. 14, 1990, and were given prison sentences ranging from six to 15 years.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth 5.4% (1988)
Current-account balance -US$926 m. (1983)
Trade balance -US$1,300 m. (1988)
Budget deficit US$440 m. (1982)
Total outstanding debt to CMEA US$6,000 m. (1989)
Debts to convertible currency countries US$200 m. (1989)
Debt service payments US$332 m. (1986)
Foreign exchange reserves US$17 m. (1986)
GNP growth 3.5% (1989 est.)
Inflation rate 33.8% (1989)
Unemployment 20% (1988)
Principal trading partners (1987) Soviet Union, remainder of Eastern Europe, Japan
Vietnam's economy performed modestly in 1989, achieving an estimated gross national product (GNP) growth rate of 3.5 per cent.
However, of principal importance was a substantial reduction in the rate of inflation, from an average of 700 per cent in 1988 to 33.8 per cent in 1989.
Acknowledging that austere fiscal policies introduced in July 1988 [see p. 36698]were responsible for the fall, analysts noted it was achieved only at a cost of increased unemployment and bankruptcies.
A report by government economists, published on Jan. 2, 1990, noted that in May 1989 many state-owned enterprises had faced acute shortages of capital due to the unsalability of stock worth more than 1,000,000 million dong.
It added that 20 per cent of the workforce in state-owned enterprises had been laid off and that some factories were closed down.
Successive devaluations of the dong to close parity with the black-market exchange rate [for March 1989 adjustment see p. 36524], and the decision to regulate the printing of paper money instilled some popular confidence in the currency.
Increasingly it was reported that gold was being reconverted into cash, which was then deposited in new saving accounts offering high rates of interest.
As a result inflation fell and in June the gap between state- and free-market prices had disappeared.
Agricultural production — Industrial output — Exports
Rice production improved markedly during 1989, with government economists at the December plenum forecasting rice harvests exceeding the 20,000,000-tonne production target set the previous year (and compared with 17,600,000 tonnes harvested in 1987).
During 1989 Vietnam was estimated, according to a report in early November 1989, to have exported 1,300,000 tonnes of rice, a 13-fold increase over the previous year.
Traders commented that the surge in exports was a result of competitive pricing, which undercut market prices by an average of US$50-$60 per tonne.
Notwithstanding attempts to diversify the production of commodities, Vietnam's state-owned enterprises faced strong competition from private companies after losing their subsidy and monopoly rights.
Despite the "stagnation of a number of industrial enterprises" , the commitment to the abolition of subsidies and a shift to "socialist cost accounting" was confirmed at the fifth session of the eighth National Assembly held in June.
The state economic sector was reported in December 1989 by government economists to have registered a 3 per cent increase in its industrial output in 1989, and contributed 800,000 million dong to the state budget — 40,000 million dong more than in 1988.
The industrial sector's level of "mobilization of output" ran at 50-60 per cent of potential capacity.
IMF negotiations
In March 1989 Vietnam was reported to have repaid a token $5,000,000 in outstanding debts to the International Monetary Fund (IMF), in an attempt to secure fresh international aid.
(In 1985 the IMF stopped aid to Vietnam after the country defaulted on interest payments, insisting that the outstanding $130,000,000 debt be repaid before lending was renewed.)
Two visiting IMF delegations in May and July 1989 discussed the feasibility of further financial assistance to Vietnam, including a $140,000,000 loan from a consortium of European banks.
In January 1990 the deputy director of the Vietnam State Bank's foreign department, Nguyen Cong Hai, stated that even though Vietnam had satisfied the IMF's requirements of reducing inflation and the promulgation of deregulatory reforms, aid had not been forthcoming.
He concluded that the issue had been influenced by "political factors" , including the continued animosity towards Vietnam by the USA.
FOREIGN
Relations with Soviet Union
According to a report in the Far Eastern Economic Review of Jan. 4, 1990, the political change and economic crisis in Eastern Europe had forced Soviet planning agencies to forecast substantial cuts in the amount of future assistance given to Vietnam.
Vietnamese economists estimated that input of key materials from the Soviet Union would be reduced by as much as 20 per cent and that imports from the Soviet Union would become more expensive.
Under Vietnam's current five-year plan, which was due to end in 1990, the Soviet Union was to provide aid amounting to $14,500 million, while Vietnam's debt to the Soviet Union was approximately $15,000 million.
It was announced on Jan. 18, 1990, that in line with an overall reduction in "overseas commitments" , the Soviet Union had begun reducing its presence at the air and naval base of Cam Ranh Bay, with the withdrawal of MiG-23 and Tu-16 aircraft at the end of 1989.
It stated that "six to 10 aircraft remained there temporarily" .
US military analysts noted that although the Soviet Union still maintained a considerable military presence at Cam Ranh Bay, with up to 20 warships and support vessels based there, the ultimate significance of its proposed reduction would depend on the results of forthcoming negotiations over US bases in the Philippines [see p. 36428].
Relations with China
Following talks in January 1989 between the Vietnamese First Deputy Foreign Minister Dinh Nho Liem and the Chinese Foreign Minister Qian Qichen [see p. 36397], a gradual improvement in relations became evident throughout the year, was greatly facilitated by the Vietnamese withdrawal from Cambodia in September 1989 [see pp. 36881-82].
On Jan. 17, 1990, the Vietnamese Foreign Minister Nguyen Co Thach and Qian Qichen were reported to have "exchanged greetings on the occasion of the 40th anniversary of the establishment of diplomatic relations between the two countries" .
Relations with USA
Following the talks in July 1989 between Vietnam and US officials regarding a plan to resettle in the USA former officials of the South Vietnam regime [see p. 36816], it was announced on Jan. 5, 1990, that 156 former Vietnamese re-education camp inmates and their families had left Vietnam for the USA.
A spokesperson for the Vietnamese government estimated that 700 people would leave every month and that a total of between 400,000 and 450,000 were eligible to leave Vietnam under the resettlement programme.
Vietnamese and US specialists held a series a meetings throughout 1989 in order to "review and evaluate" efforts in the search for the remains of US personnel regarded as missing in action in the Vietnam war (MIAs — for previous developments relating to MIA issue see p. 36699.)
A joint meeting in Hanoi on Jan. 17-19, 1990, noted that up to August 1989 seven joint search missions had been conducted in Vietnam in a bid to seek information on MIAs.
On July 20 Vietnam had returned the remains of 28 US personnel and announced its intention of returning those of a further 16.
Visit by Thai delegation
A Thai delegation led by the then Deputy Prime Minister, Bhichai Rattakul, arrived in Hanoi on Nov. 22, 1989, to discuss and promote "trade and economic co-operation between the two countries" .
At the conclusion of the visit, Bhichai announced the planned formation of a Thai-Vietnam trade panel with offices in each capital.
It was reported that trade between the two countries had increased from $770,000 in 1988 to $7,740,000 in the first quarter of 1989.
ASIA — PACIFIC
CAMBODIA (KAMPUCHEA)
BASIC DATA
Area: 181,035 sq km.
Population: 6,838,033 (1989).
Capital: Phnom Penh.
Language: Khmer (official).
Religion: Theravada Buddhism.
Av. life expectancy: 50 yrs (women), 47 yrs (men)(1989).
Armed forces: 99,300 (incl. provincial and district forces)(1989 est.).
GNP per capita: Not known.
Currency: riel (US$1.00=150 riel as at Feb. 5, 1990).
The People's Republic of Kampuchea (PRK), proclaimed in January 1979 following the invasion by Vietnamese forces supported by the troops of the Kampuchean United Front for National Salvation (KNUFNS — replaced in 1981 by the Kampuchean United Front for National Construction and Defence — KUFNCD), was renamed the State of Kampuchea (Roat Kampuchea) in late April 1989 [see p. 36589, where it is pointed out that "Kampuchea" and "Cambodia" are transliterations of the same Khmer word].
Kampuchea had been known as the Kingdom of Cambodia prior to 1970, as the Khmer Republic between 1970-75 and as Democratic Kampuchea from 1976-79.
Under its (amended) 1981 Constitution, the State of Kampuchea is an independent sovereign state "moving step by step towards socialism" .
Legislative power is vested in the National Assembly, with 117 members elected for five years by universal adult suffrage.
The Assembly (which meets twice a year) elects a Council of State (the collective presidency, whose Chairman, currently Heng Samrin, was head of state) as its permanent organ from among its members.
Executive power is held by a Council of Ministers elected by the Assembly and responsible to it.
Much of the State of Kampuchea's effective political power rests with the leadership of the country's sole legitimate party, the Kampuchean People's Revolutionary Party (KPRP).
Elections were last held in May 1981 (when the 117 seats were contested by 148 KNUFNS candidates), and in February 1986 a resolution to postpone the next elections until 1991 was endorsed by the Assembly.
Despite controlling most of Kampuchea, the State of Kampuchea government (the Phnom Penh regime) is not recognized by an overwhelming majority of the member states of the United Nations on the grounds that the government was "installed" by Soviet-backed Vietnamese forces in January 1979.
The UN General Assembly annually reiterates its recognition of the Coalition Government of Democratic Kampuchea (CGDK), which was formed in June 1982 and which comprises three organizations opposed to the Phnom Penh regime, namely (i) the Party of Democratic Kampuchea (the Khmers Rouges), the leading members of which had headed, under Pol Pot, the universally reviled government of Democratic Kampuchea between 1975-79;(ii) the Armée nationale sihanoukiste (ANS), headed by a former ruler of the Kingdom of Cambodia, Prince Norodom Sihanouk; and (iii) the Khmer People's National Liberation Front (KPNLF) led by Son Sann, a former Prime Minister under Sihanouk.
International moves over peace process
Despite a failure to negotiate a comprehensive peace settlement for Cambodia during the second Jakarta Informal Meeting (JIM) in February 1989 [see p. 36464]and during the Paris conference on Cambodia in August [see pp. 36848-49], certain concessions offered in late 1989 by the resistance groups and the Phnom Penh government indicated that a political solution to the Cambodian problem might be taking shape [for acceptance in January 1990 of an Australian peace proposal by the five permanent members of the UN Security Council see pp. 37186-87].
Diplomatic activity September-December 1989
Sept. 23 Meeting between Hun Sen and Thai Prime Minister Chatichai Choonhaven in Bangkok; Chatichai proposes informal international meeting on Cambodia
Sept. 21-26 Vietnam withdraws remaining troops from Cambodia [see pp. 36881-82]
Oct. 24-26 Thailand and China demand Vietnam acceptance by Vietnam of international verification of its military withdrawal from Cambodia
Nov. 9 Vietnam supports Thailand's calls for "informal meeting" 
Nov. 15 UN General Assembly upholds CGDK's seat with proviso that there should be no return to the "universally condemned policies of the recent past" [see p. 37041]
Nov. 16 Hun Sen accepts invitation to third JIM extended by Indonesia
Nov. 24 Australia proposes a UN-sponsored caretaker administration [see pp. 37186-87]
Nov. 24 European Parliament denounces Khmers Rouges and votes that its 12 member states give de facto recognition to Phnom Penh regime.
Nov. 27 Sihanouk, in proposing a peace settlement, considers break with Khmers Rouges, Sihanouk and Son Sann accept Australian proposal in principle
Dec. 8 UK diplomats visit Cambodia
Dec. 9 Hun Sen calls for third JIM to address formation of an international control mechanism (ICM), the cession of military aid to "all parties involved" , and a ceasefire in Cambodia.
He also stresses Cambodia's readiness to discuss the formation of UN-sponsored provisional government bodies for transitional period
Dec. 10-12 Soviet Deputy Foreign Minister Igor Rogachev visits Cambodia for talks with Hun Sen, who agrees in principle to holding of elections under UN supervision on condition that Cambodia's UN seat is vacated by CGDK
Dec. 11 CGDK reject proposal by Australia to vacate UN seat
Dec. 15 Rogachev holds talks in Bangkok with Thai Foreign Minister Siddhi Savetsila during which Soviet Union proposes moratorium on all foreign military assistance
Dec. 19 China agrees that UN should play a role in resolving Cambodian problem Hun Sen Chairman; Foreign Affairs Bou Thang Vice-Chairman Say Phouthang Vice-Chairman; Chairman of Central Control Commission Chea Soth Vice-Chairman Kong Samol Vice-Chairman; Minister in charge of Cabinet of Council of Ministers Say Chhum Vice-Chairman; Agriculture Gen. Tea Banh Vice-Chairman; National Defence Pung Peng Cheng Minister Assistant to Chairman of Council of Ministers Kong Korm State Affairs Inspectorate Koy Buntha Social Affairs and War Invalids Chea Chanto Planning Ho Hon Industry Sin Song Interior Chhay Than Finance Pen Navuth Education Ung Phan Communications, Transport and Posts Chheng Phon Information, Press and Culture Taing Sarim Trade Ouk Bun Chhoeun Justice Yith Kim Seng Health Khun Chhy Minister attached to Council Ministers Hor Nam Hong Minister Assistant in charge of monitoring Foreign and Judicial Affairs Cha Rieng Chairman of National Bank Cheam Yiep Director-General of General Directorate for Tourism Sim Ka Chairman of State Control Committee Sam Sarit Director of General Department for Rubber Plantations 
Council of Ministers
INTERNAL POLITICS
Introduction of reformist programme — Corruption
The withdrawal of Vietnam's remaining military forces from Cambodia in late September 1989 [see pp. 36881-82]signalled an upsurge in both political and military activity, as forces of the exiled CGDK put pressure on the Phnom Penh regime in a bid to induce power-sharing negotiations.
Observers noted that, since early 1989, the Phnom Penh government had embarked upon a reformist programme allowing for greater political diversity and for measures to liberalize the economy further.
The promulgation of such policies was designed to improve the country's infrastructure, especially in the countryside, in order to undermine the political appeal of the rebels, particularly of the Khmers Rouges.
The granting of life tenancy to peasant farmers and the substitution of agricultural co-operatives for collective farming were among reforms designed both to increase economic productivity and to improve the popular appeal of the government [see also p. 36617].
Nepotism, graft and bribery, however, were reported as being widespread among officials, and as increasingly undermining the government's popularity.
Observers commented that the Khmers Rouges were finding recruits among those unable to participate in the benefits of corruption (such as the peasantry).
Concern was also expressed over the growing disparity between living standards in Phnom Penh and in the rest of the country.
Corruption within the higher echelons of the Phnom Penh armed services was cited by observers as one reason behind an increasing number of desertions by ill-trained conscripts.
On Dec. 15, 1989, Heng Samrin as the KPRP central committee general secretary warned that "[Cambodia]must have a unanimous understanding that only if our internal situation is firm and our superior position on the battlefield is firm, will our diplomatic struggle be effective" .
New Director-General of Tourism
Cheam Yiep was appointed Director-General of the General Directorate for Tourism on Oct. 20, 1989, replacing Preap Pichey who had died in June.
SECURITY
Intensification of rebel offensive
In the aftermath of the Vietnamese troop withdrawal in September 1989 [see pp. 36881-82], the rebel armies moved from guerrilla tactics to more conventional fighting and the civil war in Cambodia encroached further east into population centres.
Khmer Rouge forces captured the gem-mining town of Pailin, some 80 km south-west of Battambang, on Oct. 22 and Samlot, 35 km south-east of Pailin, on Oct. 28 [see p. 36976].
In a counteroffensive launched on Nov. 4 Cambodian troops failed to recapture Pailin.
The ANS joined the KPNLF on Oct. 21 in attacking Phnom Sroc in Banteay Meanchey province, and on Nov. 26 the KPNLF claimed to control "70 per cent" of the junction town of Svay Chek in the same province.
Military analysts estimated that control of over 2,500 sq km of territory had been lost to the guerrilla forces in six weeks.
On Nov. 21 reports indicated that, in a rare co-ordinated military operation, CGDK forces numbering over 5,000 attacked government positions in the north-west.
The offensive was an attempt both to consolidate gains made over the previous two months and to wrest control of the main road and rail links to Thailand.
Despite the capture of large quantities of weapons, including 122-mm artillery pieces, mortars and heavy machine guns, Thai intelligence sources reported that the guerrillas suffered heavy casualties and failed to dislodge government troops from Svay Chek and Ban Nimit.
Interviewed on Dec. 15 Deputy Foreign Minister Sok An admitted that Cambodian troops, "fighting alone for the first time" , were not prepared for the intensity of the rebel assault.
More used to "hit-and-run" tactics, they experienced difficulties with fighting on a "larger scale" and, in addition, "had trouble during the rainy season in terms of troop mobility" .
With the advent of the dry season Sok An expected that Cambodian forces, armed with heavy artillery and Soviet T-54 tanks, would out-perform the rebel factions.
With limited access to war zones by "outside reporters" , propaganda broadcast by the Khmers Rouges did much to obscure the true extent of rebel victories.
On Dec. 28 Khmer Rouge radio reported that its troops were "on the verge" of overrunning the city of Battambang and were in control of the Angkor Wat temples.
Neither claim could be independently confirmed.
ECONOMY
General economic situation
1989 was a year during which, analysts commented, the Cambodian economy reached a "critical juncture" .
A gradual shift away from orthodox communism, towards the evolution of a free market economy, was assisted throughout the year by the implementation of a number of deregulatory reforms, which prompted a remarkable upsurge in economic activity.
Nevertheless, observers commented, Cambodia's "recovery" belied the depth of impoverishment brought on by "two decades of war, Khmer Rouge tyranny and economic isolation" .
The economy remained on a war footing during 1989 with between 30 and 40 per cent of the budget being spent on defence.
Vietnam's withdrawal of military assistance in September underlined the fragile state of the economy; large areas were land-mined, and transport, distribution networks and agricultural production in western areas of the country faced disruption as a result of guerrilla activity.
Devaluation
Rising inflation, fuelled in part by uncertainty following Vietnam's troop withdrawal, had the effect of increasing prices.
Economists estimated that the rate of inflation had increased to 20 per cent during fiscal 1989, an increase of 1.5 percentage points over the previous year.
Agricultural reforms/production — Industrial output
In October 1989 the government announced a number of measures to encourage farmers to sell more produce to the state.
The state price offered for rice was more than doubled from the "patriotic contribution" level of 7 riel per kg to 15 riel per kg.
Cambodia produced 2,700,000 tonnes of rice in 1988, the highest recorded annual total in two decades.
Difficulties due to natural disasters, however, meant that the country still faced a shortfall of 50,000 tonnes and the Cambodian Red Cross was reported in October 1988 to have distributed rice to 1,000 families in Takeo province.
The incentive of higher wages and technological assistance from Soviet aid programmes resulted in increased rubber production, and in 1988 rubber exports earned the country $24,000,000.
Timber production also increased, with a greater proportion being set aside for export.
By August 1989 export volumes exceeded 70,000 cubic metres, with a value higher than that of total timber exports for 1988.
Piece-work salaries were introduced into factories as an incentive to higher productivity.
Despite granting "autonomy" to many state-owned factories and restoring 69 factories to the private sector, shortages of electricity, raw materials and spare parts meant that many factories could produce only at half their potential capacity.
External trade
In 1988 Cambodia imported goods worth $147,000,000 and exported goods worth $32,000,000.
The country's trade deficit was offset, in part, by the bulk of imports coming from the socialist bloc so that  "hard" foreign exchange was not used.
Increased earnings through tourism and foreign investment were being looked at as a means to assist the economy.
A draft foreign investment law was reported as being considered by the National Assembly, which, if passed, would allow joint ventures, 100 per cent foreign-owned ventures and contract joint ventures.
FOREIGN
Shift in international opinion towards Phnom Penh government
Observers commented that, following Vietnam's military withdrawal in September 1989 [see pp. 36881-82], Cambodia's enforced economic and diplomatic isolation began to show signs of abating.
The prospect of the widely reviled Khmers Rouges regaining a position of predominance in the country led to a re-orientation in traditional diplomatic policy prosecuted towards Cambodia by some Western states towards accommodation.
It was noted that the Phnom Penh regime's refusal to compromise over the issue of Khmer Rouge involvement in a future Cambodian government derived from a growing belief that a shift in international opinion was under way.
On Nov. 24 the European Parliament denounced the Khmers Rouges and voted that its 12 member states give de facto recognition to the Phnom Penh regime.
On Dec. 8, despite strong protests from the United States State Department, two United Kingdom diplomats visited Cambodia — the first such visit for 14 years — as part of the UK's humanitarian aid programme to Cambodia [reports in late November had suggested that the visit had been abandoned as a result of US pressure — see p. 37041].
A UK Foreign Office official stated that an additional £250,000 (approximately $400,000) had been allocated to Cambodia, to be channelled through the UN Children's Fund (UNICEF).
INTERNATIONAL
ENVIRONMENT
Global warming — Ozone threat
Evidence of global warming
Further evidence continued to emerge during the second half of 1989 that the world was becoming gradually warmer.
Most experts attributed this to the so-called "greenhouse effect" , caused by a buildup in the earth's atmosphere of gases which act to prevent solar heat reflected from the planet from escaping into space [see pp. 36783-84].
The United Kingdom Meteorological Office announced at the end of November 1989 that the 1980s had been the warmest decade worldwide since records had been kept, with six out of 10 of the warmest years since the mid-19th century having occurred during this period.
Subsequent reports, however, suggested that the temperature rise had been uneven across the globe, with a minority of regions, including the north Pacific and north-east Atlantic oceans, having cooled by up to 0.5 degrees Celsius during the decade.
The Scott Polar Institute in Cambridge (UK) announced on Aug. 31 that measurements taken on UK nuclear submarines travelling below the Greenland ice cap revealed that the thickness of the ice had been reduced from 6-7 metres in 1976 to 4-5 metres in 1987.
Rise in CO2 emissions
According to figures released in July 1989 by the Carbon Dioxide Information Analysis Center at Oak Ridge, California (United States), worldwide emissions of CO2 (the principal greenhouse gas) rose by 1.6 per cent in 1987 to 5,600 million tonnes per year.
This brought the total rise over the previous five years to 10 per cent.
The highest rates of increase during 1987 were in the USA, the Soviet Union and China, with the last-named recording a 4.8 per cent rise.
CO2 emissions in the UK rose by 2.6 per cent, but emissions in some other countries were reduced, with France and West Germany cutting their totals by 3.2 and 2.2 per cent respectively.
Estimates of global carbon emissions varied, however, with the Washington-based World Resources Institute (WRI) announcing in September 1989 that the worldwide growth in CO2 emissions during 1987 amounted to 2.8 per cent.
The WRI's figure for 1988 was 3.6 per cent, with the US rate of growth amounting to 4.1 per cent .
Impact of new scientific theories
There was some speculation during late 1989 that the rate of global warming might accelerate due to hitherto unforeseen circumstances.
In particular, several scientists supported a hypothesis put forward by John Woods, senior marine scientist at the UK Natural Environmental Research Council (NERC), who suggested (in a paper presented to the British Association for the Advancement of Science on Sept. 14) that the ability of ocean plankton to absorb CO2 could fall drastically once temperatures began to rise.
This in turn might lead to very rapid increases in global temperature.
Woods speculated that such a "plankton multiplier" had been instrumental in a rise of 7 degrees Celsius over just 50 years at the end of the last ice age.
The NERC announced on Nov. 2 that recent shipboard experiments had revealed that the proportion of CO2 emissions being absorbed by the oceans was only 30 per cent, not 50 per cent as previously estimated.
In effect, according to the NERC, this suggested that the concentration of CO2 in the atmosphere could double within 40 years.
In an effort to gain more precise data on global climatic change, it was announced in January 1990 that more than 40 countries would co-operate in gathering information by ship and satellite for the "World Ocean Circulation Experiment" .
Proposals for action to halt global warming
Energy Ministers from 21 countries, meeting as the governing board of the International Energy Agency, agreed on May 30, 1989, on a range of policies aimed at curbing the greenhouse effect.
These included promoting energy conservation and efficiency; placing tighter controls on fossil fuel emissions; and stepping up research into alternative energy sources.
In a response to questions from the House of Commons select committee on energy the UK government stated on Nov. 24 that it was not yet fully committed to cutting the use of fossil fuel by 20 per cent(as agreed at the Toronto conference in 1988 — see p. 36784), on the grounds that this was an "arbitrary" figure, which was picked "without scientific evidence" .
However, a report submitted by the Department of Environment to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change the following month, suggested that the UK's total energy consumption could be cut by as much as 60 per cent over the next 15 years through energy conservation.
According to details reported on Aug. 8, a study carried out by the Canadian government concluded that a mixture of energy efficiency and conservation would be the best approach to achieve the 20 per cent cut.
Several governments, particularly that of the UK, sought during 1989 to portray the expansion of nuclear power as a suitable response to global warming, on the grounds that it emitted virtually no "greenhouse gases" .
This contention was challenged by environmental pressure groups, notably Friends of the Earth and Greenpeace, which drew attention to the continuing uncertainties surrounding the safety aspect of nuclear power generation and waste disposal, and to relatively high cost of nuclear power.
Environmentalists stressed the importance of energy efficiency as offering the best prospect of limiting global warming.
Ozone depletion
The US National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) reported at the end of September 1989 that seasonal ozone depletion over Antarctica (believed to be caused primarily by chlorofluorocarbons — CFCs — see p. 36785) was increasing at the rate of 1.5 per cent a day; the depletion largely occurred on a seasonal basis, with the ozone being replenished during summer months.
On Nov. 7 the West German government published a draft law providing for a complete ban on the production, sale and use of CFCs.
Eight major chemical companies, including ICI and Du Pont, announced on Nov. 24 that they were establishing a research programme into the development of alternatives to CFCs.
Tropical rainforests
UK-Brazilian co-operation agreement — Brazilian forest burning — Yanomami Indians
The then United Kingdom Minister for Overseas Development, Christopher Patten, on July 5, 1989, signed an environmental co-operation agreement with the Brazilian Foreign Ministry during a six-day visit to the country.
The five-part agreement included a promise of UK aid, in the form of technology and expertise, to Brazilian projects aimed at the "sustainable development of the Amazon rainforest" .
Speaking on July 5 after the signing ceremony, Patten said that the UK had offered Brazil its "colonial experience" in forest management and called on other industrialized countries to provide similar aid in order that Brazil's fear of "ecological imperialism" [see p. 36793]could be overcome.
Scientists of the Brazilian Institute for Space Research estimated that rainforest destruction in Brazil during the 1989 forest-burning season had totalled some 33,000 sq km by the end of August, compared with a total of 121,000 sq km for 1988 [see also p. 36793]; the burning season would not end until October.
Statements by the Brazilian President, José Sarney Costa, promising government action to evict gold prospectors, or garimpeiros, from the Yanomami Indian reserve in the northern federal territory of Roraima [see pp. 36459; 36794]were finally followed up by an eviction operation beginning on Jan. 4, 1990.
The operation, run by the police, Army and Air Force, was to last 60 days and was to result in the eviction of all garimpeiros from the 2,000-sq km reserve which had been progressively invaded over the previous two to three years.
It followed a federal court decision in Brasília, the Brazilian capital, on Oct. 20, 1989, that the gold miners' presence was illegal.
On Jan. 9, however, only days after it had begun, the Brazilian Justice Minister, Gen. Saulo Ramos, announced that the operation had ended, a decision widely seen as a concession to mining interests.
Developments in Colombia, Thailand and Mexico
The Colombian government agreed in October 1989 to hand over about 30,000 sq km of Amazon rainforest to indigenous Indian tribes in addition to the approximately 60,000 sq km transferred in previous years.
The agreement was followed by a European Community (EC) decision to provide US$386,000 towards management of the territory by its new administration.
Thailand's January 1989 logging ban [see p. 36794]was followed by a rapid increase in the number of logging concessions sold to Thai operators by neighbouring countries, especially Burma.
Thai saw-mill operators were also turning to loggers in Laos, Cambodia, Indonesia and Malaysia to replace their lost supplies.
This was causing concern over a possible acceleration in deforestation in the region as a whole.
The Mexican federal government announced on July 15, 1989, that it would commit $13,750,000 to "regenerate" Mexico's rainforest over the following 10 years.
The decision followed reports that up to 250,000 hectares (2,500 sq km) of subtropical forest in Mexico's Yucatán peninsula had been destroyed by a series of fires believed to have been started by farmers and ranchers seeking to extend their land holdings.
WWF criticism of Japanese timber imports
In a report published on April 13, 1989, the World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF) accused Japan as the world's biggest timber importer of accelerating the destruction of the world's rainforests.
The then Japanese Prime Minster, Noboru Takeshita, rejected the accusation the following day and defended the import of manufactured wood products such as plywood, which were "helping to create local employment" in rainforest countries.
Report on global rainforest destruction — FAO forestry meeting
A report published by the UK environmental organization Friends of the Earth on Dec. 14, 1989, estimated that global rainforest destruction had doubled from an average of 75,000 sq km per year in the 1970s to 142,000 sq km per year in the 1980s.
The report estimated that the current extent of tropical forest was 8,000,000 sq km.
In September 1989 a UN Development Programme (UNDP) representative addressed the ninth meeting of the UN Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) tropical forestry development committee, and was quoted as saying that official estimates of rainforest depletion (widely quoted as 11,000,000 hectares or 110,000 km a year) were "perhaps 60 per cent or more under the actual [depletion level]" .
The FAO meeting also heard that 63 tropical forest countries had thus far accepted the broad outline of the 1985 Tropical Forest Action Plan (TFAP — see p. 36249) and that 20 of these had prepared co-ordinated forestry development plans.
Acid rain
Reports on acid pollution damage
The UN Economic Commission for Europe (ECE) on July 7, 1989, published the results of its third Forest Damage Survey, covering the year 1988.
The findings revealed that significant forest damage, commonly expressed as loss of leaves or needles, had been observed in all 25 countries participating in the survey.
Of these, nine countries reported air pollution as being the principal factor responsible for weakening forest health.
The nine were Austria, Belgium (Wallonia), Czechoslovakia, West Germany, Italy (Tuscany), Liechtenstein, Poland, Switzerland and Yugoslavia.
The main pollutants responsible for forest damage were identified as sulphur dioxide (SO2) and nitrogen dioxide (NO2).
A survey published by the European Community (EC) European Environment Agency on Nov. 9, 1989, concluded that the general health of forests within the EC's 12 member states had deteriorated substantially over the past 10 years.
The worst affected areas included Scotland, the Black Forest in West Germany, south-east France, northern and central Greece and north-west Italy.
Conifers had suffered the most damage, while oak and silver birch were also badly affected.
The International Herald Tribune of Aug. 10 quoted United States scientists as saying that acid pollution from Mexico's oil industry was largely responsible for the recent rapid deterioration of some of that country's Mayan monuments, notably those of the Yucatán peninsula.
The east coast of the United Kingdom between Humberside and Norfolk was affected by an "acid mist" which blew in from the sea on Sept. 9, 1989, leading to some leaf loss from trees and the corrosion of aluminium instruments.
It was believed to have been caused by high levels of SO2 or NO2 pollution from East Germany or Poland.
The Norwegian Meteorological Institute published a report in early September 1989 claiming that significant quantities of acid rain falling on Europe resulted from SO2 emissions in the USA.
It had hitherto been thought that the effects of such emissions would be more localized.
Toxic waste
Return of Third World waste consignments to Europe — New attempts to export waste to Third World
The agreement by Italy to take back the toxic waste on board the Italian ship, the Karin B [see p. 36788], was followed on Dec. 15, 1988, by a decision by the city council of La Spezia, Italy, to accept the return of 8,000 barrels of Italian industrial waste, which had been found in a dump north of Beirut, the Lebanese capital, in June 1988 [see p. 36251].
An attempt by a Danish shipping company to export a 430-tonne consignment of Italian and Belgian zinc oxide industrial waste to the Brazilian port of Santos in July 1989 failed when the cargo ship containing the waste was refused permission to dock.
The Danish government said that its decision on Aug. 9 to take back the waste was made to "protect Denmark's international reputation" .
The ship had originally docked in Rotterdam, the Netherlands, in May before sailing for Brazil.
On July 24, following its return from Brazil, a request to unload its contents in Rotterdam had been refused by the Netherlands Environment Ministry.
A Johannesburg television report of Dec. 2, 1988, claiming that the Angolan government had concluded a US$2,000,000 contract with a private Swiss company for the disposal of chemical waste near the Namibian border, was confirmed on Dec. 19 in a statement issued by the Entente Européene pour l'Environnement (EEE), a group of environmentalist members of the European Parliament.
The EEE statement, which was immediately denied by the official Angolan news agency Angop, claimed that a four-year "concession for the importation and treatment of [5,000,000 tonnes]of wastes" from western Europe had been agreed on Nov. 5, 1988.
The practice of exporting the so-called "dirty dozen" hazardous pesticides (banned in western Europe and North America) to the Third World was highlighted by a report published by the environmental campaign group Greenpeace on Aug. 29, 1989.
The report focused on a United States pharmaceutical company, Velsicol Chemical Corporation, which had been exporting to the Third World large quantities of chlordane and heptachlor, "two of the most highly toxic persistent and bio-accumulative insecticides ever made" according to the report.
The company denied Greenpeace's claim that the chemicals were carcinogenic (cancer-causing) and also that their misuse had resulted in the contamination of food supplies in importing countries.
Toxic waste shipments and disposal in industrialized countries — Attempted dumping of waste into North Sea
A ship belonging to the UK public-sector electricity-generating concern National Power was prevented by Greenpeace activists from offloading 500 tonnes of coal ash into the North Sea on Jan. 16, 1990.
Six Greenpeace protesters were arrested during the incident but subsequently released.
The UK government had issued a licence approving the dumping and was reportedly considering at least 10 further licences.
Formal protests were made by Sweden, Denmark, Norway and West Germany, all parties (as was the UK) to an eight-country agreement in November 1987 supporting a ban on North Sea dumping of all "harmful industrial wastes" by the end of 1989 [see pp. 36052-53].
A statement issued by the UK Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food on Jan. 16, 1990, claimed that the waste was of a type which would do no damage to the environment.
An Indonesian-registered freighter, the Perintis, carrying 32 containers of toxic pesticide, sank on March 15, 1989, in an area of the English Channel described by the UK Ministry of Defence as a conventional explosives dumping ground.
A joint Anglo-French effort to recover the cargo was abandoned on April 25 with four of the containers, including one containing 5.6 tonnes of Lindane, a highly toxic pesticide, still missing.
The Canadian government on May 12, 1989, temporarily closed 94 of its 125 border crossings with the USA while an emergency task force to prevent the illegal shipment of toxic chemicals to Canada by US companies was established.
Large quantities of toxic chemicals had reportedly been mixed with fuel oil consignments to Canada to avoid detection.
Reporting on its first national investigation into waste disposal in the USA on April 3, 1989, the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) concluded that US industry was placing a "startlingly and unacceptably high" volume of toxic substances into the land, water and air.
The report estimated that US manufacturers had disposed of at least 10,200 million kg of hazardous substances during 1987.
A UK HM Inspectorate of Pollution report, published on March 22, 1989, had identified 1,390 land-fill waste sites in the UK as "potential gas risks" , as the decomposition of toxic materials increased the dangers of serious gas explosions.
Gatherings on industrial waste shipment
Speaking at an international conference in London on the transportation and disposal of hazardous waste on Oct. 4, 1989, the European Communities (EC) Environment Commissioner, Carlo Ripa Di Meana, said that proposals to make producers of toxic waste liable for the damage and injury they might cause were being drawn up by the EC Commission.
Ripa Di Meana said that the Commission was also considering effecting (i) a total ban on waste exports from the EC;(ii) severe restrictions on waste movements between the EC countries; and (iii) a ban on the dumping of raw sewage into the sea.
At a conference in Geneva, organized by the International Environment Bureau (IEB) and composed of representatives of the largest multinational chemical concerns, the chairman of Ciba-Geigy, Alex Krauer, said on Sept. 20, 1989, that the industry was obliged to make "social and financial sacrifices" if it was to respond adequately to growing environmental concerns.
A representative of Ciba-Geigy's environmental protection unit estimated that the cost of fully implementing necessary anti-pollution measures would raise the environmental expenditure of chemical companies by 10-15 per cent of total spending in the 1980s to some 25 per cent in the 1990s.
Oil Spills
Exxon Valdez cleanup operation and legal proceedings
A huge and environmentally devastating Alaskan oil spill, released from the Exxon Valdez, a tanker belonging to the Exxon Shipping Company, when it struck a reef in March 1989 [see p. 36541], was the first in a series of large-scale tanker spills during that year and at the beginning of 1990 [see below].
By mid-September 1989 it had resulted in the death of some 35,000 birds, 10,000 sea otters, 147 bald eagles and an estimated 16 whales in and around Prince William Sound, the location of the disaster.
In its "final" cleanup plan announced on May 1, 1989, Exxon had envisaged employing 3,400 people in the operation (but following public pressure this number was increased within a matter days to 5,000, and a total of 12,000 were involved at the height of the operation) and estimated that a total of US$1,300 million would be spent.
In a statement issued on Feb. 7, 1990, however, it said that some $2,000 million had been spent on an operation which had been halted in mid-September for climatic reasons.
It was widely believed that Exxon did not intend to restart the cleanup operation in the spring, for which it was condemned by environmentalists, the Alaskan state government and the local population of the Alaskan town of Valdez.
It was estimated that Exxon's 1989 operation had left up to 7,000,000 gallons of oil (of the 11,000,000 gallons originally spilt) in the affected area, largely on its coastline.
It was also claimed that a 25-km oil slick, observed in July 1989 some 35 km off the Californian coastline, had been caused by the Exxon Valdez making its way in a bad state of repair to dry dock in San Diego, California.
At the official inquiry into the disaster conducted by the (US) National Transportation Safety Board on May 16-20, 1989, evidence suggested:(i) long working hours and irregular sleeping patterns by the crew of the Exxon Valdez;(ii) a regular practice of junior and unqualified officers taking control of the ship's bridge without supervision; and that (iii) on at least one occasion the captain, Joseph Hazelwood, had been drinking alcohol against ship rules.
However, the allegation that Hazelwood had been under the influence of alcohol at the time of the disaster was contradicted by a number of witnesses at his trial, which opened in Anchorage, Alaska, on Jan. 29, 1990, after a six-month delay.
Hazelwood was charged with "criminal mischief" and on three counts of misdemeanour — reckless endangerment, negligent discharge of oil, and operating a vehicle while intoxicated.
Exxon was itself the subject of 150 lawsuits by this time [for earlier legal proceedings see p. 36606].
INTERNATIONAL
UNEP
BASIC DATA
Full title: United Nations Environment Programme.
Year of foundation: 1972.
Status: Body appointed by and accountable to the UN General Assembly.
Objective: Promotion of international environmental co-operation, recommendation of appropriate global environmental strategies and review of progress in implementation of environmental programmes by other UN and UN-appointed bodies.
Membership: The Governing Council comprises 58 countries (16 from Africa, 13 from Asia and the Pacific, 10 from Latin America and the Caribbean, 13 from Western Europe and North America and six from Eastern Europe) each elected by the UN General Assembly for a three-year term on a rotating basis [for October 1988 elections by the 43rd session of the General Assembly see p. 36781].
Executive Director: Mostafa Tolba (Egypt).
15th session of UNEP Governing Council — Approval of increased funding
The 15th normally annual session of UNEP's Governing Council at the UNEP headquarters in Nairobi, the Kenyan capital, on May 15-26, 1989, was attended by representatives of 103 governments, 26 UN agencies, eight intergovernmental bodies and 29 international non-governmental organizations.
The Council approved a target increase in voluntary contributions to UNEP from US$40,000,000 in 1989 to $100,000,000 in 1992.
The UNEP Executive Director, Mostafa Tolba, said that this target would require governments to "increase their voluntary contributions by 35 per cent annually for the next three years to reach the target" .
The United Kingdom government had on May 9, 1989, announced its intention to double its contribution to UNEP to $5,000,000 in 1989, an intention also expressed by Finland, Malta, the Netherlands and Switzerland.
Austria, Australia, West Germany and the Soviet Union were reportedly "considering an increase in their contributions" , while Japan, France and Bulgaria said at the meeting that they "would increase their contributions in the future" .
Among the resolutions adopted by the Governing Council was a call to UNEP and the UN World Metereological Organization (WMO) to initiate "as soon as possible" negotiations for an international treaty on climate change.