

AFRICA
SOUTH AFRICA
Talks between ANC and government
 "Talks about talks" 
In their first formal encounter since the founding of the African National Congress (ANC) in 1912, representatives of the government and the ANC met in Cape Town on May 2-4, 1990, for preliminary talks aimed at removing obstacles to future negotiations on a post-apartheid constitution.
[See p. 37305 for earlier postponement of talks.]
Five senior ANC leaders had returned to South Africa from exile in Lusaka (Zambia) on April 27 to form part of the delegation.
Joe Slovo, the secretary-general of the South African Communist Party (banned until February 1990), Alfred Nzo, the ANC secretary-general and acting president, Thabo Mbeki, head of the international department, Joe Modise, commander of the armed wing, Umkhonto we Sizwe, and Ruth Mompati of the national executive committee joined the "internal" leadership comprising Nelson Mandela, the ANC deputy president and leader of the delegation, Walter Sisulu, veteran ANC activist, and Ahmed Kathrada, chief of information and publicity.
Also in the ANC delegation were prominent members of its affiliated United Democratic Front (UDF), namely the UDF co-president Archie Gumede, Christian C. Beyers Naude, former secretary-general of the South African Council of Churches, and Cheryl Carolus.
The multiracial nature of this group, which included two women, contrasted with the exclusively male, white, Afrikaner membership of the government team, consisting of President F. W. de Klerk, the Ministers of Constitutional Development, Foreign Affairs, and Law and Order (respectively Gerrit van N. Viljoen, Roelof "Pik" Botha and Adriaan Vlok), and other ministers and security chiefs, with the notable omission of the Defence Minister Gen. Magnus Malan.
At a brief opening ceremony, Mandela, speaking partly in Afrikaans, assured the white minority of the population that they "had nothing to fear from the ANC" , expressing the hope that the talks would begin a process of resolving conflicts between the races "through discussion among equals" .
The talks had taken place in a remarkably cordial atmosphere, and at a joint press conference at their conclusion on May 4, de Klerk declared that he regarded the working document [see below]as "an important breakthrough in the peaceful process" , while Mandela said that as a result "not only are we closer to one another, but we are all of us victors" .
A joint statement was issued, which noted that both sides had agreed "on a common commitment towards the resolution of the existing climate of violence and intimidation from whatever quarter, as well as a commitment to stability and to a peaceful process of negotiations" .
No date for substantive negotiations was fixed.
Additionally the following measures were agreed:(i) that a joint working party would be set up, charged with defining "political offences in the South African situation" and with advising on "mechanisms for dealing with the release of political prisoners and the granting of immunity" ;(ii) that "temporary immunity from prosecution for political offences" would be considered as a matter of urgency for the ANC's NEC members and others, to enable them to return to the country without fear of prosecution;(iii) that the government would "review existing security legislation to bring it into line with the new dynamic situation developing in South Africa in order to ensure normal and free political activities" ;(iv) that the government would work towards the lifting of the state of emergency;(v) that efficient channels of communication between the government and the ANC would be set up in order to curb violence and intimidation from whatever quarter.
It was subsequently announced that the government had granted unconditional indemnity to 40 people, including the ANC's entire NEC, for an initial three-month period from May 19.
The working party's report on political offences was being considered in late May.
Dissident criticism of ANC
Meanwhile the ANC leadership was forced to address the problem of allegations by ANC dissidents that the organization had tortured and killed dissidents, was undemocratic, and continued to hold people in detention camps abroad.
Some of the dissidents had taken part in a mutiny at an ANC camp in Angola in 1984; they criticized the military leadership's earlier policy of sending activists initially to fight alongside Joshua Nkomo's guerrilla forces in pre-independence Zimbabwe in 1979-80, and later to assist the Angolan forces against right-wing rebels.
In April Mandela had admitted that the 1984 mutineers had been tortured, but said that steps had been taken to ensure that it would not happen again.
On May 9 Albie Sachs, a civil rights lawyer and member of the ANC legal and constitutional affairs committee (who returned to South Africa on May 4 after 24 years in exile — see also p. 36073), revealed that he had helped to draw up a 1985 code of conduct outlawing torture, but acknowledged that detention camps still existed.
Foreign contacts — Sanctions speculation
De Klerk on May 8 embarked on an 18-day, nine-country tour of Western Europe, the most extensive undertaken by a South African leader since the National Party came to power in 1948.
The tour was seen as an attempt to hasten South Africa's readmittance into the international community following his government's meeting with the ANC.
In the course of the trip de Klerk held high-level talks with politicians and officials in France, the United Kingdom, West Germany, Greece, Portugal, Switzerland, Spain, Belgium and Italy, and was for the most part sympathetically received.
The tour, considered a diplomatic triumph for de Klerk, gave rise to speculation that participants at the European Communities summit scheduled for June in Dublin, would recommend the lifting of at least some economic sanctions.
However, the Commonwealth Foreign Ministers' committee on South Africa (on which the UK was not represented), met in Abuja (Nigeria) on May 17, agreeing that any move to lift sanctions was premature.
The meeting was addressed by Mandela, leading an ANC delegation on a tour of six African states to discuss the Cape Town talks.
It was announced on May 28 that Mandela, who underwent a minor surgical operation on that day, would begin a tour of 13 countries on June 4; these would include the USA and the UK, with a meeting scheduled for June 25 with US President Bush.
On May 29 de Klerk postponed a scheduled visit to the USA, thereby avoiding the likelihood of controversy if Bush saw him before seeing Mandela.
Racial violence at Welkom
The emergence of an Afrikaner paramilitary group calling itself Blanke Veiligheid (White Security — BV) in the gold mining town of Welkom (Orange Free State) led to heightened racial tension in the area.
The organization, claiming 5,000 members, had in March established an unofficial curfew in white suburbs, which were patrolled by armed members of the BV, allegedly in an attempt to reduce crime.
The group's leader, Hennie Muller, denied that it was responsible for beating to death a black mineworker in March, and blamed the neo-Nazi Afrikaner Weerstandsbeweging (AWB).
In mid-May blacks in the neighbouring township of Thabong organized a boycott of white-owned shops in Welkom.
On May 16 two white mine officials were killed in clashes at the nearby President Steyn gold mine, where black miners had been dismissed after first being attacked by their white colleagues for wearing ANC emblems.
An unprecedented meeting on May 18 between representatives of black and white mineworkers' unions, along with Law and Order Minister Vlok, raised hopes that the tension was being defused, but on May 20 police shot dead three blacks at the end of a meeting held to call off the boycott.
P. W. Botha's resignation from National Party — CP rally
De Klerk's predecessor as State President and leader of the NP, P. W. Botha [for whose resignation from these posts in 1989 see pp. 36453, 36837], made known on May 6 that he was leaving the National Party and accused de Klerk of taking "the path of abdication" .
At a rally of 60,000 supporters at the Afrikaner Voortrekker Monument near Pretoria on May 26, Andries Treurnicht, leader of the Conservative Party (CP), the official parliamentary opposition, outlined his party's strategy for reversing the government's reform programme and achieving an Afrikaner homeland.
The numbers attending fell short of expectations; nonetheless the CP was pursuing its campaign to recruit 1,000,000 members in an attempt to persuade the government to hold a general election.
Stompie Moeketsie murder trial verdict
Jerry Richardson, the coach of the so-called "Mandela United Football Team" which had acted as a bodyguard to Winnie Mandela, was found guilty on May 25 of 11 charges, including the murder of a young ANC activist "Stompie" Moeketsie Seipei in Soweto in late December 1989 [see p. 36452].
Justice Brian O'Donovan in his summing up implicitly found that Winnie Mandela was an accomplice to assaults on Stompie and three other youths two nights before his disappearance.
The evidence against Richardson was, according to the judge, "solely circumstantial" , but nonetheless led "irresistibly" to the conclusion that he was guilty.
Further trials against eight other associates of Winnie Mandela were pending.
Nelson Mandela had consistently defended his wife against rumours and allegations, accusing the government of seeking to besmirch her name and reputation.
EUROPE
ROMANIA
NSF victory in national elections — Election of Iliescu as President
In Romania's first free elections since 1937, the ruling National Salvation Front (NSF) led by President Ion Iliescu won a decisive victory on May 20.
Iliescu won the presidency with almost 86 per cent of the popular vote, and the NSF secured more than two-thirds of the parliamentary seats.
Despite allegations of fraud and intimidation, more than 86 per cent of the electorate voted in the elections, which a US-sponsored team of international observers pronounced as valid.
Defeated presidential candidates Ion Ratiu (Christian Democratic National Peasants' Party — CDNPP) and Radu Campeanu (National Liberal Party — NLP) listed irregularities in the process and complained that the campaign had been waged in an atmosphere of violence; both, however, stated their intention to participate in the new parliament.
Electoral system
According to Judge Ovidiu Zarnescu, president of the Central Electoral Bureau, at the start of the campaign 5,716 candidates were nominated either as independents or by one of the 73 political parties for the 387 elective National Assembly seats and 1,584 candidates were nominated for the 119 Senate seats.
Under the electoral law decreed on March 17 by the provisional Council for National Unity government [see pp. 37327-28], the country was divided into 41 constituencies; Bucharest, the capital and the most populous constituency, was assigned 39 Assembly seats and 14 Senate seats.
Under a modified form of proportional representation, seats were allocated in proportion to votes won within each of these multi-member constituencies.
The electoral law decree also established that the President would be elected by universal suffrage and not by vote of Parliament.
The Central Electoral Bureau, which included opposition representatives, had responsibility for ensuring the fairness of the vote at the 13,000 polling stations around the country and for scrutinising the ballots and adjudicating disputes.
The government's Technical Commission had been given responsibility for providing the mechanism for an orderly poll for which 130,000,000 lei (about US$6,500,000) was set aside.
Political parties
Since the December 1989 revolution which overthrew the communist regime of Nicolae Ceausescu [see pp. 37104-05], political parties had proliferated, with 82 registered before the elections.
The main political force was the NSF, which took power during the revolution and was credited with ordering the execution of Nicolae and Elena Ceausescu and bringing the fighting to an end.
Among the first parties to be re-established were the "historic" parties of pre-war Romania, the National Peasants, the NLP and the Social Democrats, the first-named merging with the Christian Democrats to become the CDNPP.
The Hungarian minority formed a Hungarian Democratic Union of Romania (HDUR — see also p. 37327), while concern over the environment led to ecological movements, which presented a new challenge to the more orthodox political parties.
The NSF had declared in January its intention to constitute itself as a political party, reversing an earlier decision.
Drawing into its ranks many former communists, including Iliescu and Prime Minister Petre Roman, the NSF had capitalized on its position as a broad centre-left grouping which filled the vacuum left by Ceausescu's demise.
It had consolidated its position by a series of popular decisions annulling some of the most hated acts of the former regime, such as the laws against abortion and the rural systematization programme [see pp. 36620-21], and, above all, by providing food supplies from stocks previously destined for export.
At its first national conference in Bucharest on April 7-8 the NSF adopted its election platform and elected a 71-member co-ordinating council which endorsed Iliescu as leader and presidential candidate.
The party endorsed calls for a democratic multiparty system and a "complete and irreversible break with the communist system and its ideology" .
It stressed its social programme which included a minimum wage, minimum unemployment benefits and a basic 40-hour week.
While supporting state-owned industry and state farms, it declared that it would move slowly towards a market economy.
Individuals would be allowed to own their own farms and land, but the amount would be limited.
Opposition to the NSF was led by the "historic" parties, in particular the NLP and the CDNPP, both of which wished to move faster towards a free-market economy.
They advocated returning the land to the peasants and drastically reforming the agricultural system; in foreign policy the parties looked towards the European Communities (EC) and the Western democracies.
Before the elections, the two parties had urged a postponement of the polling date, indicating their lack of preparedness and difficulty in organizing a proper campaign.
Discussions took place between the two parties over a possible electoral alliance, but broke down in April.
Rivalry between the respective leaders, Campeanu and Ratiu, who already in 1984 had competed in exile for the leadership of the World Union of Free Romanians, prevented any agreement over a joint presidential candidate.
(NSF supporters branded them "carpetbaggers" for the lengthy period which they had spent in exile abroad.)
A clash of personality also led to a split in the NLP ranks, with Ion Bratianu heading the breakaway faction.
Among the other parties, the HDUR gained overwhelming support from the Hungarian minority.
At its first congress in Oradea on April 21-22, the HDUR's chairman, Geza Domokos, said that the incorporation of Transylvania within Romania had been decided by international treaties, but that the terms of those treaties concerning minority rights had not been observed.
The honorary HDUR president, Bishop Laszlo Tokes, the pastor whose forced removal from his parish in Timisoara acted as the catalyst for the revolution [see p. 37104], called for a halt to the wave of emigration.
Criticizing Vatra Romaneasca (Romanian Hearth — a nationalist organization for the defence of Romanian interests in Transylvania), Tokes demanded a statement about its proposal to investigate him and nine others for "threatening the security of Romania" .
The HDUR condemned the attitude of Vatra as signalling the "threat of civil war" , and urged restraint when deaths and injuries occurred during ethnic clashes in the Transylvanian city of Tirgu Mures, 260 km north-west of Bucharest, in March [see p. 37321].
Concern over the extent of environmental pollution prompted the formation of ecological groups, the chief of which, the Ecological Movement, fielded candidates in all constituencies for the Assembly and Senate elections.
The movement was particularly strong in the north-eastern town of Suceava where it claimed credit for the closure in February of the local cellulose fabric plant, whose carbon disulphide emissions had been blamed for causing nervous disorders.
Chemical plants in another town, Copsa Mica, 240 km north-west of Bucharest, had turned the area into one of the worst ecological disaster zones in Europe, and the ecological groups highlighted the health hazards caused by such extensive and unregulated pollution.
Election campaign
Opposition to the NSF mounted steadily during 1990 [see p. 37252].
The widely respected dissident Doina Cornea, who resigned from the Front in January [see p. 37190], accused its leaders of insincerity and of lacking the moral authority to regenerate the country.
Fears about the Securitate police surfaced with persistent rumours that their members were still in powerful positions and were being protected by the government.
The trial of senior Securitate chiefs in Timisoara was dismissed by the opposition as a show trial instead of the wholesale purge which they demanded [for opening of trial on March 2 see p. 37328].
Doubts were raised over the course of events during the revolution, with the NSF accused of being already in existence six months before Dec. 22, waiting in the wings and "stealing" the revolution from those who made it.
Iliescu himself was called a reform communist in the Gorbachev mould, whose commitment to Western-style democracy and the market economy was suspect.
On March 11, opposition groups led by George Serban drew up the Timisoara Declaration, a document calling for the banning of ex-communists from public office, a purge of the bureaucracy and democratic reforms.
This became the rallying cry of street demonstrators who held a series of protest meetings against the NSF, culminating in an occupation of University Square in Bucharest on April 22, which lasted until after polling day.
Violence marred the conduct of the election campaign with the main opposition leaders being repeatedly threatened.
Both Campeanu and Ratiu were prevented from addressing rallies; on May 5 Campeanu was violently attacked in the eastern town of Braila and on May 11 Ratiu was prevented from addressing a rally in Oradea, near the Hungarian border.
Opposition supporters were frequently harassed; in February two CDNPP canvassers were killed near the eastern town of Bacau.
Radio and television reporting of the campaign was alleged to have been heavily weighted in favour of the NSF, although opposition parties were granted access to the government-controlled media.
The level of invective waged by party leaders against each other did nothing to dampen the violently partisan mood of the contest.
The United States ambassador was recalled to Washington during the campaign to discuss the allegations of intimidation, and the teams of Western observers recorded many irregularities in the conduct of the poll.
Nevertheless, the general conclusion of observers was that the vote, however flawed, was the most free expression of Romanian opinion that was possible under the circumstances, and that the victory of the NSF reflected the wishes of the majority of Romanian voters.
Commentators analysing the results said that they showed that voters had rewarded the NSF for its efforts over the past six months, had opted for gradual change, and supported a political grouping which showed far greater coherence than the fragmented opposition.
Candidate Votes Percentage of valid vote Ion Iliescu (NSF) 12,232,498 85.07 Radu Campeanu (NLP) 1,529,188 10.16 Ion Ratiu (CDNPP) 617,007 4.29
Presidential election results
Total votes cast: 14,826,616 (of which 447,933 were annulled) out of 17,200,722 registered voters.
Turnout: 86.2 per cent.
Votes Percentage Seats NSF 9,089,659 66.31 263 HDUR 991,601 7.23 29 NLP 879,290 6.41 29 Romanian Ecological Movement 358,864 2.62 12 CDNPP 351,357 2.56 12 Romanian Unity Alliance 300,473 2.15 9 Agrarian Democratic Party 221,790 1.59 9 Romanian Ecological Party 192,574 1.38 8 Socialist Democratic Party of Romania 152,989 1.11 5
National Assembly election results
Nine smaller parties, each gaining less than 1 per cent of the total vote, were accorded a total of 11 seats in the Assembly; they included the Social Democratic Party (0.53 per cent) two seats; Centrist Democratic Forum (0.48 per cent ) two seats; Germans' Democratic Forum (0.28 per cent ) one seat; Bratianu Liberal Union (0.27) one seat; Romanies' Democratic Union (0.21 per cent ) one seat.
The total number of National Assembly seats was brought up from 387 to 400 by the allocation of (i) four seats to representatives of other political groupings; and (ii) a further nine seats to representatives of Romania's national minorities who had not already secured election.
Votes Percentage Seats NSF 9,353,006 67.02 92 HDUR 1,004,353 7.20 12 NLP 985,094 7.06 9 CDNPP 348,687 2.50 1 Romanian Ecological Movement 341,478 2.45 1 Romanian Unity Alliance 300,473 2.15 2 Agrarian Democratic Party 221,790 1.59 0 Romanian Ecological Party 192,574 1.38 1 Socialist Democratic Party of Romania 152,989 1.11 0 Independent n.a. n.a. 1
Senate election results
Among the other parties each gaining less than 1 per cent of the total vote were the Social Democratic Party (0.50 per cent); Centrist Democratic Group (0.47 per cent ); National Reconstruction Party (0.38 per cent ); Bratianu Liberal Union (0.26 per cent ); Romanies' Democratic Union (0.14 per cent ) and the Germans' Democratic Forum (0.14 per cent ).
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
PALESTINIAN AFFAIRS
Intensification of intifada
The reaction of Palestinians to the killing of seven labourers from Gaza by an apparently deranged Israeli civilian gave fresh impetus to the flagging uprising or intifada, itself originally sparked off by the killing of a similar group of Gaza labourers in December 1987 [see pp. 35856-60].
Killing of labourers
The attack occurred early in the morning of May 20, on the outskirts of Rishon Le Zion, in central Israel some 20 km south of Tel Aviv.
Groups of Palestinians were waiting in the area in the hope of being hired for a day's casual labour.
Ami Popper, a 21-year-old Israeli civilian dressed in an Army uniform and carrying his brother's Army-issue M-16 rifle, drove to the area from his home in Rishon Le Zion and rounded up for a bogus security check a group of Gazans, whom he then sprayed with bullets, killing seven and wounding nine others.
He was quickly captured and remanded by a magistrate for psychiatric examination.
Rioting in Gaza Strip — Further Palestinian casualties
As news of the shooting spread, large numbers of Palestinians in the Gaza Strip took to the streets and soon some of the most intense rioting of the whole intifada was under way.
Despite the imposition of a curfew, the Strip remained in a state of revolt throughout May 20; Rafah, the home of many of the murdered labourers, was especially tense.
The Israeli Defence Forces (IDF) responded aggressively to the unrest, shooting dead at least four more Gazans and injuring as many as 700 others.
Rioting also broke out on the West Bank, where two Palestinians were shot dead, and in Nazareth and other towns within the pre-1967 "green line" .
In West Jerusalem an Israeli bar owner was stabbed to death by an Arab employee in an apparent revenge attack.
The unrest continued over the next few days and by May 22 the number of Palestinians killed by the IDF had risen to 21.
In the aftermath of the killings many Palestinians and Israeli Arabs observed a three-day general strike and a week-long boycott of their Israeli workplaces.
Faisal al-Husseini, one of the chief co-ordinators of the intifada, was among a group of prominent East Jerusalem Arabs who protested against the killings by maintaining a hunger strike throughout the remainder of May.
On May 28 a bomb exploded in a crowded West Jerusalem market, killing one elderly Israeli and injuring nine other people.
The Islamic Jihad of Palestine group claimed that it had planted the bomb in protest at the Rishon Le Zion killings.
Unrest in Jordan
The Rishon Le Zion killings sparked off a wave of sympathy protests in Jordan, particularly in the Palestinian refugee camps outside Amman and Irbid.
The demonstrations were the most serious in Jordan since April 1989, when rioting had broken out after the imposition of austerity measures [see p. 36602].
The Army and police suppressed unrest in the refugee camps, where at least four Palestinians were killed.
In the capital, Amman, demonstrators attacked the US embassy and a number of breweries, an indication that Islamic fundamentalists were heavily involved in the rioting.
On May 21 a young Palestinian, armed with a pistol and a knife and shouting "Gaza martyrs" , attacked a group of French tourists in Amman, wounding eight of them and a passing Jordanian photographer.
While suppressing protest within Jordan, the Jordanian government responded with unusual vehemence in its condemnation of the Rishon Le Zion attack, with Prime Minister Murdar Badran describing the Israeli government as "the authorities of terror" .
Israeli, Arab and US reaction
In a statement issued on May 20, Israel's caretaker Prime Minister Itzhak Shamir described the Rishon Le Zion killings as a "fearful act of insanity" .
In a similar vein, President Chaim Herzog said that it was "a loathsome crime against innocent Arabs" .
Nevertheless, reaction in the Arab world was strong, ranging from Syria's allegation that the killings were a "premeditated massacre" forming part of the Israeli policy of annihilation of the Palestinian people, to an Egyptian statement which said that the "painful incident" showed the importance of overcoming all obstacles to the peace process.
The Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) issued a memorandum on May 21 calling on the United States to "take a firm, practical and urgent stand to prevent more brutal and shameful barbarous crimes" .
The memorandum stressed the PLO's "legitimate right" to "confront these Israeli crimes and to discharge its responsibilities for defending and protecting the Palestinian people with all its means" .
US reaction to the Rishon Le Zion killings reflected the deterioration of its relations with Israel, since the collapse of Israel's coalition government in March over Shamir's apparent refusal to move ahead with a US-backed peace plan [see pp. 37303-04].
On May 21 the US State Department issued a statement indicating its apprehension over the rising number of Palestinians being killed in the occupied territories and calling on the Israeli government to exercise restraint.
At the same time President Bush took the unusual step of sending a message of condolence not only to the families of the seven labourers killed at Rishon Le Zion, but also to the families of those killed in the rioting afterwards.
James Baker, the US Secretary of State, astonished Israeli officials on May 23 when he announced that the US government might be prepared to discuss Palestinian and Arab demands for a UN observer team in the occupied territories.
Israeli officials reacted angrily to the suggestion, claiming that a UN presence in the territories would only serve to inflame the situation.
Arafat's address to UN Security Council in Geneva
The UN Security Council convened in Geneva on May 25-26 to discuss the Palestinian issue.
The meeting, which had been requested by the Arab states, was addressed by Yassir Arafat, the leader of the PLO.
The Council convened in Geneva, rather than its usual New York venue, in order to avoid the controversy which had accompanied Arafat's last major UN address in November 1987 when the USA had refused him an entry visa [see p. 36438].
In his speech on May 25 Arafat put forward a five-point plan proposing that:(i) an emergency UN military force be sent to the occupied territories to protect Palestinian civilians;(ii) a special UN envoy be appointed to deal with the Palestinian issue;(iii) a UN resolution be passed calling for end to Jewish settlement in the territories;(iv) UN members adopt sanctions against Israel; and (v) the five permanent members of the Security Council convene to prepare for an international conference on the Middle East.
The Security Council session was adjourned on May 26, but reopened in New York a few days later.
On May 31 the USA, angered by a Palestinian guerrilla attack in Israel the previous day [see below], vetoed a Security Council initiative to send an international commission to the occupied territories to investigate "ways of protecting the Palestinian inhabitants of the territories" .
Unsuccessful PLF assault on Israeli beaches
In retaliation for the Rishon Le Zion killings, guerrillas of the Palestine Liberation Front (PLF) launched an unsuccessful seaborne attack apparently aimed at civilians sunbathing on May 30, a public holiday (Shavuot) when the beaches were particularly full.
According to Israeli reports, the guerrillas were dropped in the morning from a Libyan "mother-ship" off the Israeli coast, and headed in six motorboats for a 70-km stretch of Israeli coast between Ashqelon and Herzliyya.
The boats were quickly detected, several broke down, and only one managed to land, at Nitzanim, south of Ashkelon.
Four of the invading guerrillas were immediately shot dead by the security forces and seven others surrendered.
Another five guerrillas were captured further north whilst still at sea.
Israeli politicians and officials claimed that the PLF attack proved that the PLO was still engaging in terrorist activities despite Arafat's December 1987 statement renouncing all forms of terrorism [see p. 36438].
The failed attack was deeply embarrassing for Arafat (who denied any involvement in it) because the PLF leader, Mahmoud Abul Abbas, was a member of the PLO executive committee.
The USA reacted angrily to the attack and threatened to call off talks with the PLO which had been under way since late 1987.
INTERNATIONAL
ENVIRONMENT
Global warming: UK targets — IPCC warning — Bergen conference
The United Kingdom Prime Minister, Margaret Thatcher, speaking at the opening of the new Hadley Centre for climate prediction and research in Bracknell, Berkshire, on May 25, called for urgent international action to combat the greenhouse effect.
She endorsed the report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climatic Change (IPCC) that global warming was taking place and announced a national target for controlling emissions of carbon dioxide (CO2), the main greenhouse gas.
CO2 emissions in the UK were 3 per cent of the global total and, on current trends, were estimated to rise by just over 30 per cent by 2005.
Latest figures from the Department of Trade and Industry's Warren Springs Laboratory showed that 158,000,000 tonnes of CO2 were discharged by the UK into the atmosphere in 1988, one-third of which was emitted by power stations.
The UK was prepared to set itself the "very demanding target" of stabilizing total UK emissions of CO2 at 1990 levels by 2005 as part of "a wide international effort, with a fair distribution of the burden" , and "provided others are ready to take their full share" .
Meeting such targets, she said, would mean "significant adjustments to our economies — more efficient power stations, cars using less fuel, better insulated houses and better management of energy" .
The details would be spelled out in a White Paper due out in the autumn.
Environmental groups condemned the announcement as inadequate, pointing out that the UK target was lower than that of all other West European countries and fell short of the 60 per cent reduction in CO2 emissions which scientists regarded as necessary to stabilize greenhouse gases at current levels.
John Houghton, director of the Meteorological Office and chair of the IPCC's Working Group I, said that Thatcher's programme, if repeated worldwide, would not stop the rise in temperatures, but would slow down the rate of increase.
IPCC report on global warming
The draft report of IPCC Working Group I on the effects of climatic change [see p. 37268]was published on May 25.
This presented the unanimous view of the working group (consisting of leading climatologists), based on nine computer models, that average global temperatures would be between 1.4 and 2.8 degrees centigrade above pre-industrial levels by the year 2030.
It estimated that up to 10,000,000 people would have to be moved from low-lying coastal areas of East Anglia (UK), Bangladesh and the Netherlands, or that an immediate start would have to be made on building 360,000 km of sea defences to protect them.
Otherwise large tracts of land would be lost to the sea.
This was the first of three IPCC reports being prepared for the UN environment conference to be held in Geneva in November 1990.
Bergen conference on the environment
Environment ministers from 32 European countries plus Canada and the United States, which together produced 70 per cent of the world's CO2 emissions, met in Bergen, Norway, on May 8-16 to follow up the 1987 Brundtland report on improving the global environment [see pp. 35227-29].
After considerable debate, the final communiqué stated that countries would "strengthen international action to protect the ozone layer including, for example, through additional resources and technology transfers" .
Most countries agreed to stabilize CO2 emissions at present levels by the year 2000.
However, the USA, the Soviet Union and the UK argued that global warming targets should be settled at the Geneva conference in November.
US opposition to plans for halting global warming was based on the huge costs involved.
According to some estimates this amounted to $3,600,000 million, or more than the annual US gross domestic product.
US Assistant Secretary for Energy John Easton told the conference that the USA was not prepared to make an open-ended, unspecified commitment.
The USA also opposed UN plans to aid Third-World countries in reducing their use of ozone-depleting chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), stating that the World Bank already had resources to provide such aid.
Under the UN plan proposed by Mostafa Tolba, Executive Director of the UN Environment Programme, $100,000,000 would be distributed to developing countries for them to convert factories which used CFCs in the manufacture of refrigerators, polystyrene products and electronic components.
The amount proposed would be doubled if India and China signed the 1987 Montreal protocol (see p. 35678), with the US contribution fixed at 25 per cent.
Third-World countries appealed to the USA to reconsider its stand, saying that unless it did so, countries which had not signed the Montreal protocol would be unable to do so, rendering efforts to save the ozone layer fruitless.
AFRICA
GABON
Rioting in major towns — Commitment to introduction of multiparty system — Appointment of transitional government
Violent protest erupted in the capital Libreville and in the strategic oil town of Port Gentil following the death of Joseph Rendjambe, secretary-general of the left-wing opposition Gabonese Progress Party, whose body was found in a hotel room in Libreville on May 22.
Initial reports suggested that he had been poisoned, with the implication that it was a politically motivated killing.
His death followed the legalization of opposition parties by President Omar Bongo in response to the demands of the specially convened national conference in March-April [see below].
In the worst rioting of Bongo's 23-year rule, angry protesters demanding Bongo's resignation attempted to storm the presidential residence, setting fire to buildings in the capital.
On May 24 the protesters took hostage the French consul-general and 10 oil company employees, apparently in an attempt to obtain French support for their demands.
All the hostages were released unharmed soon afterwards.
As protest spread to provincial towns on May 25, Bongo ordered an official inquiry into Rendjambe's death.
Gabonese troops were deployed in Port Gentil to suppress the revolt, and a state of emergency was imposed there on May 28.
Unofficial reports claimed that up to eight people were killed.
By early June the situation appeared to be under control and oil production, which had been briefly suspended, was resumed.
The French government despatched some 500 troops to reinforce the 500-strong battalion of Marines permanently stationed to protect French installations, and made arrangements for the evacuation of French citizens.
On May 29 Gabonese troops, using extended powers under the state of emergency, succeeded in regaining control of Port Gentil.
During their action shots were fired at protesters, injuring 15, tear gas was used to disperse GPP supporters, and barricades were destroyed.
According to the state-owned newspaper L'Union, one soldier and one civilian died in the rebellion, and 52 people were arrested; those arrested were thought to include at least 20 GPP supporters.
Conference call for political pluralism
The month-long national conference called to discuss political reform [see p. 37307]ended on April 21.
Delegates voted by a large majority for the immediate introduction of a multiparty system, emphatically rejecting a proposal by Bongo that democratic pluralism be introduced over a three- to five-year period; delegates also rejected Bongo's proposal for a new single party, the Gabonese Social Democratic Rally (RSDG)[ibid.], encompassing various political groupings, which was to have replaced the Gabonese Democratic Party (PDG), the sole legal party since 1968.
In one of several concessions, Bongo granted legal status, initially for one year, to all the opposition groups participating in the conference.
Some 13 groups immediately formed a United Opposition Front.
Transitional government
Casimir Oye Mba was on May 3 formally installed as Prime Minister of a transitional government, membership of which had been announced on April 29.
Mba, hitherto governor of the regional bank, the Banque des états de l'Afrique centrale (BEAC), replaced Léon Mebiame who had been head of government since 1981.
Paul Mba Abessole, a prominent opposition figure and leader of a faction of the main opposition group, the National Rectification Movement (Morena), refused to accept a Cabinet post, as did some other opposition politicians, on the grounds that they had not been consulted on the composition of the new government, which included a number of ministers from the outgoing Cabinet.
Nonetheless, a number of representatives of the emerging opposition parties were appointed [for government list see p. 37480].
AFRICA
CAMEROON
Deaths at opposition demonstration
Six people died on May 26 in the north-western town of Bamenda at a demonstration organized by an illegal opposition group, the newly founded Social Democratic Front (SDF), one of whose leaders was the dissident writer Albert Mukong.
The state-owned broadcasting media strongly criticized the protest, reporting that the deaths occurred in a "rampage" which followed the dispersal of the 20,000-strong gathering by police.
Witnesses, however, claimed that the six had been shot dead by security forces.
On the same day some 300 students were arrested at a pro-SDF march at Yaoundé university.
The authorities accused the SDF of being sectarian and pro-Nigerian.
AFRICA
COTE D'IVOIRE
Government response to social unrest
On May 16 some 900 army conscripts took control of the international airport at Abidjan, the capital, for 12 hours in protest at low levels of pay and poor employment prospects.
Attempting to regain control of the already unstable situation [see p. 37307], 85-year-old President Félix Houphouët-Boigny appealed to the French government for military assistance, citing a 1961 agreement with the former colonial power.
This request was refused, but 600 French paratroopers based at Port Bouet were placed on alert.
The protestors eventually surrendered to paramilitary police.
Another group of conscripts had on May 14 occupied the national radio station but failed to persuade staff to broadcast their demands, and on May 16 they rampaged through the streets of Abidjan firing their weapons.
Similar scenes were reported in provincial towns in the vicinity of military camps.
A police officers' strike on May 21 was followed by similar action by firemen and customs officers.
Authorization of opposition parties
On May 3 the Cabinet, apparently in response to increasing popular dissatisfaction with the 30-year-old regime, endorsed a proposal from the political bureau of the ruling party, the Parti démocratique de la Côte d'Ivoire (PDCI), that other parties should be allowed to operate.
The constitution provided for a multiparty system, but the country had been a de facto one-party state since independence.
A total of nine parties were authorized on May 31, the most prominent of which was the socialist Front populaire ivoirien (FPI), formed in November 1989 by a dissident history professor, Laurent Gbagbo.
Elections at all levels were scheduled for October and November 1990.
Meanwhile on May 29 the National Assembly approved an economic recovery plan drawn up by a newly appointed economic adviser, Alassane Ouattara, president of the West African Central Bank, in conjunction with the IMF and World Bank.
This replaced the original plan whose severity had sparked off street protests in February and March and which had been abandoned in mid-April.
The new plan, which was to take immediate effect, did not, unlike its predecessor, envisage civil service salary cuts.
Instead there was to be a 25 per cent reduction in the state's operational budget, some tax increases, the sale of some 3,000 government-owned vehicles, and strict control of the civil service payroll.
The country's economy had been severely undermined by a fall of 50 per cent between 1986 and 1989 in the world market value of cocoa and coffee, the principal export commodities [see pp. 36635-36; 36676].
AFRICA
ZAIRE
Reform timetable — Transitional government
Attempting to dispel confusion caused by his April 24 statement announcing political reforms [see p. 37366], President Mobutu Sese Seko on May 3 outlined a timetable for the transitional period, and warned that parties other than the ruling Mouvement populaire de la révolution (MPR) remained unauthorized.
The reforms envisaged the continuation of the MPR as one of three parties, along with the Union pour la démocratie et le progrès social (UPDS), which was currently banned, and an as yet unspecified third party.
In the first stage of the transitional period legislation allowing for political parties was to be prepared, and a commission would be set up to draft a new constitution.
During the second phase, beginning on May 1, 1991, elections would be held at all levels, including elections for president.
Appointment of transitional government
Lunda Bululu, the newly appointed First State Commissioner (Prime Minister), announced the composition of a reduced Cabinet on May 4.
Few ministers from the previous cabinet were retained; the new ministers were largely technocrats.
Among those leaving the government were Mobutu's son Nyiwa Mobutu and former Foreign Affairs minister Nguza Karl I Bond.
Lunda Bululu First State Commissioner Engulu Baanga Mpongo Bakokele Lokonga Deputy First State Commissioner; Territorial Administration and Decentralization* **Nzanda Buana Kalemba Deputy First State Commissioner; Industry, Commerce and Crafts* Mushobekwa Kalimba Wa Katana Foreign Affairs Adml.
Mavua Mudima National Defence, Territorial Security and Veterans' Affairs Tshibangu Muyembe Kanza Justice **Okitakula Djambokota Citizens' Rights* Ngongo Kamanda Information, Arts and Culture* Banza Mukalay Nsungu Relations with Parliament Ilunga Ilukamba Planning Buketi Bukayi International Co-operation Bompito Botomba Finance ***Mananga Ma Pholo Budget Onyembe Pene Butu Agriculture, Rural Affairs, Community Development* Mboso Nkodia Puanga Land Affairs, Mines and Energy* Bangila Basila Public Works, Urbanism and Habitat Kimasi Matuika Basaula Transport and Communication Agbiamo Biamba Higher Learning, University and Scientific Research Koli Elombe Motokoa Primary, Secondary and Professional Education* Bosha Bokwete Public Health and Social Affairs* Diur Katond Environment and Nature Conservation and Tourism* ***Muduka Inyanza Labour and Social Security Muyabo Nkulu Family and Women's Affairs* Bashala Kaniu Wa Milandu Civil Service Lengelo Muyangandu Posts and Telecommunications Nyamwizi Muvingi Youth, Sports and Leisure* *New or restructured portfolio.
**Reshuffled. ***No change.
Zaïre Executive Council (State Commissioners)
Mobutu declared the primary objectives of the transitional government to be (i) financial reorganization;(ii) inflation control; and (iii) currency stabilization.
In early May the new chairman of the MPR following Mobutu's resignation from that post was named as N'Singa Udjuu Ongwakebei, a former Minister of the Interior and president of the Judicial Council.
NXR> REFERENCES.
Reference article pp. 36919-21; April 1990 announcement of political reforms p. 37366.
AFRICA
ZAMBIA
Approval of referendum on multiparty system
The 600-member national council of the ruling single party, the United National Independence Party (UNIP), on May 29 approved a recommendation by President Kenneth Kaunda to hold a referendum on introducing a multiparty system.
Kaunda had already made known his strong preference for retaining the one-party system; his action was thus seen as an attempt to appease critics of his regime, particularly among the trade union and business communities.
AFRICA
NAMIBIA
Dropping of Lubowski murder charge
The charge against Donald Acheson, accused of the murder in September 1989 of the Namibian nationalist Anton Lubowski, was dropped on May 7.
The court had failed to obtain the crucial testimony of four South African policemen due to the absence of an extradition treaty between Namibia and South Africa.
Earlier, it had emerged that an investigation being undertaken in South Africa into alleged South African Defence Force (SADF) "hit squads" [see p. 37234]would not attempt to discover whether the Lubowski murder was linked to such squads.
AFRICA
MADAGASCAR
Coup attempt
A group of armed rebels seized control of the national radio headquarters in Antananarivo, the capital, early on May 13 and managed to broadcast a statement announcing the overthrow of President Didier Ratsiraka before being overpowered by the security forces.
Five people were killed when troops and police intervened to arrest the rebels and to disperse a crowd of some 5,000 which had gathered around the radio station.
Several hundred in the crowd appeared to be in support of the rebels, and threw stones at the security forces.
According to a Paris-based opposition group, the Madagascar Committee for Democracy and Development, "about 50 people" had died in the incident.
The rebel broadcast announced the replacement of the Democratic Republic with a Republic of Madagascar and the formation of a "government of public safety" , and called on Gen. (retd) Jean Rakotoarison, a former chief of general staff and member of the Military Development Committee, to assume power.
The announcement called upon the population to revolt, referring to the 15-year "dictatorship" of Ratsiraka and his family which, it was claimed, had "impoverished" the country.
Soon afterwards the radio went of the air.
Later in the day the Prime Minister, Lt.-Col. Victor Ramahatra, broadcast that "all institutions of the state are in place" .
According to Information Minister Jean-Claude Rahaga, 11 rebels had been arrested and were to face trial.
A number of these had been involved in a similar coup attempt in July 1989 when a smaller group of rebels briefly gained control of the radio station.
Among those arrested were Joma Ernest and Jean-Jacques Rafalimanana, both members of the conservative opposition Popular Movement for National Unity (Vonjy Iray Tsy Mivaky — VITM), and an unnamed member of the nationalist party Madagascar for the Malagasy.
AFRICA
AFRICAN REGIONAL ORGANIZATIONS
ECOWAS summit
The 16 members of the Economic Community of West African States gathered for their 13th summit in Banjul (The Gambia) on May 28-30.
The summit marked the 15th anniversary of the creation of the regional body in Lagos in 1975 [for list of member states see p. 36991].
The unresolved conflicts in the region were major preoccupations, specifically Senegal's disputes with Mauritania and with Guinea-Bissau, and the civil war in Liberia — the latter forming the subject of a resolution which called for a cessation of hostilities and the holding of elections.
In addition, popular demands for greater democracy and accountability in government, inspired by changes in eastern Europe in the course of 1989, were being heard, notably in Cameroon and Côte d'Ivoire [see pp. 37445].
Executive secretary Abbas Bundu stressed the need for political stability as a prerequisite for achieving the organization's aim of economic integration.
In his report, Bundu noted that the existence in the region of some 40 inter-governmental organizations, including three economic integration groupings (ECOWAS itself, the West African Monetary Union (UMOA) and the West African Economic Community (CEAO)— see p. 36991) had served to diminish members' active participation in ECOWAS.
Resolutions adopted included a commitment to establish a Single Monetary Zone by 1992.
Bundu had earlier referred to an "emerging equilibrium" between the CFA (directly convertible with the French franc) and non-CFA currencies; nonetheless, observers suggested that obstacles to monetary union remained considerable.
Other resolutions included: the adoption of a Common Resident Card for all citizens and measures to facilitate travel and residence rights and the movement of goods by road within the community; the establishment of a Standing Mediation Committee in response to the conflicts between member states; the eventual establishment of a single economic community in West Africa; the approval of a new assessment of members' contributions to the budget — once again, non-payment of contributions had been a contentious issue; and agreement to ratify all protocols by Dec. 31, 1990.
AMERICAS
UNITED STATES
Convening of bipartisan budget summit
A special budgetary summit opened on May 15 when President George Bush and his Budget Director, Richard Darman, met with a 21-member bipartisan congressional negotiating team, led by House of Representatives Speaker Thomas S. Foley (Dem., Washington) and Senate Majority Leader George J. Mitchell (Dem., Maine).
The meeting was arranged after predictions by the administration's Office of Management and Budget (OMB) and the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) that the US budget deficit for fiscal 1991 (beginning Oct. 1, 1990), would be considerably in excess of that anticipated in the administration's budget proposal of January 1990 [see pp. 37177-79].
The move also followed the passing of budget resolutions by the House of Representatives on May 1 and by the budget committee of the Senate on May 2, both of which embodied much deeper cuts in military expenditure than those contained within the Bush budget, which was increasingly viewed as obsolete because of its failure to address the implications of the radical change in Eastern Europe.
In this respect many commentators interpreted the President's desire for immediate talks as an attempt to regain some control over the budgetary process by reaching a bipartisan agreement before further congressional action.
Blaming lower than forecast levels of personal and corporate tax receipts and rising interest rates, the OMB estimated the true level of the 1991 deficit as between $123,000 million and $138,000 million.
The CBO, whose record of accuracy was greater than that of the OMB, suggested that the true figure would as great as $160,000 million or more.
Under the terms of the Gramm-Rudman-Hollings deficit reduction legislation (the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act, passed in 1985 and amended in 1987 — see pp. 34094-95; 35895-96) there was a statutory requirement to reduce the deficit to $64,000 million by 1991 and to achieve its complete elimination by 1993.
A failure to achieve the annual Gramm-Rudman targets would trigger automatic spending cuts spread equally between defence and social programmes.
Even excluding the huge cost of rescuing the savings and loan industry [see p. 37412]by buying the assets of failing institutions (estimated at more than $50,000 million in 1991), most observers agreed that the automatic cuts imposed by the Gramm-Rudman law would amount to at least $60,000 million, a sum more than sufficient to push the country's economy from its present slow growth into outright recession.
One of the key obstacles to achieving a significant deficit reduction was the President's 1988 pledge not to raise taxes, one of the few firm commitments made by Bush during his entire presidential election campaign.
Thus, his willingness to enter budgetary talks without preconditions — a point made by Bush to congressional leaders on May 6 — was welcomed by many Democrats as evidence of a new realism on the part of the administration when compared with the use of accounting manoeuvres and optimistic forecasts which had characterized the 1991 budget proposal.
Others within the Democratic Party counselled caution, however, accusing Bush of seeking to renege upon his undertaking whilst trying to shift the blame for any new taxes upon the Democrat-controlled Congress.
In order to avoid automatic cuts, the summit negotiators faced the prospect of raising taxes and cutting expenditure, or of raising the Gramm-Rudman targets and thereby loosening the only form of discipline governing the budgetary process.
Rejecting Democratic appeals to outline a specific deficit reduction strategy, Bush stated on May 17 that he would make a public address on the issue "when we get a solution" .
As for the progress of the summit talks, the President insisted only that they "were on the right track" .
In agreeing the format of the talks on May 9, both sides agreed that they should be completed "as quickly as possible" , although no deadline was agreed and many observers predicted that they would last for several months.
Resolution of sex bias case
A federal district court in Washington D.C. ruled on May 14 that the large accounting practice of Price Waterhouse should compensate for its earlier discrimination against Ann Hopkins, a former employee, by awarding her a partnership in the firm.
Judge Gerhard A. Gesell ruled that Hopkins, who had been denied a partnership in 1982 because her colleagues considered her to be too "macho" , had been the victim of illegal "sex stereotyping" .
He also ordered Price Waterhouse to pay Hopkins $350,000 as compensation for lost earnings.
The judgment followed a decision by the Supreme Court in May 1989 [see pp. 36650-51], to return the case for reconsideration by a lower court, after ruling that an employer accused of discriminatory promotion practice could escape liability only by proving that there were other, legitimate, reasons for denying promotion.
Following the judgment, it was unclear whether Hopkins — currently a budget and policy review officer at the World Bank — would accept the opportunity of returning to Price Waterhouse.
AMERICAS
UNITED STATES
Racial violence in New York City
Bensonhurst murder trial
Joseph Fama, a 19-year-old Italian-American construction worker, was convicted on May 17 of murdering a black teenager Yusuf Hawkins, 16, in the Bensonhurst neighbourhood of Brooklyn, New York City, in August 1989.
Hawkins had entered the predominantly Italian area of Bensonhurst in order to buy a secondhand car, but had been pursued, attacked and killed by a mob of 40 white youths who were intent upon preventing blacks from attending the birthday party of a local white girl.
The jury deliberated for 10 days before acquitting Fama of firing the fatal shot, but convicting him of second-degree murder by virtue of his participation in the attack; he was also convicted of numerous lesser charges including those relating to the unlawful possession of weapons.
On the following day, however, a second jury acquitted Keith Mondello, 19, the alleged ringleader of the gang, of murder and manslaughter charges.
Although Mondello was convicted of lesser charges, including riot, his acquittal on the murder counts was unanticipated because the evidence against him was generally considered to be stronger than that which had led to Fama's conviction.
The Bensonhurst murder trial aggravated racial tensions within the city as the circumstances of the killing were portrayed by many black spokesmen as tantamount to a latter-day lynching.
Only days before the verdict was announced the Rev. Al Sharpton, a black Baptist minister, warned the white community that unless both Fama and Mondello were convicted of murder "you are lighting a match to the end of a powder keg and telling us to burn the town down" .
Several protest demonstrations were held following the Mondello verdict, and there were reports of revenge attacks against whites by gangs of black youths.
Sharpton led a 500-strong march through central Bensonhurst on May 19, which was opposed by several hundred white residents; although racial taunts and insults were exchanged, a heavy police presence prevented the outbreak of violence.
Other racial incidents — Response of Mayor Dinkins
Prior to the conclusion of the Bensonhurst trial, in the early hours of May 13 a gang in the predominantly black neighbourhood of Brooklyn assaulted three Vietnamese men, one of whom suffered a fractured skull.
It was widely assumed that the assailants had mistakenly believed their victims to be of Korean extraction, and that the assault was connected to a black boycott of two Korean-American grocery shops in the Flatbush area of Brooklyn.
This boycott had begun on Jan. 18 after an altercation between an employee of one of the shops and a Haitian woman customer, which had resulted in each accusing the other of assault and racial insults.
Thereafter, up to 500 blacks had picketed both the shop in question and another Korean-owned store in the same area.
On May 14 a teacher and some 30 black pupils from a Brooklyn school defied the boycott by entering the shop, but were intimidated and spat upon by the pickets.
The highly charged atmosphere created by the boycott and the Bensonhurst trial provided the first severe test for the city's first black mayor, David Dinkins.
His naturally reserved style, together with his apparent unwillingness to condemn either the boycott or Sharpton's involvement in the Bensonhurst case, resulted in widespread criticism that he was not doing more to ease racial tensions.
In a speech to local dignitaries on May 11, however, Dinkins condemned "any boycott based on race" and declared himself ready to mediate "in any dispute" .
He also denounced the murder of Hawkins as a hateful act but emphasized that "all of Bensonhurst did not commit this crime" and that it was essential to "categorically reject the notion of group guilt" .
Although the speech was praised by white politicians and some black leaders, several radical blacks criticized the mayor, accusing him of having betrayed his black constituents.
AMERICAS
CANADA-UNITED STATES
Violence on Indian reservation
Several hundred Canadian and US police in the early hours of May 2 entered the 5,000-hectare St Regis Mohawke Akwesasne reservation, straddling the US-Canadian border between Quebec and New York State some 60 miles south-west of Montreal.
The intervention followed several weeks of fighting between rival Indian factions armed with automatic weapons and grenades, which resulted in the deaths of at least two people, the displacement of many of the 9,500 who lived on the reservation, and the infliction of serious material damage.
The source of the conflict was six gaming casinos operating in the US sector of the reservation which attracted significant numbers of non-Indians from the state of New York where gambling was prohibited.
Although the US 1988 Indian Gaming Act allowed casinos on reservations only with the agreement of the local state, the authorities had been reluctant to act against the St Regis establishments for fear of violating treaties guaranteeing the sovereignty of the reservation.
An attempt by the authorities to raid the casinos in July 1989 had ended with state police and Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) agents being driven off the reservation by a group of heavily-armed pro-casino Mohawks known as the Warriors Society.
The Warriors were opposed by an anti-gambling, pro-Canadian Mohawk faction which claimed that the casinos were controlled by US organized crime and were used as fronts for cross-border smuggling operations.
Attempts by the anti-gamblers to block access to the casinos had led to the outbreak of fighting with the Warriors.
AMERICAS
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC
Presidential elections
Presidential elections were held on May 16, passing off peacefully and conducted in a manner described by former United States President Jimmy Carter as "adequate and honest" .
Initial returns indicated the re-election of President Joaquín Balaguer, 83, of the Social Christian Reformist Party (PRSC), but on May 18 his long-time rival, Juan Bosch, 81, of the Dominican Liberation Party (PLD), accused the government of "colossal fraud" and urged his supporters to take to the streets in protest.
A first recount was organized, supervised by a team headed by Carter and including members of the Organization of American States (OAS) and the Inter-American Human Rights Institute.
The result of this first recount, announced on May 25, gave Balaguer 669,073 votes to Bosch's 647,369.
The Central Electoral Board stated that more than 1,300,000 out of 3,275,000 eligible voters had abstained, the highest abstention figure in the 37 elections held since the proclamation of independence in 1844.
A further recount began at the end of May.
José Francisco Pena Gómez of the Dominican Revolutionary Party (PRD), reported to have come third with 25 per cent of votes cast, called on May 17 for national understanding and the formation of a government of reconciliation, to end the polarization of the country into followers of the two major candidates, whose personalities had dominated the campaign.
Jacobo Majluta of the Independent Revolutionary Party (PRI) finished in fourth place, with four other candidates receiving only insignificant levels of support.
Bosch, who had moderated his left-wing image to present himself as the defender of the small and medium businessman in the face of state bureaucracy and corruption, still retained the appeal of the reformer who had been ousted from office by the military in 1963 and by the invasion of US troops in 1965.
Critics concentrated on his anti-clericalism and alleged hostility to the USA.
Balaguer, who was blind and reportedly severely incapacitated, was accused of responsibility for an economic crisis, high unemployment and constant power failures, and of channelling available resources into the completion of the huge Colón lighthouse project, a contribution to the 1992 celebrations of 500th anniversary of Columbus's arrival in the Americas, and also seen as a memorial to Balaguer himself.
AMERICAS
DOMINICA
Government victory in general election
The result of the May 28 general election in Dominica was unexpectedly close, with Eugenia Charles, the island's 71-year-old conservative Prime Minister, narrowly winning a third consecutive term in office.
Charles's Dominica Freedom Party (DFP) won 11 of the 21 elected seats in the House of Assembly, a net loss of six seats compared with its pre-election strength [see p. 35964].
In a post-election interview at her home outside the capital of Roseau, Charles said: "I do not call this a victory…
There is no joy to it."
During the campaign, which focused on opposition accusations that Charles had become too authoritarian in style, the Prime Minister had suggested that the DFP could win all 21 seats.
The beneficiary of the DFP's comparatively poor showing was the Dominica United Workers' Party (DUWP), formed in July 1988 [see pp. 37073-74], which was contesting its first general election.
Under the leadership of Edison James, the DUWP fought an effective campaign and finished second with six seats.
It replaced as the country's main opposition party the Labour Party of Dominica (LPD), which retained its pre-election strength of four seats.
AMERICAS
ANTIGUA AND BARBUDA
Removal of minister in illegal arms scandal
There was growing disarray within the faction-ridden government of Antigua and Barbuda during April and May as a result of a scandal involving an illegal shipment of arms to Colombian drug traffickers.
Prime Minister Vere Bird temporarily relieved his son, Vere Bird Jr, a leading figure in the scandal, of his ministerial responsibilities for Communications and Works, pending the result of a judicial inquiry.
The scandal broke on April 6 when the government of Colombia informed the Antiguan Prime Minister that a shipment of Israeli arms, allegedly intended for Antigua, had been discovered on the property of the late Gonzalo Rodríguez Gacha, a leading member of the notorious Medellín cocaine cartel.
Bird Jr denied Colombian suggestions that he had known about the 1989 shipment, but he admitted having had discussions with a former Israeli army officer who had plans to establish a business in Antigua.
Following the receipt of the Colombian note, the Antiguan government established a committee of inquiry under Deputy Prime Minister Lester Bird, the younger brother and avowed opponent of Bird Jr [see p. 35766].
On April 17, however, Lester Bird stated that he would boycott further Cabinet meetings until his father agreed to a full judicial inquiry — armed with legal powers to subpoena witnesses and evidence — into the armaments affair.
His boycott was supported by Hugh Marshall, the Minister of Trade and Industry.
Prime Minister Bird acknowledged that there had been "irregularities and breaches of our customs regulations in handling the arms" .
At first he resisted the demand for a judicial inquiry, on the grounds that there was insufficient evidence, but on April 25 he received a note from the Israeli government, informing him that it possessed a letter from Vere Bird Jr dated Nov. 9, 1988, which confirmed the arms order.
This letter stated that the weapons were "contemplated to be used by the Antiguan Forces" and that they would "not be passed, sold, or given to any third party" .
Prime Minister Bird responded by announcing the establishment of a judicial inquiry and agreeing to a request by Bird Jr to be relieved of official duties until the matter had been resolved.
An Antiguan investigating team, led by one of its delegation at the UN, Patrick Lewis, questioned Israeli Foreign Ministry officials in Jerusalem on May 8, and was reportedly shown documentation which testified to the legality of the arms sale.
AMERICAS
MEXICO
Privatization of banks
On May 12 the Chamber of Deputies approved in principle, by 329 votes to 54 with 12 abstentions, the initiative of President Carlos Salinas de Gortari, announced on May 2, to reprivatize 19 state-run banks.
Although retaining its majority shareholding in development banks offering specialized loans, the government claimed that proceeds from the sale of its majority shareholding in others would be used to reduce the fiscal deficit and the burden of internal debt while consolidating the recovery of the economy.
The nationalization of the banking system by President José López Portillo on Sept. 1, 1982 [see p. 32071], was claimed to have precipitated the devaluation of the official currency, the peso, and to have contributed to high inflation and the flight of capital.
A previous attempt to sell 34 per cent of the equity of 12 banks on the domestic stock market in 1987 [see pp. 35635-36]had been only moderately successful.
Industrialists, traders and trade unions expressed support for the move, but the left-wing nationalist Democratic Revolutionary Party (PAD) described it as "unnecessary" .
AMERICAS
EL SALVADOR
Peace talks
Six days of discussions in the Venezuelan capital, Caracas, mediated by UN envoy Alvaro De Soto, led on May 21 to an agreement in principle between representatives of the Farabundo Martí National Liberation Front (FMLN) and the Salvadorean government of President Alfredo Cristiani.
The discussions (which the government refused to characterise as "negotiations" ) built on agreements reached in Geneva on April 4 [see p. 37372].
The agreement involved a ceasefire by mid-September, conditional on progress in discussions on the future role and composition of the Salvadorean army, human rights, the judicial and electoral systems, constitutional reform and social and economic problems, and a UN role in verifying implementation of these accords.
On May 28 the leaders of the nine main opposition parties were reported to have supported FMLN demands for a sharp reduction in the power of the military, as a crucial step towards ending the 11-year civil war.
The opposition parties and the FMLN had held talks in Mexico City on May 5 and had established a permanent consultative mechanism.
FMLN offensive
On May 2 the FMLN mounted their first major offensive since November 1989 [see p. 37037-38], attacking military posts and dynamiting electricity pylons throughout the country and penetrating into the exclusive suburb of Escalón in the capital, San Salvador.
President Cristiani's residence, and that of the Works Minister, Mauricio Stubig, reportedly came under fire.
Claiming that 180 soldiers had been killed or wounded in the attacks, the FMLN said that its offensive had been launched because of the "total immunity that exists in this country for members of the armed forces who violate human rights" , and to counter the military's "triumphalist and all-powerful" attitude to the current peace process.
Military officials gave a figure of 48 dead or wounded on both sides.
Earlier in the day an estimated 40,000 trade unionists and opposition party supporters had demonstrated in San Salvador against the government's austerity programme and to urge peace talks.
On May 16, coinciding with the opening of the Caracas peace talks [see above], government forces reportedly launched a major military offensive on all fronts.
Case concerning 1989 killing of Jesuit priests
The Supreme Court, investigating the November 1989 killing of six Jesuit priests, their housekeeper and her daughter in San Salvador [see pp. 37037-38; 37181], revealed in late May the disappearance of important evidence.
As reported on May 28, the court stated that Maj. Carlos Camilio Hernandez, a former director of San Salvador's military academy, had ordered the burning of logbooks detailing the movements of possible murder suspects.
Cristiani then told a news conference that it was not clear whether the logbooks had in fact been burnt, that Hernandez had ordered one of the defendants to make them "available" , and that it remained to be determined what subsequently happened to them.
The United States House of Representatives had voted on May 22 to incorporate in a foreign aid bill (which was, however, subsequently defeated) a provision cutting military aid to El Salvador by 50 per cent, in protest at the failure of the authorities to prosecute the murderers of the priests.
AMERICAS
NICARAGUA
Demobilization of contras — Public-sector strike
On May 30 contra rebel leaders signed a new agreement with the government of President Violeta Chamorro to disarm their forces by June 10.
In return the government promised to police the five security zones inside which an estimated 13,000 contras had congregated, in line with an April agreement [see pp. 37370-71]to disband under UN supervision, and to transform the security zones into development areas.
On May 25 contra leaders had suspended an earlier agreement to disband, signed on May 4, claiming that government guarantees for their protection were insufficient and that troops of the Sandinista People's Army (EPS) had massacred 14 demobilized contras in Waslala, 300 km north of the capital, Managua.
Observers from the International Commission of Support and Verification (CIAV) sent to the area reportedly found no evidence of the massacre.
By May 31 an estimated 1,482 contras were reported to have been demobilized.
Public-sector strike
An estimated 70,000 public-sector workers went on strike on May 10 after the government had unilaterally revoked the Civil Service Law, which protected the rights of public-sector workers.
The Labour Minister, Francisco Rosales Arguello, declared the strike illegal, and on May 15 police used tear gas to remove workers who had occupied various ministries.
The strike ended on May 16, when the government agreed to meet many of the key demands.
The strike, organized by unions affiliated to the Sandinista National Liberation Front (FSLN), had halted most public transport, stopped all international flights and shut down telecommunications and the state run banking system.
The government agreed to a 100 per cent pay increase, to meet demands for job security, to index wages to inflation, to set up an inquiry into the current salaries of health workers and teachers, to reinstate all workers dismissed since March, and to involve the unions in revising the Civil Service Law.
New amnesty and land laws
The National Assembly approved a new amnesty law on May 9 despite the opposition of the 39 FSLN deputies who claimed that it would "erase the crimes committed by the Somoza dictatorship" .
The decision removed the amnesty law passed by the outgoing FSLN government in March which had covered more than 1,000 prisoners.
On May 11 Chamorro signed decrees for the revision of all land confiscations under the Sandinista government and one providing for the provisional leasing back of land.
US loan
On May 25 the United States Congress finally approved US$300,000,000 in aid first requested by the US government in March [see p. 37311].
President Bush had rejected Chamorro's request for $40,000,000 in emergency aid on May 16.
AMERICAS
COSTA RICA
Inauguration of President — New Cabinet — Debt agreement
The inauguration of President Rafael Angel Calderón Fournier took place on May 8 and was attended by representatives of 72 countries.
Bernd Niehaus Quesada Foreign Affairs Luis Fishman Interior Elizabeth Odio Benito Justice Victor Emilio Herrera Alfaro Internal Security Mario Lara Eduarte Finance Gonzalo Fajardo Economy and Industry Juan Rafael Lizano Sáenz Agriculture Guillermo Madriz de Mezerville Public Works Hernán Bravo Trejos Natural Resources Marvin Herrera Araya Education Carlos Castro Charpantier Health Mercedes López de Gordienko Culture Erick Thompson Piñeres Labour Helio Fallas Planning Cristóbal Zawadzki Housing Roberto Rojas López Foreign Trade Orlando Morales Science and Technology Luis Manuel Chacón Jiménez Tourism Johnny Meoño State Reform Rodolfo Méndez Mata Presidency 
New Costa Rican Cabinet
Debt agreement
On May 6 the outgoing government of President Oscar Arias Sánchez finalized an agreement to reduce the US$1,500 million commercial debt to 200 commercial creditor banks by 64 per cent[see p. 37277], applying the March 1989 debt reduction plan of United States Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady [see pp. 36541-42; 37016-17; see pp. 37243; 37313 for similar agreements reached by Mexico and Venezuela respectively].
This provided for $1,152 million in debt to be bought back by May 21, at a secondary market rate of $0.16 per $1, by purchases from a specially created International Monetary Fund (IMF) trust to which the IMF, the World Bank, the US Agency for International Development (USAID) and the governments of the USA, Canada, Mexico, Venezuela, Taiwan and Holland had contributed.
Commercial debt servicing obligations were expected to be reduced from an estimated $145-150 million to $35-45,000,000 annually.
AMERICAS
COLOMBIA
Presidential elections
Presidential elections were held on May 27, amid an unprecedented nationwide security operation mounted in response to the campaign of violence and disruption waged by drug traffickers and right-wing paramilitary groups.
Bombings and shootings had claimed an estimated 37 dead and 324 injured during the previous two weeks, and were thought partly responsible for the low turnout, an estimated 45.85 per cent of the 14,000,000 eligible voters.
César Gaviria Trujillo, 43, the candidate of the ruling Liberal Party (PL), emerged as the winner with 47.4 per cent of the vote (2,740,000 votes, compared with the 1985 total of over 4,000,000 votes won by current President Virgilio Barco Vargas).
Gaviria was due to take office on Aug. 7.
Of the three other principal candidates Alvaro Gómez, 71, of the National Salvation Movement (MSN), won 23.8 per cent: Antonio Navarro Wolff, 41, of the April-19 Movement (M-19), the former guerrilla group, won 12.6 per cent as the candidate of the left-wing Democratic Covergence [see pp. 37371-72]; and Rodrigo Lloreda of the Social Conservative Party (PSC) received 12.2 per cent .
There were eight other minor candidates.
Simultaneously, voters also cast their ballots in what was in effect a referendum, sanctioned by the Supreme Court on May 24, on a proposal to establish a Constitutional Assembly to introduce political reforms [see also p. 37484].
The proposal was approved by 90 per cent of those voting.
Conduct of presidential election campaign
The campaign revolved around the issue of whether negotiations with the drug cartels to end the current violence should take precedence over efforts to bring them to justice.
It was conducted mainly via television and radio to ensure the security of the leading candidates.
A campaign grant of US$50,000 was paid by the government to each party represented in the Congress, and a subsidy was also paid to minor candidates.
The murder in Medellín on May 21 of a leading PL senator, Frederico Estrada Veléz, persuaded Barco to cancel a two-day visit to Peru for an Andean Pact summit meeting [see p. 37451].
The killing of Estrada, who had been captured but released unharmed the previous month [see p. 37372], was believed to be the work of the Medellín drug cartel; however, as in the previous killings of three leading presidential candidates [see pp. 36844; 37312; 37371-72], right-wing paramilitary groups were also suspected.
The body of another PL leader, Isaias Cuadros, who had disappeared on May 24, was discovered on May 28.
Gaviria alone among the major candidates stressed a determination to continue Barco's campaign to defeat the drug cartels, rejecting the possibility of political dialogue with them although modifying Barco's stance by opposing the "indiscriminate" extradition of drug traffickers to the United States.
Gómez and Lloreda opposed extradition, favouring dialogue with the drug cartels in the hope of capitalizing on a perceived public weariness with the drug war.
Gómez, who was judged seriously to have weakened the conservative constituency by breaking from the PSC to form the MSN, had also proposed that cocaine be legalized internationally in order to undermine cartel power, and that the UN narcotics commission should directly intervene to produce a peace formula which would enable the cartel chiefs to surrender themselves.
Navarro, who had replaced the original M-19 presidential candidate Carlos Pizarro León-Gómez when the latter was assassinated in April [see pp. 37371-72], also rejected extradition.
He reportedly staged a hunger strike on May 24 in support of the demand for a Constitutional Assembly.
His relatively strong showing in the election, coupled with that of the MSN, was judged to have broken the traditional grip of the PL and PSC on the country's political system.
Navarro's participation also marginalized the remaining left-wing guerrilla forces, who reportedly impeded voting in some towns.
AMERICAS
PERU
Temporary abandonment of guerrilla armed struggle
Leaflets circulated by the "Peruvian Communist Party Ayacucho Base" of the Maoist Shining Path (Sendero Luminoso) guerrillas on May 17 in the southern Andean city of Ayacucho claimed that Sendero Luminoso had "temporarily withdrawn from the armed struggle but not from the ideological battle" , in order to re-evaluate their "brilliant actions over the past decade and return with new energies" .
Although there was widespread speculation as to the authenticity of the leaflets, experts believed that for the first time there was fairly solid evidence to show that the group was experiencing internal problems, with the possibility that a moderate faction had appeared to question the cult of leadership of Sendero leader Abimael Guzmán Renoso and his military strategy to bring down the state.
The appearance of the leaflets coincided with the 10th anniversary of Sendero Luminoso's commencement of its armed struggle.
The anniversary, unlike those of previous years, was reported to have passed off peacefully.
AMERICAS
LATIN AMERICA
Andean Pact Summit
A summit meeting of Andean Pact countries was held in Cuzco, Peru, on May 22-23, attended by the Presidents of Peru, Venezuela, Bolivia and Ecuador, and by the Colombian Foreign Minister Col. Julio Londoño Paredes.
The closing declaration included joint commitments (i) to create an Andean Presidential Council whose task would be to further promote the political and economic integration of member countries;(ii) to formulate a common position on future foreign debt negotiations to be presented to the forthcoming Latin American Economic System (SELA) ministerial meeting [see p. 37018 for June 1989 meeting]; and (iii) to propose a permanent consultative system to press for the full implementation of the February 1990 Cartagena summit's agreements and measures against illegal drug production and trafficking [see pp. 37243-44].
Satisfaction was also expressed at the performance of the Andean Development Corporation (CAF).
It was hoped that free trade in goods throughout the region would be ensured by 1995 and that the movement of capital and people would be deregulated by the end of the decade.
Peruvian President Alan García Pérez stated that the proposed US$35,000,000 in anti-drug aid to Peru from the United States government emphasized a military solution to the problem and demonstrated a "flagrant breach" of the Cartagena protocols, which had highlighted the need to adequately finance and sustain crop substitution schemes by promoting and guaranteeing the prices of Andean agricultural products in new international markets.
Bolivian President Jaime Paz Zamora reported that during his May meeting in Washington with US President George Bush the latter had shown a serious attitude to the drug problem (the US government having agreed almost to double Bolivia's anti-drug aid, to $33,000,000).
He cautioned, however, that member countries could "not go forward on words" and should continue to co-operate despite delays in implementing the protocols.
Venezuelan President Carlos Andrés Pérez, expressing support for the Colombian government's anti-drugs campaign, called for a "world war against drug trafficking" .
AMERICAS
ARGENTINA
Resumption of IMF aid
On May 25 the International Monetary Fund (IMF) announced that it had agreed to reactivate its standby programme first agreed in November 1989 and suspended in February 1990 [see pp. 37040; 37244], and to allow an immediate drawing of US$240 million of the $1,400 million made available under the original agreement.
The decision was reportedly taken in response to the government's current austerity programme.
Inflation had been reduced from an estimated 95 per cent in March to 11.4 per cent in April and the local currency, the austral had been stabilized against the US dollar, firming from around US$1=6,000 australs in March to US$1=5,000 australs as at May 31.
In a letter of intent to the IMF, details of which were released on May 29, the government had pledged further to reduce inflation to 2 per cent per month for the second part of the year and to achieve the reduction of the fiscal deficit to 1 per cent over the following nine months by further adjustments to public utility prices and controls on public sector wages.
The IMF also announced that the government had given assurances that it would resume payments, suspended for two years, on its US$43,000 million commercial debt, as a condition for talks to proceed on June 7 with its 224 commercial creditor banks.
The size of the payments and their timing would reportedly be left to the negotiators.
ASIA — PACIFIC
INDIA
Continued unrest in Kashmir
The assassination of Kashmir's leading Moslem cleric in mid-May led to a serious deterioration in the security situation in the Kashmir Valley after weeks of relative calm.
The assassination, and the brutal response of the Indian paramilitary forces to the ensuing unrest, was a serious blow to the central government and prompted a change of Governor in Kashmir.
At the same time, the fresh unrest heightened fears that the turmoil in Kashmir would lead inexorably to a serious clash between Indian and Pakistani troops facing each other across the Line of Actual Control (LAC).
Assassination of Maulvi Farooq — Killing of mourners by security forces
Maulvi Mohammad Farooq, Kashmir's senior Moslem cleric and leader of the Awami Action Committee, was shot dead by unidentified gunmen at his Srinagar home early on May 21.
Maulvi Farooq was a moderate who had peacefully campaigned for an independent Kashmir, an option opposed by both India and Pakistan.
The Indian government blamed his death on Kashmiri extremists who, it was claimed, had objected to Farooq's "ambiguous role" in the conflict.
All the Kashmiri guerrilla groups denied any involvement in the assassination, and many blamed the government security forces.
Although an indefinite curfew was reimposed in Srinagar after the assassination, thousands of people took to the streets as Farooq's body was carried from the hospital to which it had been taken to his home.
As the cortege passed Srinagar's Islamia College precinct, Indian security forces opened fire on the mourners, killing at least 20 people on the spot; a further 27 people were subsequently killed, and according to some reports the death toll had reached 100 by the end of the day.
After Farooq's assassination and the subsequent shootings, both India and Pakistan initiated substantial and aggressive troop movements, and The Hindu of May 31 reported that the two countries "came close to war" on May 22.
The incident brought to an end a month-long period of peace in Kashmir, and dashed hopes of a reduction in the border tension.
Such hopes had been encouraged when a United States delegation visited Islamabad and New Delhi and apparently offered US services (including satellite information) to ensure a balanced troop pull-back from the LAC.
Appointment of new Governor
Jagmohan resigned as Governor of Jammu and Kashmir on May 25 and was replaced by Girish Chandra Saxena, security adviser to Prime Minister V. P. Singh.
Jagmohan had been appointed to the post in January 1990 when the state was first placed under Governor's rule [see p. 37183-84].
On May 28 he was nominated to the Rajya Sabha (the upper house of the Indian parliament).
According to Hindu of May 25, the decision to replace Jagmohan was made personally by V. P. Singh, in the face of Cabinet opposition.
According to the report, the removal of Jagmohan was a direct response to the action of the security forces in the aftermath of Maulvi Farooq's assassination.
Internal Indian political affairs
Resignation of Chauthala as Haryana Chief Minister
Om Prakash Chauthala resigned as the Janata Dal Chief Minister of Haryana on May 22 after serving in the post for less than seven months.
He was replaced the following day by his close associate Banarasi Das Gupta.
Chauthala had been forced to resign by the Janata Dal leadership after months of controversy over a state-level by-election in Haryana's Meham constituency.
He had first been appointed Chief Minister in early December 1989, replacing his father Devi Lal, on the latter's appointment to the central Cabinet.
To remain as Chief Minister, Chauthala was required to win a seat in the Haryana State Assembly by early June.
In February, he contested the vacant Meham constituency, but the election was countermanded by the Election Commission on the grounds of electoral malpractice [see p. 37315].
Chauthala's supporters were blamed for much of the fraud, and his continued survival as Chief Minister during March and April reflected his father's influence at the central level.
Chauthala was nominated as Janata Dal candidate in the Meham re-poll and in a by-election at Darbakalan, to be held on May 26.
However, on May 17 Amir Singh, an independent candidate in the Meham contest, was assassinated and the election was again countermanded.
Commenting on the assassination in its editorial of May 21 The Hindu stated that it was"difficult to assert at this stage if…
Chauthala is the villain in the latest outrage or if he is a victim of a brutal and diabolical act of his political opponents".
The pressure on V. P. Singh to remove Chauthala became overwhelming after the Meham election was countermanded for the second time.
The Lok Sabha (lower house of parliament) was adjourned on May 21 after scenes of uproar as Congress (I) demanded that Haryana be placed under President's rule; the next day Chauthala resigned as Chief Minister.
On May 26 he won the Darbakalan by-election, easily defeating his Congress (I) opponent by 53,000 votes.
*****900 WORDS UP TO THIS POINT — THE 300 BELOW CAN BE DISCARDED IF NECESSARY 
Election of Bommai as Janata Dal president
S. R. Bommai, a former Chief Minister of Karnataka, was on May 19 elected president of Janata Dal, the principal component of the ruling National Front Coalition.
Bommai was elected to the post unopposed after Hukumdeo Narayan Yadav and S. Jaipal Reddy had withdrawn from the contest.
Appointment of Barnala as Governor of Tamil Nadu
Surjit Singh Barnala, Chief Minister of Punjab between 1985 and 1987, was sworn in as Governor of the southern state of Tamil Nadu on May 24.
Barnala had resigned as leader of the moderate Akali Dal (Longowal) faction on May 13.
During the November 1989 general elections the Longowal faction had lost ground to the militant Akali Dal (Mann) faction [see p. 37347].
Congress (I) loss of power in Nagaland
A new non-Congress (I) coalition ministry headed by K.L. Chisi, leader of the Nagaland People's Council (NPC), was sworn in on May 15.
Congress (I) lost its majority in the 60-member Nagaland Assembly after 12 of its 36 legislators defected to form a new Congress (Regional) Party.
The 12 aligned themselves with the opposition NLF to form the United Legislature Front, thereby reducing S. C. Jamir's Congress (I) ministry to a minority.
Andhra Pradesh cyclone
A devastating cyclone hit Andhra Pradesh late on May 9 causing widespread death and destruction.
The Hindu of May 20 reported that the death toll in the coastal districts had reached 817 and was expected to rise.
The worst affected districts were Krishna, Visakhapatnam and East Godavari.
V. P. Singh visited the area soon after the disaster and told reporters that he had not seen such human suffering in any previous natural calamity.
ASIA — PACIFIC
PAKISTAN
Ethnic violence in Sind
The second half of May 1990 saw an increase in tension in Sind between ethnic Sindhis and Muhajirs, Indian Moslem migrants who had settled in the province after Indian partition in 1947.
The ensuing communal violence was the worst since the massacre of about 200 people in Hyderabad in October 1988.
A curfew was first imposed in Hyderabad on May 14 following machine-gun attacks.
The situation deteriorated after the arrest of a Sindhi nationalist leader, Qadir Magsi; the death toll in the city reached 30 by May 20.
Ethnic violence in Karachi during the same week left 13 dead including a senior Muhajir Qaumi Mahaz (MQM) party member who was killed on May 17.
On the weekend of May 26-27 there was a fresh escalation of violence.
In Hyderabad up to 80 people were killed by mounted police on May 26 while protesting against a lengthy period of uninterrupted curfew and the cutting off of water and electricity.
The police, who were carrying out an operation to recover illegal arms in Muhajir-populated areas, opened fire on the crowd which included women and children, many of whom carried copies of the Quran on their heads in a traditional sign of protest.
The police claimed that they had been forced to act to disperse the crowds when troublemakers attacked police stations, but protesters disputed this account and described the police action as a massacre.
Another 20 people were shot in Karachi where at least three Muhajir districts were placed under curfew.
On May 27 the Army moved into Hyderabad with orders to shoot to kill in order to quell unrest.
Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto came under pressure from opposition politicians to ask President Ghulam Ishaq Khan to dismiss Sind's provincial Pakistan Peoples Party (PPP) government and impose direct rule from Islamabad.
On May 29 she arrived in Karachi for emergency talks with the Sind Chief Minister, Aftab Shahban Mirani, the Governor of Sind, Fakhruddin Ibrahim, and the Army Chief of Staff, Gen. Mirza Aslam Beg.
Pakistan Radio meanwhile reported on May 29 that the President had strongly condemned the "inadequate planning and thoughtless action" of the provincial authorities, and had denounced the indiscriminate firing by the police.
On the same day Mohsin Siddiqi, an opposition senator known to be close to the MQM, was one of 15 people killed in Karachi by unidentified snipers.
Hyderabad and parts of Karachi were officially designated "disturbed areas" and put under more permanent military control.
Officials emphasized that this move, anticipated to last not more than three months, did not constitute a step towards a state of emergency but simply formalised the existing situation.
On May 30, amid tight security, Bhutto visited Hyderabad where she blamed both the MQM and the Sindhi nationalist Jiye Sind movement for the latest upsurge in violence, accusing them of seeking a "reign of terror" in Sind.
It was also alleged that Indian agents were behind the recent unrest in order to divert Pakistan's attention from Kashmir [see pp. 37377; 37451-52].
(On June 3, Pakistan withdrew 25,000 troops from the Indian border for immediate deployment in Sind.)
On May 31 Bhutto postponed her visit to four Gulf States, planned in order to win Arab support over Kashmir.
Ethnic violence in Sind continued with the death of at least 30 people waiting at a bus stop in the Qayyumabad area of Karachi.
This incident brought to over 200 the total number killed since May 26.
ASIA — PACIFIC
AFGHANISTAN
Internal political and security developments
Lifting of state of emergency
On May 4 President Najibullah lifted the national state of emergency which had first been imposed following the Soviet troop withdrawal in February 1989 [see p. 36449; for extension of state of emergency in May and November see pp. 36656; 37043].
A night curfew would remain in force in the capital, Kabul.
Appointment of new Cabinet
Sultan Ali Keshtmand, hitherto Chairman of the Executive Committee of the Council of Ministers, was appointed First Vice-President on May 6.
(The Executive Committee and the Supreme Council for the Defence of the Homeland had both been formed in February 1989 to act as a central leadership under the country's emergency regulations — see pp. 36449-50.)
The following day Najibullah invited Fazl Haq Khaleqiar, Governor General of North-Western Zone and a Minister-Adviser in the outgoing Executive Council, to form a new government.
Khaleqiar, 56, was not a member of the ruling People's Democratic Party of Afghanistan (PDPA).
A new Cabinet proposed by Khaleqiar was approved by the Wolosi Jirga (Council of Representatives) on May 27.
The key posts of Defence, Foreign Affairs, Interior and State Security remained unchanged, although more than 20 members of the Cabinet were neutral or non-party figures.
Two women were appointed: Masoma Wardak and Saleha Etemadi. **Fazl Haq Khaleqiar Prime Minister **Namatollah Pazhwak Deputy Prime Minister **Abdol Qayum Nurzay Deputy Prime Minister Mahmud Barialay Deputy Prime Minister Mohammad Sarwal Mangal Deputy Prime Minister Mahbobollah Koshani Deputy Prime Minister *Abdol Wahed Sorabi Deputy Prime Minister; Minister of Planning (also Vice President) Abdol Wakil Foreign Affairs Raz Mohammad Paktin Internal Affairs Mohammad Aslam Watanjar Defence Gholam Faruq Yaqubi State Security Mohammad Ghofran Agriculture and Land Reform Abdol Bashir Roygar Information and Culture Khalilollah Transport **Hamidollah Tarzi Civil Aviation **Sarjang Zazi Border Affairs **Mohammad Anwar Dost Light Industries and Foodstuffs **Mohammad Hakim Finance **Mehr Mohammad Ejazi Public Health *Masoma Esmati Wardak Education and Training *Gholam Mahaynodin Darez Justice *Saleha Faruq Etemadi Social Security *Mohammad Sediq Saylani Islamic Affairs and Endowment *Gholam Mayhodin Shabaz Central Statistics *Faqir Mohammad Nekzad Construction Affairs *Abdol Samad Salah Mines and Industries *Sayed Nasem Ulowi Communications *Mir Abdol Ghafur Rahim Water and Electricity *Mohammad Anwar Shamas Higher and Vocational Education *Fateh Mohammad Tarin Returnees' Affairs *Hayatollah Azizi Rival and Rural Development *Nur Ahmad Berits Minister without Portfolio **Faqir Mohammad Yaqubi Minister without Portfolio *Shah Wali Minister without Portfolio **Sayd Ekram Paygir Minister without Portfolio *New Cabinet member.
**Altered portfolio.
New Afghan Cabinet
Convening of Loya Jirga — Constitutional amendments — New peace proposals
A Loya Jirga (a nationwide traditional gathering of tribal leaders) was held in Kabul on May 28-29, attended by 722 prominent Afghans and presided over by Najibullah, who delivered an opening speech which contained new proposals to end the country's civil war.
Najibullah proposed that a referendum be held in both government and mujaheddin-controlled areas to determine whether a ceasefire should be implemented.
If a ceasefire were approved, he went on, there should be a "cooling off stage to prepare the minds of the two sides" , followed by an international conference to deal with the "foreign aspects" of the war.
The Loya Jirga approved a number of far-reaching amendments to the country's 1987 Constitution [see pp. 35782], drafted in mid-May by a commission chaired by Vice-President Abdorrahim Hatef.
The newly amended Constitution provided for a "plurality of political parties" as the "foundation of the political system" , and it deleted references to the leading role of the PDPA.
Articles were amended to encourage the development of the private sector and increased foreign investment.
ASIA — PACIFIC
NEPAL
Moves to reinforce success of pro-democracy movement
Following April's revolution in which King Birendra had been forced to accede to protesters' demands for major political reforms [see pp. 37362-63], the new interim government (headed by Nepali Congress president Krishna Prasad Bhattarai) moved to consolidate its achievements during May.
Formation of constitution drafting committee
The King announced unilaterally on May 11 the formation of a seven-member committee, headed by Supreme Court Justice Bishwanath Prasad Upadhaya, to draft a new constitution.
Bhattarai released a statement shortly after the announcement describing this action as "unnecessary and unfortunate" , while Communist Party leader Man Mohan Adhikari described it as "a clear and open example of the King's deceit" .
Bhattarai met with the King on May 15 and afterwards a statement was issued from the Royal Palace explaining that the drafting committee had been abolished.
The government's position was strengthened further on May 21 when the King formally delegated the legislative powers of the Rashtriya Panchayat (the Nepali parliament which had been dissolved in mid-April) to the Bhattarai Cabinet.
Eventually, on May 30 the King announced that a new nine-member Constitutional Recommendation Commission (CRC) had been formed on the basis of the government's suggestions.
The CRC (which, like the King's earlier proposed committee, was to be chaired by Upadhaya) was instructed to prepare a draft Constitution within three months.
Dismissal of regional commissioners — Lifting of curfew — Amnesty for political prisoners
On May 7 the government dismissed the country's 14 regional commissioners, all of whom had been appointed by the Royal Palace and were regarded as loyal supporters of the King.
The dismissals were announced the day after Girija Prasad Koirala, the general secretary of the Nepali Congress Party, had delivered a message to the King warning him that unless substantial powers were quickly turned over to the new government, crowds would be called back on to the streets of Kathmandu.
The dusk-to-dawn curfew imposed throughout Kathmandu in April was lifted in all areas except the Lalitpur district on May 10.
On May 17 the King, acting on the advice of the new government, announced a general amnesty for Nepal's political prisoners, the majority of whom had been imprisoned for violating a ban on political parties.
ASIA — PACIFIC
TIBET
Lifting of martial law in Lhasa
The Chinese government lifted the state of martial law in Lhasa, the capital of Tibet (the Chinese autonomous region of Xizang), with effect from May 1.
The martial law order, which had been imposed in March 1989 following outbreaks of secessionist unrest [see pp. 36521-22], was rescinded by Chinese Premier Li Peng on the grounds that "the situation in Lhasa has become stable and social order has returned to normal" .
Although regular units of the People's Army began withdrawing from May 1, many thousands of police and paramilitary units remained on duty within the region.
Chinese officials also estimated that there were 680 Tibetans, many of them Buddhist monks and nuns, currently in detention for pro-independence activities.
Asia Watch, the US-based human rights organization, issued a report on May 28 which alleged that abuses by the Chinese authorities in Tibet had "greatly increased" over the last two years, and that torture was frequently used against protesters.
His Holiness Tenzin Gyatso, the 14th Dalai Lama, who having fled Tibet in 1959 — nine years after the country was occupied by China — lived in exile in India, welcomed the lifting of martial law but expressed the hope that it represented more than a superficial "public relations exercise" .
In recent years the Dalai Lama, the acknowledged spiritual leader of an estimated 100,000 Tibetan exiles, had been active in lobbying world leaders for negotiations on Tibetan independence, adopting a higher diplomatic profile which was recognized in his receipt of the 1989 Nobel Peace Prize.
In accordance with his wish to democratize the independence movement, on May 15 the Tibetan People's Deputies (a parliament-in-exile) for the first time elected the three-member Cabinet hitherto appointed by the Dalai Lama.
Replacement of Chairman
Doje Cering, a 52-year-old ethnic Tibetan, resigned as Chairman of the Tibet Autonomous Region on May 20, ostensibly on the grounds of ill-health; he was replaced on May 31 by Gyainvain Norbu.
ASIA — PACIFIC
MONGOLIA
Political reforms
Approval of multiparty system — Other constitutional changes — Relations with China and Soviet Union
The People's Great Hural convened in Ulan Bator on May 10-11 to approve a number of far-reaching political reforms.
The meeting of the Great Hural came after a period of tension between the government and the opposition over the pace of reform.
Only after hunger and labour strikes had broken out throughout the country in early May did the government finally agree to enter into negotiations with the opposition (under the framework of a Consultative Council) to seek a consensus on draft reform legislation.
At the close of its session on May 11 the Great Hural approved legislation which legally entrenched the multiparty system.
Constitutional amendments were approved permitting the formation of a standing parliament, or Little Hural, to be filled partly through popular election.
Under the new system, the Little Hural would deal primarily with economic matters and "the supervision of the government" ; the Great Hural would concern itself with the fundamental issues in domestic and foreign policies.
Amendments were also approved permitting the creation of a post of President, to be elected by the People's Great Hural, with the task of co-ordinating the work of the two Hurals.
Announcement of elections
It was officially announced on May 14 that elections to local and central organs would be held on July 29.
At the same time, voting would take place for one-quarter of the seats in the Little Hural, the remainder to be elected by the members of the Great Hural.
Mongolian People's Revolutionary Party (led by Gombojavyn Ochirbat, inaugural congress 1924).
*Mongolian Democratic Party (led by Erdenijn Bat-Uul, inaugural congress April 1990).
*National Progress Party (led by Dagvasurengiyn Ganbold, inaugural congress May 1990).
*Social Democratic Party (led by Radnaasumbereliyn Batbayar, inaugural congress March 1990).
Mongolian Party of Free Labour (led by H. Maam, inaugural congress March 1990).
Mongolian Party of Greens (led by Davaagiyn Basanjorj, inaugural congress May 1990).
*Members of Coalition of Democratic Forces.
Registered political parties in Mongolia, May 1990
Relations with China and Soviet Union
Punsalmaagiyn Ochirbat, Chairman of the Presidium of the People's Great Hural (head of state), visited China on May 4-7.
Ochirbat was the highest ranking Mongolian leader to visit China since Premier Yumjaagiyn Tsedenbal arrived in Beijing in 1962.
Ochirbat had originally been scheduled to pay a six-day visit, but he returned early to take part in the critical discussions with opposition leaders on Mongolia's future political system.
However, during his visit he held talks with China's leaders and travelled to Hohhot, capital of China's Inner Mongolia Autonomous region and the home of some 3,500,000 ethnic Mongolians.
Punsalmaagiyn Ochirbat and Gombojavyn Ochirbat (the MPRP chairman) both visited the Soviet Union on May 13-15.
Economic affairs were high on the agenda during talks with President Gorbachev on May 14; at the start of 1989 Mongolia owed the Soviet Union in excess of US$15,500 million.
On May 15 Soviet troops began the second stage of their withdrawal from Mongolia, to complete a 75 per cent reduction in their numbers [for first phase of this withdrawal, which started in May 1989, see p. 36657].
In early March 1990 the two countries had reached a separate agreement providing for the withdrawal of all remaining Soviet troops by 1992.
ASIA — PACIFIC
TAIWAN
Inauguration of President — Appointment of Premier — Relations with China
Lee Teng-hui, chairman of the ruling Kuomintang party (KMT), was sworn in as President of Taiwan at a ceremony in Taipei, the capital, on May 20, having been chosen by the country's electoral college in March [see pp. 37318-19].
In his inaugural speech, Lee, who had first assumed the presidency in 1988 following the death of Chiang Ching-kuo, gave only a vague outline of the policies to be pursued during his six-year term.
He did suggest, however, ending within the next year the Temporary Provisions — the 42-year-old state of emergency which had superseded the Constitution, enhanced the draconian powers of the presidency and security agencies and frozen in office the mainland-elected members of the various deliberative assemblies pending hypothetical recovery of mainland China.
Lee suggested that other political and constitutional reforms would be accomplished within two years but did not give any further details.
Appointment of Premier and Cabinet
Lee's inauguration ceremony was marred by protests over his unexpected nomination on May 2 of a former senior general, Hau Pei-tsun, as Premier.
Some 10,000 demonstrators, including members of Taiwan's fledgling opposition parties, attacked government targets in central Taipei in protest over Hau's appointment, which they characterized as a step backwards from the recent trend of democratization towards a remilitarization of the political process.
Hau, 72, a mainlander who had left the Army in 1989 in order to assume the post of Defence Minister, was reputed to be in the conservative wing of the KMT.
Hau's appointment was due to be confirmed by the National Assembly on May 25, but he was prevented from speaking to the chamber by protesting opposition legislators.
The session was reconvened on May 29, when the vote was delayed once again, for seven hours, as 21 members of the opposition Democratic Progressive Party stormed the podium, seized microphones and disrupted voting.
Police were eventually called into the Assembly building to restore order, and Hau's appointment was confirmed by 186 votes to 27.
Outside the National Assembly some 5,000 demonstrators armed with stones and petrol bombs clashed with riot police; at least 40 people were injured in the five hours of running battles which followed.
Hau attempted to allay concerns about his authoritarian reputation by appointing a civilian Defence Minister and two independent politicians to the new Executive Yuan (Cabinet) which he announced on May 30.
Included within the 25-member body were six new members, whilst 15 Ministers retained their former portfolios.
Amongst those members who changed their portfolios was former Economics Minister Chen Li-an, who became the new Defence Minister.
Relations with China
In line with Taiwan's recent policy of seeking rapprochement with communist China, Lee's inaugural speech offered the possibility of "full academic, cultural, economic, trade, scientific and technological exchanges between the two countries" leading to the possibility of future reunification.
The offer was conditional upon the Chinese government adopting "democratic politics and the free economic system" , renouncing its commitment to reconquer Taiwan by force and refraining "from obstructing our development of foreign relations" .
Lee's offer followed a statement to Taiwan's National Assembly on May 15 in which he had suggested that there should be dialogue within a "one-China framework and on a government-to-government basis with the two sides having equal status" .
Although some commentators suggested that Lee's offer amounted to a substantial concession, others saw the preconditions as too demanding to facilitate any real progress in bilateral relations.
This latter view was reinforced on May 22 when Xinhua (the official New China News Agency) criticized Lee's "impossible preconditions" and reiterated Beijing's claim to be "the sole legitimate government representing all Chinese people" .
Evidence of Taiwan's desire to improve relationships with mainland China was also apparent in the government's less than enthusiastic support for the activities of a propaganda radio ship Goddess of Democracy, sponsored by a French magazine and supported by a Paris-based group of Chinese exiles.
The vessel, which was named after the statue erected by students in Beijing's Tiananmen Square during the 1989 protests [see pp. 36640-42; 36720-22], left France on March 17 and was due to dock in Taiwan to take on supplies before beginning anti-communist broadcasts from international waters off the coast of China.
The government of China denounced the project and on April 29 Xinhua accused Taiwan of helping to fund the vessel, conduct which was described as an "open provocation" .
Hong Kong announced on May 3 that it was refusing to allow the ship into the colony.
The government of Taiwan announced on May 11 that the vessel was free to dock in the country but that it would not be allowed to return if it violated international law by making unauthorized broadcasts to the mainland.
The 68-metre former oceanographic vessel was accorded a rousing welcome as it arrived in the northern Taiwan port of Keelung on May 13 to take on provisions and broadcasting equipment.
On the following day it was announced that the ship would extend its stay in Keelung because of unspecified supply difficulties.
Amid reports that the Taiwanese authorities were impeding the supply of the vessel, the organizers announced plans to sail to Japan as an alternative source of supply.
The plan was abandoned on May 23 when the Japanese government (which had earlier been warned by China not to assist the vessel) announced that the ship would not be welcome in Japan.
On the following day the organizers announced that the entire radio project had been abandoned and that the vessel would be auctioned.
It was reported on May 31 that a Taiwanese businessman was to purchase the Goddess of Democracy and use it as "a classroom on democracy" .
ASIA — PACIFIC
NORTH KOREA
Re-election of Kim Il Sung — Relations with USA
Kim Il Sung, 78, was re-elected as President of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea (North Korea) on May 24, for a fifth consecutive four-year term.
Kim was the unanimous choice of the ninth Supreme People's Assembly (SPA — the country's legislature) which convened for a two-day session, its first since its election in April [see p. 37375].
It also re-elected Vice Presidents Yi Jong Ok and Pak Song Chol, and determined the composition of the 17-member Central People's Committee and an 11-member National Defence Commission.
Both bodies included Kim Il Sung and his son and anticipated successor, Kim Jong Il.
In his inaugural speech Kim stated that his government would adhere to its commitment to socialism despite "temporary setbacks" , and he rejected attempts to solve socialist problems by adopting capitalist methods, describing this as a recipe for "confusion" .
In the sphere of foreign policy he promised improved relations with those capitalist countries "which respect our sovereignty" , and called for the signing of a peace treaty between North Korea and the United States, and the negotiation of a non-aggression pact between North and South Korea.
The day before his election Kim had presided over the 18th plenary session of the sixth Korean Workers' Party central committee which approved the appointment of Choe Kwang and Han Song Yong to the politburo.
The plenum also "dismissed" Ho Dam from his post as secretary of the KWP and replaced him with Kim Yong Sun.
A Korean Central News agency report referred to Ho Dam on May 29 as chairman of the Council for the Peaceful Reunification of the Fatherland.
A new State Administrative Council (Cabinet) was made public on May 24.
Vice Marshal Oh Jin Wu, Minister of the People's Armed Forces, was not included in the list carried by the Korean Central News Agency.
Speculation that Oh, generally considered to be the most powerful man in North Korea aside from Kim Il Sung and his son, might have died or been demoted was dampened by his inclusion as a Vice-chairman of the National Defence Commission.
Yon Hyong Muk Premier Kim Yong Nam Deputy Premier; Foreign Affairs Kim Pok Sin Deputy Premier; Chairman of Light Industry Commission Kim Hwan Deputy Premier; Minister of Chemical Industry **Cho Yong Nim Deputy Premier; Chairman of State Planning Commission *Kim Tal Hyon Deputy Premier; Chairman of External Trade Commission; Foreign Trade *Chang Chol Deputy Premier; Culture and Art
North Korean State Administrative Council
Kim Chang Chu Deputy Premier *Hong Song Nam Deputy Premier Kim Yun Hyok Deputy Premier Kang Hui Won Deputy Premier Paek Pom Su Chairman of Agriculture Commission Cho Chang Tok Chairman of Mining Industry Commission Yi Kil Song Chairman of Transport Commission Yi Chi Chan Chairman of Power Industry Commission Choe Pok Yon Chairman of Fisheries Commission Kong Chin Tae Chairman of People's Service Commission Kim Ung Sang Chairman of State Construction Commission **Paek Se Yun Chairman of Electronics and Automation Industry Commission Yi Cha Pang Chairman of State Scientific and Technological Commission **Yi Yong Mu Chairman of State Inspection Commission Choe Ki Chong Chairman of Educational Commission Lt.-Gen.
Paek Hak Nom Public Security Kim Se Yong Natural Resources Development Cho Hak Kun Atomic Energy Industry *Chu Yong Hun Building Materials Yi Sok Shipbuilding Industry Kye Hyong Sun Machine Industry Choe Man Hyon Metal Industry Kim Ni Kyong Coal Industry Kim Pil Hwan Mining Industry Pak Yong Sok Railways *Kim Chang Ho Posts and Telecommunications Cho Chol Chun Construction Chong Song Nam External Economic Affairs Kim Chae Yul Forestry Yi Chae Yun Labour Administration Yun Ki Chong Finance Yi Chong Yul Public Health Han Chan Kun Commerce Yi Chol Pong Urban Management **Kim Song Ku Local Industry **O Song Yol Marine Transport **Sin Kyong Sik Director of Central Statistics Bureau **Chong Mun Sang Director of Secretariat and State Administration Council **Chong Song Taek President of Central Bank Kim Kyong Pong President of Academy of Sciences Chae Gyu Bin President of General Central Materials Supply Association Kim Yu Sun Chairman of Korean Central Physical Education Guidance Commission *Altered portfolio.
**New appointment.
Return of remains of US soldiers
Reflecting the desire to improve relations with the United states, North Korean officials on May 28 handed over the remains of five US soldiers killed in the Korean War (1950-53).
The transfer, which took place at Panmunjom peace village on the border between North and South Korea, was the first since 1954 and coincided with Memorial Day, the US national holiday to honour its war dead.
The US Defence Department estimated that of the 33,629 US citizens killed during the Korean war, the bodies of some 8,172 remained unaccounted for.
ASIA — PACIFIC
SOUTH KOREA
Inaugural convention of DLP — Outbreak of popular unrest
The ruling Democratic Liberal Party (DLP) held a national inauguration convention on May 9, when President Roh Tae Woo was chosen for a two-year term as party president.
The DLP had been created in February as a result of a merger between the ruling conservative Democratic Justice Party (DJP) and two of the country's three main opposition parties, the Reunification Democratic Party (RDP) and the New Democratic Republican Party (NDRP).
Kim Young Sam, the leader of the RDP, became executive chairman of the DLP's three-member leadership council, which also included chairmen Kim Jong Pil, former leader of the NDRP, and Park Tae Joon, former vice-chairman of the DJP.
Although the merger gave Roh control of 216 of the 299 seats in the National Assembly it provoked widespread resentment on the grounds that it effectively removed the elected opposition.
Opinion surveys suggested that this factor, together with the country's recent economic malaise (including a slowing rate of growth and sharply rising prices and rents — see pp. 37375-76), resulted in the popularity of the government falling to around 12 per cent, the lowest rating ever achieved by Roh.
The government's use of police and the judiciary to suppress industrial disputes, through the arrest of radicals and the harassment of trade union activity, heightened popular disaffection.
During April and May this discontent was translated into popular unrest on a scale not seen since Roh became President in February 1988.
The year's first serious labour dispute began with a three-day unofficial strike at the giant Hyundai shipyard in the southern city of Ulsan which immediately met with a harsh response from the government.
The strike, which had been called after the arrest of several trade union leaders, was crushed on April 29 when 10,000 riot police stormed the yard.
During the following days there was further fighting both in the yard and in the city itself as police clashed with workers, and sympathy actions were called, including a strike at the Hyundai Motor Company, the country's largest car manufacturer.
After a brief return to work, there was a further three-week strike at the car plant which ended on May 28 after an improved pay offer by the management.
On April 30 some 2,400 police stormed the headquarters of the government-owned Korean Broadcasting System (KBS) to end a 19-day strike and occupation by employees protesting over the appointment as KBS president of Suh Ki Won whom the workforce accused of being too pro-government and anti-democratic.
The forcible suppression of the strike, during which over 400 employees were arrested, led to sympathy strikes at other broadcasting networks.
The wave of labour unrest coincided with falling share prices and increasing demonstrations by students in Seoul and other cities.
On May 1 the government announced emergency plans to curb the rampant speculation in real estate by forcing the Chaebol (the large business conglomerates which dominated the country's economy) to sell land and property holdings not being used for business purposes.
On the following day the share price index, which had fallen sharply during the previous year (largely because funds had been siphoned from the stock exchange into real estate speculation), rose by almost 30 points, one of its biggest one-day gains.
In the face of continuing demonstrations, Roh made a televised broadcast on May 7 in which he warned that the country was sliding into "chaos" , and promised tougher action to uphold law and order, together with a commitment to promote "economic justice" and to restore political and economic stability by the end of the year.
On the following day Deputy Prime Minister Lee Seung Yoon presented details of the government's plans to combat consumer-price abuses and real estate speculation, including the proposed forced sale of idle land held by the Chaebol.
In the ensuing days over 150 speculators were publicly named, and at least one bank president was dismissed and others warned for approving loans for use by land speculators.
Widespread demonstrations continued, however, and on May 9 (the date of the DLP's inaugural convention) 100,000 anti-Roh protesters fought running battles with riot police in Seoul and at least 12 other cities, resulting in over 150 injuries and 1,864 arrests.
On the following day there were further protests but a heavy police presence prevented renewed outbreaks of serious fighting.
Despite a warning that the government would act "immediately and resolutely" if the unrest continued, there were further protests in Seoul and elsewhere in the ensuing days as a coalition of student and dissidents groups called for the overthrow of the Roh government.
Amongst those arrested was Kim Keun Tae, an internationally recognized dissident who had been imprisoned from 1985 to 1988, who was detained on May 13, accused of organizing the May 9 protests.
Anniversary of Kwangju uprising
There were renewed protests in late May which coincided with a 10-day commemoration of the anniversary of the 1980 Kwangju uprising, a pro-democracy rebellion which had been brutally suppressed with the killing of up to 2,000 civilians.
In Kwangju itself, 100,000 people held a peaceful memorial rally on May 18, but on May 19 and 20 there was fighting in the city as 10,000 protesters calling for Roh's resignation clashed with riot police.
Attempts by police to prevent protesters from other parts of the country from reaching the city lead to the death of a student on May 20 as he sought to evade a police cordon.
His funeral, held on May 23, was attended by several thousand mourners, but passed off without violence.
ASIA — PACIFIC
SOUTH KOREA-JAPAN
Visit by South Korean President — Japanese apology for past relationship
President Roh Tae Woo made a three-day official visit to Japan on May 24-26, during which he met the Japanese Prime Minister, Toshiki Kaifu, and Emperor Akihito.
It was Roh's first visit to Japan since becoming President in February 1988 and was indicative of the recent efforts of both governments to improve bilateral relations, and to eradicate the residue of bitterness arising from Korea's colonial relationship with Japan between 1910 and 1945.
Prior to the visit two areas of long-standing ill-feeling between the two countries were resolved.
On April 30 the Japanese and South Korean Foreign Ministers held talks in Seoul at which it was agreed to relax restrictions currently applied to the 680,000 Koreans resident in Japan, many of whom were descendants of the 2,500,000 Koreans transported by the Japanese colonial administration for use as forced labour.
The key symbolic issue upon which agreement was reached in this area was the decision to exempt third-generation Koreans from the mandatory fingerprinting to which all aliens resident in Japan were subjected.
The Foreign Ministers also agreed to hold future talks on the status of Japan's Korean population which would address other areas of discrimination and would consider the possible enfranchisement of Korean residents.
The South Korean government also insisted that both Kaifu and Akihito should apologize for Japan's past treatment of Korea.
(In 1984 the late Emperor Hirohito had told visiting South Korean President Chun Doo Hwan that it was "regrettable that there was an unfortunate past incident between us" , but did not explicitly accept Japanese responsibility for what had occurred between the two countries.)
It reportedly took until May 21 for the Japanese and South Korean governments to agree a mutually acceptable form of words for the apology, thereby enabling Roh's visit to take place.
On the first day of his visit Roh attended a state banquet at which Akihito issued an apology which was well received by the South Korean government.
The Emperor's speech included the statement: "I think of the suffering your people underwent during this unfortunate period, which was brought about by my country, and I cannot but feel the deepest regret." 
Earlier in the day Kaifu had made an unprecedentedly explicit apology to Roh, expressing his "sincere remorse and honest apologies for the fact that there was a period in our history in which Japanese actions inflicted unbearable suffering and sorrow on the people of the Korean peninsula" .
There were formal sessions of talks between Roh and Kaifu on May 24 and 26 at which they discussed bilateral issues — including the position of Koreans resident in Japan and the South Korean trade deficit with Japan — in addition to regional and international subjects.
On May 25 Roh became the first South Korean leader ever to address the Diet, the Japanese legislature.
During the course of his speech Roh called for a breaking of "the shackles of the past" and for the development of a closer relationship between Japan and South Korea which would serve as a fulcrum from which "to promote peace and prosperity in north-east Asia" .
ASIA — PACIFIC
MYANMA
Opposition election victory
The country's first multiparty general election for 30 years, held on May 27, brought a clear victory for the opposition National League for Democracy (NLD).
The latest official election returns, announced on May 29, gave the NLD two-thirds of the total vote (the volume of which was undisclosed).
A total of 20,000,000 voters had been eligible to elect the 485-seat Constituent Assembly, choosing from among an estimated 2,300 candidates representing 93 parties, with a further 87 thought to be standing as independents.
The National Unity Party (NUP) favoured by the ruling State Law and Order Restoration Council (SLORC) military junta suffered a heavy defeat, reportedly receiving less than an 20 per cent of the vote.
Its leader U Tha Gyaw failed to be elected.
The NLD success apparently extended to gaining the support of rank and file soldiers, allowing it to win, for example, the garrison district of Dagon in the capital Rangoon.
Out of 63 Rangoon seats in all, the NLD took 59.
The magnitude of the NLD's victory placed into question the validity of the SLORC's stricture that the sole purpose of the election was to establish a Constituent Assembly without legislative power, whose task would be to draw up a new constitution before power could be handed over to a "strong" government, generally interpreted as meaning one acceptable to the military.
Although the SLORC promised to respect the result, the opposition was reported to be reluctant to claim victory before ascertaining the response of the country's effective ruler Gen. Ne Win, and of the Directorate of the Defence Services Intelligence (DDSI — the secret police).
However, on May 31 there were reports of widespread support among civil servants and soldiers for the military rulers to step down and for a rapid handover of power to a civilian government.
The SLORC regime had been eager to attract foreign investment; this was thought to have been the major factor in its decision to proceed with the election.
It had then come under increasing international pressure to guarantee that the actual poll was not fraudulent.
The United States government suspended all economic assistance on May 8, while pressure came also from the member states of the European Communities, from Canada, Sweden and India, and to a lesser extent from Australia and Japan.
On May 21 the authorities allowed 63 foreign journalists (excluding UK and US correspondents) to enter the country to cover the elections, although their movements were reportedly strictly monitored and circumscribed.
Martial law was also lifted in 16 townships although night curfews reportedly remained in place in all major cities.
Although polling apparently passed off peacefully, the election campaign period had reportedly been characterized by months of repression, severe restrictions and official harassment of candidates and political activists, as the military regime continued the clampdown on the pro-democracy movement which it had brutally repressed in September 1988 [see pp. 36221-25 for background].
In these circumstances the leadership of the All Burma Student Democratic Front, in exile in Thailand, had called for a mass boycott.
The charismatic NLD leader Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, 44, and former Prime Minister and leader of the League for Democracy and Peace (LDP) U Nu, 83, remained under house arrest, and the NLD leader Gen. (retd) Tin U, 64, continued to be held in prison [see pp. 36816-17; 37188; 37284].
In an attempt to split the NLD, however, the military authorities shortly before the election released Myint Myint Khin, an NLD Executive Committee member known for her disagreements with the current NLD leadership.
Criticism of SLORC during the election campaign was banned, as were meetings of more than five people, and all speeches were subject to official vetting.
In addition an estimated 500,000 people from poor neighbourhoods in Rangoon, noted for their strong involvement in the 1988 pro-democracy demonstrations, had been disenfranchised by being forcibly relocated to reportedly half-finished satellite townships in mosquito-infested regions of the interior.
Passive resistance to the SLORC's election campaign restrictions was demonstrated by the widespread wearing of the peasant bamboo hat, the election symbol of the NLD, while rice stalks, the symbol of the NUP, were worn around the ankles as a mark of disrespect for the military regime.
ASIA — PACIFIC
PHILIPPINES
Talks with USA over future of military bases — Court martial of officers involved in 1989 coup attempt
Exploratory talks on the future of the six United States military bases in the Philippines began in Manila on May 14 against a background of anti-US student protests and attacks upon US military personnel by members of the communist New People's Army (NPA).
The negotiating teams were led by the Foreign Affairs Secretary of the Philippines, Raul Manglapus, and US special negotiator Richard Armitage, a former Assistant Secretary of Defence.
The talks were designed to examine the possibility of negotiating a new US bases agreement which would become operative on Sept. 16, 1991, the date of the expiry of the current lease.
The current bases agreement, which had been revised on several occasions since its original signature in March 1947, allowed the USA to use several military installations, including the huge facilities at Clark Field and Subic Bay, respectively the largest US Air Force and naval base outside North America.
In recent years a broad spectrum of Filipino opinion — ranging from conservative nationalists to the communist NPA — had opposed the presence of the bases on the grounds that they were an affront to the sovereignty of the Philippines and were a vestige of the country's past colonial relationship with the USA.
Since October 1987 the NPA had killed at least 10 US military personnel, the most recent attack occurring on May 13 when two US airmen were shot dead outside Clark Field.
In a statement issued on May 14 the NPA warned that the 40,000 US military personnel currently stationed in the Philippines should be withdrawn or they would "suffer the agony of attrition." 
Since her election in 1986, President Corazon Aquino had maintained a deliberately ambiguous stance over the bases; although in the early years of her term she suggested some opposition to the US presence, this position had been weakened when US aircraft from the bases had played an essential role in Aquino's defeat of a serious right-wing military coup attempt in December 1989 [see pp. 37120-21].
According to US estimates the bases generated direct and indirect employment for up to 500,000 Filipinos and injected some US$1,000 million (3 per cent of GNP) into the country's economy.
Prior to the opening of the talks the US sought to strengthen its negotiating position by suggesting that the bases were expendable.
At a press conference in Washington President George Bush emphasized that the USA did not have unlimited funds, and that "we will negotiate in good faith but there are certain limits to what I will accept" .
 "We don't have a blank cheque on this," he added, "and if we're not wanted there, we're not going to be there." 
In a statement on May 13 Aquino emphasized that her government was entering the talks "with our national interest as the paramount consideration" .
After a dispute over whether the current agreement would end in 1991 or 1992, an issue which remained unresolved, the talks quickly became rancorous as the Filipino delegation accused the USA of reneging on a 1988 base review agreement which included a commitment to provide $481,000,000 in annual US aid to the Philippines.
Armitage suggested that the shortfall for fiscal 1990 was $96,000,000 and had arisen from cuts in Bush's aid request imposed by Congress, whereas Manglapus claimed that the true figure, based on the estimated cost of other "unfulfilled promises" , was $222,580,000.
For its part the US delegation accused the host country of failing to honour its commitment to provide adequate security around the bases.
The tension between the two sides was further increased on May 15 when Manglapus served a formal notice of termination of the bases agreement, to become fully effective in September 1991.
This move was necessitated by the country's Constitution — which stipulated that the current agreement should be allowed to expire in 1991 — and Manglapus did not rule out the possibility of negotiating a new bases treaty.
Such a treaty would be subject to approval by a two-thirds majority of the Philippines' Senate, however, at least 15 of whose 23 members had stated their opposition to the continued presence of the bases.
The talks ended on May 18 with an agreement to reconvene in June.
Trial of coup plotters
Two generals and 19 other officers became the first soldiers to be brought to trial in connection with the December 1989 coup attempt, when they appeared before a seven-member military court on May 8 on charges of mutiny and murder.
The trial was immediately adjourned to consider legal issues raised by the defence.
ASIA — PACIFIC
PAPUA NEW GUINEA
Declaration of independence by Bougainville
Secessionist rebels issued a statement on May 17 in which they declared the island of Bougainville to be independent from Papua New Guinea.
The declaration was made by the self-styled President of Bougainville, Francis Ona, and followed a prolonged guerrilla struggle by the Bougainville Revolutionary Army (BRA) which had succeeded in forcing the withdrawal of government forces from the island in March 1990.
The independence declaration was prompted by the tightening of a government economic blockade of the island following the collapse of peace negotiations with the rebels.
An economic embargo had been established in late March, and in early May the government had attempted to increase the pressure by declaring a 50-mile "exclusion zone" around the island, from which all ships and aircraft would be prohibited.
The zone was reduced to 12 miles after it was discovered that a 50-mile zone would interfere with international shipping lanes.
This plan was later rescinded, however, after it was revealed to be without legal foundation.
Deputy Prime Minister Ted Diro responded to the setback on May 8 by announcing a tightening of the existing blockade to allow access to Bougainville only by ships and aircraft carrying essential supplies.
It was also announced that all telecommunications, banking and other public services on the island would be terminated.
The Prime Minister of Papua New Guinea, Rabbie Namaliu, rejected the independence declaration as invalid, unlawful and "not worth the paper it is written on" .
In response to his appeal to other countries to ignore the move, the governments of Australia and New Zealand announced that they would continue to recognise Papua New Guinea's territorial integrity, whilst the Indonesian government stated on May 19 that it would abide by its principle of non-interference in the internal affairs of independent states.
The government of Kiribati issued a statement on May 25 which characterized the BRA's action as "illegal and unconstitutional" .
ASIA — PACIFIC
NEW ZEALAND — FRANCE
UN adjudication on Rainbow Warrior affair
A UN arbitration panel ruled on May 8 that France had committed "substantial violations" of a 1986 UN accord by repatriating two French agents convicted in New Zealand of sabotage and manslaughter.
The agents, who were sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment for sinking the Greenpeace vessel Rainbow Warrior and killing one of its crew in Auckland harbour in 1985, were released into French custody in return for $7,000,000 in compensation and a guarantee that they would be confined at the French military base on Hao atoll for three years.
The French authorities repatriated the two in 1987 and 1988 respectively, ostensibly for medical reasons, without seeking permission from New Zealand.
The panel ruled against demanding the reincarceration of the agents but suggested that France should contribute $2,000,000 to establish a joint fund to foster "closer relations between citizens of the two countries" .
Speaking on the day of the ruling, David Lange, the New Zealand Prime Minister at the time of the bombing, described the 1986 accord as an agreement forced upon him by French threats from "the highest level" .
Lange admitted that he had "been over a barrel" after the French government had threatened that unless the accord was accepted, New Zealand would be denied access to French markets for its agricultural exports, the mainstay of its economy,
EUROPE
SOVIET UNION
May Day protests in Red Square
There were unprecedented scenes in Moscow's Red Square on May 1 when the traditional May Day parade was followed by a parade of up to 40,000 representatives of opposition political groups, some carrying banners and shouting slogans openly denouncing communist rule and President Mikhail Gorbachev personally.
Clearly irritated, Gorbachev and other senior officials watching the parade faced barracking by groups of protesters for more than 30 minutes before leaving the balcony of the Lenin Mausoleum.
The opposition rally continued in Red Square for a further hour before dispersing.
The opposition groups, ranging from social democrats and liberals to Christians, nationalists and anarchists, had been given permission by the Moscow city council and the USSR Council of Ministers to march after the official parade organized by the trade unions, apparently to pre-empt the holding of a larger unofficial demonstration which might have clashed with the official parade.
Officials later blamed the anti-communist and anti-Gorbachev protests on small groups of extremists.
Aleksandr Yakovlev, one of Gorbachev's closest associates in the leadership, conceded to journalists on May 4 that the protests had forced Gorbachev's party to withdraw from Red Square.
Alleged military warning to Gorbachev
On May 3 sources at the headquarters of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) in Brussels claimed that on Feb. 25, the day of major opposition demonstrations in Moscow and across the country [see p. 37322-23], a division of up to 6,000 heavily armed troops had been mobilized on the outskirts of Moscow.
This mobilization, it was claimed, served to warn Gorbachev of disaffection in the top ranks of the Red Army over his reforms, and to make him take greater account of military opinion in formulating policy.
In support of this claim some commentators saw a hardening of official Soviet attitudes on a number of international issues, particularly disarmament negotiations ahead of the Washington summit meeting between Gorbachev and US President Bush due to begin at the end of May [to be covered in the June News Digest].
They also pointed to what they claimed were morale-boosting concessions by the Soviet leadership to the armed forces, notably the promotion of Defence Minister Dmitry Yazov to the rank of Marshal on April 28, and the holding of a big military parade in Red Square on May 9 to mark the 45th anniversary of the end of Second World War hostilities in Europe.
The allegation that there had been a military show of strength was flatly denied by Yakovlev on May 4.
Moreover, on the eve of the May 9 parade Gorbachev told a gathering of senior Army personnel in Moscow's Bolshoi Theatre that immediate reforms were needed in the armed forces and that it could not be "beyond the pale of criticism" .
On the following day this view was endorsed by Yazov in a speech in Red Square.
Yeltsin's election as Russian President
Boris Yeltsin, the leading radical populist and one of President Mikhail Gorbachev's fiercest critics, was elected on May 29 as Chairman of the Russian Supreme Soviet, making him de facto President of the Russian Federation, the Soviet Union's largest and most powerful republic.
This raised the prospect that Yeltsin might use the Russian presidency as an ultra-reformist power base from which to challenge Gorbachev's authority, making Russia a new element of instability in the already crisis-ridden Soviet Union.
Constituent session of Russian Congress — Three attempts at electing President
The Russian Federation had a new two-tier legislative structure like that of the central Soviet adminstration, with a Congress of People's Deputies and a bicameral Supreme Soviet to be elected by the Congress from among its members [see also p. 36978].
The Congress was also to elect the Chairman of the Supreme Soviet.
The Russian Congress, constituted as a result of elections in March [see p. 37322, where the elections are stated wrongly to be for the Russian Supreme Soviet]and comprising 1,068 deputies, convened on May 16.
On its first day the Congress, after acrimonious debate and procedural wrangling, rejected by only one vote a proposal to make the election of the Supreme Soviet Chairman one of its first agenda items.
It voted to hear first a report on the state of the Russian Federation by the outgoing Chairman of the Russian Council of Ministers, Aleksandr Vlasov.
Commentators described the outcome of these votes as a tactical victory for Yeltsin's supporters and a boost for Yeltsin's prospects of being elected (hitherto considered fairly slim), since Vlasov, who was widely regarded as Yeltsin's main opponent for Supreme Soviet Chairman (and Gorbachev's choice for the post), now faced the onerous task of defending his government's record in a Congress debate.
Indeed, Vlasov's report on May 18 was generally assessed as lacklustre.
Ahead of the vote for Supreme Soviet Chairman scheduled for May 26 a total of 13 candidates were formally nominated, including Yeltsin and Vlasov, but on May 25 Vlasov unexpectedly withdrew his candidacy, as did all but three of the nominees.
The voting on May 25-26 was inconclusive, with no candidate securing the necessary absolute majority of the 1,060 deputies (eight seats in the Congress were vacant): in the first round Yeltsin won 497 votes compared with 473 for Ivan Polozkov (a conservative Communist Party regional first secretary) and 32 for Vladimir Morozkin, and in a second round run-off Yeltsin won 503 votes compared with Polozkov's 458.
This result necessitated a repeat election on May 29, for which Yeltsin was nominated despite the custom that unsuccessful candidates from a previous ballot did not resubmit their candidatures, and Vlasov re-entered the contest.
Yeltsin won 535 votes (four more than necessary for the required simple majority), Vlasov won 467, and 11 went to Valentin Tsoy.
Yeltsin's programme
Yeltsin's political programme combined calls for radical economic reform with a strong appeal for Russia's sovereign rights.
In a Congress debate on May 22 on a draft law to establish Russian sovereignty, Yeltsin put forward his own far more radical 14-point plan.
He argued that Russia had been exploited and impoverished more than any other republic by the "imperial policy of the Centre" , noting for example that although ranking third of the 15 union republics in labour productivity it was last in social expenditure.
He called for Russia's relations with the other union republics and with the union itself to be regulated by separate treaties, and for a union treaty to be renegotiated by a conference of parliamentarians from the union republics which would work out "new, mutually acceptable forms of community" without "prior political and economic conditions" .
Russia's sovereignty should involve the Russian constitution and laws taking precedence over those of the Soviet Union; a separate Russian citizenship; Russian ownership of its economic wealth and resources; the right to formulate economic reform policies separately from the union; and independence in foreign policy.
Yeltsin also called for Russia to have a full multiparty democracy.
Yeltsin's pre-election speeches concentrated on proposals for a range of new laws covering economic and social reform, especially the expansion of real independence for industrial enterprises and multiplicity of forms of ownership.
He was strongly critical, however, of the plan by USSR Prime Minister Nikolai Ryzhkov for market economic reforms, involving in the first instance drastic price rises.
This economic reform plan, when put to the USSR Supreme Soviet on May 24, provoked a wave of panic buying, and official concern that public disapproval could lead to social unrest.
Gorbachev's reaction to Yeltsin victory
Gorbachev, arriving in Ottawa (Canada) on May 29 for an official visit, was quoted as saying that he was "somewhat worried" by Yeltsin's victory.
He suggested that in the days before his election Yeltsin had had to clarify and adjust his policy on a number of key issues, but commented: "If he is playing political games, then perhaps we are in for difficult times." 
For his part, Yeltsin on May 29 said that he hoped to build a partnership with Gorbachev "not on confrontation but on a businesslike basis, on dialogue and talks" .
During Yeltsin's campaign for the presidency Gorbachev had at times quite blatantly attempted to thwart him.
Notably, in an unscheduled address to the Congress on May 23, Gorbachev had rounded on Yeltsin's Russian sovereignty proposals by accusing him of "seeking to separate Russia from socialism" and of implicitly advocating the breakup of the Soviet Union.
There were also allegations that ahead of the voting Gorbachev had personally lobbied loyal communist deputies to vote against Yeltsin.
Other changes in republican leaderships
The new Supreme Soviet in Byelorussia (elected in March — see p. 37322) on May 19 narrowly elected Nikolai Dementei as its Chairman (i.e. President of Byelorussia), from a field of three candidates.
Previously Dementei had been Chairman of the Supreme Soviet Presidium.
On May 18 the Supreme Soviet in Azerbaijan elected Ayaz Niyaz ogly Mutalibov, the Azerbaijan Communist Party first secretary, to the post of President of the Republic, and Elmira Kafarova to the separate post of Chair of the Supreme Soviet (previously she had been Chair of the Supreme Soviet Presidium).
Pyotr Paskar resigned as Chair of the Council of Ministers in Moldavia on May 24 in response to criticism of his government voiced in the new Moldavian Supreme Soviet (elected in February — ibid.).
He had held the post only since January.
Non-communist administrations in Moscow and Leningrad
The leading radical Anatoly Sobchak was elected on May 23 by the Leningrad city soviet (council) as its chair (de facto mayor).
Gavriil Popov, a radical economist, had been elected chair of the Moscow city soviet on April 20.
New Leningrad and Moscow city soviets had held their constituent sessions on April 3 and 16, respectively, marking the passage from Communist Party (CPSU) control of municipal government in the Soviet Union's two largest cities.
Previously the city soviets — their members drawn overwhelmingly from the CPSU — had effectively functioned according to directives from the city CPSU committees.
In elections in March, however, candidates backed by the city party committees had taken barely 20 per cent of council seats in Moscow and fewer still in Leningrad.
Control of the Moscow soviet had been won by the Democratic Russia coalition of radical groups, with 281 of the 468 seats, and in Leningrad a similar grouping known as Democratic Elections"90 had won 355 of the 400 seats [see p. 37322].
Although reformist communists made up the bulk of members of these groupings, they refused the whip of the local party committee.
Communists' retention of Moscow and Leningrad newspapers
Having lost control of the Moscow city soviet the Moscow CPSU committee on April 15 terminated the arrangement whereby it published jointly with the city soviet the newspapers Moskovskaya Pravda and Vechernaya Moskva.
By taking sole control of the capital's most popular daily papers, the party committee deprived the city soviet of its principal media voice.
Similarly, in Leningrad the CPSU committee took sole control of the daily Leningradskaya Pravda and the weekly Leningradsky Rabochy, albeit handing over to the city soviet the daily Vecherny Leningrad.
Presidential decree removing demonstrations from Moscow soviet jurisdiction
President Mikhail Gorbachev on April 20 issued a decree taking the authorization of demonstrations and other public gatherings in the centre of Moscow out of the jurisdiction of the Moscow city soviet and passing it to the USSR Council of Ministers.
Observers related this development to the loss of CPSU control over the city soviet.
Baltic independence developments
Latvian independence resolution — Soviet reaction to Latvian and Estonian independence drives
The new Supreme Soviet in Latvia, elected in March-April and with a majority of deputies loyal to the nationalist Popular Front [see p. 37322], on May 4 passed a resolution proclaiming Latvia's independence from the Soviet Union, but nevertheless taking a more cautious line than its Baltic neighbours.
The constitution of the independent Latvian republic in existence from 1918 to 1940 was declared reinstated, following the example given by Lithuania on March 11 [see pp. 37299-300; 37360-61; see also below], but the Latvian Supreme Soviet immediately suspended it in almost all respects, thus seeking to avoid the key issue in the current conflict between Lithuania and the Soviet Union.
Latvia also declared a transitional period for negotiations on independence, as Estonia had done on March 30 [see p. 37322 and below], but without rejecting the validity of the Soviet Constitution and laws, provided that they were not in conflict with Latvia's laws and sovereign rights.
The independence resolution, drafted by the Popular Front, began by declaring that the June 1940 Soviet occupation of independent Latvia had been an "international crime" , and reiterating the illegality of the July 1940 elections conducted under Soviet supervision and in "conditions of political terror" for a Latvian parliament (Saeima) which had voted subsequently for Latvia's accession to the Soviet Union.
It declared that the independent Republic of Latvia proclaimed on Nov. 18, 1918, and recognized internationally in 1920, was still in existence de jure, as was the Aug. 11, 1920, peace treaty by which Soviet Russia had recognized Latvia's independence in perpetuity.
The resolution declared reinstated Latvia's Constitution of Feb. 15, 1922, and the formal name Republic of Latvia (i.e. dropping the adjectives Soviet and Socialist).
During the (unspecified) transitional period to the restoration of independence, whereupon a new constitution would be adopted, the 1922 Constitution would be suspended except for four key articles which could only be changed by referendum, namely the definition of Latvia as an independent democratic republic; the assertion that sovereign power belonged to the Latvian people; a statement defining the extent of Latvia's territory (and rejecting the Soviet decision, post-annexation, to transfer the town of Jaunlatgale — now called Pytalovo — and the surrounding district to the Russian Federation); and a definition of the electoral system for the pre-war parliament, which would be restored.
During the transitional period the Latvian Supreme Soviet would remain the "supreme power" in the republic, and the provisions of the 1978 Constitution of Soviet Latvia would remain in force provided that the four key articles from the 1922 Constitution were not contradicted.
The resolution included a guarantee of rights and liberties to all residents of Latvia in accordance with international norms of human rights, and stated that after independence residents could choose to remain in the republic either as USSR or Latvian citizens.
Constitutional changes required a two-thirds majority of the total Latvian Supreme Soviet membership, i.e. 135 out of 201 votes.
This majority was obtained by the votes of the 128 Popular Front deputies together with those of independents and deputies from radical nationalist groups; the resolution was passed by 138 votes to none, with one abstention, but with a group of 57 pro-Soviet deputies boycotting the vote.
Election of new Latvian President and Prime Minister
At the opening session on May 3 Anatolijs Gorbunovs, previously the Chairman of the Latvian Supreme Soviet Presidium [hitherto his name has been given in Keesing's as Anatoly Gorbunov, its Russian form], was elected to the restyled post of Chairman of the Supreme Soviet (de facto President).
Gorbunovs, although in favour of Latvian independence, had remained a member of the section of the Latvian Communist Party loyal to the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (CPSU) following the split in Latvian communist ranks in April [see p. 37385]; his endorsement by the Popular Front was regarded as another example of the cautious approach being taken on Latvian independence, since Gorbunovs's good relations with the Soviet leadership were considered valuable for any future negotiations.
He defeated Anatoly Alekseyev, leader of the International Front which was supported overwhelmingly by the Russian minority and opposed Latvian independence, by 153 votes to 43.
The Popular Front chairman, Dainis Ivans, was elected First Deputy Chairman of the Supreme Soviet on May 3.
Popular Front deputy chairman Ivars Godmanis was elected Chairman of the Latvian Council of Ministers (Prime Minister) on May 7.
Meeting of unofficial "Congress of Latvia" 
Ahead of the Latvian Supreme Soviet session, the radical nationalist National Independence Movement organized on April 30-May 1 a rival "Congress of Latvia" , elected in privately organized elections in which only people who had been citizens of the pre-war independent Latvia and their descendants were eligible to vote.
The organizers claimed that 700,000 people had voted, representing nearly half of Latvia's ethnic Latvians (now only a 53 per cent majority in their republic).
The Congress, describing itself as the "first legal representation of Latvian citizens since 1940" , declared Latvia an "occupied country" and passed resolutions on independence and on the withdrawal of Soviet troops [see p. 37322 for holding of similar "Congress of Estonia" in March].
Proclamation of Republic of Estonia — Partial reinstatement of pre-war constitution — Suspension of military draft
The Estonian Supreme Soviet brought the republic into line with Latvia on May 8 by restoring five key articles of independent Estonia's 1938 Constitution, and reinstated the formal name Republic of Estonia.
It also abolished the use of the state emblem, flag and anthem of Soviet Estonia.
On May 16 it passed a law establishing a provisional system of government for the republic during the period of transition to independence.
On April 11 the Estonian Supreme Soviet passed a law replacing compulsory military service for Estonian residents in the Soviet armed forces with community service, and abolishing legal penalties for draft dodgers.
(Similar moves in Lithuania in March had led to a Soviet military clampdown against draft dodgers — see pp. 37360-61.) relationship"with Soviet Union
Gorbachev's condemnation of Latvian and Estonian independence moves — Earlier offers of"special
Gorbachev issued decrees on May 14 outlawing the independence declarations of the Latvian and Estonian Supreme Soviets, assessing that they violated the USSR Constitution and the USSR law of April 3, 1990, which defined the procedure for a republic's secession from the Soviet Union [see pp. 37361-62].
However, no ultimatums were issued concerning the withdrawal of the declarations, nor were sanctions threatened similar to those being applied to Lithuania [see pp. 37360-61 and below].
Following Lithuania's independence declaration, Gorbachev had tried to forestall independence moves by Estonia and Latvia, with offers of talks on creating a "special relationship" between these two republics and the Soviet Union, to involve a very large degree of autonomy or "confederate status" .
Reportedly this was the subject of meetings between Gorbachev and Estonian leaders on March 19 and Latvian leaders on March 20, and again at separate meetings on April 19 (significantly, by this time Estonia's independence resolution had already been passed).
On May 22 Gorbachev held a meeting with Gorbunovs and Estonia's President Arnold Rüütel, later described by Rüütel as "difficult and unpleasant for all sides" , at which Gorbachev repeated the demand that they cancel their independence declarations before any negotiations on the republics' status could begin.
Anti-independence demonstrations and strikes in Riga and Tallinn
Groups of demonstrators, both pro- and anti-independence, gathered outside the Latvian Supreme Soviet building during the May 3-4 sessions.
On May 14 a group of up to 300 Army officers and military cadets protesting against the independence declaration tried to push their way into the Supreme Soviet building, and clashed briefly with police and independence supporters before dispersing when Gorbunovs agreed to receive a petition from them.
However, a similar action by Army officers took place on the following day.
Meanwhile, on May 14 a military helicopter circled over Riga (Latvia's capital) dropping leaflets produced by the International Front calling on opponents of independence to stage a strike on May 15, which in the event was supported by as many as 12,000 people.
Around 2,000 of the strikers attempted to march on the Supreme Soviet, but were held back by police in Riga's Cathedral Square.
In Tallinn, Estonia's capital, on May 15 around 2,000 members of Estonia's Russian minority opposed to Estonian independence staged a noisy demonstration during which part of the crowd rushed the gates of the Supreme Soviet building and occupied the courtyard, and briefly succeeded in replacing the Estonian tricolour flying above the building with the red flag of Soviet Estonia.
They retreated after a radio appeal by Prime Minister Edgar Savisaar brought around 15,000 Estonians to the building.
As a result of the demonstration the Estonian Supreme Soviet announced on May 16 that a Home Guard was being set up to defend government buildings, and the Tallinn city council placed a temporary ban on the organization responsible for calling the demonstration, the United Council of Work Collectives.
On May 17 the Estonian Supreme Soviet banned political strikes in an attempt to head off stoppages threatened by the United Council of Work Collectives to start on May 21.
Although some strikes went ahead, the estimated 30,000 Russian workers in 18 enterprises who stopped work on May 21 were fewer than had participated in strikes for Russian minority rights in August 1989 [see pp. 36854-55].
The strikes were called off on May 23 after an appeal from Gorbachev.
Lithuania
During May there was little movement towards negotiations between the Soviet and Lithuanian authorities on resolving the crisis caused by Lithuania's declaration of independence in March [see p. 37299-300].
The Soviet economic blockade introduced in mid-April to pressurize the Lithuanians into rescinding the declaration [see pp. 37360-61]remained rigidly in force.
Prunskiene's quest for foreign aid and recognition — Foreign reactions to blockade
Lithuania's Prime Minister, Kazimiera Prunskiene, in late April and early May conducted an extensive but largely fruitless round of foreign visits in the hope of securing recognition by Western governments for Lithuania's independence and material support to alleviate the effects of the blockade.
Western governments generally expressed sympathy for the Lithuanian cause and concern at Soviet military pressure and the economic blockade, and Prunskiene was received everywhere by heads of government, but these governments did little more than call for restraint by both sides and for negotiations.
After consultations with other Western governments the United States adminstration on April 24 drew back from any punitive measures against the Soviet Union over its blockade of Lithuania (officials having previously hinted at possible limited economic sanctions), when President Bush gave a clear indication at a press conference that the administration considered Gorbachev's political survival and good Soviet-US relations to be more important than Lithuanian independence, explaining: "I am concerned that we do not inadvertently compel the Soviet Union to do something that would set back the whole process of freedom around the world." 
Bush nevertheless received Prunskiene in the White House on May 3.
Lithuania's President Vytautas Landsbergis claimed on April 17 that Scandinavian countries had offered material support in the event of an economic blockade.
However, Prunskiene returned empty-handed from a tour of Scandinavia on April 18-23, when she had discussed the possibility of buying Norwegian oil and other raw materials from private companies.
It appeared that sympathetic foreign governments regarded exports to Lithuania to alleviate the Soviet blockade as diplomatically contentious.
Exports to Lithuania undertaken by private companies or on the initiative of Lithuanian emigré organizations were also likely to prove logistically impossible, since Lithuania's borders and customs posts remained under Soviet administration.
Furthermore, Lithuania had very little hard currency to pay for imports.
Franco-German initiative — Prunskiene's meeting with Gorbachev
President Mitterrand of France and Chancellor Helmut Kohl of West Germany on April 26 announced an initiative for negotiations (reportedly sponsored by Bush), involving Lithuania's temporary suspension of its independence declaration to enable Soviet-Lithuanian talks to start.
Landsbergis on May 2 expressed support for the idea of Franco-German mediation, and said that some of the laws passed since the March 11 independence declaration could be frozen, but that the declaration itself was sacrosanct.
Prunskiene visited Moscow on May 17 for a meeting with Gorbachev and Soviet Prime Minister Nikolai Ryzhkov.
She put forward a compromise proposal approved by the Lithuania Supreme Council on the previous day which was broadly in line with the Franco-German initiative and Landsbergis' statement.
Gorbachev reportedly insisted that the independence declaration should be at least suspended before negotiations could begin, but this represented a departure from his previous position that the declaration should be completely rescinded.
In response the Lithuanian Supreme Council on May 23 voted to offer to suspend all laws passed since the independence declaration, but not the declaration itself.
Autonomy declaration by predominantly Polish district
It was reported on May 23 that Lithuania's Salcininkai okrug (district) had been proclaimed autonomous by its local soviet (council) and that it would continue to recognize the constitution of Soviet Lithuania rather than the independence constitution.
Salcininkai okrug had an 80 per cent Polish population.
Revival of Baltic Council — Economic co-operation
The Presidents of the three Baltic republics held a meeting in Tallinn on May 12.
They signed a declaration re-establishing the Baltic Council, created by a "treaty of concord and co-operation" signed by the republics in 1934 but defunct since 1940.
The main purpose of reviving the Council was to co-ordinate the republics' independence strategies.
The three heads of government of the Baltic republics (Prunskiene, Savisaar and the then Latvian Prime Minister Vilnis Bresis) had met earlier, on April 12 in Vilnius, to sign a 10-year agreement on economic co-operation featuring plans to create a Baltic common market, with a Baltic Market Co-operation Council and commission to be based in Riga.
Renewed violence in Armenia
Armenian militants clashed with Interior Ministry troops on May 27 at the railway station in Yerevan, the Armenian capital.
Official reports said that a 15-strong Armenian gang had attempted to ambush the 11 soldiers, who were waiting to escort a train from Yerevan to Kafan (in southern Armenia) through the Azerbaijani exclave of Nakhichevan.
In an exchange of fire, six Armenian militants were shot dead, and 10 servicemen and a passer-by were injured.
Stirred up by this incident, nationalists took to the streets in several parts of Yerevan, setting up road blocks.
In clashes later on May 27 and during May 28, according to the Soviet news agency Tass, another 16 Armenian militants, a woman bystander and a serviceman were killed and more than 50 people were injured.
The incidents occurred ahead of demonstrations planned to take place in Yerevan to mark the anniversary on May 28 of the proclamation of Armenia's brief independence in 1918-21, and tensions were already high in Yerevan.
The killings produced a sombre mood at an anniversary rally in which at least 100,000 people took part.
The Armenian authorities declared May 29 a national day of mourning for the victims of the fighting.
A senior commander of Interior Ministry troops, Gen. Yury Shatalin, speaking in Yerevan on May 28, accused the Armenian leadership and republican law-enforcement agencies of not doing enough to control militant Armenian nationalist groups.
Death of Patriarch Pimen
His Holiness Patriarch Pimen of Moscow and All Russia, the head of the Russian Orthodox Church, died on May 3, aged 79.
Enthroned in 1971, in his last years he presided over the church's rehabilitation by the Soviet authorities after decades of repression.
Born Sergei Izvekov at Bogorodsk near Moscow, he pursued his religious vocation in a hostile climate of militant state atheism, becoming a monk in 1927 and a priest in 1932.
He was widely believed to have been interned in a labour camp in the mid-1930s (a fate shared by the greater part of the clergy), and again for a year immediately after the Second World War, following military service.
A path of accommodation with the Soviet authorities was widely assessed as having ensured his rise through the Church hierarchy from 1949; as Patriarch he was criticized for failing to challenge the repressive state regulations governing church affairs and to defend persecuted believers.
More recently he was criticized for failing to exploit possibilities created by the improvement in church-state relations at the time of the Russian Orthodox millennium in 1988 [see p. 36040], although this was partly excused by commentators on the grounds of his serious ill health.
EUROPE
ALBANIA
Announcement of major reforms
The People's Assembly (parliament) on May 7-8 approved wide-ranging judicial reforms, including liberalization of the penal code and an end to the ban on religious propaganda.
It was also announced that a law was being drafted to give all Albanians the right to obtain a passport for foreign travel.
A package of economic reforms increased enterprise autonomy, and the constitutional ban on seeking foreign credits and investment was relaxed [for January 1990 reform proposals see p. 37196; for April relaxation of Albania's isolationist policies see p. 37385].
The judicial reforms were detailed on May 8 by Deputy Premier and Chairman of the State Control Commission Manush Myftiu, who described them as strengthening the observance of human rights.
They featured (i) the reinstatement of the Ministry of Justice (abolished in 1966), the minister having the right to overturn court rulings;(ii) the guaranteeing to defendants of the assistance on demand of a defence lawyer, including at the investigation stage;(iii) a reduction in the number of capital offences from 34 to 11 (retaining as capital offences treason, espionage, terrorism, murder and "economic crime" such as sabotage and theft of state property), and the exclusion of women from capital punishment;(iv) clearer definition of the crime of agitation and propaganda against the state (which was no longer to be a capital offence), in order to prevent its abuse by the authorities;(v) the redefinition of internment and deportation as penal rather than administrative sanctions (i.e. requiring a court ruling rather than merely a local authority order); and (vi) the introduction of remission for prisoners for good behaviour.
Myftiu stated that lifting the ban on religious propaganda, in force since 1967, brought the law into line with official practice since "such acts have never been prosecuted" , and "the question of religious belief is a matter of conscience for every individual" .
However, he stressed that the state's "atheist propaganda" would continue, and officials stated subsequently that there would be no immediate reopening of churches and mosques.
In addition to the planned introduction of the right to obtain a passport, Myftiu announced that in future defection would be considered as trespass on the country's borders and not as "betrayal of the homeland" , which had carried the death penalty.
Appointments
Enver Halile was appointed Minister of Justice on May 8.
He was replaced as General Secretary of the Council of Ministers by Niko Gjyzari, who was in turn replaced as Chair of the State Planning Commission by Bujar Kolaneci.
Reported demonstrations and strike
According to unofficial reports based on alleged eye-witness accounts, shortly before the passage of the reforms there had been demonstrations in several Albanian towns and an unprecedented strike [for reports of protests in December 1989 and early January 1990 see pp. 37195-96].
The most consistent reports were of a disturbance at a football match on March 25 in Kavaje (close to Tirana, the capital) where members of the crowd chanted slogans expressing support for President Ramiz Alia but attacking the repressive policies of his predecessor Enver Hoxha and the "Hoxha dynasty" .
The strike reportedly took place in mid-April and involved an eight-hour walk-out by up to 2,000 textile factory workers in Berat, some 70 km south of Tirana, protesting against low wages, although one report also spoke of anti-Hoxha slogans being daubed on the factory walls.
For some time there had been allegations in the foreign media of a power struggle centring on the issue of introducing political reforms between Alia and Hoxha's widow Nexhmije Hoxha, who was chair of the Democratic Front (an umbrella organization dominated by the ruling Party of Labour — APL) and who reputedly wielded great influence in the APL central committee.
EUROPE
YUGOSLAVIA
New state President — Warning on country's disintegration — Non-communist governments in Slovenia and Croatia
Borisav Jovic of Serbia took over as President of the federal Collective State Presidency on May 15 in accordance with the system of annual rotation of that office.
Stipe Suvar (Croatia) succeeded him as Vice-President.
Jovic was a noted hardliner, and his leadership of the Presidency was expected to contrast sharply with that of his predecessor, the liberal Slovene Janez Drnovsek.
In his inaugural speech Jovic noted the seriousness of the task of preserving Yugoslavia's political stability and integrity.
He criticized "irrational nationalistic blindness" , and in a scarcely veiled attack on the introduction of multiparty systems in Slovenia and Croatia he complained that the process of drawing up a new federal constitution and a legal framework for democratization was being jeopardized by "autonomous attempts" at constitutional reform.
He assessed that "determined and systematic undermining of [Yugoslavia's]constitutional order" ultimately threatened civil war and the country's disintegration.
On May 16 the Collective State Presidency issued a warning clearly directed at Slovenia and Croatia that a "serious breakdown of the system established by the Constitution" and "disregard for existing federal laws" meant that Yugoslavia had entered a critical period of instability.
A 13-point plan of "urgent measures to protect the territorial and political integrity of the country and the unhindered functioning of the law-governed state on the whole territory of Yugoslavia" , was presented by Jovic on behalf of the Presidency to the Federal Assembly (parliament) on May 28.
This advocated accelerating the introduction of a new, more centralized federal constitution and the provision of federal powers to overturn laws and constitutional changes adopted unilaterally by the republics, but also called for consultations between federal and republican leaders "jointly to seek out and harmonize possible proposals and solutions for future mutual relations in Yugoslavia" .
The plan called for a ban on political parties "which incite national or religious hatred" : in this context Jovic renewed his condemnation of the recent multiparty elections in Slovenia and Croatia, in particular making a veiled attack on the victorious Croatian Democratic Union (HDZ — see p. 37381 and below) as a fascist organization.
Jovic nevertheless dismissed fears that the Presidency might seek to annul the election results and declare a state of emergency.
The Assembly session ended on May 29 without adopting the Presidency's plan.
It decided that further discussion was needed on what measures were within the Assembly's competence under the federal Constitution.
Formation of non-communist governments in Slovenia and Croatia
Lojze Peterle, Chairman of the Slovene Christian Democratic Party (one of the six parties in the DEMOS alliance which had won the Slovene Assembly elections in April — see p. 37381), was elected President of the Slovene Executive Council (Prime Minister) by the new Slovene Assembly on May 16.
The composition of his government was approved on the same day.
The new Croatian Assembly elected in April and May [see p. 37381]on May 30 elected Franjo Tudjman, leader of the HDZ, as President of the Croatian Presidency, and Stjepan Mesic of the HDZ as President of the Croatian Executive Council.
Mesic's government was approved on May 31.
According to the Croatian Assembly election results after the second round of voting on May 6-7, the HDZ had taken 205 out of the 356 seats in the three Assembly chambers.
The former ruling League of Communists (LC) had come second with 75 seats.
Rejection of resignation offer by Kosovo government members
The provincial Assembly in Kosovo on May 23 refused the resignation of Jusuf Zejnulahu, the President of the Kosovo Executive Council [see p. 37382, where he is incorrectly described as Chairman of the provincial Assembly], and of nine other ethnic-Albanian members of his government.
The ethnic Albanian ministers had been tendering their resignations one by one since late March [ibid.], and in passing a vote of confidence in the Kosovo government the provincial Assembly was apparently acting to prevent the government being left in the hands solely of its ethnic Serb members.
Resumption of LCY congress
The 14th congress of the League of Communists of Yugoslavia (LCY), suspended in January [see pp. 37172-73; 37324-25], finally resumed for its closing session on May 26, despite a continuing boycott of federal party meetings by the Croatian and Macedonian LCs and the breakaway Slovene party.
The congress session adopted a resolution introduced by Miomir Grbovic (a central committee presidium member from Montenegro, who on May 17 had become acting head of the LCY following the expiry of Milan Pancevski's term as presidium president) that the LCY should be relaunched at its 15th congress, called for September 1990.
A provisional leadership was elected, headed by Miroslav Ivanovic of Montenegro, and charged with preparing for this "congress of democratic renewal" .
Premier's proposals for rival party
Ante Markovic, the President of the Federal Executive Council (federal Prime Minister) and one of Yugoslavia's most popular politicians, announced on May 25 that he was planning to set up a new political party based around his government team and with a programme of Western-style economic and political reforms, to contest multiparty elections to the Federal Assembly expected before the end of 1990.
The announcement was greeted with consternation by LCY leaders, who accused Markovic, an LCY member, of betrayal.
Protest against Tito personality cult
The 10th anniversary on May 4 of the death of Josip Broz Tito, the founder of communist Yugoslavia, was marked by a minute's silence throughout the country, but also by a demonstration by around 2,000 Serbs in Belgrade calling for an end to the personality cult surrounding Tito and for his remains to be moved from Belgrade to his native Croatia.
The march had been organized by the recently formed Serbian Democratic Party and the People's Radical Party, with the backing of the banned Serbian National Renewal.
Amnesty for political prisoners
The Federal Assembly on May 16 approved legislation proposed by the Federal Executive Council (FEC — the federal government) amnestying people who had committed the criminal offence of hostile propaganda (Article 133 of the Yugoslav Penal Code).
The Assembly also adopted an amendment extending the amnesty to people convicted of slandering the state (Article 157).
EUROPE
CZECHOSLOVAKIA
Resignation of ministers — Continued controversy over security service
Marian Calfa, the Federal Prime Minister, announced on May 11 the resignation for health reasons of Vladimir Prikazsky, since February federal Minister without Portfolio in charge of state relations with the media.
He was replaced by Karel Havlik.
The following day Oldrich Bursky, federal Minister of Agriculture and Food, resigned and was replaced by Rudolf Katner.
Both Prikazsky and Bursky were alleged to have had links with the Statni Bezpecnost (StB — State Security, or secret police) under the communist regime before November 1989, and it was suggested that a third (unnamed) minister had also had such links.
The resignations occurred amid continuing controversy over the handling of the security services by Richard Sacher, the federal Minister of the Interior [see p. 37382], who had been criticized for not proceeding rapidly enough with the removal of StB officers from the ministry.
However, it was reported on May 7 that 35 leading officials in the newly established intelligence service department of the Interior Ministry had been removed following leaks of secret information, and the screening of various sections of the security services was reported to be well advanced or completed by early May.
By the end of the month 775 former members of the StB were reported to have been dismissed.
The Federal Assembly on May 9 passed a legal amendment making it possible to speed up the purging of the security services, including the StB.
The amendment provided for the dismissal of policemen on grounds of insufficient moral qualities, and codified the existence of civic commissions supervising the purging of the security apparatus.
Racial violence — Call by Havel for resignation of Czech Interior Minister
At a press conference on May 2 President Vaclav Havel said that he thought that racist attacks by groups of skinheads on Romanies, Vietnamese guest workers and other members of racial minorities were being provoked by supporters or agents of the former communist regime, who were also engaging in disinformation about the situation in the country.
Havel's remarks followed a series of such incidents in various parts of the country, especially North Bohemia.
A general rise in crime had also been reported since the beginning of the year, following an amnesty which had led to a large number of convicted offenders being released from prison [see p. 37192].
It was widely felt that the police were failing to take adequate measures to check the growth in crime and violence, and on May 12, following a meeting with representatives of the Romany community, Havel criticized the Czech Ministry of the Interior for handling the situation badly.
He called for the resignation of the Minister, Antonin Hrazdira (a member of the Communist Party of Czechoslovakia — CPCz).
It had been reported on April 24 that Czechoslovakia would not renew the agreements under which some 46,000 foreign workers, including 37,000 Vietnamese, were employed on contract in the country.
Abolition of death penalty
The Federal Assembly on May 2 voted in favour of abolishing the death penalty and replacing it for the relevant offences with life imprisonment.
The decision was part of a series of changes to 40 articles of the country's criminal code.
Steps to confiscate CPCz property
Large-scale rallies were held in several cities on May 14 to demand the return to the state of assets leased or rented by the CPCz before November 1989.
A group of four parties — the People's Party, the Socialist Party, Social Democracy and the Democratic Party of Slovakia — issued a statement on May 18 calling on the CPCz to withdraw voluntarily from the general election in June as an admission of the party's responsibility for the country's condition after 41 years of communist rule and of the party's continued totalitarian tendencies.
If it did not withdraw, the statement said, the CPCz should be banned.
The call was rejected by the federal government and by leaders of Civic Forum, the dominant element within it.
The government on May 18 froze all transfers of assets in the CPCz's direct possession, valued at 4,500 million crowns (approximately US$278 million), although the party would be allowed eventually to retain that portion of the assets which could be proved to have been acquired legally through membership dues.
It was officially announced on May 19 that the CPCz would be subjected to legal proceedings for defrauding the state between 1971 and 1989 by borrowing or leasing property under agreements of uncertain legality.
On May 21 the government demanded the return by Sept. 30 of all such property remaining in the party's hands.
EUROPE
POLAND
Local elections
Local elections held on May 27 were Poland's first completely free multiparty elections since before the Second World War (in the parliamentary elections of June 1989 there had been an agreed distribution of seats in the Sejm (the lower house of the National Assembly) among the former ruling parties and opposition or independent candidates — see pp. 36722-24, and some opposition groups had been denied registration to compete as parties).
Voter turnout was only around 42 per cent, however.
Commentators blamed the low turnout on disaffection with the Solidarity-led government's draconian economic austerity measures [see p. 37194], and on confusion about the programmes of the more than 80 competing political parties and dozens of associations.
The elections were also partly overshadowed by a burgeoning rail strike, the first major workers' challenge to the government's economic policy.
(This strike action was suspended late on May 27 as a result of negotiations between strike leaders and Solidarity chairman Lech Walesa.)
In the contests for around 52,000 seats on over 2,300 local councils, Solidarity-backed Citizens' Committees won over 41 per cent of the seats nationwide and performed strongly in the main cities, making a virtually clean sweep in Gdansk, Krakow and Wroclaw and taking nearly 90 per cent in Warsaw, the capital.
Around 38 per cent of seats nationwide went to independent candidates, while the Polish Peasants' Party performed best of the national political parties, with around 6.5 per cent of seats.
A package of laws redefining local government structure, responsibilities and powers and the electoral system had been rushed through the National Assembly in recent weeks.
These gave local authorities substantially more independence than under the former communist regime.
Erratum
The report of the Solidarity congress on p. 37383 details incorrectly the issue of future parliamentary and presidential elections.
Prime Minister Tadeusz Mazowiecki had stated that should the next parliamentary elections be brought forward from 1993 the practice of reserving 65 per cent of seats in the Sejm (which is the lower house of the National Assembly) for the former ruling parties, as in the June 1989 elections, should no longer apply.
All parties to the April 1989 round-table agreements had already committed themselves to free multiparty elections at the end of the new National Assembly's first four-year term — see p. 36578.
The Polish United Workers' Party was dissolved in January 1990 [see pp. 37194-95].
EUROPE
HUNGARY
Interim President — New government
Hungary's Országgyülés (National Assembly), elected in March and April [see pp. 37325-26; 37380], met for the first time on May 2-3.
On May 2 Arpad Göncz was elected by 339 votes to 31 as its Speaker and thus as interim President of the Hungarian Republic, pending a decision by the Assembly on how presidential elections should be held later in the year.
Göncz, 68, a writer and literary translator, had spent six years in prison after receiving a life sentence for his role in the revolutionary government crushed by Soviet intervention in 1956.
His election, as candidate of the Alliance of Free Democrats (SzDSz), reflected a deal whereby the Free Democrats would remain in opposition, but would accept parliamentary rules allowing the passage of most categories of legislation (including the budget) by simple majority.
A two-thirds majority, as provided for in the constitution, would only be held necessary for constitutional changes and legislation affecting human and civil rights.
The Hungarian Democratic Forum (HDF or MDF), whose leader Jozsef Antall was formally invited on May 3 to seek to form a government, agreed to support Göncz in the eventual presidential elections; meanwhile the (HDF) First Deputy Speaker, György Szabad, would be acting Speaker while Göncz acted as interim President.
The inaugural Országgyülés session was addressed by Bela Varga, Speaker of the 1946-47 Hungarian parliament, and attended by other dignitaries including Otto von Habsburg, son of the last Austro-Hungarian Emperor, who sat as a West German member in the European Parliament.
The Assembly approved a law to "perpetuate the memory of the 1956 revolution and freedom struggle in law" and declaring Oct. 23 a national holiday; it also unanimously approved a statement of intent on joining the Council of Europe; and it accepted the resignation of outgoing Prime Minister Miklos Nemeth of the Hungarian Socialist Party (the reformed successor to the Hungarian Socialist Workers' Party), but requested him to remain in office at the head of an interim government until a replacement government had been formed.
Nemeth said of Hungary's transition to multiparty democracy that "the revolution happened not only because people did not want to live in that way, but also because the government did not want to govern in that way" .
Antall announced on May 16 the membership of his coalition Cabinet, dominated by HDF members but including four members of the Independent Smallholders' Party, one from the Christian Democratic People's Party (CDPP), non-party academic experts to the Finance and International Economic Relations portfolios, and a non-party legal expert, Ferenc Madl, as Minister without portfolio charged with preparing Hungarian integration into European organizations.
Antall on May 22 presented this team, and his outline "programme of national renewal" , to the Országgyülés, which on the following day approved both simultaneously, by 218 to 126 with eight abstentions, and the government was then duly sworn in.
Jozsef Antall (HDF) Premier Bertalan Andrasfalvy (HDF) Culture and Public Education Istvan Balsai (HDF) Justice Peter Akos Bod (HDF) Industry and Commerce Lajos Für (HDF) Defence Sandor Györivanyi (Smallholders) Labour Affairs Balazs Horváth (HDF) Interior Geza Jeszenszky (HDF) Foreign Ferenc Rabar Finance Bela Kádár International Economic Relations Sandor Keresztes (HDF) Environmental Protection Ferenc Jozsef Nagy (Smallholders) Agriculture Csaba Siklos (HDF) Transport and Communications Lajos Surjan (CDPP) Social Welfare Jenö Gerbovics (Smallholders) Without portfolio Gyula Kiss (Smallholders) Without portfolio Ferenc Madl Without portfolio
New Hungarian Cabinet
Antall had already made clear that privatization measures would be a top priority to promote the transition to a free market economy, and that Hungary would seek to honour its debt repayments to maintain the confidence of the international financial community.
His outline programme included a 100-day package to curb inflation, a declared intention to make the forint into a convertible currency (but without a specified target date), and a commitment to land reforms, as demanded by the Smallholders who had campaigned on the single issue of returning farmland to its pre-1947 owners; agriculture was to become primarily based on private ownership, with encouragement for family farms and voluntary co-operatives, although a limited number of state farms would also remain in existence.
On Warsaw Pact membership, Antall's statement provided some response to the challenge of the Free Democrats, who had tabled an emergency resolution earlier in the month calling for the immediate withdrawal of Hungarian forces from the alliance's joint command.
His statement referred to the 1956 decision on withdrawal, noting that membership "was in conflict with the wishes of the people in 1956 and during the last elections, and we think the whole agreement is unnecessary" ; the matter was then referred to the relevant parliamentary committees.
EUROPE
EUROPEAN BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
Signature of founding charter — Decision on location and first president
Representatives of 40 countries, of the Commission of the European Communities (EC) and of the EC's European Investment bank (EIB), met at the Elysée Palace in Paris on May 29 to sign the founding charter of the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD or, by its French acronym, BERD), a new international organization intended to finance industrial and economic development in the countries of Eastern Europe, using loans, guarantees, equity investment and underwriting to promote the transition to free-market economic systems in those countries.
The EBRD, whose creation had been agreed in principle at the EC Strasbourg summit in December 1989 [see pp. 37132; 37196], would become operational once two-thirds of its 42 members had ratified their signature of its charter.
March 31, 1991, was the deadline for such ratification.
It would have capital resources of 10,000 million ECU (some US$12,400 million), 30 per cent of this to be paid up in members' subscriptions and the rest being callable capital.
The EC and member countries together accounted for 51 per cent of the capital, with France, West Germany, Italy and the United Kingdom each providing 8.5 per cent.
Of the East European members, Poland, East Germany, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Bulgaria, Romania and Yugoslavia would subscribe small amounts and the Soviet Union 6 per cent.
Other member countries were the remaining 13 OECD member countries — with the United states providing 10 per cent and Japan 8.5 per cent of the capital — and Cyprus, Egypt, Israel, Liechtenstein, Malta, Mexico and Morocco.
London was chosen as the administrative headquarters, and Jacques Attali, formerly a special adviser to President Mitterrand of France, was elected president for an initial four-year term at a meeting in Paris on May 19.
These decisions, supported respectively by 23 and 32 countries, provoked a walkout by the Dutch delegate, who complained that they exemplified the lack of consideration of the larger EC members for the smaller member countries, and that the outcome of the voting had been "deviously stage-managed" to present a fait accompli based on an Anglo-French deal reached at the IMF Group of 7 meeting on May 6 [see p. 37474].
With the growing awareness of the scale of financing which would be necessary for urgent economic and environmental projects in Eastern Europe, there was some recognition that the EBRD could only be one of several sources of funds, but emphasis was given to its potential as a co-ordinating and technical assistance agency.
The USA had expressed numerous reservations before agreeing to join the EBRD.
It had made its participation conditional on the undertaking that at least 60 per cent of the bank's total lending should be to the private sector, with no more than 40 per cent for infrastructure projects.
It also stipulated that no subsequent change to the borrowing rules could be made without the approval of at least 85 per cent of the shareholders.
To meet concern about the extent of borrowing by the Soviet Union, it was agreed that Soviet borrowings could not exceed 6 per cent, i.e. the proportion of Soviet capital involvement in the fund.
EUROPE
EAST-WEST GERMANY
First round of two-plus-four talks
On May 5 the Foreign Ministers of East and West Germany and of the four major victorious allied powers of the Second World War — France, the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom and the United States — met in Bonn, the West German capital, for the first meeting at this level in the so-called "two-plus-four" discussions on the security implications of German unification [see pp. 37259-60 for February agreement on talks].
At the meeting Eduard Shevardnadze, the Soviet Foreign Minister, proposed the "decoupling" of the internal and external aspects of unification so that the former could be completed swiftly while allowing a unified Germany's security status to be resolved over a number of years.
In his speech Shevardnadze declared his readiness to talk about "a final legal settlement" (as advocated by the Western allies) rather than a peace treaty to mark the end of the Second World War.
During a "transitional period" , he maintained, "four-power rights and responsibility and the presence in Germany of troops from the allied powers will exert a stabilizing influence on the whole process of building German unity" .
He proposed the establishment in Berlin of a "centre to prevent the danger of war" which would provide "full information about the military and strategic situation in Germany and throughout Europe" .
These proposals were initially welcomed by both Helmut Kohl, the West German Federal Chancellor, and his Foreign Minister, Hans-Dietrich Genscher (although they were not so favourably received by the East German government), but on May 8 Kohl rejected them as "negotiation poker" .
The presence on German territory of Soviet troops (currently numbering 380,000 in East Germany) for more than "a short transitional period" would infringe the country's sovereignty, he said, and the question of a unified Germany's membership of NATO had to be clarified before unification.
On May 17, President Bush (during a brief visit by Kohl to the United States) reportedly gave his unqualified support to a unified Germany enjoying full sovereignty.
It should, he said, decide on its own security links without external constraints and "have full control over all its territory" .
The Soviet position on Germany's security status remained ambivalent [see pp. 37259; 37303; 37379], initially favouring a demilitarized and neutral united Germany.
Concern on this issue was seen as one reason for Soviet delaying on the "Open Skies" talks and at the conventional armed forces reduction talks in Vienna [see p. 37393].
On May 17 the Soviet Foreign Ministry announced the suspension of unilateral Soviet troop withdrawals from East Germany (first announced in 1988 — see p. 36440).
On May 25, during a visit to Moscow by President Mitterrand of France, President Gorbachev declared his preference for a unified German membership of both NATO and the Warsaw Pact.
Gorbachev nevertheless apparently conceded that "one of the options" was German membership solely of NATO, but not of its military command (as was the case with France).
On May 28 the West German Defence Minister, Gerhard Stoltenberg, rejected the latter suggestion but declared: "It is remarkable that the Soviet President is now beginning to concern himself in public with the prerequisites for [German]NATO membership." 
Stoltenberg's comments were made after talks in Strausberg near Berlin with his East German counterpart, Rainer Eppelmann, when it was agreed that "official relations" between the East and West German armed forces would be opened on June 1, 1990.
Contacts between the two governments continued apace and included meetings between Kohl and Lothar de Maizière, the East German Prime Minister, on May 14, 18, 28 and a joint visit by both leaders to the European Parliament in Strasbourg on May 17.
On that occasion, in contrast to Kohl's increased pressure for early all-German elections (following Christian Democratic setbacks in two Land elections on May 13 — see p. 37467), de Maizière declared that "all German elections should not be held until the Soviet Union [was]fully satisfied on the external aspects of unification" .
Weizsäcker visit to Poland
President Richard von Weizsäcker of West Germany paid an official visit to Poland on May 2-6 during which he sought to dispel Polish anxieties about German unification.
Speaking on May 4 he said: "Poland's current western frontier will remain unviolable.
Neither today nor in the future do we make any claims whatsoever on territory in Poland or in any other neighbouring country."
US Secretary of State James Baker also visited Poland on May 6 to brief Polish leaders and to pass over a West German invitation for Poland to join the July round of two-plus-four talks in Paris.
[For controversy over inviolability of Oder-Neisse border see pp. 37379; 37302; 37260; 37048-49.]
Signature of state treaty on German economic monetary and social union
On May 18 Theo Waigel and Walter Romberg, respectively the West and East German Finance Ministers, signed a state treaty on "the creation of a monetary, economic and social union" between the two countries.
Assuming ratification by both parliaments the treaty would provide for the introduction from July 1, 1990, of "a currency union with a unified currency area and the Deutschmark as the common currency" .
The West German Bundesbank (central bank) would be the issuing bank.
 "The basis of such a union" was "the social market economy…determined particularly by private ownership, the free establishment of prices and the fundamentally full freedom of movement of labour, capital, goods and services" .
The social union was to be characterized "by a system of labour law which corresponds to the social market economy and a comprehensive system of social security" .
As agreed in principle on May 2 (shortly before the local elections in East Germany — see p. 37467) the treaty provided for wages and salaries to be converted at parity according to their gross value on May 1, and for the adaptation of East Germany's less advantageous pension system to West Germany's (which paid 70 per cent of net earnings after 45 years of work).
Personal savings [see p. 37379]were to be converted at a one-to-one rate up to ceilings of 2,000 Marks for children up to 14 years of age, 4,000 Marks for people aged 15-59, and 6,000 Marks for those over 60; savings in excess of these ceilings would be converted at 2:1, as would state companies' debts and liabilities.
On May 10 tens of thousands of people stopped work throughout East Germany, protesting that they would lose employment protection under the terms of the treaty.
On May 12 police in West Germany arrested 16 people at a demonstration by some 7,000 people in favour of socialism and against "incorporation" of East Germany in the capitalist West.
Agreement on German Unity Fund
In order to help fund the costs of unification the West German federal government and the Länder (states) agreed on May 16 to set up a German Unity Fund to raise DM95,000 million (US$1.00=DM1.6443 as at May 14, 1990) on the capital markets over the ensuing 4@1/2 years (half to be raised by federal government and half by the Länder).
A further DM20,000 million would be channelled into the fund from the federal budget.
The agreement was described by the Financial Times of May 16 as "designed to remove any need to raise taxes during the politically sensitive phase of completing reunification" .
It was intended to cover two-thirds of the East German budget deficit up to the end of 1994.
Romberg estimated on May 17 that East Germany's borrowing requirement would be DM33,000 million in the second half of 1990 and DM53,000 million in 1991.
EUROPE
EAST GERMANY
Local elections
Local elections on May 6 confirmed the leading role of the Christian Democrat Union (CDU) led by Prime Minister Lothar de Maizière, although the party lost some ground compared with its March general election success [see pp. 37300-02].
The electoral campaign was overshadowed by the discussion on the terms for German economic and monetary union [for May 2 agreement in principle see pp. 37466-67].
With counting complete in all but 14 of the 20,120 constituencies the CDU had won 34.4 per cent of the vote (40.82 per cent in the March general election); the Social Democrats (SPD) 21.3 per cent(21.88); the reformed communist Party of Democratic Socialism (PDS) 14.6 per cent (16.4); the League of Free Democrats (BFD) 6.7 per cent (5.28); the Democratic Peasants' Party (DBD) 3.8 per cent (2.18); the German Social Union (DSU) 3.4 per cent (6.31); and New Forum 2.4 per cent (2.91).
In all over 60 parties and groups put up candidates.
The total electorate was 12,319,787 and the turnout was 75 per cent.
The SPD emerged as the strongest party in East Berlin (with 34 per cent of the vote; the PDS were runners-up with 30 per cent), Leipzig, Dresden and several other cities.
Immediately after the election Tino Schwierzina, the SPD mayor-elect of East Berlin, held a joint press conference with his West Berlin counterpart Walter Momper (also SPD) in which Momper asserted: "We want to join the two city administrations very quickly." 
Expropriation of PDS assets
The government on May 31 introduced legislation to determine the value of political parties' assets and for the expropriation of the assets of those parties existing on Oct. 7, 1989.
Gregor Gysi, the PDS chair, angrily told parliament that the government wanted "to eliminate the opposition, nothing less" .
On June 2 tens of thousands of PDS supporters protested in the streets of East Berlin.
EUROPE
WEST GERMANY
SPD victories in Lower Saxony and North Rhine-Westphalia elections
Elections were held to the state parliaments in North Rhine-Westphalia and Lower Saxony on May 13, involving 19,000,000 voters or two-fifths of the West German electorate.
The Social Democratic Party (SPD) won Lower Saxony from the Christian Democratic Union (CDU), which had held it since the mid-1970s (in coalition with the Free Democrats since the last state election in 1986 — see pp. 34503-04); the SPD also retained its absolute majority in North Rhine-Westphalia (with 11,000,000 voters Germany's most populous state), where it had held control for 24 years.
The SPD accordingly took over Lower Saxony's five seats in the Bundesrat (upper house of the federal parliament) to have a total of 27 seats, with the result that the government CDU-Christian Social Union (CSU) -Free Democratic Party (FDP) coalition, now with 18 seats, lost what had been a one-seat majority.
Bundesrat representatives came from the 10 Land (state) governments, of which the SPD now controlled six including the cities of Bremen and Hamburg; the SPD also controlled West Berlin, in coalition with the Greens, but West Berlin did not have voting representation in the Bundesrat.
The results reflected concern in West Germany about the pace and particularly the financial consequences of the German unification process, although Federal Chancellor Helmut Kohl made it clear on May 14 that he intended to stick to the timetable of holding all-German elections in December 1990 or January 1991 despite the CDU's "bitter" defeat in Lower Saxony.
Following the poor showing in both states of the extreme right-wing Republicans (REP) which had made advances in 1989 in elections to the European Parliament elections and in West Berlin and Hesse [see pp. 36874-75; 36403; 36531], the party leader Franz Schönhuber resigned on May 25 at the instigation of the party executive.
Percentage of votes 1990 1986 SPD 44.2 42.1 CDU 42.0 44.3 FDP 6.0 6.0 Greens 5.5 7.1 REP 1.5 — Others 0.8 0.5
Lower Saxony
Turnout: 74.9 per cent.
Percentage of votes 1990 1985 SPD 50.0 52.1 CDU 36.7 36.5 FDP 5.8 6.0 Greens 5.0 4.6 REP 1.8 — Others 2.3 0.8 Turnout: 71.8 per cent.
North Rhine-Westphalia
Agreement on 35-hour week
The engineering union IG Metall on May 4 reached agreement with the employers' organization Gesamtmetall on phasing in a 35-hour week for its 700,000 workers in the North Württemberg area.
The agreement was expected to be applied nationally following its approval in other regions.
The current 37-hour working week (reduced from 40 hours in 1984) was to be reduced to 36 hours from April 1, 1993, and to 35 hours from Oct. 1, 1995.
The latest reduction, agreed after several days of wildcat strikes beginning on April 27 and involving some 250,000 employees, averted the prospect of a national strike in support also of an 8.5 per cent pay rise.
It formed part of a package including a 6 per cent pay rise over one year beginning on June 1, supplemented by one-off payments to cover April and May, and it was agreed that 18 per cent of the workers in a plant would be allowed to volunteer to work a 40-hour week in the interests of flexibility.
Negotiations between employers and the trade union IG Medien for the introduction of a 35-hour week in the printing industry, coupled with salary increases of 10.5 per cent, ended without success in early May and wildcat strikes were staged, but an arbitration commission recommended on May 7 that a 35-hour week should be introduced in one stage as from April 1, 1995, coupled with a salary increase of 6.8 per cent for 1990.
This was accepted by both sides on May 18.
EUROPE
UNITED KINGDOM
Local government elections
In local government elections held on May 3 in about half the districts or boroughs in England, for the Scottish regional and island councils and in six districts in Wales, the Labour Party made considerable gains in terms both of seats won and councils controlled.
The seats concerned had last been contested in 1986 [see pp. 34451-52].
On that occasion the Conservatives had lost ground, while Labour gained seats, as did the Liberals and the Social Democratic Party (SDP) then operating in alliance.
(Unlike in 1986, there were no elections in 1990 to the Inner London Education Authority, which had ceased to exist on April 1, 1990 — see also p. 36502.)
Overall, Labour had net gains of about 300 seats, while net losses were suffered by the Conservatives (nearly 200 seats), by the Liberal Democrats (about 50), by the SDP (about 25) and by independents and others (about 40); the Scottish National Party made net gains of four seats and the Green Party three.
The elections were held in the context of continuing controversy over the recent introduction of the community charge ( "poll tax" ) system of local government finance [see page 37329].
While the pattern of gains and losses was generally broadly uniform especially across England, the Conservatives, and also the Liberal Democrats, were relatively successful in London; the Conservatives held both Wandsworth and Westminster, the London boroughs in which Conservative-controlled councils had set a notably low poll tax.
Parliamentary by-elections
Parliamentary by-elections were held in Upper Bann (Northern Ireland) on May 17 and in Bootle (England) on May 24, following the deaths of the incumbent MPs.
The (Official) Ulster Unionists retained Upper Bann with 58 per cent of the valid vote (61.5 per cent in the 1987 general election).
In Bootle Labour increased its share from 67 to 75 per cent; the share of the Conservative candidate dropped from 20 to 9 per cent and that of the Liberal Democrat from 13 to 9 per cent , while the Green candidate polled 3.6 per cent .
The elections were notable in particular for (i) the intervention in Upper Bann of an official Conservative candidate (who, however, obtained only 3 per cent of the vote) and (ii) the disastrous result in Bootle for the SDP, which received only 155 votes.
EUROPE
IRELAND
Death of Cardinal O Fiaich
His Eminence Cardinal Tomás O Fiaich died in Toulouse (France) on May 8 as he was leading a pilgrimage to the Catholic shrine at Lourdes.
Born in the border village of Crossmaglen, South Armagh, in 1923, he was a linguist, historian and scholar of Celtic language and culture.
He served briefly as a curate before teaching at St Patrick's seminary at Maynooth.
In 1977 he succeeded Cardinal William Conway as Roman Catholic Archbishop of Armagh and ex officio Primate of All Ireland, and was ordained Cardinal in 1979.
Outspokenly supporting the unification of Ireland, he was nevertheless unequivocal in condemning violence as a means to this end, and was held in great affection by his congregation.
EUROPE
FRANCE
Desecration of Jewish graves
At a cemetery in Carpentras in south-eastern France on May 10, the body of a Jewish man who had died two weeks previously was disinterred and, according to first reports which were later contradicted, impaled; the grave of a woman was also disturbed, and more than 30 others were damaged.
Anti-Semitic slogans were sprayed in the cemetery and in nearby Avignon.
The only group claiming responsibility was the hitherto unknown "Mohammed El Boukhima" , and about 15 people detained for questioning in the Albi area on May 23 were freed the same day.
Reactions to the desecration reflected deep concern in France over anti-Semitism and racism.
Interior Minister Pierre Joxe emphasized the belief that the extreme right-wing National Front (FN) had contributed to the creation of a climate in which hostility to Jewish people and immigrants could be freely expressed.
The National Front condemned the Carpentras attack, but on May 11 its leader Jean-Marie Le Pen claimed that the desecration was "a fake" , carried out with the intention of discrediting his party.
A silent protest march through Paris organized by the Representative Council of Jewish Institutions in France took place on May 14, attracting thousands of participants.
Those taking part included President Mitterrand (who had condemned the "particularly abject" attack at Carpentras and had called on the French people to "pull themselves together" ), Prime Minister Michel Rocard, and other members of the government and senior politicians excluding the FN.
Similar marches were held in other cities.
Many French towns, including Le Pen's birthplace in Brittany, refused to allow him to hold meetings.
The Carpentras attack was followed by incidents in Jewish cemeteries elsewhere in France, including one at Clichy-sous-Bois outside Paris on May 13.
Three youths were charged on May 18 with damaging a cemetery in the Nantes area.
It was revealed that a Jewish cemetery in Strasbourg had been desecrated between April 12 and May 4, while other instances were recalled in Alsace and along the Channel coast in 1988, and at Stains near Paris in 1989.
Le Pen was on May 23 ordered by a civil court to pay a nominal 1 franc in damages for having stated in a September 1987 radio interview that the gas chambers were "a mere detail" in the history of the Second World War [see p. 35522].
The case for damages was brought by groups representing concentration camp survivors.
EUROPE
ITALY
Regional, provincial and municipal elections
Elections were held on May 6-7 to over 6,000 town councils, and to 87 provincial governments and the regional councils (parliaments) of the 15 regions governed by normal statute (Liguria, Piedmont, Lombardy, Veneto, Emilia-Romagna, Tuscany, Umbria, Marches, Abruzzi, Latium, Molise, Apulia, Campania, Basilicata and Calabria).
In a surprising development regional autonomy groups in the north, campaigning against the centralized state and against immigration, particularly from southern Italy, and advocating federalism, won 5.6 per cent of the vote overall, making them the fourth largest political force nationally.
The largest of the groups, the Lombard League, which had won a small percentage in the 1989 European Parliament elections as the Lombardy Regional Party [see p. 36876], took 19 per cent of the vote in Lombardy and became the second largest party in the region, while separate local leagues in Veneto and Piedmont won between 5 and 7 per cent of the vote each.
The Communist Party (PCI), currently undergoing a transition to social democracy [see p. 37330], sustained losses throughout the country, its overall vote falling by 6 percentage points compared with 1985.
However, the PCI retained its position as the second-largest party.
The largest party, the Christian Democrats (DC), and the third-largest, the Socialist Party (PSI), both increased their share of the vote by about 2 percentage points.
Turnout was 86.3 per cent of the 46,000,000 people eligible to vote, compared with over 89 per cent in 1985.
Party 1990 1985 DC 33.4 35.0 PCI 24.0 30.2 PSI 15.4 13.3 Regional leagues 5.5 — Italian Socialist Movement-National Right (MSI-DN) 4.2 6.5 Republican Party (PRI) 3.8 4.0 Social Democratic Party (PSDI) 3.2 3.6 Liberal Party (PLI) 2.0 2.2 Greens* 3.5 1.8 Others 5.0 3.4 *Combined results of two separate Green lists.
Regional election results Overall percentage of votes
During the election campaign 10 candidates were murdered by the regional Mafia groups of Naples and Calabria.
In Palermo, Sicily, an absolute majority was won by the DC list headed by the former mayor Leoluca Orlando (representing the left-oriented faction of the DC), who until his resignation in February had for the previous 2@1/2 years headed an "anti-Mafia" coalition of the DC and the PCI.
EUROPE
SPAIN
PP financial scandal
Angel Sanchis, a former treasurer of the conservative Popular Party (PP) and a parliamentary deputy, announced his resignation from the party on May 7 after the emergence of a financial scandal.
Six members of the PP had been arrested on April 6 on the orders of a magistrate in Valencia and questioned for a week about their involvement in irregular financial dealings to obtain political donations for the party worth 2,000 million pesetas (about US$19,000,000).
The six included Rosendo Naseiro, the party treasurer (who had succeeded Sanchis), who resigned, and Salvador Palop, a councillor in the Valencian regional parliament.
Evidence of the commission deals was revealed when Palop's brother's telephone was tapped (for other reasons) in December 1989.
Arturo Moreno, the deputy secretary-general, resigned on May 10 after it emerged that the transcript of the taped telephone conversations, lodged with the Supreme Court, implicated him.
The report of an internal PP investigation carried out in May, a copy of which was obtained by El Mundo, recommended the expulsion from the party of Sanchis, Palop and Eduardo Zaplana, president of the PP in Alicante, and the dismissal of two others from official positions, but it exonerated Naseiro.
Both José María Aznar, the PP secretary-general [wrongly given as Julio on p. 36983], and Manuel Fraga Iribarne, the party president, denied any involvement in the affair.
EUROPE
GREECE
Election of President — Agreement on US bases
Parliament on May 4 elected Konstantinos Karamanlis as President of Greece and he was sworn in on May 5 for a five-year term.
Karamanlis, 83, had presided over Greece's return to democracy in 1974, holding office as Prime Minister until 1980 and then serving a term as President from 1980 to 1985.
As the candidate of New Democracy (ND), he was elected on the second round of voting with 153 votes (two more than the required absolute majority of the 300 seats in parliament).
The Pan-Hellenic Socialist Movement (Pasok) candidate, Yannis Alevras, won 125 votes and Konstantinos Despotopoulos, the candidate of the communist-dominated Coalition of the Left and Progress, and until recently the Education Minister, 21.
The one Ecology deputy abstained.
In the first round on April 30, when 180 votes (three-fifths of the total) were required for a candidate to be successful, Karamanlis had received 149 votes, Alevras 123 and Despotopoulos 21.
The term of the outgoing president, Khristos Sartzetakis, had expired on March 30, but Karamanlis had refused to stand as the candidate of New Democracy earlier in the year.
Three rounds of voting in February and March failed to elect any of the candidates [see p. 37264], so that the task fell to the new parliament which emerged from the April 8 general election.
Agreement on US bases
After three weeks of talks Greece and the United States on May 30 initialled a new defence co-operation agreement allowing two of the four US bases (at Gournes and Souda Bay in Crete) to continue to operate in Greece for the next eight years.
The two other bases, at Athens airport and at Nea Makri north-east of Athens, were to be closed but some of their facilities and operations would be transferred to the remaining bases and auxiliary installations.
The accord replaced the 1983 Defence and Economic Co-operation Agreement [see p. 32588]which had expired in December 1988 but had been extended at six-monthly intervals since then in view of the political uncertainties in Greece.
Further details were expected to be finalized in the coming weeks and would be submitted to the Greek parliament for ratification.
Relations with Israel
Greece on May 21 extended full diplomatic recognition to Israel, becoming the last European Community member country to do so.
Relations with the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) were also to be upgraded.
EUROPE
CYPRUS
TRNC general election
In a general election on May 6 in the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus (TRNC — recognised only by Turkey) the ruling National Unity Party (UBP or NUP) won 55 per cent of the vote and 34 of the 50 seats in the Legislative Assembly (as against 37 per cent of the vote and 24 seats in the last elections in 1985 — see pp. 34067-68).
The opposition coalition, the Democratic Struggle Party (DSP, formed on Jan. 15, 1990), won 44 per cent of the vote and the remaining 16 seats.
The elections were conducted under a new electoral law passed by the NUP-controlled Assembly in October 1989, under which additional seats were given to the larger parties, thus allowing them to gain the maximum number of seats with the minimum of votes.
The DSP comprised the conservative New Birth Party and the left-wing Socialist Liberation and Republican Turkish parties, which both opposed the "intransigence" of President Rauf Denktash in the UN-sponsored negotiations between the two parts of the island [see pp. 37331; 37516-17].
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
YEMEN
Unification
The unification of the Yemen Arab Republic (North Yemen, with its capital at San'aa) and the People's Democratic Republic of Yemen (South Yemen, with its capital at Aden) was proclaimed at midday on May 22, after ratification the previous day by both parliaments.
The new unified state, the Republic of Yemen, had San'aa as its political capital (with Aden as economic and commercial capital), a total area of 540,000 sq km, and a population of some 11-13,000,000 plus 2,000,000 nationals working abroad.
It adopted as its national anthem the former anthem of South Yemen, and as its flag the horizontal stripes of red, white and black, as used formerly by North Yemen, but without the green star in the centre.
The Republic of Yemen was welcomed as a member of the United Nations on May 23, and sent a unified delegation to the Arab League summit in Baghdad [see pp. 37472-73], where on May 29 it was agreed with the heads of state of the other three Arab Co-operation Council members (Egypt, Iraq and Jordan) that the Republic of Yemen would hold the seat formerly held by North Yemen.
Its unified parliament, the House of Representatives, comprised the 159 members of the North's former legislature and the 111 from the South, plus 39 members appointed on March 24, mainly to give representation to opposition political parties which had been prohibited in the North and only recently legalized in the South.
The House of Representatives held its first session on May 26, electing Yasin Said Numan (hitherto Prime Minister of South Yemen) as its Speaker and also choosing a three-member presidium.
Political leadership personnel
Pending elections to be held at the end of a 30-month transitional period, a five-member Presidential Council would hold office.
Lt.-Gen. (formerly Col.) Ali Abdullah Saleh, hitherto President of North Yemen, was chosen as President, and Ali Salim al-Bid, secretary-general of the Yemen Socialist Party (YSP) in former South Yemen, as Vice-President.
The other three Council members were Qadi Abdel-Karim al-Arashi, hitherto Speaker in the North Yemeni parliament, Abdel Aziz Abdel Ghani, former North Yemeni Prime Minister, and Salim Salih Muhammad, the YSP deputy secretary-general.
Haider Abu Bakr al Attas, hitherto the South Yemeni President, was named as Prime Minister on May 22 and his government was sworn in on May 27.
Meanwhile on May 24 Brig. -Gen.
Abdullah Hussain al-Bashiri had been named as Chief of General Staff of the Armed Forces, the separate existence of North and South Yemeni armed forces having been "dissolved within the framework of the united state" on May 12.
Haider Abu Bakr al Attas Prime Minister Hasan Muhammad Makki First Deputy Prime Minister Brig. -Gen.
Mujahid Yahya Abu Shawarib Deputy Prime Minister; Internal Affairs Brig. -Gen.
Salih Ubayd Ahmed Deputy Prime Minister; Security and Defence Muhammad Haider Masdus Deputy Prime Minister; Development of Manpower and Administrative Reform Abdullah Hussayn al-Kurshumi Construction Abdul Ali al-Karim al-Iryani Foreign Affairs Brig. -Gen.
Salih Munassar as-Siyayli Expatriates' Affairs Muhammad Said al-Attar Industry Salih Abu Bakr Bin Hussain Oil and Mineral Resources Fadl Mohsin Abdullah Supply and Trade Muhammad Said Abdullah Muhsin Local Administration Abdul-Wahhab Mahmud Abdul-Hamid Electricity and Water Muhammad al-Khadim al-Wajih Civil Service and Administrative Reform Faraj Bin Ghanim Planning and Development Ahmad Muhammad al-Unsi Telecommunications Ismail Ahmad al-Wazir Legal Affairs Muhsin Muhammad al-Ulufi Waqfs (Religious Affairs) and Guidance Ahmad Muhammad Luqman Securities and Social Affairs Hasan Ahmad al-Lawzi Culture Muhammad Ahmad al-Kabab Youth and Sports Muhammad Abdullah al-Jayfi Education Abdul Wasi Ahmed Sallam Justice Muhammad Ahmad Jirghum Information Salih Abdullah MuthannaTransport Salim Muhammad Jubran Fisheries Abdul Qawi Muthena Hadi Housing and Urban Planning Alawi Salih al-Salami Finance Muhammad Ali Muqbil Public Health Sadiq Amin Abu Ras Agriculture and Water Resources Muhammad Abdullah al-Arashi Tourism Col. Ghalib Motahar al-Qomesh Interior and Security Brig. -Gen.
Haytham Qasim Tahir Defence Abdul Rahman Dhiban Labour and Vocational Training Ahmad Salim al-Qadi Higher Education and Scientific Research
Members of unified Yemen Council of Ministers
Ministers of state Abdul Aziz ad-Dali Foreign Affairs Yahya Hussein al-ArashiCabinet Affairs Rashid Muhammad Thabit House of Representatives Affairs Muhsin Ali al-Hamadani Without portfolio 
Acceleration of unification process
The original timetable had envisaged unification on Nov. 30, 1990, and the leadership in South Yemen was hitherto believed to be resisting pressures for an earlier formal announcement.
The two Cabinets had met jointly in San'aa on Jan. 20-22 and in Aden on March 21, while impetus was also given by the opening of the border [see p. 37266], by meetings between Saleh and al-Bid in Ta'izz on March 8 and in Aden on May 1, and between the respective Prime Ministers in San'aa on May 1-4, and by progress made in joint committees at ministerial level.
Reports were carried by Agence-France Presse on May 1 of heavy fighting around Saa'da involving Moslem tribes opposed to unity, and by the UK newspaper the Independent on May 12 suggesting that Saudi Arabia was fomenting this resistance to hold up the unity process [but see p. 37266 for official Saudi position welcoming unification].
Officials in San'aa denied that there was any basis for these reports, which were, however, used in Western press reports to suggest that unification had been brought forward to pre-empt the development of any serious opposition of this kind.
It was noted that, whereas the May 21 vote for unification was recorded as unanimous in the parliament of the South, there were demonstrations by Moslem fundamentalists outside the North Yemeni parliament, and a walkout by a small number of fundamentalist MPs.
In a move to promote economic integration, it was announced on May 4 that both the (North Yemeni) rial and the (South yemeni) dinar could be used throughout Yemen, interchanging at a rate of 1 dinar=26 rials (effectively a devaluation of the dinar).
The exchange rates with the US dollar were set on May 10 at US$1.00=12 rials=0.461 dinars.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
IRAQ
 "Supergun" affair
A number of important developments in the so-called Iraqi "supergun" affair, details of which had emerged in early April [see pp. 37390-91], came to light in late April and May.
The developments are listed as follows.
April 20.
Trucks allegedly laden with British-manufactured supergun parts were seized by the Greek and Turkish authorities; British truck driver Paul Ashwell was placed under arrest by the Greek authorities.
May 1.
As many as 18 executives from the two British companies implicated in the supergun affair (Sheffield Engineering and Walter Summers) were taken in for questioning by UK customs officials.
May 3.
Peter Mitchell, managing director of Walter Summers, and Christopher Cowley, a former metallurgist with Brussels-based company Space Research Corporation (SRC), were charged after a brief court appearance in Sheffield with contravening UK export orders; both were freed on bail and their cases adjourned until Aug. 22.
May 3.
Iraq's Industry, Minerals and Military Industrialization Ministry imposed a selective embargo on UK companies.
May 7.
The Belgian public prosecutor launched an investigation into the alleged involvement in the supergun affair of Poudreries Réunies de Belgique (PRB — a subsidiary of UK company Astra Holdings).
May 9.
A UK House of Commons select committee investigation into the affair, launched in late April, was suspended until legal proceedings had finished.
May 11.
Paul Ashwell was released in Greece on £19,000 bail posted by the Daily Mirror newspaper.
May 12.
Steel forgings, bound for Jordan and possibly to be used in the supergun's bridge section, were seized by the Italian authorities.
According to the manufacturers of the forgings (Societa della Fucine, a subsidiary of the Ilva state steel company) they were for use in Iraq's petrochemical industry.
May 14.
The Iraqi Industry Ministry announced its intention to take legal measures against UK, Greek, Italian and Turkish authorities which had "illegally" confiscated non-military material bound for Iraq.
May 14.
A West German television report claimed that customs officials at Frankfurt airport had seized suspected supergun parts (possibly recoil mechanisms), en route from Belgium and Switzerland, in late April.
Two days later a report in the Guardian implicated the West German engineering giant Mannesmann in the Belgian and Swiss operation.
May 16.
The UK ambassador to Iraq, Harold Walker, returned to Baghdad after being withdrawn in March over the Bazoft affair [see p. 37322].
May 18.
An Italian engineer recently arrested in connection with the supergun affair disclosed that he had been employed by SRC associate company ATI to co-ordinate production of supergun parts in Italy, Switzerland and the UK.
May 26.
The Financial Times reported that Spain, acting on UK information, had launched an investigation into a possible Spanish supergun connection.
May 31.
The British television programme This Week alleged that UK directors of Astra Holdings had in September 1989 notified both the UK Ministry of Defence and "intelligence people" of PRB's possible involvement in the construction of a supergun.
In mid-April 1990 UK Trade and Industry Secretary Nicholas Ridley had told MPs that the government had only "recently become aware in general terms" of the project.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
IRAN-UNITED STATES
Agreement over small claims
After months of sporadic negotiations, Iran and the United States on May 13 signed an agreement to settle more than 3,100 US financial claims arising from the 1979 Iranian revolution.
The agreement was reached by the Iran-US Claims Tribunal in The Hague (Netherlands), established in 1981 under an accord which ended the imprisonment of 52 US embassy personnel in Tehran, which constituted the only formal diplomatic link between the two countries.
Under the terms of the settlement Iran agreed to pay $50,000,000 to settle individual US claims each of less than $250,000, for property seized, contracts voided or debts unpaid since 1979.
The Iranians would also pay a further $55,000,000 to cover 15 outstanding loans made by the US Agency for International Development (USAID) to finance Iran's foreign currency needs prior to 1979.
Tentative agreement was also reached on the payment of $400,000 by the USA to settle 108 Iranian small claims, mostly by naval cadets forced to leave the US after the revolution.
The agreement opened the way for negotiations on Iran's claim for $11,000 million arising from US military contracts which were abrogated after the revolution.
Discussions on the 2,500 inter-linked contracts involved in this, the main claim still before the Tribunal, began on May 21.
Both sides rejected suggestions that the agreement had been influenced by Iranian assistance in securing the release of two US hostages in Lebanon in April [see p. 37391].
Most observers concluded, however, that the slight improvement in Iranian-US relations embodied by the deal was a positive development for the six US hostages who remained in captivity.
MIDDLE-EAST
EGYPT
Presidential visits to Syria, China, Soviet Union and UK
The visit of President Hosni Mubarak to the Syrian capital, Damascus, for talks with President Hafez al Assad on May 2-3, was the first by an Egyptian leader for 13 years and marked the full normalization of relations between the two countries, broken off in November 1977 at the start of Egypt's peace initiative with Israel.
Formal diplomatic relations had been re-established in December 1989 [see p. 37137].
Mubarak reportedly emphasized the "pressing" need for pan-Arab unity in the face of a possible renewed confrontation with Israel over the resettlement of Soviet Jews in its occupied territories, at a time when the US-sponsored peace formula for the region had been rejected by Israel.
Assad reportedly disagreed with Mubarak's position that a peaceful solution was the "optimal" one but agreed that a peaceful course should be pursued, provided that the solution sought was "a just and comprehensive one" .
Mubarak confirmed that Assad was now willing to renew contact with Yassir Arafat, chairman of the Palestinian Liberation Organization (PLO), but stated that many obstacles still remained to prevent an early reconciliation between Assad and Iraq's President Saddam Hussein, between whom a bitter personal rift existed due to Syria's support of Iran in the Gulf War.
[For Saddam's non-attendance at Arab League summit in Iraq on May 28-30 see p. 37472-73.]
Assad also reaffirmed that Syria's efforts to release the Western hostages held in Lebanon would continue.
Mubarak stated that committees were to be established to enhance political and economic co-operation between both countries.
Visit to China
Mubarak visited China on May 11-13, meeting President Yang Shangkun, Premier Li Peng and the nominally retired veteran leader Deng Xiaoping, reportedly Deng's first public appearance since Feb. 17.
Egypt's repayments on its US$167,000,000 debt to China were reportedly rescheduled and further agreements allowed for increased volumes in trade, additional bilateral facilities for exporters and direct flights between Beijing and Cairo.
Li Peng, who accepted an invitation to visit Egypt, stated that the Chinese government "resolutely" opposed Israel's resettlement of Soviet Jews in the occupied territories as contrary to international law and detrimental to the Middle East peace process.
Visit to Soviet Union
Mubarak's visit to the Soviet Union on May 14-16, the first by an Egyptian leader for 18 years, marked a return to normal relations ended by President Anwar Sadat in 1981 [see p. 31253].
Following talks with President Gorbachev (who accepted an invitation to visit Egypt) and other Soviet leaders, agreements were signed on economic, trade, scientific and technical co-operation over the next 10 years.
As reported by the Egyptian state-owned Middle East News Agency, Egypt's debt to the Soviet Union, of 2,200 million roubles (about US$3,700 million), had been recalculated to the equivalent of US$252,000,000 by applying a new exchange-rate mechanism.
Both sides expressed opposition to Israel's settlement of immigrants in the occupied territories, and endorsed proposals to hold a Palestinian-Israeli dialogue, to further the Middle East peace process and to facilitate preparation for a possible UN international conference on the region, to be attended by all parties including the PLO and permanent members of the UN Security Council.
Mubarak's initiative for a Middle East free from nuclear, chemical and biological weapons was also welcomed.
In addition both sides expressed support for the UN Secretary-General's efforts to achieve a stable peace between Iran and Iraq, and for the efforts of the Arab League and the Committee of Three to bring stability in Lebanon in line with the Taif accords [see p. 36986], and stated that they were willing to promote peace dialogues in the Horn of Africa.
Visit to UK
Mubarak's private talks with UK Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher on May 17 reportedly covered the breakdown in the Middle East peace process, Soviet Jewish emigration, and the current state of relations between Iraq and the UK [see p. 37332].
The first joint military exercises between the countries since the Suez crisis in 1956 were announced, to take place in Egypt on May 18-30.
Internal unrest
On May 6 the government announced that the security forces had made 28 arrests in foiling plans by the Islamic Jihad group to bomb police stations in Cairo and Jizah.
Earlier, five unarmed demonstrators were reportedly shot dead in late April in Manfalut, south-west of Cairo in the Fayourn region, reportedly while protesting at the banning of a traditional Moslem festival.
Armed members of the breakaway group New Islamic Jihad seized control of the nearby town of Mansheit Al Kahk, but were overpowered by police on April 30, when 15 of them were shot dead.
The Islamic militants believed that, since the government was non-Islamic and therefore infidel, its employees, especially those in uniform, were legitimate targets for attack.
Constitutional crisis
The Supreme Constitutional Court judged on May 19 that the People's Assembly had been unconstitutionally elected in 1987 because a 1986 amendment to the 1972 electoral law had unfairly discriminated against independent candidates.
The Court ruled that legislation already passed by the Assembly remained valid, but that no new legislation could be approved after June 2.
Opposition politicians called for the dissolution of parliament and the holding of fresh elections.
IMF agreement
An agreement reached with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) announced on May 10 was expected to release new credits and to create conditions for the rescheduling of the US$50,000 million debt [see p. 37222].
Economic reforms involving cuts in the high levels of state subsidies, as requested by the IMF, were introduced on May 5.
In consequence, the price of petrol and kerosene rose sharply, as did the prices of a wide range of basic commodities, with butane gas going up by 130 per cent and basic food items by between 90 and 100 per cent.
Government officials, mindful of the 1977 riots provoked by increases in food prices [see pp. 28264-66], emphasised that local prices still remained below world levels.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
MOROCCO
Internal unrest
On May 8, Islamic fundamentalist demonstrators were reported to have been violently beaten by paramilitary police and men in civilian clothes wielding clubs, during the largest demonstration ever held in Rabat, the Moroccan capital.
2,000 demonstrators were arrested but were all reportedly released the following day.
The protest was held outside the Court of Appeal where six leaders of the illegal fundamentalist Justice and Welfare Party (Adl wa Lihsane) were appealing against two-year prison sentences conferred on them in March.
Vote of no confidence
A motion of censure on the government, reproaching it for economic incompetence and for promoting "anti-popular" and "antisocial" policies, was tabled by the four opposition parties on May 14, reportedly the first such motion in the parliament's history, but was defeated by 200 votes to 83.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
SYRIA
General election
A general election to the fifth People's Assembly (Majlis al-Sha'ab) was held on May 22-23 [for previous elections in 1986 see p. 34580].
The Assembly was expanded from 195 to 250 seats, allowing for a larger allocation of seats to independent candidates.
The ruling Baath Party maintained its dominant position in the Assembly, although its proportion of seats fell from 66 per cent in 1986 to 54 per cent.
Over 9,700 candidates competed in the elections and a turnout of just over 60 per cent was officially recorded.
The number of women in the Assembly increased from 18 to 21.
Baath Party 134 *Other National Progressive Front parties 32 Independents 84 Total 250 *The National Progressive Front was an electoral coalition consisting of the Baath Party and five other parties, including the Syrian Communist Party and the Arab Socialist Party.
Election results
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
ARAB LEAGUE
Baghdad summit
An emergency summit meeting of the members of the Arab League was held in Baghdad on May 28-30, principally to discuss the "threat to pan-Arab security" posed by Soviet Jewish emigration to Israel [see pp. 37304; 37392; for last Arab League summit in Casablanca in May 1989 see p. 36669].
Palestinian and Jordanian pressure for a summit had been mounting since April, and in early May Iraq announced that it would host the meeting.
Hafez al-Assad, the President of Syria and the long-term adversary of Iraqi President Saddam Hussein, quickly let it be known that he would not attend a summit in Baghdad, and the ensuing efforts of some Arab leaders to persuade Assad to attend were of little use.
Four other heads of state also failed to attend, namely President Elias Hrawi of Lebanon, President Chadli Bendjedid of Algeria, King Hassan of Morocco and Sultan Qaboos bin Said of Oman.
Those countries represented by their head of state were: Bahrain, Djibouti, Egypt, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Libya, Mauritania, Qatar, Palestine, Saudi Arabia, Somalia, Sudan, Tunisia, United Arab Emirates and the newly-unified Yemen.
Speeches
In his opening speech to the summit on May 28 President Hussein reiterated the warning he had issued to Israel in early April, stating: "If Israel attacks and strikes, we will strike powerfully.
If it uses weapons of mass destruction against our [Arab]nation, we will use against it the weapons of mass destruction in our possession [see p. 37390]."
It was no longer possible, he said, to isolate "Israeli aggression" from the "desire of American imperialism" .
King Hussein of Jordan claimed that mass Jewish emigration to Israel represented a "direct aggression against Palestine,…an imminent aggression against Jordan…[and a]premeditated aggression against the entire Arab homeland" .
Israel, he alleged, had selected Jordan as "the point through which to penetrate…the Arab Nation" and his country could no longer continue to carry the burden of confronting the Israeli threat alone.
Jordan had exhausted all of its "material capabilities" and the King appealed to the other Arab leaders to contribute economic and military aid.
Yassir Arafat, the PLO Chairman, called upon the Arab states to impose economic sanctions on countries and companies involved in the transfer of Jews to Arab lands.
Hosni Mubarak, the Egyptian President, adopted a more moderate approach.
On the question of Jewish emigrations, he warned Arab leaders against creating "hostility or tension" .
The "Arab message to the outside world," he said, "should be humane, logical, realistic and consistent with the values and concepts of the age." 
Final statement
The final statement issued at the end of the summit represented a victory for the more confrontational line encouraged by Iraq and the PLO, and was a setback for moderates such as Egypt and Saudi Arabia.
The statement fell short of endorsing Arafat's call for the imposition of economic sanctions, but nevertheless called on states to stop providing the Israeli government with aid or loans to facilitate the settling of Jewish emigrants "in Palestine and the other occupied Arab territories" .
The United States was explicitly criticized as "the power which provides Israel with military capabilities, financial aid and political cover" .
The statement strongly denounced recent "aggressive threats, campaigns and measures" against Iraq, and affirmed Iraq's right to take all the appropriate measures to protect its national security.
The Arab states also affirmed their "total adherence to defending and protecting Jordanian national security" .
They agreed that Arab financial support for Jordan would be organised through bilateral negotiations.
It was agreed that annual Arab League summit meetings would be held, with the first to be in Cairo in November 1990.
INTERNATIONAL
NATO
Defence Ministers' meetings
NATO Defence Ministers attended a meeting in Brussels of the Defence Planning Committee on May 22-23 and formally abandoned their 13-year-old target of 3 per cent real annual increases in national defence budgets [see p. 36750].
They also agreed to relax the state of readiness of their forces and to reduce military exercises.
Gen. John Galvin, Supreme Allied Commander Europe, proposed steps to lower the state of readiness and availability of NATO forces, as well as a three-year schedule for NATO military exercises which would reduce the number, frequency and size of manoeuvres.
The cutback in training involved the cancellation of 10 exercises; a further 22 would be merged and 22 reduced.
The amount payable in annual damage compensation to West German landowners was expected to fall by more than $20,000,000.
Reviewing defence strategy for the 1990s, the ministers accepted the view of Gen. Vigleik Eide, chairman of NATO's military committee, that "the threat from a united Warsaw Pact no longer exists" .
However, Soviet forces were still impressive and were being modernized across the whole spectrum.
The 14 allies made clear their intention of maintaining the basis of the NATO concepts of "forward defence" and "flexible response" with a mix of conventional and nuclear forces and a continued United States presence in Europe.
They also agreed to take more of the defence burden from the USA.
In the final communiqué stress was laid on the importance of concluding a treaty on conventional forces in Europe (CFE) in 1990, as a result of which some reduction in overall defence expenditure could be expected.
On May 9-10 NATO's Nuclear Planning Group met at Kananaskis, Alberta, Canada, to discuss the future of nuclear arms in Europe.
They welcomed US President Bush's recent decision to cancel development of new tactical nuclear missiles (the follow-on to the Lance programme) and artillery for deployment in Europe, but did not reach agreement on the withdrawal of existing nuclear artillery or short-range missiles before talks with the Soviet Union began.
The West Germans favoured withdrawing all nuclear artillery and ground-based missiles from German soil, while the UK urged only a partial reduction.
The Netherlands wanted the USA to withdraw promptly all nuclear-tipped artillery shells.
INTERNATIONAL
DISARMAMENT
Baker-Shevardnadze talks in Moscow
United States Secretary of State James Baker held talks in Moscow with Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard Shevardnadze on May 16-19 to prepare for the summit between their respective Presidents scheduled for May 30-June 3.
Arms control and related issues were high on the agenda and significant agreement was reached on the status of air-launched and sea-launched cruise missiles, which had been the major stumbling blocks in the way of a new strategic arms limitation treaty (START).
The agreement on aircraft specified that the USA would be allowed to have 150 bombers, each equipped with a maximum of 20 cruise missiles, although only 10 would be counted under the START rules.
The Soviet Union would be allowed 210 bombers, equipped with 12 cruise missiles but counting as eight.
In reality, neither side expected to deploy more than about 100 bombers.
The ceiling on sea-launched, nuclear-tipped cruise missiles was agreed at 880, but this covered only missiles with a range of more than 600 km.
Shorter range cruise missiles would be excluded from the agreement.
On chemical weapons, all the principal elements were agreed, the basic position being that sufficient of each country's stock would be destroyed to leave 5,000 tonnes, production of new weapons would cease and they would join forces to try and secure a global ban on such weapons.
Under the agreement, the USA would have to destroy about 20,000 tonnes of chemical weapon stocks and the Soviet Union about 45,000 tonnes.
The US concession to cease production was a major factor, since it had been developing new binary systems but had not produced enough to replace the existing 25,000 tonnes of stocks.
US concessions would allow the Soviet Union partially to modernize and test its next generation of SS-18 intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs) and leave the Soviet Backfire bomber out of the START treaty.
Both suggestions caused right-wing critics of the US administration to claim that Baker had made unnecessary concessions; Richard Perle, former Assistant Defence Secretary under President Reagan, commented that "we are strong, and just at the moment when we are strong, we are making concessions" , and he warned: "Any American official making concessions to the Soviets today has to explain himself." 
The Soviet Union had agreed to reduce from 308 to 154 its arsenal of SS-18s, the heaviest ICBM in the world, each of which could carry 10 warheads.
However, critics pointed out that the Soviet Union already had an upgraded fifth model of the SS-18 and was able, therefore, to get by on half its present firepower; they also claimed that the USA had bowed to Soviet wishes that the START treaty cover all air-launched, nuclear-tipped missiles with a range of more than 375 miles (600 km).
The original US position had been 930 miles (1,488 km).
Baker countered by saying that critics had failed to recognize the importance of the huge cutbacks the Soviet Union had agreed to make and that the US proposal was to allow only a very limited Soviet capacity to modernize.
INTERNATIONAL
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
Increased funding for IMF — G-7 and G-24 reactions
The 22-member policy-making Interim Committee of the IMF announced on May 8 an increase of 50 per cent in capital resources.
The agreement to lift the IMF's quotas, effectively the membership fees payable by its 152 members, from 90,000 million to 135,000 million special drawing rights (SDR1=US$1.32757 as at May 11, 1990), was made conditional on the adoption of a tougher policy against countries in arrears.
The US Treasury Secretary, Nicholas Brady, had insisted that the increase be linked to a firmer line with threatened suspension for persistent defaulters.
Currently 11 IMF member states owed a total of more than $4,200 million in arrears.
Michael Wilson, the Canadian Finance Minister, who chaired the Interim Committee, said that all countries had made concessions and that the compromise 50 per cent increase represented a "balanced agreement" .
The Managing Director of the IMF, Michel Camdessus, had been lobbying for a doubling of quotas and other members had argued in favour of a two-thirds increase.
However, according to Camdessus, the increases announced would permit the IMF to help countries in difficulties, despite the fact that the transition of East European countries to a market-based economy was likely to mean heavy claims on IMF resources.
The extra funds were also needed to help service the debt and debt service reduction measures involved in the Brady Plan [see pp. 36541-2]to help middle-income debtor nations.
Finance Ministers of the Group of Seven (G-7) industrialized countries (the USA, UK, West Germany, Canada, France, Italy and Japan) held their meeting on May 6 in Washington to discuss the compromises necessary to finalize the IMF increases.
Before doing so, the UK and France settled their dispute over rankings in voting power in the IMF league.
Under this settlement the two countries were placed in joint fourth position, the UK having ceded some of its IMF voting rights to allow Japan to rise from fifth to share joint second place with West Germany, thereby reflecting Japan's increased financial weight in the world economy.
In the bargaining to settle this question, it was further agreed that France would support London as the location for the new European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, while the UK would support the French nominee for director [see pp. 37465-66 for signing of EBRD charter].
Among other matters, the G-7 Finance Ministers reaffirmed their concern over the yen, although they noted that it had stabilized since their last meeting in April.
The present level of the Japanese currency, they warned, "may have undesirable consequences for the global adjustment process" .
They also discussed the inflationary pressures in the world economy.
Karl Otto Pohl, president of the West German Bundesbank, said that fears that German monetary union would lead to higher interest rates were exaggerated.
He said that credit costs had been rising partly as a reaction to global inflationary fears, but that the current high interest rates were necessary and appropriate and were a way of keeping inflation in check.
The Group of 24 (G-24), representing the poorer nations, which also met in Washington on May 6, warned against a rigid approach to IMF funding "which could adversely affect the access of future users of the Fund" .
It went on to declare its opposition to a strict line on suspension of those countries in default in meeting IMF repayment obligations, which, it said, "will not serve a useful purpose and is not acceptable" .
INTERNATIONAL
DISASTERS
Earthquakes in Peru and Romania
An earthquake measuring 5.8 on the Richter scale struck northern Peru on May 29, killing at least 101 people; the UN Disaster Relief Office in Lima, the capital, estimated the possible death toll at 200.
Many more people were missing as villages were either flattened or submerged in landslides in the forested region of San Martín, where the regional capital, Moyobamba, was severely damaged.
At least 70 people were killed and hundreds more were missing in the Romanian town of Focsani, 160 km north-east of Bucharest, after an earthquake struck on May 30.
It was measured at between 6.5 and 7 on the Richter scale, but its destructive force was limited by its depth — 100-150 km beneath the earth's surface [for 1977 Romanian earthquake which killed 1,500 see p. 28298].
INTERNATIONAL
GATT
Observer status for Soviet Union
The Governing Council of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) on May 16 granted observer status to the Soviet Union.
This was seen as a first step towards integrating the Soviet economy with international financial institutions, although this did not permit Soviet participation in GATT's current multilateral Uruguay Round of trade discussions.
The Soviet Union was the largest trader still outside GATT, ranking eighth in world export rankings with a 3.5 per cent share of international trade in goods.
As a non-GATT member its goods generally faced higher tariffs and other trade barriers in world markets.
INTERNATIONAL
WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION
43rd World Health Assembly
Delegates representing the 167 member states of the World Health Organization (WHO) met for the 43rd World Health Assembly in Geneva on May 7-18 to consider the biennial report of the Director-General, Hiroshi Nakajima.
Ecuador's Minister of Public Health, Plutarco Naranjo, was elected president of the annual assembly.
Namibia was welcomed as the 167th member state.
Technical discussions took place on the role of health research in the strategy for health for all by the year 2000, with four working groups dealing with nutrition research, health systems research, the strengthening of research capability, and recent advances in biological and physical sciences and their implications for health care.
Nakajima formally appointed the US epidemiologist Michael H. Merson as director of the $100,000,000 WHO Global Programme on AIDS [see p. 37335].
The organization reported that there had been a worldwide increase of nearly 17,000 AIDS cases in April, bringing the total to 254,078.
A 10 per cent increase in cholera cases in 1989 was also reported, bringing the total to 48,403 from a total of 35 countries.
For the second consecutive year the WHO rejected a membership application from the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), which currently had observer status [see p. 36672].
The USA had threatened the withdrawal of its $111,000,000 funding if the application were accepted.
The USA contributed approximately 25 per cent of the WHO regular budget and up to 30 per cent of some special programmes.
A compromise resolution linked indefinite postponement of the PLO's application with greater WHO assistance for Palestinians living in the Israeli occupied territories.
INTERNATIONAL
AVIATION
Lockerbie crash inquiry report
The United States Presidential Commission on Aviation Security and Terrorism, chaired by former Secretary of Labour Ann McLaughlin, presented its report in Washington on May 15 into the Lockerbie disaster of Dec. 21, 1988 [see pp. 36409-10].
It blamed the bombing of Pan American World Airways (Pan Am) flight PA 103, which killed 270 people, on a "seriously flawed" aviation system and lax security at Pan Am check-ins in Frankfurt (West Germany) and London.
The report concluded that the bombing was "probably preventable" .
Of the report's 60 recommendations, the most far-reaching was its call on the US administration to support pre-emptive military measures against terrorist targets.
It said that terrorism had too often been treated as a law-enforcement problem when it should be treated as a matter of national security and an act of aggression against the USA.
Other main recommendations were that:(i) Congress should create the post of assistant secretary for transport in charge of security and intelligence;(ii) the US government should directly manage security at domestic airports and conduct a study to assess the safety of US airports;(iii) the State Department rather than the airlines should conduct negotiations with foreign governments to meet security standards at airports used by US carriers;(iv) victims of terrorist attacks aimed against the US government should qualify for special financial compensation; and (v) the State Department should take steps to ensure that relatives of victims were given "prompt, humane and courteous treatment and services in overseas disasters" .
The commission criticized the Federal Aviation Authority (FAA) for only reacting to disasters and not doing enough to prevent them.
 "The US civil aviation security system is seriously flawed," it said, "and has failed to provide the proper level of protection for the travelling public." 
The FAA had found persistent violations of security regulations by Pan Am not only before Lockerbie, but even after the disaster.
It was only after a fine [see p. 36910]and the threat to suspend the airline's operating licence, that the FAA could declare itself satisfied.
In May the FAA's director of civil aviation security, Raymond Salazar, was moved to another post.
The report said that specific Pan Am security flaws both in Frankfurt and London made a "disturbing story" .
Unaccompanied baggage at Frankfurt was X-rayed, not hand-checked as required, before being loaded.
At both airports luggage was not cross-checked against individual passengers and there was inadequate screening of passengers.
Pan Am baggage containers were not secured against tampering while awaiting loading.
Pan Am's chairman, Thomas Plaskett, said that the report unfairly characterised Pan Am's security system.
The amount of explosive hidden in the radio cassette player which destroyed the aircraft was not detectable by any X-ray equipment.
The disaster had already cost the company $250,000,000 in lost business and compensation claims, and in 1990 Pan Am would spend over $63,000,000 on security.
EUROPE
VATICAN
Papal visit to Mexico
Pope John Paul II paid his second visit to Mexico on May 6-13 (his 10th to Latin America) and was welcomed at the airport by President Carlos Salinas de Gortari, an act criticized by opposition parties since Mexico had no diplomatic relations with the Vatican.
During the visit, the purpose of which had been described in advance as purely pastoral, opposition parties also criticized the Pope's call for the repeal of anti-clerical legislation and those clauses in the 1917 Constitution which banned the church from teaching (below university level), debarred the clergy from voting, and banned clerical dress and church services in public.
If this legislation was repealed, the Pope promised, the church would confine itself to religious matters.
The Secretary of Government Fernando Gutiérrez Barrios stated, however, that the government had no intention of amending the current restrictions on the church.
The Pope's itinerary of public engagements throughout the country was modified to include a special service in Tuxtla Gutierrez, the scene of an airline crash which killed the Bishop of Tapachula and 26 pilgrims on May 10.
He beatified Juan Diego, an Indian believed to have had a vision of the Virgin Mary in 1531, denounced abortion and the use of contraceptives, and visited those southern and central states where protestant evangelism had made significant inroads over the previous 20 years.
In public addresses to large crowds he also attacked corruption and economic inequality, criticized rich nations over their failure to relieve the burden of world debt, and called for solidarity with Latin America's poor.
On the eve of his departure, he warned a meeting of Mexican bishops of the risks "of certain theologies of liberation" .
On May 13 the Pope made a brief stop at the Caribbean island of Curaçao in the Dutch Antilles on his return trip to Rome.
INTERNATIONAL
OPEC
Emergency ministerial meeting on price slump
Oil ministers of the 13 member states of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) met in Geneva on May 2-3 and agreed to cut total oil production to about 22,000,000 barrels per day (bpd) in order to stabilize prices [see p. 37335].
The OPEC president, Algerian Minister for Mines, Saddek Boussena, called for production cuts of 1,000,000-1,500,000 bpd as the production levels in April had reached 23,500,000 bpd.
By mid-May OPEC production levels had dropped by between 700,000 and 900,000 bpd, with Saudi Arabia alone cutting back 430,000 bpd to reach its agreed quota of 5,380,000 bpd.
However, by late May traders expressed doubts that OPEC's agreement was holding since other countries were still exceeding their quotas.
Kuwait, for example, was only expected to have cut back half its pledged 400,000 bpd, maintaining production above its 1,500,000 bpd quota.
The market's weakness was reinforced by continuing over-supply as crude which had been produced before the agreement reached the market place.
At the end of April the average price of a basket of seven crudes monitored by OPEC was $15.37 per 42-gallon (184-litre) barrel, down from $17.12 a barrel at the beginning of the month.
By the beginning of May prices had steadied, although they were still below the OPEC reference price of $18 per barrel, but by the end of the month prices again dropped, reflecting the uncertainty about the scale of OPEC's output cuts.
Displacement of oil as fuel worldwide
An assessment by energy analysts published in the International Atomic Energy Agency's Bulletin Vol. 32, No. 1 (1990) calculated that OPEC oil had not only lost a portion of its share of existing markets, but had failed to make any penetration into new energy markets created by economic growth.
World energy use had increased by 39 per cent between 1973 and 1987, and at 3 per cent per year since 1983.
New energy needs had been met from other sources, as shown in the chart below.
The study went on to estimate what fuels would have been used in electricity generation if there had been no nuclear power, concluding that the world 1987 total of 1660,800 million kilowatt-hours of electricity generated by nuclear power had displaced 1,790 million barrels of oil, 185 million tonnes of coal and 3,103,000 million cubic feet of natural gas, and had meant the avoidance of purchases of OPEC oil to the value of US$30,700 million in that year alone.
INTERNATIONAL
OECD
Annual ministerial meeting
Ministers of the 24-country Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) held their annual meeting in Paris on May 30-31.
After reviewing their economic performance, their commitment to developing countries, the situation in Eastern Europe and the global dimension of environmental problems, the ministers discussed agricultural reform.
The Commission of the European Communities (EC) refused to single out farm export subsidies as a specific target for reform.
This was contested by a group of countries led by the United States, and produced the first significant economic disagreement in the organization for 10 years.
The OECD member countries paid out farming subsidies totalling US$245,000,000 million in 1989, or 13 per cent lower than 1988.
However, the fall was due more to commodity price rises and the strength of the dollar than any concerted national effort.
The US-led group insisted on a specific policy commitment to cut internal support for agriculture, to reduce barriers to farm imports and to phase out extra subsidies.
However, the EC urged support for its Aggregate Measure of Support, a gross valuation of all subsidies which could then be used as a basis for reductions.
The EC Agriculture Commissioner, Raymond MacSharry, said that the EC would not completely eliminate export subsidies, as such a policy would drive "3,000,000-4,000,000 farmers out of business" .
The lack of agreement threatened the timetable for completing the Uruguay Round of multilateral trade talks in the GATT negotiations [see pp. 37227-29].
The final communiqué said that OECD member countries would "take urgent steps to reform agricultural policy" and that their long-term objective was to allow "market signals to influence the orientation of agricultural production and to establish a fair and market-oriented agricultural trading system" .
Aid statistics
The OECD's Development Assistance Committee (DAC) released on June 22, 1990, its figures for trends in official development assistance (ODA) and net total resource transfers from all countries and multilateral organizations to developing countries in 1989.
OECD member countries of the DAC accounted for 91 per cent of all ODA.
(US$ million, current prices) 1988 1989 Bilateral ODA 40,300 39,800 Multilateral ODA 11,400 11,500 Other official development finance 14,400 15,800 Export credits -500 1,200 Private direct investment 23,400 22,000 Bank lending 5,800 8,500 Grants by non-governmental organizations 4,200 4,200 Other private flows 5,300 6,000 Total 104,300 109,000
Total net resource flows to developing countries
Only four countries (Denmark, the Netherlands, Norway and Sweden) had levels of ODA in 1989 exceeding 0.7 per cent of their GNP.
1988 1989 % of GNP % of GNP $million Australia 0.46 0.37 1,017 Austria 0.24 0.23 282 Belgium 0.41 0.47 716 Canada 0.50 0.44 2,302 Denmark 0.89 1.00 1,003 Finland 0.59 0.63 705 France* 0.50 0.54 5,140 West Germany 0.39 0.41 4,953 Ireland 0.20 0.17 49 Italy 0.39 0.39 3,325 Japan 0.32 0.32 8,958 Netherlands 0.98 0.94 2,094 New Zealand 0.27 0.22 87 Norway 1.10 1.02 919 Sweden 0.86 0.98 1,809 Switzerland 0.32 0.30 559 UK 0.32 0.31 2,588 USA 0.21 0.15 7,664 Total 0.36 0.33 46,498 * Excludes French assistance to its overseas departments and territories.
ODA performance in 1988 and 1989, DAC member countries
OECD member countries not in the DAC provided an estimated $400 million in ODA in 1989, compared with $380 million in 1988 (of which $240 million from Spain).
Estimates for ODA from other sources for 1988 were $4,234 million from the Soviet Union and $501 million from the rest of Eastern Europe, $2,098 million from Saudi Arabia (2.7 per cent of its GNP) and $109 million from other Arab countries, and $351 million from less developed country donors.
INTERNATIONAL
UNITED NATIONS
Special session on economic co-operation
The UN General Assembly convened a special session from April 23 to May 1 to discuss ways of revitalizing economic growth and relieving external debts in the Third World.
The changes in Eastern Europe were also raised in the context of the difficulties in managing the global economy.
The benefits of sustained economic growth in the developed countries had not filtered down to the developing nations during the 1980s.
Since the onset of the debt crisis in the early 1980s more than 70 countries were currently having serious debt problems.
The UN goal for developed countries to contribute 0.7 per cent of their GNP to the developing countries had not been attained, except by some small countries led by the Scandinavians.
The United States permanent representative at the UN, Thomas Pickering, reiterated the USA's refusal to support this target.
While the special session produced no immediate results, a common set of principles was established.
These emphasised (i) urgent attention to the external debt problems of the less developed countries (LDCs);(ii) co-ordination of macro-economic policies to take full account of the interests of all countries;(iii) national action and international support to prevent marginalization of the LDCs;(iv) provision of increased resources to multilateral financial institutions to support development, facilitate structural reforms and alleviate the adverse social consequences of such reforms;(v) promotion of an open multilateral trading system and discouragement of trends to unilateral and bilateral action;(vi) encouragement for developed countries to increase the quantity and quality of aid and implement the agreed target of 0.7 per cent of GNP in official development assistance, with 0.15 per cent to the LDCs; and (vii) reduction of military expenditures and promotion of environmentally sustainable development.
AFRICA
CAMEROON
BASIC DATA
Area: 475,442 sq km.
Population: 11,213,000 (1988).
Capital: Yaoundé.
Languages: French and English (official); many local languages.
Religion: Christianity, traditional beliefs and Islam.
Av. life expectancy: 57 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 11,600 (incl.
Gendarmerie)(1989).
GNP per capita: US$1,010 (1988).
Currency: franc of the Coopération financière en Afrique centrale (US$1.00=280.5000 francs CFA as at May 4, 1990).
The Republic of Cameroon is a one-party state with an executive President who is head of state, head of government and C.-in-C. of the Armed Forces.
The President is elected for a five-year term by popular vote.
There is a National Assembly of 180 members which meets twice a year.
Candidates in the legislative elections of May 1983 were all members of the Cameroon National Union which in 1985 was restructured and renamed the Cameroon People's Democratic Movement.
Members of the Cabinet must not be members of the National Assembly.
Legislative and presidential elections were held simultaneously in April 1988, when President Paul Biya, who first came to office in November 1982 and was confirmed in office in the presidential elections of January 1984, obtained 98.75 per cent of the vote; 153 new deputies were elected to the National Assembly.
Michel Meva'a M'Eboutou Minister-Delegate at the Presidency for Defence Ibrahim Mbombo Njoya Territorial Administration Yaou Aissatou Social Affairs and Women's Affairs John Niba Ngu Agriculture Ogork Ebot Ntui Minister at the Presidency in Charge of Special Missions Emmanuel Zoa Oloa Minister at the Presidency in Charge of Special Missions Joseph Tsanga Abanda Industrial and Commercial Development Joseph Mboui National Education Hamadjoda Adjoudi Livestock, Animal Industries and Fisheries Abdoulaye Babale Higher Education, Scientific Research, Public Contracts and Computer Sciences Sadou Hayatou Finance Joseph Owona Public Service and State Control Henri Bandolo Information and Culture Joseph Fofe Youth and Sports Adolphe Moudiki Justice; Keeper of the Seals Francis Nkwain Lands, Water and Energy Elizabeth Tankeu Planning and Territorial Development Sanda Oumarou Posts and Telecommunications Jacques-Roger Booh-Booh Foreign Affairs Joseph Mbede Health Paul Tessa Public Works and Transports Jean-Bedel Bokam Labour and Social Welfare Ferdinand Léopold Oyono Housing and Town Planning Edouard Akame Mfoumou Secretary-General at the Presidency Laurent Esso Director of the Civil Cabinet at the Presidency Titus Edzoa Special Adviser to the President Benjamin Itoe Tourism 
Cabinet
POLITICS
On Nov. 30, 1989, Ahmadou Ahidjo, the former President of Cameroon who held office from independence in 1960 until his retirement in 1982, died of a heart attack in Senegal at the age of 65.
An exile in Senegal and France since 1983, he had been condemned to death (later changed to life imprisonment) in his absence in 1984 for allegedly plotting against his successor, Paul Biya.
His death was ignored by the government in Cameroon.
In a Cabinet reshuffle on April 13, 1989, Biya created a Ministry of Tourism, headed by Benjamin Itoe, hitherto the Justice Minister, who was replaced in that post by Adolphe Moudiki.
Biya also appointed an additional Secretary of State at the Finance Ministry (Roger Tshoungi, the former director of economic and financial controls), and a second Minister at the Presidency in charge of Special Missions (Emmanuel Zoa Oloa, a former holder of this post and the incumbent Deputy Secretary-General at the Presidency).
A newcomer to the Cabinet was banker Edouard Akame Mfoumou who took the post of Secretary-General at the Presidency, his predecessor, Paul Tessa, becoming Minister of Public Works and Transport.
Laurent Esso became Director of the Civil Cabinet at the Presidency.
Meanwhile the Secretariat of State for Internal Security was reorganized as the Delegation-General for National Security, headed by former Defence Minister (until 1984), Gilbert Andzé Tchoungui (who replaced Denis Ekani).
Jean Fochivé, a former director of the secret police, was appointed to head the Centre National de la Documentation et de la Recherche (National Documentation and Investigation Centre — CENER).
Tchoungui and Fochivé had lost their previous posts following the abortive coup attempt of April 1984, aimed at bringing Ahidjo back to power [see pp. 33075-76].
In a further change, in July 1989, the National Education Minister, Georges Ngango, was replaced by Joseph Mboui.
SECURITY
Yondo Black, an outspoken lawyer and former president of the Cameroon Bar Association, received a three-year prison sentence for subversion in early April 1990.
He had been arrested along with 10 other dissidents, including the writer Albert Mukong, on Feb. 19 for allegedly circulating pamphlets hostile to the regime and advocating an end to the single-party system.
Mukong, who had been held in detention during 1988-89 [see p. 36611], was found not guilty of subversion.
There were reports in late 1989 of maltreatment of prisoners at the Yaoundé central prison, where in December two former Army officers imprisoned after the 1984 coup attempt were reportedly beaten to death.
On April 22, 1990, Biya announced that people still in detention as a result of the coup attempt were to be released.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth -9% (1987/88)
Current-account balance -US$1,112 m. (1987)
Trade balance +US$143 m. (1988-89 est.)
Total external public debt US$3,500 m. (mid-1988)
Gross domestic product US$11,640 m. (1988 est.)
Gross national product US$10,441 m. (1987)
Inflation rate 6% (1988)
Principal trading partners EC, USA, France, Japan 
External loan arrangements
In an effort to meet the terms set by the World Bank in June 1989 for the granting of a US$150,000,000 structural adjustment loan, the government agreed to a number of measures aimed at restructuring the banking, state and agricultural sectors.
On July 21 radical changes were introduced in the banking sector with the decision to liquidate four banks and to open the system up to the French bank Crédit Lyonnais.
The government also announced that it would be selling shares in enterprises owned or partly owned by the state and would be asking others to sign performance contracts.
In an attempt to boost exports, Biya announced on Sept. 8 that the producer price of cocoa would be cut by 40 per cent for the 1989-90 season, and on Nov. 21 that the producer price of arabica coffee would be cut [for slump in world cocoa and coffee prices see pp. 36635-36].
On May 24, 1989, the Paris Club creditor nations agreed to reschedule approximately $550 million of Cameroon's outstanding public foreign debt (estimated at $2,785 million at the end of 1987 by the World Bank).
1989/90 budget
On June 29, 1989, the National Assembly approved a budget of 600,000 million francs CFA for 1989/90, the same as for the previous year [see p. 36611]and thus a decline in real terms.
The budget allowed for a lower proportion to be spent on debt-servicing (97,000 million francs CFA or $292 million, as compared with 170,000 million francs CFA or $512 million in 1988-89), with the Defence, Public Health and Education Ministries continuing to receive the largest share.
AFRICA
EQUATORIAL GUINEA
BASIC DATA
Area: 28,051 sq km.
Population: 397,000 (1988).
Capital: Malabo.
Languages: Spanish (official); African languages.
Religion: Christianity (about 95% Roman Catholic).
Av. life expectancy: 46 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 1,400 (1989).
GNP per capita: US$350 (1988).
Currency: franc of the Coopération financière en Afrique centrale (US$1.00=280.5000 francs CFA as at May 4, 1990).
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea achieved independence from Spain in October 1968.
The current President, Brig. -Gen.
Teodoro Obiang Nguema Mbasogo, seized power in a coup in August 1979 and established the ruling Supreme Military Council (composed of both military and civilians since December 1981).
All political parties were banned until mid-1987, when the President announced the formation of a single "party of government" .
A new Constitution, approved by referendum in August 1982, extended the President's term of office for a further seven years, and provided for the holding of presidential and legislative elections in the course of a gradual transition from military to civilian rule.
Elections to a 41-member House of Representatives of the People last took place in July 1988, when all candidates were nominated by the President and were elected unopposed for a five-year term.
The President was re-elected unopposed on June 25, 1989, for a seven-year term [see p. 36727].
Brig. -Gen.
Teodoro Obiang Nguema Mbasogo President of the Supreme Military Council; Minister of Defence Capt. Cristino Seriche Bioko Prime Minister Isidoro Eyi Monsuy Andeme Deputy Prime Minister, Education, Youth and Sports Marcelino Nguema Ongueme Minister of State; Minister Secretary-General to the Presidency Eloy Elo Nve Mbengono Minister of State at the Presidency, in charge of relations with constitutional organs Alejandro Evuna Asangono Minister of State at the Presidency in charge of missions Martin Nka Esono Nsing Minister Deputy Secretary-General to the Presidency Silvestre Siale Sale Bileka Justice Alejandro Envoro Ovono Public Works, Urban Development and Transport Anatolio Ndong Mba Agriculture, Fishing and Forestry Francisco Pascual Obama Asue Industry and Energy Antonio Pascual Oko Ebobo Labour and Social Development Ministers-Delegate Antonio Fernando Nve Ngu Economic and Financial Affairs Juan Olo Mba Nseng Mines and Hydrocarbons Leandro Mbomio Nsue Culture, Tourism and Handicrafts Santiago Eneme Ovono Foreign Affairs and Co-operation Melanio Ebendeng Nsomo National Defence Casto Nvono Akhele Economy, Commerce and Planning Segundo Munoz Itala Territorial Administration and Communications Alejandro Masoko Bengono Health Purificaçion Angue Ondo Women's Development 
Supreme Military Council
POLITICS
Reshuffle of Supreme Military Council
In an extensive reshuffle of the Supreme Military Council (now composed principally of civilians) on Oct. 14, 1989, President Teodoro Obiang Nguema Mbasogo created three Ministries of State at the Presidency, one of which went to a newcomer to the Council, Alejandro Evuna Asangono.
A number of key portfolios were placed directly under the President's supervision in the form of Ministries-delegate.
Several portfolios were combined, including Agriculture with Fishing and Forestry, Industry with Energy, and Transport with Public Works.
Marcelino Nguema Ongueme was transferred from Foreign Affairs to become Minister of State and Secretary-general to the Presidency, and was replaced in his previous post by newcomer Santiago Eneme Ovono as Minister-Delegate.
The other new Council members were appointed to the portfolios of Justice, Agriculture, Labour and Social Development, and at the Ministries-delegate for Economy, Territorial Administration, Health and Women's Development.
Nine ministers left the Council.
Earlier, the former Minister for Water and Forests, Angel Algo Nchama, had been dismissed after being arrested on corruption charges; he received a two-year prison sentence in November 1989.
Formation of new opposition party
A new Madrid-based opposition party, the Social Democratic Party, was launched on May 11, 1990, led by Marcelino Mangue Mba.
The party announced its adherence to the Madrid Pact of Guinean and Spanish parties calling for democracy in Equatorial Guinea [see p. 36923].
SECURITY
Release of Esono
José Primo Esono, an activist in the illegal opposition group the Progress party (Partido del Progreso), who had been imprisoned for his part in a coup plot against the regime in 1988 [see p. 36200], was released in February 1990.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
Trade balance -US$95 m. (1987)
Total external public debt US$193 m. (1987)
Debt service ratio (as % of export earnings) 23.1% (1987)
Principal trading partner Spain
In December 1989 the International Monetary Fund (IMF), following the visit of an IMF delegation, decided to delay disbursement of funds for the second phase of the structural adjustment programme agreed with Equatorial Guinea in December 1988 [see p. 36923].
Having noted the failure of the government to rein in public spending, the Fund set May 1990 for a further appraisal meeting to assess whether the estimated 1,000 million francs CFA could be released.
The government in January 1990 ordered a 50 per cent salary increase (to a minimum of 55,000 francs CFA per month) for all private-sector employees, a move aimed to bring the salaries into line with those of other member countries of the Central African Customs Union (UDEAC).
Obiang on Feb. 9 rejected criticism by business managers of this decision, accusing them of neglecting the export of Equatorial Guinean goods.
Cocoa production rose in 1989 to 9,000 tonnes (from 8,188 tonnes in 1987-88), a production rate still well below the 35,000 tonnes frequently produced in the 1960s.
Other export earners, such as coffee and timber, remained stagnant, while imports continued to rise.
FOREIGN
Co-operation agreement with Spain
On the signing in Malabo in February 1990 of a 12,000 million pesetas (approximately US$110 million) co-operation plan with Equatorial Guinea, Luis Yañez, the Spanish Secretary of State for International Co-operation, declared that relations between the two countries had overcome earlier problems to enter a more friendly phase.
AFRICA
SAO TOMÉ AND PRINCIPE
BASIC DATA
Area: 964 sq km.
Population: 119,000 (1988).
Capital: Sao Tomé.
Languages: Portuguese (official); native dialects.
Religion: Christianity (Roman Catholic).
Av. life expectancy: 65 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: Not available.
GNP per capita: US$280 (1987).
Currency: dobra (US$1.00=104.4574 dobras as at May 4, 1990).
The Democratic Republic of Sao Tomé and Príncipe became fully independent from Portugal in July 1975.
Executive power is vested in the President of the Republic.
The 40-member National People's Assembly, "the supreme organ of the state" , is elected for a five-year term and meets twice a year.
All candidates in the elections of August 1985 were nominees of the Movement for the Liberation of Sao Tomé and Príncipe (Movimento de Libertaçao de Sao Tomé e Príncipe — MLSTP), the sole legal political party.
The Party's central committee decided in October 1987, as part of a process of "democratization" , on amendments to the Constitution to allow for the election by direct, secret, universal suffrage of the President and the National Assembly deputies, up till now elected indirectly.
The amendment also provided for the election to public office of independents and candidates put forward by "organizations with recognized representation" , and allowed for the recreation of the post of Prime Minister (the functions of this post having been taken over by the President in 1979).
A Prime Minister was appointed in January 1988.
Celestino Rocha da Costa Prime Minister Raul Bragança Neto Defence and Internal Security Agapito Mendes Dias Economy and Finance Carlos da Graça Foreign Affairs Francisco Fortunado Pires Justice and Public Affairs Maj. Oscar Aguiar Sacramento Sousa Agriculture and Fisheries Guilherme Posser da Costa Co-operation Ligia do Espirito Santo Costa Education and Culture Armindo Vaz de Almeida Health, Labour and Social Security Carlos Ferreira Equipment and Environment, in charge of Transport and Communications Manuel Quaresma Costa Minister-Delegate to the Prime Minister's Office for Príncipe Island Manuel Vaz Afonzo Fernandes Minister-Delegate, Secretary-General of the Government 
Cabinet
POLITICS
At the first national conference of the ruling MLSTP, held on Dec. 5-8, 1989, delegates proposed the introduction of a multiparty system.
The conference recommended, among other things, that the party give up its leading role in society; that the President be elected through universal suffrage for a maximum of two terms; that power be shared with the Prime Minister; that workers and the press have freedom of expression; and that the privatization of nationalized companies be speeded up.
The proposals were endorsed by President Manuel Pinto da Costa.
The reform programme was to be presented for approval to the party's third congress, due in July 1990.
[For earlier progress towards democratization see pp. 35750; 36995.]
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth -0.6% (1980-87)
Overall balance of payments -US$11.6 m. (1986)
Budget deficit US$5.9 m. (1987)
Total external public debt US$87 m. (1987)
Debt service ratio (as % of export earnings) 41.5% (1987)
Gross domestic product US$31 m. (1987)
Gross national product US$32 m. (1987)
Inflation rate 4.9% (1980-87)
Principal trading partners Exports: East Germany, Netherlands, Portugal; Imports: Portugal, East Germany, Benelux countries
Speaking in Sao Tomé on Nov. 22, 1989, Prime Minister Celestino Rocha da Costa announced that five of the 15 state-owned cocoa plantations (which covered 80 per cent of land for cultivation and were the major source of export earnings) would be shortly sold off as part of a privatization programme.
Also to be sold were the Enatal state telecommunications company, a ceramics factory built with West German aid and several tourist interests.
The development followed pressure from the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank which on June 2, 1989, provided loans in support of a three-year structural adjustment facility arrangement worth a total of 2,800,000 special drawing rights (SDR1=US$1.24890 as at June 2, 1989).
AFRICA
GABON
BASIC DATA
Area: 267,667 sq km.
Population: 1,077,000 (1988).
Capital: Libreville.
Languages: French (official); Fang and Bantu dialects.
Religion: Christianity (about 60% Roman Catholic).
Av. life expectancy: 53 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 4,700 (1989).
GNP per capita: US$2,970 (1988).
Currency: franc of the Coopération financière en Afrique centrale (US$1.00=280.5000 francs CFA as at May 4, 1990).
The Gabonese Republic achieved full independence from France in August 1960.
The current head of state, President Omar Bongo, succeeded to the Presidency in 1967 on the death of Gabon's first President, Léon M'Ba, and has been re-elected three times for successive seven-year terms, most recently in November 1986 [see p. 35047].
The Gabonese Democratic Party (Parti démocratique Gabonais — PDG) was formed in 1968, when a single-party system was adopted.
There is a National Assembly, to which 111 members are elected by direct universal suffrage every five years from a single list approved by the party; a further nine deputies are appointed by the President, who also appoints the Council of Ministers.
Casimir Oye Mba Prime Minister Zacharie Myboto Public Works, Construction and Territorial Administration Cécile Nkama Justice, Keeper of the Seals Ali Ben Bongo Foreign Affairs and Co-operation Jules Bourdes-Ogouliguende Commerce, Consumption and Industry; Relations with Parliament Henri Minko Town Planning, Housing and Habitat Martin Fidèle Magnaga National Defence, War Veterans, Public Security and Immigration Antoine Mboumbou-Miyakou Territorial Administration and Local Collectivities Paulette Moussavou Civil Service and Administrative Reform Paul Toungui Finance, Budget and State Holdings Marcel Doupamby-Matoka Planning and Economic Development Jean Remy Pendy-Bouyiki Information, Posts and Telecommunications and Government Spokesman Jean Ping Mines, Hydrocarbons, Energy and Water Resources Michel Anchouey National Education, Higher Education and Scientific Research Serge Mba Public Health, Population, Social Affairs and National Solidarity Thierry Moussavou Employment, Human Resources and Professional Training André Mba-Obame Agriculture, Livestock and Rural Economy Jean Robert Goulongana Water, Forests and Environment Pierre Claver Nzeng Youth, Sports, Culture and Popular Education, in charge of Francophone Affairs Pierre Nziengui Mabila Transport Pepin Mongokodji State Control and Para-Public Sector Reform Thomas Dydime Nze-Emane Tourism, National Parks and Leisure Marc Ropivia Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises and Handicrafts Simon Oyono-Aba'a Minister-Delegate in Prime Minister's Office in charge of Decentralization 
GABON Council of Ministers
POLITICS
An extraordinary session of the central committee of the ruling PDG was held on Jan. 10-14, 1990.
Opening the session, President El Hadj Omar Bongo — the party's founding chairman — called for urgent action to stamp out corruption.
However, while stressing the need for a greater democratization of the country's institutions in the face of current political unrest, he reaffirmed the PDG's leading role and dismissed the possibility of a multiparty system [but see p. 37307 for subsequent developments].
SECURITY
The leader of the Union of the Gabonese People (Union du peuple gabonais — UPG), Pierre Mamboundou, who had been accused by the Gabonese government in October 1989 of planning a coup attempt against Bongo [see p. 36967], was expelled to Senegal from France on Feb. 28, 1990, on the orders of the French Minister of the Interior.
It was reported on Jan. 12 that legal proceedings were still continuing against 21 people for their alleged role in plots against Bongo (some held for their part in the Mamboundou affair, and the others detained for their part in an internal conspiracy by Lt.-Col. Georges Moubandjo, a former aide-de-camp to Bongo).
Five other suspects had been released on Jan. 10.
On Nov. 7, 1989, one of two Frenchmen arrested in connection with the October coup plot, Richard Anton, died from acute malaria following his transfer to a hospital, according to medical reports.
On Dec. 12 another detainee, Doukaga Nziengui [ibid.], also died after his transfer from prison.
Those close to him rejected official claims (later confirmed by a post-morten requested by the Justice Ministry) that he had died from high blood pressure, alleging instead that he had been tortured.
The banned Mouvement de redressement national (National Rectification Movement — Morena) dismissed Fr Paul Mba Abessolo, one of its leaders, it was reported on Jan. 29, 1990.
The move came after Abessolo — recently returned to Gabon from 13 years in exile — declared that he would participate in national politics "within the framework of the government majority" to make use of President Bongo's "policy of openness and change" [see p. 37307].
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
Gross domestic product US$3,295 m. (1988 est.)
Current-account balance -US$210 m. (1987)
Trade balance +US$966 m. (1989 forecast)
Overall balance of payments -US$129 m. (1987)
Budget deficit US$294 m. (1989)
Total external public debt US$1,605 m. (1987)
Debt service ratio (as % of export earnings) 5.1% (1987)
Gross domestic product US$3,500 m. (1987)
Gross national product US$2,700 m. (1987)
Inflation rate 8.4% (1980-87)
Principal trading partners France, USA, Spain, Japan
On Dec. 16, 1989, the Gabonese National Assembly adopted a national budget expenditure of 400,000 million francs CFA for 1990, just over 14 per cent up on 1989.
The increase was made possible by the anticipated boost in oil export revenues from the new Rabi-Kounga oil field [see p. 36922].
AFRICA
CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC
BASIC DATA
Area: 622,984 sq km.
Population: 2,794,000 (1988).
Capital: Bangui.
Languages: Sango (national); French (official).
Religion: Animism; Christianity.
Av. life expectancy: 48 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 6,500 (incl.
Gendarmerie)(1989).
GNP per capita: US$390 (1988).
Currency: franc of the Coopération financière en Afrique centrale (US$1.00=280.5000 francs CFA as at May 4, 1990).
The Central African Republic (CAR) became fully independent from France in August 1960.
The country's first President, David Dacko, was ousted in January 1966 in a coup led by Col. Jean-Bedel Bokassa, who proclaimed himself emperor and introduced a new constitution under which the country became a parliamentary monarchy, the name being changed to the Central African Empire.
Bokassa was deposed by former President Dacko in September 1979, the country reverting to the status of republic.
The present ruler, Gen. André Kolingba, himself seized power in a bloodless coup in September 1981, and the country was governed by a Military Committee for National Recovery until September 1985, when the Committee was dissolved and a predominantly civilian Council of Ministers was appointed.
A gradual process of returning the country to civilian rule has been undertaken; in November 1986 the electorate approved by referendum a Constitution establishing a one-party system, the Central African Democratic Assembly (Rassemblement démocratique centrafricain — RDC) holding its inaugural congress in February 1987.
Legislative elections were held in late July 1987, and the National Assembly (one of the two houses of the Congress, the other being the Economic and Regional Council) held its first session in October; a new Assembly president, Michel Docko, was elected in April 1989.
Gen. André Kolingba President; Prime Minister, Defence; Armed Forces and Veterans' Affairs Dieudonné Wazoua Economy and Finance, Planning and International Co-operation Michel Gbezera-Bria Foreign Affairs Lt.-Gen.
Thomas Matouka Rural Development Lt.-Col. Christophe Grelombe Interior and Territorial Administration Jean-Louis Psimhis National and Higher Education Hugues Dobozendi Posts and Telecommunications Pierre Gonifei Gaibounanou Transport and Civil Aviation Gen. Timothée Marboua Commerce and Industry, Small and Medium-scale Enterprises Daniel Sehoulia Civil Service, Labour, Social Security and Professional Training Raymond Mbitikon Tourism, Water, Forests, Wildlife and Fisheries Jean Willibiro-Sako Justice; Keeper of the Seals Dieudonné Padoudji-Yadjoua Mines and Energy, Geology and Water Resources Jean Bengue Communication, Arts and Culture Jean Limbassa Public Health and Social Affairs Jacques Kitte Public Works and Territorial Planning Edouard Franck Minister in charge of the Cabinet Secretariat 
CAR Council of Ministers
POLITICS
A steering committee of the ruling RDC, at an extraordinary session on May 14, 1990, rejected increasing demands for multipartyism on the grounds that such a system "does not constitute an absolute basis for democracy and economic development" .
A debate on the issue had been prompted by strikes by teachers and students in higher education, calling for greater democracy and improved working conditions.
The steering committee did however recommend the appointment of a Prime Minister, and provision for greater freedom of information.
The RDC's first regular congress was scheduled for September 1990.
SECURITY
On Oct. 19, 1989, the government confirmed that it was holding Gen. François Bozize and 11 other opposition figures who had fled to Benin after an abortive coup attempt in 1982.
According to reports, Bozize was being held at the Roux camp, the Army headquarters in Bangui — also the place of detention of the deposed emperor Jean-Bedel Bokassa.
Bozize, leader of the underground Popular Rally for the Reconstruction of Central Africa (Rassemblement Populaire pour la Réconstruction de Centrafrique — RPRC) movement, was flown back to Bangui with the other 11 from Benin on Aug. 31, having been detained in that country at the end of July.
Benin reportedly agreed to the extradition, also described as an abduction, following the decision of the CAR to provide a grant of 1,000 million francs CFA (US$3 million) to Benin and with the assurance of the acquiescence of France, which, according to Africa Confidential of Oct. 6, was "anxious to reduce its costly military presence" in the CAR without destabilizing the government, to which Bozize's group was considered to be a threat.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth 2% (1980-87)
Current-account balance -US$75.3 m. (1987)
Trade balance -US$70.6 m. (1987)
Overall balance of payments -US$11.6 m. (1987)
Total external public debt US$520 m. (1987)
Debt service ratio (as % of export earnings) 12.1% (1987)
Gross domestic product US$1,010 m. (1987)
Gross national product US$912 m. (1987)
Inflation rate 7.9% (1980-87)
Principal trading partners Imports: France, Zaïre, Japan; Exports: France, Belgium/Luxembourg, Israel 
1990 budget
The National Assembly on Feb. 15, 1990, approved the 1990 budget amounting to 103,300 million francs CFA, an increase of 2,500 million francs CFA on the previous year, and with a projected deficit of 56,500 million francs CFA.
Priority was given to the Health and Education ministries and a new budgetary allocation was created for road infrastructure.
The civil service suffered a cut of 2,000 million francs CFA, raising the prospect of job losses.
The budget also anticipated a 34.3 per cent reduction in debt servicing payments (to 13,000 million francs CFA, as against 20,000 million francs CFA in 1989).
IMF loan
The International Monetary Fund (IMF) on May 29, 1990, approved a loan equivalent to 6,080,000 special drawing rights (SDR1=US$1.30758 as at June 4, 1990) in support of the third annual programme under the structural adjustment facility (SAF).
The CAR had already received disbursements totalling SDR15,200,000 under the first and second annual arrangements of the SDR21,280,000 three-year arrangement approved in June 1987 [see pp. 35428; 37058].
The IMF commented that progress had been made by the CAR in the implementation of structural reforms.
FOREIGN
It was reported on Sept. 19, 1989, that Sudan had restored diplomatic relations with the Central African Republic (which had broken ties on May 30 in protest at Sudan's refusal to allow President Kolingba to use the country's airspace — see p. 37058).
AFRICA
CONGO
BASIC DATA
Area: 342,000 sq km.
Population: 2,100,000 (1988).
Capital: Brazzaville.
Languages: French (official); many African languages.
Religion: Traditional beliefs (more than 50%) and Roman Catholicism (about 40%); Protestant and Moslem minorities.
Av. life expectancy: 59 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 8,800 (1989).
GNP per capita: US$930 (1988).
Currency: franc of the Coopération financière en Afrique centrale (US$1.00=279.2951 francs CFA as at May 4, 1990).
The People's Republic of the Congo achieved full independence from France as the Republic of the Congo in August 1960, the country's name subsequently being changed in January 1970 after the establishment of a Marxist regime in which the Congolese Party of Labour (Parti congolais du travail — PCT) became the sole political party.
A socialist Constitution was endorsed by referendum in July 1979.
Under the terms of a 1984 constitutional amendment, the chairman of the PCT central committee is also head of state, these offices being held currently by Gen. Denis Sassou-Nguesso, who assumed power in 1979.
The fourth congress of the PCT on July 30, 1989, re-elected him as central committee chairman and thus as head of state for a further five years.
Elections to the National Assembly, a body which had been suspended on several occasions since independence, were held in July 1979, September 1984 and September 1989.
All candidates for the 133 seats are proposed by the PCT central committee, with 59 seats reserved for PCT delegates, 66 for mass organizations, and a further eight for individuals.
Gen. Denis Sassou-Nguesso President; Head of Government; Defence and Security Alphonse Poati-Souchalaty Prime Minister Ministers of State Pierre Moussa Plan and Economy Gabriel Oba-Apounou Youth and Rural Development Col. Raymond Damas Ngollo Forestry Antoine Ndinga Oba Foreign Affairs and Co-operation Ministers Paul Ngatse Information Jean-Baptiste Tati-Loutard Culture and Arts Celestin Ngoma-Foutou Territorial Administration and People's Power Alphonse Boudenesa Trade, Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises Hilaire Babassana Fishing, Industry and Crafts, Tourism Aimé Emmanuel Yoka Mines and Energy; Posts and Telecommunications Florent Tsiba Equipment, Environment Rodolphe Adada Secondary and Higher Education, Scientific Research Jeanne Dambenzet Labour and Social Security Pierre-Damien Bassoukou-Boumba Basic Education and Literacy Ossebi Douniam Health and Social Affairs Jean-Claude Ganga Physical Education and Sport Alphonse Nzoungou Justice and Keeper of the Seals; Administrative Reform Auxence Ickonga Minister in the Presidency with responsibility for State Control Edouard Ngakosso Finance and Budget François Bita Transport and Civil Aviation Pascal Ngayama Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs and Co-operation 
Council of Ministers
POLITICS
It was reported on Nov. 17. 1989, that Sylvain Bamba, a former permanent under-secretary at the Ministry of the Interior and Justice who had been living in exile since 1963, had announced the formation of an opposition Union for Congolese Democracy (Union pour la démocratie congolaise — UDC), with himself as its chairman.
SECURITY
Speaking at the ceremony on Nov. 4, 1989, to mark the inauguration of his third term in office President Sassou-Nguesso announced that former head of state Gen. Joachim Yhombi Opango, would be put on trial with three senior Army officers and three civilians in connection with a rebellion in July 1987 [see pp. 35371; 36199].
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth -4% (1988)
Current-account balance -US$245 m. (1987)
Trade balance +US$417 m. (1987)
Total external public debt US$4,500 m.
(December 1988)
Gross domestic product US$2,200 m. (1987)
Gross national product US$870 (1987)
Average annual inflation rate 1.8% (1980-87)
Principal trading partners (1987) Exports: USA, France, Italy; Imports: France, Italy, UK 
Steps towards privatization
Following a speech on Oct. 28, 1989, when Sassou-Nguesso announced wide-ranging economic reforms and the encouragement of private enterprise, the government announced on Jan. 9, 1990, that it had decided to end the state monopoly on the distribution of petroleum products, with the distribution and marketing of natural gas, kerosene, fuel and other lubricants to be shared with the UK/Dutch Shell, British Petroleum and United States companies Amoco-Conoco and Chevron.
The HYDRO-CONGO state oil company would nevertheless continue to exploit oil reserves, occasionally with the participation of foreign companies.
On Feb. 1 it signed an exploration agreement with three US companies — Atlantic Richfield (Arco Congo), Apache Oil (Congo) and Citizens Energy Corporation — following a year of negotiations over production rights at the Marine 8 field.
The government announced on Jan. 19 that it would privatize loss-making agro-pastoral concerns.
1990 budget
Submitted to parliament by Prime Minister Alphonse Poati-Souchalaty on Dec. 14, 1989, the 1990 budget totalled 251,134 million francs CFA, as against 235,833 million francs CFA for the previous year.
The 6.49 per cent increase was allowed by an increase in oil revenues.
Increased taxation on oil companies was expected to bring in 31,000 million francs CFA, compared with just over 4,000 million francs CFA in 1989.
IMF agreement
The government on March 14, 1990, reached agreement with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) on a second structural adjustment programme; Congo's first such programme, initiated in 1985 [see p. 34406], had not been considered a success.
The external debt burden, now estimated at over 1,000,000 million francs CFA, was a serious impediment to real economic improvement.
The new 21-month programme envisaged public spending cuts, strict budgetary controls and measures to diversify the economy away from its dependence on oil.
FOREIGN
In his first official visit to the United States, Sassou-Nguesso in February 1990 held talks with US President Bush, officials of the US administration and private business people.
AMERICAS — CARIBBEAN
ECUADOR
BASIC DATA
Area: 270,670 sq km(incl. inland water).
Population: 10,154,000 (1988).
Capital: Quito.
Languages: Spanish (official); Quechua and other indigenous languages.
Religion: Christianity (90% Roman Catholic).
Av. life expectancy: 66 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 42,000 (1989).
GNP per capita: US$1,080 (1988).
Currency: sucre (US$1.00=S713.8313 as at May 4, 1990).
The Republic of Ecuador achieved independence from Spain in 1830.
Under the 1979 Constitution it has an executive President, directly elected together with a Vice-President for a single four-year term.
Legislative power is held by a 72-member unicameral National Congress, similarly elected for a four-year term (with 60 members elected on a provincial basis every two years and 12 members elected for a four-year term on a national basis).
The Cabinet is appointed and presided over by the President.
Ecuador comprises 20 provinces, including the Galapagos Islands, each administered by an appointed Governor.
In the second-round run-off presidential election held on May 8, 1988, Rodrigo Borja Cevallos of the centre-left Democratic Left (Izquierda Democrática — ID) polled 46 per cent of the vote and was sworn in at the head of a new government on Aug. 10 [see p. 36343].
Andrés Vallejo Government and Justice (Interior) Gen. (retd) Jorge Félix Defence Alfredo Vera Arrata Education and Culture Enrique Delgado Agriculture and Livestock Juan Neira Public Works and Communications Jorge Gallardo Finance and Public Credit Diego Cordóvez Foreign Affairs Jacinto Jouvín Industry, Commerce and Integration Plutarco Naranjo Public Health Raúl Baca Social Welfare and Public Promotion Washington Herrera Public Administration Diego Tamariz Energy and Mines César Verduga Labour and Human Resources Gonzalo Ortiz Secretary General for Public Information 
Cabinet
POLITICS
Suspension of government alliance
The alliance between ID and the Popular Democracy Party (Democracia Popular — DP) was suspended on Nov. 9, 1989, according to the French news agency Agence France-Presse.
The move followed disagreements over a decision to increase the price of vegetable oils.
[For August 1989 difficulties between ID, DP and the Christian Democratic Union — Unión Demócrata Cristiana (UDC)— see p. 37067.]
Arrest of Febres — Impeachment proceedings against Minister
It was reported on Jan. 20, 1990, that the Supreme Court had ordered the arrest of the right-wing former President (in 1984-88), León Febres Cordero Rivadeneira, who was accused of embezzling US$150,000 of public funds when in office.
The case arose from charges against Ramón Orellana, Febres's son-in-law and former private secretary, now a fugitive, to whom the payment of $150,000 had allegedly been made [see p. 37067].
On Oct. 3 the Congress initiated, for the second time, impeachment proceedings against Minister of Energy and Mines Diego Tamariz, who was accused of administrative irregularities.
SECURITY
 "War" on drugs
President Borja announced a "war" on drugs in October 1989 in support of the anti-drugs policy of the Colombian government [see pp. 36844; 36889-90].
In January 1990 the Congress was considering a government anti-drugs bill which contained a constitutional amendment to allow Ecuadorian nationals accused of drug offences to be extradited.
On Sept. 28 Evaristo Porras Ardila, an alleged member of the Colombian Medellín drug cartel, was captured and deported to Colombia.
Government accusation against opposition
In October 1989 the government had accused the right-wing opposition of attempting to provoke a military coup by organizing four days of demonstrations in the city of Guayaquil, Febres's powerbase.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth 1.5% (1989 est.)
Current-account balance -US$1,176 m. (1987)
Trade balance +US$734.6 m. (1989)
Total external public debt US$10,437 m. (1987)
Debt service ratio (as % of export earnings) 21.9% (1987)
Gross domestic product US$10,610 m. (1987)
Inflation rate 54.3% (1989)
Principal trading partners USA, Latin America, Caribbean
Oil exports were resumed on Oct. 3, 1989, following a six-day suspension costing an estimated US$150,000,000 in lost revenues.
The resumption followed an oil workers' strike and the planned transfer of the trans-Andean oil pipeline from the United States company Texaco to the state-owned PETROECUADOR [see pp. 36344; 37068].
The announcement by the government of liberalization measures to reactivate the economy was reported on Oct. 21; these included exchange rate adjustments to favour exports, lifting credit restrictions, reducing bank controls and opening credit lines to promote production.
In a news conference on Jan. 18, 1990, Borja announced that inflation had been brought down to just over 54 per cent in December 1989 after reaching a record 99.1 per cent in March; a further objective of the administration had been to reduce the accumulated annual inflation rate to 30 per cent for 1989.
Borja also declared a monthly increase of 10 sucres in the price of petrol, but did not specify the effective date or duration of the measure.
Finance
It was announced on Oct. 26, 1989, that maturities of $386,400,000 with the "Paris Club" of Western creditor countries were to be rescheduled over 10 years with a six-year grace period.
The agreement covered payments falling due between Nov. 1 and Dec. 31 as well as those outstanding up to Oct. 31.
Borja announced on Jan. 18, 1990, that in order to concentrate on domestic economic and social problems Ecuador would seek to negotiate a 70 per cent reduction in principal payments on its $11,100 million foreign debt in line with the "Brady plan" for voluntary debt reduction [see pp. 36541-42; 37016-17].
The president of the National Monetary Board, Abelardo Pachano Bertero, stated in early January that debt interest payments would be limited to 30 per cent in 1990, amounting to around $120,000,000.
FOREIGN
On Feb. 11, 1990, Borja welcomed President François Mitterrand of France for a two-day visit.
A French loan of F310,000,000 (approximately equivalent to $54,600,000 as at Feb. 12, 1990) and a grant of F20,000,000, were announced.
During a visit on Oct. 25, 1989, by then Brazilian President José Sarney, Ecuador and Brazil signed bilateral agreements on co-operation in naval and civil construction, in culture and education, as well as a protocol of intent to balance trade.
A protocol on economic and technological co-operation was signed with China on Jan. 19, 1990.
On Feb. 26 Ecuador, the most frequent Latin American user of the Panama Canal, protested to the Panamanian government concerning a 20 per cent increase in tolls for ships using the canal with effect from April 1.
AMERICAS — CARIBBEAN
COLOMBIA
BASIC DATA
Area: 1,141,748 sq km.
Population: 30,007,000 (1988).
Capital: Bogotá.
Language: Spanish.
Religion: Christianity (95% Roman Catholic).
Av. life expectancy: 66 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 130,400 (some 40,400 conscripts)(1989).
GNP per capita: US$1,240 (1988).
Currency: peso (US$1.00=471.6807 pesos as at May 4, 1990).
The Republic of Colombia won its independence from Spain in 1819 although its borders have been redrawn several times since.
There is an executive President and a Congress consisting of a 114-member Senate and a 199-member House of Representatives, the President and Congress being directly elected for a four-year term.
The Cabinet is appointed by the President, while a Primer Designado (First Delegate) is elected by Congress, subject to biannual reappointment, to act in the event of a presidential vacancy.
Col. Julio Londoño Paredes Foreign Affairs Horacio Serpa Uribe Interior Gen. Oscar Botero Defence Luis Fernández Alarcón Mantilla Finance Gabriel Rosas Vega Agriculture Carlos Arturo Marulanda Economic Development Margarita Mena de Quevado Mines and Energy Maria Teresa Forero de Saade Labour and Social Security Roberto Salazar Manrique Justice Eduardo Díaz Uribe Health Priscila Cavallos Ordóñez Public Works Enrique Danies Communications Manuel Francisco Becerra Education 
Cabinet
POLITICS
Appointments
On Oct. 8, 1989, Roberto Salazar Manrique replaced the interim Justice Minister, Carlos Lemos Simmons, who became the new Interior Minister following the resignation of Orlando Vásquez Velásquez; Enrique Danies became the new Communications Minister.
Simmons subsequently resigned on March 25, 1990, and was replaced by Horacio Serpa Uribe [see p. 37312].
Constitutional reform — Resignation of party leaders
On May 4, 1990, President Barco announced that proposals for constitutional reform which had been debated by the Congress since August 1989 would be presented for national approval as part of the May 27 presidential elections [see p. 37450].
Julio César Turbay Ayala, the president of the Liberal Party (Partido Liberal — PL) and President of the Republic in 1978-82, and Misael Pastrana Borrero, the president of the opposition Social Conservative Party (Partido Social Conservador — PSC), resigned from their posts on Dec. 14, 1989, in protest at the indiscipline shown by both parliamentary groups in pressing for referendums on both political reform and on the government's policy of extraditing drug traffickers to stand trial in the United States.
Death of former President
Alberto Lleras Camargo, twice President of Colombia (in 1945-46 and 1958-62) and the first secretary-general of the Organization of American States (OAS) in 1948-52, died in Bogotá on Jan. 4, 1990, aged 83.
A prominent journalist, he was a dominant figure in the PL.
SECURITY
Supreme Court ruling on extradition policy
On Oct. 24, 1989, details were released of a Supreme Court ruling which qualified an earlier ruling on Oct. 3 that the government's emergency policy of extradition by decree (introduced in August — see p. 36844) was constitutional, stating that administrative measures could only be used in cases where countries requesting extradition had no extradition agreement with Colombia.
The court ruled that a 101-year-old treaty with the USA could be used instead of a 1979 treaty which had been declared unconstitutional in June 1987 [see p. 35756].
Drugs
As reported in the newspaper La Prensa on Oct. 7, 1989, Joaquin Vallejo Arbeláez, a former Interior Minister, claimed that he and Germán Montoya Vélez, the Secretary-General to the Presidency, had acted since September 1988 as intermediaries in negotiations between the government and the Medellín drugs cartel before the government's August 1989 declaration of "war" on drug traffickers [see p. 36844].
Government officials strenuously denied this.
The drug cartels, in a letter to congressional president Luis Guillermo Giraldo Hurtado on Oct. 23, 1989, under their pseudonym the "Extraditables" , displayed previous knowledge of the Supreme Court's ruling and asked for its recognition as part of a peace plan rejected by the government who reaffirmed that emergency extraditions would continue.
Congressional deputy Luis Francisco Madero Forero, a supporter of extradition, was murdered on Nov. 1 in Bogotá.
By April 1990 the number of drug traffickers extradited had reached 15, including, among mainly middle-ranking drug traffickers, José Rafael Abello Silva, thought to be a leading member of the Medellín cartel.
On Oct. 1, 1989, the Ecuadorian authorities extradited Evaristo Porras Ardila to Colombia.
Another leading Medellín member, José Antonio Ocampo Obando, was reported to have been released on Jan. 16, 1990, because of insufficient evidence.
On Jan. 12, 1990, a so-called "war tax" law to fight drug trafficking came into force.
Approved by Congress in November 1989 and backed by industrialists, the law placed a 5 per cent tax on business profits.
Drug-related killings
From mid-August 1989, 25 people were officially reported to have been killed and 109 wounded in 220 drug-related bombings which had caused an estimated US$17,000,000 in damages.
On Oct. 18 a bomb exploded outside the Congress building in Bogotá; another in Medellín on Oct. 24 killed five police officers and wounded 14 civilians.
Pablo Escobar Gaviria, one of the leaders of the Medellín cartel, had reportedly narrowly missed being arrested on Nov. 25 during a raid by police and Army units near Concorno in Antioquia province; two of his private army were reportedly killed and 55 others wounded.
On Dec. 6 a bomb destroyed the Department of National Security (DAS) headquarters in Bogotá, killing 67 people and wounding up to 800 others.
Gen. Alfredo Maza, head of the DAS, claimed that there was evidence that Euskadi ta Askatasuna (ETA), the Spanish Basque separatist organization, had been contracted by the cartels to plant the bomb.
In a major escalation in cartel violence beginning in April 1990 [see p. 37372], three car-bomb explosions on May 13, two in Bogotá and one in Cali, 300 km south-west of Bogotá, all in busy urban shopping areas, reportedly killed a total of 26 civilians and seriously injured at least 180 others.
Statistics released by state security agencies on May 13 showed that 243 police officers had been killed since the start of the year.
Major anti-drugs operation
On May 3-5, 1990, Army units were reported to have seized 12 tonnes of cocaine (estimated to be worth $900,000,000) during raids in the Amazonian departments of Meta and Caqueta and in the commissary of Guaviare, south-east of Bogotá.
Two drug traffickers were reported killed and 17 arrested.
Oscar Mariano Ospina, the alleged "treasurer" of the Medellín cartel, was reported to have been killed in Medellín by an elite police corps on May 4, along with seven others.
Murders of judges and journalists — Amnesty International report
The murders by the drug cartels of two federal judges, Héctor Jiménez Rodriguez and Mariela Espinoza Arango, in Medellín on Oct. 17 and Nov. 1, 1989, respectively, and that of court summoner Guillermo Mena Lozano on Nov. 1 in Cali provoked a 13-day strike beginning on Nov. 2 of judges and court workers which paralysed the judicial system nationwide (350 judicial employees and 50 judges were estimated to have been killed in drug-related violence since 1980).
The government's promise to provide increased protection did not prevent the murder on Dec. 5 of another judge, Bernardo Jaramillo, who had been investigating activities of the Medellín drug cartel.
An Amnesty International report of Oct. 11 claimed that in the previous 18 months members of the armed forces, often working in collusion with drug traffickers and right-wing paramilitary groups, had killed 2,500 people and were responsible for 250 others who had "disappeared" following detention.
On Feb. 26, 1990, Silvia Dussan, a journalist working for the British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC), became the fourth journalist to be murdered by suspected right-wing paramilitaries in 1990 (12 were murdered in 1989), who the same day were blamed for the murder of Diana Cardona Saldarriaga, the left-wing Patriotic Union (Unión Patriótica — UP) mayor of Apartado.
UP leaders Gabriel Jaime Santamaria and Benito Súarez Garcia had been murdered in November 1989 and February 1990, and the murder of agricultural workers' trade union leader Sebastian Mosquera had led to a strike of 26,000 banana workers in September 1989.
Guerrilla activity
On Jan. 11, 1990, the left-wing Simón Bolívar Guerrilla Co-ordinating Board (Coordinadora Guerrillera Símon Bolívar--CGSB — see p. 36278) proposed peace talks with the government which included a demand for an amended Constitution and for a referendum [see above]on the formation of a multiparty national assembly.
The guerrilla initiative followed peace talks between the government and leaders of the Colombian Revolutionary Armed Forces (Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias Colombianas — FARC) and the Maoist People's Liberation Army (Ejército de Popular de Liberación — EPL) which had begun on Oct. 21, 1989, following three months of preparatory negotiations.
On Feb. 3, 1990, the government announced the creation of a National Council for Normalization made up of representatives of the government, security forces and guerrillas.
Its task was to duplicate the peace process with the April 19 Movement (Movimiento 19 de Abril — M-19 — for whose March 1990 demobilization see p. 37311) in order to disband and reintegrate guerrilla groups into civilian life.
During the entire peace process both the EPL and FARC had maintained their guerrilla activity.
However, on Feb. 18 FARC announced that it would respect the results of the March 11 municipal elections [see pp. 37311-12], and its offer of a ceasefire during the May presidential election period was reportedly accepted on Feb. 24 by a "commission of notables" (comprising former Presidents, church and business representatives).
A total of 13 government troops were reported killed in a clash with FARC guerrillas on March 5, but the Army claimed to have killed an important FARC commander, Alonso Cortes, in Cauca department on March 15 and were reported to have killed 30 FARC and EPL guerrillas in a clash on April 26 destroying 16 of their camps.
Seven police officers and 13 FARC and EPL guerrillas had been reported killed near Sibundo and San Francisco, 700 km from Bogotá, on April 9.
The pro-Cuban National Liberation Army (Ejército de Liberación Nacional — ELN), whose persistent attacks on oil pipelines (the latest on May 13, 1990, closing the main Caño-Limón line) had caused the loss of an officially estimated $40,000,000 in revenue since January 1990 (and an estimated $500,000,000 since 1985), maintained its rejection of peace contacts with the government which had declared an "all-out war" on the group on Jan. 3.
The government and the Catholic Church had earlier accused the ELN of the kidnapping and murder on Oct. 2, 1989, of Mgr Jésus Emilio Jaramillo, Bishop of Arauca.
The Army's reported offer on April 15 of a reward of (100,000,000 pesos) for the capture of veteran ELN leader Manuel Pérez Martínez effectively disproved reports that Pérez had been executed by an ELN faction on March 29.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
Growth rate 3% (1989 est.)
Trade balance +US$1,962 (1989 est.)
Public deficit as % of GDP 2.7% (1989 est.)
Foreign debt US$16,500 m. (1988)
Inflation 26.1% (1989)
Unemployment 8.9% (1989)
Principal trading partners USA, EC, Latin America
As a result of the collapse of talks in July 1989 at a meeting of the International Coffee Organization (ICO)[see p. 36836], officials in September 1989 estimated that Colombia would lose $411 million over the next year, a quarter of annual coffee export earnings.
On Feb. 20, 1990, the government protested to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) at the USA's decision to double its "anti-dumping" duty on imported Colombian flowers.
A strike beginning in late April had reportedly halted production at the El Cerrejon coal mine, the largest export mine in the world.
A 22,800 million yen loan (approximately equivalent to $158,800,000) was secured from Japan in early December 1989.
FOREIGN
Relations with Latin America
A bilateral treaty signed by Barco and President Carlos Andrés Pérez of Venezuela on Oct. 5, 1989, covered agreements on water resources, the building of a hydroelectric plant on the Orinoco River in Venezuela, methods to deal with oil spillages and the establishment of a telephone link between the Colombian department of Norte de Santander and the Venezuelan state of Táchira.
Co-operation on drug trafficking was also discussed.
On March 6, 1990, both Presidents signed the "San Pedro Alejandrino" agreement promising to implement future proposals of existing bilateral border commissions and setting up five more bilateral commissions, one of which was to deal with the controversial issue of territorial demarcation in the Gulf of Venezuela.
During a visit by President Carlos Salinas de Gotari of Mexico on July 12, 1989, economic, scientific and technical co-operation agreements were signed and anti-drug trafficking co-operation measures approved.
During a brief visit on Oct. 12, 1989, as part of a tour of Latin America, President François Mitterrand of France stated that the break up of the International Coffee Agreement (ICA — see above) "seemed to confirm Colombia's isolation in its fight against drug trafficking" .
AMERICAS — CARIBBEAN
PERU
BASIC DATA
Area: 1,285,216 sq km(incl. inland water).
Population: 20,681,000 (1988).
Capital: Lima.
Languages: Spanish, Quechua and Aymara.
Religion: Christianity (majority Roman Catholic).
Av. life expectancy: 62 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 120,000 (79,000 conscripts)(1989).
GNP per capita: US$1,470 (1987).
Currency: inti (US$1.00=14,973.9156 intis as at May 4, 1990).
The Republic of Peru gained independence from Spain in 1826.
Under the 1980 Constitution executive power is vested in the President, who is directly elected for a five-year term.
The President governs with the assistance of two Vice-Presidents and an appointed Council of Ministers.
Legislative authority is vested in a bicameral National Congress, comprising the Chamber of Deputies (consisting of 180 members elected for a five-year term) and the Senate (consisting of 60 members elected for a five-year term along with the former Presidents of constitutional governments who have the status of life senators).
The President, Vice-Presidents and the Senate are elected nationally while members of the Chamber of Deputies are elected by constituencies under a system of proportional representation.
A presidential election on April 14, 1985, was won by Alan García Pérez of the centre-left American Popular Revolutionary Alliance (Alianza Popular Revolucionaria Americana — APRA), who was sworn in as President on July 28, 1985 [see pp. 33836-37].
In simultaneous elections to the National Congress, APRA candidates won 32 of the Senate seats and 107 of the seats in the Chamber of Deputies.
For the first round in April of the 1990 presidential elections see p. 37371.
Guillermo Larco Cox Prime Minister; Foreign Affairs Augustín Mantilla Interior Gen. Julio Velasquez Giacarini Defence César Vásquez Bazan Economy and Finance Isaac Roberto Angeles Food and Agriculture Efrain Orbegozo Rodriguez Public Education Mario Samame Boggiora Energy and Mines Juan Carpio Rebaza Fisheries Antenor Orrego Spelucin Housing Carlos Raffo Dasso Industry, Commerce, Tourism and Integration María Angélica Bockos Heredia Justice Wilfredo Chao Villanueva Labour and Social Relations Paul Caro Gamarra Public Health Osvaldo Moran Transport and Communications Lt.-Gen.
Pablo Varela President of Joint Command of the Armed Forces Rodolfo Beltran Bravo Minister of Presidency 
Council of Ministers
POLITICS/SECURITY
Political violence
According to a report by the Senate committee on violence and pacification which was monitoring acts of political violence carried out by the Maoist Shining Path (Sendero Luminoso), the Tupac Amarú Revolutionary Movement (Movimiento Revolucionario Tupac Amarú — MRTA), right-wing death squads and other extremist groups and also, in 1989, links between rebel groups and drug traffickers, it was estimated that a total of 3,198 people were killed as a result of such activity in the course of 1989, compared with 1,986 in 1988.
Most of these were between the age of 15 and 30, and the majority who died were unidentified.
The report said that since Sendero Luminoso began its operations in May 1980, 15,800 killings had taken place, although the committee's chairman, Enrique Bernales, expressed the personal belief that the figure was closer to 17,500.
The report attributed 1,632 attacks to Sendero Luminoso, which was thought to have 5,000 active fighters in 19 of Peru's 24 departments; 52 mayors and 92 governors, judges or local officials had been killed.
There were 37 attacks by the right-wing paramilitary Rodrigo Franco Commandos (Comandos Rodrigo Franco) but no perpetrators had been arrested.
Among the mayors who were killed in the run-up to the November 1989 municipal elections [see p. 37039]was the left-wing mayor of Ayacucho, Fermín Azparrent, who was shot dead at his home on Sept. 19.
He had received numerous death threats from Sendero Luminoso and from the Rodrigo Franco Commandos since being elected in 1986 and had escaped three assassination attempts, and his house had been bombed several times in 1989.
A curfew was imposed in Ayacucho on Sept. 20.
Sendero Luminoso had threatened to kill all candidates as well as those voting in the municipal elections, and 200 mayoral candidates and about 300 other candidates had withdrawn in the areas under states of emergency [for which see pp. 36972; 37065].
García visited the town of Ayacucho on Oct. 24 to show support for the only remaining mayoral candidate, Abraham Macizo, representing APRA.
In Ica (the venue for the Group of Eight presidential summit which took place on Oct. 11-12 — see p. 36973) Sendero Luminoso carried out several bomb attacks and killed the wife of a university rector on Oct. 1-2, and also attacked a police post in the neighbouring town of Palpa, killing eight and wounding 13.
On Oct. 15 about 100 Sendero Luminoso guerrillas ambushed two Army lorries near Huancavelica, approximately 225 km south-east of Lima; six guerrillas and 13 soldiers were killed in the clash while nine peasants were reportedly executed by Sendero Luminoso for supporting the government.
Sendero Luminoso also killed nine Indian farmers, apparently members of self-defence groups [see also below], near Ayacucho, on Oct. 22.
The MRTA on Oct. 4 kidnapped Héctor Delgado Parker, a media magnate and a friend and former aide of García, from his car in central Lima, killing his driver and wounding his bodyguard and three others.
Car bombs exploded outside the Soviet and Chinese embassies on Oct. 26.
With the declaration of a state of emergency in four provinces of Lima department on Oct. 24 for the next 30 days [see p. 36972], one-third of the 182 provinces were under a state of emergency.
Furthermore on Nov. 1 the government placed Lima and the nearby port of Callao under military control.
This followed an attack by 200 guerrillas on a television station owned by Ricardo Belmont Cassinelli, the leading candidate for mayor of Lima, in the course of which three guerrillas were killed by police and about 20 people were wounded and 150 arrested.
On Dec. 15 a bus was blown up by dynamite in Lima, killing three naval employees and wounding 15 other people.
About 10 foreigners were among the victims of political violence in 1989, with the result that foreign aid workers, archaeologists and tourists increasingly withdrew from or avoided rural areas.
Two young French tourists travelling on a bus between Ayacucho and Andahuaylas, 425 km south-east of Lima, were forced off the bus by guerrillas and shot dead on Jan. 13.
Other victims were an English tourist in March 1989, an Austrian journalist in April, and an Australian and a New Zealander in December, while two West German tourists disappeared in May after being forced off a bus in the south of the country.
A United States journalist working for the Tampa Tribune, Todd Smith, was kidnapped in the Upper Huallaga valley on Nov. 17 and subsequently found beaten and murdered in Uchiza, accused of being a US spy.
In May a Lithuanian-born journalist with a Lima newspaper, Barbara D'Achille, had been beaten to death by suspected rebels.
In the first 11 days of 1990 there were 72 victims of political violence.
They included the mayor of Huanuhuanu (Arequipa department), on Jan. 2, and 39 members of peasant self-defence groups who were killed by Sendero Luminoso in Ayacucho province.
García had presided over the distribution of semi-automatic rifles and ammunition to the self-defence groups during a visit to the area in early December 1989.
[For murder on Jan. 9, 1990, of former Defence Minister see pp. 37182-83.]
The police claimed to have captured Sendero Luminoso's second-in-command, Julio César Mezzich, in the region around Huaraz, 300 km north of Lima, on March 5.
Human rights
According to a report in February 1990 by the Peruvian Human Rights Commission, between 1986, when the military entered the war against the guerrillas, and the end of 1988 over 2,000 people had disappeared.
A total of 306 people who had been detained by the security forces during 1989, mostly in areas under states of emergency, had disappeared, 150 of them in Apurimac department alone.
Most of the victims were peasants, some were students and teachers, and 31 were children and young people.
A report in September 1989 by a parliamentary committee asserted that 5,877 people had disappeared in political circumstances in the past nine years and that another 2,346 had died in unexplained circumstances.
Human rights groups in March 1990 reacted angrily to what they called "an unprecedented series of aggressions" against their workers following the bombing on Feb. 18 of the offices of the Andean Commission of Jurists and of the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), and the bombing of an Amnesty International office on March 4.
Lurigancho riot trial
After a 15-week trial, a military court on Dec. 12, 1989, sentenced a police colonel to 15 years' imprisonment for ordering the killing in cold blood of 124 unarmed inmates of Lurigancho prison in Lima in 1986 following an uprising [see pp. 34607-08].
A police lieutenant was also sentenced to seven years, but 76 others, including an Army general who had led the operation, were acquitted for lack of proof.
It emerged at the trial that 89 of the victims, most of them suspected members of Sendero Luminoso, had been shot in the head.
Two court cases were still awaited in connection with the simultaneous uprisings at Santa Barbara and El Frontón prisons in which at least another 100 inmates were thought to have died.
New Archbishop of Lima
Mgr Augusto Vargas Alzamora, a Jesuit, was appointed in February 1990 as the Archbishop of Lima, replacing Cardinal Juan Landázuri Ricketts, who had retired in 1988 after 34 years in office.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth -12% (1989)
Current-account balance -US$700 m. (1989)
Trade balance +US$1,646 m. (1989)
Budget deficit (as % of GNP) 18% (1989)
Total external public debt US$19,900 m. (1989)
Debt service ratio (as % of export earnings) 37% (1989)
Gross domestic product US$22,000 m. (1989)
Inflation rate 2,775% (1989)
Unemployment 9% (1989)
Principal trading partners USA, EC, Japan, Latin America 
Anti-inflation measures
At the beginning of the last stage of García's presidential term the government on Oct. 2, 1989, adopted measures to reduce inflation (which averaged 32 per cent monthly in 1989, reaching a record annual rate of 2,775 per cent) and to contribute to economic recovery.
The devaluation of the inti for the month of October was restricted to 6 per cent overall; exporters were to receive 10 per cent of the value of their exports in foreign currency and 45 per cent in freely redeemable US dollar certificates, while the remaining 45 per cent would be paid in intis at the single exchange market rate; import restrictions were eased; to protect the silver sector against the continuing slump in prices since 1989 on the world market, the Central Reserve Bank was to buy silver at 5 per cent over the current market price; fuel prices would rise by only 5 per cent in October, and public utility rates by less than the percentage rise in salaries, which themselves would be increased in accordance with inflation.
(Fuel prices, however, were in February increased by between 16 and 20.5 per cent.)
It was revealed by García, in an interview with the news agency Reuters in the following week, that bonuses were to be offered to producers to encourage silver bullion exports and to provide stability for mining companies and their employees.
Silver production had been lower than average in the first seven months of 1989.
Measures against illegal dollar trading
Following a dramatic rise in the US dollar exchange rate on the black market, from 6,000 intis at the end of October to 11,200 on Nov. 21 (and to 14,000 intis by May 1990), transit through the Tacna border with Chile and border points with Ecuador and Bolivia was restricted for 15 days as from Nov. 21 to crack down on smuggling and illegal trading in US dollars, particularly in the Chilean free zone of Iquique.
Action by creditors on debt
The Economy and Finance Minister, César Vásquez Bazán, revealed on March 2, 1990, that the US Citibank, acting on behalf of 230 of Peru's creditor banks, had begun legal action to recover US$3,400 million owed by Peru.
Although the largest of the 11 suits called for the immediate repayment of $1,200 million, bankers were reported on March 13 to be viewing the move as a defensive and not as a provocative act.
In response the government announced on March 20 that it had transferred money and gold deposits from the New York branch of the Swiss Bank Corporation to the principal bank in the Swiss capital, Berne.
Mining strikes
In 1989 mines run by the state-owned Centromín mining concern (a leading producer of zinc, lead, silver and copper) were badly affected by sabotage by Sendero Luminoso, which caused the main mine, Morococha, to close throughout September.
In addition security and replacement costs restricted operations and new investment.
On Jan. 15, 1990, Centromín workers went on strike for about 10 days to demand improvements in wages and conditions and the release of Víctor Taype, the president of the National Federation of Mine, Metallurgical and Steel Workers (Federación Nacional de Trabajadores Mineros, Metalúrgicos y Siderúrgicos — FNTMMS), who had been detained in Huancavelica since November 1989 on terrorist charges.
Six of the seven Centromín mines (all except Casapalca) participated and the company declared force majeure with effect from Jan. 18, 1990 (until early February).
The FNTMMS subsequently called a three-day nationwide strike for March 19-21 in support of the same demands.
A further eight-day strike for wage increases by 13,000 Centromín miners, supported by colleagues at the Cerro de Pasco complex of zinc and copper mines, ended on March 22 at an estimated cost in lost production of $10,000,000.
An eight-week strike officially estimated to have cost $80,000,000 in lost production at the US-owned Southern Peruvian Copper group was ended on May 4 by a government supreme decree.
Mudslide and river disasters
At least 200 people were believed to be missing after a mudslide on Feb. 27, 1990, buried the village of San Miguel de Río Mayo in the northern jungle, 800 km north of Lima, following heavy rains.
A river passenger boat crashed into a cargo ship and sank on the Amazon on March 7 after leaving Iquitos.
Only 74 of the more than 200 people on board were rescued.
FOREIGN
Indignation over the military intervention in Panama by the United States in December 1989 [see pp. 37112-13; 37271]led to the withdrawal of co-operation by Peru in anti-drugs operations, but this was resumed at the end of that month.
In view of the commitment expressed by the US President, George Bush, to withdraw all US invasion forces from Panama by the end of February 1990 [see p. 37177], García agreed to attend the international drugs summit in Cartagena (Colombia) on Feb. 15 [for which see pp. 37243-44].
A US-financed $35,000,000 military aid programme, announced by the Peruvian government in late April to counter drug production in and left-wing guerrilla control of the Upper Huallaga valley, was held up in May due to a hostile domestic political response.
The establishment of full diplomatic relations with North Korea was announced on Nov. 21, 1989.
AMERICAS — CARIBBEAN
BOLIVIA
BASIC DATA
Area: 1,098,581 sq km(incl. inland water).
Population: 6,917,000 (1988).
Capital: La Paz.
Languages: Spanish, Quechua and Aymará.
Religion: Christianity (majority Roman Catholic).
Av. life expectancy: 53 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 28,000 (some 19,000 conscripts)(1989).
GNP per capita: US$570 (1988).
Currency: boliviano (US$1.00=3.0865 bolivianos as at May 4, 1990).
The Republic of Bolivia won its independence from Spain in 1825.
In the recent past Bolivia was under the rule of military juntas almost continuously between 1964 and 1982, when it was returned to civilian rule under President Hernán Siles Zuazo.
Legislative authority is held by the bicameral Congress, comprising a 27-member Senate and a 130-member Chamber of Deputies, both elected for a four-year term by universal adult suffrage.
Executive power is vested in the President and the Cabinet, which the President appoints.
The President also serves for a four-year term; if no presidential candidate gains a majority of the vote under direct elections, then the President is elected by the Congress.
The country is divided for administration purposes into nine departments, each of which is governed by a prefect, appointed by the President.
Following the failure of any candidate to attain the required outright majority in elections on May 7, 1989 [see p. 36652], the Congress on Aug. 5 elected Jaime Paz Zamora of the Movement of the Revolutionary Left (Movimiento de la Izquierda Revolucionaria — MIR) as President to lead a coalition government supported by the right-wing Democratic Nationalist Alliance (Alianza Democrática Nacionalista — ADN)[see p. 36845].
Carlos Iturralde Ballivián (ADN) Foreign Affairs; Worship Guillermo Capobianco Ribera (MIR) Interior; Justice; Migration Gustavo Fernández Saavedra (MIR) Minister of Presidency Héctor Ormachea Peñaranda (ADN) National Defence David Blanco Zabala (ADN) Finance Enrique García Rodríguez (ADN) Planning and Co-ordination Mariano Baptista Gumucio (MIR) Education; Culture Willy Vargas Vacaflor (ADN) Transport and Communications Guido Céspedes Argandoña (MIR) Industry; Commerce; Tourism Oscar Zamora Medinacelli (MIR) Labour and Labour Development Mario Paz Zamora (MIR) Social Services and Public Health Walter Soriano Lea Plaza (ADN) Mining and Metallurgy Mauro Bertero Gutiérrez (ADN) Agriculture; Campesino Affairs, Livestock Affairs Angel Zannier Claros (MIR) Energy and Hydrocarbons Enrique Prado Abasto (ADN) Housing and Urban Affairs Manfredo Kempff Suárez (ADN) Information Luis Gonzalez Quintanilla (MIR) Aeronautics Guillermo Fortún Suárez (ADN) Without portfolio 
Cabinet
POLITICS
Municipal elections
In municipal elections on Dec. 3, 1989, the MIR and ADN coalition won in six of the nine departments.
The MIR-ADN alliance failed to win La Paz, being pushed into second place by the Conscience of the Fatherland party (Conciencia de Patria — CONDEPA); the National Revolutionary Movement (Movimiento Nacionalista Revolucionario (Histórico)— MNR) came third.
The two remaining provincial capitals — Trinidad, the capital of Beni department, and Sucre, the capital of Chuquisaca department — went respectively to the Civic Solidarity Union party (Unión Cívica Solidaridad — UCS) and the Left Unity coalition (Izquierda Unida — IU).
SECURITY
End of state of siege — New Commander-in-Chief
The government announced on Feb. 9, 1990, that the state of siege in force since Nov. 15, 1989 [see pp. 37039-40], would be ended as planned on Feb. 14.
A total of 118 union and student leaders who had been in internal exile since the declaration of the state of siege were reported to have been released on Nov. 27.
It was reported on Sept. 7, 1989, that Gen. Rolando Espinoza Lora had been appointed as the new Commander-in-Chief of the Army.
Opening of trial of former junta leader
The Supreme Court trial of a former President, Gen. Luis García Meza, which had begun on July 12, 1989, proceeded despite his absence.
García Meza, the leader of the military coup in July 1980 [see p. 30584]who faced charges of armed uprising, fraud, genocide and violations of the Constitution, had gone into hiding in January 1989.
A police report submitted to a congressional commission the same month stated that García Meza, ignoring a Supreme Court restriction on his movements, had hitherto been able to move freely around the country under military protection.
Anti-drug programme
In January 1990 the government announced that a United States crop substitution aid package worth US$12,000,000 would allow it to eradicate 6,000 hectares of coca plants provided that foreign markets for substitute crops were provided.
On Jan. 15 President Paz Zamora claimed that the coca economy was worth an annual $1,500 million, $600,000,000 of which remained in the country.
The Bolivian Workers' Central (Central Obrera Boliviana — COB) proposed that the USA buy coca surpluses in order to avoid social conflict.
In June 1989 unions representing coca growers had organized protests against forced eradication plans [see p. 36483].
Foreign Minister Carlos Iturralde Ballivián stated on Feb. 14 that the coca replacement programme would cost $3,500 million over eight years, while the US embassy in La Paz had reportedly calculated the figure to be $1,000 million over five years.
On Sept. 22, 1989, Gen. (retd) Lucio Añez was appointed new commander of the special forces combating drug trafficking.
The government said that it was reorganizing and restoring morale in national anti-drug institutions.
Extradition of former minister to USA
Luis Arce Gómez, Interior Minister under García Meza [see above], was extradited on Dec. 11, 1989, to the USA to face drug-trafficking charges.
Wanted in Bolivia on murder charges brought as a result of the coup in July 1980, Arce had allegedly used his position to set up a cocaine racket.
On Nov. 29, 1989, Juan Carlos Lisboa Melgar, reportedly one of Bolivia's top cocaine traffickers, was captured.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth 2.5% (1989)
Current-account balance -US$485 m. (1987)
Trade balance +US$95 m. (1989)
Total external public debt US$5,080 m. (1987)
Gross domestic product US$4,640 m. (1987)
Inflation rate 16.5% (1989)
Unemployment 20% (March 1988 est.)
Principal trading partners USA, Argentina
Modest economic recovery, begun in 1987, continued in 1989, when at 16.5 per cent Bolivia's was one of the lowest inflation rates in Latin America.
While agricultural production fell by 1.5 per cent, construction grew by 11 per cent and mining improved due to favourable international prices and exploitation of new minerals.
However, gross domestic product (GDP) fell slightly following uncertainty after the May 1989 elections [see p. 36652].
The projected 1989 foreign debt of the Yacimientos Petrolíferos Fiscales Bolivianos (YPFB) state oil company totalled $374,000,000.
Finance — Accession to GATT
The International Development Association (IDA) in May 1989 approved credits totalling 54,800,000 special drawing rights (SDR1=US$1.25783 as at May 19, 1989) over 40 years with a 10-year grace period.
At a World Bank-sponsored meeting in Paris on Oct. 27 leading developed countries and multilateral agencies approved a further $2,200 million in aid over the three years 1990-92.
On Dec. 4 the International Monetary Fund (IMF) announced approval of a second annual arrangement equivalent to 45,350,000 special drawing rights (SDR1=$1.28878 as at Dec. 1, 1989) under the enhanced structural adjustment facility (ESAF).
Of this SDR22,635,000 would become available immediately.
This was the second annual arrangement of a three-year ESAF arrangement for a total of SDR136,050,000 which had been approved in July 1988, and under which Bolivia had already drawn SDR45,350,000.
On Dec. 14 the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) approved a $34,600,000 loan for Bolivia's social emergency fund.
The US government in July 1989 granted a $100,000,000 credit to support the balance of payments.
Government officials expressed confidence in January 1990 that Bolivia would by June have cancelled all its commercial bank debts, after receiving promises of a total of $30,500,000 in donations which would enable it to buy back the remaining $270,000,000.
A General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) working group approved a working-group report on Bolivia's application for GATT membership, it was reported on July 19, 1989, and a protocol of accession was signed by Bolivia on Aug. 4 [see also p. 37227].
FOREIGN
Relations with other Latin American countries
On Sept. 1, 1989, the government wrote off Argentina's $300,000,000 arrears in payments for Bolivian natural gas in return for the Argentinian government pardoning Bolivia's $800,000,000 bilateral debt.
On Dec. 12 Paz Zamora arrived in Argentina on a two-day official visit [see also p. 37501].
The Bolivian government signed an agreement renegotiating $41,500,000 of its $380,000,000 debt with Brazil on Nov. 29.
On Nov. 27 the two countries signed a joint agreement for a $1,032 million energy integration programme.
During a meeting held on Lake Titicaca in October 1989, Paz Zamora was advised by President Alan García Pérez of Peru that Peru would not object if Chile granted landlocked Bolivia an outlet to the Pacific Ocean through territories formerly belonging to Peru.
Bolivian political parties rejected a statement of Jan. 27, 1990, from Chile's Foreign Minister-designate Enrique Silva Cimma that problems with Bolivia could be solved independently of the sea outlet issue.
[For opening in April 1987 of formal negotiations on this issue see pp. 35764-65; for background to dispute see p. 26512; for appointment of Bolivian consul see p. 37490.]
In December 1989 the Ministry of the Interior denied reports that Sendero Luminoso (Shining Path), the Peruvian guerrilla organization, had a presence on Bolivian territory.
However, on Jan. 2, 1990, the Minister of Defence announced troop reinforcements on the Peruvian border.
AMERICAS — CARIBBEAN
CHILE
BASIC DATA
Area: 756,626 sq km.
Population: 12,760,000 (1988).
Capital: Santiago.
Language: Spanish.
Religion: Christianity (majority Roman Catholic).
Av. life expectancy: 72 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 101,000 (33,000 conscripts)(1989).
GNP per capita: US$1,510 (1988).
Currency: Chilean peso (US$1.00=294.8313 pesos as at May 4, 1990).
The Republic of Chile won its independence from Spain in 1818.
Prior to a right-wing military coup led by Gen. Augusto Pinochet Ugarte in September 1973 [see pp. 26151-52], Chile had been a parliamentary democracy with an executive President and a National Congress elected by universal adult suffrage.
After the coup, absolute power rested with the military junta, and increasingly with Pinochet, who in June 1974 was designated Supreme Chief of State, and in December President of the Republic (although he did not formally assume that title until March 1981).
The junta proclaimed various "constitutional acts" in 1976 [see p. 28273]purporting to establish an "authoritarian democracy" , with executive and legislative authority vested in the President and the junta, assisted by a Cabinet.
The 1980 Constitution, which was put into effect in March 1981 [see pp. 30619-20; 30931], provided for the re-establishment, effective 1989, of the bi-cameral National Congress, consisting of a Senate of 38 elected and nine appointed members, all of whom were to serve an eight-year term, and a Chamber of Deputies whose 120 members were to be directly elected for a four-year term.
In accordance with the Constitution a plebiscite was held on Oct. 5, 1988, to decide whether Pinochet should remain in office for a further eight years upon the expiry of his term in 1990.
A majority of nearly 55 per cent voted against Pinochet, and in the resulting presidential elections held on Dec. 14, 1989 [see p. 37117], Patricio Aylwin Azócar of the Christian Democratic Party (Partido Demócrata Cristiano — PDC), who was also the representative of the 17-party Coalition for Democracy (Concertación de los Partidos por la Democracia — CPD), was the clear winner with 53.8 per cent of the vote.
He took office on March 11, 1990 [see p. 37311].
POLITICS
Appointments to Senate
At the end of December 1989 the Supreme Court named the three final conservative appointees to the Senate [see p. 37117 for first six appointments], so that the outgoing military regime was represented by 28 of the 47 members, further ensuring that the incoming government of President Aylwin would be unable to modify the central role of the military under the 1980 Constitution [see p. 30619].
Under an agreement reached on March 2, 1990, between the CPD and the conservative Independent Democratic Union (Unión Democrática Independiente — UDI), representatives of pro-Aylwin parties would occupy the posts of president of the Chamber of Deputies and of the Senate.
Granting of autonomy to Central Bank — Further efforts by outgoing government to retain power base
Three days before the presidential elections, the military government on Dec. 11, 1989, granted the Central Bank full autonomy under new statutes which allowed the Finance Minister to attend meetings and to have a 15-day veto on policy.
The new statutes could only be changed by a two-thirds majority vote of the new Congress.
A new five-member board was also appointed which included two members of the opposition CPD alliance, Robert Zahler and Juan Eduardo Herrera, as well as the then Finance Minister, Brig. -Gen.
Enrique Sequel Morel, who would resign his Cabinet post, and an economist, Alfonso Serrano.
Andrés Bianchi (deputy executive secretary of the UN Economic Commission for Latin America — ECLA) was appointed president of the board for a two-year term.
On Dec. 12 the military junta passed a law regulating the activities of the incoming Congress, which would prevent it, among other things, from taking action against members of the outgoing government for their actions during the past 16 years of military rule.
The opposition objected in principle to the law (which was to enter into force on March 11, 1990) and appealed to the constitutional tribunal which, however, upheld it.
A 1978 law already protected members of the security forces from being investigated for human rights abuses, and the then President, Augusto Pinochet, had stated in late 1989 as regards human rights that "the day one of my men is touched, the state of law is over" .
Many other measures enacted by the outgoing military government provided, for example, for the transfer of buildings from government to Army ownership and for the protection of civil servants from dismissal.
After a week of discussions in January 1990 with representatives of the military government, including then Interior Minister Carlos Cáceres Contreras, representatives of the President-elect reached agreement on Jan. 4 on modifications to an Armed Forces Charter affecting the role of the military in relation to the President and the Defence Minister after March 11.
The modifications were regarded by the incoming regime as a considerable improvement on the original military proposals and were backed by the main conservative group, the National Renewal Party (Partido de Renovación Nacional — PRN).
They provided for the abolition of the military junta of commanders-in-chief which, under the original military proposals, would have had extraordinary powers and would have been able to conduct independent relations with any other government authority, and they reduced the degree of military control over the armed forces budget.
The new President would not, however, be responsible for appointing under-secretaries for the armed services or his own military aides (and under other legislation was not allowed to remove military commanders).
On March 8 Rear-Adml.
Jorge Martínez Busch was installed as Commander of the Navy replacing junta member Adml.
José Toribio Merino on his retirement [see p. 37183 for January 1990 announcement to this effect].
Reorganization of Army high command
On Oct. 9, 1989, Pinochet carried out a major reorganization of the Army high command.
Gen. Jorge Zincke, a moderate who had been appointed deputy commander in November 1988 [see p. 36346]and had worked towards restoring the Army to a professional and depoliticized force, was one of 12 senior officers retired, while seven were promoted (making a total of 43 in the Army high command, about twice the pre-1973 level).
Zincke was replaced by Gen. Jorge Lucar, a hardliner.
Dissolution of intelligence service
The Central Nacional de Informaciones (CNI — the state secret police), was formally dissolved by decree of the junta at the end of February 1990, its agents returning to their military units and its property passing to the Army.
Rear Adml.
Patricio Carvajal, the then Defence Minister, had announced in mid-November 1989 that its records would be destroyed.
Party developments
The various factions of the Socialist Party of Chile (Partido Socialista de Chile — PSCh) entered the final phase of a reunification process when their leaders, Clodomiro Almeyda (Marxist-Leninist faction) and Jorge Arrate (Renovators), together with a group within the United Popular Action Movement (Movimiento de Acción Popular Unitaria — MAPU) led by Oscar Guillermo Garretón, signed a document on Dec. 29, 1989, establishing a unified central committee to organize a "unity congress" .
Almeyda would meanwhile act as party president and Arrate as secretary-general.
In the document Marxism was represented merely as a source of political inspiration similar to Christianity or "any current of contemporary thought in favour of progress" , and no mention was made of any merger between socialists and communists.
At a meeting in January 1990 to celebrate its 68th anniversary the Communist Party (Partido Comunista de Chile — PCCh) formally renounced its policy of "armed popular rebellion" .
During the election campaign the PCCh, which was not legalized, had announced on Nov. 9, 1989, that it would work for the victory of the presidential opposition candidate; the former secretary-general of the PCCh, Luis Corvalán, who had returned to Chile on Oct. 12 after 13 years in exile, had made a similar declaration.
The PCCh and the MIR on Jan. 27, 1990, undertook not to resort to violence during the term of office of the Aylwin administration.
On April 10 a pro-Soviet PCCh faction claiming 2,000 supporters was reported to have split away from the main party when a group of leading members resigned accusing the leadership of a "lack of internal democracy" .
New political parties
As reported on May 9, 1990, the Radical Democratic Party, the National Party, The National Vanguard party, the Free Democratic Centre and the Social Democratic Faction (led by Arturo Benegas) merged to form the National Centrist Democracy Party with a claimed membership of 137,000.
In another merger announced on the same day, the Liberal Party led by Hugo Cepeda and the Party of the South led by Eduardo Diaz joined to form the Liberal Party.
SECURITY
Two police officers were killed in Santiago on July 21, 1989, by the Lautaro Popular Rebel Forces (Fuerzas Rebeldes Populares Lautaro — FRPL) in retaliation for incidents on July 17 when police, clashing with people trying to occupy housing, killed one person and arrested 220.
An Army officer was shot dead on Aug. 20 at Tobalaba military airport, west of Santiago, by an assailant who was himself shot dead.
The Manuel Rodríguez Patriotic Front (Frente Patriótico Manuel Rodríguez — FPMR) said that one of its former members had carried out the killing, and 13 people were subsequently arrested.
During the campaign for the presidential and congressional elections which began on Aug. 11, about 35 people were detained and eight injured in confrontations with police at rallies for two of the candidates, Aylwin and Hernán Büchi, on Oct. 12.
In all more than 1,000 people were arrested during the electoral campaign.
The spokesperson for the moderate faction of the Movement of the Revolutionary Left (Movimiento de Izquierda Revolucionaria — MIR), Jécar Antonio Neghme Cristi, was shot dead from a passing car on Sept. 4.
A police officer was shot dead in his car on Sept. 29.
Opposition demonstrations, bombings, arrests and electricity blackouts were reported on Sept. 11, 1989, the 16th anniversary of the 1973 coup which overthrew Salvador Allende.
Bombs exploded in front of the United States embassy on Sept. 26 and at the US-Chilean Cultural Institute on Dec. 28, the latter attack being attributed to the FPMR.
Demonstrations against the military regime also took place on Oct. 5, the first anniversary of the 1988 referendum in which the electorate had voted overwhelmingly against Pinochet's continuation in office until 1998 [see pp. 36344-45].
Police units used teargas and water cannon against the crowds and over 200 people were arrested.
On the previous night 16 bombs had exploded, damaging banks and electricity transmitters and causing power cuts for several hours in Santiago.
On Pinochet's 74th birthday on Nov. 26 the FPMR carried out a series of attacks.
A teenager was killed and another injured by a bomb which destroyed an electricity pylon, and a radio presenter at a pro-government radio station was injured by another bomb; the capital and towns to the north were again plunged into darkness by power cuts.
Earlier in November right-wing police elements had perpetrated a series of attacks and assaults which resulted in four police officers being placed before the courts by Gen. Rodolfo Stange, the police director-general (and then junta member).
Right-wing elements were also believed responsible for setting fire to the home of Juan Pablo Cárdenas, editor of the opposition magazine Análisis, on Nov. 24, and for other attacks against journalists and the media.
A total of 49 left-wing political prisoners escaped from a Santiago prison on Jan. 30, 1990, through a tunnel which they had constructed.
Most of them were members of the FPMR and they included some of those who had tried to assassinate Pinochet in 1986 [see p. 34986].
Among seven who were recaptured was Carlos Pino Molina who, together with Luis Melo Mendoza, was granted unconditional freedom by a judge one week later on grounds of lack of evidence for the case against them.
On May 14, 1990, bombings in Santiago, which included attacks against the Defence Ministry and the US consulate, reportedly caused extensive damage but only minor injuries.
The FPMR claimed responsibility.
The assassination on May 10 of Col. (retd) Luis Fontaine, the former head of DICOM-CAR, a specialist intelligence unit dealing in repression of opponents of the previous dictatorship, was thought to be the work of right-wing elements.
Fontaine had made known his intention to give evidence to the new National Commission for Truth and Reconciliation, which had been set up by the government on April 25 to investigate human right violations under the Pinochet regime.
Human rights
The officer in command of a military unit which in July 1986 burned to death a photographer, Rodrigo Rojas de Negri, and severely burned his colleague, Carmen Quintana Arancibia [see p. 34985]was in August 1989 condemned to 300 days' imprisonment by a military court.
Pedro Fernández Dittus was not, however, required to spend time in detention but merely to present himself to the authorities once a week.
According to the electoral platform of the CPD as regards political prisoners, a distinction would be made between prisoners of conscience and prisoners of violence, and those accused of "homicide, grievous bodily harm, kidnapping and child theft" would fit into the former category.
Out of 435 prisoners classified as political (85 of whom had been sentenced), only 30 would benefit from this classification, but the platform also covered the right to conditional liberty and to reduced sentences on grounds of inhumane conditions suffered.
According to the Chilean Human Rights Commission the distinction was unacceptable because it made a prior judgment of guilt.
Following a decision by the Supreme Court in September 1989 to close the investigation into the West German commune, Colonia Dignidad [see pp. 36346; 36932], on the grounds that no crimes had been discovered there which could affect international relations, the West German Foreign Minister, Hans-Dietrich Genscher, on Sept. 26 announced that he would be taking the issue to the UN Commission on Human Rights.
At the same time the West German government stated its suspicions that the Chilean government was concealing deeds occurring in the colony and that it thus shared responsibility for "the reported tortures, maltreatment and denial of personal liberties" said to be taking place there.
Colonia Dignidad, situated in Parral, 400 km south of Santiago, and inhabited by an estimated 300 people, mainly West Germans, had been in existence for 28 years and was variously linked with slave labour, child sexual abuse, and the torture and disappearance of political prisoners.
Release of trade union leaders
Pinochet on Oct. 23, 1989, pardoned two trade union leaders, Manuel Bustos and Arturo Martínez, who were serving 541-day sentences of internal exile in remote towns for calling national protest days in 1985 [see p. 34347].
The Polish Solidarity leader, Lech Walesa, had called for their release and had been due to arrive in Chile on Oct. 26 at the invitation of the Central Unitaria de Trabajadores (CUT) to try to obtain their release.
As reported on May 3, 1990, a hunger strike by an estimated 2,000 prisoners in the Colina prison in Santiago ended having failed to persuade the government to extend a limited amnesty given to political prisoners on March 20 [see also p. 37311]to all inmates.
However 3,076 prisoners and 1,731 others on parole were expected to benefit from a pardon law, details of which were published on May 14.
On April 11 an anti-Castro Cuban exile José Dionisio Suárez y Esquivel was arrested in St Petersburg, Florida, in connection with the assassination on Sept. 21, 1976, of Orlando Letelier, Chile's ambassador to Washington in 1970-73, when he entered Allende's Cabinet [see pp. 28273-74].
On May 14 the Chilean government announced that it was willing to reach an agreement with the US government to compensate the families of the victims killed or injured in the car bombing which was widely acknowledged to have been masterminded by agents of Pinochet's DINA secret police.
The figure was to be agreed by an international tribunal [see pp. 36346; 36931].
On May 4 an Army prosecutor, Maj. Raúl Rozas, had ordered the imprisonment of the Epoca journalist, Monica Lagos, who had reportedly uncovered the identity of a former secret agent allegedly linked to Letelier's murder.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth 9.9% (1989)
Current-account balance +US$461 m. (1989)
Trade balance +US$1.4 m. (1989)
Total external public debt US$17,600 m. (1989)
Gross domestic product US$22,000 m. (1988)
Inflation rate 21.4% (1989)
Unemployment 5.9% (1989)
Principal trading partners EC, USA, Japan 
IMF and World Bank loans
The International Monetary Fund (IMF) on Nov. 8, 1989, approved a one-year standby arrangement authorizing purchases up to the equivalent of 64,000,000 special drawing rights (SDR1=$1.27549 as at Nov. 10, 1989) in support of the government's economic and financial programme for 1989-90.
An extended fund facility arrangement supporting economic measures, originally concluded for 1985-88 [see p. 33844]but prolonged and increased in 1988 [see p. 36346], had expired in August 1990.
On Sept. 28 the World Bank agreed to a loan worth $224,000,000 to support a public works maintenance programme for 1990-93.
On Nov. 22 Finance Minister Seguel Morel announced that the Central Bank proposed to repurchase $140,000,000 of its foreign debt at a 58.25 per cent discount, costing $81,400,000.
This was in accordance with a 1987 debt restructuring agreement whereby creditor banks agreed to allow the repurchase of up to $500,000,000 of debt obligations, and in 1988 $299,000,000 had been repurchased for $167,000,000 from foreign reserves at a 44 per cent discount.
Strike by copper miners
In September 1989 some 3,500 miners at the northern El Salvador copper mine, owned by the state company Codelco, went on strike for two weeks.
The miners were opposing company plans to introduce a continuous working day but finally called off the strike after accepting higher pay and bonuses.
A further strike was threatened at Chuquicamata, the largest copper mine, and at Codelco's three other mines in November in opposition to last-minute legislation proposed by the junta.
The proposed measures would reorganize the management of Codelco by restricting presidential appointments, limit the company's operations exclusively to copper and privatize some service operations.
The incoming government proposed to diversify Codelco's production and vigorously opposed the new law, from which the article restricting Codelco's operations was ultimately removed.
The new head of Codelco (previously a military appointment) would as from March 11 be Alejandro Noemi, a businessman.
Tripartite accord
Tripartite discussions between government, employers and labour resulted in the signing on April 27, 1990, of a Social Accord called "Chile, an historic opportunity" and described by Aylwin as opening up a "path of understanding and not one of confrontation" between employers and labour.
Under the accord, which Bustos claimed was only a "first step" falling short of CUT demands, a new minimum wage of US$87 was to be paid from June 1 in addition to adjustments to family allowances, pensions and some subsidies, which would be subject to annual vision.
FOREIGN
Amid the resumption of trade and consular relations with various East European countries, diplomatic relations with Hungary, which had been broken off in 1973, were resumed on Jan. 11, 1990, and with Czechoslovakia, East Germany, Yugoslavia and the Soviet Union on March 11.
On March 19 Bolivia announced the appointment of a consul but no decision was made for a resumption of diplomatic relations [for Bolivian sea outlet issue see p. 37488].
Aylwin visited Argentina as President-elect on Feb. 27, and diplomatic relations were resumed with Mexico on March 20.
On Feb. 3, 1990, a draft agreement was signed laying the foundation for a future treaty of co-operation with Spain, similar to that signed between Spain and Mexico in January [see p. 37274].
Aylwin had had talks with the Spanish Prime Minister, Felipe González, during a tour of five European countries including Spain in September 1989.
On March 12, 1990, during a visit to Chile by the Spanish Prime Minister, Felipe González, an agreement was signed under which Spain granted a total of 220,000 million ptas (approximately US$2,006 million), of which 88,000 million ptas were in soft credits under market conditions and the remainder constituted investments over the period to 1993.
AMERICAS — CARIBBEAN
VENEZUELA
BASIC DATA
Area: 912,050 sq km.
Population: 18,759,000 (1988).
Capital: Caracas.
Language: Spanish.
Religion: Christianity (Roman Catholic).
Av. life expectancy: 70 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 70,500 incl.
National Guard (18,000 conscripts)(1989).
GNP per capita: US$3,170 (1988).
Currency: bolívar (US$1.00=44.3945 bolivares as at May 4, 1990).
The Republic of Venezuela, which achieved independence from Spain in 1830, did not have a democratically elected government until 1947.
Under the 1961 Constitution executive power is vested in the President, who appoints and presides over a Council of Ministers.
Legislative power is exercised by a bicameral National Congress, the Senate having 49 elected members and as life members the former Presidents of constitutional governments, and the Chamber of Deputies having 196 members.
The President and National Congress are directly elected for concurrent five-year terms.
The country comprises 20 states, two federal territories, a Federal District around the capital and 72 federal dependencies.
The States are autonomous, each with their own executive Governor, appointed by the President, and an elected legislature, but must comply with the laws and Constitution of the Republic.
In presidential and congressional elections held on Dec. 4, 1988, Carlos Andrés Pérez of the centre-left Democratic Action party (Acción Democrática — AD) was elected President [see p. 36423].
He took office, in succession to Jaime Lusinchi, on Feb. 2, 1989 [see below].
Alejandro Izaguirre Angeli Interior Reinaldo Figueredo Planchart Foreign Affairs *Roberto Pocaterra Finance Gen. Filmo Lopéz Uzcategui Defence Moisés Naim Development Gustavo Roosen Education Manuel Adrianza Health Eugenio de Armas Agriculture and Livestock Germán Lairet Labour **Augusto Farias Transport and Communications Luis Beltran Guerra Justice Celestino Armas Energy and Mines Enrique Colmenares Finol Environment Luis Penzini Fleury Urban Development Marísela Padrón Quero Family Jesus Rámon Carmona Borjas Secretary-General of the Presidency Dulce Arnao de Uzcategui Science and Technology José Antonio Abreu Culture Miguel Antonio Rodríguez Fandeo Co-ordination and Planning Leopoldo Sucre Figarella Venezuelan Office for the Guyanan Region *Avila Vivas Governor of the Federal District *Appointed March 12, 1990. **Appointed October 1989.
Council of Ministers
POLITICS/SECURITY
Inauguration of Pérez
Following his election in December 1988 [see p. 36423]Carlos Andrés Pérez was inaugurated as President for a five-year term on Feb. 2, 1989, in the presence of over 20 heads of state and government including the Cuban President, Fidel Castro, the then Nicaraguan President, Daniel Ortega Saavedra, and Felipe González, the Spanish Prime Minister, as well as the United States Vice-President, Dan Quayle.
Pérez had previously been President in 1974-79 and was the first Venezuelan head of state to be re-elected.
Continuing violence following austerity measures
The state of emergency imposed throughout the country on Feb. 28, 1989, the second day of violent unrest following the introduction on Feb. 16 of an economic austerity programme [see pp. 36459-60], was lifted on March 9, 1989.
Certain constitutional restrictions remained in force until March 22, but the curfew had been lifted as of March 6.
The Cabinet agreed price controls on 18 basic products and a freeze on bus fares following the 50 per cent increase on the latter as one of the austerity measures, in addition to the wage increases announced on March 1 to mitigate the effect of the measures [ibid.].
Some 10,000 troops had been flown into Caracas in response to the unrest, and official casualty figures put the number of people killed at 256, including two soldiers and a police officer, and the number injured at 1,831, with deaths and injuries mostly caused by gunfire.
However, following allegations in the Congress by the Movement towards Socialism (Movimiento al Socialismo — MAS) of indiscriminate gunfire by the police and the Army in the slums, and of the execution of 19 people and other reports alleging that torture had been used in detention and that people had gone missing, a parliamentary commission claimed that over 600 were killed in Caracas alone and that 7,000 people were in detention (compared with the official figure of 1,000).
The human rights organization Amnesty International then called on the government to investigate whether human rights had been violated, and a presidential commission accordingly set up recorded allegations of torture from nine of the 13 detainees whom they interviewed, and Pérez on March 24 ordered the release of eight suspects who were still being held.
Fresh protests against price increases took place in Caracas and three other cities on April 4 in which a student was killed.
A 12-hour general strike in Caracas, the first for 31 years, was organized on May 18 by the Confederation of Venezuelan Workers (Confederación de Trabajadores de Venezuela — CTV) in protest at the economic measures and was widely observed.
There were two days of clashes on June 9-10 with the National Guard over bus fare increases in Acarigua, Portuguesa state, in the Andean town of Valera and in Ocumaré del Tuy, dozens of people being reported injured and nearly 200 being arrested.
A police strike in Caracas was ended on June 10 when 600 troops were sent into police stations which had been occupied by the strikers for two days in protest at low wages and the dismissal of 10 officers.
Seven police officers were injured in a gun battle.
On Feb. 20, 1990, violent disturbances took place in Caracas and several other cities, in which over 100 people were arrested.
The unrest, which was connected with further proposed petrol price and bus fare increases and also involved student protests, was believed to have been caused by a Supreme Court decision not to proceed with corruption charges against various former ministers.
Corruption investigations
As a result of investigations which began in 1989 against officials suspected of corrupt practices under the administration of the previous President, Jaime Lusinchi, a senator and former Minister of the Interior and of Development, José Angel Ciliberto, was on Jan. 27, 1990, stripped of parliamentary immunity as a prelude to facing charges of misuse of government funds.
Also under investigation for exchange control irregularities under the scheme authorized by the Differential Exchange System Office (Regimen de Cambios Diferenciales — Recadi) were executives of multinational companies, many of whom had left the country to avoid judicial proceedings.
An arrest warrant had been issued in May 1989 for Néstor Rapanelli, an executive of an Argentine multinational company Bunge and Born, who was in July appointed Finance Minister in Argentina [see p. 36810].
Amnesty report
An Amnesty International report on Venezuela published on Jan. 26, 1989, referred to cases of murder, ill-treatment and arbitrary arrest by soldiers and police in recent years.
In rural areas villagers had been detained and their houses had been burned in connection with land disputes, names were given of people held for up to 10 years without charge, and many who had been detained spoke of beatings in prison.
Lusinchi, then President, on Jan. 28 denied that human rights were being violated.
Amnesty International also called in May 1989 for urgent action to be taken regarding the case of 14 fishermen murdered by the Army near El Amparo on the Colombian border in October 1988 [see p. 36423].
A military tribunal's claim in November that the dead were Colombian rebels, was followed by a conflicting court ruling in January 1989 that charges should be brought against the perpetrators and their superior officers.
In April a further court ruling ordered the release of 19 soldiers who had been arrested, whereupon the two survivors of the massacre who in January had returned from Mexico — where they had sought asylum [ibid.]— felt obliged to seek church protection.
In August the government ordered the dissolution of the military unit involved in the massacre.
Kidnapping of President's brother-in-law
Pérez's brother-in-law, Norberto Rodríguez Rodríguez, was kidnapped in Colombia on July 14, 1989, apparently by the Colombian pro-Cuban National Liberation Army (Ejército de Liberación Nacional — ELN) who demanded a ransom of US$10,000,000.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth -8.1% (1989)
Current-account balance +US$792 m. (1989)
Trade balance +US$4.9 m. (1989)
Overall balance of payments +US$439,000 m. (1988)
Budget deficit (as % of GNP) 3% (1989)
Total external public debt US$33,000 m. (1989)
Gross domestic product US$45,700 m. (1989)
Gross national product US$59,390 m. (1988)
Inflation rate 81% (1989)
Unemployment 9.7% (1989)
Principal trading partners USA, West Germany, Japan
The then Finance Minister, Eclée Iturbe de Blanco, announced on March 12, 1989, that a single floating exchange rate would be imposed with effect from the following day for all financial transactions as part of the economic adjustment programme.
This effective 64 per cent devaluation was accompanied by measures guaranteeing the old official commercial rate of US$1.00=14.5 bolivares for importers with outstanding letters of credit.
Also as part of the austerity package, a broad reform of tariffs and of import regulations was announced in early June to reduce protectionism and render domestic industry more competitive.
On July 4, 1989, the government, business leaders and the CTV signed an economic pact to help reduce inflation and combat recession.
A permanent consultation mechanism was established and the public sector committed itself to the privatization of state enterprises except for certain strategic concerns, and to the substantial reduction of unnecessary bureaucracy, of expenditure and of the public deficit.
In a broad reform, foreign investment restrictions were lifted in January 1990, eliminating controls on profit remittances, profit reinvestment, and foreign investment in sectors hitherto reserved for nationals, and removing restraints on the transfer of technology.
IMF and World Bank loans
In accordance with a letter of intent signed on Feb. 28, 1989, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) on March 29 approved a purchase in the first credit tranche (i.e. for immediate disbursement) equivalent in total to 342,880,000 special drawing rights (SDR1=$1.29496 as at March 28, 1989), or 25 per cent of Venezuela's total Fund quota, in support of its economic reform programme [see p. 36459].
It was the first time that Venezuela had had recourse to the IMF.
Also in March the US administration agreed to grant Venezuela a bridging loan of $450,000,000 to support economic reforms and assist debt repayments.
The IMF on June 23 furthermore approved an extended arrangement authorizing purchases up to the equivalent of SDR3,703 million (about $4,600 million) over the next three years.
The IMF agreed to Venezuela's request that 25 per cent of purchases should be set aside for debt reduction, and announced its readiness to consider increasing the amount of the extended arrangement by up to 40 per cent above Venezuela's IMF quota in the event of financing arrangements being concluded with commercial bank creditors for debt-service reduction.
Both loans were dependent on major economic adjustments to reduce dependence on oil exports and to improve domestic competitiveness, and in the medium term to strengthen the current-account position consistent with real annual economic growth of 4.5-6 per cent, to reduce the external debt-service burden while strengthening the external reserve position, and to improve domestic investment.
In its first loan to Venezuela for 25 years, the World Bank on June 15 agreed a sum of $755,000,000, 25 per cent of which would be set aside for debt reduction, the rest for structural programmes and in support of economic reforms.
A further World Bank loan was approved in September for $3,750 million over the next five years in support of economic adjustment plans.
Debt negotiations
Following Lusinchi's announcement on Dec. 31, 1988, of the decision to halt principal payments on $21,700 million of public-sector foreign debt from Jan. 17, 1989 [see p. 36424], the new Pérez administration on Feb. 23, 1989, also suspended principal payments on about $5,000 million of private-sector foreign debt with effect from Feb. 28, pending renegotiation of new terms for the repayment of both private- and public-sector foreign debt.
Debt renegotiation talks during 1989 failed to achieve Venezuela's target, proposed in July, of a 50 per cent cut in debt-service payments, and negotiations continued on the basis of a proposed 42 per cent reduction in payments for 1990 and a proposal by creditor banks to reschedule $21,200 million of debt over 17 years.
In early October the advisory committee, representing the 450 creditor banks, had announced that Venezuela had paid $900,000,000 in accumulated arrears of interest payments following the granting of a bridging loan of about $600,000,000 by 25 creditor banks in September [see p. 37313 for March 1990 debt reduction agreement].
FOREIGN
On March 28, 1989, Pérez and President Virgilio Barco Vargas of Colombia met on the Urena border bridge and agreed to set up a permanent commission, chaired by former Spanish Prime Minister Adolfo Suárez González, to look into their marine border dispute, which last erupted in August 1987 when a Colombian warship sailed into the Gulf of Venezuela (known by Colombia as the Gulf of Guajira--see p. 35757).
Two other commissions were also to be established to deal with border problems such as drug trafficking, smuggling, illegal emigration and guerrilla attacks.
On Oct. 5 a border integration agreement was signed by the two Presidents.
Guyana and Venezuela agreed in February 1990 to the appointment of a special UN representative to mediate in their dispute over the Essequibo region.
AMERICAS — CARIBBEAN
GUYANA
BASIC DATA
Area: 214,969 sq km.
Population: 799,000 (1988).
Capital: Georgetown.
Languages: English (official); Hindi, Urdu and Amerindian dialects.
Religion: Christianity (about 50%), Hinduism (about 33%), Islam (less than 10%).
Av. life expectancy: 66 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 5,450 (1989).
GNP per capita: US$410 (1988).
Currency: Guyana dollar (US$1.00=G$33 as at May 4, 1990).
Guyana (formerly British Guiana) gained independence from the United Kingdom in 1966, becoming the Co-operative Republic of Guyana within the Commonwealth on Feb. 23, 1970.
Under the 1980 Constitution legislative power is held by the unicameral National Assembly, comprising 65 members (53 elected for five years by universal adult suffrage, on the basis of proportional representation, and 12 regional representatives) while executive power is held by the President.
The President appoints a First Vice-President and Prime Minister who must be an elected member of the National Assembly, and a Cabinet which may include non-elected members and is collectively responsible to the legislature.
According to the official results of a general election held on Dec. 9, 1985 [see p. 34162], the ruling People's National Congress (PNC) was returned to power winning 42 of the 53 seats in the National Assembly; the principal opposition party, the People's Progressive Party (PPP), withdrew from the election on polling day alleging widespread ballot-rigging by the government, but was subsequently declared to have won eight seats.
Hugh Desmond Hoyte, who had assumed office on Aug. 6, 1985 [see p. 33977], was sworn in as elected President on Dec. 12 [see p. 34162].
Hamilton Green First Vice-President and Prime Minister (Youth and Sports, Housing, Health) Viola Burnham Vice-President (Culture and Social Development); Deputy Prime Minister Keith Massiah Attorney General; Justice William Haslyn Parris Deputy Prime Minister (Planning and Development) Robert Corbin Deputy Prime Minister (Public Utilities) Patrick McKenzie Senior Minister of Agriculture Carl Greenidge Senior Minister of Finance Rashleigh Jackson Senior Minister of Foreign Affairs Winston Murray Senior Minister of Trade and Tourism Seeram Prashad Senior Minister of Planning and Development Jeffrey Thomas Senior Minister of Regional Development Yvonne Harewood-Benn Senior Minister in the President's Office Deryck Bernhard Senior Minister of Education Gowkarran Sharma Labour and Co-operatives Jules Richard Kranenburg Communications; Public Works Urmia Johnson Regional Planning Stella Odie-Ali Home Affairs 
Guyana Cabinet
POLITICS
At the annual convention of the ruling PNC on Aug. 20, 1989, Desmond Hoyte was returned unopposed as party leader.
Hamilton Green was appointed deputy leader and Seeram Prashad general secretary (replacing Ranji Chandisingh, hitherto Deputy Prime Minister, who was appointed ambassador to Moscow).
On Nov. 15 the PNC candidates for seats on municipal councils were declared elected unopposed after a boycott of the elections by the five-party opposition Patriotic Coalition for Democracy (PCD, which included the PPP, first formed in 1986 — see p. 34163) which had demanded electoral reform.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth -3% (1988)
Trade balance -US$14 m. (1987)
Total external debt US$1,800 m. (1988)
Gross domestic product US$360 m. (1988)
Gross national product US$273.1 m. (1988)
Inflation 29% (1987)
Principal trading partners UK, USA, CARICOM
Negotiations between the government and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) continued during late 1989 and early 1990 over the terms of future structural adjustment and standby facilities, but progress towards an agreement was impeded by the breaching of targets set under the IMF's monitoring programme.
(Guyana had been ineligible for IMF aid since 1985 — see p. 33977.)
The implementation of any future programme was also delayed by the slow progress made by a seven-member support group of donor countries in providing the US$180,000,000 "bridging loan" required to pay off Guyana's arrears to the IMF and other institutions, a necessary precondition to the resumption of lending by the IMF.
In January 1990 the Senior Minister of Finance, Carl Greenidge, stated that the loss of earnings resulting from the strikes in the bauxite and sugar industries in April and May 1989 had contributed to an additional $20,000,000 in arrears, as yet not covered by pledges from the support group.
The amounts of aid forthcoming from some member countries of the support group also proved less than at first anticipated.
In February 1990 the United States announced that it was giving only $1,000,000 to the government's economic recovery programme (ERP, launched in April 1989) instead of the $6,000,000 indicated earlier and the $13,000,000 requested by Canada, the chair of the support group.
On Jan. 24, 1990, Hoyte said that $27,000,000 of the $95,000,000 pledged by the group to help the ERP over its three-year period had been disbursed.
As reported on March 18 the Italian government had pledged $6,000,000 to the ERP and $1,000,000 in food aid, in addition to 996 tonnes of rice.
AMERICAS — CARIBBEAN
SURINAM
BASIC DATA
Area: 163,265 sq km.
Population: 429,000 (1988).
Capital: Paramaribo.
Languages: Dutch (official); Hindustani (32%) and Javanese (15%); the majority can speak the native language Sranang Tongo (taki-taki).
Religion: Christianity, Hinduism, Islam.
Av. life expectancy: 67 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 3,000 (1989).
GNP per capita: US$2,450 (1988).
Currency: Surinam gulden (guilder)(US$1.00=1.7666 guilders as at May 4, 1990).
Formerly Dutch Guiana, the Republic of Surinam gained independence from the Netherlands in 1975.
In August 1980 the Constitution was suspended and the legislature dissolved following the overthrow in February of the elected government and its substitution by a National Military Council (NMR).
In 1982 the NMR appointed an interim President and a predominantly civilian Council of Ministers (presided over by a Prime Minister).
Nevertheless real power remained with Sgt.-Maj. (later Lt.-Col.) Désiré "Desi" Bouterse, the Commander-in-Chief of the National Army and (until mid-August) Chairman of the National Military (later Supreme) Council.
A National Assembly, consisting of 31 nominated members, was appointed in January 1985 [see p. 33653].
Under a new Constitution approved in a national referendum on Sept. 30, 1987 [see p. 35758], ultimate authority now rests in theory with a 51-member National Assembly, elected for a five-year term; executive authority rests with the President, elected by the National Assembly (currently Ramsewak Shankar who, elected on Jan. 12, 1988, took office on Jan. 25 — see p. 35759), as head of state, head of government, head of the armed forces, and Chair of the Council of State (the successor of the Supreme Council) and of the Security Council (which was to assume all government functions in the event of "war, state of siege or exceptional circumstances to be determined by law" ).
The Army would remain the "vanguard of the people" .
In elections to the National Assembly on Nov. 25, 1987, 40 of the 51 seats were won by the Front for Democracy and Development (FDD), a coalition comprising the East Indian Progressive Reform Party (Vooruitstrevende Hervormings Partij — VHP), the Creole Surinam National Party (Nationale Partij Suriname — NPS) and the Party for National Unity and Solidarity (Kerukanan Tulodo Pranatan Ingil — KTPI).
The composition of the Council of State was decided on Dec. 4, 1987 [see p. 35759].
A. Sedoc Foreign Affairs Subhes Chandra Mungra Finance and Planning Pretaapnarian Radhakishun Natural Resources and Energy Evelyn Alexander-Vanenburg Home Affairs, District Administration and People's Mobilization H. Jankipersadsing Public Works, Telecommunications and Construction Henk Ali Mahumed Health Ronald Venetiann Education, Science, Culture, Sports and Youth Affairs W. Grep Transport, Trade and Industry Romeo Van Russel Labour S. Redjosenpono Agriculture, Livestock, Fisheries and Forestry Willy Soemita Housing and Social Affairs J. Adjodhia Justice and Police Maj. A. Sheikkariem Army 
Surinam Council of Ministers
POLITICS/SECURITY
Assassination of Soviet diplomat
The second secretary in the Soviet embassy, Stasis Obukauskas, was found shot dead near Paramaribo on April 10, 1990.
No group claimed responsibility but the police were reported to have arrested three suspects.
Developments following peace pact with guerrillas
The agreement reached in July 1989 between the government and the Jungle Commando (also known as the Surinamese Liberation Army — SLA and the Brunswijk gang, after its leader, Ronnie Brunswijk — see pp. 34931-32) in Kourou, French Guiana [see p. 36811], was approved overwhelmingly by the National Assembly on Aug. 8.
The Army leadership remained hostile to the accord, however, and at the end of August a series of attacks by an armed group of Tucayana Amerindians began in the west of the country.
The Tucayana demands included the cancellation of the Kourou accord and autonomy for Amerindian areas in the interior.
It was widely suspected that the Tucayana had links with the military and had been involved with anti-insurgency operations against the Jungle Commandos and that they feared the establishment of a police force for the interior composed mainly of former Jungle Commando members.
The situation was complicated by the actions of other armed groups, possibly dissident units of the Jungle Commando, including the seizure on Oct. 13 of the bauxite mining town of Moengo, 100 km east of Paramaribo, by a group calling itself the Union for Liberation and Democracy, and by the growing involvement of both rebel and Army-backed groups in the production and trafficking of illegal drugs, particularly cocaine.
The government, faced with this fresh outbreak of insurgency, maintained its policy of talks with Brunswijk and also opened negotiations with the Tucayana, an eight-member Tucayana delegation meeting with Jaggernath Lachmon, chairman of the National Assembly, on Oct. 9.
In the face of continued violence by armed bands the Army commander, Lt.-Col. Desi Bouterse, agreed to requests from Brunswijk for direct talks and a meeting between the two was held in Paramaribo on Dec. 19.
Further meetings followed, as did meetings between Bouterse and the Tucayana and two dissident Jungle Commando leaders.
The negotiations allowed Bouterse to adopt an increased political role at the expense of the civilian government, but on Feb. 14, 1990, he handed the mandate for negotiations back to the government claiming that the government was not supporting him fully.
According to Radio Surinam both Brunswijk and the Tucayana leader, Thomas, appeared with Bouterse at events in Paramaribo to mark the 10th anniversary of the military coup.
A commission headed by President Ramsewak Shankar then assumed responsibility for direct negotiations and had talks with Brunswijk and the Tucayana on March 2-3.
An agreement in May to resume these talks was seen as a setback for the Army, which had arrested Brunswijk and 10 Jungle Commando guerrillas, killing two of Brunswijk's bodyguards, on March 26 while he was attending peace talks with the government in Paramaribo.
Bouterse, who had claimed that Brunswijk was being held on drugs charges, complied with a government written order, and released the Jungle Commando leader on March 28.
Signing of accords on repatriation of refugees
On April 20 the government signed two accords with the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) for the repatriation of an estimated 1,000 Surinam refugees from French Guiana and the setting up of an official UN office in Paramaribo.
Air crash
On June 7, 1989, a DC-8 aircraft belonging to Surinam Airways crashed while trying to land at Zanderij airport.
A reported 174 passengers and crew were killed, including the Army Chief of Staff, Maj. Lieuw Yen Tai and the Air Force commander, Maj. Eddie Djoe.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
Current-account balance +US$63.2 m. (1988)
Trade balance +US$119.3 m. (1988)
Overall balance of payments -US$5.2 m. (1988)
Budget deficit US$250.4 m. (1986)
Total external debt US$60 m. (1988)
Gross domestic product US$1,080 m. (1987)
Principal trading partners Netherlands, USA, Norway
As reported on April 19, 1990, credit lines of US$11,000,000 and $3,000,000 had been granted respectively by an unidentified Japanese company and the Import-Export Bank of South Korea.
AMERICAS — CARIBBEAN
BRAZIL
BASIC DATA
Area: 8,511,965 sq km.
Population: 144,369,000 (1988).
Capital: Brasília.
Language: Portuguese.
Religion: Christianity (90% Roman Catholic).
Av. life expectancy: 65 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 324,000 (145,200 conscripts)(1989).
GNP per capita: US$2,280 (1988).
Currency: cruzeiro (US$1.00=67.9608 cruzeiros as at May 4, 1990).
The Federative Republic of Brazil became independent from Portugal in 1822 and a federal republic in 1889.
It comprises 23 states (each of which has a directly elected Governor and legislature), three territories and a Federal District (Brasília).
National legislative authority rests with the bicameral National Congress, comprising a Chamber of Deputies of variable size which is directly elected every four years, and a 69-member Federal Senate elected for eight-year terms with elections at four-year intervals for, alternately, one-third and two-thirds of the members.
Congressional elections are by universal and compulsory adult suffrage with one-third of the senators elected indirectly.
Executive power is exercised by the President who appoints and leads the Cabinet.
A new Constitution which entered into effect on Oct. 6, 1988, scheduled direct presidential elections and confirmed a five-year presidential term.
It also removed many of the restrictions imposed during the period of military rule between 1964 and 1985.
José Sarney Costa of the Liberal Front Party (Partido da Frente Liberal — PFL) was succeeded on March 15, 1990 [see p. 37312], by Fernando Collor de Mello of the National Reconstruction Party (Partido de Reconstruçao Nacional — PRN), the winner, with 53.03 per cent of the vote, of the second round of the presidential elections held on Dec. 17, 1989 [see p. 37117; for first round see p. 37040].
Bernardo Cabral Justice Francisco Rezek External Relations Zélia Cardoso de Mello Economy Ozires Silva Infrastructure Antonio Rogério Magri Labour Margarida Procópio Social Security Carlos Chiarelli Education (vacant) Agriculture Alceni Guerra Health Adml.
Mario César Flores Navy Gen. Carlos Tinoco Ribeiro Gomes Army Brig.
Sócrates Monteiro da Costa Air Force 
Cabinet
POLITICS/SECURITY
1989 appointments
Gen. Saulo Ramos was appointed Minister of Justice on Aug. 7, 1989, replacing Oscar Dias Corrêa, who had resigned on Aug. 1 after frequently speaking out against mismanagement of the economy and corruption in the administration.
In early April 1989 Brig.
Cherubim Rosa Filho had been appointed as the new Chief of Staff of the Air Force.
Vatican action against progressive bishops
The archdiocese of Sao Paulo, encompassing some 15,000,000 inhabitants, was reduced in March 1989 to one-eighth of its former size by order of the Vatican.
Theologically conservative bishops were appointed to each of the four resulting new dioceses, which removed the peripheral slum areas of the city, containing the poorest inhabitants, from the direct influence of Cardinal Paulo Evaristo Arns, the Archbishop of Sao Paolo.
The decision, which was officially taken for administrative reasons, was widely considered to have been taken in order to reduce the Cardinal's strong socially progressive influence based on the doctrine of "liberation theology" .
During his 17 years in Sao Paulo Arns had set up grassroots organizations dealing with social issues affecting the poor, including human rights and problems with the police.
Criticism from the Vatican during the papacy of Pope John Paul II had also resulted in one of Arns's auxiliary bishops, Mgr Luciano Mendes de Almeida, who was also president of the Bishops' Conference, becoming Archbishop of Mariana in the largely rural state of Minas Gerais, while other progressive Brazilian bishops, including Arns, had lost their seats on Vatican councils and other responsibilities to conservatives.
The Vatican in December 1989 ordered the closure in Recife on the east coast of two progressive seminaries founded by the former Archbishop of Olinda and Recife, the Most Rev. Helder Câmara.
Mgr José Cardoso Sobrinho, a conservative who had replaced Câmara when the latter retired in 1984, called a halt to church involvement in human rights work in the archdiocese; on Dec. 7, 1989, he dissolved a justice and peace committee which had been working with the poor, while on Dec. 14 eight priests, two of them French, were ordered to leave the diocese immediately.
Fr Leonardo Boff, a renowned Brazilian liberation theologist condemned by the Vatican to a year's silence in 1985 [see p. 33823], was banned by the Vatican with effect from Jan. 1, 1990, from preaching or pursuing his theological teaching at the university in Petrópolis, 50 km north-east of Rio de Janeiro.
Action on gold prospecting in Indian territory
In an agreement signed with Amazonian gold prospectors on Jan. 9, 1990, under the auspices of the National Security Council, miners were granted the right to continue prospecting in three areas totalling about 686 sq km, and at the same time the reduction of the size of the Yanomami Indian reservation to 19 separate "islands" of forest was confirmed.
The miners agreed not to carry weapons and to control the use of mercury used to purify alluvial gold.
The Procurator-General, however, on Jan. 10 declared this agreement null and void because it contravened an October 1989 ruling of the federal court in Brasília [see p. 37292].
Human rights
In January 1989 the human rights organization Amnesty International urged the government to investigate numerous killings of trade union leaders and called for it to take immediate action over the suspected participation of police and members of the judiciary in harassment of and death threats against peasant leaders.
It noted that the authorities had failed to investigate the six previous attempts on the life of Francisco "Chico" Mendes, the peasant union leader and ecological campaigner who was finally murdered on Dec. 22, 1988, in the Amazonian town of Xapuri [see p. 36459].
(Darli Alves da Silva was on Aug. 10, 1989, charged by a judge in Xapuri with ordering the murder of Chico Mendes while his son, Darcy Pereira da Silva, and Jardeir Pereira, who was still at large, were charged with committing the murder.)
In a report in October 1989 Amnesty International noted that in 1988 at least 50 peasants, trade unionists, Indians and church workers had been murdered in rural areas, usually at the instigation of landowners or land speculators and with the apparent collusion of the police.
It also mentioned the increasingly documented use of slave labour and the routine torture of prisoners and detainees.
An earlier report in September 1988 had claimed that over 1,000 Indians and peasants had been killed in land disputes since 1980 at the instigation of landowners, with official collusion, and that priests, nuns, church workers, lawyers and trade unionists had also been killed for working on their behalf.
Murderers had been brought to justice in only a small number of the cases referred to.
Ramos, the then Justice Minister, rejected the accusations against the authorities contained in the October 1989 report (and borne out in a document published by the Landless Peasants Movement, Sem Terra, in September 1989) and proposed the declaration of a state of emergency in certain areas to crush this kind of violence.
Throughout Brazil death squads operating against "marginal" members of society in the first half of 1989 killed at least 82 street children and adolescents, according to a survey conducted by IBASE, an independent research institute, and the National Street Children's Movement welfare organization.
Some 750 Brazilian street children (believed to number up to 12,000,000 throughout the country) went to Brasília in late September for a conference, at which they said 624 of their number had been murdered in the past 19 months, many of them by death squads.
They urged the President to hold a police inquiry into the killings and called on Congress to set up an investigation into links between the police and the death squads.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth 3% (1989)
Current-account balance +US$300 m.
Trade balance +US$16,100 m.
Budget deficit (as % of GNP) 7%
Total external public debt US$112,000 m. (1989)
Gross domestic product US$380,000 m. (1989)
Inflation rate 1,765% (1989)
Unemployment 3.6% (end 1989)
Principal trading partners USA, EC, Latin America
In his first public appearance since his election, the President-elect, Fernando Collor de Mello, on Dec. 22, 1989, ruled out any plans to bring forward his inauguration from March 15, 1990, and promised to use fiscal and administrative reforms to deal with the problem of inflation, including privatization and the dismissal of superfluous civil servants.
In January 1990 his team of economic advisers, led by Economy Minister Zélia Cardoso de Mello, put forward proposals to reduce the monthly rate of inflation to 5 per cent by June 1990 without recession or reduction of real wages and in accordance with the electoral programme [for formal introduction of austerity plan in March see p. 37312].
Daily devaluations of the new cruzado were averaging 3.4 per cent in February, while inflation reached a monthly rate of 56.1 per cent in January 1990 and 73 per cent in February.
1989 action against inflation
The previous government's "Summer Plan" introduced on Jan. 15, 1989 [see p. 36393], failed to produce the desired price stabilization.
Plans to dismiss up to 90,000 public employees had not been carried out, and high interest rates (up to 14 per cent in real terms in February 1989) had led to a consumer boom and raised the government's internal debt by 25 per cent.
Acknowledging the plan's failure the then Finance Minister, Maílson Ferreira da Nóbrega, on June 16 reintroduced an official daily indexation factor, the National Fiscal Treasury Bond (BTNF), to act as a stable point of reference for financial operations.
Daily devaluations of the new cruzado were also reinstated to reflect price increases.
In February 1989 inflation was down to a monthly rate of 3.6 per cent compared with 28.8 per cent in December 1988 and 37 per cent in January 1989, but accelerated sharply over the following months, reaching a monthly rate of 53.55 per cent by December.
Previously the Central Bank had carried out a series of devaluations of the new cruzado, which on its introduction in January 1989 had exchanged at near equity with the United States dollar.
The official rate was adjusted to US$1.00=1.032 cruzados following the April 18 devaluation (which was accompanied by public-sector wage increases) to $1.00=1.053 cruzados on May 5 and to $1.00=1.095 cruzados on May 12.
The rate on the free market around this time fluctuated between $1.00=2.6 cruzados and $1.00=3.2 cruzados.
In early July the new cruzado was again devalued from $1.00=1.512 cruzados to $1.00=1.693 cruzados following protests against low prices due to the overvalued currency by soyabean farmers which had spread through the states of Mato Grosso and Paraná.
During October the value of the currency fell by almost a half on the free market, to $1.00=12.7 cruzados, prompting police intervention in some exchange bureaus.
There was another rapid fall on the free market in mid-December, from $1.00=14 cruzados at the beginning of the month to $1.00=22 cruzados on Dec. 11.
The major parties in Congress in August submitted a series of specific measures to then President José Sarney designed to cut spending and to stabilize the economy in order to ward off hyperinflation.
These included selling off minority shareholdings in state companies, halting all subsidies and incentives for eight months, stricter monetary discipline and more efficient tax collection.
A number of these proposals were included in legislation presented to the Congress by Sarney on Aug. 16, which was accompanied by a bill preparing for the privatization of 18 state concerns in the steel, chemicals, fertilizers, mining and shipping sectors.
It was envisaged that a dozen of these could be privatized within a year and that foreign participation would be possible.
The state-sector deficit in 1988 was $5,000 million, half of this attributable to the steel concern SIDERBRAS.
Industrial unrest and general strike during 1989
Uncertainty regarding the currency in early 1989 was exacerbated by a wave of strikes by dockers, public transport workers, police, bank and hospital employees, and postal and telecommunications workers, and by rising prices.
A 48-hour general strike for large pay increases was organized on March 14-15 by the Central Union of Workers (Central Unica dos Trabalhadores — CUT) and the General Workers' Confederation (Confederaçao Geral dos Trabalhadores — CGT).
According to the Rio de Janeiro daily Jornal do Brasil, the strike was fully supported in 13 state capitals, partially in six and hardly at all in only three.
On April 27 Sarney announced provisional measures regulating the right to strike by workers in essential services (although the right of all workers to strike had been enshrined in the new Constitution promulgated in October 1988).
As detailed on May 2, the measures gave the government the technical right to dismiss strikers in these sectors and laid down that strikes in non-essential services had to be approved by an assembly of at least one-third of union members concerned, while in essential services strikes had to be announced 48 hours in advance and a minimum level of service ensured.
Also on April 27 measures laying down sanctions against speculation and the circumvention of price controls were announced.
A bomb on May 1 destroyed a newly unveiled monument in Volta Redonda, approximately 100 km north-west of Rio de Janeiro, to three steelworkers who had been killed by the Army during a strike in November 1988 [see p. 36553].
The attack was attributed to extreme right-wing military and civilian elements who were reputedly uneasy over the strikes and over the possibility of a left-wing victory in the presidential elections.
In June 1989 Sarney decreed an 85 per cent increase in the minimum monthly wage to $108 as of July 1.
The wage would in future be subject to inflation indexation.
Debt developments
In what was presented as action to protect its foreign exchange reserves (which had fallen to $5,600 million according to government sources) the government on July 5, 1989, informed the "Paris Club" group of creditors that it was temporarily deferring payment of $812,000,000 in interest which had been due on June 30 and July 3.
In line with Ferreira da Nóbrega's assurance that Brazil was not imposing a debt moratorium such as had been the case in February 1987 [see pp. 35823-24; for lifting of moratorium see p. 36553], and that payments would resume when the exchange situation permitted, payment was in fact made the following week.
In other moves to protect its reserves, the government had on July 3, 1989, centralized all foreign exchange operations in the Central Bank, thereby effectively temporarily suspending debt interest payments to private banks also.
At the end of August an indefinite freeze was placed on the repatriation of foreign companies' profits and dividends; however, in September the rules were relaxed to allow transfer of normal profits after 60 days, and in November it was reported that the freeze was to be lifted under pressure from international corporations.
Brazil's reserve problems were caused by its failure to conclude a new agreement with the International Monetary Fund (IMF), having failed to meet the requirements of the previous agreement, concluded in August 1988, as regards inflation and the public-spending deficit [see p. 36553].
The banks accordingly refused to release $600,000,000 promised under a 1988 debt refinancing agreement until agreement was reached with the IMF, and some $2,800 million from Japan, the World Bank and commercial banks was also being withheld.
Following a meeting in early August between Sarney, Ferreira da Nóbrega and John Reed, chairman and chief executive of the US Citibank (which as Brazil's largest creditor was owed some $4,000 million), Ferreira da Nóbrega confirmed the government's intention to continue to make the payment of debt interest dependent on the state of reserves, which it wanted to keep at a "safe" level of at least $6,000 million.
A further interest payment of $1,600 million due to commercial banks on Sept. 18 was withheld, but following talks in New York in September the creditor banks extended until January 1990 the availability of the $600,000,000 promised under the 1988 agreement.
In late January 1990 the Sarney administration delayed a further $980,000,000 interest payment to its Paris Club creditors plus $3,300 million which was due to commercial creditors.
On Oct. 17 an agreement was signed with Italy for Brazil to receive $1,500 million in loans from January 1990.
This figure would include $800,000,000 in commercial credits, $400,000,000 in soft loans with a 1.75 per cent interest rate, repayable over 20 years, and $80,000,000 in social credits.
The World Bank in September 1989 agreed to release credits of $1,600 million to Brazil.
In line with the Group of Eight's decision in December 1988 to offer fair treatment to Latin American debtors, Brazil in January 1990 proposed that debtor countries with payments imbalances or shortages of hard currency (such as Bolivia, Ecuador and Peru) should convert their debt into local currency to pay for Brazilian imports and to finance cross-border ventures, and also offered them the possibility of buying back debt at a discount.
In mid-November 1989 negotiations had been concluded with Guyana (owing $15,000,000) and Paraguay ($350,000,000), both of which chose to swap debt for debt certificates.
Energy sector
In 1989 Brazil faced a critical shortage of fuel alcohol, used to run more than a quarter of passenger cars, because the rise in demand (48 per cent since 1985) could not be met by the stagnating production of sugar cane.
Imports of methanol to supplement alcohol supplies were banned by a lower court in December 1989 because of fears of its environmental impact, but this ban was overruled by a federal court in January 1990.
At the instigation of the then Mines and Energy Minister, Vicente Cavalcante Fialho, Sarney in April 1989 dismissed the chief executive of the state oil company PETROBRAS, Orlando Galva, after only three months in office and appointed Carlos Sant'Anna to replace him.
Two other chief executives had left since June 1988 over government intervention in the company's activities.
Nuclear capacity
The head of the Navy's special projects co-ordinating board, Rear-Adml.
Othon Pinheiro da Silva, and the chairman of the National Commission for Nuclear Energy (CNEN), Rex Nazaré Alves, were quoted in the daily O Globo of April 9, 1989, as confirming that Brazil was now producing uranium enriched to 20 per cent(regarded as the threshold of nuclear weapons technology).
They stressed that Brazil did not intend to go beyond this stage as it had "no warmongering pretensions" .
Enriched uranium would be produced commercially at the Navy-run Aramar research centre at Ipero in Sao Paulo state from January 1990, and Pinheiro da Silva considered it feasible that it could be produced on an industrial scale by 1997 to supply Brazil's nuclear reactors.
A reactor for Brazil's first nuclear submarine would also be completed by 1995.
Uranium enrichment had first been achieved in Brazil (to 1.2 per cent) in 1987 [see p. 35822].
Brazil was a member of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), but although it had signed the 1967 Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America (the Treaty of Tlatelolco — see p. 22505) it had not signed the 1968 Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT — see p. 22787), and for this reason had been allowed no international shipments of nuclear fuel since 1978.
Reopening of futures markets
Trading in stock options and index futures suspended on June 25, 1989, following a stock market scandal [see p. 36732]was resumed on Oct. 27 under new regulations drawn up by the capital markets regulator, the Comissao de Valores Mobiliários (CVM), to prevent price manipulation and speculation.
Naji Robert Nahas, the speculator who provoked the collapse in share prices after defaulting on extensive debts, was arrested in Sao Paulo on Oct. 30 and charged with fraud.
Disasters
A landslide of earth and debris on Oct. 25, 1989, buried a shantytown on the outskirts of Sao Paulo, reported variously as killing between 15 and 60 people.
Floods in late December in the states of Minas Gerais, Bahia, Pará, Pernambuco and Goiás left 200,000 people homeless.
FOREIGN
President Carlos Menem of Argentina visited Brazil on Aug. 22-24, 1989, for talks with Sarney.
During the visit ratification documents for the treaty for integration, co-operation and development signed in November 1988 [see p. 36553]were exchanged and other agreements were concluded.
These covered reciprocal credit to cover trade imbalances, the freeing of over 100 Argentinian food products for import, the harmonization of space programmes, the exemption of nuclear power plant equipment from import duties, and confirmation that the Pichi Picún hydroelectric project would go ahead.
On Aug. 22, 1989, the two heads of state and President Julio María Sanguinetti Cairolo of Uruguay met at Uruguaiana (Brazil) on the Argentine-Brazilian border and signed a tripartite agreement on co-operation and integration and a communiqué condemning drug trafficking and terrorism.
Collor de Mello visited Argentina, Uruguay and Paraguay in January 1990 for talks centring on Brazil's debt, and on Jan. 24 began a three-week tour of the USA, seven European countries and Asia.
AMERICAS — CARIBBEAN
PARAGUAY
BASIC DATA
Area: 406,752 sq km.
Population: 4,042,000 (1988).
Capital: Asunción.
Languages: Spanish (official); majority speak Guaraní, an indigenous Indian language.
Religion: Christianity (90% Roman Catholic).
Av. life expectancy: 67 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 16,000 (9,800 conscripts)(1989).
GNP per capita: US$1,180 (1988).
Currency: guaraní (US$1.00=1,208.7349 guaranís as at May 4, 1990).
Paraguay achieved independence from Spain in 1811.
The 1967 Constitution defines the Republic of Paraguay as a "representative democracy" with an executive President directly elected (and re-eligible) for a five-year term.
The President governs with the assistance of an appointed Council of Minsters.
Legislative power is vested in a bicameral National Congress consisting of a Senate of at least 30 members and a Chamber of Deputies of at least 60 members, both directly elected for five-year terms (subject to dissolution) at the same time as the President.
The party receiving the largest number of votes (since 1947 the Colorado Party — Partido Colorado) is allotted two-thirds of the seats in both Houses of Congress, the remaining seats being divided among the minority parties in proportion to their electoral strength.
Since taking power in a military coup in 1954 Gen. Alfredo Stroessner was on eight consecutive occasions declared the winner of presidential elections as the candidate of the Colorado Party, most recently on Feb. 14, 1988 [see p. 35887].
This uninterrupted period of rule was ended abruptly on Feb. 3, 1989, by a coup led by Gen. Andrés Rodríguez, who was sworn in immediately as interim President [see p. 36458].
Presidential elections held concurrently with congressional elections on May 1, 1989, returned Rodríguez as President for a five-year term [see p. 36652].
Gen. Orlando Machuca Vargas Interior Luis Maria Argaña Foreign Affairs Dionisio González Torres Education and Religion Enzo Debernardi Finance Hernando Bertoni Argón Agriculture Antonio Zuccolillo Moscarda Industry and Commerce Brig. -Gen. (retd) Porfirio Pereira Ruíz Díaz Public Works and Communications Alexis Frutos Vaesken Justice and Labour Maria Cynthia Prieto Health and Social Welfare Gen. Angel Juan Souto Hernández Defence Conrado Pappalardo Secretary-General of the Presidency Juan Ramón Chavez Without Portfolio 
Council of Ministers
POLITICS
Following its mass resignation on Dec. 11, 1989 [see pp. 37118-19], the Cabinet was reappointed unchanged shortly afterwards, except for the replacement of Manuel Cano Melgarejo by Maria Cynthia Prieto as Health and Social Welfare Minister.
President Rodríguez had announced on Aug. 12, 1989, the replacement by Gen. Angel Juan Souto Hernandez of Gen. Adolfo Samaniego as Defence Minister.
SECURITY
Dismissal of generals
As reported in the newspaper El Diario of March 21, 1989, Samaniego had announced that former President Stroessner and his son, Col. Gustavo Stroessner, both of whom were in exile in Brazil, would be dismissed from the military and that those generals who had supported the previous regime "until the last minute" would be retired, dismissed or tried by military courts.
The government was reported by June only to have initiated proceedings for the extradition of Gustavo Stroessner in compliance with an order for his arrest on corruption charges issued by a criminal court in March.
An audit of Stroessner's financial affairs had been ordered by the government in March, and it was reported that this would reveal details of a "secret account" into which Stroessner and his former Treasury Minister, Gen. Cesar Barrientos [for whose death see p. 36687], had deposited millions of dollars from tolls and special petrol tax payments.
Suppression of protests
Dogs were used to put down a land reform demonstration outside the National Congress in Asunción on June 23, 1989; 10 people were injured in what was the first major use of force since Rodríguez had seized power.
The protest came after police, supported by soldiers, had evicted squatters occupying unused private land.
In an earlier meeting with political leaders (including opposition figures), Rodríguez had requested support for land reform which he described as the country's most pressing problem, but he insisted on respect for private property rights, as well as the squatters' vacation of the occupied land, before such reforms could be implemented.
On Dec. 12 two people were killed and 10 wounded when soldiers fired on picketing workers at the Itaipú hydroelectric dam in Ciudad del Este, approximately 300 km east of Asunción, where 2,500 workers were on a two-week strike.
Rodríguez deplored the incident, saying that a judicial team had been sent to investigate, and accused union leaders of instigating the disturbances.
Detention of Spanish national — Return of Communist Party exile
In July 1989 the police ordered the detention of a fugitive Spanish national, Emilio Hellín, an ultra-rightist sentenced in Spain for the murder in 1980 of a left-wing student from Madrid.
The general secretary of the Paraguayan Communist Party (Partido Comunista Paraguayo — PCP), Antonio Maidana, who in 1978 had been released from prison into exile, returned to Paraguay on Dec. 16.
Human rights
Human rights leaders in April 1989 claimed to have discovered the remains of 40 political dissidents in a secret grave 70 km outside Asunción, allegedly used between 1963 and 1976.
Rodríguez denounced on Aug. 17 the "massive trade" in Paraguayan children, claiming that up to seven children were sold abroad every week for US$7,000 each.
Condemning the involvement of United States citizens and of local lawyers and judges, he called for the media to launch investigations at Asunción airport.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth 6% (1989)
Current-account balance -US$307.2 m. (1988)
Trade balance -US$17 m. (1988)
Total external public debt US$2,150 m. (1989 est.)
Debt service ratio (as % of export earnings) 8.1% (1989 est.)
Gross domestic product US$8,175.5 m. (1989 est.)
Inflation rate 28% (January-November 1989)
Unemployment 10% (1989)
Principal trading partners EC, Brazil, Argentina, USA
Rodríguez announced on March 2, 1989, that the government had (i) freed the exchange rate from Central Bank control;(ii) ended the system of multiple exchange rates and minimum export prices;(iii) removed price controls and differential interest rates; and (iv) begun the removal of subsidies and monopoly privileges in parts of the public sector (such as in the sale and distribution of sugar, alcohol and rum, and in the marketing of alcohol fuel).
He added that two or three state industries would be privatized and that efforts would be made to streamline the administration of the rest, making them self-financing.
A new law, approved by the Council of State on April 24, 1989, was aimed at promoting national and international investment through tax concessions.
The Council of State (its constitutional decision making role, which the previous Stroessner regime had ignored, restored by Rodriguez) on April 14 had decreed a 30 per cent increase in civil servants' wages and increased the national budget by just over 33 per cent.
In March 1990 it was reported that the target of a 6 per cent growth rate for 1989 had been reached and that inflation was falling.
Spending cuts, a clampdown on corruption and an increase in tax revenues had reportedly enabled the government to reduce the public-sector deficit from 8 per cent of gross domestic product (GDP) in 1988 to zero.
In addition in 1989 foreign reserves were reported to have doubled to $285,000,000 and exports to have risen by 106 per cent to $1,000 million, compared with 1988.
The servicing of Paraguay's estimated $2,150 million foreign debt was expected to be cut by 20 per cent in 1990.
In early February the Senate was reported to have been considering government proposals to reject responsibility for more than $200,000,000 in loans to the Stroessner government from international lending agencies.
FOREIGN
Relations with other Latin American countries
In a debt reduction agreement ratified by the Council of State on May 1, 1989, Paraguay was granted a new period of 20 years, with eight years' grace, for the payment of its $436,000,000 debt to Brazil.
During a visit on Nov. 27-28 by the Argentinian President, Carlos Saúl Menem, an agreement was signed to increase sales of hydroelectric power to Argentina.
Both governments also re-emphasized the importance of the completion of the joint Yacyretá dam project [see p. 34418]which was expected to begin operation in 1993.
An earlier agreement on July 4 between the Paraguayan National Power Administration and the Argentinian Water and Energy Company allowed for water to be supplied to Argentina's north-eastern region.
An agreement with Colombia to exchange information on drug trafficking was reported to have been reached on March 2, 1990.
Also on March 2 Rodríguez announced that diplomatic relations would be resumed with Nicaragua following the inauguration on April 25 of President-elect Violeta Chamorro [see p. 37370].
Signing of Montevideo Declaration
Following the inauguration on March 1, 1990, of Uruguayan President Luis Alberto Lacalle Herrera [see p. 37313], Rodríguez joined the Presidents of Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil and Uruguay on March 2 in signing the Montevideo Declaration which reaffirmed common support for the Paraná-Paraguay rivers free passage agreement of April 1988 [see p. 36688].
AMERICAS — CARIBBEAN
URUGUAY
BASIC DATA
Area: 176,215 sq km.
Population: 3,004,000 (1988).
Capital: Montevideo.
Language: Spanish.
Religion: Christianity (Roman Catholic).
Av. life expectancy: 71 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 24,400 (1989).
GNP per capita: US$2,470 (1988).
Currency: New Uruguayan peso (US$1.00=1018.4638 pesos as at May 4, 1990).
The independence of the Eastern Republic of Uruguay was recognized in 1828 after a period in which its territory was the subject of a dispute between Argentina and Brazil.
Under the 1966 Constitution the republic has an executive President and a National Congress consisting of a 99-member Chamber of Deputies and a 30-member Senate, the President and the Congress being directly elected for a five-year term.
The President is assisted by a Vice-President and an appointed Council of Ministers.
Following the return to civilian rule in 1985 (after more than 11 years of military rule — see p. 33516) a National Constituent Assembly was installed on July 1, 1985, to draw up a series of constitutional reforms to be submitted to a plebiscite for ratification.
Presidential and legislative elections on Nov. 26, 1989 [see p. 37039 — the first fully free elections since 1971], were won by the National (Blanco) Party (Partido Nacional Blanco).
Luis Alberto Lacalle Herrera took over as President from Julio María Sanguinetti Cairolo on March 1, 1990 [see p. 37313].
POLITICS
Resignation by Lacalle of party posts
It was reported on Jan. 10, 1990, that, as President-elect, Lacalle had resigned as director of the Blanco Party and as president of the national executive committee of the party's Herrera movement tendency.
Controversy surrounding duel
In February Sanguinetti's outgoing government was accused by politicians and union leaders of diverting national attention from current political and economic issues by allowing a duel to proceed under a 1920 law.
A police inspector, Saul Clavería, had obtained permission to defend his honour after alleging that the editor of the daily newspaper La República, Federico Fassano, had accused him of involvement in the smuggling of contraband from Brazil.
Clavería subsequently withdrew his challenge.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth 0.6% (1989 est.)
Current-account balance -US$50 m. (1989 est.)
Trade balance +US$300 m. (1989)
Foreign debt US$6,300 m. (1989)
Debt service ratio (as % of export earnings) 26.7% (1989 est.)
Gross domestic product US$8,693.4 m. (1989 est.)
Inflation rate 89.18% (1989)
Unemployment 9.2% (1989)
Principal trading partners Brazil, USA, Argentina
A severe drought [see p. 37146]continued to affect large parts of the country throughout 1989 and led to heavy losses in agriculture and serious declines in hydroelectricity output.
The service and construction industries recorded growth of 10 per cent in 1989 but manufacturing showed no significant increases.
Transport workers staged strikes on Jan. 15 and 26, 1990, for increased wages to compensate for monthly devaluations in the peso, which had fuelled inflation rises.
Such devaluations were reportedly made to retain competitiveness with the heavily devalued Argentinian austral [see p. 37244]in order to stem the flow of contraband into the country.
On March 8 the "commercial" border with Argentina was reported to have been closed due to a "massive increase" in smuggling.
In February Tabaré Vázquez, the socialist mayor of Montevideo [for whose election see p. 37039], announced cuts in transport tariffs and a decentralization of the city's administration.
During a visit to the United States in early February 1990 [see also below]Lacalle initiated fresh talks with the US Treasury, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank about a possible debt reduction scheme with commercial creditor banks covering an estimated US$1,600 million of Uruguay's $6,300 million foreign debt.
FOREIGN
Lacalle met United States President George Bush on Feb. 5, 1990, during a visit to the USA, and an agreement was reached to prevent the laundering of drug money through Uruguayan banks.
The signing of a penal law co-operation treaty was reported to be imminent.
It was reported on March 14, 1990, that the government had recognized the Panamanian government of Guillermo Endara and would be restoring diplomatic relations.
AMERICAS — CARIBBEAN
ARGENTINA
BASIC DATA
Area: 2,766,889 sq km.
Population: 31,506,000 (1988).
Capital: Buenos Aires.
Language: Spanish.
Religion: Christianity (90% Roman Catholic, 2% Protestant).
Av. life expectancy: 71 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 95,000 (39,000 conscripts)(1989).
GNP per capita: US$2,640 (1988).
Currency: austral (US$1.00=5,006.8674 australs as at May 4, 1990).
The Federal Republic of Argentina gained independence from Spain in 1816.
It comprises a Federal District, 23 provinces and the National Territory of Tierra del Fuego.
The legislature consists of a Chamber of Deputies of 254 members elected directly for four-year terms with half of the seats renewable every two years, and a 46-member Senate nominated by the legislatures of each of the 23 provinces for nine-year terms with one-third of the seats renewable every three years.
Executive power is vested in the President who, with the Vice-President, is elected for a six-year term by an electoral college of 600 directly-elected members.
The Cabinet is appointed by the President who is the head of state.
Each province has its own elected governor and legislature, concerned with all matters not delegated to the federal government.
In elections on Oct. 30, 1983 [see pp. 32553-55], the Radical Civic Union (Unión Cívica Radical — UCR), led by Raúl Alfonsín Foulkes, won 317 of the 600 seats in the electoral college and the UCR took 129 seats in the Chamber of Deputies.
The new administration duly took office on Dec. 10, marking a return to civilian and democratic government following seven years of rule by successive military juntas.
The Justicialist Party (Partido Justicialista — the formal name for the Peronists) won control of the Chamber of Deputies in elections on May 14, 1989 [see pp. 36651-52], and the Peronist presidential candidate Carlos Saúl Menem was elected to succeed Alfonsín in December 1989.
Given the current economic crisis, however, Menem's inauguration was brought forward to July 8 [see p. 36810].
Humberto Romero Defence Antonio Ermán González Economy Antonio Francisco Salonia Education and Justice Domingo Cavallo Foreign Relations Julio Mera Figueroa Interior Alberto Jorge Triaca Labour and Social Security Eduardo Bauzá Public Health and Social Action José Roberto Dromi Public Works and Services Alberto Kohan Secretary General of the Presidency 
Cabinet
POLITICS
Growing unpopularity of Menem
Six months after his early takeover of the presidency from Raul Alfonsín on July 8, 1989 [see p. 36810], Carlos Menem's popularity was in sharp decline.
The economy was in deep recession, hyperinflation was a major concern, and price rises and food shortages had led to looting.
In January 1990 all the telephones in Menem's residence and in the presidential palace were discovered to be bugged.
The daily Clarín reported on March 3 that under a decree signed by Menem on Feb. 26, 1990 (expanding an earlier decree of March 10, 1989, introduced after the La Tablada attack — see p. 36394 and below), the armed forces were entitled to intervene in the event of "a state of internal disturbance" serious enough to endanger the life, liberty, property or security of the country's inhabitants; with this in mind the National Security Council [see p. 36613]was to draw up plans for possible joint actions by the police, the security forces and the armed forces.
However, the Interior Minister, Julio Mera Figueroa, insisted at a press conference on March 7 that the decree did not modify the March 1989 decree but merely changed the composition of the National Security Council.
The Justice Secretary, César Arias (appointed on Oct. 5, 1989, to replace Julio Oyhanarte), later described as a "fantasy" remarks by former President Raúl Alfonsín who in a television interview on March 7, 1990, warned that democracy was under threat and alleged that the government was studying the possibility of closing Congress using a 1909 decree.
New president of UCD
Federico Clerici was on June 10, 1989, elected president of the right-wing Union of the Democratic Centre (Unión del Centro Democrático — UCD), the country's third largest party, in succession to Alvaro Alsogaray, the government's foreign debt negotiator.
[On p. 36810 the latter's daughter María Julia Alsogaray, the administrator of the state telecommunications company Entel, is wrongly stated to be the UCD leader.]
Military appointments
At the same time as the appointment on July 10, 1989, of Gen. Isidro Cáceres as the new Army Chief of Staff [see p. 36810], Rear-Adml.
Jorge Ferrer became Navy Chief of Staff, Gen. José Julia Air Force Chief of Staff and Vice-Adml.
Emilio Osses Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
Cáceres died from a heart attack on March 21, 1990, and was replaced by Gen. Martín Felix Bonnet.
SECURITY
Armed forces
The armed forces continued to be split, chiefly over the issue of the treatment of soldiers involved in the "dirty war" of 1976-83 and in more recent military rebellions, with former officers such as Aldo Rico and Mohamed Alí Seineldin who had been involved in 1987-88 rebellions keeping a high public profile despite their pardoning and subsequent dismissal from the Army in October 1989 [see p. 36972].
Seineldin attributed a bomb which exploded on Dec. 21, 1989, in front of Army headquarters in Buenos Aires to discontent over pay and to the "lack of attention" paid to non-commissioned officers.
While still in detention at a military barracks in Buenos Aires, Seineldin in a letter of June 1989 accused the Army leadership of breaking promises made in a deal to end the December 1988 "Villa Martelli" mutiny [see p. 36394]which he claimed foresaw the full reintegration into the armed forces of officers involved in previous mutinies, and exemption from punishment for the December mutineers.
However, Gen. José Dante Caridi, who had stood down as Army Chief of Staff after the rebellion, immediately denied the existence of any such deal (as did his successor, Gen. Francisco Gassino, who warned that he would respond firmly to any further mutinies) and accused Seineldin of excessive nationalism and fundamentalism and of being involved in a group of Army conspirators which had been in existence for 25 years.
Despite his dismissal from the Army Seineldin, until 1988 a military adviser to the Panamanian Defence Forces under Gen. Manuel Antonio Noriega, was in late 1989 appointed head of an elite special force.
Brig. -Gen.
Orlando Ramón Agosti, a member of the ruling military junta in 1976-79, was released from prison in May 1989 after serving part of a 4@1/2-year sentence imposed in December 1985 for torture and robbery committed during the dirty war [see p. 34667].
Agosti still faced charges of involvement in the 1976 coup which overthrew President María Estela (Isabelita) de Martínez Perón [see pp. 27741-43], but military trials had been effectively suspended in April 1989 when the Supreme Court decided to examine the documentation pertaining to all cases involving military officers accused of human rights abuses in 1976-83.
Italo Argentino Lúder, the then Defence Minister, announced on Aug. 17 that about 100 trials of members of the armed forces were to be cancelled but that the armed forces might look at individual cases with a view to punishment.
Jorge Born, a leading grain dealer, who, with his brother Juan, had been kidnapped in 1974 by the Peronist Montoneros guerrilla group [see p. 26762], called in August for a complete amnesty for both sides involved in the dirty war.
A national "mass of reconciliation" was proposed for Aug. 15 by the "revolutionary Peronism" faction of the ruling Justicialist Party, including the remnants of the Montoneros, who called for reconciliation with the armed forces and an amnesty for their imprisoned leader Mario Firmenich [see p. 35561]; this mass was to have been attended both by former Montonero guerrillas and by military officers from the dirty war, but was cancelled by the Church when it became clear that certain officers were using it to support their demand for an amnesty.
Menem on Oct. 18 extended to three more Army officers and seven former guerrillas the pardon granted on Oct. 7 [see pp. 36972-73].
Leading figures excluded from the Oct. 7 pardon in addition to Gen. Jorge Rafael Videla, Gen. Roberto Eduardo Viola, Gen. Guillermo Carlos Suárez Mason and Gen. Ramón J. Camps [ibid.]were Adml.
Eduardo Emilio Massera (a military junta member in 1976-78) and Vice-Adml.
Armando Lambruschini (a junta member in 1978-81).
Gen. Reynaldo Bignone (President in 1982-83) was among those freed.
Demonstrations against a military amnesty took place in Buenos Aires on Sept. 8 [see p. 36973]and on Oct. 20, involving human rights organizations, trade unions, left-wing parties, members of the UCR and some elements of the Justicialist Party.
A petition signed by 1,000,000 Argentinians was also handed over in October to the then Interior Minister, Eduardo Bauzá, demanding that soldiers should face punishment for their crimes.
As reported on April 30, 1990, Menem stated that he intended to pardon Videla, Viola, Massera and Firmenich in December 1990.
La Tablada trial
The trial began on July 20, 1989, of 16 men and four women accused of taking over the La Tablada barracks on Jan. 23, 1989, when about 40 people were killed and over 60 wounded [see pp. 36394; 36613].
The defendants, some of them very young, belonged to a small left-wing group known as Everyone for the Motherland Movement (Movimiento Todos por la Patria — MTP); at the time 13 of them were arrested inside the barracks and five nearby, while two, including a priest, surrendered later.
All claimed that they had attacked La Tablada because they believed a military coup was under way and that they were trying to forestall it; they also said that their attempts to surrender had been ignored and that at least four of their comrades had been tortured and killed.
On Oct. 6 the court sentenced 11 of the men including the MTP leader, Roberto Felicetti, and two of the women to life imprisonment for murder, wounding, robbery and rebellion, with the possibility of release after 25 years for good behaviour; the remaining seven, including the priest, Fr Juan Antonio Puigjane, an MTP leader who had not participated in the actual attack, were sentenced to terms of between 10 and 20 years' imprisonment for complicity.
On March 27, 1990, the human rights organization Amnesty International cited strong evidence that MTP members had been tortured, illegally executed and had disappeared while in military custody.
It called on the government to hold a "special and exhaustive investigation" .
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth -5.5% (1989)
Current-account balance -US$700 m. (1989)
Trade balance +US$5 m. (1989)
Budget deficit US$8,000 m. (1989)
Budget deficit (as % of GNP) 6.3% (1989)
Total external public debt US$60,000 m. 1989
Gross domestic product US$68,300 m. (1989)
Inflation rate 4,923% (1989)
Unemployment 8% (1989)
Principal trading partners Exports: USA, Soviet Union, Italy; Imports: USA, Brazil, West Germany 
New Central Bank presidents
The president of the Banco Central, Javier González Fraga, resigned on Nov. 23, 1989, and was replaced by Egídio Iannella.
Iannella was later succeeded by Rodolfo Rossi, who resigned on Jan. 22, 1990, and was replaced by Enrique Eugenio Folcini.
Folcini himself resigned on March 7.
Economic crisis
In July 1989 inflation reached a record monthly rate of 196.6 per cent, compared with 114 per cent in June, fuelled by the huge increases in the prices of public services announced on July 9, and by the price rises effected just before the entry into force of a price control agreement with leading manufacturers [see p. 36810]which, it was announced on Oct. 7, would be extended until March 1990.
Inflation in August fell to 37.9 per cent.
On Aug. 8 the Senate approved an economic emergency bill which declared a state of emergency in the public sector for 180 days.
During this period it provided for the suspension of government subsidies to industry and industrial promotion benefits (a form of tax relief to companies in the interior), and for a halt to subsidies to provincial administrations.
Some taxes were to be increased, the government would be freed of its obligation to buy Argentinian goods and services, and some barriers to foreign investment were removed.
The Chamber of Deputies passed the bill on Aug. 31 after modifying some of its provisions, so that in its final form the law cut state subsidies by only 50 per cent and these would be restored in full on expiry of the 180 days; provisions for a moratorium on unpaid taxes and greater flexibility on contracts and salaries for senior government employees were voted out.
The government's obligation to "Buy Argentine" was suspended by decree on Oct. 9.
On Aug. 10 the Chamber of Deputies approved a state reform bill on privatization.
This provided for the return to private ownership of over 30 state-owned companies, many of them founded by Juan Perón himself, including air and shipping lines, railways, coal and oil and posts and telecommunications companies, utilities and radio and television stations.
In implementation of the law Menem on Sept. 13 signed a decree for the privatization by June 28, 1990, of Entel, the state telecommunications company, and on Dec. 22 signed a decree for the sale of two state-owned television channels to groups of investors as of Dec. 27.
A decree signed in October allowed for the gradual deregulation of the oil industry, whereby the exploration and exploitation of oil reserves, hitherto the sole province of Yacimientos Petrolíferos Fiscales (YPF), would be open to foreign companies and all YPF oil wells would be privatized within six months.
The Economy Minister, Antonio Ermán González, said on Jan. 16, 1990, that YPF and the state gas, coal and hydroelectric companies, which had a combined operating deficit of over $700,000,000 in 1989, were to be merged into one group, the Federal Fuel Company, within 60 days.
On Oct. 9, 1989, the then Economy Minister, Néstor Rapanelli, signed a decree allowing freedom of action for foreign companies to buy into Argentina without prior government approval; however, areas such as the media were to remain closed to foreign investment.
Following political pressure in the Congress throughout March 1990 the government was expected to alter the proposed privatization terms of Entel, which was to be divided into two companies.
The potential profits of the buyers of the 60 per cent of Entel to be sold off would be reduced by being based on the purchase price of $1,900 million and not on the $3,500 million net asset value as fixed by the government.
In addition buyers would be required to purchase a minimum of $220 million of foreign debt in cash and $380 million in government bonds.
A demonstration of an estimated 60,000 state-sector workers had protested on March 3 at the sale announced the previous day along with that of Aerolíneas Argentinas.
Inflation, which had officially fallen to 9.4 per cent in September 1989 and to around 7 per cent in October, rose sharply in November, while the austral lost one-tenth of its value on the black market, dropping to $1.00=1,000 australs in the course of a few hours on Nov. 20 against a background of uncertainty over economic policies, tension within the government and divisions in the labour movement.
Further economic adjustments were announced on Dec. 10 but faced with the continuing collapse of the austral Rapanelli resigned as Economy Minister on Dec. 15 and was replaced by González [see p. 37118].
(González had previously been Health Minister, appointed on Sept. 23 to replace Julio César Corzo who was killed in an air crash.)
At the end of December the government was reported to be considering introducing the US dollar as its official currency.
Inflation for the month of December was officially stated as 40.1 per cent but was unofficially recognized to be much higher.
Banks were closed from Dec. 29, 1989, to Jan. 4, 1990, during which time the austral, which had closed on Dec. 28 at US$1.00=2,000 australs, fell by over 30 per cent in value.
In a move to freeze about two-thirds of all the money in circulation, short-term seven-day banking deposits worth about $2,000 million were frozen on Jan. 1, and the amount which investors could withdraw in cash was limited to 1,000,000 australs, the option being to accept repayment of savings in 10-year dollar bonds.
Interest rates had risen in recent months as high as an annualized rate of 1,200 per cent as banks struggled to retain their funds, and the move initially froze the savings of thousands of Argentinians and also affected major corporations.
This caused the austral to deteriorate still further as dollars were purchased, trading in February at over $1.00=4,000 australs and falling on Feb. 25 to a record low of $1.00=5,600 australs.
Inflation continued to spiral throughout January and February [see p. 37118].
González, who said that he was pleased by the progress made in the past two weeks in stabilizing the economy, announced further measures on Jan. 15.
These included the rationalization of the State Intelligence Secretariat (SIDE), with one-third of employees being made redundant and buildings and vehicles auctioned off (the SIDE chief, Juan Bautista Yofre, announcing his resignation at the end of the month and being succeeded by Hugo Anzorreguí), and the creation of a central body to supervise the finances of public-sector companies due for privatization.
Several petrochemical plants owned by the armed forces were also to be put up for sale.
On March 4 González announced measures to cut public spending by $2,000 million.
They included the immediate retirement of all civil servants at or above retirement age, the suspension of civil servants who were within two years of retirement, a freeze on promotions, overtime and new recruitment, the closure of dozens of government departments and the state Banco Hipotecario Nacional, the imposition of strict controls on the Banco Central to restrict the growth of the money supply, the suspension of export loans and subsidies to industry, the raising of capital taxes and export duties, and the suspension of collective bargaining in the public sector.
As from April 1 the basic public-sector wage would be raised from 100,000 to 450,000 australs per month.
González on March 7 authorized price rises for public-sector companies, including an increase in petrol prices of 124 per cent in water charges of 58 per cent retroactively to November 1989, even though the state-run water company had already raised its prices by 87 per cent on Feb. 8 and in telephone charges, which had already risen on Feb. 8 by 112 per cent, of a further 300 per cent .
World Bank loan
González announced on Jan. 16 that Argentina was to receive $3,000 million from the World Bank over 10 years for the restructuring of its financial system.
The loans would be made available in three phases to both public and private sectors.
The World Bank had in March 1989 suspended disbursements on $350,000,000 of sector reform loans after the government failed to meet the conditions attached to them [see p. 36613].
Debt rescheduling
On Dec. 21, 1989, Argentina reached agreement with its "Paris Club" group of creditor countries on the rescheduling of $2,800 million of foreign debt principal, interest and arrears for the period July 1, 1988, to March 31, 1991 [for 1987 rescheduling agreement see pp. 35562-63].
The rescheduling would take place over 10 years with a six-year period of grace to allow the renegotiation of debt for the preceding period.
Argentina's debt to the Paris Club creditors amounted to $5,500 million on a total foreign debt of some $60,000 million, of which almost nothing had been paid since April 1988.
Labour developments
The General Confederation of Labour (Confederación General del Trabajo — CGT), which had traditionally formed the power base of Peronism, was split broadly into those for and those against the secretary-general, Saúl Ubaldini, who regarded the government's economic policies as a betrayal of Peronism.
On Sept. 23, 1989, Menem urged the two factions to abandon their plans to hold separate congresses and elect parallel leaderships, and instead to convene a single congress for October.
At this congress, however, Ubaldini on Oct. 11 lost the post of secretary-general to Guerino Andreoni, who represented the pro-Menem unions.
All delegates supporting Ubaldini walked out before the vote, claiming that the Ministry of Labour had accredited extra delegates to unions opposing Ubaldini.
Despite an announcement by the Labour Ministry on Nov. 8 that the government recognized Andreoni's CGT as "the only confederation" of Argentinian workers, many workers continued to regard Ubaldini as their leader, leaving the movement strongly divided.
The Secretary for Economic Co-ordination, Orlando Ferreres, announced on Oct. 2 that the monthly inflation rate target for the next six-month period would be 9 per cent and that salary increase guidelines would be implemented.
Public-sector workers, it was announced in mid-October, would received a fixed pay rise of 12,000 australs and have an earlier fixed bonus of 8,000 australs incorporated into their monthly salaries; according to Rapanelli this represented an across-the-board increase of between 9 per cent for the highest paid and 32 per cent for the lowest paid.
No percentage increases would be given, but public companies were entitled to increases above these guidelines if productivity agreements were reached with individual trade unions.
Private-sector companies were exempt from the official guidelines.
In the first major labour conflict of Menem's administration, bus drivers began a strike in Buenos Aires on Nov. 7 which spread to other cities on Nov. 8.
They were joined by underground train drivers in the capital.
In a television broadcast Menem criticized the action as "sabotage by sectors which resist reform" ; he vowed to stand firm against "the law of the jungle" and "the savage vandalism concealed behind the unquestionable need for better living conditions" , and to use all means at his disposal to get transport moving again, including obligatory arbitration.
On Nov. 9 the government threatened to bring in troops to drive buses and to protect those vehicles which continued to operate from being stoned.
Services in the capital resumed partially on Nov. 9, and the strike ended on Nov. 14 with the drivers' trade union agreeing to arbitration.
Immediately afterwards workers in the metallurgical sector, led by Lorenzo Miguel, began a series of strikes.
These resulted in a 71 per cent pay award to the metallurgical workers at the end of November, backdated to September and valid until March 1990.
On March 8, 1990, at least six people were reported wounded and 20 others arrested in continued disturbances in Rosario [for looting in February see p. 37244], 300 km north-west of Buenos Aires, as police clashed with slum dwellers who had blocked a highway in an attempt to loot vehicles.
On March 7 hundreds of government employees had reportedly rioted in Salta, 1,600 km north-west of Buenos Aires, in protest at Menem's plans to cut state spending, and thousands more participated in a nationwide strike on March 21, an estimated 40,000 demonstrating in Buenos Aires for an end to privatization and for wage increases to compensate for an estimated 40 per cent rise in prices in the first two weeks of the month.
On March 19, 100 federal police agents occupied the police headquarters in the north-western city of Tucumán demanding the reinstatement of 30 colleagues dismissed in the government cutbacks, and increased salaries.
By early May an estimated 80,000 civil servants had been made redundant.
Nuclear energy
Atucha 1, Argentina's first nuclear plant, reopened on Jan. 10, 1990, having been closed since 1988 due to technical failure [see p. 36204].
FOREIGN
On April 26, 1990, the government confirmed that the Condor II long-range missile project would be suspended following objections to production in September 1988 from the USA and other countries [see p. 36614].
Menem paid a six-day visit to the United States in September 1989, immediately following which the US Senate voted to repeal a 1977 law restricting military aid and arms sales to Argentina [see p. 28343].
The Foreign Ministry, in a diplomatic note on Sept. 15, 1989, called on the Soviet Union to renegotiate the 1986 fishing agreement allowing Soviet vessels to fish in Argentine territorial waters [see p. 34673], failing which it said the agreement would not be extended on its expiry in March 1990.
Menem visited Paraguay on Nov. 27-28, 1989, for talks with President Andrés Rodríguez, at the conclusion of which the two heads of state signed a joint declaration covering economic and hydroelectric co-operation and border integration.
Menem subsequently met President Jaime Paz Zamora of Bolivia in La Paz on Dec. 14 where bilateral agreements were signed including one covering the purchase of Bolivian natural gas.
During a 24-hour visit to Argentina on March 2-3, 1990, President Virgilio Barco of Colombia and Menem signed a joint declaration setting up a ministerial commission for political co-ordination and integration.
[For Menem's visit to Brazil in August 1989 see p. 37496.]
The Foreign Relations Minister, Domingo Cavallo, undertook a tour of several European countries including France, Spain, Italy and West Germany in February 1990 and the United Kingdom in April.
Discussions between Menem and the UK Deputy Prime Minister, Sir Geoffrey Howe, on March 12 in Santiago, the Chilean capital (both of whom were attending the inauguration of President Patricio Aylwin Azócar — see p. 37311), centred on further co-operation and the prospects of British investment in Argentina [see p. 37245 for restoration of diplomatic relations].
The inclusion of the Falkland (Malvinas) Islands in the new National Territory of Tierra del Fuego created by the Congress on April 26 was a "purely symbolic act" and did nothing to change "the juridical or de facto situation" on sovereignty, according to the Foreign Ministry.
The remains of the Argentine dictator (1829-52) and nationalist figurehead, Juan Manuel de Rosas, who died in exile in the UK in 1877, were returned to Argentina on Oct. 1, 1989, in what was apparently a gesture of goodwill in the context of talks over the Falkland Islands.
Menem delivered a speech over the remains before they were interred at the Recoleta cemetery in Buenos Aires where Eva Perón was also buried.
AMERICAS — CARIBBEAN
FALKLAND (MALVINAS) ISLANDS
BASIC DATA
Area: East Falkland and adjacent islands 6,760 sq km; West Falkland and adjacent islands 5,413 sq km .
Population: 1,919 (November 1986).
Capital: Stanley (on East Falkland Island).
Armed Forces: Falkland Islands Defence Force composed of Falkland Islanders; 1,600 British troops (1989).
Currency: Falkland Islands pound (at par with pound sterling).
The Falkland (Malvinas) Islands have been a United Kingdom dependent territory since right of sovereignty was claimed in 1833, when a British naval captain expelled an Argentine force.
The Argentine claim having never been relinquished, and following the failure of UN-instigated negotiations in the 1960s, the Falkland Islands were invaded on April 2, 1982, by Argentina; some 1,000 people, nearly all service personnel, were killed in the ensuing war before Argentina surrendered on June 14 [see pp. 31525-37; 31709-18].
Administration is by an appointed Governor (who is the personal representative of the British monarch), currently William H. Fullerton, aided by an Executive Council of two ex officio members and three members elected by the Legislative Council, which in turn is composed of two ex officio members and eight elected members.
POLITICS
The UK Secretary of State for Defence, Tom King, made a four-day visit to the Falkland Islands at the beginning of March 1990.
Urging the islanders to become more involved in their own defence, he gave assurances, however, that the UK had no immediate plans to reduce its military commitment to the islands following the February agreement to restore diplomatic links with Argentina [see p. 37245].
Timothy Sainsbury, the Under-Secretary of State at the Foreign and Commonwealth Office, on March 7 insisted in the British House of Commons that the UK had no intention of giving up sovereignty of the islands and that the issue was not on the political agenda.
The Governor, William H. Fullerton, dissolved the Legislative Council on June 19, 1989, three months before legislative elections were due [for results see p. 36973].
The move came after three councillors from Stanley had resigned in protest at the council's reversal of a vote to exclude from a £500,000 soil improvement grant farms owned by the Falkland Islands Company, which dominated the economy.
The councillors argued that the company traditionally expatriated such large profits to the UK that it did not merit its share of about £150,000 of the grant.
ECONOMY
Report on Seamount affair
In December 1989 a UK government report severely criticized senior civil servants in the Falkland Islands for their role in Seamount Ltd, a fishing company whose collapse through mismanagement contributed to losses of up to £30,000,000 of UK taxpayers' money [see p. 37001].
Prepared by Stewart Boyd QC, the report of the investigation into the Seamount affair heavily criticized the former chief executive of the Falkland Islands, Brian Cummings.
Cummings had been the executive chairman of Stanley Fisheries, a subsidiary of the Falkland Islands Development Corporation (FIDC), which with a Scottish company, Seabord Offshore, had formed the Seamount joint venture company which collapsed because the high proportion of loan capital left it extremely vulnerable to operating losses.
Change of ownership of Falkland Islands Company
In November 1989 it was announced that the Falkland Islands Company (now owned by Anglo United, a UK-based mining and fuel distribution group which had taken over Coalite, the Falkland Islands Company's existing owner, in August 1989) would be appointing a chief executive who would be based for the first time on the islands themselves.
Projected licence revenues
It was reported on Dec. 6 that the sale of fishing licences to foreign vessels had replaced sheep farming as the Falkland Islands' biggest revenue earner.
Licence revenue rose from US$22,200,000 in 1987 to $24,800,000 in 1988, with estimates for the financial year to June 1990 put at $42,600,000, or 71 per cent of the government's total estimated revenues of $60,000,000 (£39,500,000).
In October 1989 a member of the Executive Council, Tony Blake, reported that four oil companies had approached Fullerton seeking oil exploration licences; he commented that the sale of such licences could be worth several times as much as the revenue from fishing licences.
FOREIGN
On March 14, 1989, the Indiana I, a Bahamian-registered vessel which had begun an irregular ferry service from the Falkland Islands to the South American mainland in January, was intercepted by a Brazilian naval vessel and prevented from docking at Rio Grande in southern Brazil.
A spokesperson at the Brazilian embassy in London said that Brazil did not want to become a regular base of support for the British presence in the Falkland Islands [see also p. 37001].
AMERICAS — CARIBBEAN
REGIONAL AFFAIRS
Debt
IDB annual meeting
In the annual report presented to the conference of the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) held in Montreal, Canada, on April 1-4, 1990, the 1980s were described as a "lost decade" for Latin American countries whose per capita gross domestic product (GDP) had fallen by approximately 8 per cent to its 1978 level.
However, the IDB President, Enrique Iglesias (Uruguay), stated that Latin American countries were imbued with a "new realism" and were prepared to readjust their economies and welcomed the debt reduction plan of United States Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady [see pp. 36541-42; 37016-17; for Mexican and Venezuelan debt reduction agreements under Brady plan see pp. 37243; 37313 respectively]as a recognition that governments needed a breathing space to introduce long-term adjustment policies.
Strengthened by a 75 per cent increase in its capital following successful negotiations with the US government, the IDB announced a US$22,500 million aid programme for 1990-93.
This would concentrate finance on infrastructural improvement projects, especially those which benefited the most disadvantaged groups.
Of IDB resources 25 per cent would go on new "sectoral loans" cofinanced by the World Bank and aimed at promoting economic, social and institutional reforms.
Joint projects would also be sought with private commercial banks.
Japan announced that it would increase by 5,500 million yen (approximately equivalent to $34,000,000) an 8,000 million yen special fund which it had created for providing technical assistance to Latin America.
On Feb. 25 the Caracas-based Latin American Economic System (SELA — for June 1989 meeting see p. 37018) announced that ministers from the group's 26 member countries would meet on June 21-22 to propose a 75 per cent reduction of Latin America's $434,000 million foreign debt.
Aid from EC
The European Commission approved on May 8, 1990, in Brussels, the Belgian capital, aid worth 870 million European currency units (approximately equivalent to $1,073 million) to Latin America.
European Community (EC) commissioner Abel Matutes stated that such economic co-operation demonstrated the EC's determination to balance assistance to East European countries with that to developing regions elsewhere [see also p. 37132].
Group of Eight meeting
The Group of Eight (G-8) Latin American debtor countries (Argentina, Brazil, Colombia, Mexico, Peru, Uruguay, Venezuela and Panama — the last having been expelled, however, on March 30, 1990 — see p. 37373) meeting in the Argentine capital Buenos Aires on Dec. 4-5, 1989, issued the Buenos Aires Declaration, under which the Foreign Affairs and Economic and Planning Ministers agreed to meet every six months with a view to establishing a Latin American common market by 1992.
The G-8 countries agreed to adopt measures to reduce intra-regional trade tariffs, to eliminate other non-tariff barriers and a pledge to "begin a progressive co-ordination of macroeconomic policies" to facilitate Latin American integration.
Inter-regional trade tariffs
A plan to expand preferential trade tariffs as a means of integrating the region was opposed by Mexico and led to the adjournment of the meeting of the Latin American Association for Integration (ALADI) held in Mexico City on May 1-2, 1990.
Argentina, along with Brazil, Colombia, Chile and Uruguay, were reported to have been willing to propose a 50 per cent reduction in tariff levels and a 10 per cent increase in the list of goods covered.
ALADI officials were reported to have stated that they hoped Mexico would participate in such a scheme but that they would proceed without it.
Many delegates reportedly accused Mexico of being more interested in developing trade with the developed world and in particular the USA than with poorer countries.
ECLAC annual report
The UN Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC) painted a bleak picture of the regional economy in its annual report published on Dec. 20, 1989.
According to its findings, the GDP for the region rose by a mere 1.1 per cent in 1989 in real terms, 9 per cent down on 1980 growth; and per capita production fell, for the second consecutive year, by 1 per cent to 1978 levels.
Only Chile, Colombia, Cuba and nine Caribbean countries had a significantly higher GDP than in 1980, while per capita production in Argentina, Bolivia, Guyana, Nicaragua, Peru, Trinidad and Tobago and Venezuela was 20 per cent lower than in 1980.
Average inflation for 1989 soared to a record 1,000 per cent, with the highest rates recorded in Argentina (3,700 per cent ), Nicaragua (3,500), Peru (3,000) and Brazil (nearly 1,500 per cent ).
The level of foreign debt in the region, put by ECLAC at $416,000 million (almost a 5 per cent reduction), continued to put a brake on economic recovery, with the net transfer of resources abroad amounting to $24,600 million (over $200,000 million in the last eight years).
Only five countries were able to service their debts fully and on time in 1989.
Exports rose by 9 per cent in 1989 (albeit at a lower rate than the 14 per cent recorded in the previous two years), to $110,000 million (fob) and imports by 8 per cent, thus leaving a commercial balance of $28,000 million.
This surplus amounted to no more than 73 per cent of debt service and remittance payments; and in spite of a 57 per cent increase in the volume of exports since 1980, poor prices meant that the value of such exports represented a mere 24 per cent increase over the decade.
Andean Pact summit
A summit of the Andean Pact was held in the Galapagos Islands on Dec. 17-18, 1989.
Attended by the Presidents of Bolivia, Colombia, Ecuador, Peru and Venezuela, the meeting issued a wide-ranging statement which included:(i) a joint commitment to human rights and international nuclear arms control, as well as support for the aims and principles of the charters of the UN and the Organization of American States (OAS); and (ii) a reaffirmation of the need for increased bilateral co-operation between member countries in economic, social and military matters.
The member countries thereby aimed to minimize border disputes and to control internal or inter-regional terrorism and drug trafficking so as to facilitate the kind of peaceful coexistence, regional development (including the protection of the environment through a "rational" exploitation of indigenous natural resources) and political integration which promoted democracy while respecting national sovereignty.
Human rights
Coinciding with the 19th session of the OAS General Assembly, the human rights organization Amnesty International issued a statement on Nov. 14, 1989, drawing attention to the "spectacular deterioration" of the human rights situation in the region over the last year.
A total of 2,500 civilians had been killed for political reasons in Colombia [see also pp. 37484-85], while in Peru hundreds had "disappeared" or had been murdered or tortured by government security forces [see also pp. 37485-86].
Hundreds of summary executions by the security forces or death squads had also been recorded in Guatemala.
On El Salvador and Guatemala, Amnesty International said that it had "overwhelming evidence" that the Army and police were responsible for most of the kidnappings and political murders attributed to death squads.
Amnesty International also deplored the continuing practice of torture in Brazil, Chile, Ecuador, Mexico, Panama and Venezuela.
Quayle tour — US drugs plans
A tour of Latin American countries by the US Vice-President, Dan Quayle, in January 1990 was reduced to visits to Honduras, Jamaica and Panama following warnings by the governments of Costa Rica, Mexico and Venezuela that the visit could foment anti-US feeling following the December 1989 US invasion of Panama [see pp. 37112-13].
In a one-week tour beginning on March 10 Quayle attended presidential inaugurations in Chile and Brazil and visited Argentina, Paraguay and Venezuela.
EUROPE
NORWAY
BASIC DATA
Area: 323,878 sq km.
Population: 4,202,000 (1989).
Capital: Oslo.
Languages: Norwegian (Bokmöl and Nynorsk) and Lappish.
Religion: Christianity (92% Lutheran Protestant).
Av. life expectancy: 77 yrs.
Armed forces: 34,100 (21,800 conscripts)(1989).
GNP per capita: US$20,020 (1988).
Currency: krone (US$1.00=6.4894 kroner as at May 4, 1990).
The Kingdom of Norway is a parliamentary monarchy; executive power is vested formally in the king (currently Olav V) and effectively in the Prime Minister and the Council of State (Cabinet); legislative power is vested in the 165-member Parliament (Storting) elected for a four-year term.
In the general election of September 1989 [see p. 36901]the Norwegian Labour Party (Det Norsk Arbeiderparti — DNA), which had held office in a minority administration since May 1986, lost ground.
In October a minority three-party centre-right coalition comprising the Conservative Party (Höyre), the Christian People's Party (Kristelig Folkeparti — KrF) and the Centre Party (Senterpartiet — SP) took office, with Höyre leader Jan P. Syse as Prime Minister [see pp. 36984-85].
Jan P. Syse (Höyre) Prime Minister Kjell Magne Bondevik (KrF) Foreign Affairs Arne Skauge (Höyre) Finance Per Ditliv-Simonsen (Höyre) Defence Else Bugge Fougner (Höyre) Justice Johan J. Jakobsen (SP) Local Government Wenche Frogn Sellaeg (Höyre) Health and Social Affairs Eivind Reiten (SP) Petroleum and Energy Kristin Hille Valle (SP) Environment Petter Thommassen (Höyre) Industry Kaci Kulman Five(Höyre) Trade and Shipping Svein M. Munkejord(Höyre) Fisheries Anne Vik (SP) Agriculture Lars Gunnar Lie (KrF) Transport and Communications Solveig Sollie (KrF) Family and Consumer Affairs Tom Vraalsen (SP) Development and Co-operation Eleonore Bjartveit (KrF) Church and Cultural Affairs Einar Stensnaes (KrF) Education Kristin Clemet (Höyre) Labour 
Norwegian Council of State
POLITICS
Lapp parliament
Simultaneously with the holding of the general election in September 1989, the country's estimated 25,000 Lapps elected 39 representatives to a communal parliament.
To be based in the northern town of Karasjok, the new assembly would be a consultative body only, and concern itself with issues of direct importance to the community, such as fishing and land rights and the preservation of cultural traditions.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth 1.1% (1988)
Current-account balance -US$3,678 m. (1988)
Trade balance -US$111 m. (1988)
Overall balance of payments -US$138 m. (1988)
Budget deficit 17,039 m. kroner (1989)
Gross domestic product US$91,183 m. (1988)
Inflation 6.7% (1988)
Unemployment 4.8% (1989)
Principal trading partners (1988) Exports: UK (27%), West Germany (15%), Sweden (11%); Imports: Sweden (19%), West Germany (19%), UK (9%)
Revised 1990 budget — Job-creation package — Wage settlement
Three weeks after taking office the new centre-right government introduced its 1990 budget, a revised version of the proposals presented by the outgoing Labour government.
Cutting 3,100 million kroner from the earlier draft, the new budget allowed for expenditure of 330,000 million kroner, an increase of 6 per cent on the previous year, and for revenue of 322,600 million kroner.
To keep the budget deficit down, the government proposed to sell off shares and property valued at around 1,000 million kroner.
The main features of the new draft were (i) tax cuts totalling 3,100 million kroner (including a reduction of the top rate of income tax from 62 to 56 per cent) and (ii) cuts in most spheres of expenditure with the exception of defence, environment, family support and the judicial system.
The budget was approved by parliament on Nov. 17 and Dec. 20, 1989.
On Feb. 4, 1990, the government introduced job-creation measures to combat a sharp rise in unemployment, which had reached a record 4.8 per cent(or 7.7 per cent if people on government-training schemes were included — see p. 36942).
A proposal by the opposition Labour Party for a more extensive package failed to gain parliamentary approval.
On March 15 the main employers' and trade-union federations agreed a general wage rise of 4 per cent for around 400,000 private-sector workers.
The agreement, which would supersede a two-year virtual wage freeze [see p. 36241], was in line with the ceiling called for by the government as part of its economic programme.
Oil investment fund
The government on Jan. 25, 1990, proposed the setting up of an investment fund from the profits derived from the oil industry, the country's main source of revenue.
The fund, which was expected to begin operating in 1991 and would be administered by Norges Bank, the central bank, would be used to reduce the dependency on the oil industry by means of foreign investment and investment in non-oil domestic industries.
According to the Finance Minister, Arne Skauge, the fund would also draw attention to the extent to which government finances were dependent on oil revenues and would ensure that in future closer attention would be paid to long-term use of the revenues.
Parliament would have unlimited access to the funds, but would have to pass specific resolutions to appropriate money.
Under existing arrangements oil revenues were simply added to government revenue, and in recent years concern had grown among all political parties that the oil boom had led to wasteful investment.
Revenues from oil and gas production were expected to amount to around 20,000 million kroner in 1990, equivalent to nearly 7 per cent of the national budget.
New LO chair
The Norwegian Federation of Trade Unions (Landsorganisasjonen i Norge — LO), the country's dominant trade-union federation representing around 35 per cent of the labour force, elected Yngve Haagensen as its new president on Oct. 25, 1989.
She succeeded Leif Haraldseth and thus became the first woman to hold the post.
FOREIGN
Norway and the Soviet Union agreed on Dec. 15, 1989, on the terms of a treaty providing for an exchange of information on civilian and military accidents at sea outside their territorial waters.
An agreement on these lines had been proposed by the then Foreign Minister, Thorvald Stoltenberg, after a nuclear-powered and -armed Soviet submarine had sunk in international waters north of Norway in April 1989 [see p. 36604], raising concerns of radioactive fallout.
In June 1989 another Soviet submarine caught fire in the same area, and this time Norwegian scientists reported evidence of a small radioactive leak.
In a related development, the two countries in February 1990 set up a special "hotline" to notify each other of oil spills in the Barents Sea and agreed to arrange joint oil-pollution control exercises.
On April 27, 1990, Norway and Israel signed a draft agreement providing for the return of 10.5 tonnes of heavy water (deuterium oxide, used to cool nuclear reactors) to Norway, half the amount which had been sent to Israel in 1959.
In 1986 the Norwegian government had demanded the return of the water because it suspected that, contrary to the original agreement, it was not being used for peaceful purposes but for the manufacture of plutonium for nuclear weapons [see p. 36942].
EUROPE
SWEDEN
BASIC DATA
Area: 410,928 sq km.
Population: 8,459,000 (1989).
Capital: Stockholm.
Languages: Swedish (national); Finnish and Lapp minorities.
Religion: Christianity (95% Evangelical Lutheran Church of Sweden).
Av. life expectancy: 77 yrs (1989).
Armed forces: 64,500 (49,000 conscripts)(1989).
GNP per capita: US$19,150 (1988).
Currency: krona (US$1.00=6.0753 kronor as at May 4, 1990).
The Kingdom of Sweden is a parliamentary democracy in which the monarch (currently Carl XVI Gustav) retains purely ceremonial functions as head of state.
A Cabinet led by a Prime Minister is responsible to a unicameral parliament (Riksdag) which is elected every three years.
The Social Democratic Labour Party (Socialdemokratiska Arbetarepartiet — SAP), led by Ingvar Carlsson, was returned to office as a minority government in a general election in September 1988 [see pp. 36357-58].
It resigned in February 1990 after failing to gain parliamentary support for an economic austerity package, but was re-formed soon afterwards [see pp. 37261-62].
Ingvar Carlsson Prime Minister Odd Engström Deputy Prime Minister; Minister with special responsibility for research Sten Andersson Foreign Affairs Roine Carlsson Defence Allan Larsson Finance Laila Freivalds Justice Rune Molin Industry (including energy affairs) Mona Sahlin Labour Mats Hellström Agriculture Ingela Thalén Health and Social Affairs Ulf Lönnqvist Housing and Physical Planning Bengt Göransson Education and Cultural Affairs Georg Andersson Transport and Communications Bengt Johansson Public Administration (including wages and pensions) Birgitta Dahl Environment Maj-Lis Lööw Minister at the Ministry of Labour (immigrant affairs) Anita Gradin Minister at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs (foreign trade) Lena Hjelm-Wallén Minister at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs (international development co-operation) Eric Asbrink Minister at the Ministry of Finance (budget) Bengt Lindqvist Minister at the Ministry of Health and Social Affairs (social services, family affairs and matters concerning disabled and elderly) Margot Wallström Minister at the Ministry of Public Administration (ecclesiastical, equality and youth affairs) Göran Persson Minister at the Ministry of Education and Cultural Affairs (schools, adult education and study assistance)
Swedish Cabinet
POLITICS
Party name change
At a congress in Stockholm in late May 1990, delegates from the Left Party — Communists (Vänsterpartiet — Kommunisterne — VPK) voted by a large majority to drop "communist" from the party name, so that in future it would simply be known as Vänsterpartiet.
SECURITY
Sentencing of Palestinians
Abu Taleb and Marten Imadi, two Palestinains living in Sweden, were each sentenced by a court in Uppsala to life imprisonment on Dec. 21, 1989.
They were found guilty of involvement in several bomb attacks in 1985 and 1986 in Copenhagen, the Danish capital, Amsterdam, the Netherlands capital, and Stockholm.
Taleb was reportedly also suspected by the United Kingdom police of involvement in the Lockerbie disaster of December 1988 [see pp. 36409-10].
Award of damages to Pettersson
Christer Pettersson, who was sentenced for and then acquitted of the murder in February 1986 of the Prime Minister, Olof Palme, was on May 2, 1990, awarded 300,000 kronor in damages for the 10 months he had spent in custody.
Pettersson had been arrested in December 1988 and sentenced to life imprisonment in July 1989 [see pp. 36742; 36823], but had been acquitted on appeal in October [see p. 37160].
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth 2.0% (1988)
Current-account balance -US$1,202 m. (1987)
Trade balance +US$4,120 m. (1988)
Overall balance of payments -US$810 m. (1987)
Gross domestic product US$178,883 m. (1988)
Inflation 5.8% (1988)
Unemployment 1.9% (1987)
Principal trading partners West Germany, UK, USA 
Tax reform
The government on Nov. 7, 1989, agreed with two opposition parties — the Liberal Party (FP) and the Centre Party (CP)— the terms of a long-awaited reform of the country's taxation system, thus ensuring its passage through parliament.
To be introduced over a two-year period, the reform had as its main aim the reduction of income tax rates while increasing indirect taxes, and tightening rules on the taxation of capital gains without altering the overall tax burden.
The changes included:(i) an effective general tax rate of 30 per cent for the majority of the population;(ii) improvement in tax rebates and child allowances for the lower-paid, resulting in a reduced rate of 23 per cent;(iii) the reduction of top rate of income tax from 72 per cent (the highest in the world) to 50 per cent ; and (iv) reduction of corporation tax from 52 per cent to 30 per cent .
To pay for the direct tax cuts, petrol tax and value-added tax (VAT) would be increased (the latter being extended to previously exempted services), and new taxes on private pension funds and income from capital and property sales would be introduced.
Introduction of 1990/91 budget
The government on Jan. 10, 1990, presented the 1990/91 budget amid concern over the growing current-account deficit and worsening international competitiveness.
The then Finance Minister, Kjell-Olof Feldt, warned that Sweden's economy had reached a "critical stage" .
He identified high wage rises as the most serious problem, and announced that he would hold talks with employers and unions on how to restrain wage increases.
In general the budget was intended to stimulate growth, reduce pressure on the very tight labour market, and reduce consumer spending, inflation and the balance-of-payments deficit.
The budget allowed for expenditure of 408,200 million kronor (US$66,000 million) and revenue of 407,900 million kronor ($65,700 million), thus showing a small deficit, as in the previous year.
Expenditure plans were also in line with previous years.
The main features of the budget were:(i) increases in spending on the police force, the judiciary system, culture, and foreign aid (to accommodate greater economic support for emerging democracies in Eastern Europe);(ii) cuts in defence spending; and (iii) the extension of parental leave on full pay from 12 to 15 months.
Tripartite talks on voluntary wage restraint collapsed in early February 1990, leading to the introduction by the government of a package of stringent austerity measures and its consequent resignation and re-formation [see pp. 37261-62].
Agreement on austerity package
The Social Democratic government negotiated the terms of an austerity programme with the FP (the second-largest opposition party in parliament) on April 5.
The nine-point programme, a modified version of the more drastic package defeated in February, was introduced in parliament on April 25 as part of a supplementary budget submitted by the new Finance Minister, Allan Larsson.
The measures included:(i) a temporary rise (until the end of 1991) in the rate of VAT from 23.46 to 25 per cent;(ii) delays in the introduction of higher childcare benefits;(iii) indefinite postponement of previously approved extensions of parental-leave periods and annual holidays;(iv) alterations to the sickness pay system, aimed at combating absenteeism; and (v) the abolition of a price and rent freeze introduced in February.
Industrialists reacted favourably to the measures, although many considered them too weak to improve competitiveness and cool the economy.
The Swedish Trade Union Confederation (LO), however, rejected the proposals.
Its executive announced that it would seek substantial wage increases for its members, to compensate them for the inevitable rises in living costs.
FOREIGN
The Foreign Ministry announced on March 28, 1990, that it had accused a member of the Soviet trade mission of industrial espionage and had ordered him to leave the country.
No further details of the case were released.
EUROPE
FINLAND
BASIC DATA
Area: 338,145 sq km(incl. inland water).
Population: 4,960,000 (1989).
Capital: Helsinki.
Languages: Finnish, Swedish (both official), Lappish.
Religion: Christianity (89% Evangelical Lutheran Church of Finland).
Av. life expectancy: 76 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 31,000 (23,700)(1989).
GNP per capita: US$18,610 (1988).
Currency: markka (US$1.00=3.9475 markkaa as at May 4, 1990).
The Constitution of the Republic of Finland provides for a parliamentary system of government as well as a presidency with considerable powers, particularly in the foreign policy sphere.
Elected for a six-year term by universal suffrage (or by a 301-member electoral college in case no candidate obtains an absolute majority), the President appoints a Cabinet under a Prime Minister, which must enjoy the confidence of the 200-member parliament (Eduskunta), elected for a four-year term.
The last general election in March 1987 [see p. 35091]brought to power a four-party coalition led by Harri Holkeri, the first conservative Prime Minister since the Second World War.
Apart from his National Coalition Party (Kansallinen Kokoomus — KOK), the parties participating in the coalition are the Finnish Social Democratic Party (Suomen Sosialidemokraattinen Puolue — SSDP), the Swedish People's Party (Svenska Folkpartiet — SFP) and the Finnish Rural Party (Suomen Maaseudun Puolue — SMP).
At the last presidential elections, held on Jan. 31-Feb. 1, 1988, Mauno Koivisto, the candidate supported primarily by the SSDP, failed to win the required absolute majority but was re-elected for a second term by the electoral college on Feb. 15 [see pp. 35853-54].
Harri Holkeri (KK) Prime Minister Pertti Paasio (SSDP) Foreign Affairs; Deputy Prime Minister Matti Louekoski (SSDP) Justice Jarmo Rantanen (SSDP) Interior Ole Norrback (SFP) Defence Erkki Liikanen (SSDP) Finance Ulla Puolanne (KK) Finance (Second) Christoffer Taxell (SFP) Education and Culture Anna-Liisa Piipari (SSDP) Education and Culture (Second) Toivo T. Pohjala (KK) Agriculture and Forestry Pekka Vennamo (SMP) Communications Ilkka Suominen (KK) Trade and Industry Pertti Salolainen (KK) Foreign Trade Helena Pesola (KK) Social Affairs and Health Tarja Halonen (SSDP) Social Affairs and Health (Second) Matti Puhakka (SSDP) Labour Kaj Bdrlund (SSDP) Environment Ilkka Kanerva (KK) Minister in the Cabinet 
Finnish Cabinet
POLITICS
New Communications Minister
Raimo Vistbacka was appointed Minister of Communications and Transport on Sept. 29, 1989, in succession to Pekka Vennamo, who had resigned to leave politics [see below].
The appointment was made amid controversy over Vistbacka's comment that Finland accepted too many refugees and that only women should be allowed to come to Finland as refugees "to be wives for unmarried Finnish farmers" .
The Prime Minister, Harri Holkeri, subsequently warned the SMP, the coalition partner of which Vistbacka like his predecessor was a member, to fall in line with the government's policy on refugees.
Formation of new left-wing alliance
At a congress in Helsinki on April 29, 1990, attended by over 4,000 delegates, the country's splintered communist and left-socialist forces formed a new party, the Left-Wing Alliance.
The new party subsumed the Finnish Communist Party (Suomen Kommunistinen Puolue — SKP), the Finnish Communist Party-Unity (Suomen Kommunistinen Puolue-Ydennäisys — SKP-Y), the anti-reformist grouping which had split from it in 1986, and their respective electoral umbrella organizations: the Finnish People's Democratic League (Suomen Kansan Demokraattinen Liitto — SKDL) and the Democratic Alternative (Demokraattinen Vaihtoehto — DEVA).
All four formations had previously dissolved themselves and "transferred" their political activities and assets to the new party.
[For earlier changes and divisions in communist parties see pp. 36708-09; for split within SKP see p. 34507].
Claes Andersson, a member of parliament who had not held a senior post in any of the old parties, was elected leader of the Alliance.
In his acceptance speech he called on delegates to work to overcome the rivalries which had traditionally split the country's communist movement and invited "all left-oriented people" to join the new party.
Observers interpreted the merger as an attempt to halt the steady decline of the communist vote in Finland.
During the 1950s and 1960s the SKDL regularly gained the support of over one-fifth of the electorate.
In the 1987 elections [see pp. 35091-92], however, the SKDL and DEVA combined polled 13.6 per cent and gained 20 seats in the Eduskunta.
Recent opinion polls, taken in the light of the changes which had occurred in Eastern Europe, showed a further erosion of support.
The attempt to create a unified alliance to the left of the Social Democrats had gathered pace after the SKDL and SKP executives had approved a merger in principle.
The participation of the SKP-Y, which had at first rejected the plan, was in doubt until the April congress.
The debates over the merger had precipitated a number of leadership changes in the old parties and alliances in the months leading up to the final agreement.
They were as follows:(i) on Oct. 22, 1989, the central committee of the SKP-Y elected Esko-Juhani Tennilä as party leader, replacing Jouko Kajanoja, who had supported the concept of a realignment of the far left;(ii) on Oct. 28 Marja-Liisa Löyttyjärvi replaced Kristiina Halkola as leader of the DEVA; and (iii) at its congress on Feb. 23-25, 1990, the SKP elected Heljä Tammisola as party leader in succession to Jarmo Wahlströhm (who remained in the political bureau), with Asko Mäki taking over her previous post of general secretary.
SMP leadership change
Heikki Riihijärvi was elected leader of the SMP at its congress on Aug. 8-9, 1989.
A pastor and member of parliament, he succeeded Vennamo, who had announced his retirement from politics to become director of the national post and telecommunications service.
He had led the party since 1979 [see p. 30099].
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth 5.2% (1989 provisional)
Trade balance US$618 m. (1988)
Current-account balance -US$2,998 m. (1988)
Overall balance of payments +US$255 m. (1988)
Gross domestic product US$91,850 m. (1988)
Inflation 5.1% (1988)
Unemployment 4.5% (1988)
Principal trading partners West Germany, Sweden, Soviet Union, UK 
Approval of 1990 budget — Wage deal — Supplementary budget
The main features of the 1990 budget presented on Aug. 25, 1989, and approved on Sept. 12 were (i) cuts of between 1 and 3 percentage points on all rates of income tax;(ii) an increase in the sales tax from 16.5 per cent to 17 per cent;(iii) increases in child benefits (by 15 per cent ) and in student loans; and (iv) tax incentives for car owners to instal catalytic converters (to reduce toxic emissions).
Of the overall expenditure in the balanced budget of 139,700 million markkaa, some 19 per cent was allocated to social services, 17 per cent to education, 9 per cent to health and 5 per cent to defence.
In March 1990 employers and trade unions accepted a two-year wage agreement sponsored by the government which would restrict rises in incomes to no more than 4 per cent in real terms by the end of 1991.
The tripartite deal was similar in scope to one agreed in August 1988 [see p. 36709].
In line with the terms of the agreement the government announced a supplementary budget on April 2, which provided for further tax cuts and increases in the subsidies on agricultural produce and house building.
Bank strike
A strike which closed most of the country's banks for a month was settled on March 4, 1990, after employers and the bank staff union accepted an offer by the national arbitrator.
The deal allowed for a wage increase for employees of 7 per cent, with a further increase to be negotiated.
Employers had locked out employees on Feb. 1 for refusing to handle inter-bank payments, and the union formally called a strike two weeks later.
During the dispute all banks, with the exception of the state-controlled Postipankki, had been closed, causing serious liquidity problems for many smaller companies.
FOREIGN
President Koivisto paid an official state visit to West Germany on Oct. 2-5, 1989.
The main issues discussed were the development of bilateral trade relations and the future relationship between the European Free Trade Association (EFTA), of which Finland was a member, and the planned European single market of the European Communities (EC)[see pp. 36531; 37134].
King Juan Carlos of Spain paid an official state visit to Finland on July 3-5, 1989, the first by a Spanish monarch.
President Ali Hassan Mwinyi of Tanzania paid an official state visit on April 19-20, 1990, as part of a tour of the Nordic countries.
President Herzog of Israel visited Finland on May 23-25, 1990, the first official visit by an Israeli head of state.
EUROPE
ICELAND
BASIC DATA
Area: 103,000 sq km.
Population: 254,000 (1990).
Capital: Reykjavík.
Language: Icelandic.
Religion: Christianity (93% Evangelical Lutheran Church).
Av. life expectancy: 77 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: None.
GNP per capita: US$20,160 (1988).
Currency: króna (US$1.00=IKr60.1445 as at May 4, 1990).
The Republic of Iceland was formed in June 1944, when the convention linking the island with the Kingdom of Denmark was terminated.
A President (currently Vigdís Finnbogadóttir — re-elected on June 25, 1988 — see p. 36107) is elected every four years by universal adult suffrage and appoints a Prime Minister and Cabinet who exercise effective executive authority.
The legislature comprises the 63-member bicameral Althing (Parliament), also elected by universal adult suffrage for four years, the upper house of which consists of one-third of the members of the entire Althing, elected at a joint sitting, while the lower house comprises the remaining two-thirds.
As a result of a general election held on April 25, 1987 [see p. 35138], a new coalition government was eventually sworn in on July 8, in which the Social Democratic Party (Althyduflokkurinn — SDP) joined the outgoing coalition partners, the Independence Party (Sjáfstaedisflokkurinn — IP), and the Progressive Party (Framsóknarflokkurinn — PP).
This coalition collapsed, however, and a new government was formed in September 1988.
Led by Steingrímur Hermannsson of the PP, the Cabinet also comprised members of the SDP and the left-wing People's Alliance (Althydubandalag — PA).
In September 1989 another party, the right-wing populist Citizens' Party (Borgaraflokkurinn — CP), joined Hermannsson's coalition.
Steingrímur Hermannsson (PP) Prime Minister; Economic Planning Jón Baldvin Hannibalsson (SDP) Foreign Affairs and Foreign Trade Olafur Ragnar Grímsson (PA) Finance Halldór Asgrímsson (PP) Fisheries Svavar Gestsson (PA) Education and Culture Jóhanna Sigurthardóttir (SDP) Social Affairs Guthmundur Bjarnason (PP) Health and Social Security Jón Sigurthsson (SDP) Commerce and Industry Steingrímur Sigfússon (PA) Agriculture, Communications Júliús Sólnes (CP) Environment and Nordic Co-operation Oli Th.
Gudbartsson (CP) Justice and Ecclesiastical Affairs 
Icelandic Cabinet
POLITICS
CP in government
The CP formally joined the centre-left four-party coalition government on Sept. 28, 1989, thereby assuring the new government of a working majority of 11 seats.
Hitherto, the coalition had only had a one-seat majority in the Parliament as a whole and was actually in a minority in the lower house.
The CP was allocated the portfolios of Economic Planning, Nordic Co-operation, Justice and Ecclesiastical Affairs.
The party leader, Július Sólnes, took responsibility for the first two, while the deputy leader, Oli Th.
Gudbartsson, took responsibility for the last-named.
All the portfolios had previously been held by other members of the Cabinet.
The Prime Minister, Steingrímur Hermannsson, affirmed in Parliament that the government would not change its policies.
He highlighted the reduction of inflation and the stimulation of economic growth as its two main tasks.
The political realignment had become likely after the CP's founder, Albert Gudmundsson, resigned as party leader in January 1989 after having accepted the post of ambassador to France.
At the time of the coalition negotiations in September 1988, mutual distrust between Gudmundsson and the left-wing parties had been widely quoted as one of the main reasons for his party refusing to join the government.
Sólnes's indication on being elected to the party leadership that he would consider participation in the government led to a split within the party.
Five of his colleagues backed the change of policy, but two broke away to form a new party.
[For formation in 1987 of CP see p. 35138].
New Environment Ministry
Parliament created a Ministry for the Environment in February 1990.
Sólnes was appointed its first minister.
The portfolio of Economic Planning, which he had held since September 1989, was subsequently returned to its traditional place as one of the responsibilities of the Prime Minister.
Municipal elections
In municipal elections held on May 26, 1990, the opposition right-wing IP, one of the government coalition parties for just over a year after the 1987 general election [see pp. 35138; 36430], made gains, especially in Reykjavík, where the IP mayor, Davíd Oddsson, was re-elected by 60.4 per cent of the vote.
Of the coalition parties the PP increased its share of the vote, especially in the north and east of the country, while the SDP sustained limited losses.
Parties further to the left of the political system fared worse.
Relegalization of beer
On March 1, 1989, the sale of beer became legal after 74 years, thus ending the last vestiges of prohibition.
Parliament had voted in May 1988 to lift the ban [see p. 36107].
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth -1.9% (1988)
Trade balance -US$52 m. (1987)
Current-account balance -US$191 m. (1987)
Overall balance of payments -US$18 m. (1987)
Budget deficit US$70.454 m. (1.3% of GNP)(1987)
Gross domestic product US$5,913 m. (1988)
Inflation 19.8% (1988)
Principal trading partners UK, West Germany, USA 
Devaluation of króna
In an effort to improve the competitiveness of the fishing industry, the government announced a devaluation of the króna by 1.5 per cent on May 10, 1989, the third in 1989 [see also p. 36430].
It was announced in February 1990 that overall the currency had lost 19.7 per cent of its value against the United States dollar in the course of 1989.
Strike by state employees
More than 2,000 state employees went on strike on April 7, 1989, in support of a pay demand to establish wage parity with the private sector.
The strike, involving teachers, hospital staff and local-government workers, was settled after six weeks.
One of its effects had been the cancellation of examinations in most secondary schools, with instead assessment of students' work over the year being counted towards matriculation.
Agreement on wage rises
In February 1990 employers and unions agreed an unprecedented deal on wages, in a concerted effort to bring inflation (running at around 15 per cent) down to single figures.
The agreement allowed for rises of 9.5 per cent between February 1990 and its date of expiry in September 1991.
The government in turn undertook to keep price increases to a minimum.
Introduction of VAT
Value added tax on goods and services was introduced on Jan. 1, 1990.
Set at 24.5 per cent(0.5 per cent below the sales tax which it replaced), the new tax had caused much controversy within the ruling coalition and in the country at large .
A number of items (including water and electricity supplies and books and magazines) would be exempted from VAT, while VAT on most basic foodstuffs would be refunded.
EUROPE
ITALY
BASIC DATA
Area: 301,277 sq km.
Population: 57,470,000 (1988).
Capital: Rome.
Languages: Italian; German, Ladin, French and Catalan spoken in some regions.
Religion: Christianity (90% Roman Catholic).
Life expectancy: 77 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 265,000 (215,000 conscripts)(1988).
GNP per capita: US$13,320 (1988).
Currency: lira (US$1.00=L1,225.3012 as at May 4, 1990).
The Italian Republic has a bicameral Parliament elected by universal adult suffrage using proportional representation.
It comprises a Senate, made up of 315 senators elected for five years on a regional basis as well as seven life senators, and a 630-member Chamber of Deputies, also elected for up to five years.
The head of state is the President of the Republic (currently Francesco Cossiga), elected for a seven-year term by an electoral college made up of both Houses of Parliament and 58 regional representatives.
The President of the Republic appoints the President of the Council (Prime Minister) and, on the latter's recommendation, the other members of the Council of Ministers.
Giulio Andreotti became Prime Minister in July 1989 [see p. 36821], succeeding Ciriaco De Mita.
All governments since the June 1987 elections have comprised the Christian Democrats (Partito della Democrazia Cristiana — DC), the Socialists (Partito Socialista Italiano — PSI), the Republicans (Partito Repubblicano Italiano — PRI), the Democratic Socialist Party of Italy (Partito Socialista Democratico Italiano — PSDI) and the Liberals (Partito Liberale Italiano — PLI).
Giulio Andreotti (DC) Prime Minister Claudio Martelli (PSI) Deputy Prime Minister Gianni De Michelis (PSI) Foreign Affairs Mino Martinazzoli (DC) Defence Antonio Gava (DC) Interior Giuliano Vassalli (PSI) Justice Guido Carli (DC) Treasury Cirino Pomicino (DC) Budget Salvatore (Rino) Formica (PSI) Finance Sergio Matarella (DC) Education Giovanni Prandini (DC) Public Works Calogero Mannino (DC) Agriculture and Forests Carlo Bernini (DC) Transport Oscar Mammí (PRI) Posts and Telecommunications Adolfo Battaglia (PRI) Industry Carlo Donat-Cattin (DC) Labour Renato Ruggiero (PSI) Foreign Trade Carlo Vizzini (PSDI) Merchant Navy Carlo Fracanzani (DC) State Participation Francesco De Lorenzo (PLI) Health Franco Carraro (PSI) Tourism Ferdinando Facchiano (PSDI) Culture Giorgio Ruffolo (PSI) Environment Riccardo Misasi (DC) Southern Italy Vito Lattanzio (DC) Civil Protection (against natural disasters) Antonio Ruberti (PSI) Scientific Research and Universities Egidio Sterpa (PLI) Relations with Parliament Antonio Maccanico (pro-PRI) Regional Affairs and Institutional Reforms Pierluigi Romita (pro-PSI/PSDI) Co-ordination of EEC Policy Carmelo Conte (PSI) Urban Areas Rosa Russo Jervolino (DC) Social Affairs Remo Gaspari (DC) Public Administration 
Council of Ministers
POLITICS
Immigration
New immigration legislation, which had initially been introduced in December 1989 as a Cabinet decree, was approved by both Houses of Parliament in late February 1990.
The legislation sought to encourage illegal immigrants (mostly from North African countries and variously estimated as between fewer than 500,000 and as many as 2,000,000) to regularize their situation by registering with the police.
Those who had been in Italy before the end of 1989 and who registered within an appointed time limit were to be allowed to remain in the country and would be granted rights to medical care, schooling and equality of opportunity in relation to employment.
The legislation also sought to ensure that future immigration from outside the European Communities (EC) was properly controlled.
The government's intention was to review the situation after the end of the registration period, taking into account factors such as employment and housing, and to decide whether a quota system was needed.
In the meantime consideration was given to the problems of control, particularly given the length of Italy's seaboard.
The passage of the law through Parliament caused tension within the five-party government coalition, notably between the Socialist Deputy Prime Minister, Claudio Martelli, who was the sponsor of the legislation and the PRI leader, Giorgio La Malfa.
The PRI joined the neo-fascist MSI in voting against the bill, but were heavily defeated because of the support for the bill of the Communist Party (Partito Comunista Italiano — PCI).
Racial and economic tensions related to the immigration issue also manifested themselves during the early months of 1990.
In Florence, where black itinerant traders were blamed for increased petty crime and were viewed by local traders as a source of unfair competition, a number of violent incidents took place.
Measures taken by the authorities against the itinerant traders led to a crisis in the city government, as a result of which the Socialist mayor, Giorgio Morales, was forced to resign.
In a vote of no confidence, the PCI, a coalition partner in the city, joined the opposition in condemning the action taken.
In the south of the country, four immigrants and an Italian were killed near Naples in late April in a gun battle believed to have taken place when local drug dealers attempted to eliminate competition from a group of illegal African immigrants.
Political parties
At their conference in the northern town of Rimini, the neo-fascist Italian Social Movement-National Right (Movimento Sociale Italiano-Destra Nazionale — MSI-DN) elected Pino Rauti as secretary-general on Jan. 15, 1990.
Rauti replaced the much younger Gianfranco Fini who had narrowly defeated him for the post in December 1987 [see p. 35989].
A certain amount of violence occurred between supporters of Rauti and Fini.
Following the extraordinary congress on March 7-10 of the PCI [see pp. 37330-31], the secretary of the PSI, Bettino Craxi, indicated that the PSI would consider the possibility of working, at some future date, with a reformed and renamed PCI in the interests of establishing a new socialist unity which could provide an alternative potential government alliance.
Craxi had also proposed earlier in the year that Italy should move towards a presidential form of government with greater regional autonomy.
Municipal elections in Rome
Elections took place on Oct. 29-30, 1989, for the 80-seat city council of Rome.
Of the 2,300,000 eligible voters, 80.4 per cent turned out, the lowest figure for many years, and compared with 87.9 per cent in 1985 [see p. 33789].
Due to problems in vote counting, the final results were not confirmed until three weeks after the election, but there was no change in control, which remained in the hands of the same five-party coalition as the national government.
The numbers of seats allocated to the main parties were as follows, with the previous position shown in parentheses: DC 27 (28), PCI 23 (26), PSI 12 (eight), Italian Green Party (Federazione Nazionale per Le Liste Verdi) six (two), MSI five (seven), PRI three (three).
The elections had been held early as a result of a crisis which had arisen following a scandal over school catering, leading in July to the resignation of the DC mayor, Pietro Giubilo.
Since then the city had been run by an interim commissioner.
Following negotiations between the members of the ruling coalition, Franco Carraro was elected in mid-December as the first Socialist mayor of the city.
Criminal law reform
A new procedure for criminal inquiries and trials, the most radical legal reform since the fascist era, entered into force on Oct. 24, 1989.
Incorporating features drawn from the Anglo-American adversarial system, the procedure entailed the abolition of the role of the giudice istruttore and placed the prosecution on the same footing as the defence.
While the intention was also to speed up procedures, the initial introduction caused some practical difficulties.
Drug legislation
In early December 1989 the Senate passed by 152 votes to 87 a bill prohibiting the previously legal possession and personal use of drugs, whether "soft" or "hard" .
It was anticipated that the anti-prohibitionist lobby would campaign hard to prevent the passage of the bill through the Chamber of Deputies.
During the municipal elections in Rome [see above], Marco Pannella, a prominent PRI deputy [see p. 35989], had stood as a candidate for the Anti-prohibitionist Party, which succeeded in securing only one seat.
After the elections, Pannella resigned his seat in the Chamber of Deputies in protest against allegedly insufficient coverage of his candidacy by the media.
Corruption
A report in January 1990 to a parliamentary committee by a Green Party deputy, Giancarlo Savoldi, presented prima facie evidence that the returns for the Naples- Caserta area in the 1987 general election [for which see pp. 35586-88]might have been affected by ballot rigging.
The committee voted, however, to take no further action.
Among the deputies representing the constituency were several prominent individuals, including the DC Interior Minister, Antonio Gava, and Bettino Craxi.
Obituaries
Mariano Rumor, DC Prime Minister five times between 1968 and 1974, died in his northern home town of Vicenza on Jan. 22, 1990, aged 74.
Benigno Zaccagnini, Secretary of the DC in 1975-80, died in the northern town of Ravenna on Nov. 5, 1989, aged 77.
SECURITY
Armed forces
Gen. Domenico Corcione was appointed head of the armed forces in succession to Gen. Mario Porta who retired at the end of March 1990.
Corcione's previous post as chief of the Army was filled by Gen. Goffredo Canino.
Red Brigades
Enzo Calvitti, believed by Italian police to be one of the leading members of the extreme left-wing Red Brigades (Brigate Rosse — BR) responsible for terrorist attacks in the 1970s and early 1980s, was arrested in Paris on Oct. 12, 1989.
With him were also arrested Anna Mutini and Dario Faccio.
In two mass trials which ended in October and December 1989, 253 and 168 BR members respectively were acquitted of charges alleging calls to armed insurrection and civil war.
Many of the defendants were already serving sentences for other crimes.
Alvaro Baragiola, formerly known as Lojacono, who had been arrested by Swiss police in Lugano on June 8, 1988 [see p. 36434], was convicted by a Swiss court on Nov. 6, 1989, of the murder in Rome in 1978 of a judge, Girolamo Tartaglione [see p. 29687].
Baragiola had previously been convicted of murder in Italy, but had escaped in 1980 and obtained Swiss citizenship.
The trial had been remarkable, since the court had visited a prison in Italy in order to hear evidence from members of the BR, who were in custody there.
Italian police believed Baragiola to have been directly involved in the kidnapping of Aldo Moro in 1978 [see pp. 29053-55; 32756-57].
The extradition from Switzerland of Antonio De Luca, who had been arrested in Basel on Sept. 22, 1988 [see p. 36433], was approved in mid-February 1990.
De Luca, alleged to be a member of the BR, was wanted by the Italian authorities to stand trial for the murder of a DC senator Roberto Ruffilli in 1988 [see p. 35989].
Anti-Mafia developments
A series of arrests and arms discoveries took place in early December 1989 as a result of information provided by Francesco Marino Mannoia, a convict serving an eight-year sentence for drug trafficking.
Considered to be the most important Mafia informer since Tommaso Buscetta [see p. 33792], Mannoia's decision to provide information was said to have been prompted by the murder in April of his younger brother, himself alleged to be a Mafia killer.
In retaliation Mannoia's mother, younger sister and aunt were murdered in Palermo, Sicily, on Nov. 24.
In early April 1990, acting on information believed to have been provided by Mannoia, police in Sicily arrested Giuseppe Lucchese, alleged to have killed, among others, Gen. Carlo Alberto Dalla Chiesa in 1982 [see pp. 32755-56].
One of the most wanted fugitives sought by the Italian police, Nunzio Barbarossa, alleged to be a head of the Neapolitan Camorra, had been arrested in the northern city of Bologna in October 1989.
A further 12 people alleged to be involved in international drug smuggling were arrested in Palermo, Miami and New York in February 1990, in an operation co-ordinated with the United States Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI).
Domenico Sica, the High Commissioner responsible for co-ordinating the fight against the Mafia [see p. 36433 for his appointment in August 1988], was in March 1990 accused of having exceeded his powers, in that he had conducted rather than co-ordinated police investigations [see pp. 36433; 37096].
Shortly before this development, three magistrates who had been seconded to assist Sica had been withdrawn on the grounds that they were working too closely with the police, thereby prejudicing their independence as magistrates.
Subsequently, one of the three, Francesco Di Maggio, in a television appearance, suggested that they had been withdrawn because they were getting too close to identifying links between the Mafia and establishment figures.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
Gross domestic product US$859,996 m. (1989)
Real GDP growth 3.3% (1989)
Current-account balance -US$10,932 m. (1989)
Trade balance -US$12,280 m. (1989)
Budget deficit US$105,600 m. (1989)
Budget deficit (as % of GDP) 11% (1989)
Inflation rate 6.5% (1989)
Unemployment 12% (1989)
Principal trading partners EC, USA, OPEC 
1990 budget
The 1990 budget, which had been agreed by the Cabinet on Sept. 29, 1989, completed its passage through Parliament just before Christmas without major difficulties [for 1989 budget — see p. 36434].
The principal objective of the budget was to hold the public deficit for 1990 at more or less the same level in absolute terms as for 1989, thereby reducing it from 11 per cent to 10.4 per cent of gross domestic product (GDP).
Revenue was set at L436,700,000 million and expenditure at L569,700,000 million, leaving a borrowing requirement of L133,000,000 million (approximately $105,000 million).
Total government indebtedness was expected to increase during the year from 97.5 per cent of GDP to 100.5 per cent.
Measures to achieve the budget target included increasing income from indirect taxation, reducing tax evasion and cutting spending, particularly on industrial aid.
Criticism of the budget proposals was voiced by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) both in a report presented to the Italian government by a team of inspectors in early December 1989 and again in early February 1990.
The IMF cast doubt on budget expectations relating to inflation, forecast by the government to come down to 4.5 per cent but which the IMF believed would be at least 5.5 per cent, and on the ability of the government to cut public spending sufficiently.
Bearing in mind the high level of interest rates, the IMF warned that, without additional expenditure cuts, the public deficit could reach at least L142,000,000 million (approximately $112,600 million).
The governor of the Banca d'Italia (central bank), Carlo Azeglio Ciampi, expressed similar concerns in the February 1990 issue of the central bank's Bollettino Economico.
Citing health service expenditure and public-sector salaries as major problems, the article suggested that a further package of economic measures would be necessary to enable the government to keep within the targeted budget deficit.
Currency, capital and banking
After 10 years during which the lira had enjoyed a fluctuation band of 6 per cent against its central rate within the European monetary system (EMS), the government decided on Jan. 5, 1990, to adopt for the lira the narrower band of 2.25 per cent which applied to all member currencies except the Spanish peseta [see also pp. 36741; 37196].
In doing so the government also effectively devalued the lira by approximately 4 per cent against its central EMS rate.
Later in January restrictions preventing Italians from purchasing short-term financial instruments in foreign currencies were lifted.
This measure constituted one of the last steps towards the removal of all restrictions on the free movement of capital within the EC as envisaged in stage one of the Delors plan for economic and monetary union due to be completed by July 1, 1990 [see pp. 36598; 37132].
Remaining restrictions, preventing Italians from holding bank accounts overseas and from purchasing longer term financial instruments in foreign currencies, were lifted from May 14 [see p. 37364].
In late March the Chamber of Deputies approved a bill relating to the regulation of the banking sector, sometimes referred to as the "Amato law" after Giuliano Amato, the Socialist Treasury Minister in the previous De Mita administration who had been one of its prime movers.
The bill, which had still to pass through the Senate, would permit banks to adopt articles of association more suited to their needs and facilitated the raising of external capital.
Other regulations were also relaxed, but it was still envisaged that the state would retain 51 per cent participation in publicly controlled banks (accounting for an estimated 80 per cent of the sector).
State enterprises
Successors were appointed at the end of October 1989 to the heads of Italy's two largest state enterprises, Istituto per la Ricostruzione Industriale (IRI) and Ente Nazionale Idrocarburi (ENI).
Franco Nobili replaced Romano Prodi as IRI president and Gabriele Cagliari replaced Franco Reviglio at ENI.
The retiring incumbents had both served in their posts since 1983 and both had succeeded in bringing their respective enterprises out of loss and into profit.
In making the appointments the government followed the familiar pattern of political patronage, Nobili and Prodi both being Christian Democrats and Cagliari and Reviglio Socialists.
A proposal put forward at the end of January 1990 by Mario Schimberni, who in November 1988 had been appointed temporary special commissioner of the state railway system (Ferrovie dello Stato — FS)[see pp. 37095-96], met fierce opposition from both unions and politicians.
Following the threat of a national rail strike, Schimberni was obliged to suspend the proposal, which envisaged cutting 29,000 jobs, and to enter into discussions with the labour organizations.
Schimberni's 10-year investment plan for the FS had also been received unfavourably by the Transport Minister Carlo Bernini, whose preference had been for a programme with greater emphasis on capital projects.
Media ownership legislation
The Senate in late March 1990 passed a bill designed to prevent excessive concentration of media ownership.
The bill, which was expected to go before the Chamber of Deputies after the municipal and regional elections in May 1990, prohibited ownership of a daily newspaper to anyone owning three or more television stations.
Conversely, circumstances, related to proportions of national circulation, were defined in which a newspaper publisher might own one or two television stations.
Debate concerning the media bill took place against the background of a protracted contest between Silvio Berlusconi, who already owned three television stations [see also pp. 35987-88], and Carlo De Benedetti, over control of the Mondadori publishing group, owner of Italy's largest circulation daily La Repubblica.
The bill also covered other aspects of television and radio regulation, including frequencies, advertising and news programmes.
FOREIGN
The Soviet President, Mikhail Gorbachev, made a three-day official visit to Italy on Nov. 29-Dec. 1, 1989.
At the end of their talks Gorbachev and Andreotti signed agreements relating to economic co-operation.
Italy also gave strong support to the eventual possibility of the Soviet Union joining major international bodies such as the IMF.
While in Rome, Gorbachev also visited Pope John Paul II [see p. 37129].
During the visit a number of Italian companies, including Fiat and ENI, announced commercial deals with Soviet counterparts.
In accordance with the agreement to continue to consult regularly, Foreign Minister Gianni De Michelis visited Moscow on April 16-18, 1990.
Andreotti visited the United States on March 6-8, 1990.
Talks with US President George Bush focused particularly on the issue of German reunification and the role of the USA in Europe.
EUROPE
SAN MARINO
BASIC DATA
Area: 60.5 sq km.
Population: 22,682 (1988).
Capital: San Marino.
Language: Italian.
Religion: Christianity (Roman Catholic).
Av. life expectancy: Not available.
Armed forces: There are combined Voluntary Military Forces; mass conscription in emergency.
GNP per capita: Not available.
Currency: Italian lira (US$1.00=L1,225.3012 as at May 4, 1990).
In the Republic of San Marino legislative power is vested in a 60-member Grand and General Council elected every five years by universal adult suffrage according to proportional representation.
Two of its members are elected every six months to act as Captains-Regent (currently Adolmiro Bartolini and Ottaviano Rossi), with the functions of head of state, and who with a Congress of State exercise executive power.
A coalition government of the Communist Party (Partito Communista Sammarinese) and the Christian Democratic Party (Partito Democratico Cristiano Sammarinese), formed in July 1986, was returned to power in a general election on May 29, 1988 [see p. 36231].
EUROPE
MONACO
BASIC DATA
Area: 1.95 sq km.
Population: 27,063 (at 1982 census).
Capital: Monaco-Ville.
Languages: French (official); Monégasque, Italian and English.
Religion: Christianity (Roman Catholic).
Currency: French franc (US$1.00=F5.6099 as at May 4, 1990).
The Principality of Monaco is a hereditary monarchy, which since 1861 has been under French protection.
The monarch (currently Prince Rainier III), as head of state, nominates the Minister of State from a list of three French diplomats submitted by the French government.
As head of the Council of Government the Minister of State exercises executive power under the monarch, while legislative authority resides with the National Council elected every five years by universal adult suffrage, most recently in January 1988 [see p. 36161].
Jean Ausseil Minister of State Raoul Biancheri Finance and Economics Louis Caravel Public Works and Social Affairs Jean-Charles Rey President of the National Council 
Monaco Council of Government
ECONOMY
Tourism continued to be the principality's dominant industry.
However, around 700 small businesses (often situated on the 22 hectares of land known as Fontvieille west of Monaco-Ville, reclaimed from the Mediterranean since 1965) contributed some 27 per cent of Monaco's national income.
Over 30 banks accounted for 35 per cent of financial turnover and employed over 1,200 people.
The director of the Banque Industrielle de Monaco (BIM), Jean-Claude Colcy, was arrested on March 22, 1990, and charged with fraud.
The bank, which went into receivership on Feb. 2, was reported to be missing around F80,000,000.
FOREIGN
Monaco joined the International Maritime Organization (IMO) on Dec. 22, 1989.
This brought the organization's membership to 134 (plus Hong Kong as an associate member).
EUROPE
MALTA
BASIC DATA
Area: 316 sq km.
Population: 345,000 (1988).
Capital: Valletta.
Languages: Maltese and English (official); Italian widely spoken.
Religion: Christianity (Roman Catholic).
Av. life expectancy: 73 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 1,500 (1989).
GNP per capita: US$5,050 (1988).
Currency: Maltese lira (US$1.00=M£0.3268 as at May 4, 1990).
The Republic of Malta became an independent member of the Commonwealth in 1964, and in 1974 adopted a republican Constitution.
A 65-member House of Representatives is elected for a five-year term (subject to dissolution) by direct universal adult suffrage under a system of proportional representation.
Should a party polling the majority of votes fail to gain a majority of seats in the House, extra seats are allocated until a majority of one seat is achieved.
The House elects the President of the Republic for a five-year term, the current incumbent, Vincent Tabone, having been elected in April 1989 [see p. 36599].
The President in turn appoints the Prime Minister and, on the latter's advice, the other members of the government.
In elections on May 9, 1987, the National Party led by Edward Fenech Adami narrowly defeated the ruling Labour Party [see pp. 35213-14].
*Edward Fenech Adami Prime Minister *Guido De Marco Deputy Prime Minister; Foreign Affairs; Justice *Ugo Mifsud Bonnici Education; Interior Louis Galea Social Policy George Bonello du Puis Finance Michael Falzon Infrastructure Development *Lawrence Gatt Agriculture and Fisheries Emmanuel Bonnici Tertiary Sector Development Anton Tabone Gozo *John Dalli Economic Affairs Parliamentary secretaries attached to Ministries **Stanley Zammit Environment, Local Government, Public Cleansing and Lands (Education and Interior) **Michael Frendo Youth, Sport, Consumer Protection, Broadcasting, Theatre, Culture (Education and Interior) **Francis Zammit Dimech Telephone and Telecommunications, Postal Services, Public Transport, Civil Aviation and Air Terminal Management (Infrastructure Development) *Given different responsibilities in Cabinet reshuffle of May 5, 1990. **Appointed May 5, 1990.
Maltese Cabinet
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth rate 10% (1989)
Current-account balance +US$3,163,265 (1988)
Trade balance -US$52,074,829 (1988)
Budget deficit US$23.7 m. (1989)
GDP US$1,826 m. (1989)
Inflation 1% (1988)
Unemployment 7.4% (1986)
Principal trading partners West Germany, UK, Italy
The nationalist government of Edward Fenech Adami maintained its policy of encouraging West European investment [see p. 37014], liberalizing trade and foreign investment, removing import licences, and promoting export industries and private-sector employment.
During the 12-month period to September 1989 exports increased by 23 per cent in value terms while imports increased by 13 per cent.
Since exports were expanding from a much smaller base, however, the merchandise deficit continued to widen, but was more than offset by earnings from foreign exchange transactions in the banking system with the result that the overall balance of payments remained positive.
Tourism remained Malta's chief income earner, providing 20 per cent of gross national product (GNP) in 1989, when 828,311 visitors spent nearly US$380,000,000 as compared with 750,000 in 1987, when earnings were $325,000,000 [see p. 37014].
FOREIGN
During a visit by Abel Matutes Juan, the Commissioner of the European Communities (EC) whose responsibilities included Mediterranean Policy, Fenech Adami on March 30, 1990, declared his government's intention to apply for EC membership before the end of 1990.
At the same time an agreement was signed providing for a grant of 2,400,000 European currency units (ECU1=US$1.19255 as at March 26, 1990) to help combat marine pollution especially by oil.
(Malta's relations with the EC were currently governed by an Association Agreement due to expire in December 1990, the third financial protocol of which had been signed in March 1989 — see p. 36714.)
The 1984 economic and security co-operation accord with Libya [see p. 33435]was renewed on Feb. 19, 1990, for another five years, but now covered only economic, social and cultural links.
The new agreement signed by Fenech Adami and Jadallah Azouz al-Talhi, the Libyan Secretary for Foreign Liaison, amended the military clauses of the 1984 protocol, reducing them to a commitment on security, with each country undertaking not to be used to the detriment or harm of the other [see also pp. 33435; 36243; 37014].
John Paul II visited Malta on May 25-27, 1990, in the first visit by a Pope to the island.
EUROPE
YUGOSLAVIA
BASIC DATA
Area: 255,804 sq km.
Population: 23,688,000 (end 1989).
Capital: Belgrade.
Languages: Serbo-Croat; Macedonian and Slovene (all official).
Religion: Christianity (Orthodox and Roman Catholic); Islamic minority.
Av. life expectancy: 72 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 180,000 (101,400 conscripts)(1989).
GNP per capita: US$2,680 (1988).
Currency: New dinar (US$1.00=11.5737 dinars as at May 4, 1990).
The Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (comprising the republics of Bosnia-Hercegovina, Croatia, Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and Slovenia and the autonomous Serbian provinces of Kosovo and Vojvodina) was established in 1945, and adopted its present name in 1963.
The office of president ceased to exist upon the death in 1980 of Marshal Josip Broz Tito [for which see pp. 30472-73], being replaced by a Collective State Presidency whose eight members (one from each republic and province) are elected for five years (most recently in May 1989 — see pp. 36662-63) by the bicameral Federal Assembly (Parliament).
The offices of President and Vice-President of the Presidency (currently Borisav Jovic and Stipe Suvar respectively) rotate among the members annually in May.
Deputies to the Federal Assembly, which is made up of the Federal Chamber (220 seats) and the Chamber of Republics and Provinces (88 seats) are elected by a multi-tiered system of communal assemblies, and serve for four years.
Each new Federal Assembly elects the Federal Executive Council (Cabinet).
The federal government is currently preparing constitutional amendments which will abolish the guaranteed monopoly of political power of the League of Communists of Yugoslavia (LCY).
The party endorsed the change at a congress on Jan. 20-23, 1990 [for which see pp. 37172-73], but the congress subsequently collapsed amid arguments about the LCY's federal structure (the Slovene League of Communists (LC) shortly afterwards split from the LCY), and before scheduled elections could be held to a new party central committee and presidium.
A provisional leadership was elected when the congress resumed at the end of May, and was charged with preparing for relaunching the LCY at a further congress in September.
Multiparty political systems have already been introduced by means of constitutional changes in Slovenia and Croatia.
Elections for the republican assemblies held there during April-May 1990 [see pp. 37381-82]resulted in the communists being ousted from power by opposition parties, although a direct presidential election in Slovenia was won by the candidate of the Party of Democratic Renewal (LCS — the renamed Slovene League of Communists — see p. 37381).
Ante Markovic President (Federal Prime Minister) Aleksandar Mitrovic Vice-President Zivko Pregl Vice-President Nikola Gasevski Without portfolio Dzevad Mujezinovic Without portfolio Branimir Pajkovic Without portfolio Veselin Vukotic Without portfolio Budimir Loncar Federal Secretary for Foreign Affairs Col.-Gen.
Veljko Kadijevic Federal Secretary for National Defence Col.-Gen.
Petar Gracanin Federal Secretary for Internal Affairs Branko Zekan Federal Secretary for Finance Franc Horvat Federal Secretary for Foreign Economic Relations Namzi Mustafa Federal Secretary for Trade Stevan Santo Federal Secretary for Energy and Industry Vlado Kambovski Federal Secretary for Justice and Administration Bozidar Marendic Federal Secretary for Development Stevo Mirjanic Federal Secretary for Agriculture Joze Slokar Federal Secretary for Transport and Communications Radisa Gacic Federal Secretary for Labour, Public Health, War Veterans' Issues and Social Policy Darko Marin Federal Secretary for Information 
Yugoslavian Federal Executive Council
POLITICS/SECURITY
Yugoslavia's central authorities and Communist Party faced continued criticism during the winter of 1989 and spring of 1990.
Events in Romania and elections in East Germany and Hungary made the LCY appear one of the more reactionary political forces left in Europe.
The competition for Western financial aid to Eastern Europe had also increased, making Yugoslavia's situation as a state favoured by the West less relevant.
As investment from the West began to be linked to the introduction of democracy and civil rights, the country began to experiment with "political pluralism" , a move accepted in the more Westernized republics of Slovenia and Croatia, but opposed in Serbia and by the Army.
LCY and armed forces opposition to multiparty system — LCY stance on economic reform
The LCY central committee released a paper in October 1989 acknowledging that it would back the development of political pluralism and the individual's rights.
The central committee subsequently held a two-day plenum, on Oct. 21-22, at which the changes to the political system, the crisis in socialism and the role of pluralism were discussed.
The Deputy Defence Secretary, Stane Brovet, expressed the Army's concern that under a multiparty system the government administration would become politicized and that this would affect adversely the role of the Army [see p. 37155].
Other central committee members urged the party to speed up its own reform and to anticipate the changes happening in the country.
Ivica Racan, a (Croatian) member of the party presidium, said that this meant affirming the freedom of a citizen's political association, keeping self-management strategic to socialist development, but did not mean that political pluralism "should be reduced simply to the question of a multiparty system, because this is only one of the possible forms of political pluralism" .
A central committee draft law discussing the powers of the presidency of the party was also introduced at the plenum.
It was proposed that the president be elected for two years without the right to re-election.
The central committee would elect its president from its ranks, but each time from a different republican or provincial party.
The draft said that the future presidium should be reduced from 23 to 15 members [see p. 37155]to reflect the streamlining of the central committee's membership from 165 to 129 members.
The presidium would no longer have ex-officio members.
On Oct. 27 the central committee proposed that multi-candidate elections with secret ballots be obligatory.
Plans for votes of confidence in executive party bodies were also proposed.
In November the conference of the communist party organizations in the armed forces heard a speech by its then head, Vice-Adml.
Petar Simic (who died on April 10, 1990), rejecting a multiparty system for Yugoslavia on the grounds that it would exacerbate national divisions within the federation.
At the LCY central committee plenum in October Simic also said that the new programme of reform could not be implemented by the LCY, and he called for a referendum on these questions and on the Constitution.
The LCY central committee discussed a document on economic reform on Oct. 20, 1989.
Those who supported the document accepted that economic reform could not be realized without an integrated market, but they also urged the strengthening of the state role in fiscal, monetary, tax and foreign relations policy; while they were not against private ownership they favoured state ownership in industries which were of "economic interest" .
Delegates from Slovenia and Croatia were against the broadening of state powers, while the Serbian party members supported the position for a stronger federation.
All agreed, however, that a single Yugoslav market, rather than republican insularity, was vital for the success of economic reform.
New political parties
While discussion among the LCY progressed at a slow pace, new parties emerged.
The Yugoslav Green Party was founded in Belgrade on Feb. 10, 1990, and on Feb. 11 the Yugoslav Independent Democratic Party.
In Skopje the League for Democracy was founded and in Pristina the Social Democratic Party of Kosovo began its work on Feb. 10.
The Serbian Democratic Party (SDP) was formed on Feb. 17, as a breakaway group from the Independent Democratic Party which had, according to the SDP, opposed having a Serbian leadership.
The Social Democratic Alliance of Yugoslavia, uniting Social Democratic organizations in Bosnia-Hercegovina, Montenegro, Croatia and Serbia, was founded in Zagreb (Croatia) on April 7 [for multiparty elections in Slovenia and Croatia see p. 37381].
Proposals for new constitution
In January 1990 the Yugoslav federal presidency issued a proposal for a new constitution, along with an alternative proposal from Slovenia calling for the transformation of Yugoslavia into a confederation rather than a federal state.
The Yugoslav Assembly approved the federal presidency's position which would "remove inconsistencies in the procedure for the possible secession by any republic from Yugoslavia, thus removing the danger of republics regulating this matter as they consider it necessary" .
The presidency's proposals were also supported by the assemblies in all republics and provinces save Slovenia.
The Federal Assembly on April 11 passed legislation extending its own mandate until the end of 1990, subject to the holding of multiparty elections within that period.
The mandate of the Federal Executive Council was similarly extended.
Republic appointments
Jugoslav Kostic was re-elected to the post of President of the Vojvodina Presidency at the Vojvodina Assembly session on Dec. 4, 1989.
The Kosovo Assembly re-elected Hisan Kajdomcaj President of the Kosovo Presidency and elected Jusuf Zejnulaju President of the Kosovo executive council on Dec. 4.
Serbian elections
The first round of the Serbian local, parliamentary and presidential elections was held on Nov. 10 and 12, 1989, the first direct secret ballot in Serbia since before the Second World War.
However, many Serbs were reported to be disappointed with the refusal to introduce a more democratic political system in Yugoslavia's largest republic, since all but staunch followers of the republic's President, Slobodan Milosevic, were removed from the electoral lists, and three candidates from the Serbian LC's umbrella organization, the Socialist Alliance, who were known only for their support of Milosevic, were selected to contest the presidential post in addition to Milosevic himself.
Mihalj Kertes, Zoran Pjanic and Miroslav Djordevic did not campaign, speak in public or produce a manifesto.
Even the Belgrade daily Borba commented that "it is not a merry event to proclaim as a great democratic act the voting for a single political concept" .
Despite this, Milosevic maintained his popularity among Serbs, which could be partly attributed to his hardline attitude towards the ethnic unrest in the republic's autonomous province of Kosovo.
Having received 86 per cent of the votes, Milosevic was returned to the presidency, to which he was first elected in May 1989 [see p. 36663]; it was noted that the reduced turnout (75 per cent of the electorate) reflected the fall in his popularity.
In response to the handling of the elections, Belgrade's official Socialist Youth Organization called it anti-democratic.
In February 1990 the organization left Belgrade's Socialist Alliance, citing the shortcomings in the alliance's electoral procedure.
The 90 seats in the parliamentary elections were contested by only 108 candidates, even though the Serbian opposition had demanded that at least 180 candidates be put forward.
Independent candidates were not included on the electoral lists, leaving only Socialist Alliance candidates.
Croatia
The central committee of the Croatian LC met on Nov. 22, 1989, to discuss the LCY programme document [see above].
One member, Marin Buble, said that although the document was praised by politicians, it had received unprecedented criticism from experts and professionals, since the proposed system of property ownership was inconsistent, there was no clear stand on what kind of political pluralism the party advocated and there was no indication on how the party's de-monopolization would be effected.
One central committee member, Ognjen Krstulovic, resigned because he could not accept responsibility for the implementation of the policy.
In early February 1990 Croatia's parliament endorsed 10 amendments allowing multiparty and secret elections and broader political reform.
This came after the Croatian Peasant Party held a meeting to reconstitute itself.
On Feb. 3 the Croatian Democratic Community held its founding assembly, demanding that all LC organizations disband and that the republic's assembly demand that all Croatian armed forces be withdrawn from Kosovo.
Eight further political parties were formally legalized on Feb. 5 and other parties were encouraged to apply for registration.
More than 30 parties contested the elections in April-May [for which see p. 37381].
The Matica Hrvatska ( "Mother Croatia" ) organization resumed its activities in December 1989 with official approval, after a ban of 18 years.
Founded in 1842, it was Croatia's oldest cultural organization, but had been discredited by its central role in the Croat nationalist agitation at the beginning of the 1970s [see pp. 25213-14].
Kosovo
In a report to the 15th conference of the Kosovo LC on Nov. 9, 1989, Rahman Morina, its president, said that the struggle in Kosovo had taken a new turn and accused people of trying to encourage processes aimed at destroying Yugoslavia and at changing its federal system.
The emigration of Serbs and Montenegrins had not abated, and attempts to encourage returnees were not gaining ground.
He blamed the weak links at federal level for shortcomings in the Yugoslav programme on Kosovo, but was convinced that constitutional changes would help resolve some of these problems.
Kosovo was in favour of democratic centralism, Morina said, and against replacing it with multiparty elections, since pluralism would lead to dangerous divisions between nationalities.
An Army spokesperson announced on April 11, 1990, that 39 "underground groups" , with a total membership of around 200 and engaged in "subversive activity" , had been discovered within the armed forces during 1989, the overwhelming majority of the members being Albanian nationalists and separatists.
Macedonia
The Movement for All-Macedonian Action (MAAK) held its founding assembly on Feb. 4, 1990.
Although not a political party, MAAK aimed to play a significant role in Macedonian politics.
The assembly was attended by 300 supporters, mainly from the intelligentsia.
In November 1989 a group of 3,500-4,000 Edjupci, Egyptians, requested that an ethnic category be formed in the next census to include themselves.
They claimed that they were being treated like Gypsies or Albanians, which according to them was unacceptable.
Radio 303 began broadcasting in Skopje in February 1990.
This was the first independent radio station in the republic and was to be run by the students' official youth organization.
Vojvodina
Petar Matic, a member of the LCY central committee, was expelled from the LCY on Dec. 8, 1989.
The Yugoslav news agency Tanjug reported that together with the former Vojvodina leadership, he was accused of undermining Serbian, and thus Yugoslav, unity [see also p. 37156].
Two senior editors of Novi Sad television news were suspended on April 8, 1990, for giving greater prominence in a news bulletin to coverage of an election rally in Croatia by the right-wing nationalist Croatian Democratic Union (HDZ — the eventual winners in the election — see p. 37381) than to a rally in Belgrade attended by Milosevic commemorating the 175th anniversary of the second Serbian uprising against the Turks.
Commentators claimed that the Serbian leadership was engaged in a purge of the media in Serbia and its provinces.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth 1.5% (1980-87)
Current-account balance +US$2,010,000 (1989)
Trade balance -US$763 m. (1989)
Overall balance of payments +US$3,410,000 (1989)
Total external public debt US$16,000 m. (1989)
Gross domestic product US$59,960 m. (1987)
Gross national product US$154,100 m. (1988)
Inflation rate 2,600% (annual), 1,225% (retail price)(1989)
Unemployment 15% (1989)
Principal trading partners Soviet Union, West Germany, Italy, USA
The government's main economic priority was that of reducing inflation, which reached an annualized rate of 2,600 per cent by the end of 1989, its aim being to reduce the monthly inflation rate of 50 per cent to 13 per cent by the end of 1990.
Austerity measures contained in its economic recovery programme and introduced in December 1989 were based on strict financial discipline, convertibility of the dinar, free formation of prices and interest rates and a wage freeze from January to June 1990.
A law on salaries which was passed on Dec. 26, 1989, was deemed to be of key importance.
Around 70 per cent of Yugoslavia's 6,500,000 workers would have their salaries increased by 22 per cent, but the remainder were to have their salaries reduced.
However, recession seemed unavoidable, according to the government's prognoses for 1990.
Industrial production (up by 2 per cent in 1989), would fall as would agricultural production (which had increased by 5 per cent in 1989).
Demand was not expected to improve until the second half of the year, despite gross capital investment (which had risen by 5 per cent in 1989 compared with 1988, but was down by 30 per cent compared with 1980).
Retail turnover, down by 15 per cent in 1989, would decrease still further.
Unemployment figures were expected to increase by 150,000 in 1990 as a result of the government's measures.
1990 budget — Establishment of financial market
The Yugoslav Assembly approved the federal budget for 1990 in December 1989.
The largest share, some 34,400 million dinars, would be set aside for the Army, with 3,200 million dinars for the disabled and 6,100 million dinars for federal administration.
Social security funds for workers to be made redundant reached 1,800 million dinars, and 3,100 million dinars were apportioned for banks' recovery.
The budget proposed for 1991 would be lower by 1,350 million dinars, which would be achieved primarily by lowering provincial and republican contributions.
By not adopting the law on financing the Yugoslav bank for economic co-operation, 350,000 million dinars were saved.
For the first time the budget would not finance an LCY congress.
The financial market saw rapid development.
On Dec. 27 a stock exchange opened in Slovenia's capital Ljubljana.
In November a capital and securities market was established in Belgrade, although trade was restricted to treasury bonds only.
By the end of 1989 all 145 banks were required to have completed steps to become limited companies.
By November, however, only three banks had dodne so, reflecting the confusion over how the future banking system would work.
Trade
The government's policy of trade liberalization was vigorously implemented throughout 1989.
The level of tariff protection was reduced so that by December tariffs averaged 7.1 per cent, and despite very high non-tariff levies imports rose by 11 per cent in 1989.
Exports in convertible currencies — not including trade with the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance (COMECON)— rose by approximately 4 per cent, with a resulting trade deficit of $763,000,000 in 1989, compared with $350,000,000 in 1988.
However, reserves of $6,700 million ensured that this figure did not give rise to undue concern.
In 1990 the government expected a growth in imports of 25 per cent, so that exports would need to grow by 15 per cent in order to limit the fall in gross domestic product (GDP) in 1990 to 2 per cent .
The Soviet Union remained Yugoslavia's biggest trading partner with goods worth $4,914 million exchanged in 1989, on which the Soviet Union owed Yugoslavia about $1,700 million.
On Jan. 15, 1990, Aleksandar Mitrovic, Vice-President of the Yugoslav Federal Executive Council, held talks with three Soviet ministers to discuss trade.
It was revealed that bilateral trade had increased by 3 per cent in 1989 over the previous year, and the aggregate target figure for bilateral trade in 1990 was set at $6,200 million.
FOREIGN
Loncar made visits to the United Kingdom and Belgium in April 1989 and to West Germany and France in December, with the primary purpose of discussing the economy and Yugoslavia's economic integration with Europe.
On Sept. 17, following talks the previous month, the Adriatic Initiative was signed between Yugoslavia and Italy on inter-governmental co-operation on environment protection, transport, tourism and infrastructure.
In January 1990 the Irish Foreign Minister Gerard Collins visited Yugoslavia, Ireland having assumed the presidency of the European Community (EC) Council of Ministers in that month.
Talks focused on relations between Yugoslavia and the EC and also on Yugoslavia (which currently had special status) becoming a full member of the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD).
EUROPE
GREECE
BASIC DATA
Area: 131,957 sq km.
Population: 10,030,000 (1988).
Capital: Athens.
Language: Greek.
Religion: Christianity (majority Greek Orthodox Church).
Av. life expectancy: 76 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 208,500 (143,500 conscripts, 1,800 women)(1989).
GNP per capita: US$4,790 (1988).
Currency: drachma (US$1.00=163.0722 drachmas as at May 4, 1990).
Under its 1975 Constitution Greece, or the Hellenic Republic, is a parliamentary democracy.
The head of state is the President of the Republic (currently Konstantinos Karamanlis, who has largely ceremonial functions and is elected by Parliament for a five-year term.
The President appoints the Prime Minister and, upon the latter's recommendation, the other members of the government.
The unicameral 300-member Chamber of Deputies is elected for a four-year term by universal adult suffrage under a system of reinforced proportional representation.
In a general election in June 1989 the Panhellenic Socialist Movement (Panellinion Socialistikou Kinema — Pasok), led by Andreas Papandreou, lost its overall majority of seats, and a temporary government was formed comprising members of the right-wing New Democracy (Nea Demokratia — ND) and the communist-dominated Coalition of the Left and Progress (Synaspismos) and led by Tzannis Tzannetakis [see pp. 36738-39].
This government resigned in October but elections on Nov. 5 left no party with an overall majority, and on Nov. 23 an all-party coalition government led by Xenofon Zolotas was formed [see pp. 37050-51].
However, this coalition collapsed on Feb. 12, 1990 [see pp. 37263-64], and on the following day Zolotas formed a caretaker government which held office until elections on April 8.
These finally broke the political deadlock and on April 11 ND, led by Konstantinos Mitsotakis, formed a single-party government [see p. 37388].
POLITICS
During 1989 and the first part of 1990 Pasok's standing was seriously undermined by a number of scandals, as attempts were made to uncover the full extent of corruption during the period of Pasok government.
Controversy also surrounded Papandreou himself, including his divorce in June 1989 [see p. 36738], and third marriage, to Dimitra Liani, on July 13, 1989.
Koskotas affair
The most significant scandal concerned George Koskotas, who had been charged in November 1988 with forgery and the embezzlement of US$200,000,000 from the Bank of Crete, but had escaped to the United States where he remained in custody awaiting extradition [see p. 36562; see also pp. 36527; 36822; 36902].
A key suspect and witness was Yannis Mantzouranis, legal adviser to Koskotas and a former Cabinet aide to Papandreou.
Mantzouranis was arrested on March 2, 1989, and charged with illegally handling $2,000,000 of Bank of Crete funds.
His testimony later that month implicated Agamemnon Koutsogiorgas, the former Justice Minister and Minister to the Prime Minister [see p. 36527], whom Mantzouranis claimed had been the recipient of the US$2,000,000 from Koskotas which had been paid in return for his effecting the passage of a law which lifted the Bank of Greece's control over the Bank of Crete.
In addition, charges of "receiving the fruits of a crime" were brought on Feb. 20, 1989, against 14 Greek companies, including the state-owned telegraphic and telephone office OTE and the state airline Olympic Airways, which were alleged to have deposited large sums of money with the Bank of Crete in August and September 1988, when the Bank's dealings were already under investigation.
The directors of these two companies were among those appearing in court in March 1989, although the political uncertainties during the year left the situation unresolved.
On June 21, 1989, the US Justice Department filed criminal charges against the National Mortgage Bank of Greece (47 per cent of which was owned by the Bank of Greece) for allegedly laundering $700,000,000.
Controversy over purchase of US and French fighter jets
On Aug. 8-9, 1989, Parliament voted unanimously to set up a "fact-finding commission" to investigate the circumstances surrounding the purchase of 40 US-made F-16C and 40 French Mirage-2000 fighter aircraft [see p. 34637]as well as of 300 French Magic-2 missiles.
Definitive contracts had been signed in July 1985 for the Mirage fighters and in January 1987 for the F-16Cs [see p. 35130].
While Synaspismos supported ND in its view that there was serious overpricing and other irregularities in the contracts, it maintained that there was insufficient evidence to allow prosecution.
In the event the fact-finding commission concurred with this view.
Yugoslav maize scandal
In late August 1989 Parliament voted that Nikos Athanasopoulos, a former Deputy Finance Minister, should stand trial before a special tribunal of 12 senior judges in connection with the so-called Yugoslav maize scandal.
On May 28, 1990, his trial, the first of a former Pasok minister, began.
Athanasopoulos was charged with criminal fraud and forgery in the illegal sale as Greek produce of 20,000 tonnes of Yugoslav maize, which therefore did not attract countervailing levies by the European Communities (EC) which would have totalled 1,350,000 European currency units (ECU; approximately equivalent to US$1,630,000).
The maize had been brought from Yugoslavia to Greece in two shiploads in 1986 and then resold as Greek maize by ITCO, a state-owned trading company, after the customs documents had been forged.
The former head of ITCO and four other Finance Ministry and customs officials also faced charges.
In judgment of a case brought by the European Commission against Greece the European Court of Justice on Sept. 24, 1989, had ordered the Greek government to pay court costs and a fine of 620,000,000 drachmas (representing the EC's lost revenue plus interest).
The court found that Papandreou's government had failed to carry out a 1987 EC request that investigations be made into ITCO's activities.
Ending of broadcasting monopoly
Le Monde of Oct. 5, 1989, reported that Parliament had approved a law allowing the establishment of local private television stations and thereby bringing to an end the state broadcasting monopoly.
A National Radio and Television Council was established to regulate the market.
In any company individual shareholdings, whether Greek or foreign, could not exceed 25 per cent.
(Private radio had been introduced by a law passed in August 1987 but which had not come into effect until Oct. 6, 1989.)
On Nov. 20, 1989, the first private television channel, Mega Channel (in which three left-wing and two conservative publishers each held a 20 per cent stake), began broadcasting.
The channel's main competitor was expected to be Antenna TV, in which Minos Kyriakou, a Greek shipowner and supporter of the private radio station Antenna Radio, Rupert Murdoch and Leo Kirch, the United States and West German media tycoons, each held shareholdings.
Immediately before the April 1990 general election Dimitris Angelopoulos, the chief of the National Intelligence Service, was dismissed in connection with an attempt to sabotage a television channel linked to Pasok and was replaced on April 1 by Pandelis Kalamakis.
Military appointments
On May 7, 1990, Ioannis Verivakis, previously Chief of the Army General Staff, was appointed Chief of the National Defence General Staff.
Gen. Athanasios Spathias returned from retirement to become Chief of the Air Force General Staff; Lt.-Gen.
Dimitrios Karvellis was appointed Chief of the Army General Staff, while Vice-Adml.
Evangelos Lagaras remained Chief of the Navy General Staff.
[For July 1989 changes see p. 36822.]
KKE leadership change
On July 11, 1989, Harilaos Florakis, 75, resigned as general secretary of the orthodox Marxist-Leninist Communist Party of Greece (Kommunistiko Komma Ellados — KKE), the leading element within Synaspismos.
Grigorios Farakos was unanimously elected to replace Florakis, who had held the post since 1973 [see also p. 26781].
Florakis was appointed president of the KKE's central committee and remained president of Synaspismos.
Death of Averoff
Evangelos Averoff-Tossizza, a prominent conservative politician who had held ministerial office on numerous occasions, died on Jan. 2, 1990, at the age of 80.
First elected to Parliament in 1946, Averoff later served in various ministerial capacities most notably as Foreign Minister in 1956-63, when he played a key role in reaching agreement on Cyprus's independence in 1960.
Following the 1967 coup he remained politically active and was arrested shortly afterwards [see p. 22452]and again in 1973 in connection with an abortive naval mutiny [see pp. 25965; 26062].
When democracy was re-established Averoff served as Minister of Defence in 1974-80 in the government led by Karamanlis [see p. 26668].
Upon Karamanlis's election as President in 1980 [see pp. 30359-61], Averoff narrowly failed to win the ND leadership, but was elected party leader in 1981 after the party's defeat in the 1981 election [see p. 31265].
SECURITY
During 1989 and early 1990, in addition to the May and September 1989 attacks listed above (both of which were believed to be connected with the Koskotas affair and with the November 17 Revolutionary Organization) there were a number of small bomb attacks against cars and buildings, which caused material damage and sometimes injury but no deaths.
Attacks for which the November 17 Revolutionary Organization claimed responsibility included:(i) the bombing on Feb. 22, 1989, of three empty luxury homes in Athens in protest at the government's housing policy which had led to greatly increased rents; and (ii) bomb attacks on May 15, 1990, which caused a fire and a total electricity failure in a wealthy Athens suburb.
Other attacks included:(i) an explosion at the offices of the French Banque Nationale de Paris in Athens on March 10, 1989, which a group calling itself Revolutionary Solidarity claimed was in support of the French urban guerrilla organization Action Directe;(ii) a bomb attack on April 10 on a judge's apartment in Athens for which the May 1 Revolutionary Organization claimed responsibility and threatened to attack any judge supporting the extradition to the USA of Muhammad Rashid [see p. 36667];(iii) a bomb attack on the Justice Ministry on June 1 and on three government offices in Athens and Piraeus on June 13 for which the Revolutionary Popular Struggle (ELA) claimed responsibility;(iv) car-bomb attacks on three US vehicles near Athens on Oct. 22 in which four Greeks were slightly injured and for which ELA claimed responsibility;(v) a car-bomb attack on March 19, 1990, which injured a former senior British Petroleum executive; and (vi) attacks on 12 cars belonging to East European and Arab diplomats on March 27, for which an organization called Social Resistance claimed responsibility on behalf of the "vested rights of Third-World countries" .
On Oct. 22, 1989, a Greek Air Force officer, Michalis Pavlis, was killed on the island of Lesbos while apparently attempting to plant a bomb in a building where Mitsotakis was due to speak.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
Real GDP growth 3.9% (1988)
Current-account balance -US$957 m. (1988)
Budget deficit as % of GDP 16.1% (1988)
Total external debt US$20,950 m. (1988)
Debt service (interest and amortization) as % of budget expenditure 36% (1988)
Gross domestic product US$52,490 m. (1988)
Inflation rate 14.8% (1989)
Unemployment 7.8% (1989)
Principal trading partners Exports: EC, Americas, Asia; Imports: EC, Asia, Africa.
The failure of either the June or the November 1989 general elections to resolve Greece's political impasse led to a rapid deterioration in the country's economic position during 1989.
In advance of the June election the Pasok administration attempted to strengthen its position through political patronage, with the result that, according to ND, over 90,000 people were given jobs in the public sector during the first six months of 1989.
Afterwards the interim government led by Tzannetakis (in which ND and Synaspismos held differing economic views) was reluctant to introduce unpopular austerity measures when elections were again imminent.
Tax reforms propounded by Zolotas's all-party Cabinet installed after the November election were dropped when this government collapsed in February 1990.
According to the annual report on the Greek economy published by the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) on Jan. 31, 1990 [see also below], the position of the public sector deteriorated during 1989 after improving during the period of the two-year austerity plan of 1986-87.
The public-sector borrowing requirement (PSBR), which had been reduced from 17.9 per cent of gross domestic product (GDP) in 1985 to 13.2 per cent in 1987, rose again, to an estimated 21.5 per cent of GDP in 1989.
Similarly the balance-of-payments deficit on the current account more than doubled, from $957 million in 1988 to around $2,500 million or 5 per cent of GDP in 1989.
This was partly due to reduced growth both in financial transfers from Greeks abroad and in tourism revenue.
A series of strikes during 1989 and early 1990, by which employees sought to recoup an 11 per cent cut in real wages during the 1986-87 austerity plan, tended to fuel inflation.
This rose to 14.8 per cent in 1989 from 14 per cent in 1988 (according to statistics released by the Greek national statistical office in January 1990) and was expected to rise further during 1990.
Following the general strike on March 2, 1989 [see p. 36527], differences within the Synaspismos-ND government in August over bread prices threatened to split the coalition, and in September an index-linked wage increase of 10 per cent was awarded.
Upon taking office in November Zolotas immediately introduced price increases for many goods and services [see p. 37051].
On Dec. 6 he introduced further austerity measures designed to increase revenue (which was anyway significantly less than originally forecast) by 200,000 drachmas.
These included a 5-7 per cent extra levy on private-sector company profits, an income tax surcharge on individuals with declared earnings over 2,000,000 drachmas, increases in transport and public utility charges averaging 17 per cent, and increased petrol and road taxes of 17 and 25 per cent respectively.
These measures precipitated another 24-hour general strike on Jan. 25, 1990, and further industrial action in February [see pp. 37197; 37263-64].
Nevertheless, in April Mitsotakis's ND government introduced a package of emergency price and tax increases [see p. 37388].
A further 24-hour general strike on May 22 severely disrupted transport and services.
Various international bodies warned of the need to impose radical austerity measures without delay if adverse trends were to be reversed.
In January the OECD's annual report declared: "The short-term outlook is for a continuation of disappointing trends." 
In early March a confidential report by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) reportedly called for long-overdue structural reforms and a broad-based austerity package to be introduced after the April election.
Wage ceilings needed to be introduced and the heavily indebted state pension scheme overhauled.
(Outlays from the scheme had reached 15 per cent of GDP in 1989 while its deficits rose to 9 per cent of GDP.)
In order to increase revenue the IMF recommended raising indirect taxes and reforming the fiscal system in order to broaden the tax base and to reduce tax evasion.
(At least 3,500,000 million drachmas in income had escaped taxation in 1989 according to government estimates in March 1990.)
In a letter to Zolotas on March 5 Jacques Delors, President of the EC Commission, claimed that Greece's economic situation had become "a serious cause for concern for all of us" .
He warned that economic development was lagging so far behind that of the rest of the EC that the EC's "course towards the single market, monetary union and European unification is in danger of being permanently undermined" .
The letter recalled that a 1,750 million ECU loan in 1985 had been given on condition that the PSBR and inflation be reduced over three years [see p. 34440]and that these terms had not been adhered to.
FOREIGN
Controversy over Moslem minority in Thrace
Relations with Turkey were strained in early 1990 after 19 people were injured in clashes in Komotini in north-eastern Greece on Jan. 29, 1990, between Greeks and the 120,000-strong Moslem minority in Thrace, which straddled the joint Greek-Turkish-Bulgarian border.
Tensions were raised on Jan. 26 when Achmet Sadiq, a leader of the Moslem minority who had been elected to Parliament in June 1989 but disqualified from the November election on procedural grounds, and another Moslem parliamentary candidate were found guilty of "inciting violence and dissension" and using the word "Turkish" in their campaign manifestos.
Both leaders were each sentenced to 18 months' imprisonment and three years' civil rights deprivation (although an appeal court ordered Sadiq's release immediately before the April election and he was again elected to Parliament — see p. 37388).
The rights of the Moslem minority in (Greek) western Thrace were guaranteed under the 1923 Lausanne Treaty in which Turkey had inter alia regained control of the eastern part of Thrace).
However, a 1988 Supreme Court ruling had banned the use of the word "Turkish" in the names of political organizations.
Some 1,500 Moslems had gathered on Jan. 29 to commemorate this ruling, the violence following this demonstration [for clashes in 1988 see p. 36117].
On Feb. 1 the Turkish ambassador in Athens was temporarily recalled and two days later the Turkish consul-general in Komotini was expelled for referring to the Moslems in the area as fellow countrymen, while the Greek consul-general was on the same day expelled from Istanbul.
The incident marked a reversal from the policy of reconciliation espoused by the Turkish and Greek governments at a meeting in Davos, Switzerland, in January 1988 [ibid.].
Emigration of Pontian Greeks from Soviet Union
During 1989 5,000-6,000 ethnic Greeks took advantage of the Soviet Union's more lenient travel laws and emigrated to Greece.
These Pontian Greeks had originally lived on the southern coast of the Black Sea (called Euxinos Pontos or Hospitable Sea in ancient Greek).
According to the Centre for Pontian Studies in Athens 350,000 Pontians were massacred in 1916-23; around 1,000,000 Pontians fled to Greece while others escaped to the Caucasus, only to be exiled to central Asia and Siberia under Stalin.
The Greek Foreign Ministry estimated that of the estimated 500,000 Pontians currently in the Soviet Union at least 20 per cent would be likely to emigrate to Greece.
Plans to resettle them in (Greek) Thrace were criticized by the Turkish government as altering the region's demography, but the Greek administration rejected such "unwarranted intervention in Greek domestic affairs" .
Relations with Israel
Mitsotakis's government on May 21, 1990, formally established diplomatic relations with Israel.
Greece, the last EC country formally to recognize Israel, had maintained de facto relations with Israel since 1949 and there was an Israeli diplomatic mission in Athens.
EUROPE
CYPRUS
BASIC DATA
Area: 9,251 sq km(incl.
Turkish-occupied region).
Population: 686,000 (1988).
Capital: Nicosia.
Languages: Greek (75%); Turkish (most of the remainder).
Religion: Majority of Greek speakers are Christians (Orthodox Church of Cyprus); most Turks are Moslems.
Av. life expectancy: 76 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: Cyprus — 13,000; Northern Cyprus — 3,000 (1989).
GNP per capita: US$6,260 (1988).
Currency: Cyprus pound (US$1.00=0.4740 Cyprus pounds as at May 4, 1990)
Since February 1975 the Republic of Cyprus (a member of the Commonwealth) has been de facto divided into two states — the (Greek-Cypriot) Republic of Cyprus and the (Turkish-Cypriot) Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus (TRNC).
The latter (which is not internationally recognized other than by Turkey) was declared in November 1983 by the Assembly of the Turkish Federated State of Cyprus, which was itself created after the occupation by Turkish troops of about 40 per cent of the island's area in July 1974.
The Greek-Cypriot administration continues to observe the 1960 Constitution, although provisions for the participation in government of Turkish-Cypriots are in abeyance.
The administration consists of an executive President who is directly elected by universal adult suffrage for a five-year term, and who appoints and presides over a Council of Ministers.
The legislature is the unicameral House of Representatives (increased prior to the December 1985 elections from 50 seats to 80, including a nominal allocation of 24 seats to Turkish-Cypriots) which is elected by universal adult suffrage according to a system of proportional representation.
In an election on Feb. 14, 1988, Georgios Vassiliou was elected President in place of Spyros Kyprianou, and his new Cabinet took office on Feb. 29 [see pp. 35849-50].
The TRNC, whose citizens make up about one-fifth of the population of the island, has an executive President who is elected by universal adult suffrage every five years and who presides over a Cabinet.
Legislative authority is vested in a 50-member unicameral parliament, which is similarly elected by universal adult suffrage for a five-year term.
Rauf Denktash was re-elected president in April 1990 [see p. 37389].
Georgios Iacovou Foreign Affairs Georgios Syrimis Finance Christodoulos Veniamin Interior Andreas Aloneftis Defence *Christoforos Christofidhis Education *Pavlos Savvidhis Communications and Works Panicos Papageorghiou Health Takis Nemitsas Commerce and Industry *Iacovos Aristidhou Labour and Social Insurance Andreas Gavrielides Agriculture and Natural Resources *Nikolaos Papaioannou Justice *Appointed on May 4, 1990, in reshuffle following resignation for personal reasons of Takis Christofides as Labour and Social Insurance Minister.
Cyprus Council of Ministers
POLITICS
Continuing deadlock in negotiations between Greek and Turkish sectors
Disturbances along the "Green Line" between the Greek and Turkish sectors of the island in July 1989 led Rauf Denktash, the TRNC President, to break off talks scheduled to be held in September 1989 under UN auspices.
Nevertheless separate meetings which President Vassiliou and Denktash held with the UN Secretary-General, Javier Pérez de Cuéllar, on Nov. 29 and Dec. 4, 1989, resulted in both sides accepting an invitation from Pérez de Cuéllar to meet for an indefinite period in search of an agreement, starting on Feb. 26, 1990.
At those meetings, held in New York, Denktash countered Pérez de Cuéllar's proposals with demands for the recognition of "two peoples" , rather than separate communities within the island, as well as both peoples' right to self-determination; his stance brought the meetings to an end on March 2, 1990 [see p. 37331].
Denktash's position was rejected by Resolution 649 approved by the UN Security Council on March 13, 1990, which reaffirmed the Council's support for a bicommunal federal republic excluding "any form of partition or secession" .
The Security Council also confirmed its support for the role played by Pérez de Cuéllar, explicitly requesting him "to assist the two communities by making suggestions to facilitate the discussions" , and calling on both communities to co-operate with him "on an equal footing" .
Splits in AKEL
The communist Progressive Party of the Working People (AKEL) underwent an internal upheaval on Jan. 26-29, 1990, as 10 members of its central committee resigned and four of its political bureau's 15 members were dismissed or resigned, after attempts by dissidents to demand democratic reforms.
The coming into the open of a dissident wing also divided AKEL's parliamentary group, with five dissidents among the party's then 15 parliamentarians.
Church and family law
Despite strong church opposition, Parliament on June 12, 1989, modified Article 111 of the Constitution which regulated family law, marriage and divorce, ending the Orthodox Church's control of these matters.
The reform, which came into force on Jan. 1, 1990, allowed the option of civil marriage and provided for family law courts to rule on divorce cases which until then had been decided by church courts.
SECURITY
Incidents in buffer zone — Troop movements
A Greek-Cypriot soldier was killed and a Turkish-Cypriot soldier wounded in a shooting incident which took place on May 7, 1989, in the UN-controlled buffer zone in Nicosia.
Government and TRNC forces on May 17, 1989, abandoned 24 military positions along the Green Line dividing Nicosia, as part of a pullback agreement brokered by the UN Peace-Keeping Force in Cyprus (UNFICYP), which aimed at reducing tension along the buffer zone.
The government claimed that this was a step towards the demilitarization of Nicosia.
Police used tear gas and baton charges on Nov. 15, 1989, to prevent thousands of students from storming into the Turkish sector of Nicosia in a protest against the division of the island.
The government showed its new military capabilities at the independence anniversary celebrations on Oct. 1, 1989, when Franco-German anti-tank missiles and French Mistral portable ground-to-air missiles were displayed for the first time.
The country's first military aircraft, a Swiss Pilatus PC-9 trainer with military capability, was also shown.
Renewal of UNFICYP mandate
A six-month extension of the UNFICYP mandate was approved by the UN Security Council on Dec. 14, 1989 [for 1987, 1988 and June 1989 extensions see pp. 35850; 36711; 36823].
Pérez de Cuéllar appealed on Nov. 8, 1989, for voluntary contributions for the financing of UNFICYP, as the accumulated shortfall reached $175,000,000.
The burden of the deficit, he said, was falling on the troop-contributing countries, which had already had to absorb more than 71 per cent of costs.
Sentencing of Lebanese
A court on Oct. 13, 1989, sentenced the six members of a Lebanese assassination team to up to eight years in prison for smuggling arms, including Sam-7 missiles, into the island.
The six confessed that they had planned to shoot down a helicopter carrying Lebanese Christian Army leader, Gen. Michel Aoun, on his arrival at Larnaca airport.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth 6% (1989)
Current-account balance +US$13 m. (1988)
Trade balance -US$987 m. (1988)
GDP US$4,494.4 m. (1989)
Inflation rate 4% (1989)
Principal trading partners Middle East, North Africa, UK, USA 
Growth led by consumer demand
The Central Planning Commission approved on June 8, 1989, the government's five-year plan for the period 1989-93.
The plan called for investments totalling US$6,831 million — a 56 per cent increase over the previous five-year period — and an annual 5 per cent growth rate.
The economy registered a 6 per cent growth in 1989, with government projections anticipating a 5.5 per cent growth rate for 1990.
Inflation reached 4 per cent in 1989, slightly over the 3.8 per cent registered in 1988, while salaries rose by 4.3 per cent in real terms.
According to Finance Minister Georgios Syrimis, the economy in 1989 showed conditions close to those of full employment, with unemployment standing at 2.5 per cent, and he noted that key sectors of the economy, particularly tourism, construction and industry, faced labour shortages.
Although the economy continued to grow, that growth was being led by a rapidly increasing domestic demand for consumer items.
Rising incomes and growing demand were pulling in more imports as labour shortages constrained output, threatening the dwindling current-account surplus and placing future growth in doubt.
Foreign exchange reserves reached $1,500,800,000 by end-1989, an increase of $436,900,000 compared with the previous year.
The fiscal deficit was estimated at $53,800,000 or 3.5 per cent of the gross national product (GNP).
These indicators contrasted sharply with those of the TRNC economy, heavily subsidized by Turkey but also sharing the effects of Turkey's 80 per cent inflation.
Average per capita income in the TRNC was estimated at one-third of that in the rest of the island.
The 1990 budget provided for expenditure of $1,356,500,000 and revenue of $1,001,400,000.
It was approved by the House of Representatives on Dec. 8, 1989, with only the socialist Cyprus National Democratic Union (EDEK) voting against, following the introduction of cuts ranging from $13,500,000 to the ordinary budget and of $132,480 to the refugee relief fund.
Tax and exchange reforms
During the budget debate Syrimis announced on Nov. 16, 1989, a series of tax reform proposals, introducing a value added tax (VAT) and changes in the structure of income tax.
The VAT proposal sought charges of 25 per cent for luxury items and of 10 per cent for other goods and services, while granting exemptions to housing rents, items regarded as "of primary need and broad consumption" (such as foodstuffs, water, pharmaceutical products, books, newspapers and children's clothes) and "essential services" in the areas of health and education.
Income tax brackets were to be reduced from 11 to three, with the rate for the upper bracket cut from 60 to 40 per cent and the ceiling of tax exempted income raised from $3,105 to $4,140.
Current corporate taxes of 42.5 per cent plus the "special contributions" to the refugee fund, were to be abolished and replaced by a 20 per cent flat rate company tax.
The Central Bank liberalized its foreign exchange regulations on Feb. 1, 1990, eliminating the system which required all transactions to go through the bank and to take place at a fixed daily rate.
Commercial banks were now allowed to trade directly with overseas dealers at competitive rates.
FOREIGN
The tax reforms proposals and the liberalization of exchange regulations were designed to meet the terms of the customs union agreement with the European Communities (EC) signed on Oct. 19, 1987 [see p. 35850], the basic feature of which was the gradual elimination of trade tariffs and exchange barriers.
The European Parliament (EP) ratified on Feb. 15, 1990, a protocol providing $70,000,000 in financial assistance to enable the economy to adapt to the customs union agreement.
EC Commissioner for Mediterranean Affairs, Abel Matutes, signed on Feb. 10, 1990, an agreement to establish a permanent EC mission in Cyprus.
Denktash, however, was critical of the government's links with the EC and the prospects of an application for membership, claiming that once an application was formalized the government would have closed the door on reunification talks.
On Jan. 12, 1990, officials from Cyprus and the Soviet Union signed a two-year scientific and cultural co-operation agreement.
At the ceremony the Cypriot representative reaffirmed Soviet support for the restoration of the island's unity and for UN efforts to reach a settlement.