

EUROPE
SOVIET UNION
Extension of Gorbachev's powers — Shevardnadze's resignation
Constitutional changes approved by the Congress of People's Deputies on Dec. 25 gave President Mikhail Gorbachev executive powers more extensive than those of any previous Soviet leader.
In the course of December a series of developments indicated that Gorbachev's position had shifted to the right, partly under the pressure from conservative and authoritarian forces to tackle the economic crisis and collapsing law and order, and partly in an attempt to forestall the country's disintegration.
These developments included the replacement of the liberal Interior Minister Vadim Bakatin, Foreign Minister Eduard Shevardnadze's stunning resignation announcement, decrees threatening a crackdown against draft-dodgers and creating worker vigilante groups to police food distribution, warnings by the KGB couched in Cold-War language, and the election of a Communist Party apparatchik to the new vice-presidency.
Whether Gorbachev's shift was fundamental, or only tactical and temporary, remained to be seen.
Taken in conjunction with his new powers, however, it aroused fears among pro-reform forces and among foreign observers that the recent period of liberalism and growing political freedom, ushered in under Gorbachev since 1985, was drawing to an end.
Food supply crisis
The extent of the crisis in the Soviet economy was illustrated in November and December by the introduction of food rationing in many parts of the country, including Leningrad, its second largest city, and by an international airlift of emergency food aid which was looked upon by some as a national humiliation.
The food crisis was not the result of any incapacity by the Soviet Union to grow enough food to feed its population.
Rather, it was the product of near-collapse in the state supply and distribution system, of technical breakdown, and of storage, transport and labour problems which meant that up to half of what had in fact been a bumper harvest in 1990 had been allowed to rot.
1990 harvest
A state of near-panic by the authorities had accompanied the harvest, beginning with reports in July that a quarter of the country's combine harvesters were out of action because of a lack of spare parts.
Later in July it was reported that factories in some regions, facing the unaccustomed pressure to make a profit, were refusing to lend out their workers to provide the usual help in bringing in the potato and vegetable harvests.
The resultant lack of manpower prompted authorities in several regions to declare a state of emergency and to call on all able-bodied citizens to help with harvesting.
An emergency meeting of the USSR Council of Ministers on Aug. 2 ordered ministries to reassign 10-15 per cent of the vehicles in their sectors to the harvest, and to order workers and students to participate in picking fruit and vegetables.
A further Council of Ministers resolution adopted on Sept. 26 authorized the use of soldiers to assist in the harvest.
On Nov. 1 it was officially announced that the grain harvest had amounted to a record 240 million tonnes.
Subsequent unofficial estimates suggested, however, that at most only 140 million tonnes would be available for consumption, the rest being wasted because of poor storage and transport.
It was also estimated that 60 per cent of the fruit and vegetable crop had been lost, although this could be blamed in part on almost continuous rain between late August and October in the main vegetable-growing belt of central European Russia, Byelorussia and the north Ukraine, with the result that crops had rotted in waterlogged fields.
Food rationing — Airlift — Western credits
Rationing of staple foodstuffs was introduced in state shops in Leningrad on Dec. 1.
It had already been introduced progressively in a number of regions of the Russian Federation and throughout the Ukraine and Armenia in recent weeks.
For many months virtually everywhere in the Soviet Union stocks in state shops of even basic foodstuffs such as bread had been growing increasingly erratic, although some of the blame for this lay in the withholding of deliveries to the state supply network by farms and local authorities, in anticipation of prices rising or to meet local needs [for indications of breakdown in the distribution system in May see p. 37538].
Western media reports of the food shortages prompted a flood of charitable donations, especially from Germany, where help for the Soviet Union was regarded as a gesture of gratitude for the role of the Soviet leadership in Germany's reunification.
An airlift of charitably financed food aid began on Nov. 29 after a "telethon" on Nov. 27, featuring television appeals for public donations by Chancellor Helmut Kohl and Foreign Minister Hans-Dietrich Genscher, had raised more than DM6,000,000 (approximately US$4,020,000) within 24 hours.
Germany also responded to an appeal made by Gorbachev on Nov. 21 during meetings at the Paris summit of the CSCE [see p. 37838-39]for governments to provide emergency food aid.
It began on Dec. 7 an airlift to the Soviet Union of some of the DM600,000,000-worth of emergency food supplies stored in Berlin.
These stores had been kept as a contingency against another Soviet blockade of the city like that of 1948-49, but reunification had rendered them obsolete.
[For approval of European Community aid package see p. 37906]
United States President Bush on Dec. 12 announced a temporary waiver until mid-1991 of the Jackson-Vanik Amendment restricting US trade with the Soviet Union [see also p. 37921].
This allowed the administration to extend to the Soviet Union credit guarantees worth up to US$1,000 million to buy US agricultural produce.
On Dec. 18 Japan granted the Soviet Union US$100 million-worth of credits to buy food.
Gorbachev on Dec. 4 had announced to the USSR Supreme Soviet emergency plans to import basic foodstuffs to the value of 2,100 million roubles (US$1,050 million at the new commercial exchange rate) to ensure that supplies in the first quarter of 1991 were at the levels of the same period in 1990.
Clampdown against black market
A significant factor in the food crisis was the spread of corruption and black-marketeering linked to the state food distribution and retail network.
On Dec. 2 Gorbachev ordered the establishment within 10 days of worker vigilante committees, elected in workplaces, to prevent the theft or black-market sale of food and other goods in short supply.
These committees were to work in concert with the police and with the KGB (which, under a Nov. 23 USSR Supreme Soviet resolution, had already been given the responsibility of ensuring that food aid from abroad did not fall into the hands of speculators).
Committee members were empowered to visit factories, shops and restaurants (state-run or private) in order to monitor the delivery and sale of food.
They would be able to close down enterprises temporarily, and to institute criminal proceedings on the basis of legislation against the black market passed in October [see p. 37787].
Law and order
Decree on enforcing conscription
Gorbachev on Dec. 1 decreed that republican legislation which infringed the central authorities' supremacy in defence matters was null and void.
This included legislation and other measures allowing young men to evade conscription or ordering that they only serve in their home republic, and moves by individual republics to set up their own military detachments.
The decree came only days after Defence Minister Marshal Dmitry Yazov had complained on television about disrespect shown towards the Soviet armed forces by "leaders of certain republics" .
Commentators noted that the decree might prove impossible to implement except by force.
Replacement of Interior and Justice Ministers
Gorbachev removed Bakatin as USSR Minister of Internal Affairs on Dec. 2, appointing in his place Boris Pugo, the ethnic-Latvian chair of the CPSU central control commission and a major-general in the KGB (he had been Latvian KGB chief in 1980-84).
Gorbachev also appointed Col.-Gen.
Boris Gromov, the well-respected former commander of Soviet forces in Afghanistan, as First Deputy Interior Minister.
In recent weeks Bakatin had come under criticism from senior military and KGB officers for his perceived failure to tackle the current crime wave, and for suggesting decentralization of control of limited contingents of Interior Ministry troops to republican governments.
He had been accused also of having allowed recent inter-ethnic conflicts in Moldavia to get out of hand [for latest developments in Moldavia's minority separatism crises see p. 37863; p. 37920].
Calls for Bakatin's removal had been taken up on Dec. 1 by the Soyuz ( "Union" ) group of conservative deputies in the Congress, the very people who had nominated him in March to run against Gorbachev for the presidency.
The USSR Supreme Soviet on Dec. 11 elected Sergei Lushchikov as USSR Justice Minister, transferring his predecessor Veniamin Yakovlev to the post of Chief State Arbiter.
It also elected Nikolai Trubin as USSR Procurator General in succession to Aleksandr Sukharev, whose retirement had been announced on Oct. 15.
The Congress of People's Deputies gave the necessary endorsement to Trubin's appointment on Dec. 27.
Threat of KGB crackdown
Gen. Vladimir Kryuchkov, the KGB chairman, made an unscheduled nationwide television broadcast on Dec. 11 in which he pledged that KGB troops would do their utmost to prevent the Soviet Union's collapse by continuing to "act as a barrier against those forces which seek to push the country towards chaos" .
Claiming to speak at Gorbachev's behest, and using some of the most hardline language heard from a senior official in recent years, Kryuchkov lumped together groups ranging from radicals to nationalists to economic saboteurs in warning that anti-democratic forces were "rushing to seize power on a wave of anti-communism" .
He claimed that the KGB had information that "in certain hot spots" opposition groups were compiling "lists of people to be neutralized if necessary" .
He spoke of "extremely radical political tendencies…enjoying lavish moral and material support from abroad" , and of the continuing fight against "foreign special services and foreign organizations" which had been "conducting a secret war against the Soviet state for decades" .
Kryuchkov affirmed the high priority being given by the KGB to combating black-marketeering and organized crime, but not before he had alleged that certain forces were engaged in "economic sabotage" for political ends and were in league with the criminal underworld.
Razing of Moscow protesters' camp
Moscow's so-called "Tent City" , a squatter camp in front of the Rossiya Hotel close to the Kremlin, was bulldozed by police early on Dec. 30, and 57 of its residents were arrested.
For nearly six months it had housed up to 100 people protesting against injustices ranging from human rights abuse, emigration restrictions and mistreatment by bureaucrats to unemployment, homelessness and low pensions.
Congress session
The Congress of People's Deputies convened on Dec. 17.
Its main agenda items were the new Union Treaty and amendments to the USSR Constitution, which would greatly enhance the role of the President and restructure and "federalize" the central administration.
Gorbachev's report
Gorbachev's keynote address to the Congress on Dec. 17 was sombre in its assessments and uncharacteristically conservative in tone.
Gorbachev justified his proposals for sweeping new presidential powers by stressing that restoring order and discipline in the country was the only way to overcome its current state of crisis.
He spoke of the need to "curb destructive actions by separatist and nationalist forces" , and to launch an offensive against crime.
He singled out the role of the Army, describing it as the "vital bulwark of the country's state sovereignty" .
On the subject of the draft union treaty, Gorbachev introduced the idea of holding a referendum on it throughout the country.
He also proposed a referendum on private ownership of land.
In the ensuing debate Gorbachev found himself assailed by conservatives and radicals alike over his policies and his record.
One of the most notable contributions was a proposal from deputy Sazhi Umalatova from Checheno-Ingushetia in the North Caucasus, for a Congress vote of no confidence in Gorbachev.
In a forthright and emotional speech she declared that Gorbachev "does not have the moral right to govern" .
Accusing him of having "cruelly deceived" the Soviet people and of having reduced "this great powerful country" to the level of "holding out its hands for alms" , she told Gorbachev: "You bring in your wake destruction, ruin, famine, cold, blood and tears." 
Most stingingly, she declared: "Amid the applause of the West, Mikhail Sergeievich has forgotten whose President he is." 
In a roll-call vote Umalatova's proposal was defeated by 1,288 to 426, with 182 abstentions.
Draft union treaty
The Congress began debating the draft union treaty on Dec. 19.
The draft had been published on Nov. 24, and had already been approved by the USSR Supreme Soviet on Dec. 3.
Under the treaty, the USSR would be a "sovereign federative state formed as a result of voluntary unification of republics, and exercising the degree of political power given to it by the parties to the treaty" .
A key article defined the powers and responsibilities of the Union as including (i) citizens' fundamental rights and freedoms under the Constitution;(ii) defence;(iii) foreign policy and regulation of foreign economic relations (including the customs service);(iv) pursuit of a single financial, credit and monetary policy based on a single currency, and drafting and execution of a national budget;(v) management of a single fuel and energy complex, transport and national communications, pipelines, defence industry, and environmental control; and (vi) co-ordination of activities to maintain public order and combat crime.
The treaty endorsed the principle, already enshrined in the republics' sovereignty declarations, of republican ownership of land and natural resources, and of the supremacy of republican laws "in all matters with the exception of those within the competence of the Union" .
Republics would be able to draw up their own budgets, and set their own taxes.
Lithuania, Latvia, Estonia, Moldavia, Georgia and Armenia had already signalled that they would not sign the treaty.
Lithuanian and Armenian deputies were boycotting the Congress session, and Estonians and Latvians were not participating in some votes.
On Dec. 18 most Moldavian deputies staged a walkout because representatives of the separatist Gagauz and Dnestr Russian communities were taking part in the Congress as guests (on the previous day a rally against the treaty in Kishinev, Moldavia's capital, had attracted up to 200,000 people).
Asked during the Dec. 4 Supreme Soviet session what would happen if a republic refused to sign, Gorbachev replied that public opinion increasingly was in favour of the authorities' acting "resolutely to preserve the Union" .
He continued that he was prepared to "go down fighting to ensure that our Union is renewed" .
During a debate lasting until Dec. 21 the treaty drew unexpected criticism from the traditionally conservative and compliant Central Asian Republics.
Kazakhstan's President Nursultan Nazarbayev and Uzbekistan's President Islam Karimov both condemned the way in which the draft treaty had been thrust upon the republics by the centre, and took the same line as the Russian Federation President Boris Yeltsin in arguing that it should be the republics' prerogative to dictate what powers the centre should retain.
The Congress on Dec. 24 adopted by 1,605 votes to 54, with 86 abstentions, a resolution approving the "general concept" of the union treaty and procedures for its signature.
It also approved Gorbachev's proposal to put the treaty and private land ownership to referendums.
The USSR Supreme Soviet was instructed to set the dates.
Deputies rejected one specific provision in the draft union treaty, however, which would have entailed formally renaming the country the Union of Sovereign Soviet Republics.
Deputies voted that the name Union of Soviet Socialist Republics should be retained.
Shevardnadze's resignation
Shevardnadze stunned the Congress by announcing from the podium on Dec. 20 that he was resigning in protest at the ascendency of reactionary forces, and what he called the "onset of dictatorship" .
In an embittered speech, Shevardnadze complained that he had been hounded by reactionary political opponents.
He cited the battle fought at the CPSU congress in July [see pp. 37614-17], a campaign of misinformation about Soviet policy towards the Gulf crisis (an oblique reference to Soyuz), and a recent, much-repeated public boast by two deputies from the military, whom he described disparagingly as "boys with colonels' stripes" , to the effect that having cleared Bakatin out of the way "the time had come to settle accounts" with Shevardnadze.
"Comrade democrats, you have scattered.
The reformers have gone to ground,"he continued.
"Dictatorship is coming, I state it with complete responsibility.
No one knows what kind of dictatorship this will be."
Shevardnadze concluded: "I cannot reconcile myself to the events which are taking place in our country and to the trials which await our people.
I nevertheless believe that dictatorship will not succeed, that the future belongs to democracy and freedom."
The speech was greeted with a standing ovation by the majority of deputies.
Shevardnadze (appointed in 1985 — see p. 33738) had been regarded as one of Gorbachev's closest allies and personal friends in the leadership.
Speaking in an impromptu Congress debate on the resignation Gorbachev was visibly angered by the announcement, rejecting Shevardnadze's charges about dictatorship and warning against "panic sentiments" .
He said that he was "wounded" by not having been consulted by Shevardnadze beforehand, and declared that "to go now is unforgivable" .
Soviet efforts to minimize the impact of his resignation internationally included a Congress resolution passed overwhelmingly at the end of the debate affirming the continuity of foreign policy.
Shevardnadze would continue in office until his resignation was considered by the Supreme Soviet at its next session, beginning at the end of December.
There was shock and alarm around the world over Shevardnadze's announcement, his apparent desertion from Gorbachev's side and his impending departure from the international diplomatic scene, where he was well-known and respected.
US Secretary of State James Baker observed that Shevardnadze's warning about dictatorship had to be taken seriously, and French Foreign Minister Roland Dumas commented on the resignation: "It confirms that what, as everyone knows, is a disastrous situation is now turning into an open crisis.
We have to conclude that the Soviet Union is now heading into the unknown, an unknown which could take dramatic directions."
Presidential powers and new leadership structure
Gorbachev's proposed constitutional changes were formally presented to the Congress on Dec. 21.
Having secured backing on Nov. 17 from the USSR Supreme Soviet for the changes in outline, Gorbachev had submitted detailed proposals to that body and secured its endorsement on Dec. 4 by 281 votes to 17 after a brief debate.
The Congress on Dec. 25 gave the necessary two-thirds majority approval to all save one of Gorbachev's original proposals, after a contentious debate.
The only element not accepted was the idea of creating a Supreme State Inspectorate to ensure that all laws and decrees were being enforced in the republics.
New leadership structure
President.
Functions extended to head all central executive bodies.
Vice-President.
The President's deputy and successor should the President be unable to complete a term of office; nominated by the President; given special responsibility for ensuring enforcement of presidential decrees throughout the country.
Cabinet of Ministers.
Defined as the "executive apparatus of presidential authority" ; headed by a Premier chosen by and reporting to the President, and comprising around 15 heads of ministries and departments in charge of "those spheres of government assigned to the Union in keeping with the allocation of powers between the Union and the republics" , plus the heads of republican governments; replaced the 69-member Council of Ministers, responsible directly to the Supreme Soviet.
Security Council.
Reporting to the President, and comprising the Defence, Interior and Foreign Ministers, the KGB chief, and "top scholars, specialists and public figures who enjoy prestige and influence in the country" ; responsible for ensuring the "external and internal security of the country and its indissoluble unity" .
Federation Council.
Headed by the USSR President and comprising as before the Presidents of the union republics, but with the addition of the USSR Vice-President and the Presidents of the 20 autonomous republics*; upgraded from a consultative to an executive body, responsible for co-ordinating the work of the central and republican governments, ensuring observance of the Union Treaty, and resolving inter-ethnic and inter-republican disputes; Council resolutions needed a two-thirds majority, and were binding on the President (who had to enact them by decree) and on all republics.
*Abkhazia, Adzharia, Bashkiria, Buryatia, Checheno-Ingushetia, Chuvashia, Daghestan, Kabardino-Balkaria, Kalmykia, Karakalpakia, Karelia, Komi, Mari El, Mordova, Nakhichevan, North Ossetia, Tartaria, Tuva, Udmurtia and Yakutia.
Election of Yanayev as Vice-President
Gorbachev unexpectedly nominated Gennady Yanayev as Vice-President on Dec. 26.
Yanayev, 53, was an ethnic Russian.
He had spent most of his working life as a bureaucrat in various organizations attached to the CPSU.
He had been elected to the leadership of the former All-Union Central Council of Trade Unions in 1986, and served as chairman of that body for three months prior to his election in July 1990 to the CPSU politburo and secretariat.
He was not widely known, but many commentators identified him as a conservative and suggested that he was unenthusiastic about market economic reform.
Gorbachev told the Congress that Yanayev was "a mature politician, a man with firm principles, an active supporter and participant in perestroika" .
Radical deputies pointed to Yanayev's credentials as a bureaucrat and denounced him as an "old-style leader" , and regrets were also expressed that a non-Russian had not been nominated.
In a secret ballot on the morning of Dec. 27, the last day of the Congress, Yanayev polled 1,089 votes in his favour (31 votes short of the necessary absolute majority of deputies, not counting vacant seats) and 583 against, with 117 abstentions.
Not prepared to settle for this result, Gorbachev renominated Yanayev.
His rebuke to the Congress, that "if this leadership is to succeed, it must have the men it wants" , effectively made the second vote on Yanayev a vote of confidence in Gorbachev, and Yanayev was then elected by 1,237 votes to 563.
Also on Dec. 27 the Congress held elections to replace one-third of the USSR Supreme Soviet deputies, as required by the Constitution.
Ryzhkov's heart attack
Gorbachev announced to the Congress on Dec. 26 that on the previous day Prime Minister Nikolai Ryzhkov had suffered a heart attack, and was seriously ill in hospital.
First Deputy Premier Yury Maslyukov was named as acting Premier.
This appeared conclusively to rule out Ryzhkov as a candidate to head the new Cabinet, although his unpopularity had already made his candidature highly unlikely.
On Dec. 19 Ryzhkov had admitted to the Congress his share of responsibility for the collapse of the economy.
He had declared that "perestroika, in the form in which it was envisioned" , had failed.
EUROPE
GERMANY
All-German elections
On Dec. 2, as a result of the first all-German general election since November 1932, Helmut Kohl of CDU, who over the preceding months had presided over the unification of Germany [see pp. 37761-63], was returned to office as Federal Chancellor.
In an election dominated by the unification issue, it was notable that combined share of the vote won by the CDU and its Bavarian sister-party, the Christian Social Union (CSU), was only 43.8 per cent, a smaller percentage than in any of the West German general elections except that of 1949.
The biggest winner was the liberal Free Democratic Party (FDP), which polled 11 per cent(its highest since 1961) and overtook the CSU as the second largest element in Kohl's ruling centre-right coalition.
The opposition Social Democratic Party (SPD) recorded its worst result since 1957, with 33.5 per cent.
As regards the smaller parties, only the Party of Democratic Socialism (PDS — the successor to the former East German ruling Socialist Unity Party) and the Alliance 90/Greens gained representation.
In both cases this was because they exceeded the 5 per cent minimum threshold in terms of votes won in what was formerly East Germany, albeit not in Germany as a whole.
The electoral law approved in October [see pp. 37826-27]exceptionally allowed separate 5 per cent hurdles to be applied for this election in the two parts of the country.
In the former West Germany the Greens, represented in the Bundestag (lower house of parliament) for the last seven years, fell below the 5 per cent threshold and lost representation altogether.
The western Greens merged on Dec. 3 with their eastern sister party, which had two Bundestag deputies elected on the Alliance 90/Green ticket.
The turnout in Germany as a whole was 77.8 per cent; that in western Germany was 78.6 per cent (as compared with 84.3 per cent in 1987 — see pp. 35014-15); that in eastern Germany (where voters had gone to the polls three times in the previous nine months — see pp. 37300-03; 37467; 37762) was 74.7 per cent .
There were 136 women in the new Bundestag.
Election campaign — Draft 1991 budget
The election campaign concentrated on unification questions and on the personalities of the candidates for Chancellor, largely ignoring other current issues such as the Gulf crisis, European union, asylum and immigration policy, and abortion.
On the key question of the projected cost of unifying the two Germanies, Kohl declared that taxes would not have to be raised, while his SPD challenger Oskar Lafontaine maintained that this would not be possible.
Estimates as to the likely cost of unification varied widely.
The draft 1991 budget presented by Finance Minister Theo Waigel on Nov. 14 required spending cuts of DM35,000 million (US$23,645 million), after which the 1991 public-sector deficit was still calculated to rise dramatically to DM140,000 million or 5 per cent of GNP.
Three days later Kohl conceded that "we cannot avoid talking about an increase in duties" (rather than taxes) and mentioned possible duties on carbon dioxide emissions or motorway tolls.
The CDU, with the slogan "Yes to Germany!— Yes to the future!" , exploited Kohl's success in bringing the process of unification to completion in October.
Similarly the FDP campaign was dominated by Hans-Dietrich Genscher, the longstanding Foreign Minister who had also played a leading role in the unification process, and FDP posters urged the electorate to "Vote for the Germany the world trusts!" .
Lafontaine, although regarded as a better orator than Kohl, was unable to draw support for a campaign which concentrated on the cost of unification (he had initially opposed the treaty on economic and monetary union — see pp. 37535-36) and on social and environmental issues.
Doubts within the SPD about the choice of Lafontaine, and about his conduct of the campaign, resurfaced notably when a Dutch newspaper in late November cited a comment by former Chancellor Helmut Schmidt that he would lose the election and "deserves it too" .
The loss of support for the Greens was attributed to their critical stance on unification, their internal divisions, and the espousal of environmental causes by the other parties.
Germany Western Germany Eastern Germany (incl.
W. Berlin)(incl.
E. Berlin) Dec 1990 Dec 1990 1987 Dec 1990 March 1990 CDU 36.7 35.5 34.5 41.8 42.7 FDP 11.0 10.6 9.1 12.9 5.5 CSU 7.1 8.8 9.8 — Governing coalition 54.8 54.9 53.4 54.7 48.2 SPD 33.5 35.7 37.0 24.3 20.8 Greens 3.9 4.8 8.3 0.1 Alliance 90/Greens 1.2 0.0 — 6.0 4.5* PDS 2.4 0.3 — 11.1 15.2 Republicans 2.1 2.3 — 1.3 Greys** 0.8 0.8 — 0.8 ÖDP*** 0.4 0.5 0.3 0.2 NPD*** 0.3 0.3 0.6 0.3 DSU*** 0.2 0.0 — 0.9 6.6 Others 0.4 0.3 0.4 0.2 4.7 *In March 1990 in East Germany Alliance 90 and the (East German) Greens campaigned separately.
**Party campaigning for the elderly, founded in July 1989 [see pp. 37676-77].
***ÖDP — Ecological Democratic Party; NPD — National Democratic Party; DSU — German Social Union.
Following December As enlarged 1990 election after unification* CDU 268 248 FDP 79 57 CSU 51 57** Governing coalition 398 362 SPD 239 226 Greens 0 Alliance 90 8 49 PDS 17 24 Others 0 2 Total 662 663 *For seat distribution immediately before unification see p. 37762. **Includes eight seats held by the DSU.
Percentage of votes won in all-German general election (provisional official results)
Distribution of Bundestag seats
Inaugural session of new Bundestag
The Bundestag held its inaugural session in the Reichstag (the former German parliament building) in Berlin on Dec. 20, and re-elected Rita Süssmuth as its president (Speaker).
Thereafter sessions were to revert to Bonn pending a decision on the final seat of parliament [see pp. 37661; 37832].
CDU victory in Berlin
In simultaneous elections in Berlin on Dec. 2 — the first since 1946 for a unified administration in the city — the CDU led by Eberhard Diepgen won a landslide victory against the SPD-Alternative List (AL) coalition led by Walter Momper, which had ruled in West Berlin since the last election in January 1989 [see pp. 36403; 36530].
Momper's "red-green" alliance had collapsed on Nov. 15 when the AL withdrew in protest at the violent eviction by 3,000 police of several hundred (mainly west Berliner) squatters from 13 apartment buildings in the Friedrichshain district of east Berlin the previous day; 300 people were arrested and over 100 injured in the clashes.
Percentage of vote Seats All Berlin West* East CDU 40.3 48.9 (37.8) 25.0 100 SPD 30.5 29.5 (37.3) 32.1 76 PDS 9.2 1.1 (-) 23.6 23 FDP 7.1 7.9 (3.9) 5.6 18 AL 5.0 6.9 (11.8) 1.7 12 Alliance 90 4.4 1.4 (-) 9.7 11** Republicans 3.1 3.7 (7.5) 1.9 0 Others 0.4 0.6 (1.7) 0.4 0 *Figure in brackets shows percentage won by parties in January 1989 West Berlin election [see p. 36403].
**Separate 5 per cent thresholds were applied in the eastern and western sectors.
Berlin election results
Resignations of Haussmann and Teltschik
On Dec. 3 Helmut Haussmann resigned as (FDP) Economics Minister, having been widely criticized for failing to give a lead on the economic aspects of unification.
Two days later Horst Teltschik (CDU) announced that he would be stepping down at the end of the year as Kohl's foreign policy adviser at the Chancellery.
Despite 19 years of close co-operation with Kohl, Teltschik was known to have come into conflict with Genscher at the Foreign Ministry.
De Maizière's resignation
On Dec. 10 the magazine Der Spiegel, pursuing allegations that former East German Prime Minister Lothar de Maizière had worked for the Stasi secret police, cited a Stasi index card showing someone named "Czerny" living at de Maizière's Berlin address.
De Maizière denied signing up with the Stasi, delivering information or receiving gifts or money; his "only contacts" , he said, "came from my duties as a lawyer and were directed to being useful" to his clients.
However, on Dec. 17 he resigned as Minister without Portfolio in Kohl's Cabinet and as deputy leader of the CDU (although not as a Bundestag member).
[For other Stasi-related resignations see pp. 37302; 37718; 37828.]
SPD leadership
Immediately after the election Lafontaine announced that he was returning to his post as Saarland Minister President, and would not take on the SPD party or parliamentary group leadership.
Hans-Jochen Vogel was confirmed as SPD parliamentary leader on Dec. 5, and on Dec. 10 the SPD presidium nominated Björn Engholm, 51, Minister President of Schleswig-Holstein since May 1988, to succeed Vogel as chair at the party's congress in May 1991.
EUROPE
EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
Rome summit — Opening of intergovernmental conferences
The European Council of heads of state and government of the 12 members of the European Communities (EC) held a summit in Rome on Dec. 14-15.
The meeting established a broad framework for the negotiations at the parallel intergovernmental conferences on political union and on economic and monetary union, which the Council formally opened in Rome on Dec. 15.
At the summit the United Kingdom was represented for the first time by John Major, who had replaced Margaret Thatcher as Prime Minister on Nov. 28 [see pp. 37839-40].
His less assertive approach was welcomed by EC colleagues, but Major stressed that UK policies on key issues had not fundamentally changed.
A week before the summit the French President, François Mitterrand, and the German Chancellor, Helmut Kohl, had on Dec. 6 addressed a joint open letter to their EC colleagues containing proposals for political union, notably the development of common foreign, security and ultimately defence policies.
Notably, it proposed that a "clear organic relationship" be established between the Western European Union (WEU) and the new political union, with the WEU eventually becoming part of the political union and developing "a common security policy on its behalf" , which would not, however, interfere with existing defence arrangements.
The proposal was critically received, among others, by Dutch Prime Minister Ruud Lubbers who maintained that the initiative would upset the existing balance between EC institutions.
[See also p. 37931 for NATO discussion of WEU role.]
Discussions on economic and monetary union were further advanced and the Commission had already drawn up a draft treaty.
The UK nevertheless intended to submit its own proposed amendments in January 1991 (on the basis of Major's June proposals for a parallel "hard ecu" — see p. 37521), prompting European Commission President Jacques Delors to warn on Dec. 15 of a political crisis if the UK tried to stall over the issues of a single currency and a central bank.
On political union key issues included strengthening the role of the European Parliament and the concept of European citizenship, while the Mitterrand-Kohl joint letter added the wider and more sensitive issues of possible joint security and even defence policies.
Both conferences were to "proceed in parallel" with a view to their conclusion by October 1991.
The proposed treaty changes would be then submitted to national parliaments for ratification so that they could enter into force on Jan. 1, 1993.
(The only previous intergovernmental conference of the EC, held in September 1985 — see p. 34003, led to agreement on the Single European Act which came into effect in July 1987 — see pp. 34107-08; 34889; 35534-35; 34889.)
Summit conclusions
Extracts from the communiqué are given below.
Political union.
"…Without prejudice to other subjects raised by governments or by the Commission…the European Council asks the conference to give particular attention to the following:
1.
Democratic legitimacy.
 "In order to strengthen the role of the European Parliament, the Council asks the conference to consider the following measures: extension and improvement of the co-operation procedure; extension of the procedure for assent to international agreements which require unanimous approval by the Council; involvement of the European Parliament in the appointment of the Commission and its president; increased powers on budget control and financial accountability; closer monitoring of the implementation of Community policies; and consolidation of the rights of petition and inquiry as regards Community matters." 
The Council"also discussed further-reaching reforms on the role of the European Parliament and asks the conference to consider developing co-decision procedures for acts of a legislative nature, within the framework of the hierarchy of Community acts.
Consideration should be given to arrangements allowing national parliaments to play their full role in the Community's development."
The Council "notes the particular importance which some member states attach to the adoption of arrangements taking account of the special competence of regional or local institutions as regards certain Community policies [and]the need to consider suitable procedures for the consultation of such institutions" .
2.
Common foreign and security policy.
The effective implementation of a common foreign and security policy should take place within an institutional framework based on "one decision-making centre, namely the Council; harmonization and, where appropriate, unification of the preparatory work; a unified secretariat; a reinforced role for the Commission through a non-exclusive right of initiative; adequate procedures for consulting and informing the European Parliament; detailed procedures ensuring that the union can speak effectively with one voice on the international stage in particular in international organizations and vis-à-vis third countries" .
 "The following elements should be considered as a basis for the decision-making process: the rule of consensus in defining general guidelines,[and]in this context, non-participation or abstention so as not to interfere with unanimity; the possibility of recourse to qualified-majority voting for the implementation of agreed policies." 
 "As regards common security, the gradual extension of the Union's role in this area should be considered with particular reference initially to issues debated in international organizations: arms control, disarmament and related issues; CSCE matters; certain questions debated in the United Nations, including peacekeeping operations; economic and technological co-operation in the armaments field; co-ordination of armaments export policy, and non-proliferation." 
The Council furthermore emphasized that"the prospect of a role for the Union in defence matters should be considered without prejudice to member states' existing obligations, bearing in mind the importance of maintaining and strengthening the ties within the Atlantic alliance and without prejudice to the traditional positions of other member states [a reference designed not to prejudice the position of neutral Ireland, the only non-NATO member of the EC].
The idea of a commitment by member states to provide mutual assistance, as well as proposals put forward by some member states on the future of the Western European Union, should also be addressed."
3.
European citizenship.
The Council asked"the conference to consider the extent to which the following rights [as proposed by the Spanish government]could be enshrined in the treaty so as to give substance to the concept of citizenship:
"Civil rights: participation in elections to the European Parliament in the country of residence; possible participation in municipal elections.
"Social and economic rights: freedom of movement and residence irrespective of engagement in economic activity; equality of opportunity and of treatment for all Community citizens; joint protection for Community citizens outside the Community's borders.
 "Consideration should be given to the possible institution of a mechanism for the defence of citizens' rights as regards Community matters (" ombudsman "— a Danish proposal)…" 
4.
Extension and strengthening of Community action.
The Council "notes that there is a wide recognition of the need to extend or define the Community's competence in specific areas" , among them: "the social dimension, including the need for social dialogue; economic and social cohesion among the member states; improved protection of the environment in order to ensure sustainable growth; the health sector and in particular the combating of major diseases; a research effort commensurate with the development of the Community's competitive capacity; an energy policy aiming at greater security and efficiency, bearing in mind also co-operation in the whole of Europe [a Dutch proposal]; providing the Community with major infrastructures, allowing also the completion of a trans-European network; safeguarding the diversity of the European heritage and promoting cultural exchanges and education…" 
5.
Effectiveness and efficiency.
The "essential role" of the Council in creating political momentum would continue and "the conference will consider whether the Community's development towards the Union necessitates an accentuation of this role" .
 "The extension of majority voting will be examined…together with the possibility of making it the general rule with a limited number of exceptions." 
The Commission's role and in particular its implementing powers, would also need to be strengthened…
Economic and Monetary Union.
Noting that the conferences opening on Dec. 15 would "take due account of the opinions given by the European Parliament and by the Commission under Article 236 of the Treaty" , the Council confirmed that the work would proceed in parallel, should be concluded "rapidly and at the same time" , and that their results would be submitted for ratification with a view to this taking place before the end of 1992.
The Social Dimension.
The Council referred to the need, in the context of European integration, to "give equal weight to social aspects and to economic aspects" in order to bring about a genuine improvement in employment and in living and working conditions.
It stressed "the importance of pressing ahead more actively with the implementation of the Social Charter" .
The summit did not discuss in depth the question of a possible enlargement of the EC or of relations with countries of the European Free-Trade Area (EFTA).
An EC-EFTA meeting on Dec. 19 made progress in discussions on the European Economic Area or EEA (the term now adopted in preference to "European Economic Space" or EES — see pp. 37134; 37535), and it was anticipated that these EC-EFTA talks would now reach a conclusion by mid-1992 such that an EEA agreement could go through the various ratification processes and take effect on Jan. 1, 1993.
Communiqué points on external relations
The EC undertook to make available to the Soviet Union food aid up to an amount of ECU750,000,000, of which one-third would be "in the form of gifts under the 1990 farm budget" and the rest in the form of a medium-term loan guarantee.
By arrangement with the Soviet authorities the aid would be routed in such a way as to ensure that it "actually reaches those for whom it is intended and does not jeopardize the gradual advance towards normality of supplies in accordance with market rules" .
Such aid would commence as soon as possible and would continue in 1991.
Technical assistance worth ECU400,000,000 would be available for specific projects in 1991 and a further undetermined sum in 1992.
On the Gulf crisis, the EC and its member states"remain firmly committed to full implementation of the UN Security Council resolutions…
Security Council Resolution 678 sends the clearest possible signal to Iraq that the international community is determined to ensure full restoration of international legality."
On the situation in South Africa, the Council deplored the present phase of serious violence but welcomed "further indications…that the process of change already begun is going ahead" , and decided to lift its ban on new investments in South Africa [see also p. 37910].
ASIA — PACIFIC
BANGLADESH
Overthrow of President Ershad
The latest intensive phase of a campaign by the combined opposition parties in Bangladesh finally succeeded in forcing the resignation of the President, Lt.-Gen. (retd) Hussain Mohammad Ershad, in early December.
Ershad, 60, first came to power as the result of a bloodless coup in 1982 [see pp. 31501-02]; he assumed the presidency the following year [see pp. 32919-20], and in November 1986 he was elected to the post for a five-year term [see p. 34813].
In late 1987 the main opposition alliances launched an agitation aimed at forcing Ershad's resignation, whereupon he declared a state of emergency [see pp. 35571-73].
He secured for his Jatiya Party a victory in parliamentary elections held in March 1988 [see pp. 35835-36]; however, the government was subsequently paralysed by renewed agitation launched in October 1990 [see pp. 37775-76]with student activists at the forefront.
Attempting unsuccessfully to repeat his 1987 tactics, Ershad had declared a state of emergency on Nov. 27, 1990, ordering troops on to the streets of the capital, Dhaka, to restore order [see p. 37856].
The opposition defied curfews and continued to organize rallies and strikes to press for Ershad's resignation.
In early December student protesters were joined by large numbers of academics and civil servants.
Clashes with the security forces continued and, according to opposition sources, up to 70 people died and 500 were injured in late November and early December.
Ershad's weakened position was revealed on Dec. 3 when he made a national broadcast offering the opposition a number of concessions, including simultaneous parliamentary and presidential elections in June 1991.
He would himself resign the presidency, he said, 15 days before the filing of nomination papers, handing power to a "neutral vice-president" .
This offer was denounced as a bluff by the two main opposition leaders, Sheikh Hasina Wajed, leader of the Awami League and a left-of-centre eight-party alliance, and Begum Khaleda Zia, leader of the Bangladesh Nationalist Party (BNP) and a seven-party alliance.
The offer was also denounced by Rashid Khan Menon, leader of a less powerful five-party Marxist-Leninist alliance.
Resignation of Ershad — The Army's role
On Dec. 4, anti-Ershad demonstrations continued in Dhaka, and at least 19 MPs from the Jatiya Party resigned their parliamentary seats.
Ershad met with senior Army officers who informed him that they were unwilling to step in and take control of the country.
Once informed of this, Ershad had little option but to announce his forthcoming resignation, which he did late on Dec. 4, saying that he would resign as soon as the opposition had nominated an interim president who would replace him and supervise elections.
Ershad's resignation announcement was greeted with scenes of wild jubilation in Dhaka where hundreds of thousands of people took to the streets in celebration.
Reports suggest that the Army Chief of Staff, Maj.-Gen.
Nuruddin Khan [see p. 37653 for Khan's appointment in August 1990], was the key figure in Ershad's overthrow.
The decision to impose a state of emergency in late November had been taken without Khan's knowledge, while he was in Saudi Arabia inspecting the Bangladesh military contingent in the Gulf.
In Gen. Khan's absence the Army leadership apparently divided into "neutralist" and pro-Ershad camps, with members of the former group openly refusing to act against rioting students.
Upon his return to Bangladesh Khan sided with the "neutralists" and made it clear to his officers that he wanted the military to remain impartial in the ongoing political conflict.
Appointment of acting President and Council of Advisers — Announcement of elections
On Dec. 5 the three main opposition alliances met in Dhaka and nominated Shehabuddin Ahmed, hitherto Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, to replace President Ershad.
The next day Ershad formally resigned and Shehabuddin Ahmed was sworn in as acting President in a brief ceremony attended by, amongst others, Gen. Khan and the main opposition leaders.
Following the transfer of power the opposition parties officially called off their agitation programmes and urged a return to work.
Shehabuddin Ahmed on Dec. 9 appointed the first members of a Council of Advisers, announcing the appointment of the remainder on Dec. 16.
Kafiluddin Ahmed Finance Fakhruddin Ahmed Foreign Affairs M. A. Majeed Health and Family Welfare Zillur Rahman Siddiqi Education Mohammad Abdul Khaliq Law and Justice A. B. M. G. Kibria Communications Maj. (retd) Mohammad Rafiqul Islam Civil Aviation, Tourism and Shipping *Rehman Sobhan Planning, Irrigation, Water Resources and Flood Control *Wahiduddin Ahmed Energy and Works *Alamgir M. A. Kibir Social Welfare, Women's Affairs and Sports *A.
K. M. Musa Industry, Jute and Textiles *Yeazuddin Ahmed Cultural Affairs and Food *Kazi Fazlur Rahman Agriculture, Irrigation, Water Development and Flood Control *Appointment announced on Dec. 16.
Bangladesh Council of Advisers
Shehabuddin Ahmed announced on Dec. 14 that parliamentary elections would take place on March 2, 1991.
The date was subsequently brought forward to Feb. 27 after the National Moon Sighting Committee advised the election commission that a Moslem holiday was likely to fall on March 2.
On Dec. 24 Mohammad Abdur Rouf was appointed Chief Election Commissioner.
Arrest of Ershad and ministers — Purge of pro-Ershad officers and officials
In the days following Ershad's downfall pressure mounted for him to be put on trial.
However, in an interview from his home in the Army's Dhaka cantonment on Dec. 9 Ershad insisted that he was still planning to contest the forthcoming parliamentary, and possibly presidential, elections.
The next day the main opposition parties joined in the calls for Ershad's arrest and students threatened to storm his home.
In the first direct move against members of Ershad's Cabinet, former Home Minister Maj.-Gen. (retd) Mahmudul Hasan was arrested in Dhaka on Dec. 11 whilst allegedly planning to organize a pro-Ershad rally.
The next day Ershad and his wife were formally arrested under the Special Powers Act, which allowed the authorities to detain them without charge for up to 120 days.
At the same time warrants of arrest were issued for a number of former ministers and other Ershad associates.
Upon their arrest Ershad and his wife were moved from the Army cantonment and confined to a diplomatic compound.
Radio Bangladesh reported on Dec. 17 that a three-member committee had been formed to investigate allegations of the abuse of power and of corruption by Ershad, his Cabinet and other associates.
All-India radio reported the following day that the committee would be headed by a Supreme Court judge, E. M. Ansaruddin.
On Dec. 24 Ershad was finally informed that he was under house arrest "for public safety and public order" and that he was suspected of corruption and abuse of power.
Former Deputy Premier Shah Moazzam Husayn was arrested on Dec. 13, and it was reported on Dec. 20 that former Vice-President Moudud Ahmed had also been arrested.
According to some reports former Prime Minister Kazi Zafar Ahmed escaped into India soon after Ershad's resignation.
Some reports also claimed that a number of ministers had escaped to Thailand in a fishing boat.
In addition to ordering the arrest of Ershad and some of his ministers the new interim regime also sought to purge overt Ershad supporters from the armed forces, the higher echelons of local government, state financial institutions and the civil service.
Among senior Army officers transferred were Maj.-Gen.
Ashraf Hussain, director-general of National Security Intelligence, and Gen. Rafiqul Islam, commander of the key 9th Division.
AFRICA
CHAD
Overthrow of Habré
President Hissène Habré and his government fled the Chadian capital, Ndjaména, on Dec. 1, initially to neighbouring Cameroon, following the emphatic defeat of Habré's 30,000-strong army in a three-week campaign launched by an estimated 2,000 rebels of the Patriotic Salvation Movement (MPS).
The MPS leader, former Col. Idriss Déby, installed himself as President, heading an interim Council of State.
Déby had been Habré's military commander and the architect of victories over Libyan forces in the 1986-87 war [see pp. 34914-17; 35876-79; 36256].
He had been in exile, however, since leading an unsuccessful coup attempt in April 1989 [see p. 36581].
Based across the border in Sudan, he had formed the MPS with Libyan backing, and had launched a series of offensives from Sudan's western Darfur region; the third (and finally successful) such offensive began on Nov. 10.
The seizure of the strategic eastern town of Abéché on Nov. 30 effectively broke the resistance of Habré's forces, who were reported to have fled in large numbers or defected to the MPS.
According to MPS sources 3,000 government troops, 800 MPS rebels and 1,300 civilians were killed between Nov. 10 and Nov. 28.
French military authorities estimated government troop losses at 1,700.
The local garrison of French soldiers at Abéché did not intervene, the French government having adopted an attitude of neutrality in what it regarded as an "internal affair" .
However, 150 French paratroopers were sent to reinforce the 1,300 legionnaires already stationed in Chad, and over 1,600 French nationals were eventually evacuated from the country.
Déby called for national unity and for the return of those in exile, including the ousted former President Goukouni Oueddei [see pp. 31677-79; 37213], to help to rebuild the country.
He promised to respect human rights, to create a pluralist and secular society, and to hold free elections.
Déby's Council of State, announced on Dec. 4, was headed by himself as President and Maladoum Bada Abbas as Vice-President.
There were 20 commissioners responsible for the various ministerial portfolios, principal among these being Soungui Ahmed — Foreign Affairs; Mahamat Saleh Adoum — Interior and Security; Jean Alingue Bawoyeu — Agriculture; Abakar Mallah — Justice; Djibrine Dassert — Defence; and Mohiaaine Salah — Finance and Equipment.
It was announced on Dec. 18 that former Foreign Minister Acheikh bin Oumar had been made a special councillor to Déby.
Habré himself was granted asylum in Senegal on Dec. 11.
The new regime in Chad sought his extradition in the light of evidence that over 300 political prisoners had been executed, allegedly on his orders, in Ndjaména prisons on Dec. 1.
The US State Department announced on Dec. 3 that it would not formally recognize the new regime, which it accused of being backed and financed by Libya.
The French government, however, pledged US$90,000,000 in aid on Dec. 23.
The Libyan leader, Col. Moamer al Kadhafi, sent his congratulations to Déby on Dec. 5, and welcomed a decision to repatriate 2,000 Libyan prisoners of war held since the end of the 1986-87 war.
An estimated 600 Libyans prisoners of war opposed to Kadhafi, who had received US military training, had been airlifted out of Chad with US assistance, first to Nigeria and thence to Zaïre.
AFRICA
HORN OF AFRICA
Opening of port of Massawa
In what was seen as a crucial breakthrough for efforts to avert massive famine in the Horn of Africa [see p. 37845]the World Food Programme announced on Dec. 18 that it had secured the definite agreement of the Ethiopian government and leaders of the Eritrean People's Liberation Front (EPLF) guerillas to open the Red Sea port of Massawa, closed to shipping since its capture by the EPLF in February.
The decision came at a time when 1,500,000 besieged refugees in the city of Asmara, the last government stronghold in Eritrea, faced imminent death by starvation.
A special report drawn up by the UN Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) and released on Dec. 28 appealed to the international community "not to let domestic economic constraints and concern for the problems of eastern Europe divert their attention from the food need of millions of Africans" .
It estimated that the Ethiopian provinces of Tigray and Eritrea required urgent food aid of 980,000 tonnes, and that Sudan needed 1,000,000 tonnes.
On Dec. 7 the German government cancelled Ethiopia's US$70,000,000 debt and agreed $30,000,000 in further aid.
The United Kingdom announced £5,000,000 ($US9,650,000) in emergency food aid to Ethiopia and Sudan on Dec. 29.
AFRICA
KENYA
KANU endorsement of one-party system
More than 3,000 delegates of the Kenya African National Union (KANU) at a special meeting on Dec. 3-4 agreed to retain the existing one-party political system for the time being, thus endorsing the recommendations of a confidential report by a party review committee.
The meeting also approved changes to voting arrangements, abolishing certain procedures first employed in 1988 party elections [see p. 36137], including the controversial queue-voting system (whereby voters in primary elections queued publicly behind a picture of their preferred candidate) and the rule under which candidates obtaining 70 per cent of the votes in such primaries were entitled to go forward unopposed.
The KANU policy review failed to address demands for wide-ranging political reform, although it had been set up after the rioting in July 1990 in the wake of a growing campaign by pro-democracy supporters [p. 37603].
Restoration of security of tenure — Treason trial
Security of tenure was restored for High Court judges, the Attorney General, and members of the Public Services Commission, when on Dec. 6 the National Assembly passed unanimously a bill reversing a 1986 constitutional amendment which had removed security of tenure for certain senior public officers [see also p. 35429-30].
Seven dissidents appeared in court on Dec. 11 on treason charges.
Among them was former MP Koigi wa Wamwere, arrested on his return from exile in Norway in October, who in 1988 had founded the banned opposition Kenya Patriotic Front (KPF)[see pp. 36917-18].
AFRICA
LIBERIA
Appeal for emergency aid — Ceasefire agreement
The UN Secretary-General, Javier Pérez de Cuéllar, made an appeal to the international community on Dec. 5 for $13,800,000 in humanitarian aid to assist the estimated 350,000 Liberians in the war-ravaged capital, Monrovia, who were in urgent need of food and medical aid.
On Dec. 19, UN officials reported that no pledges had yet been received.
The three contending armed factions inside Liberia signed a ceasefire agreement in Bamako (Mali) on Nov. 28, and a further agreement in Banjul (The Gambia) on Dec. 21 declaring their intention to set up a national conference within 60 days as a prelude to establishing their own interim government.
They undertook to set up a technical committee to oversee the ceasefire, under the supervision of ECOWAS (the Economic Community of West African States), and to declare all ports and airports "military-free zones" .
Their agreement made no mention, however, of the interim government led by academic and former opposition politician Amos Sawyer [see pp. 31282; 32297 for his chairmanship of national constitutional commission in 1981-83; pp. 33322-23; 34146 for his arrest in August 1984 and subsequent detention while chairman of the Liberian People's Party], who had been sworn in as Prime Minister on Nov. 22 under ECOWAS auspices.
[For ECOWAS mediation efforts and role of its Nigerian-dominated peacekeeping force, the ECOWAS monitoring group or ECOMOG see p. 37766.]
The Nov. 28 Bamako agreement, concluded at the end of an extraordinary ECOWAS summit, had been signed by (i) Charles Taylor, leader of the National Patriotic Front of Liberia (NPFL),(ii) Noah Bordolo, for the breakaway Independent NPFL led by Taylor's rival, Prince Yormie Johnson, and (iii) Capt. Wilmot Diggs, for the Armed Forces of Liberia (AFL), the relics of the army of former President Doe.
(The AFL leader, Brig. -Gen.
David Nimley, had reportedly left the Liberian capital, Monrovia, on Nov. 5 and gone into exile in Lagos.)
Taylor, who had denounced Sawyer as head of a "puppet regime" , reportedly agreed to sign the agreement only after pressure from the governments of Libya and Burkina, which had supported the NPFL during the conflict.
An ECOWAS delegation had held talks with the Libyan leader, Col. Moamer al Kadhafi, in Tripoli on Nov. 21.
Taylor had earlier demanded in vain that Libyan troops should be included in the ECOMOG peacekeeping force.
Despite the Bamako accord, there were renewed clashes between Taylor's NPFL and the AFL in Monrovia on Nov. 30-Dec. 1.
ECOMOG forces intervened to stop the fighting, and arrested members of both factions.
AFRICA
CONGO
Resignation of Prime Minister — Further multiparty developments
Alphonse Poati-Souchalaty resigned as Prime Minister on Dec. 3.
An official communiqué issued in Brazzaville explained the development as a consequence of "deep differences" within the government resulting from "the search for solutions to the political crisis facing the country" .
Poati-Souchalaty, who had been Prime Minister since August 1989, also resigned from the ruling Parti congolais du travail (PCT).
The source of the Congo's recent "crisis" lay in the continuing political and trade union pressure upon President Denis Sassou-Nguesso, chairman of the PCT's central committee, to accelerate the implementation of his commitment to transform the country from a single-party (nominally Marxist) to a multiparty state.
Further significant progress towards multiparty reform was achieved later in December.
At the PCT's fourth extraordinary congress on Dec. 4-7, held to discuss the prevailing atmosphere of political instability, the party formally relinquished its constitutional monopoly of power and abandoned its doctrinal foundation of Marxism in favour of social democracy.
The congress also selected a new 249-member central committee and elected Ambroise Noumazalay to the newly created post of general secretary.
The National People's Assembly (the Congolese legislature) on Dec. 27 approved legislation for the authorization and financing of opposition parties.
No limit was set on the number or size of political parties, although each was prohibited from receiving more than 20 per cent of its budget in the form of grants or donations from abroad, and each was required to pay a registration fee of 1,000,000 francs CFA (approximately US$3,900).
Official estimates suggested that 57 de facto parties existed in the country at the end of 1990.
In his New Year message to the nation, broadcast on national radio and television on Dec. 31, Sassou-Nguesso announced that a "national conference" would be convened on Feb. 25, 1991, in order to set a date for multiparty elections.
Initially a conference had been scheduled for mid-1991, but the Congolese Trade Union Confederation and many of the opposition parties had appealed to Sassou-Nguesso to bring the date forward.
The President also announced that he would form a transitional government of "national union" as early as January 1991, which would seek to "strengthen state machinery" and "devote itself to restoring the ethics of the civil service." 
AFRICA
NIGERIA
Local elections
Local elections were held on Dec. 8 — the first elections since the military coup of 1983 — and were contested by the two government-sanctioned parties.
Regarded as a step in the process of transitional to civilian rule, which would culminate in presidential elections scheduled for 1992, the local elections recorded only a low voter turnout, particularly in the south of the country.
The Social Democratic Party (SDP) won 232 chairmanships of local governments and had a total of 2,934 councillors elected.
The National Republican Convention (NRC) won 206 chairmanships and had 2,558 councillors elected.
Neither party was allowed to comment on matters of regionalism, ethnicity or religions and both were careful not to criticize the current economic austerity programme of the President, Maj.-Gen.
Ibrahim Babangida, who had in October 1989 severely restricted the electorate's choice by dissolving 13 political parties, sanctioning instead the creation of the SDP and NRC [see p. 36968].
The use of an open ballot system was thought to have further deterred voters.
AFRICA
ZIMBABWE
Approval of land legislation
The House of Assembly approved a law on Dec. 12 which amended the Constitution in order to allow the state greater power to nationalize land ownership.
The legislation allowed the government to confiscate white farmers' land and to pay compensation at a price of its own choosing, without being subject to legal challenge by the owner of the land.
The provision was designed to assist the government in assuaging widespread land-hunger by resettling some 110,000 peasant farmers on about 5,000,000 hectares of white-owned land, the bulk of which lay in the fertile maize and tobacco belt in the north-east of the country.
MPs celebrated noisily as the amendment to Section 16 of the (1980) Lancaster House Constitution was approved by 113 votes to three.
Some analysts predicted that this heralded the most significant alteration in the structure of land ownership since the expropriation of black land by white settlers in the late 19th century.
Since independence in 1980 some 52,000 peasant farmers had been resettled on 3,000,000 hectares purchased from the 4,000-strong white farming community, but whites still owned 12,000,000 hectares (40 per cent of Zimbabwe's total land area).
Some 750,000 black peasant farmers shared 15,000,000 hectares of largely poor quality "communal" land which was being placed under ever increasing pressure by Zimbabwe's 3.5 per cent annual population growth.
In an address to the fourth session of the ruling ZANU central committee on Dec. 14, President Robert Mugabe asserted that issues such as land-hunger and unemployment were in need of urgent remedial action.
Therefore, whilst he promised that compensation for confiscated land would be paid for at a "fair and reasonable" rate, he stressed that "nothing must stand in our way to the acquisition of any land we identify and designate for resettlement" .
On Dec. 21, however, the Minister for Lands, Agriculture and Rural Resettlement, Witness Mangwende, sought to reassure the white farming community that it was not the government's intention to "grab land" for the resettlement programme.
AFRICA
ZAMBIA
Restoration of multiparty system
In accordance with a commitment made in September 1990, President Kenneth Kaunda on Dec. 17 signed into law a bill approved by the National Assembly on Dec. 4, amending the Constitution to allow for the formation of political parties other than the ruling United National Independence Party (UNIP).
Kaunda said that his country's experience of multiparty politics — from independence in 1964 to the prohibition of opposition parties in 1973 — had been "a sad one" , but predicted an optimistic future for Zambian democracy and announced that he was looking forward to "a good fight" in elections scheduled for October 1992.
The Movement for Multiparty Democracy (MMD), a loose alliance of opposition groups formed in July 1990, immediately applied for registration as a political party.
A second opposition party, the National Democratic Alliance (Nada), was formed on Dec. 22.
It was reported on Dec. 31 that the Zambian Congress of Trade Unions had decided to switch its support from UNIP to the MMD.
Cabinet change
On Dec. 4 Kaunda dismissed his Defence Minister, Lt. Gen. Hannaniah Lungu and replaced him with the former Deputy Defence Minister, Dodson Siatalimi.
Lungu had been appointed in July 1990 after helping to rally loyal troops during an unsuccessful coup attempt [see p. 37523, where his name is wrongly given as Hanniah].
Also on Dec. 4 Kaunda dismissed the editors of two of Zambia's daily newspapers.
AFRICA
MOZAMBIQUE
Agreement with MNR restricting Zimbabwean troops to rail corridors — Famine report
A significant step towards a ceasefire in the long-running civil war was taken on Dec. 1, when delegations from the Mozambique government and the rebel Mozambique National Resistance (MNR or Renamo) reached an agreement confining Zimbabwean troops in the country to two strategic transport routes.
The agreement followed the acceptance in November by the ruling Frelimo movement of wide-ranging political reforms [see pp. 37843-44], and an offer by President Joaquim Chissano to merge the MNR forces with those of the government.
The Zimbabwean forces, thought to number about 6,000, had played an important role in countering the MNR threat, and in securing access to the sea for Zimbabwean exports.
They were now to withdraw to corridors with a width of 3 km, along (i) the 315-km road, rail and oil pipeline running through central Mozambique to the port of Beira; and (ii) the 540-km railway along the Limpopo river from the Zimbabwean border to Mozambique's capital, Maputo.
In return, the MNR undertook not to launch attacks on these corridors.
The agreement would be overseen by an international verification commission, comprising representatives of the two governments and of the MNR, together with those of the Congo, France, Kenya, Portugal, the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom, the United States and Zambia.
After signing the accord with the MNR, the head of the Mozambique government delegation, the Transport and Communications Minister Lt.-Gen.
Armando Guebuza, expressed the hope that a comprehensive ceasefire agreement would follow shortly.
Further talks took place in Rome on Dec. 20 under the auspices of the verification commission.
Famine report
A joint Mozambique government and World Bank report, released at a donors' meeting in Paris on Dec. 10, warned that half of the country's 16,000,000 people faced starvation, largely as a result of the civil war.
At least 2,000,000 people had been made homeless by the war, the report said, and it estimated food aid needs for 1991 as totalling approximately 1,000,000 tonnes.
At the end of the meeting, it was announced that donors had pledged US$1,200 million in aid for 1991.
AFRICA
ANGOLA
MPLA-PT decision on reforms
At the third congress of the ruling MPLA-PT, held in Luanda, the capital, on Dec. 4-9, delegates agreed on a package of reforms, including steps towards a multiparty system.
The moves were widely seen as part of an attempt to end the 15-year civil war by meeting conditions demanded by the opposition UNITA rebels.
The congress took place against a backdrop of increasing diplomatic activity aimed at securing a ceasefire, involving both the United States and Soviet governments [for recent progress towards a ceasefire agreement see p. 37842].
The MPLA-PT congress discussed a range of reforms proposed by its central committee at the end of October [ibid.].
It opened with an address by President José Eduardo dos Santos, who referred to the ending of the Cold War and the collapse of communist regimes in eastern Europe, and spoke of the need to institute democratic reforms which would lead to "a multiparty system in which power will be won through the ballot box" .
The congress was characterized by frank admissions of past failings, notably in the economic sphere.
Both dos Santos and other leading MPLA-PT figures admitted the relative failure of the party's collectivist economic policies which, compounded by the civil war, had left the economy almost wholly dependent on revenue from oil exports — which were particularly vulnerable to UNITA attack.
Delegates endorsed wide-ranging changes, including the replacement of the party's Marxist ideology by a commitment to "democratic socialism" , and plans for the president and legislature to be directly elected by universal secret ballot, and for a revised constitution which would guarantee freedom of expression, permit the formation of political parties, and end the MPLA-PT's control over the armed forces.
The congress also agreed to work towards the establishment of a free market economy, with guarantees protecting private property and foreign investments.
Assuming that the reforms were approved by the People's Assembly — scheduled to debate them in early 1991 — opposition parties could be legalized by the end of March.
The congress closed by electing a new central committee, dominated by liberals and "pragmatists" who strongly supported the reforms.
This in turn chose a new 21-member political bureau in its first session on Dec. 12.
Peace talks — Renewed fighting
In an effort to build on the progress of the November peace talks, the US and Soviet governments arranged an unprecedented meeting in Washington on Dec. 12 between UNITA leader Jonas Savimbi and the then Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard Shevardnadze.
At the same time, US Secretary of State James Baker held talks with the Angolan Foreign Minister, Lt.-Gen.
Pedro de Castro Van Dúnem "Loy" (who had earlier met Shevardnadze), when Baker reportedly said that Angola's moves towards multiparty democracy had removed the last obstacle to US endorsement of a peace settlement.
Earlier, on Dec. 7, Savimbi had undertaken to accept a ceasefire on condition that the Angolan government legalized opposition parties.
A further round of bilateral negotiations was scheduled to take place in Portugal in mid-January.
The Angolan State Security Minister, Kundi Paihama, later declared his willingness to meet Savimbi, adding that"Savimbi is as Angolan as I am…
We cannot run away from reality".
Meanwhile fighting within Angola continued.
A UNITA rebel attack on Nov. 29 caused substantial damage to Luanda's oil refinery, compelling the government to rely on oil imports while repairs were carried out.
However, UNITA denied responsibility for a bomb attack at Luanda airport on Dec. 27, which caused extensive damage but no casualties.
AFRICA
SOUTH AFRICA
Return of ANC president — ANC consultative conference
Oliver Tambo, president of the African National Congress (ANC), returned to South Africa on Dec. 13 after 30 years in exile, marking a further step in the ANC's return to a full political role in the country.
Tambo arrived in time for the first consultative conference of the movement for 31 years, an event which provided an opportunity for the ANC to clarify its policy of negotiation with the government.
The ANC conference held in Johannesburg on Dec. 14-16 ended with a commitment to continue negotiations but with a threat to suspend them if the government did not take action before April 30, 1991, to halt township violence, release all political prisoners, allow exiles to return, repeal remaining "repressive" legislation and halt political trials.
ANC deputy president Nelson Mandela declared that a majority was in favour of negotiations, although he acknowledged that the party's leadership had failed to consult its supporters on many issues.
The conference also decided to establish defence committees to protect township residents against attack.
It rejected the calls of some senior ANC leaders for a relaxation of economic sanctions against South Africa.
The conference ended on a note of renewed militancy by calling for a "mass action" campaign in 1991 in favour of an interim government, a constituent assembly and the abolition of the tricameral Parliament (which had separate chambers for whites, coloureds and Indians, and none for blacks).
Dispute over "secret talks" 
Newspaper reports of a "secret" meeting between Mandela, Tambo and President F. W. de Klerk on Dec. 17 caused embarrassment for the ANC, which later admitted that a meeting had taken place but described it as "a long-scheduled meeting of the working group looking into the suspension of armed actions" .
The first of these press reports, in the Johannesburg Sunday Times, said that the Dec. 17 meeting had discussed plans for an all-party conference early in 1991, to set the agenda for constitutional negotiations.
The government, it said, intended to use this conference to get all negotiating parties to commit themselves to "such fundamentals as a multiparty state, a free economy and press, and protection of human rights and property" .
De Klerk's agenda for 1991
Criticism of the ANC's militant rhetoric formed part of de Klerk's Christmas message on Dec. 18, but he also indicated that he would be convening "constructive and peaceful negotiations" in the New Year.
He promised to send more police to the townships to restore law and order.
Legislation planned for 1991 would remove some of the remaining pillars of apartheid, government sources announced in late December.
Preliminary drafts of a bill repealing the Group Areas Act had been completed and were to be presented to the Cabinet in mid-January.
Also destined to be repealed was the Free Settlement Areas Act of 1989.
The Land Acts of 1913 and 1936 would retain recognition of tribal lands for the time being, but the Population Registration Act, which classified race at birth, would be amended during constitutional negotiations.
Preparations for return of exiles
In a move expected to pave the way for the return of about 20,000 political exiles, de Klerk on Dec. 18 granted an indemnity against prosecution on the charge of leaving the country illegally before Oct. 8, 1990.
The Department of Justice also published the names of 787 people granted indemnity for leaving the country without authority, although it was not clear how many of them could still be liable for prosecution for other offences.
Several high-ranking political leaders, mainly in the ANC, had their unconditional immunity from prosecution extended from the end of 1990 to Feb. 15, 1991.
Earlier similar immunity was granted to 18 members of the Pan-Africanist Congress (PAC).
One of those to return on Dec. 5 was PAC administration secretary Joe Mkhwanazi, who had been in exile since 1962.
Positions of PAC, Azapo, Inkatha and of Bophuthatswana
The PAC on Dec. 9 elected Clarence Makwetu as its new president following the death in October of Zephania Mothopeng [see p. 37765].
Makwetu declared that the PAC would not negotiate with the government before a constituent assembly had been elected.
The newly elected president of the Azanian People's Organization (Azapo), Pandelani Nefolovhodwe, on Dec. 23 declared 1991 a year of struggle and warned that the government's reforms were replacing "naked racism and exploitation with subtle forms of racism and exploitation" .
Azapo also rejected the suggestion of an all-party conference, and denied having pursued any contacts with the government.
A special general conference of the predominantly Zulu Inkatha Freedom Party on Dec. 9 confirmed Mangosuthu Buthelezi as leader, and resolved to co-operate with other parties in working for a non-racial multiparty democracy.
The President of the Bophuthatswana homeland, Lucas Mangope, on Dec. 6 rejected any idea of re-incorporation into South Africa.
He would wait to see what the negotiation process turned up, he said, but "only if real progress is made during negotiations, and if there are obvious and clearly defined benefits for my country and its people, will we consider any possible change to our present constitutional position" .
The only opposition party in Bophuthatswana, the National Seoposongwe Party, announced that it would soon become part of the ANC.
Reduction in township tensions
There was a longer period of comparative calm in the townships of the East Rand during the second half of December than at any time in the previous five months, although during the first half of the month deaths had averaged 20 per day.
The fighting between supporters of the ANC and Inkatha reached a high pitch in Thokoza on Dec. 11.
Talks on the same day between local ANC and Inkatha leaders, however, resulted in a lull in the violence.
Later, on Dec. 24, Mandela said that a high-level meeting between the two parties was a "crucial step" towards stopping the violence.
EC lifting of investment ban — Foreign relations
The European Communities (EC) agreed on Dec. 16 to begin the process of easing sanctions against South Africa by lifting the voluntary ban on new investments in the country.
The United Kingdom government had earlier broken ranks when it unilaterally lifted the investment ban in February 1990 [see p. 37234].
In a joint statement in Rome, the EC leaders said that the removal of the ban could be followed by other steps to relax sanctions if and when the South African government took other steps to end apartheid.
They called in particular for the repeal of the Group Areas Act and the Land Acts.
They also agreed that the EC should step up aid to projects to improve social and economic conditions for victims of apartheid.
Mandela had urged the EC to refrain from lifting any sanctions for two or three months; he told the ANC consultative conference that the time had come for a "re-evaluation" of sanctions, but the 1,600 delegates voted to push for their retention.
South Africa and Bulgaria forged new diplomatic links at the end of November, and Foreign Minister R. F. "Pik" Botha predicted restoration of full diplomatic relations with the Soviet Union within six months.
(South Africa had offered assistance to the Soviet Union in the resettlement of victims of the Chernobyl disaster.)
Reporting on Nov. 21 on the results of his week-long tour of Eastern Europe from which he had just returned, Botha noted the establishment of consular ties with Czechoslovakia and Romania.
Botha visited the Comoros, Kenya and Zambia during December, while South African Airways began scheduled flights to Nairobi.
The International Olympic Committee announced its intention to visit South Africa in early 1991, amid speculation that the country might qualify for full participation in most sporting activities.
AMERICAS
UNITED STATES
Cabinet changes
Lauro Cavazos announced his resignation as Education Secretary on Dec. 12.
Five days later President George Bush nominated Lamar Alexander, a former Governor of Tennessee (1979-87) and the current president of the University of Tennessee, to succeed him.
The President's choice of a middle-of-the-road Republican with a strong record of educational reform received considerable bipartisan approval.
Cavazos, the first Hispanic-American to serve in a US Cabinet, had been nominated in August 1988 by Bush's predecessor, Ronald Reagan.
Recently, however, he had been criticized by fellow Republicans as ineffective at a time when education was increasingly achieving national prominence as a key domestic issue.
It was widely believed that his resignation followed a demand from John Sununu, Bush's combative White House Chief of Staff, that he leave the Cabinet by the end of December.
The resignation also coincided with a controversial ruling by the Education Department prohibiting federal aid to colleges which offered scholarships designated solely for minority students.
Coming within the context of an ongoing political debate concerning the merits of "affirmative action" or "reverse discrimination" , the decision provoked a storm of protest from civil rights organizations and minority pressure groups.
On Dec. 18 Bush instructed the department to reverse its decision on the grounds that it contradicted his stated intention to increase educational opportunities for minorities.
Following the resignations in October and November of Elizabeth Dole and William Bennett respectively, Cavazos was the third senior member of the Bush administration to resign from office.
On Dec. 14 Bush nominated Lynn Martin, whom he described as a "cherished friend" and "unofficial adviser" , to replace Dole as Labour Secretary.
Prior to her appointment Martin had represented Illinois in the House of Representatives for 10 years.
In November 1990, rather than seek re-election, she had unsuccessfully challenged for a Senate seat, running against the incumbent Democrat Paul Simon.
Decision by Bennett to reject RNC chairmanship
Bush's attempt to revitalize the Republican Party — and to rally the support of its right wing after abandoning his "no new taxes" pledge [see p. 37768]— received a serious setback on Dec. 13 when Bennett, the former "drugs tsar" , informed him that he had changed his mind and would not accept the chairmanship of the Republican National Committee (RNC).
Bennett explained that the decision, which had been made with "the deepest reluctance" , had been financially motivated.
He had been advised that ethics legislation prevented him from combining the RNC job with outside interests which he had planned to pursue, including consultancy work and the fulfilment of a lucrative book contract.
There was also considerable press speculation that Bennett's decision had in part resulted from ill-feeling between himself and Sununu.
Sentencing of Iran-contra defendant
Thomas G. Clines was sentenced on Dec. 13 to 16 months in prison for his part in the Iran-contra scandal [for his indictment in February see p. 37241].
Clines, who was also fined $40,000 and ordered to pay the costs of the prosecution, had been convicted in September 1990 of filing false income tax returns.
The sentence was the most severe on any of the eight convicted Iran-contra defendants.
Clines, 62, a former Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) agent, was convicted on four counts of having failed to disclose $260,000 in arms sales profits on his income tax returns and of failing to file reports on foreign financial accounts in 1985 and 1986.
In passing sentence US District Judge Norman P. Ramsey told Clines that his "was not a case of misplaced patriotism; it was purely a case of greed" .
Arrest of John Gotti
John Gotti, 50, reputedly head of the Gambino "family" of the Mafia, was arrested in New York City on Dec. 11.
On the following day he was indicted on 11 counts, including murder, loan sharking, obstruction of justice and tax evasion.
Amongst the murders which he was alleged to have orchestrated was the killing of his predecessor, Paul Castellano, in 1985.
It was the fourth time in five years that Gotti, whose elegant sartorial taste had earned him the nickname "Dapper Don" , had been indicted.
On each previous occasion he had been acquitted on all charges.
Supreme Court ruling on defendants' rights
A Supreme Court ruling in the case of Minnick v Mississippi on Dec. 3 unexpectedly extended the right of criminal suspects to have a lawyer present when questioned by the police.
The court adjudged that, having requested access to a lawyer, a suspect could not then be questioned without the presence of a lawyer, even if he or she had already conferred with the lawyer.
The decision, by six votes to two, occurred when the court overturned the death sentence against Robert S. Minnick, a Mississippi man who escaped from prison and, with an accomplice, murdered two men during a burglary in 1986.
The court ruled that Minnick's confession, taken without a lawyer present but following several consultations between the prisoner and his attorney, had violated the defendant's Fifth Amendment protection against self-incrimination.
Justice Antonin Scalia, in a dissenting opinion supported by Chief Justice William Rehnquist, claimed that the majority was "misguided" to discourage "an honest confession" .
Justice David H. Souter, the most recently appointed member of the court, did not take part in the case.
 "Right to die" cases
A Missouri court ruled on Dec. 14 that Nancy Beth Cruzan had the right to die.
Cruzan, 33, had been in an irreversible coma since a 1983 car accident in which she suffered severe brain damage.
She had been kept alive by means of a feeding tube, which was disconnected following the court's decision, and she died on Dec. 26.
Hitherto, her parents' requests for withdrawal of her life-support measures had been denied by the courts on the grounds that the patient's own wishes in the matter were unclear, and that nobody else was competent to make the decision on her behalf.
The US Supreme Court, in its first right-to-die ruling on June 25, 1990, recognized the right of a patient to withdrawal of life support, but ruled that individual states could insist upon "clear and convincing evidence" of a patient's wishes before authorizing such action.
In Nancy Cruzan's case the original court became satisfied that this standard had been met after three of her friends testified that, prior to the accident, Nancy had expressed the wish never to live "like a vegetable" .
Although the case failed to resolve several crucial legal and ethical problems, its outcome was hailed as a victory for the growing right-to-die lobby within the USA.
In another case, a Michigan District Court on Dec. 13 dismissed the controversial charge of first degree murder brought on Dec. 3 against Jack Kevorkian for assisting a woman to commit suicide.
Kevorkian, an enthusiastic advocate of euthanasia, had built a "suicide machine" which had enabled Janet Adkins, an Oregon woman in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease, to kill herself in June 1990.
The charge was dismissed on the ground that Michigan state law did not prohibit assisting someone to commit suicide.
AMERICAS
HAITI
Presidential elections
Fr Jean-Bertrand Aristide, a radical Roman Catholic priest representing the National Front for Democracy and Change, defeated 10 other candidates to achieve a landslide victory in the presidential elections on Dec. 16.
Some 60 per cent of the electorate participated in the poll, with Aristide winning 67 per cent of the votes cast.
A former World Bank official, Marc Bazin, of the National Alliance for Democracy and Progress, came second with 15 per cent of the vote.
Aristide, 37, represented a loose coalition of peasants, trade unionists and radical clerics.
A charismatic orator and vigorous proponent of liberation theology, with a personal following built up through his consistent championing of the poor and the dispossessed, he had reportedly been regarded in the past by the United States government as a mentally unstable communist, and had survived numerous assassination attempts [see also pp. 37071-72].
Within hours of the closure of the polls, news of Aristide's victory led to scenes of national euphoria not witnessed since the overthrow in 1986 of the notorious Duvalier family dictatorship.
Since 1986 Haiti's political process had been characterized by instability, endemic violence and corruption, punctuated by a succession of presidents and military coups.
An attempt to hold elections in 1987 had been abandoned after polling stations were attacked by members of the Tontons Macoutes, the remnants of the Duvaliers' much feared and hated private army.
On this occasion, however, apart from some irregularities and sporadic outbreaks of violence, the elections passed off peacefully.
Former US President Jimmy Carter, one of a team of several hundred international observers, described the electoral process as "free and honest" , and congratulated the armed forces "for the remarkable work they performed during the elections" .
The Provisional Electoral Council (CEP) formally proclaimed Aristide as winner of the elections on Dec. 23.
He was due to be inaugurated for a five-year term on Feb. 7, 1991, the fifth anniversary of the overthrow of the Duvalier regime.
In an address to the nation he promised that his government would seek to lower the cost of living and to stimulate employment, and would "promote a stable atmosphere for production and protect investors' interests" .
Roger Lafontant, leader of the neo-Duvalierist Union for National Reconciliation and alleged leader of the Tontons Macoutes, had urged Haitians to boycott the election, after the CEP's declaration as invalid of his own candidacy and 14 others.
He also predicted that even if Aristide won he would not be permitted to assume the presidency.
AMERICAS
PANAMA
Alleged coup attempt
Col. Eduardo Herrera Hassan, a former chief of police, was arrested by United States troops on Dec. 5 following what the government of President Guillermo Endara Galimany described as an "attempted coup" .
Although the arrest was a technical violation of the 1977 Panama Canal Treaty signed by US President Jimmy Carter and Gen. Omar Torrijos [see pp. 28629-30; 28793-97], the US military intervention was reported to have been generally supported.
Herrera, until 1987 a collaborator with Gen. Manuel Noriega (the Panamanian leader deposed by US intervention in December 1989 — see pp. 37112-13), had been arrested on Oct. 25 and charged with planning to bring down the government [see p. 37771].
In a daring helicopter operation supporters had freed him from the prison on Naos Island, off Panama City, on Dec. 4.
In his subsequent 17 hours at large he had seized, with a 100-strong force, the central police headquarters.
He issued a series of varied and confusing demands, ranging from reaffirmations of his patriotism to claims that he was fighting for an "authentic democracy" .
He also protested at the general level of unemployment in the country and issued specific demands for the reinstatement of the standing of the Panamanian security forces which had been largely disarmed and reduced to a police force by the US-backed civilian government.
One of Herrera's supporters was shot dead by a US soldier.
The affair highlighted the fragility of Endara's government and the extent to which it remained dependent on the presence of nearly 10,000 US troops.
It came amid reports that the government had in July accepted US funds to establish a new 100-strong secret service, to be called the Council for Public Security and National Defence, closely linked to the US Central Intelligence Agency (CIA).
Protests
A decision by Endara to dismiss 400 public-sector workers, who had participated in a general strike on Dec. 5 for improved wages and conditions and against forced redundancies, sparked off sympathy strikes which concluded in a demonstration dispersed by riot police using tear gas and bird shot on Dec. 13.
Union leaders denied government allegations that the general strike had been time to coincide with Herrera's rebellion.
On Dec. 20, the first anniversary of the US invasion, thousands of people marched through Panama City shouting anti-government slogans and burned a US flag.
AMERICAS
GUATEMALA
Suspension of US military aid
The United States Department of State announced on Dec. 21 that military aid to Guatemala was being suspended immediately because of the government's failure to "criticize or exhaustively investigate" those responsible for human rights abuses.
The statement cited the Dec. 2 massacre by the Army of 16 peasants, and the wounding of 24 others, in the town of Santiago Atitlán 70 km west of the capital Guatemala City, as "an illustration of escalating violence that continues to mark out this country" .
Troops had fired into a crowd of 2,000-3,000 unarmed civilians as they marched to a local barracks to protest against the illegal detention of a neighbour, acts of intimidation, and the abuse of Army authority.
A petition signed by 15,000 people demanded justice and the closing down of the garrison, whose commander was reported to have been relieved of his duties.
The US government was also critical of the lack of progress towards prosecuting those responsible for the murder of Michael Devine, a US citizen, in the northern province of El Petén on June 8, 1990, and the abductors of Diana Marck Ortiz, a nun of US nationality who later identified those who had tortured and raped her as agents of the National Police.
AMERICAS
CENTRAL AMERICA
Costa Rica Summit
The ninth Central American summit was held in the Costa Rican town of Puntarenas on Dec. 15-17, attended by the Presidents of Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua, El Salvador and Costa Rica, with the President of Panama attending as an observer.
The Declaration of Puntarenas contained joint commitments to (i) strengthen the mandate given to the Central American Security Commission in Antigua, Guatemala [see p. 37526], on arms limitation and troop numbers while recognising the "specific tasks" of armed forces in supporting the civilian authorities for the implementation of "social and environmental protection programmes" ;(ii) to establish a five-member committee of eminent Central American civilians appointed by "national reconciliation commissions" to verify the political commitments made as part of the Esquipulas II or "Arias" peace process [see pp. 35440-42], and to seek multilateral and bilateral support to establish an Association for Democracy and Development in Central America to promote regional peace, democracy and economic development;(iii) to build on the progress made under the Economic Action Plan for Central America (PAECA)[see p. 37526], extended by the UN General Assembly for three more years, in order to realize a Central American common market;(iv) to begin talks on a comprehensive Central American customs and tariffs policy by March 31 and to have a regional "anti-dumping code" in place by Dec. 31, 1991, and an effective and uniform custom and tariffs system by Dec. 31, 1992; and (v) to persuade multilateral lending agencies to promote increased regional development and integration programmes, to write off significant portions of debt and reschedule the remainder in line with the "economic realities" of the region's countries and to simplify mechanisms for the negotiation of and disbursement of future loans.
In a separate statement the Presidents supported the peace efforts of El Salvador's President Alfredo Cristiani Burkard, condemned the Farabundo Martí National Liberation Front (FMLN) for its November military offensive in El Salvador [see p. 37850], and called on the UN to take "effective action" to end the civil war in that country.
AMERICAS
SURINAM
Military coup
The National Assembly elected Johan Kraag, 77, as provisional President and Jules Wijdenbosch as provisional Prime Minister on Dec. 30, following a bloodless military coup which had effectively deposed President Ramsewak Shankar on Dec. 24.
Venezuela immediately broke all diplomatic and economic ties, and called on the permanent council of the Organization of American States (OAS) to condemn the coup and force the military to reinstate Shankar.
This demand was supported by the United States government, while the Netherlands government said that it was stopping its annual US$120,000,000 aid payment to its former colony.
The coup was ostensibly precipitated by the Dec. 22 resignation of Col. Desi Bouterse, the military ruler of the country from 1980 to 1987, from his post as Commander-in-Chief of the Army.
Bouterse claimed that Shankar had collaborated with the Netherlands government to humiliate him by failing to lodge a diplomatic protest when, on three occasions during December, he was denied access to the Netherlands or to the local press while in transit at Amsterdam airport.
Bouterse's disagreements with Shankar stemmed from the government's attempt to negotiate a peaceful end to the armed revolt of the Surinamese Liberation Army (SLA), led by Bouterse's former bodyguard Ronnie Brunswijk [see pp. 37493-94].
Cdr.
Iwan Granoogst, appointed by Shankar as Bouterse's interim successor, was nominally the leader of the Dec. 24 coup.
Shankar and Vice-President Henck Arron formally "resigned" and handed over power to the Army on Dec. 27.
Kraag, a retired Creole politician belonging to the minority Surinam National Party (NPS), undertook to hold free elections in 100 days.
He was considered to be a mouthpiece for Bouterse, whom he immediately reinstated as Army Commander-in-Chief.
AMERICAS
ARGENTINA
Military rebellion
An attempted Army rebellion in support of imprisoned former Col. Mohamed Alí Seineldin was crushed by loyalist forces on Dec. 3.
The rebels seized the headquarters of the Army and the Naval Prefecture in the centre of Buenos Aires, and the Patricios infantry barracks in the suburbs, the scene of the fiercest fighting, where two loyal officers and a corporal were killed.
The rebels also captured the Boulogne tank factory on the outskirts of the city, killing three civilians when a tank they had commandeered collided with a bus.
The military, hitherto reluctant to intervene in previous attempted coups, went on the offensive on this occasion after they were given a firm mandate from Menem for resolute action.
Using tanks, heavy artillery and the threat of air strikes, they succeeded in defeating the rebels in 18 hours.
A total of 313 rebels soldiers surrendered and were arrested; rebel units in the interior were also reported to have surrendered.
During the fighting 21 people were killed (five civilians and 16 loyalist and rebel soldiers) and 60 others injured.
This was the fourth such rebellion in three years by the right-wing "carapintadas" faction in the Army.
This group, so called because of the custom among its members of grease-painting their faces, was composed largely of non-commissioned officers.
Known collectively as (la perrada)( "pack of dogs" ), they were disgruntled with their low pay and lack of status, and with government military cutbacks.
They regarded the higher officer ranks and the armed forces Chiefs of Staff as politically motivated and corrupt, accusing them of corruption and of being traitors to military ideals such as "national dignity" .
Seineldin had been imprisoned along with former Lt.-Col. Aldo Rico for leading rebellions against the regime of former President Raúl Alfonsín Foulkes [see pp. 35560-61; 36203; 36394].
Both had been pardoned by Menem in October 1989 [see pp. 36972-73]and subsequently cashiered, but Seineldin had been re-arrested and sentenced on Oct. 22 to 60 days' military detention in San Martín de los Andes, 1,500 km from Buenos Aires, for bypassing the Army chain of command and writing directly to Menem warning him of growing discontent within the Army [see p. 37853].
He remained in detention during the rebellion but stated in a letter published in the press that he had been responsible for it, a claim which was interpreted more as a dramatic personal gesture than a statement of fact; earlier reports stated that the rebellion had been such a surprise to him that he had requested a pistol in order to shoot himself.
Rico, who headed a carapintada faction allegedly committed to gaining power by democratic means, publicly disowned the rebellion and described Seineldin as a traitor and coward.
However, Rico was himself arrested on Dec. 10 for allegedly inciting public disorder, by claiming in the press that there were major problems still unresolved in the Army, that he had known of the intended rebellion, and that he had made a mistake in not preventing it.
Government officials also confirmed that there had been some forewarning of the rebel attack but that the magnitude of it had been unexpected.
One of the rebel leaders, former Maj. Hugo Abete, who along with several of the other mutineers had also been pardoned by Menem for involvement in previous rebellions, claimed that as they still recognised Menem as the Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces their action could not be described as a "coup" .
However, government officials claimed to possess a rebel "hit list" of prominent people which included Menem's name.
The Armed Forces Prosecutor Gen. Carlos Domínguez on Dec. 18 asked the Armed Forces Supreme Council to approve death sentences on Seineldin and four other leaders of the coup attempt.
He called for the discharge of rebels from the Army, and for courts martial and lengthy sentences for the mutineers.
In all 646 soldiers and civilians were arrested and accused of supporting the rebellion.
It was expected that President Carlos Saúl Menem would commute any death penalty.
The government announced a five-year reorganization programme of the armed forces on Dec. 7 (originally to have been publicized on Dec. 3).
Designed to bolster internal discipline, streamline military structures, cut costs, and discourage military involvement in politics, it involved regrouping the 43,000-strong Army into six regional divisions.
Several bases would be closed, and units concentrated in Buenos Aires would be redeployed to the provinces.
The Navy and Air Force were to undergo similar re-organizations.
A national state of siege was lifted on Dec. 5.
Menem stated that the government's proven ability to defeat what he characterized as an "attempted coup" would raise its standing internationally.
[For Bush's Dec. 3 decision not to cancel the Argentine leg of his Latin American tour see p. 37914.]
Military pardons
Menem signed six decrees on Dec. 29, which were not officially released until the following day, pardoning eight former high-ranking Army officers who had been the architects of the "dirty war" of the 1970s.
Over 40,000 people staged a demonstration in Buenos Aires on Dec. 30 against the decision, which had been forecast for some time.
The decision, following on from pardons granted in October 1989 [see pp. 36972-73], drew widespread criticism from within the ruling Peronist Party (Partido Justicialista) and from opposition politicians, members of the Catholic church hierarchy and human rights groups.
Opinion polls had shown that 70 per cent of the population opposed the move.
Other pardons covered the former Montonero left-wing guerrilla leader Mario Firmenich, who was released from a 30-prison sentence, and José Alfredo Martinez de Hoz, a former economic "superminister" to the military dictatorship between 1976 and 1981.
The pardon had been a central demand of previous Army mutinies, and the prospect of its being announced was thought to have encouraged the loyalty of the Army in putting down the Dec. 3 carapintadas rebellion.
Menem, who later claimed that his action had been taken in the long-term interests of national unity and reconciliation, was immediately accused of double standards in releasing the former officers when he was simultaneously demanding the severest penalties for those involved in the latest rebellion.
Julio Strassera, who had been the chief prosecutor at the original "dirty war" trials in 1985, announced that he was resigning in protest as Argentina's representative to the UN Human Rights Commission.
Principal among those pardoned and immediately released from prison were the military junta members, former Gen. Jorge Videla, Gen. Roberto Viola and former Adml.
Emilio Massera, together with former chief of the Buenos Aires provincial police Ramón Camps, his successor former Gen. Pablo Ricchieri, and former Brig.
Gen. Orlando Agosti.
All had been sentenced to long prison sentences for the "dirty war" against left-wing guerrillas and dissidents, during which an estimated 9,000 people "disappeared" and thousands more were abducted, tortured and murdered.
Former Adml.
Armando Lambruschini, also pardoned, was already provisionally free, having served three-quarters of a lighter sentence.
The inclusion of former Gen. Carlos Suárez Mason, also pardoned and released, raised the possibility of a protest from the US government, which in 1988 had extradited him to stand trial in Argentina on 39 counts of murder.
All of the former officers remained stripped of their rank and were barred from holding public office.
Videla immediately sent an open letter to the Chief of Staff of the Army Gen. Martin Bonnet, claiming that the armed forces were owed an apology, and vowing to carry on "the struggle for the moral vindication of the war we won against subversion" .
Relations with UK
An agreement covering the protection and guarantee of British investments in Argentina, signed in London on Dec. 11, marked a significant extension of bilateral co-operation since the full restoration of diplomatic relations in February 1990 [see p. 37245].
It followed on from a Nov. 28 agreement between both countries to extend the previous 150-mile fishing limit to the north, east and south of the Falkland Islands into a 200-mile Anglo-Argentine co-operation area, from which other international fishing fleets from Japan, South Korea, Taiwan and the Soviet Union would be excluded as from Dec. 26 [see p. 37853].
Both sides also agree to establish a South Atlantic Fisheries Commission to exchange information and make recommendations on conservation.
AMERICAS
BRAZIL
Convictions for murder of Chico Mendes
In the western Amazonian town of Xapuri, Acre province, a cattle rancher, Darly Alves da Silva, 56, and his son Darci Alves Pereire, 23, were sentenced to 19 years' imprisonment on Dec. 15 for the premeditated murder of Francisco "Chico" Mendes Filho, the internationally acclaimed environmentalist and leader of the seringueiros rubber-tappers' union, who was murdered on Dec. 22, 1988 [see p. 36459].
Darci Alves confessed to sole responsibility, in what was seen as an attempt to get his father acquitted, but a key prosecution witness, Genesio Ferreira da Silva, 15, a former employee and relative of the Alves family, stated that he had overheard both of them plotting the murder and that they had celebrated its successful execution with a barbecue.
The four-day trial, which completed formal legal proceeding initiated in October [see p. 37773], was held under tight security and was attended by hundreds of environmentalists.
Jair Meneguelli, the leader of the Workers' Central Union (CUT), and Osmarino Amancio Rodriguez, Mendes's successor as leader of the seringueiros, were joined by other union members, the wives of murdered union members, and environmentalists, in signing the Declaration of Xapuri which was read out over Mendes's grave.
The declaration stated that "the sentencing does not end this process" and that "many important people are involved: politicians,…landowners and newspaper owners, who are protected by a network of impunity and for whom justice has no meaning" .
An estimated 1,600 rural workers and union leaders were reported to have been murdered in the Amazonian region over the last decade but this was the first time that any substantial landowner had been brought to trial.
In September 1988 Mendes had saved from development some land owned by the Alves family which the government had then declared a reserve.
On Dec. 10 Gentil Alves da Silva, another of Darly Alves's sons, was arrested after threatening Osmarino Rodriguez.
AMERICAS
COLOMBIA
Constitutional Assembly elections
Elections were held on Dec. 9 for a 70-member Constitutional Assembly, due to sit from February to July 1991 with the responsibility of proposing constitutional reforms.
The December turnout was only 3,700,000, of 14,200,000 eligible voters, or little more than half the number who had voted in a referendum in May in favour of the establishment of the Assembly [see p. 37450].
This led several members of the Congress to question the Assembly's moral right to initiate political reforms.
The ruling Liberal Party (PL) won 24 seats, narrowly topping the poll.
Its historic rival, the Social Conservative Party (PSC), came only fourth, with nine seats.
The April 19 Movement (M-19) won 19 seats, marking a clear breakthrough in what had historically been a two-party system dominated by the PL and the PSC.
The conservative National Salvation Movement (MSN) coalition came third with 11 seats.
Independents won seven seats and two were reserved for guerrillas who gave up their arms; it was anticipated that these would be allocated to representatives of the Workers' Revolutionary Party (PRT), a guerrilla group which signed a peace pact with the government on Dec. 28 and was due to disarm in the far northern province of Sucre on Jan. 26.
The Interior Minister, Julio César Sánchez, resigned on Dec. 21 after being held responsible in the press for the low turnout in the elections.
He was replaced by Humberto de la Calle, 44, a university professor and barrister.
Offer to drug cartels
A leading member of the Medellín drug cartel, Fabio Ochoa, wanted by the United States authorities for drug trafficking offences and the murder of an agent of the American Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA), surrendered on Dec. 19 in what was seen as a vindication of the policy of President César Gaviria Trujillo, who had adopted legal and political methods rather than the previous military offensive against the drug cartels [see p. 37772 for October proposals]; on Dec. 17 the government had said that it would waive extradition to the USA and reduce prison terms for those traffickers who surrendered and confessed to crimes.
The Medellín cartel had pressed for the confession stipulation to be dropped; it wished to be considered as a group and given political status [see p. 37851].
Two of eight journalists being held hostage were released by the cartel on Dec. 11 and Dec. 13 in what was seen as a peace gesture.
On Dec. 28 Gaviria admitted in an interview that official talks had taken place with the drug cartel; however, he said, they had been limited to offering traffickers protection if they surrendered.
Military offensive against guerrillas
The two strongest left-wing guerrilla groups, the National Liberation Army (ELN) and the Colombian Revolutionary Armed Forces (FARC), reportedly informed journalists in late December that they were ready to hold peace talks with the government [see p. 37772].
A major military offensive launched on Dec. 9 against the FARC headquarters at Casa Verde, 200 km south of the capital, Bogotá, had reportedly led to the death of 60 guerrillas and 20 soldiers, but the FARC leadership had apparently escaped.
In a counterattack the FARC claimed responsibility for the bombing of a bus in Medellín on Dec. 12 in which seven police officers were killed; for five widely separated attacks on Dec. 13 during which an Army helicopter was badly damaged and an unspecified number of soldiers killed; for the dynamiting of a police post in Medellín on Dec. 15; and the blowing up of an aircraft at the Villa Garzon airport, 482 km south of Bogotá in the south-western region of Putumayo, on Dec. 16 (all 19 passengers having been evacuated beforehand).
AMERICAS
LATIN AMERICA
Bush tour
US President Bush, accompanied by Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady and Deputy Secretary of State Lawrence Eagleburger, undertook a tour of Brazil, Uruguay, Argentina, Chile and Venezuela on Dec. 3-8, the first major tour of the region by a US President since that by President Eisenhower in the 1960s.
In his final statements in the Venezuelan capital Caracas, his last stop, Bush repeated the central message of the tour, that a "new age" was opening up for the Americas.
Already characterized by the victory of democracy over authoritarianism in Latin America, this new age would, he said, be bolstered by a new economic partnership linking both hemispheres in a free-trade zone stretching from Alaska to Cape Horn, a concept expounded in the US Enterprise for the Americas Initiative launched by Bush in June 1990 [see p. 37526].
The Finance and Economy Ministers of Bolivia, Brazil, Colombia, Chile, Ecuador, Mexico, Peru and Uruguay had met together in the Chilean capital, Santiago, on Dec. 1-2, to discuss a joint strategy ahead of the Bush visit.
Many of them were frustrated by the lack of progress under the Enterprise for the Americas Initiative, seeing its message of free trade as at odds with the actions of an increasingly protectionist US Congress.
The Bush tour produced no substantial new initiatives, and was seen primarily as a US effort to reassure the region's governments that they were not being ignored, even though US foreign policy was currently dominated by eastern Europe and by the Gulf crisis.
In Brazil Bush thanked President Fernando Collor de Mello for adopting sanctions against Iraq (one of Brazil's major export markets) and expressed his support for the government's efforts to protect the Amazonian rain forest.
He declined to postpone his visit to Argentina, expressing confidence that a military rebellion which had begun there on Dec. 3 [see p. 37913]would be put down by the government of President Carlos Saúl Menem, whom he thanked for sending two Argentinian frigates to the Gulf.
In Chile, in an address to the Congress, Bush stated that the country's economic policies put it in the "forefront of the free-market movement now taking hold across Latin America" and that this made it a "prime candidate" for debt relief proposed under the Enterprise for the Americas Initiative.
Chile had already signed an outline bilateral trade agreement with the USA in October, and the US administration had announced on Dec. 2 that an embargo on military arms sales to Chile was to be lifted, due to government's decision to transfer the case of Orlando Letelier from the military to the civil court.
Letelier, the former Chilean ambassador to the USA, had allegedly been assassinated in Washington D.C. in 1976 by agents working for the military regime of Gen. Augusto Pinochet Ugarte [see pp. 28273-74; 37709].
One of the few firm agreements announced by Bush gave the go-ahead for the sale of a high performance IBM supercomputer to the Brazilian Embraer state aircraft company, especially in the light of a Nov. 28 joint agreement between Brazil and Argentina to confine their nuclear programmes to peaceful purposes and to ratify a Latin American version of a nuclear non-proliferation treaty.
US critics opposed to the sale had said that the computer could be used to design nuclear weapons.
On Dec. 4, in an agreement which was expected to open up new lines of credit to Argentina, Brady reached an agreement with Economy Minister Antonio Ermán González to refinance US$650,000,000 of debt with the US Eximbank and US$50,000,000 of debt with the International Development Association (IDA), the concessionary loan affiliate of the World Bank, for repayment over 10 years, with a six-year grace period.
In contrast to visits by previous US presidents, the tour attracted little public protest.
Large crowds lined the route of Bush's entourage in the Uruguayan capital, Montevideo, and the Argentine capital, Buenos Aires, but there was widespread public indifference to the visit in the Chilean capital, Santiago.
Minor bombing incidents in Buenos Aires and Santiago caused little structural damage and nobody was reported to have been injured.
Rome summit
The Foreign Ministers of the "Group of Rio" countries, representing Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, Mexico, Paraguay, Peru, Uruguay and Venezuela, met with their counterparts from the 12 countries of the European Communities (EC) for a summit in the Italian capital, Rome, on Dec. 20.
The Latin American ministers urged the EC countries not to forget them as the demand for aid from eastern Europe and the Soviet Union became more pressing.
The Declaration of Rome signed by both sides at the conclusion of talks stressed the need for regular meetings at ministerial level to guarantee closer political contacts and in particular to establish mechanisms to control drug-trafficking and to combat terrorism.
The document also contained an undertaking to deepen co-operation in trade, economic development and science and technology between the two regions.
Andean pact meeting
A meeting of the Andean Pact countries, held in the Bolivian capital, La Paz, on Nov. 29, to discuss Bush's free trade proposals, was attended by the Presidents of Bolivia, Colombia, Ecuador, Peru and Venezuela.
The concluding La Paz Declaration included a joint agreement on the removal of all customs tariffs between the Andean Pact member countries by Dec. 31, 1991, and the establishment of a single customs system by 1995, with the objective of establishing a Latin American common market by the end of the century.
ASIA — PACIFIC
INDIA
Communal unrest — Shekhar's new Punjab initiative — President's rule in Goa — New state governors
Further agitation at Ayodhya — Serious communal unrest in Andhra Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh — Resignation of Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister
Hindu agitation around the disputed shrine at Ayodhya in early December fuelled serious communal unrest in many parts of India.
Attempts by supporters of the radical Vishwa Hindi Parishad to begin construction of a Hindu temple on the grounds of the shrine in late October had resulted in serious violence [see p. 37774].
Ironically, the fresh agitation which started on Dec. 6 was based around a programme of satyragraha (peaceful protest) so that as violence erupted in other parts of the country, Ayodhya itself remained relatively calm.
The most serious trouble occurred in the southern city of Hyderabad, capital of Andhra Pradesh, where as many as 200 people died in a week of violence which started on Dec. 7.
Serious unrest also broke out in Aligarh and Agra (Uttar Pradesh), where up to 100 people died in brutal fighting.
Marri Cheni Reddy resigned as the Congress (I) Chief Minister of Andhra Pradesh on Dec. 16 after stating that he accepted moral responsibility for the unrest in Hyderabad.
He was replaced later that day by N. Janardhan Reddy.
Shekhar-Mann meeting on Punjab — 1990 casualty figures
Simranjit Singh Mann, leader of the Akali Dal (Mann) faction, held talks on Punjab with Prime Minister Chandra Shekhar in New Delhi on Dec. 28.
Mann's decision to enter into talks came in response to repeated offers by Shekhar's new government to open a dialogue on Punjab.
Following the meeting Mann said that Shekhar had agreed to hold direct talks with militant leaders.
Mann, who had resigned from the Lok Sabha in October in protest at the recent extension of President's rule in the state [see p. 37775], had previously been authorized to represent two other Akali Dal factions (Badal and Longowal) at the talks.
According to India Today of Dec. 31 a total of 3,560 people had been killed in Punjab between Jan. 1 and Dec. 11, 1990.
Of those killed, 53 per cent were civilians, 34 per cent were militants and 13 per cent were members of the security forces.
Imposition of President's rule in Goa
President's rule was imposed in Goa on Dec. 14.
The move followed the withdrawal of the Maharashtrawadi Gomantak Party (MGP) as the main constituent of the eight-month-old Progressive Democratic Front (PDF) government on Nov. 29.
The Chief Minister, Luis Proto Barbosa, had served in the post since he replaced interim Chief Minister Churchill Alamao on April 14.
Reshuffle of state governors — Resignation of government in Pondicherry
A major reshuffle of state governors was announced on Dec. 14.
Gen. O. P. Malhotra, former Army Chief of Staff, was appointed Governor of Punjab.
Malhotra replaced Virendra Verma, who moved to Himachal Pradesh, replacing Basavaiah Rachaiah, who was transferred to Kerala.
The Governor of Kerala, Sarup Singh, was shifted to Gujarat to replace the outgoing Mahipal Shastri.
Markandey Singh was appointed Lieutenant-Governor of the Union Territory of Delhi and Har Sarup Singh as Lieutenant-Governor of the Union Territory of Pondicherry.
On Dec. 27 the 10-month-old Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam-Janata Dal coalition government in Pondicherry, headed by DMK Chief Minister D. Ramachandran, resigned.
ASIA — PACIFIC
SRI LANKA
Unilateral declaration of ceasefire by Tamil Tigers
In an unexpected statement issued on Dec. 30 the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE, or Tamil Tigers), the main Tamil separatist group, offered to "cease all its armed hostilities against the Sri Lankan armed forces" from Dec. 31.
The most recent bout of full-scale fighting between the LTTE and the armed forces, which had begun in northern and eastern Sri Lanka in June 1990, had left between 3,000 and 5,000 people dead [see pp. 37529-30; 37611; 37654; 37711; 37856].
The unilateral ceasefire statement, made through the International Committee of the Red Cross, said that if the government "reciprocates positively" then the LTTE would enter into peace talks.
However, if the government failed to reciprocate, then the LTTE reserved the right to carry out "defensive actions" .
The government responded cautiously to the offer, stating that it would have to "asses the genuineness of the [LTTE's]declared intentions" .
However, press reports on Jan. 2 stated that the government had ordered a halt to all offensives against the Tamil Tigers.
ASIA — PACIFIC
MYANMA
Formation of opposition parallel government
A group of candidates elected to Myanma's People's Assembly in the May 1990 elections [see pp. 37457-58]announced on Dec. 18 the establishment of a "government" at Manerplaw on the border with Thailand.
The new "government" claimed to be supported by the Democratic Alliance of Burma, a 21-member umbrella organization of ethnic rebel forces.
The May elections had resulted in an overwhelming victory for the opposition National League for Democracy (NLD) and allied parties.
However, the country's ruling military junta, the State Law and Order Restoration Council (SLORC), had subsequently refused to allow the Assembly to convene and had ordered a crackdown on the NLD.
Most of the eight members of the "National Coalition Government of the Union of Burma" at Manerplaw were NLD members, although the leader, Sein Winn, was a member of the Party for National Democracy (PND).
Sein Winn was also a first cousin of the detained NLD leader, Aung San Suu Kyi.
The SLORC and the NLD responded similarly to the announcement.
The NLD on Dec. 20 expelled from its membership all those who had taken part in the formation of the "government" .
For its part, the SLORC de-registered the PND, and six days later, annulled the People's Assembly representative status of all eight members of the "government" .
ASIA — PACIFIC
THAILAND
Formation of new government
In mid-December the beleaguered Thai Prime Minister Chatichai Choonhaven carried out his third — and most extensive — Cabinet reshuffle in four months.
Chatichai, who had previously removed three parties from his ruling coalition and had replaced them with two new members, had been under pressure for some time from the military and the media to carry out an extensive reshuffle in order to cleanse his government of allegedly corrupt elements.
Chatichai initiated the reshuffle on Dec. 8 by formally resigning as Prime Minister.
Before his resignation he had secured written undertakings from a number of parties stating that they would support his re-appointment.
The next day he was reappointed, having been renominated by leaders of six parties; his own Chart Thai (CT), four other members of the coalition, namely the Democrat Party (DP), Social Action Party (SAP), Rassadorn (R) and Puang Chon Chao Thai (Thai People's Party — PCCT), and the main opposition party, Ekkaparb (Solidarity — E).
Coalition members Muan Chon and the United Democratic Party did not vote to renominate Chatichai.
After Chatichai's re-appointment, both the SAP and the DP refused offers to join a new coalition, forcing the Prime Minister to bring in Prachakorn Thai (PT) and Ekkaparb.
The new coalition announced on Dec. 13, of Chart Thai (96 seats), Ekkaparb (62), Prachakorn Thai (31), Rassadorn (21) and Puang Chon Chao Thai (17), with a total strength of 227 seats, thus afforded Chatichai a slightly reduced, but still comfortable, majority in the 357-member House of Representatives.
Chatichai appointed a new Cabinet on Dec. 14.
Reshuffled Thai Cabinet
ASIA — PACIFIC
VIETNAM
New party platform — National Assembly session
Prior to the National Assembly on the economy held on Dec. 5-21, the 10th plenary session of the sixth Communist Party of Vietnam (CPV) central committee concluded in Hanoi on Nov. 26 with the adoption of a new "Draft Platform on Socialist Construction for the Transitional Period" [see p. 37375 for details of ninth plenum held in March 1990].
The draft constituted the party's second political platform, the first having been adopted at the time of the foundation of the Indo-Chinese Communist Party (the CPV's forerunner) in 1930.
The plenum also adopted a "draft strategy for socio-economic stabilization and development up to the year 2000" .
The platform and socio-economic strategy were published on Nov. 30 for public consultation before submission to the party's seventh national congress, scheduled for May 1991.
Party platform.
The draft was divided into six chapters:(i) "The great victory and lessons of the Vietnamese Revolution" ;(ii) "Transition to socialism in our country" ;(iii) socio-economic development;(iv) national defence, security and foreign policy;(v) the political system; and (vi) the CPV in the building of socialism.
Despite the virtual collapse of the communist system in eastern Europe during 1989-90, the CPV platform confidently predicted that "socialism will recover its vitality, and despite the winding path it will finally score a victory" .
Vietnam was attempting to make the transition to socialism at a time when the international situation had undergone major changes.
Nevertheless, the "fundamental substance which takes up our time remains the transition from capitalism to socialism on a world scale ushered in by the Great October Soviet Revolution" .
The CPV had made a number of errors in the past; it had taken too much time setting forth the initial stage of the transitional period to socialism and had made "many mistakes" in reforming prices, wages and money and in ideological and organizational tasks.
Despite such errors, however, the leadership of the party remained the "decisive factor for all victories of the Vietnamese revolution" .
The platform predicted that Vietnam would remain in the "period of transition to socialism" for a further "two or three five-year plans" .
By the end of this stage, social productivity and economic efficiency would have increased at least two-fold compared to the present day.
On foreign policy the platform called for consolidation and development of friendship and co-operation with the Soviet Union, Laos and Cambodia and for the "restoration of friendship" with China.
National Assembly session
The eighth session of the eighth National Assembly was held in Hanoi on Dec. 5-21 [for seventh session in June 1990 see p. 37532].
The Assembly adopted a resolution approving the 1991 socio-economic development plan and analysing the results of 1990's plan.
In 1990 the economy had a "serious imbalance" ; large numbers of state-operated companies had experienced difficulties and some had faced bankruptcy; the state budget had displayed "a major overdraft" ; market prices had been unstable; progress had been slow in education and public health; and the social security and order situation had developed "in a complex way" .
The plan for 1991 would be implemented against "a very complicated international background" .
The major targets included increasing GNP by 5.6 per cent, national income by 5.8 per cent , agricultural production by 4.5 per cent and export value by "at least 16 per cent " .
Legislation was passed on private business transactions and shareholding companies, and also amending the law on military service.
ASIA — PACIFIC
CAMBODIA
SNC meeting in Paris
The latest round of talks aimed at achieving a consensus on the UN peace plan for Cambodia took place in Paris on Dec. 21-22 [see p. 37858 for finalization of peace plan at a meeting in Paris in late November].
The talks were attended by members of Cambodia's Supreme National Council (SNC), as well as by Roland Dumas and Ali Alatas, Foreign Ministers of France and Indonesia respectively and co-chairs of the Paris International Conference on Cambodia (PICC), and by Rafeeuddin Ahmed, UN Under-Secretary-General of the Department of International Economic and Social Affairs.
The 12-member SNC, composed of members of all four Cambodian factions, had not convened since its inaugural meeting in Bangkok in September [see p. 37712].
The main stumbling block had been the appointment of its chair [see pp. 37712; 37777; 37858], a problem temporarily resolved on Dec. 11 when Prince Norodom Sihanouk, who had hitherto been pressing for the chairmanship, called on the SNC to "stop talking about the chairmanship and vice-chairmanship…and have the 12 SNC members, on an equal footing, work for peace" .
A final statement released after the talks stated that there had been "concurrence on most of the fundamental points" of the draft UN peace plan.
 "The remaining questions" , according to the statement, would be discussed by the SNC and the PICC co-ordinating committee.
The main sticking points were the objections of the State of Cambodia (SOC) government to the plan's provisions for the demobilization and disarmament of military forces in Cambodia.
A further point of disagreement was the SOC's insistence that the plan should explicitly refer to Khmer Rouge "genocide" .
The delegates agreed that the full PICC should be re-convened "in an atmosphere propitious to national reconciliation" [for July-August 1989 PICC see pp. 36848-49].
ASIA — PACIFIC
CHINA
Party plenum — State Council appointments
Seventh party plenum — Guidelines for eighth five-year plan
The seventh plenum of the 13th Chinese Communist Party (CCP) central committee was held in Beijing on Dec. 25-30 [see p. 37318 for sixth plenum held in March 1990].
The session adopted proposals for the drawing-up of the eighth five year plan (1991-95) and a new 10-year strategic development programme (1991-2000).
The plenum had been delayed for several months, allegedly because of divisions over economic policy between the central and provincial authorities.
Much of the debate over economic policy was thought to have centred on the level of provincial autonomy which should be allowed; the provinces were generally thought to favour a more radical pace of economic reform than the centre.
Details of seventh plenum communique — Reaction of commentators
A communiqué issued by the CCP central committee on Dec. 30 contained few detailed economic proposals.
The following were listed as the key points in economic construction during the coming decade and the eighth five-year plan period: strengthening agriculture; strengthening the basic industries and infrastructure and reorganizing and transforming the processing industry; and strengthening educational, scientific and technological undertakings.
The communiqué outlined five principles for drawing up and implementing the five- and 10-year plans:(i) "firmly follow the road of building socialism with Chinese characteristics" ;(ii) "firmly push forward reform and opening to the outside world" ;(iii) "firmly implement the principle of developing the national economy in a sustained, stable and co-ordinated manner" ;(iv) "firmly follow the principle of self-reliance, hard struggle and building up the country through thrift and diligence" ; and (v) "firmly implement the principle of promoting both material civilization and socialist culture and ethics" .
Some commentators asserted that the communiqué's lack of detail demonstrated that the plenum had only managed to reach agreement on basic guidelines and that a great deal of work was necessary before the eighth five-year plan was completed.
They also claimed that the language used, and the emphasis on socialist ideology, indicated that orthodox hardliners had emerged from the plenum in the ascendant.
Appointment of new ministers
Wang Fang, State Councillor and Minister of Public Security, was replaced on Dec. 28 by one of his deputies, Tao Siju.
The Guardian of Dec. 29 reported that Wang had "been under a cloud" ever since the police force had failed to control the nationwide pro-democracy demonstrations of April-June 1989 [see pp. 36587; 36640-41; 36720-22].
On the same day Zheng Tuobin was replaced as Minister of Foreign Economic Relations and Trade by one of his deputies, Li Lanqing, a former head of the Foreign Investment Department.
ASIA — PACIFIC
TAIWAN
Setting of date for abolition of Temporary Provisions — Timetable for constitutional reform
President Lee Teng-hui announced on Dec. 25 that the government of the Republic of China (Taiwan) would formally rescind by the end of May 1991 the "temporary provisions effective during the period of Communist rebellion" .
The announcement effectively signalled the government's intention to end its state of war with mainland China and as such it removed a major obstacle to closer ties with the Chinese government.
The Temporary Provisions had been adopted by the Legislative Yuan in 1948, just before the Nationalist government fled to Taiwan.
The Provisions had superseded the Constitution, enhanced presidential powers and frozen in office the mainland-elected members of the various deliberative assemblies, pending hypothetical recovery of the mainland.
On Dec. 26 the ruling Kuomintang outlined a timetable for constitutional reform, to be conducted by the National Assembly in several phases.
The first phase would begin in late April 1991 when the Assembly would amend the Constitution to abolish the Temporary Provisions.
Phase two would start in December 1991 with the election of a new Assembly.
The third stage would begin in early 1992 when the newly elected Assembly would meet to "enact supplements to the Constitution" .
Sentencing of opposition leader
Huang Hwa, leader of the "New County Alliance" faction of the opposition Democratic Progressive Party, was sentenced on Dec. 8 to 10 years' imprisonment after being found guilty of "preparing to commit sedition" .
During national elections in December 1989 the "New County Alliance" faction had openly campaigned for Taiwan's "independence" from the mainland [see p. 37123].
ASIA — PACIFIC
JAPAN
Cabinet reshuffle — Indictment of LDP legislator in financial scandal
Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu announced a sweeping reshuffle of the Cabinet on Dec. 29, in which he replaced 17 of its 21 members.
The new Cabinet was the third formed by Kaifu since he took office in mid-1989, but the first major reshuffle since February 1990.
Pressure for Cabinet changes had increased after faction leaders of the ruling Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) met on Dec. 11 and resolved that a reshuffle should take place before the end of the year.
Traditionally, frequent Cabinet reshuffles provided the means through which LDP faction leaders rewarded the loyalty of their members by securing periods in office for them.
On this occasion, however, Kaifu had resisted the move, arguing that Cabinet stability and continuity were crucial at a time when the government was under pressure from the impact of the Gulf crisis and from the collapse of the "Uruguay Round" of multinational trade negotiations.
The fact that he was eventually forced to comply with the wishes of his senior LDP colleagues was interpreted as further evidence of his lack of authority within the ruling party.
In two respects, however, Kaifu was successful in realizing his wishes.
The key Foreign Affairs, Finance and Chief Cabinet Secretary posts remained unchanged in the reshuffle.
Kaifu also managed to resist pressure for the inclusion within the new Cabinet of LDP members who were tainted by the Recruit scandal, which meant the continued exclusion from office of faction leaders Michio Watanabe, Kiichi Miyazawa, and Shintaro Abe (a former Prime Minister), each of whom wielded enormous influence within the party and was considered a potential Prime Minister.
*Toshiki Kaifu Prime Minister Megumu Sato Justice *Taro Nakayama Foreign *Ryutaro Hashimoto Finance Yuaka Inoue Education Shiniichiro Shimojo Health and Welfare Motoji Kondo Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries Eiichi Nakao International Trade and Industry Kanezo Muraoka Transport Katsutsugu Sekiya Post and Telecommunications Sadatoshi Ozato Labour Yuji Ohtsuka Construction Akira Fukida Home Affairs Ministers of State *Misoji Sakamoto Chief Cabinet Secretary Man Sasaki Director-General of Management and Co-ordination Agency Yoichi Tani Director-General of Hokkaido and Okinawa Development Agencies Yukihiko Ikeda Director-General of Defence Agency Michio Ochi Director-General of Economic Planning Agency Akiko Santo Director-General of Science and Technology Agency Kazuo Aichi Director-General of Environment Agency Mamoru Nishida Director-General of National Land Agency *Unchanged portfolio.
New Japanese Cabinet
The distribution of portfolios amongst the LDP's various factions remained almost unaltered, although the Abe faction (the second-largest within the party) gained one junior post — at the expense of Kaifu's own small Komato faction — as the apparent price for maintaining the services of Nakayama, a leading member of the Abe faction.
The LDP's largest faction, that associated with former Prime Minister Noboru Takeshita, retained its six portfolios, although its influence continued to be diminished by the current struggle for its control between Takeshita himself and his old associate Shin Kanemaru.
The only woman included within the Cabinet was Akiko Santo, a television presenter and member of the Takeshita faction.
Distribution of Cabinet portfolios amongst LDP factions: Takeshita: six; Abe: five; Miyazawa: five; Watanabe: three; Komato: two;
The three most senior LDP officials remained unchanged, including the party's secretary-general, Ichiro Ozawa.
Indictment of former Cabinet minister — Collapse of possible pact with Komeito
Kaifu's determination to maintain the exclusion of Recruit-tainted ministers was strengthened by the emergence in December of a fresh scandal.
Former LDP Cabinet Minister Toshiyuki Inamura, who served as Director-General of the Environment Agency in 1986-87, resigned from the party on Dec. 26, a day before he was indicted on charges of tax evasion.
The charges followed an investigation by the Tokyo District Prosecutor's Office into allegations that he had failed to declare profits of 2,800 million yen (US$1.00=135.622 yen as at Dec. 31, 1990) made on stock market deals conducted during his period in office.
Some of these transactions were alleged to have been conducted with the assistance of insider information supplied by Mitsuhiro Kotani, the head of a speculative investment syndicate who in 1990 pleaded guilty to one charge of manipulating stock prices and who remained under investigation for other alleged offences.
Inamura was the 17th person to face charges in connection with Kotani, but the first politician to have been so implicated.
The emergence of the scandal appeared to have struck a mortal blow to the government's attempts to compact an alliance with the country's second-largest opposition grouping, Komeito.
This centrist, Buddhist, "clean government party" had recently abandoned its strategy of seeking to participate in government through an alliance with the largest opposition force, the Japan Socialist Party (JSP).
Although the LDP enjoyed an overall majority in the House of Representatives (the lower chamber of the Diet), it had been in a minority in the 252-seat upper chamber, the House of Councillors, since the elections of July 1989 [see pp. 36800-01].
As the largest single party in the upper chamber, however, the LDP could have commanded an overall majority if it had secured the support of Komeito.
ASIA — PACIFIC
NORTH KOREA-JAPAN
Agreement to begin full talks
At the third round of preliminary talks for normalizing relations between Japan and North Korea, held in Beijing on Dec. 15-17, the two sides agreed to begin full normalization talks in Pyongyang, the North Korean capital, in January 1991.
The preliminary talks, which had begun in November, represented the first formal contact between the governments of the two countries after more than four decades of implacable hostility.
The agreement marked a symmetrical development to the recent rapprochement between South Korea and the Soviet Union.
The speed with which it was effected reinforced the widespread belief that the North Korean government was keen to end its international isolation.
Economic benefits from links with Japan could ease the impact of the loss of preferential trade arrangements with China and the Soviet Union, both of which were reportedly reducing their subsidized oil exports to North Korea and demanding hard-currency payment for future shipments of oil and other commodities.
It was agreed that the talks would begin in Pyongyang, with further sessions in Tokyo and Beijing, and would be conducted at Vice-Ministerial level.
ASIA — PACIFIC
SOUTH KOREA
Cabinet reshuffle
President Roh Tae Woo reshuffled his 24-member Cabinet on Dec. 27, replacing his Prime Minister and nine other ministers.
Ro Jai Bong, 54, hitherto chief presidential aide and a former university professor, was appointed to succeed Prime Minister Kang Young Hoon, whom Roh had reportedly asked to retire from public life.
*Ro Jai Bong Prime Minister Lee Seung Yoon Deputy Prime Minister; Economic Planning Board *Lee Sang Ock Foreign Affairs Ahn Eung Mo Home Affairs Chung Yong Euy Finance Lee Chong Nam Justice Lee Jong Koo Defence *Yoon Hyong Sup Education **Park Chul Un Sports and Youth Cho Kyung Suh Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries *Lee Bong Suh Commerce and Industry Lee Hee Il Energy and Resources Lee Hang See Construction Kim Jeong Soo Health and Social Affairs **Choe Byung Yul Labour *Lim In Taik Transport *Song Eon Jong Communications *Choi Chang Yoon Public Information Lee Yun Tack Government Administration Kim Jin Hyun Science and Technology **Choi Ho Joong National Unification Lee O Young Culture Choi Sang Yup Director of Office of Legislation *Min Kyung Bae Director of Patriots' and Veterans' Affairs Agency Suh Dong Kwon Director of Agency for National Security Planning Huh Nam Hoon Director of Environment Agency Kim Yoon Hwan First Minister of State for Political Affairs Lee Ke Soon Second State Minister for Political Affairs *New Appointment.
**Altered portfolio.
New South Korean Cabinet
The Cabinet reshuffle reflected little significant change in the policies of Roh Tae Woo, although some observers considered it indicative of his desire to make greater efforts to sustain and develop the recent dialogue with North Korea.
Choi Ho Joong, who was moved from Foreign Minister to Unification Minister in charge of that dialogue, had been one of the architects of South Korea's recent successes in establishing ties with many of the former communist allies of North Korea.
In a statement issued immediately after his appointment, the new Prime Minister announced that the priorities of his administration would be to establish "social discipline as well as law and order and progress in inter-Korea dialogue" .
He also vowed to maintain ties with the United States while continuing to improve relations with the Soviet Union.
Official visit to Soviet Union by South Korean President
President Roh Tae Woo became the first South Korean head of state to make an official trip to the Soviet Union when he arrived in Moscow on Dec. 13 at the beginning of a four-day visit.
Roh's entourage included Cabinet ministers, diplomats and the heads of 20 major companies said to be interested in joint ventures in the Soviet Union.
Diplomatic relations between South Korea and the Soviet Union had been established in September 1990, thereby bringing to an end a period of hostility dating from the Korean war.
Oleg Sokolov, the Soviet Union's first ambassador to South Korea, had arrived in Seoul on Dec. 7.
During the course of his visit Roh held talks with Soviet President Gorbachev and on Dec. 14 they signed a declaration of general principles which stated that their countries were "fully determined to build their relations in the spirit of good-neighbourliness, trust and co-operation" .
The two countries also signed a series of co-operation agreements on Dec. 14, covering joint ventures in capital investment protection, trade, scientific and technological projects.
Soviet officials predicted that trade between the two countries, which stood at less than US$600 million in 1989, could exceed $10,000 million per year by the mid-1990s, and that massive Korean investment in the crisis-ridden Soviet economy could provide an immediate injection of consumer goods and technological expertise.
On the eve of his departure from Moscow, Roh stated that he was "very satisfied with the results" of his visit which, he suggested, represented "a giant step inspiring a new, hopeful era in the peoples of the two countries" .
He also expressed the view that his visit signalled the imminent end of hostilities with North Korea, a long-term ally of the Soviet Union.
 "The opening of the road for friendship and co-operation between us and the Soviet Union," he said, "is directly related to opening a road for peace and unification of the Korean peninsula." 
ASIA — PACIFIC
NORTH-SOUTH KOREA
Premiers' meeting — Revelation of alleged communist plots
The Premiers of North and South Korea, Yon Hyong Muk and Kang Young Hoon, had a third round of talks in Seoul, the South Korean capital on Dec. 12-13.
[For Kang's replacement as Prime Minister later in the month see this page.]
No tangible progress was made in resolving the differences between the two Korean states, and the atmosphere in which the talks were conducted was more hostile than on previous occasions.
Yon proposed a 10-point Declaration of Non-aggression and Reconciliation, incorporating the North's previous insistence upon a non-aggression agreement with the South's demand for confidence-building measures such as freedom of travel between the two Koreas, the restoration of communications and co-operation in economic and technical spheres.
Yon also reiterated the North's demand for the suspension of the annual South Korean-United States "Team Spirit" military exercise, the release of those imprisoned for making unauthorized visits to North Korea, and the abandonment of South Korea's aspirations for separate membership of the UN.
Kang rejected Yon's draft document, proposing instead a 10-point Basic Agreement on Inter-Korean Relations — which concentrated on the achievement of basic confidence-building measures — as a prelude to the negotiation of a non-aggression agreement.
The mood of the meeting was adversely affected by President Roh Tae Woo's forthcoming trip to the Soviet Union [see p. 37918], and by a series of confrontations involving journalists in the Northern delegation who made unauthorized visits to several of Seoul's universities where they met with student radicals.
A fourth round of Premiers' talks was due to be held in Pyongyang, the North Korean capital on Feb. 25-28, 1991, although the South's refusal to cancel the next Team Spirit exercise (due to begin in January) made it unclear whether this meeting would go ahead as scheduled.
Revelation of alleged communist conspiracies
In a further blow to inter-Korean relations, the Agency for National Security Planning (NSP), South Korea's main internal security agency, claimed on Dec. 26 that it had thwarted a conspiracy linked with North Korea which aimed to overthrow the South Korean government.
The NSP announced that 31 people, including students and teachers, had been indicted under the draconian anti-communist National Security Law.
Warrants had been issued for the arrest of a further 70.
Those charged were members of an underground group known as Chamintong (Independent National Unification group), formed in late 1988 to support North Korean plans for reunification.
The NSP claimed that the organization used Chondaehyop, a national student alliance, as "a front for revolutionary movement" .
Amongst those indicted was Song Kap Suk, Chondaehyop's leader.
On Dec. 27 it was announced that 53 students had been arrested for alleged membership of the Democratic Students League (DSL).
According to the authorities, the DSL had more than 900 members spread between 45 universities, and had operated by infiltrating student groups and the military.
The aim of the group, it was claimed, was to organize "an armed uprising to topple the free democratic system and the capitalist economy" .
ASIA — PACIFIC
MALAYSIA
UMNO general assembly — Death of Tunku Abdul Rahman
The United Malays National Organization (UMNO) general assembly held on Nov. 29-Dec. 2 unanimously re-elected Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamed and Deputy Prime Minister Ghafar Baba as party president and deputy president respectively.
The assembly was the first to be held since April 1987, when Mahathir had narrowly survived a leadership challenge, a contest which subsequently led to a split within the party [see pp. 35459; 35773; 36657].
The assembly also elected three party vice-presidents, namely:(i) incumbent vice-president Anwar Ibrahim, the Education Minister widely regarded as a future party leader;(ii) incumbent vice-president, former Defence Minister and Anwar's long-time rival Abdullah Ahmad Badawi; and (iii) Agriculture Minister Sanusi Junid.
Death of Tunku Abdul Rahman
Tunku Abdul Rahman Putra al-Haj, Malaysia's first Prime Minister, died on Dec. 6, aged 87.
Known to all Malaysians as "the Tunku" (the Prince), he was leader of UMNO from 1952 until 1970, and, from 1955, Chief Minister after Malaya's first national elections.
He negotiated Malaya's independence from the United Kingdom two years later and was the country's first Prime Minister, overseeing the creation of the Federation of Malaysia in 1963, and during the next two years withstanding the threat of "Confrontation" with Indonesia and taking the difficult decision that Singapore secede from the Federation.
The violent communal riots of 1969 precipitated his resignation as Prime Minister in 1970.
He then served for three years as Secretary General of the Islamic Conference Organization.
His retirement years were marked by what the Far Eastern Economic Review of Dec. 20 described as "a consistent championship of causes" .
He remained a potent political force through his weekly column in The Star newspaper and during the mid- and late 1980s he became a formidable critic of Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamed.
Despite increasing physical frailty he insisted on campaigning on behalf of the opposition UMNO splinter party, Semangat"46, founded in May 1989 [see p. 36657].
ASIA — PACIFIC
INDONESIA
Formation of government-endorsed Moslem organization
President Suharto and several ministers and government officials attended the inaugural symposium of the Association of Moslem Intellectuals in the Javanese town of Malang on Dec. 6-8.
Suharto's open endorsement of a broad-based Moslem organization constituted a major development in Indonesian politics.
Conspicuous by their absence were any leading members of the country's Armed Forces.
The Far Eastern Economic Review of Dec. 20 commented that Suharto's endorsement had "alarmed" the military "who regard the polarization of politics along religious lines as a threat to stability" .
The report also predicted that the new association might be used by Suharto as a vehicle to ensure his re-election as President in 1993.
ASIA — PACIFIC
PHILIPPINES
Appointments — Talks on US bases
Cabinet and military appointments
President Corazon Aquino dismissed her deputy within the Cabinet, Executive Secretary Catalino Macaraig, on Dec. 10.
He was replaced by Oscar Orbos, the Transport and Communications Secretary, whom Aquino was believed to be cultivating as a possible presidential successor on the expiry of her current term of office in 1992.
The departure of Macaraig, who was also the government's energy co-ordinator, was hastened by confusion and discontent caused by sharp cuts in retail price subsidies for petrol announced earlier in the month.
On Dec. 5 the government's Energy Regulatory Board had announced increases in petrol prices of between 50 and 80 per cent.
On the following day the Board stated that, owing to an error in its earlier calculations, further increases of 50 per cent were to be imposed.
The government said that the rises were necessitated by higher crude oil prices caused by the Gulf crisis and by the deteriorating peso-dollar exchange rate.
The increases were met by a series of strikes and protest demonstrations which, together with the threat of a national strike, led the government to withdraw the second price rise on Dec. 10.
It was reported on Dec. 17 that Aquino had dismissed from the Cabinet Trade and Industry Secretary José Concepcion, one of her closest allies, in an attempt to counter growing criticism of her government.
Concepcion had been widely accused of using his office to promote the interests of his family.
He was replaced on Dec. 30 by Peter Garrucho, hitherto the Tourism Secretary [not Narzalina Lim, as given on p. 37579].
On the same day José de Jesus replaced Fiorello Estuar as Secretary of Public Works and Highways.
On Dec. 21 Aquino announced the appointment of Maj.-Gen.
Rodolfo Biazon to succeed Gen. Renato de Villa as Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces of the Philippines when the latter's three-year term ended in January 1991.
Biazon had been given much of the credit for the successful loyalist defence of Camp Aguinaldo during the December 1989 coup attempt [see pp. 37120-21].
Biazon would not have the full power of his predecessor, however, since Aquino had signed a bill on Dec. 13 which separated the administration of the armed forces from that of the Philippines Constabulary.
The 40,000 members of the constabulary were incorporated into a new Philippine National Police (PNP) under the control of the Department of Interior and Local Government.
The measure was seen as part of an ongoing process designed to increase the reliability of both police and Army units.
To this end 224 soldiers were dismissed from the Army for their role in the failed Mindanao revolt in October 1990 [see p. 37781], whilst on Dec. 19 a total of 81 officers and men received prison terms of up to 32 years for participating in an August 1987 coup attempt in which over 50 people were killed [see pp. 35709-11].
The military court which imposed the sentences, the most severe yet to have been imposed upon anti-Aquino coup participants, acquitted a further 20 men; cases against a further 16 remained pending.
Progress of talks over US bases
The four-day third round of talks over the future of the United States military bases in the Philippines ended on Dec. 7.
Although details of the talks were not released, both sides were reported to remain far apart on the details of a new agreement.
The talks were scheduled to resume in early January 1991, the Philippine government having previously set Jan. 31 as the deadline for concluding a new accord to replace the current Military Bases Agreement which was due to expire in September 1991.
ASIA — PACIFIC
AUSTRALIA
Indictment of Alan Bond — Collapse of Fairfax Group
Alan Bond, one of Australia's most flamboyant entrepreneurs and former chairman of Bond Corporation Holdings, was arrested on Dec. 6 following an investigation into the November 1988 collapse of Rothwells Ltd., a merchant bank run by his friend and business associate Laurie Connell.
The discovery of undisclosed borrowing and falsified accounting by Rothwells had led to charges against a number of businessmen including Connell and Bond.
Bond was charged under the Western Australian Securities Code with dishonestly concealing the fact that Rothwells had agreed to pay Bond Corp. a fee of A$16,000,000 for taking part in an attempted rescue of the bank in 1987.
He appeared in court on Dec. 7 and was released on bail of A$100,000 with a further A$100,000 surety (US$1.00=A$1.2965 as at Dec. 3, 1990).
Collapse of Fairfax Group
The John Fairfax Group, one of Australia's two major newspaper concerns, went into receivership on Dec. 9 with debts of A$1,700 million.
The group's financial problems had increased since late 1987 when Warwick Fairfax, a member of the family which had controlled the company since its formation 150 years earlier, launched a A$2,100 million buyout of the group which coincided with the 1987 collapse of the world stock markets [see pp. 35740-41].
ASIA — PACIFIC
UN PACIFIC TRUST TERRITORY
Partial termination of Trust Territory arrangement
The UN Security Council voted on Dec. 22 to terminate the UN Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands status for three of its constituent elements: the Federated States of Micronesia (FSM), the Marshall Islands and the Northern Marianas.
The decision, by 14 votes to one (Cuba), meant that the only territory to remain within the Trusteeship Agreement was Belau.
The Trusteeship, which encompassed almost 5,000,000 sq km of the western Pacific, had been administered by the United States since its creation in 1947.
In 1978 the Mariana Islands (excluding Guam) had opted for status as a self-governing commonwealth of the USA, and in 1982 the FSM and the Marshall Islands had signed compacts of free association which provided for internal sovereignty and US economic support in return for continuing US control of their defence and foreign policies.
Such an arrangement was incompatible with the nuclear prohibition clauses of Belau's Constitution, however, and despite numerous efforts to override the ban, the status of Belau remained unclear [see pp. 37251; 37885-86].
Previous US attempts to terminate the Trust Agreement had been foiled by the opposition of the Soviet Union which accused the administering power of having used its economic strength to force the territories into accepting the compacts.
Although the USA had been successful in persuading the UN Trusteeship Council (where the Soviet Union had no power of veto) to declare the trusteeship terminated in 1986, little diplomatic recognition had been extended to the FSM or to the Marshall Islands, since the view was widely held that termination could become effective only with the approval of the Security Council.
EUROPE
SOVIET UNION
Developments in republics
Azerbaijan and Kirghizia: New formal names
The adoption of the name Republic of Azerbaijan (dropping the adjectives Soviet and Socialist) was proclaimed by a decree of the republic's President Ayaz Mutalibov reported on Dec. 1.
A new state flag was also adopted comprising blue, red and green horizontal bands with a white crescent and eight-pointed star in the red band.
Similarly, the name Republic of Kirghizia was proclaimed by the Kirghiz Supreme Soviet on Dec. 13.
Moldavia: Gorbachev decree on settling Gagauz and Russian separatism crises
President Mikhail Gorbachev issued a decree on Dec. 22 ordering normalization of the situation in Moldavia.
He threatened that if the Moldavian authorities did not notify him within 10 days of their implementation of measures to extricate Moldavia from its crisis of "inter-ethnic confrontation" he would take "necessary measures" in accordance with his newly enhanced presidential powers [see p. 37903].
Apparently fearing that direct rule might be imposed, the Moldavian Supreme Soviet voted on Dec. 30 to endorse the decree.
Leaders of the separatist Gagauz and Russian populations had already agreed to obey, subject to the Moldavians also doing so.
The decree ordered the Moldavian authorities to ensure the observance of USSR legislation in the republic.
It asked the Moldavian Supreme Soviet to review its August 1989 language law "in order to protect the interests of all nationalities" , and ordered it to adopt legislation ensuring equal rights for all citizens.
It demanded the repeal of a Nov. 2 resolution establishing a republican guard, and ordered Moldavia's government to disband all voluntary militias.
It declared invalid the Gagauz and Dnestr Russian independence declarations, and also a Moldavian resolution of June 23 concerning the illegality of Moldavia's 1940 annexation by the Soviet Union [see p. 37539].
The state of emergency in force since late October in the Gagauz-populated districts had been lifted on Dec. 6.
Georgia: State of emergency in South Ossetia — Communist Party independence
The autonomous oblast (region) of South Ossetian on Dec. 10 reaffirmed its September proclamation of independence and state sovereignty within the Soviet Union [for which see p. 37723].
In response the Georgian Supreme Soviet on the following day passed legislation stripping South Ossetia of its autonomy.
On Dec. 13 a clash between ethnic Georgian police officers and Ossete militants resulted in three of the Georgians and one Ossete being shot dead in the regional capital, Tskhinvali, whereupon the Georgian Supreme Soviet immediately introduced a state of emergency in Tskhinvali and South Ossetia's second town of Dzhava.
USSR Interior Ministry troops were drafted in to enforce it.
South Ossetia had witnessed intercommunal tensions escalating periodically into violence since the latter part of 1989 [see pp. 36979; 37044-45].
The Georgian Communist Party ended its 28th congress on Dec. 8 with the announcement that it was seceding from the CPSU.
The congress also affirmed the party's goal of securing Georgia's secession from the Soviet Union.
Congress delegates from South Ossetia and from the autonomous republic of Abkhazia boycotted the voting.
On Dec. 7 the congress elected Avtandil Margiani as party first secretary, replacing Givi Gumbaridze.
Armenia-Azerbaijan cross-border violence
Four Azerbaijani Interior Ministry troops and three Armenian guerrillas were killed in a gun battle at Martunashen, just inside Azerbaijan, on Dec. 4.
This brought the death toll from cross-border clashes since September to at least 18 [for August clashes see p. 37664].
In the disputed Nagorny Karabakh enclave three residents were killed in separate incidents on Dec. 1-2.
Byelorussia: new CP leader
The Byelorussian Communist Party on Dec. 12 elected as its first secretary Anatoly Malofeyev, who succeeded Yefrem Sokolov.
Uzbekistan: Violence in Namangan
A fight between Interior Ministry servicemen and a group of youths in the city of Namangan on the evening of Dec. 2 escalated into a pitched battle and rioting.
Five servicemen and three civilians were killed, and over 50 servicemen and police officers and an undisclosed number of civilians injured.
According to the official Tass news agency six servicemen, part of the contingent stationed in east Uzbekistan since the outbreak of violence between Uzbeks and Kirghiz in June [see pp. 37540-41; 37618], were returning from leave to rejoin their unit when the fight broke out on a bus.
Members of a crowd which gathered around the bus joined in, and four of the soldiers were beaten to death.
The soldiers' unit commander went to the scene with a group of unarmed subordinates, but upon being confronted by a stone-throwing mob numbering around 3,000 people he called in armed reinforcements which apparently used batons and firearms to put down the riot.
On Dec. 4 a crowd stormed the police station and released all those people detained in connection with the Dec. 2 violence; calm was not fully restored in Namangan until Dec. 5.
Lithuania: Renaming of independent Communist Party
One year on from its declaration of independence from the CPSU [see pp. 37128-29], the Lithuanian Communist Party (LCP) reorganized itself as the Lithuanian Democratic Labour Party at an extraordinary congress on Dec. 8-9.
Outgoing LCP first secretary and Lithuanian Deputy Premier Algirdas Brazauskas was elected chair of the reorganized party, which proclaimed itself a "moderate, left-of-centre parliamentary party of social-democratic inclination" .
EUROPE
SOVIET UNION-UNITED STATES
Shevardnadze meetings with Baker and Bush — Announcement of US aid
Talks in Houston, Texas, on Dec. 10-12, between United States Secretary of State James Baker and his Soviet counterpart, Foreign Minister Eduard Shevardnazde [for whose subsequent resignation see p. 37903], were dominated by events in the Middle East, but also covered disarmament issues and regional conflict in Afghanistan and Angola.
On the Gulf crisis, Baker urged the deployment of a token Soviet military contingent as part of the multinational force.
US officials would not provide details of Shevardnadze's response, but Soviet sources indicated that he had refused, claiming that Soviet public opinion would be against such a deployment.
A joint statement on Dec. 12 announced "good progress" on the completion of a strategic arms reduction treaty (START)[see also p. 37518], and expressed the hope that a treaty would be ready for signing during a Bush-Gorbachev summit meeting, scheduled for Feb. 11-13, 1991.
Regarding the Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe (CFE)[see p. 37838], a Soviet Foreign Ministry statement on Dec. 21 disclosed that Baker and Shevardnadze had discussed the dispute surrounding "the accuracy of data on the number of weapons and military equipment" supplied by the Soviet Union.
The two sides also exchanged the documents on the ratification of two bilateral treaties limiting underground nuclear tests, signed in July 1974 and May 1976 [see pp. 26614-15; 27813-14]and ratified in September and October 1990 [see p. 37796].
On Afghanistan, the Guardian of Dec. 13 quoted Shevardnadze as saying: "We succeeded in coming close to an agreement on a very major provision in Afghanistan.
We, the Soviet Union and the USA, support the idea of free elections and the formation of a transitional body that would supervise those free elections.
We also support ceasefire and a cut in arms deliveries.
As to exact date, that is still a subject for further consideration."
According to the Washington Post of Dec. 12, US officials had suggested that obstacles to an accord centred on differences concerning the precise nature of the "transitional body" , and the reluctance of mujaheddin groups to join in any arrangement.
Baker and Shevardnadze also examined progress on, and expressed support for, the talks mediated by Portugal aimed at settling the conflict in Angola [see pp. 37643; 37702; 37842; 37910].
A joint statement on Dec. 12 announced the opening of a Soviet consulate general in New York and a US consulate general in Kiev.
Shevardnadze-Bush meeting
Shevardnadze travelled from Houston to Washington, where he met President Bush on Dec. 12.
Bush said afterwards that the USA had agreed to a package of trade credits and food and medical assistance for the Soviet Union.
He also announced a special waiver of the 1974 Jackson-Vanik Amendment (which had restricted US-Soviet trade because of Soviet emigration limits — see pp. 26850-51) in order to allow the Soviet Union to import US food on easy credit terms.
Bush confirmed that the USA would recommend special status for the Soviet Union with the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund (IMF), to help finance long-term reform, adding that "we want both economic and political reforms to continue because they are inextricably linked" .
Responding to Bush's announcement, Shevardnadze said that he appreciated US support for "the processes taking place in our country" and understood that Bush's decision to suspend the Jackson-Vanik Amendment had not been "simple" .
EUROPE
POLAND
Election of Walesa as President — Nomination of new Prime Minister
Lech Walesa, the leader of the Solidarity trade union and the country's most prominent opposition figure in the 1980s, gained a landslide victory in the second round of the presidential elections, held on Dec. 9.
He defeated the emigré businessman Stanislaw Tyminski, who had surprisingly come second in the first round of the elections held on Nov. 25 [see pp. 37840-41], by 10,622,696 votes (74.3 per cent) to 3,693,098 (25.7 per cent ).
As in the first round, the turnout at 55 per cent was relatively low.
Walesa had secured the backing of virtually all of the country's political and social organizations, including the Catholic Church.
The wing of Solidarity which had supported Tadeusz Mazowiecki, the outgoing Prime Minister, in the first round and which had been very critical of Walesa during the campaign, also urged — albeit with no great enthusiasm — that voters should support Walesa.
The momentum of the Tyminski campaign faltered amid further allegations about his credentials and and background.
He suffered over evidence that he had links with former communists and the secret police; over criticism of his ambiguous prescriptions for economic recovery; and over ridicule of his claims that he had had mystical experiences.
Even so, as in the first round, he retained considerable support in the rural areas and among social groups most threatened by the economic changes (such as farmers and miners) and disaffected young people.
As in the first round [see p. 37840], Walesa argued primarily for an acceleration of the government's reform programme in order to avert social unrest, and Tyminski called for even more radical free-market measures.
Tyminski declined to concede defeat immediately and claimed that people had been intimidated into voting for Walesa.
Although he said he would remain active in Polish politics, he left Poland for Canada on Dec. 12.
(He had previously given assurances that he would return to face charges of slandering Mazowiecki during the first round.)
Walesa's career to date
Walesa, born in September 1943, came from a poor peasant family in a village in central Poland.
He worked first as an electrician for a state machinery centre serving the local collective farms, then (from 1967) at the Lenin shipyard in Gdansk.
Following worker demonstrations in 1970 he was elected chairman of the workshop strike committee and spent several days in detention.
Throughout the 1970s he was involved in trade union activities in opposition to the communist regime, and as a result was dismissed from several jobs.
When the Lenin shipyard came out on strike in August 1980 Walesa joined and was instrumental in extending the action beyond the plant through the Inter-Enterprise Strike Committee (MKS), of which he became chairman.
On Aug. 31 he signed the agreement with the government which was to be the basis for the registration of the free trade union Solidarity.
In September he was elected chairman of a new National Co-ordinating Commission of Solidarity, set up by representatives of the regional organizations which had recently come into being.
Interned when the government declared martial law in December 1981, but released 11 months later, he took up employment at the shipyard in the spring of 1983 and in October of that year was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize.
He maintained contact with underground Solidarity and participated in the strikes of 1988, emerging as an officially recognized public figure again towards the end of that year.
He played a major role in the talks between the government and Solidarity leaders which in April 1989 paved the way for the dismantling of the communist regime.
With Solidarity once again legalized later that month, he again became its chairman.
Resignation as Solidarity chairman
Walesa announced his resignation as leader of Solidarity at a meeting of its national executive on Dec. 12.
Delegates elected the two current deputy chairman, Lech Kaczynski and Stefan Jurczak, as temporary co-chairmen pending the election of a new leader at a special congress.
Inauguration
Walesa was sworn in as President for a five-year term on Dec. 22.
In his inaugural address he said that "the evil era when the authorities of our country were appointed under pressure of foreigners or as the result of forced compromises is ending" .
The new era of the "Third Polish Republic" was beginning.
It was imperative that the Polish people "believe in themselves" and overcome "passivity and apathy" .
He promised that Poland would become "an element of the peaceful order in Europe" , would seek friendly relations with its neighbours, and would continue the dramatic market reforms launched in early 1990 [see p. 37194].
In a symbolic gesture, Walesa did not accept office from the outgoing President, Wojciech Jaruzelski, the communist who had declared martial law in 1981.
Jaruzelski was excluded from all the inaugural events.
Instead, the presidential insignia and other symbols of government were handed over by the president of the anti-communist Polish government which had been in exile in London since 1939, Ryszard Kaczorowski.
Under current constitutional arrangements Walesa became head of state and commander in chief of the armed forces, and held powers to nominate the prime minister, to veto certain parliamentary decisions, to dissolve parliament and to declare a state of emergency.
The powers of the president were expected to be redefined in the new constitution currently being drafted and scheduled to be approved in 1991.
Nomination of new Prime Minister
Soon after his election victory Walesa began discussions with several politicians on the formation of a new government.
The new President's favoured candidate for prime minister, Jan Olszewski, a lawyer who had defended anti-communist dissidents for years, was unable to agree terms with him, however.
On Dec. 29 Walesa nominated Jan Krzysztof Bielecki, a 39-year-old economist, for the post.
The Mazowiecki government had tendered its resignation after the first round of the presidential elections, but parliament had initially refused to accept it.
It finally did so on Dec. 14 and asked the government to continue in office in a caretaker capacity.
EUROPE
CZECHOSLOVAKIA
Agreement on division of powers
The Federal Assembly on Dec. 12 overwhelmingly approved new constitutional arrangements on the division of powers between the federal government and the country's two constituent republics, the Czech Lands and Slovakia.
Adopted by 237 votes to 24, the amendment to the Constitution, known as the power-sharing law, stipulated that the federal government would retain competence over foreign policy, defence and economic and fiscal strategy, while broad economic powers would be handed over to the two republics.
The vote resolved a constitutional crisis which had been brewing for some months and which had centred around Slovak demands for far-reaching autonomy in most areas of policy.
Since the collapse of communist rule in late 1989 pressure had mounted in Slovakia for an end to what was regarded as traditional domination from Prague and the Czech republic.
A series of tripartite meetings between the federal Prime Minister, Marian Calfa, and the Prime Ministers of the Czech and Slovak republics, Petr Pithart and Vladimir Meciar, had led to an initial agreement on Nov. 13.
Subsequently, however, disagreements emerged on the terms of the accord.
It was also reported that the Slovak government had threatened to proclaim the primacy of Slovak law over federal law, unless its demands for more substantial devolution were met.
A new compromise was then negotiated and put to parliament.
Particularly controversial was the Slovak government's demand for a division of control of the country's oil and gas pipelines from the Soviet Union, which raised fears in the Czech republic over the supply of vital energy resources.
On Dec. 11 agreement was reached to set up a single joint company to oversee the pipelines.
The two-day debate in parliament opened with an emergency speech by President Vaclav Havel, who declared that the country was in danger of breaking up under nationalist pressures from Slovakia.
Havel asked the legislature to grant him broader powers to defuse the constitutional crisis.
Although he did not specify the powers he had in mind, they were reported to include a right of veto over parliamentary decisions.
The President also urged the setting up of a constitutional court and the holding of referendums to settle future constitutional disputes.
His intervention, although criticized by Slovak leaders, was widely regarded as having facilitated a resolution of the devolution issue.
EUROPE
ROMANIA
Continuing protests
Strikes and protests continued throughout December, obliging the National Salvation Front (NSF) government to postpone the price liberalization programme which it had begun to implement in November [see p. 37866].
On Dec. 10 the Drivers' Union of Romania went on strike, demanding the resignation of President Ion Iliescu and Prime Minister Petre Roman.
Between 2,000 and 10,000 demonstrators held a rally at Aviators' Square in Bucharest (the capital) on the same day, despite a ban, and main roads into Bucharest and other cities were blocked.
After several meetings with trade union groups, the government agreed on Dec. 11 to postpone price liberalization until June 1, 1991.
The strike was called off on Dec. 12.
In Timisoara on Dec. 16, the first anniversary of the uprising in the city which led to Ceausescu's downfall [see pp. 37104-05], there was a demonstration by 5,000-8,000 people, including students and workers, at which Fr Laszlo Tokes, the ethnic Hungarian priest whose arrest had sparked off the events of 1989, called for a "second revolution, not like last year but a peaceful, Christian one" .
Demonstrations by tens of thousands continued in Timisoara and other towns over the next four days.
On Dec. 21 over 20,000 protested in Bucharest demanding the resignation of Iliescu and the government.
Opposition alliance
On Dec. 16 the National Convention for the Restoration of Democracy was founded in Bucharest.
The opposition grouping comprised six parliamentary parties: the Hungarian Democratic Union of Romania, the Liberal Party, the Peasants' Party, the Ecological Movement, the Ecological Party and the Socialist Democratic Party.
On the same day the recently formed Civic Alliance of extraparliamentary opposition groupings held its inaugural congress, electing as chair student leader Marian Munteanu [for his arrest and subsequent release see p. 37665].
Expulsion of former King
Former King Michael, 69, flew to Romania on Dec. 25 with his wife Anne and his daughter Sophia, but was expelled early on Dec. 26.
EUROPE
HUNGARY
HDF congress — Cabinet changes — Budget
Jozsef Antall, Premier of the centre-right government, was re-elected unopposed as Hungarian Democratic Forum (HDF) president at an HDF congress on Dec. 15-16.
Cszaba Kiss resigned as HDF vice-president, and a 20-member presidium was elected.
Antall, whose ill-health had forced him in October to leave the government leadership in the hands of Balazs Horváth, then Interior Minister, proposed Horváth as acting party vice-president.
Antall's Cabinet underwent a reshuffle on Dec. 20.
The changes were precipitated by economic policy disagreements and the resignations of Ferenc Rabar (Finance) and Gyorgy Matolcsy (head of the economic policy secretariat).
Horváth, criticized over the handling of the October fuel crisis [see pp. 37790-91], became Minister without portfolio responsible for relations with parliament, and for Hungarians abroad.
Peter Boross, hitherto Minister without portfolio, replaced him as Interior Minister.
New appointees were: as Finance Minister, Mihaly Kupa (an economist who, under the former "reform communist" regime, helped draft the first income tax system in Eastern Europe); and as Ministers without portfolio Ernö Pungor (head of the state office for technology development and of the national nuclear energy committee), Katalin Botos (hitherto Rabar's deputy in her post as State Secretary for Finance), and Andras Galszecsy (who took over from Boross responsibility for the state security services).
The new Cabinet members were sworn in on Dec. 21.
Rabar and Matolcsy, although both in favour of rapid and fundamental economic restructuring, had clashed over policy, with Matolcsy favouring "supply-side" policies and tax concessions inimical to Rabar's fiscal orthodoxy.
Accusing Matolcsy of disregarding the proper delineation of responsibilities, Rabar revealed on Nov. 28 that he had resigned, having first submitted his resignation on Oct. 10.
Matolcsy in turn resigned on Dec. 12, the day after the government presented its 1991 budget in detail to the National Assembly; his own more radical prescription had been published on Nov. 1, as a six-month programme which he claimed would "demand a single but huge sacrifice and throw open opportunities for breakthroughs" .
The 1991 budget, whose approval by end-1990 was the precondition for a crucial US$2,000 million IMF emergency lending package, was debated by the Assembly on Dec. 27-30 and eventually passed on Dec. 30 by 214 votes to 128.
The budget deficit was projected at nearly 79,000 million forint (US$1,308 million at the Dec. 31 exchange rate of $1.00=60.404 forint), even with expenditure held back to 931,690 million forint.
There would be deep cuts in industrial subsidies, price liberalization (with immediate increases of one-third for many household goods and a doubling of electricity prices) and accelerated privatization.
Avoiding Polish-style "shock therapy" , however, the budget covered expanded social services and higher welfare payments.
EUROPE
BULGARIA
Coalition government
The composition of a transitional coalition government was approved by the Grand National Assembly (GNA) on Dec. 20.
Led by Dimitur Popov, a Sofia municipal court judge without party affiliation, it included members of the former ruling Bulgarian Socialist Party (BSP), the Union of Democratic Forces (UDF), and the Bulgarian Agrarian Peoples Union (BZNS).
Dimitur Popov (unaffiliated) Chair Dimitur Ludzhev (UDF) Deputy Chair Aleksandur Tomov (BSP) Deputy Chair Viktor Vulkov (BZNS) Deputy Chair; Minister of Foreign Affairs Ivan Kostov (UDF) Finance Ivan Pushkarov (UDF) Industry, Trade and Services *Atanas Paparizov (BSP) Foreign Economic Relations Veselin Pavlov (BSP) Transport *Pencho Penev (BSP) Justice *Col. -Gen.
Yordan Mutafchiev (BSP) Defence Khristo Danov (unaffiliated) Internal Affairs Boris Spirov (BZNS) Agriculture Dimitur Vodenicharov (unaffiliated) Environment *Emiliya Maslarova (BSP)(f) Labour and Social Welfare *Ivan Chernozemski (BSP) Health *Matey Mateev (BSP) Education Georgi Fotev (unaffiliated) Science and Higher Education *Dimo Dimov (unaffiliated) Culture *Member of outgoing government.
Women are indicated by (f).
Bulgarian Council of Ministers
Popov, 63, had been nominated by President Zhelyu Zhelev with the endorsement of the participants in all-party negotiations on forming a government, and approved overwhelmingly by the GNA as Premier on Dec. 7.
Reportedly he was only the third choice for the post.
Ending of strikes
The strike since Nov. 29 by Members of the Confederation of Independent Bulgarian Trade Unions (CITUB) was called off on Dec. 6.
The student strike under way since early November was called off on Dec. 11.
Resignation of opposition leader
Petur Beron on Dec. 3 announced his intention to resign as chair of the UDF co-ordinating council (he had succeeded to that post after Zhelev had resigned it in August upon being elected President).
He had been exposed as a secret police informer under the ousted communist regime, although he insisted that his activities had been confined to reporting on foreign visitors to Sofia's Natural History Museum (where he had been a department head) and on his visits abroad for scientific research; he categorically denied that he had ever informed on dissidents.
Beron's resignation was accepted by the co-ordinating council on Dec. 6, and on Dec. 11 Filip Dimitrov of the Green Party was elected as the new UDF chair.
A main source of the original allegations against Beron had been Konstantin Trenchev, chair of the UDF-affiliated Podkrepa trade union.
Beron on Dec. 4 described himself as victim of a plot by his political opponents, including erstwhile colleagues in the opposition, thereby fuelling rumours that Trenchev and other militant anti-socialists had retaliated against Beron for having taken the UDF into negotiations on a coalition government.
Indictment of Zhivkov
Bulgaria's former communist leader Todor Zhivkov and his second-in-command Milko Balev were indicted on Dec. 7 on charges of "especially gross embezzlement" .
The charges against Zhivkov featured misappropriation of 26,500,000 leva (about US$9,000,000) between 1962 and 1989.
EUROPE
YUGOSLAVIA
Multiparty elections in four republics
The process of free elections for republican assemblies, begun in Slovenia and Croatia in April 1990, was completed with elections in Yugoslavia's four other constituent republics in November-December.
The way was now clear for talks between the republics on a new federal or confederal arrangement for Yugoslavia.
However, these latest elections confirmed the existing schism between republics: the ruling communists were rejected in favour of nationalist parties in Bosnia-Hercegovina and Macedonia (as in Slovenia and Croatia in April), but in Serbia (with over 40 per cent of the country's population) and Montenegro the communists were returned to power with huge majorities.
Bosnia-Hercegovina
In the central republic of Bosnia-Hercegovina elections were held in three rounds on Nov. 18, Dec. 2 and Dec. 9 for a reorganized 240-seat bicameral Assembly.
In a result reflecting both the republic's ethnic diversity and a resounding rejection of the ruling Bosnia-Hercegovina League of Communists, the vast majority of seats went to the three main nationalist parties separately appealing to the Moslem, Serb and Croat populations.
Between them these parties also took all seven seats in the Bosnia-Hercegovina state Presidency, which was directly elected in separate voting on Nov. 18.
The Party of Democratic Action (SDA — the main Moslem party) won 86 seats, the Serbian Democratic Party (SDS) 72 seats, and the Croatian Democratic Union (HDZ — an affiliate of the party in power since May in neighbouring Croatia) 44 seats.
The League of Communists won only 19 seats (five of those in coalition with the Socialist Alliance, which also won one seat on its own), and the Alliance of Reform Forces (Federal Premier Ante Markovic's new pan-Yugoslav party) won 13 seats.
Four other parties shared the remaining five seats.
In a power-sharing deal hailed by some commentators as a model for Yugoslavia's future, the three nationalist parties formed a coalition administration.
It was announced on Dec. 20 that Alija Izetbegovic of the SDA would be President of the Presidency, Jure Pelivan of the HDZ would be Prime Minister, and Momcilo Krajisnik of the SDS would be President (Speaker) of the Assembly.
Macedonia
In the southern republic of Macedonia, voting for a newly reorganized 120-seat unicameral Assembly on Nov. 11, Nov. 25 and Dec. 9 produced a hung parliament.
The nationalist Internal Macedonian Revolutionary Organization — Democratic Party for Macedonian National Unity emerged as the largest party with 37 seats, followed by the Macedonian League of Communists — Party for Democratic Change with 31 seats, the Party for Democratic Prosperity and the National Democratic Party (both representing the Albanian minority) which together won 25 seats, and the Alliance of Reform Forces with 18 seats.
The remainder went to the Socialist Party (four seats), the Party of Yugoslavs (one) and independents (three); one seat remained vacant.
The election campaign was marred by racial tensions between the majority Macedonians and the Albanians, who constituted over one-third of Macedonia's 1,900,000 population and were concentrated in the west of the republic.
These tensions were heightened by allegations made after the first-round most vocally by Macedonian nationalists that Albanians had perpetrated a massive multiple voting fraud.
Irregularities did indeed force the annulment of first-round results in 33 constituencies, albeit not all in Albanian populated areas.
Montenegro
In Montenegro, the smallest republic, the elections to a new 125-seat Assembly were held on Dec. 9 and 16.
The Montenegrin League of Communists won convincingly with 83 seats, followed by the Alliance of Reform Forces with 17, the Democratic Coalition of Moslems and Albanians with 13, and the National Party with 12.
In a separate presidential election Momir Bulatovic of the Montenegrin LC defeated Ljubisa Stankovic of the Alliance of Reform Forces in a second-round run off on Dec. 23, having failed to win an absolute majority in a three-candidate first round contest on Dec. 9.
Serbia
The ruling Socialist Party (SPS — the renamed League of Communists in the republic) took 194 of the 250 seats in the Serbian Assembly as a result of elections on Dec. 9 and 23.
In a separate presidential election on Dec. 9 the Socialist Party leader and incumbent Serbian Presidency President Slobodan Milosevic won with 65 per cent of the vote, defeating 30 other candidates.
A strong challenge anticipated from the fiercely nationalist and right-wing Serbian Renaissance Movement (SP0) failed to materialize: SPO leader Vuk Draskovic took only 20 per cent of the vote to come second in the presidential election, while his party took only 19 seats in the Assembly (after winning 13 seats in the first round it fought the second round in coalition with other opposition parties).
The remaining Assembly seats went to the Democratic Community of Vojvodina Hungarians (eight), independents (eight), the Democratic Party (seven), the Party of Democratic Action (three), the Alliance of Reform Forces of Vojvodina (two), the Party of Serbian Peasants' Union (two), and to seven other parties taking one seat each.
No parties representing the Albanian population concentrated in the province of Kosovo had been allowed to participate in the election, prompting an overwhelming boycott by Albanians, who constituted over 85 per cent of voters in Kosovo.
The election campaign saw the SPS and SPO vying with one another in nationalist rhetoric.
Milosevic conjured up a vision of a Serbia surrounded by enemies but standing as guardian of a strong Yugoslav union.
His party was bolstered by public endorsement by the Army, as expressed by Federal National Defence Secretary Col.-Gen.
Veljko Kadijevic.
Draskovic's election promises included rehabilitation of wartime chetnik guerrilla leader Draza Mihailovic, and a referendum on restoring the monarchy, and he accused the SPS of wanting to make Serbia Europe's last "Bolshevik ghetto" .
However, the SPO's electoral prospects apparently had been damaged by Draskovic's earlier calls, much toned down during the campaign, for redrawing Serbia's borders to include parts of Bosnia-Hercegovina and Croatia: many voters were frightened away by what sounded like a call for civil war.
Neither party offered a workable plan to rescue Serbia's crumbling economy, but the SPS attracted strong workers' support by promising continued full employment.
The SPO on Dec. 9 alleged widespread irregularities, including the opening of polling stations outside the proper hours, doctoring of electoral lists, and continued canvassing by SPS activists after the official end of the campaign.
Moreover, journalists from Belgrade Television on Dec. 9 complained of biased reporting and manipulation of broadcasting schedules in favour of the SPS.
A representative of an independent observers' group comprising United States and Canadian citizens of Serbian extraction and led by US congresswoman Helen Delich Bentley told a press conference on Dec. 26 that it had found irregularities which would have rendered the elections illegal in the West.
Slovenia independence referendum
Slovenia on Dec. 23 held a referendum on secession from Yugoslavia.
The turnout was 93.5 per cent of the 1,500,000 eligible voters, of whom 94.6 per cent voted in favour of mandating the republican government to declare "an independent and sovereign state" if no agreement on restructuring Yugoslavia was reached within six months by the republics.
Called on the initiative of the ruling DEMOS coalition and approved almost unanimously by the republican Assembly on Dec. 6, the referendum had gone ahead in the face of claims by the federal authorities that it was unconstitutional, and despite threats of economic sanctions.
New Croatian constitution
The Croatian Assembly on Dec. 21 promulgated a new constitution for the republic.
It proclaimed Croatia's sovereignty (extending to control over its own armed forces, diplomatic relations and international agreements) and enshrined its right to secede from Yugoslavia.
Other provisions included giving Croatia's President broad powers including the supreme command of the armed forces and the right to dissolve parliament and to appoint or dismiss the government.
The Assembly session was boycotted by ethnic Serbian deputies.
EUROPE
ALBANIA
Unrest — Foundation of opposition party — Government and party changes
The demand for political and economic reform intensified in Albania in December.
Mass protests led by students and workers in Tirana, the capital, on Dec. 9, quickly spread to all main cities, including the northern city of Shkodër, the port of Durrës and the industrial centre of Elbasan.
Pro-democracy demonstrators demanded an end to one-party rule, the holding of multiparty elections, and major changes in the country's economic structure.
The government, which had responded to earlier demands for change with cautious constitutional reforms in November [see p. 37864], responded to the demonstrations by announcing on Dec. 11 that the formation of independent political parties would be allowed.
President Ramiz Alia also on Dec. 11 announced the removal of five well-known opponents of reform from the 11-member politburo of the ruling communist Party of Labour (PLA), and instructed the Prime Minister, Adil Carcani, to prepare a government reshuffle [see below].
At the same time the government reiterated that it would not tolerate "criminal acts" .
Troops and tanks were sent in to restore order a week after the first demonstrations in Tirana.
Some 157 demonstrators were subsequently convicted of a range of offences and were sentenced to up to 20 years' imprisonment.
Observers noted that the government appeared to have adopted a dual "soft-hard" approach, attempting to maintain strict control over the country, including the political system, the media and the economy, while giving some ground to calls for change.
Formation of opposition party
On Dec. 12 intellectuals and students in Tirana announced the formation of the country's first opposition party in 46 years, the Democratic Party.
A week later parliament formally adopted a decree permitting the establishment of political parties, and the party was registered the following day.
Its leaders called for a postponement of the multiparty elections scheduled for Feb. 10, 1991, on the grounds that they would not have sufficient time to organize a campaign, but this demand was immediately rejected by the government.
The Democratic Party subsequently also complained that it was being denied access to the state-controlled media.
In one concession by the government on Dec. 28, it was given permission to publish its own newspaper, Rilindja Demokratika.
In further indications of a relaxation of one-party rule, the country's only trade union federation, the Central Council of Albanian Trade Unions (KQBPS), on Dec. 23 announced its intention to act independently in future and to re-form itself as a "pluralist association" .
Also on Dec. 23, leading intellectuals set up the first independent human rights monitoring group, the Forum for the Defence of Human Rights, which set itself the goal of the release of all political prisoners.
In a symbolic move, the government ordered the removal of the statue of Stalin from Tirana's main square on Dec. 22.
Government and party changes
On Dec. 20, Nexhmije Hoxha, the widow of Enver Hoxha (the country's ruler from 1944 until his death in 1985) and an opponent of change, was removed as president of the Democratic Front, the communist-dominated political umbrella organization, and was replaced by Carcani.
On Dec. 23 Alia announced a reshuffle of key economic portfolios in an effort to tackle the country's economic crisis.
Qemal Disha was appointed Finance Minister and Fatos Nano, a young reformist economist, was made General Secretary of the Council of Ministers, taking over from Andrea Nako and Niko Gjyzari respectively.
In other changes, the Chairman of the State Control Commission (in charge of the security police), Simon Stefani, was replaced by Ali Kaza; and the Minister of Transport, Hajredin Celiku, was replaced by Sakvador Franja.
All the dismissed ministers were considered anti-reform hardliners.
At a special conference of the PPS on Dec. 26, convened to draft the party's election manifesto, Alia gave a keynote speech in which he admitted that the party needed "fresh thought" and "a new concept to realize its socialist goal" , but asserted that it would not "abandon its Marxist ideology" .
EUROPE
DENMARK
Early general election — New centre-right coalition
An early general election, held on Dec. 12, brought significant gains for the opposition Social Democratic Party (SD) and losses for two of the three parties in the centre-right minority coalition.
The SD made gains of 7.5 per cent and 14 seats, while the Conservative People's Party (Con.) and Radical Liberals (Rad.
Lib.) lost 3.3 per cent and five seats and 2.1 per cent and three seats respectively.
However, the overall left-right balance within the Folketing remained virtually unaltered since the gains by the SD were mostly at the expense of the Socialist People's Party (SF) on the left, and the losses of the coalition parties were balanced by gains of 4.0 per cent and seven seats by the Liberals (Venstre — Lib.).
The turnout was 81.4 per cent.
Thirteen parties fielded candidates, but only the eight represented in the outgoing parliament secured the minimum 2 per cent of the vote required for representation.
The Prime Minister, Poul Schlüter, had called the election on Nov. 22 [see p. 37868]after his minority coalition had failed to reach agreement with the Social Democrats over the 1991 budget and other economic measures.
On the strength of his party's advance the Social Democrat leader, Svend Auken, called for Schlüter's resignation and the formation of a new centre-left coalition.
Schlüter responded, however, that the election result did not signify a vote of no confidence in his government, and he vowed to renew the coalition.
Schlüter had initially expressed a desire to expand the coalition to include all five traditional centre-right parties, but the Radical Liberals refused to rejoin the coalition and the smaller Centre Democrats (CD) and Christian People's Party (KrF) also declined to join, although all three pledged their external support.
On Dec. 17 Schlüter announced the formation of a new two-party minority coalition of his own Conservatives and the Liberals, which commanded the direct support of only 59 members of the 179-member Folketing (not an unusual situation in Danish politics).
The new Cabinet contained 19 members, 10 Conservatives and nine Liberals.
The only change among the major portfolios was the appointment of Anders Fogh Rasmussen, hitherto Fiscal Affairs Minister, as Minister of Economic Affairs.
Early elections in Greenland
Jonathan Motzfeldt, the Prime Minister of Greenland, an internally self-governing part of Denmark, on Dec. 10 called early elections in the territory, for March 1991, after opposition members had claimed to have evidence that Cabinet ministers had misused public funds on entertaining party members.
Percentage Seats* of votes 1990 1988 1990 1988 SD 37.4 29.9 69 55 Con. 16.0 19.3 30 35 Lib. 15.8 11.8 29 22 SF 8.3 13.0 15 24 Progress Party (FP) 6.4 9.0 12 16 CD 5.1 4.7 9 9 Rad.
Lib. 3.5 5.6 7 10 KrF 2.3 2.0 4 4 Others 5.2 4.7 0 0 *The two seats allotted to the Faroe Islands went to the People's Party (Fkfl) and the Union Party (Sb), and the two seats allotted to Greenland went to Feeling of Community (Atassut) and Forward (Siumut).
Poul Schlüter (Con.)
Prime Minister Uffe Elleman-Jensen (Lib.)
Foreign Affairs Henning Dyremose (Con.)
Finance **Anders Fogh Rasmussen (Lib.)
Economic Affairs Knud Enggaard (Lib.)
Defence Bertel Haarder (Lib.)
Education and Research Hans Engell (Con.)
Justice Thor Pedersen (Lib.)
Interior; Nordic Affairs Laurits Ternaes (Lib.)
Agriculture Torben Rechendorff (Con.)
Ecclesiastical Affair; Communications *Svend Erik Hovmand (Lib.)
Housing Kent Kirk (Con.)
Fisheries Knud Erik Kirkegaard (Con.)
Labour Anne Birgitte Lundholt (Con.)
Industry Ester Larsen (Lib.)
Health *Kaj Ikast (Con.)
Transport *Per Sig Moeller (Con.)
Environment *Else Winther Andersen (Lib.)
Social Affairs *Grethe Rostboell (Con.)
Culture *New appointment.
**Altered portfolio.
Election results
(metropolitan Denmark)
New Danish Cabinet
EUROPE
SWEDEN
Parliamentary approval for EC application — Emergency austerity package
On Dec. 20 the Riksdag approved the Social Democratic government's plans to apply in 1991 for membership of the European Communities (EC).
In what was widely regarded as the most significant foreign policy decision since 1945, the Riksdag vote was 198 to 105 with 26 abstentions.
Only the Left Party (VP) and the Green Party (MdG) were firmly opposed to joining the EC, but several individual members of other parties also voted against the motion.
The government argued that the country's economic crisis [see below], coupled with the danger of being locked out of the future EC single market and the collapse of communist rule in eastern Europe, made the major shift in policy in favour of EC membership imperative.
The motion did, however, contain a number of conditions for membership, the principal such condition being that Sweden should be allowed to maintain its traditional policy of neutrality.
The government, which did not expect Sweden to gain admission to the EC before 1994, had previously expressed interest in framing a joint application with Norway and Finland.
Economic developments
On Dec. 14 the Riksdag approved a major austerity package of spending cuts in social services, defence and subsidies, and job cuts in the public sector.
The package, originally proposed on Oct. 26, included a reduction in government spending of 15,000 million kronor (US$2,650 million) over three years and a reduction of 18,000 civil service jobs, or 10 per cent of the total, over the same period.
The cuts would include reductions in:(i) sickness benefits, with measures to discourage long-term sick-leave;(ii) the defence and foreign-affairs budget; and (iii) government subsidies for industry, agriculture, communications, education and the railways.
Prime Minister Ingvar Carlsson said that these "forceful steps" were necessary to maintain international credibility, restore business confidence, and deal with growing budget and balance-of-payments deficits, inflation and the weakness of the krona.
EUROPE
EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
Agreements on VAT, excise duties and money-laundering
The European Communities (EC) Council of (Finance) Ministers on Dec. 17 agreed a new system of collecting value added tax (VAT) after 1992.
Goods would continue to be taxed in the country of consumption so that revenue was little affected.
Instead of filling out customs forms companies would be required to submit information on a quarterly basis listing their intra-EC exports, broken down by customer, and tax authorities would co-operate to prevent fraud when VAT rates differed among member states.
A new excise system was designed to replace border controls.
Goods subject to excise duty, such as tobacco and alcohol, could move freely between bonded warehouses in the different member states.
A commitment was also made to reach agreement by March 1991 on phasing out duty-free allowances.
At the same meeting ministers agreed in principle to make the laundering of money made from drug trafficking a criminal offence by 1993.
This agreement, in the form of a declaration by governments to change their criminal law, would mean placing an obligation on banks to check the identity of any customer carrying out a one-off transaction worth more than 15,000 European currency units (ECU1.00=US$1.37255 as at Dec. 17, 1990), and to report any suspicious dealings to the national authorities.
[For November 1990 Council of Europe convention on money laundering see p. 37870.]
Fishing ban
The Council of (Agriculture) Ministers on Dec. 20 agreed measures to try to conserve sharply declining stocks of fish, particularly cod and haddock, in the North Sea.
As well as establishing reduced overall catch quotas for 1991 (93,570 tonnes for cod, 40,500 for haddock), they agreed that fishing boats over 100 tonnes in the North Sea and also along the west coast of Scotland, more than 40 per cent of whose catch consisted of cod and haddock, should be obliged to remain in port for eight consecutive days each month from Feb. 1 to Dec. 31, 1991.
No decision was taken either on closer monitoring of catch quotas or on increasing the fishing net mesh size to allow immature fish to escape, as had been urged by the European Commission, but a new deadline of July 1, 1991, was established for reaching such decisions.
EUROPE
FRANCE
Cabinet appointment — Resignation of Noir from RPR
On Dec. 19 Michel Delebarre was appointed to the new post of Minister of State for Towns, with the task of combating growing social problems in urban areas [for October rioting see p. 37869].
He was replaced as Minister of Equipment and Housing, Transport and the Sea by Louis Besson, hitherto Minister-Delegate of Housing.
Michel Noir, the mayor of Lyon, resigned on Dec. 6 from the Rally for the Republic (RPR), the main opposition party, and gave up his seat as a deputy.
Noir had belonged to the Renovator faction of the RPR which since 1989 had been challenging the existing structure of the right [see pp. 37262; 37684; 36706].
He described France as "sick" due to outmoded political structures, political in-fighting and the conduct of its leaders, and he urged others who were similarly dissatisfied to resign and provoke a general election.
EUROPE
AUSTRIA
Formation of grand coalition
On Dec. 17 Franz Vranitzky was sworn in as Federal Chancellor at the head of a "grand coalition" of his own Socialist Party (SPÖ) and the centre-right People's Party (ÖVP).
Vranitzky had led a similar coalition prior to the October 1990 general election [see p. 37785], in which the ÖVP had registered its worst result since 1945.
The subsequent lengthy coalition negotiations had revealed the preference of some ÖVP members for a coalition with the right-wing Liberal Party (FPÖ), which together had formed the government in 1983-87.
Franz Vranitzky (SPÖ) Federal Chancellor Josef Riegler (ÖVP) Vice-Chancellor; Federalism; Administrative Reform in the Federal Chancellery **Johanna Dohnal (SPÖ)(f) Women's Affairs in the Federal Chancellery Aloïs Mock (ÖVP) Foreign Affairs Wolfgang Schüssel (ÖVP) Economic Affairs Josef Hesoun (SPÖ) Employment and Social Affairs Ferdinand Lacina (SPÖ) Finance **Harald Ettl (SPÖ) Health, Consumer Protection and Sport Franz Löschnak (SPÖ) Interior *Nikolaus Michalek (Independent) Justice *Werner Fasslabend (ÖVP) Defence Franz Fischler (ÖVP) Agriculture and Forestry Marilies Flemming (ÖVP)(f) Environment, Youth and Family Affairs *Rudolf Scholten (SPÖ) Education and Arts Erhard Busek (ÖVP) Science and Research *Peter Jankowitsch (SPÖ) Minister at Chancellery (European Questions, Integration and Development Co-operation) *Peter Kostelka (SPÖ) Minister at Chancellery (Public Service) Günter Stummvoll (ÖVP) Minister of State to Finance Minister *Maria Fekter (ÖVP)(f) Minister of State to Economic Affairs Minister (Construction and Tourism) *New appointment.
**Altered responsibilities.
Women are indicated by (f).
Austrian Cabinet
EUROPE
SPAIN
ETA attacks
Six policemen were killed and two were severely injured on Dec. 8 when the Basque separatist organization ETA detonated a car bomb alongside a minibus in the Catalonian town of Sabadell, about 20 km north of the city of Barcelona.
ETA had last been active in Catalonia in 1987.
Security officials feared that it was re-establishing itself in the region, possibly with the help of the small Catalan secessionist group Terra Lliure.
Documents discovered on a leading ETA member Carmen Guisasola, arrested in Bayonne, south-west France on Nov. 17, allegedly indicated that the 25th Olympiad, to be staged in Barcelona in 1992, was to be a priority target for ETA.
According to the Ministry of the Interior the same documents also contained orders from the ETA leadership to all of its commando cells to stage a general offensive.
In further car bomb attacks on Dec. 14 attributed to ETA, a policeman was killed in the town of Amorebieta, east of Bilbao in the province of Viscaya, and another seriously injured in San Sebastián.
A car bomb injured 12 people, five of them soldiers, in Valencia on Dec. 20, the first victims of an ETA attack in the city.
EUROPE
GREECE
Reversal of amnesty
A decision announced by the government on Dec. 28 to free from prison a dozen former officers connected with the 1967-74 military dictatorship, was revoked at an emergency Cabinet meeting on Dec. 30.
The announcement had brought fierce protests not only from the left (many of whose leaders had been imprisoned or exiled under the dictatorship) but also from within the ruling New Democracy party.
The former officers in question were serving sentences of 20 years or more, imposed in 1975.
They included George Papadopoulos, Stylianos Pattakos and Nikolaos Makarezos, the three leading members of the original military junta which was notorious for its brutal treatment of opponents.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
GULF CRISIS
Release of hostages — Cancellation of proposed US-Iraqi talks — EC position — Arab initiatives
In an announcement on Dec. 6 President Saddam Hussein ordered the release of all Western hostages held in Iraq and Kuwait [see pp. 37638-39].
The Washington Post of Dec. 11, citing US State Department sources, gave the total numbers as 1,175 Britons, about 900 US nationals, 197 Japanese and 180 Italians, in addition to 3,232 Soviet nationals.
(The newspaper gave no figures for the number of Australian, Canadian, Danish, Irish, Dutch and South Korean nationals known also to have been held.)
The Independent of Dec. 7 estimated that 3,400 foreign nationals were being held in Kuwait and Iraq, including 580 detained at strategic military and civilian sites as part of Iraq's now abandoned "human shield" policy [for which see p. 37697].
Saddam Hussein had urged the Iraqi parliament "to adopt your just decision to lift the travel ban on all foreigners and to restore to all of them the freedom to travel, apologizing to those who may have been harmed, and seeking forgiveness from God" .
He added that holding the hostages had "given a great service to the cause of peace" but that the time had come to take a final decision on this "humanitarian issue" .
In making his decision, he said, he had consulted with representatives from "Jordan, Yemen, Palestine, Sudan and the Arab Maghreb" and had been "encouraged" by "the decision of the Democratic Party in the US Senate and the European Parliament's invitation to our Foreign Minister for dialogue" .
The Guardian of Dec. 7 quoted "Middle East sources" to the effect that Yassir Arafat, chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), had played "a vital role" in impressing upon Saddam Hussein that "the liberation of the hostages would lead to a wider dialogue" .
Saddam Hussein's decision, in compliance with UN Resolutions 664, 667 and 674 [see pp. 37639; 37759], was cautiously welcomed by US President Bush, who emphasized, however, that "no single hostage should have been taken in the first place" .
The Italian Foreign Minister, Gianni De Michelis, speaking in his current capacity as President of the Council of Ministers of the European Communities (EC), said that "I hope this is the first step towards complete compliance with UN resolutions" .
It was reported on Dec. 12 that the airlift of foreign nationals from Kuwait and Iraq was almost complete and that all foreign nationals who wished to leave would be able to do so before Christmas.
However, doubts still remained about the safety of an estimated 1,000 foreign nationals who had chosen to remain in Iraq and Kuwait.
Le Monde reported on Dec. 20 that the Iraqi Industry and Military Industries Minister (and acting Oil Minister), Brig. -Gen.
Hussein Kamil, had confirmed that his government had also authorized the departure of all Soviet experts, regardless of whether or not their contracts had expired.
On Dec. 4 an announcement by Iraq's Revolutionary Command Council had said that all 3,232 Soviet nationals would be allowed to leave Iraq.
However, on Dec. 17 a spokesman at the Soviet embassy in Baghdad said that Iraq had refused exit visas to Soviet workers whose contracts had not yet expired.
Cancellation of talks between USA and Iraq
On Dec. 18 Bush confirmed that talks between himself and the Iraqi Foreign Minister, Tariq Aziz, scheduled to be held in Washington between Dec. 20 and Jan. 3, had been cancelled following disagreements over the precise date of the meeting.
Bush emphasized that he still hoped to avert war, and that a meeting could still go ahead in Baghdad between US Secretary of State James Baker and President Saddam Hussein a few days after Jan. 3.
Bush's statement came after weeks of speculation about the timing and prospects for such talks, originally proposed by Bush on Nov. 30 as "going the extra mile for peace" [see p. 37871].
As regards timing, Bush had wanted to hold his talks with Aziz in Washington "at a mutually convenient time during the latter part of the week of Dec. 10" .
A tentative date of Dec. 17 was subsequently set.
The US side rejected, however, the Iraqis' Dec. 8 proposal to hold the Baker-Saddam meeting on Jan. 12, on the grounds that this date was too close to the Jan. 15 UN deadline for the withdrawal of all Iraqi forces from Kuwait [see p. 37870].
On Dec. 15 the Iraqi News Agency (INA) announced that Iraq had called off the Bush-Aziz talks.
The Iraqis argued that if the USA were to set the date for the Bush-Aziz meeting, Iraq should have been allowed to choose the date of the Baker-Saddam meeting.
As regards the content of the proposed talks, the Iraqi Revolutionary Command Council communiqué on Dec. 1, in which Iraq originally accepted Bush's offer of talks, stressed that "Iraq will endeavour to follow up and broaden any window for dialogue rather than the language of threats" .
The communiqué added, however, that the Council would continue to adhere to Saddam Hussein's Aug. 12 declaration which linked any withdrawal of Iraqi forces from Kuwait to a settlement of other conflicts in the Middle East [see p. 37635].
In an interview on French television on Dec. 2, Saddam Hussein said that "if this meeting is to be a true path to dialogue, then we are closer to peace,…but if this meeting is to be nothing more than a formal exhibition…then we are closer to war" .
On Dec. 19 he said in an interview on Turkish television: "We do not go to the United States to get directives from them.
If Bush is to repeat the UN resolutions to us, then there is no point in our going there."
EC position
On Dec. 4 EC foreign ministers met in Brussels.
They agreed to invite Tariq Aziz to Rome after his visit to Washington, for a meeting with De Michelis.
French Foreign Minister Roland Dumas said that it was "indispensable" to hold an international conference on the Middle East after the resolution of the Gulf crisis and that "a lot of countries were thinking that way, including the USA" .
Reports of the EC initiative suggested that Dumas as well the German Foreign Minister, Hans-Dietrich Genscher, had agreed to go to Iraq before the expiry of the Jan. 15 UN deadline.
On Dec. 18 EC Foreign Ministers, meeting again in Brussels, agreed that de Michelis should not meet Aziz unless the Bush-Aziz meeting had taken place.
It was understood that this concealed differences among EC partners, with France arguing for an EC-Iraq meeting irrespective of the position regarding US-Iraqi contacts, and Italy and Spain prepared to endorse a meeting with Tariq Aziz provided that an eventual date had been set for a Bush-Aziz meeting.
The UK Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd, however, said on Dec. 17 after a meeting of NATO foreign ministers [see pp. 37931]that "I don't think there is much to be said for an entirely separate meeting" .
At a meeting of the UN Security Council on Dec. 7, it was made clear that a prospective resolution calling for a Middle East peace conference would not achieve US endorsement.
Arab initiatives
Bush's offer for direct talks with Iraq led to the intensification of Arab initiatives to find a peaceful solution.
On Dec. 4 the Yemeni Vice-President, Ali Salem al-Bid, after a meeting with Saddam Hussein, called for an Arab summit to prevent war in the Gulf.
Yemen, which held the presidency of the UN Security Council in December [see pp. 37870-71], had proposed on Dec. 2, through its UN permanent representative Abdallah Saleh al-Ashtal, that attempts should be made to "clarify the positive consequences" , including the lifting of economic sanctions and the withdrawal of all foreign troops from the Gulf.
A communiqué issued after a meeting of Foreign Ministers from Egypt, Saudi Arabia and Syria in Cairo on Dec. 5 failed to mention the Bush offer and urged only that Iraq "respond to the initiatives seeking the implementation of the decisions of international legitimacy" .
On Dec. 9 King Hussein of Jordan, who had met Saddam Hussein on Dec. 4, put forward a peace plan based on the simultaneous settlement of the Iraq-Kuwait dispute and the Arab-Israeli conflict.
His proposals also called for an international peace conference on the Middle East.
There were reports on Dec. 11 that the Algerian President, Col. Chadli Bendjedid, who met Saddam Hussein on Dec. 12, had held secret meetings in an attempt to mediate between Iraqi, Saudi and Kuwaiti representatives.
These reports were denied by Kuwaiti and Iraqi spokesmen.
Reports on Dec. 17 suggested that Algerian proposals for the simultaneous withdrawal of US and Iraqi troops had encountered Saudi reluctance and growing Iraqi inflexibility.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
KUWAIT
Accusations of violations of human rights by Iraq
On Dec. 19 the UN General Assembly passed by 144 votes to one (Iraq) a resolution condemning Iraq for serious violations of human rights in Kuwait including torture, detention, summary execution and disappearances.
The human rights organization Amnesty International claimed in a report published the same day that thousands of Kuwaitis had been tortured, raped and killed since the Iraqi invasion on Aug. 2 and the ensuing occupation [see pp. 37631-41].
Some 6,000-7,000 Kuwaiti troops had been transferred to Iraq, it said, and thousands of people were held in Iraqi and Kuwaiti prisons, including children as young as 13.
The report listed details of 38 cases where torture had allegedly been carried out by Iraqis.
Most abuses had occurred within the first three months of the occupation, in response to protests against forced "Iraqization" .
Amnesty claimed to have "compelling evidence" confirming that Iraqi soldiers had looted incubators from three of the main hospitals in Kuwait City, thereby causing the deaths premature babies, the number of such deaths being given by the Kuwaiti Red Crescent Society as 300.
The Times of Dec. 11, however, had quoted an Icelandic doctor who had headed the intensive care unit at the Mubarak al-Kabir hospital, who described as "not true" the reports that Iraqi looting had contributed to the deaths of premature babies, but said that some babies had died "because of lack of staff" .
Kuwaiti sources cited in the International Herald Tribune of Dec. 17 suggested that at least 7,000 Kuwaitis had been killed and 25,000 arrested since the invasion.
However, the New York-based human rights group Middle East Watch was reported on Dec. 17 to have estimated the deaths at 1,000 and arrests at 5,000; its director, Andrew Whiteley, was quoted as saying that there was no wish to overstate human rights abuses in order to "whip up war fever" .
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
IRAQ
New Defence Minister — Formation of opposition front
In the second reshuffle in Iraq's military high command within four weeks [see also p. 37872]as announced by the Iraqi News Agency (INA) on Dec. 12, President Saddam Hussein had appointed Maj.-Gen.
Saadi Tu'ma Abbas al-Jaburi as Defence Minister.
According to INA, Jabiri's elderly predecessor Gen. Abdel-Jabbar Khalil Shanshal, appointed in 1989 [see p. 36671], had been promised that he would not be required to serve more than one year in office.
The new Defence Minister, understood to be a strong supporter of Saddam Hussein's stance on Kuwait, had been Inspector General of the armed forces and previously a deputy Chief of Staff, and had been decorated for his service in commanding the First Army Special Corps during the Iran-Iraq war.
Formation of opposition front
At a meeting on Dec. 27 in Damascus, the Syrian capital, agreement was reached between 17 opposition groups belonging to the Iraqi National Joint Action Committee on issuing a common programme calling for the overthrow of Saddam Hussein and the establishment of a democratic system.
The agreement, adopting a Kurdish proposal, brought to a formal end the long-standing differences especially between nationalist and Islamic opposition groups.
The manifesto condemned the invasion of Kuwait and called for the immediate withdrawal of Iraqi forces.
It supported the restoration of the pre-invasion Kuwaiti government and demanded that all foreign troops be withdrawn after the liberation of Kuwait.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
GULF CO-OPERATION COUNCIL
Summit meeting in Doha
Heads of Gulf states met in Doha, the capital of Qatar, on Dec. 22-24 for the 11th annual summit of the Gulf Co-operation Council (GCC — comprising Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia and the UAE).
Overshadowed by the Gulf crisis, the meeting noted that the multinational forces confronting Iraq "have come at the request of the GCC states and will leave the region when the GCC states request" .
They called for Iraq to withdraw unconditionally from Kuwait and to pay reparations for damage done, while declaring that the Palestinian question was the "first issue for the Arab world" and incorporating in an eight-point "Doha declaration" a clear expression of "complete support" and "absolute help" for the "historic uprising of the Palestinian people" .
The confrontation with Iraq was accompanied by a radical change in the climate of GCC relations with Iran, hitherto seen as the principal security threat but now being discussed as a possible participant in a wider regional security framework.
The summit communiqué "welcome[d] trends in Iran to improve and develop its relations with GCC member states" but noted that there would have to be "serious work to settle differences" .
The summit also resolved to create "a programme to support development efforts in the Arab and Islamic world" , by setting up a fund expected to total some US$15,000-20,000 million, with contributions to be set by Finance Ministers at a forthcoming meeting.
The 12th GCC summit was scheduled for December 1991 in Kuwait.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
PALESTINIAN AFFAIRS
UN Security Council resolution — Intifada
After weeks of delay, the UN Security Council unanimously adopted a resolution on Dec. 20 condemning Israeli conduct in the occupied territories.
It was the third time since the Temple Mount killings in October that the United States had declined to use its veto against a Security Council resolution harshly critical of Israel [see pp. 37759-60].
The Jerusalem Post of Dec. 29 pointed out that for first time the USA had backed a resolution in the Council (as opposed to the General Assembly) which referred to "all the Palestinian territories occupied by Israel since 1967, including Jerusalem" .
The USA also approved a separate, vaguely worded and non-binding preamble which called for an eventual Middle East peace conference.
Resolution 681, drafted by Finland, condemned Israel's recent decision to deport four Palestinians from the Gaza Strip [see below].
It also called on UN Secretary-General Javier Pérez de Cuéllar to "monitor" the situation in the occupied territories.
Previous Security Council efforts to send a mission to the territories to investigate the Temple Mount killings had been frustrated by the Israeli government's refusal to co-operate.
The resolution also backed Pérez de Cuéllar's earlier call for a meeting of the signatories of the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949 [see p. 37873].
The US administration, anxious not to be pushed into vetoing what it saw as an unacceptable draft resolution originally proposed by Cuba, Colombia, Malaysia and Yemen, had launched prolonged diplomatic efforts to secure this more acceptable formulation.
Publicly, Israeli officials criticized the resolution, but privately many declared it to be "tolerable" in that it did not recommend any concrete UN steps against Israel.
The low-key Israeli response to the resolution also reflected an improvement in Israeli-US relations following a meeting in Washington on Dec. 12 between US President George Bush and Israeli Prime Minister Itzhak Shamir [see p. 37929].
Palestinians
Progress of intifada — Continued campaign of "stabbings" — Proposed deportation of Hamas activists — Israeli attack on
The intifada in the Israeli-occupied territories entered its fourth year on Dec. 10.
As in previous years the Israeli security forces began imposing curfews in the West Bank and Gaza Strip during the days leading up to the anniversary.
Dec. 9 passed relatively peacefully, although one Palestinian was shot dead by the security forces in Gaza and a soldier died in a bomb explosion in Bethlehem.
Four Palestinians died and over 150 were injured during clashes with the Israeli security forces in the Gaza Strip on Dec. 29.
Curfews were imposed on the Strip and the area was declared a closed military zone.
Israeli troops killed four more Palestinians in clashes in the Gaza Strip and West Bank on Jan. 1, Fatah Day, the date Palestinians marked as the anniversary of the first al-Fatah military operation.
The wave of Arab knife attacks on Israelis in the aftermath of the Temple Mount massacre continued during December, prompting calls for the exclusion of Arab labourers and the resumption of mass deportations of Palestinians.
On Dec. 1 a Palestinian woman was shot dead by Israeli police after attacking two policemen in West Jerusalem with a knife.
The next day one Israeli died and three were wounded when a group of Arabs attacked passengers on a bus in the Tel Aviv district.
The bus was stormed by Israeli border police who killed one of the attackers and wounded two others.
Three Israeli factory workers were stabbed to death by members of the Islamic fundamentalist Hamas movement in the Tel Aviv suburb of Jaffa on Dec. 14.
On Dec. 15 the Israeli authorities ordered the expulsion of four middle-ranking members of Hamas from the Gaza Strip.
The government's deportation policy had been suspended in mid-1989 under strong pressure from the United States.
The Zionist Avengers, a previously unknown group, carried out an armed attack on a Palestinian family in the West Bank on Dec. 28.
Three members of the family were seriously wounded.
The attack occurred one day after three members of a Jewish guerrilla group, the Jewish Underground, had been released from prison after serving less than seven years of life sentences for murdering Palestinians [see also pp. 33190-91; 34010].
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
LEBANON
Implementation of greater Beirut security plan — Formation of new government
The regular Lebanese Army, under the command of Gen. Emile Lahud, began deploying throughout the whole of greater Beirut on Dec. 3 after various Lebanese militias had withdrawn from the area.
President Elias Hrawi had ordered the militias to leave greater Beirut (an area comprising a belt running roughly 25 km around the city, from the Kelb River in the north to the Damour River in the south) on Oct. 24, in order to allow the government to press ahead with its "Greater Beirut Security Plan" .
The implementation of the Syrian-backed strategy (itself part of the wider Taif 1989 accord — see p. 36986) had been fully set in motion on Oct. 13 when Syrian and Lebanese Army troops finally removed Gen. Michel Aoun from his East Beirut stronghold [see pp. 37792].
Withdrawal of militias from greater Beirut
President Hrawi had originally set a Nov. 19 deadline for the withdrawal of the militias.
The main Moslem militias had all withdrawn well before this deadline,(Druse) Progressive Socialist Party (PSP) fighters moving south to their Chouf mountain stronghold, and the rival Shia groups Amal and Hezbollah deploying even further south to the Iqlim al-Tuffah hills and other areas bordering Israel's self-declared "security zone" .
The main Maronite Christian militia, however, Samir Geaga's Lebanese Forces (LF), failed to meet Hrawi's deadline.
Geaga refused to order a full withdrawal from the Metn, the Maronite area adjacent to East Beirut, whilst rival pro-Syrian Christian militias remained in the area.
Geaga was particularly concerned about the presence of fighters loyal to his arch-rival, Elie Hobeika.
Units of Hobeika's "Executive Committee of the Lebanese Forces — The Promise" had accompanied Syrian troops into Christian territory during their rout of Aoun in mid-October.
Following Syrian intervention Hobeika started to hand over his positions to Geaga's fighters on Nov. 23, and by Dec. 3 the LF forces had completed their withdrawal from their Ashrafiyeh stronghold to the Maronite hinterland of Kesrouan, north of greater Beirut.
Israeli response to deployment of Moslem militias in southern Lebanon
The bolstering of the Syrian position in Lebanon following Aoun's removal, and the subsequent movement of armed Moslem militiamen towards the south, seriously alarmed the Israeli government.
The Israelis were further unsettled by attempts, unsuccessful as of late December, to begin deploying regular Lebanese Army units in the Iqlim al-Tuffah.
President Hrawi's efforts towards this end were boosted in early November when Syrian and Iranian officials brokered a fresh ceasefire and agreement between their rival Shia client groups, Amal and Hezbollah, respectively.
Israel responded to the developments in Lebanon aggressively.
During November it ordered ground forces over the "security zone" border on three occasions and in a clash on Nov. 27 on the edge of the zone five Israeli soldiers were killed by Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (PFLP) guerrillas.
Both the Israeli and the Lebanese governments made public statements pledging to maintain control of the key town of Jezzine, situated on the northernmost tip of the "security zone" .
posts
Appointment of Umar Karami as Prime Minister — Formation of new government — Refusal by Geaga and Saadah of government
In a further move to implement the Greater Beirut security plan Prime Minister Selim al-Hoss submitted the resignation of his Cabinet to President Hrawi on Dec. 19.
Hrawi asked Hoss to continue as Prime Minister in a caretaker capacity until a new government was formed.
The next day Hrawi invited Umar Karami, the Sunni Moslem Education Minister in the outgoing Hoss Cabinet, to form a new government.
Karami was the brother of former Prime Minister Rashid Karami, who was assassinated in 1987 [see pp. 35346-47].
Karami announced the composition of his new Cabinet on Dec. 24.
It originally included nine ministers of state without portfolio, each post corresponding to one of the nine main Lebanese militias.
However, Geaga rejected one of the posts of Minister of State, charging that the new body did not truly reflect the views of the Christian community.
George Sa'adah, Phalangist Party leader and Minister of Telecommunications and Posts in the outgoing Cabinet, also refused to enter the Karami Cabinet in protest at the alleged dominance of pro-Syrian ministers.
The Middle East Economic Digest of Jan. 11, 1991 reported that Sa'adah and Geaga had both been particularly angry at the appointment of pro-Syrians to the key posts of National Defence (Michel al-Murr) and Interior (Maj.-Gen.
Sami al-Khatib).
*Umar Karami Prime Minister Michel al-Murr Deputy Prime Minister; Minister of National Defence *Ali al Khalil Finance Faris Buwayz Foreign and Expatriate Affairs Maj.-Gen.
Sami al-Khatib Interior Khatchik Babikian Justice Jamil Kibbih Health and Social Affairs *Michel Sassin Labour (vacant) Telecommunications and Posts Butrus Harb Education and Fine Arts Mohammed Yusuf Baydun Hydroelectric Resources Marwan Hamadah Economy and Trade *Albert Mansur Information *Muhsin Dallul Agriculture Nadim Salim Public Works and Transport Mohammed Jarudi Industry and Oil Mohammed Baydun Housing and Co-operatives Talal Arslan Tourism *Nazih al Bizri Minister of State *Nabbi Berri Minister of State *Walid Jumblatt Minister of State Niqula al-Khuri Minister of State Abdullah al-Amin Minister of State As'as Hardan Minister of State (vacant) Minister of State Elie Hobeika Minister of State Suleiman Franjieh Minister of State Zahir al-Khatib Minister of State for Administrative Reforms Shawqi Fakhuri Minister of State for Land, Sea and Air Transport Affairs Agop Zukhatarian Minister of State for Environmental Affairs *Member of outgoing Cabinet.
New Karami Cabinet
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
ISRAEL
Shamir visit to USA
On Dec. 11-14 the Israeli Prime Minister Itzhak Shamir visited the United States, at a critical juncture in Israeli-US relations [see p. 37052 for Shamir's last visit to Washington in November 1989].
US President George Bush, concerned above all to hold together an anti-Iraq coalition in the Gulf which included key Arab allies, had quite openly distanced himself from Israel in recent months.
In the event, however, Shamir's meeting with Bush in Washington on Dec. 12 was friendly and, according to the Financial Times of Dec. 12, "appeared to smooth over relations between the two leaders" .
Bush assured Shamir that there would be no arrangement with Iraq at Israel's expense.
The two leaders also discussed US federal guarantees for bank loans to house Soviet Jewish immigrants in Israel.
An initial US$400 million commitment by the USA had yet to be implemented.
Also on Dec. 12 Shamir had a meeting in Washington with the visiting Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard Shevardnadze.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
IRAN
Human rights — Relations with France
On Dec. 4 the UN Human Rights Commission approved a resolution based on a report submitted by the UN's special envoy Reynaldo Galindo Pohl [see p. 37200], noting with concern "allegations of violations of human rights" in Iraq and calling on the government "to rectify" these abuses.
According to a report published on Dec. 5 by the human rights organization Amnesty International, more than 5,000 people had been executed in Iran in the past three years, including some 2,500 during the last six months of 1988 coinciding with a crackdown on left-wing dissidents [see pp. 36630-31].
Detailing the "ruthless" abuse of human rights against opponents of the regime, the report said that many executions were officially described as having been for drug-trafficking offences, adding that prisoners had no recourse to legal counsel or right to appeal.
On Dec. 7 the head of the Iranian judiciary, Ayatollah Mohammad Yazdi, dismissed Amnesty's claims as "lies" and denied that anyone had "been imprisoned or executed on ideological grounds" .
On Dec. 30 the Majlis approved a bill allowing defendants the right to legal representation in court.
Upholding of Rushdie death sentence
On Dec. 26 Iran's spiritual leader Ayatollah Seyed Ali Khamenei said that the February 1989 fatwa against the British author Salman Rushdie "remains unchanged" .
[For fatwa, calling on Moslems to carry out a death sentence on Rushdie on grounds of apostasy, see pp. 36450-51; 37266; 37549.]
Rushdie had announced on Dec. 24 that he had embraced Islam and withdrawn permission to allow his book The Satanic Verses to be published in paperback.
Visit to France by Vellayati
Foreign Minister Ali Akbar Vellayati visited France on Dec. 5-8, holding talks with President Mitterrand and the French Foreign Minister, Roland Dumas.
At a news conference on Dec. 8, Vellayati and Dumas reaffirmed their governments'commitment to recent UN resolutions on the Gulf crisis, although Vellayati added that Iran would not participate in any war against Iraq or another country in the region.
Efforts were also made to resolve a financial dispute concerning the repayment by France of a US$1,000 million loan made in 1974 by Iran's pre-revolution government.
Although France had agreed to repay $630 million, it refused to repay the outstanding balance, claiming that it was the equivalent of losses incurred by French companies as a result of broken contracts.
MIDDLE EAST
EGYPT
People's Assembly elections
The ruling National Democratic Party (NDP) of President Hosni Mubarak was the clear winner in the first and second round of elections for the new People's National Assembly, held respectively on Nov. 29 and Dec. 6.
The elections, approved by the October referendum [see p. 37795], were boycotted by the three major opposition parties, who nevertheless had a number of their members standing as independent candidates.
The NDP captured 348 out of the total of 444 elective seats in the Assembly, although 93 of these were to be occupied by candidates who had distanced themselves from the leadership.
Independent candidates won 83 seats, among them Jaled Mohiedine, the veteran leader of the small left-wing Progressive Patriotic Association and a leading figure in the 1952 revolution against the monarchy.
Candidates of the left-wing Nasserite National Progressive Unionist Party won six seats.
Seven seats remained undecided because of electoral irregularities, and further run-off elections were expected.
Mubarak, in accordance with the Constitution, appointed a further 10 delegates by decree on Dec. 10.
The Assembly was formally inaugurated on Dec. 13.
According to the Ministry of the Interior the abstention rate in Cairo had been over 70 per cent whereas in some rural areas the turnout had been 70 per cent.
There were violent clashes with police near the Mediterranean port of Damietta after the first round.
Demonstrators reacted violently to the news that two NDP candidates had won local seats, and attempted to burn down a police station; four supporters of independent candidates were killed, and some 60 civilians and seven policemen injured.
Five people were reported to have been killed in disturbances during the second round.
AFRICA
MOROCCO
Major unrest
Rioting in the cities of Fez, Tangier, Kenitra, Meknes, Nador and the capital, Rabat, during a 24-hour general strike held on Dec. 14, was followed by large-scale arrests.
According to official figures 150 people, the majority of them youths and students, received prison sentences ranging from one month to seven years; at least 450 others were still thought to be awaiting trial.
Defence lawyers claimed that several injured defendants had been denied medical attention and that many others had been tortured while in custody.
They also boycotted several hearings because of alleged widespread legal irregularities.
The two main unions, the General Union of Moroccan Workers (UGTM) and the Democratic Confederation of Labour (CDT), had called the strike, the first since 1981, to promote demands for a doubling of the legal minimum wage to 2,000 dirhams (about US$245) per month to compensate for rising food prices.
The unions claimed that the strike had received the support of 80 per cent of the population.
The government mobilized troops, ostensibly to maintain order and the running of public services.
There were clashes between troops and demonstrators in several towns and cities; the most serious clashes were in Fez, where serious rioting erupted on Dec. 14-15.
Buses were destroyed and a luxury tourist hotel burnt to the ground, although no holidaymakers were injured.
Hospital and mortuary records indicated that at least 100 people, troops and civilians, had died in the fighting and a further 200 were injured.
The death and injury toll was expected to rise, but some families of demonstrators were believed not to have reported their dead or wounded for fear of reprisals.
The official death toll was given as five and the cost of damage in Fez was estimated at $15,000,000, according to the official news agency MAP.
Opposition parties of both the right and left joined with the unions in calling for an independent inquiry into the Fez incidents.
On Dec. 20 the UGTM called for the resignation of the government, the dissolution of parliament, a revision of the constitution and the holding of free elections.
In what was widely seen as a veiled attack on the French government, the Moroccan authorities blamed the disturbances on "a conspiracy of foreign countries" .
Relations with France had deteriorated in recent weeks [see p. 37874], and on Dec. 21 the government denounced as "paternalistic" the comments of Thierry de Beaucé, the French Secretary of State for International Cultural Relations, who had called on the Moroccan government to respect human rights, especially in the context of the trials of those arrested over the Dec. 14-15 demonstrations.
INTERNATIONAL
OPEC
88th meeting — OAPEC meeting
The 88th regular ministerial-level meeting of the 13-member Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) was held in Vienna on Dec. 12-13.
Those attending included the Kuwaiti Oil Minister Rashid Salim al Amiri, and an Iraqi delegation led by the head of the State Company for Oil Marketing rather than by the recently appointed acting Oil Minister, Brig. -Gen.
Hussein Kamil [see p. 37759].
The meeting endorsed unanimously a resolution agreeing to maintain present high levels of production.
Quotas agreed in July [see p. 37632]would be "immediately reinstated as soon as the [Gulf]crisis is over" .
A further special meeting would be held in March 1991.
(The July OPEC production ceiling, set at a total of just under 22,500,000 barrels per day (bpd), had been suspended since late August — see p. 37641 — and the Financial Times of Dec. 14 estimated that current overall OPEC output was 400,000 bpd above the ceiling, despite the loss of 4,300,000 bpd of Iraqi and Kuwaiti exports.)
Iran's Oil Minister, Gholamreza Aghazadeh, reportedly expressed fears that the current high oil output levels could lead to over-supply and a plunge in prices if the Gulf crisis was resolved peacefully.
The Algerian Minister for Mines and Industry Sadek Boussena, OPEC's president, said after the meeting that quotas would be reconsidered in 1991 if prices fell below OPEC's current US$21 a barrel reference price.
Although he rejected suggestions that a price crash was inevitable after the resolution of the Gulf crisis, he hinted that OPEC might meet before March if necessary to "defend our prices" .
AOPEC meeting
The 45th ministerial meeting of the 11-member Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC) was held in Cairo on Dec. 8.
According to the Arab Republic of Egypt Radio (ARER) the meeting was attended by the oil ministers of Bahrain, Egypt, Kuwait, Libya, Saudi Arabia, Syria and the United Arab Emirates, while Iraq was represented by its ambassador in Cairo.
(Algeria, Qatar and Tunisia were also members of OAPEC, whose headquarters were in Kuwait.)
A communiqué cited by ARER said that ministers had agreed to make Cairo the temporary headquarters of the organization.
INTERNATIONAL
GATT
Suspension of "Uruguay Round" 
Trade representatives from 107 countries, meeting in Brussels on Dec. 3-7, failed to reach an agreement on world trade under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) to conclude the "Uruguay Round" of negotiations, under way since 1986 [see pp. 35024-28; 36508-09; 36605-06; 37227-28; 37796].
The European Communities (EC) differed crucially from the United States and from the "Cairns Group" of 14 major agricultural exporters (including Australia, Canada and Latin American countries) on the question of farm subsidies.
Reports of a deadlock emerged during preliminary discussions on Dec. 2 when representatives from the USA and the Cairns Group emphasized that they would not endorse a general trade agreement unless the EC cut farm support by 75 per cent and export subsidies by 90 per cent.
In October the EC had offered to cut internal farm supports by 30 per cent, taking 1986 as the base year [see p. 37796].
The EC was supported by Japan and South Korea, both reportedly reluctant to liberalize access to their hitherto closed rice markets.
Responding to calls by GATT's Director-General Arthur Dunkel for greater flexibility, the EC Agriculture Commissioner Ray MacSharry said on Dec. 3 that "the only flexibility I have is in explaining in detail the impact which the [30 per cent]reductions in internal supports will have on our export restitutions and market access" .
On the same day some 30,000 EC farm workers demonstrated in Brussels, demanding that subsidies be protected.
The US Representative for Trade Negotiations, Carla Hills, emphasized that there could be no extension of the Uruguay Round December deadline, underlining the urgency of pushing through a trade agreement which could secure US congressional approval on the "fast track" procedure.
(Congress had agreed to give the US administration until March 3, 1991, to submit an entire trade package which would then be subject to a single vote instead of the more usual procedure of amending it item by item.)
US refusal to accept EC concessions — Rejection by EC of Swedish compromise
Reports on Dec. 6 confirmed that the USA had refused to accept an EC offer to renegotiate a deal linking the liberalization of agriculture to the extension of free trade rules for services, textiles and copyrights.
US representatives rejected any new "global" talks unless the EC made specific concessions on agriculture.
The hardening of the US stance was attributed to rumours that some EC member countries, reportedly including the United Kingdom, the Netherlands and Germany, might consider deeper cuts in agricultural subsidies (whereas France, Ireland and Luxembourg were known to oppose this).
On Dec. 7 Sweden's Agriculture Minister, Mats Hellström, who chaired the GATT steering committee on farm trade, submitted a compromise proposal accepting the EC offer of 30 per cent reductions but accommodating US and Cairns Group demands by extending them to cover, in addition to domestic farm aid, export subsidies and border protection.
It stipulated that reductions would be made over five years (taking 1990 as the base year) instead of over 10 years backdated to 1986 as proposed by the EC [see p. 37796].
Although representatives from the USA, the Cairns Group and the EC initially welcomed the Swedish proposal, talks finally broke down on Dec. 7 after MacSharry claimed that the compromise proposal "was not a basis for negotiation" .
South Korea and Japan also rejected the Swedish proposal.
Hills thereupon accused the EC of "economic warfare" , while Neal Blewett, the Australian Trade Negotiations Minister, warned of imminent "protectionism" and a delegate from Côte d'Ivoire spoke of "anger and regret" .
MacSharry, however, condemned US attempts to "orchestrate a crisis" .
Progress in other sectors
On Dec. 3 a group of industrial countries led by Canada tabled a proposal drafted in co-operation with some developing countries in an effort to break the deadlock on financial services.
Welcomed by the USA and the EC, it allowed countries to maintain existing curbs on foreign-controlled financial services in their territory and to bring in liberalization measures at their own pace.
A service accord had been held up by developing countries, who feared that liberalization would allow Western financial companies to cripple newly established indigenous financial service industries.
The USA had also resisted including the "most favoured nation" principle for services on a global basis, which would require that countries treated all trading partners alike; the USA wanted to be free to discriminate in favour of countries which opened their markets to US services [see also pp. 37228-29].
Reports on Dec. 7 suggested a softening of the US stance on this in order to "get the services negotiations moving" .
Agreements were also reached on (i) cutting tariffs over a five-year period following the conclusion of the Uruguay Round;(ii) public procurement, i.e. buying of goods and services by governments; and (iii) the reform of GATT's anti-dumping code.
Prospects for renewal of GATT negotiations
After a meeting on Dec. 14 between MacSharry and US Agriculture Secretary Clayton Yeutter, both sides expressed optimism about the chances of an agreement on world trade.
EC leaders meeting in Rome on Dec. 14-15 [see pp. 37905-06], said in a communiqué that only "a global approach based on balanced concessions…would make an agreeement possible" .
It was announced on Dec. 18 that Dunkel had summoned a meeting of heads of delegations in Geneva on Jan. 15 to resume negotiations.
INTERNATIONAL
NATO
Defence Ministers' meeting
NATO Defence Ministers attended meetings of the Defence Planning Committee (DPC) and the Nuclear Planning Group (NPG) in Brussels on Dec. 6-7 under the chairmanship of the German Defence Minister Gerhard Stoltenberg.
A communiqué issued afterwards reaffirmed NATO's commitment to negotiations between the United States and the Soviet Union on the elimination of short-range nuclear forces (SNF) as "foreseen in the London Declaration" (of July 1990 — see pp. 37599-600).
The communiqué added that the changed strategic environment in Europe required "dramatic reductions in the number of NATO's nuclear weapons retained in Europe" .
The statement confirmed that ministers had discussed a draft resolution concerning NATO's future and expected to complete a review of the alliance's political aims by May 1991.
The Gulf crisis was described as "a fundamental challenge to the vision of a peaceful world order" which served as an example of the "continuing risks of aggression" .
US Defence Secretary Richard Cheney appealed to NATO's European partners to provide more military assistance, although he stressed later that the US-led capability to enforce an Iraqi withdrawal from Kuwait was "not dependent on additional contributions by other nations" .
At a news conference on Dec. 5 Stoltenberg said that members had agreed to pool their military resources in the event of US troop reductions in Europe following the collapse of the Warsaw Pact.
He also confirmed that France, which left NATO's military structure in 1966 [see pp. 21605-10], would be invited to participate in plans to set up multinational units.
On the issue of the future of NATO's ground-launched short-range nuclear weapon, the Lance missile, which had threatened earlier to split the alliance [see pp. 36476-77], Stoltenberg claimed that there was now a clear consensus in favour of abolishing Lance.
During the meeting, ministers expressed concern about the reduced amount of Soviet military equipment scheduled for destruction under the Conventional Forces in Europe (CFE) treaty [see p. 37838].
In a reference to continuing reports that more Soviet weapons had been moved east of the Ural mountains and thus out of the treaty area, the UK Defence Secretary Tom King raised doubts about whether the treaty process was going forward with "the degree of control and accuracy that was intended" .
Foreign Ministers' meeting
A meeting of the North Atlantic Council (NAC), composed of NATO Foreign Ministers, was held in Brussels on Dec. 17-18.
Attention focused chiefly on strengthening the "European pillar" of the military alliance, although members failed to agree on how precisely this was to be achieved.
A communiqué issued after the meeting stressed that while "a European security identity and defence role" was essential, "we will consider how the political and military structures of the alliance must be adapted accordingly" .
While the UK and the USA reportedly expressed support for plans to transform the nine-member Paris-based Western European Union (WEU)[see p. 37212]into the basis of a cohesive European defence pillar for NATO, other member states, notably France, Germany and Italy, saw the WEU as evolving into a genuine European security and defence policy.
The communiqué also said that ministers had agreed "to seek full implementation by all parties of the CFE treaty and, in particular, the timely resolution by the Soviet Union of serious problems relating to data and treaty interpretation" .
Although the communiqué stressed that NATO should "deepen its dialogue" with eastern Europe, it left open the question of whether such dialogue would be undertaken by the alliance or by individual members.
It was reported that the French Foreign Minister, Roland Dumas, had, in the course of a "flaming row" , objected strongly to the alliance as such claiming the right to seek new relations with former members of the Warsaw Pact.
Controversy also marked the issue of NATO's "out of area" role.
While the communiqué made clear that the alliance needed to confront "new security risks and challenges of a global nature" which threatened "common interests" , it was understood that France had expressed strong reservations about NATO extending its responsibilities beyond European frontiers.
In a separate statement on the Gulf crisis, the NAC noted that insofar as the crisis posed "a potential threat to one of our Allies having common borders with Iraq" , it was determined "to fulfil the commitments stipulated in Article 5 of the Washington Treaty whereby an armed attack against one of our states shall be considered an attack against them all" .
INTERNATIONAL
UNITED NATIONS
New non-permanent members of Security Council
As from the end of 1990 Canada, Colombia, Ethiopia, Malaysia and Finland ceased to be non-permanent members of the 15-member Security Council, their two-year terms ending on Dec. 31.
Their vacant seats would be taken up, with effect from Jan. 1, 1991, by Austria, Belgium, Ecuador, India and Zimbabwe, all elected for the standard two-year term by the General Assembly when its 45th session (opened on Sept. 18 — see pp. 37731-32) ended its general debate on Nov. 1.
The other five non-permanent members, with a year left to serve, were Côte d'Ivoire, Cuba, Romania, Yemen and Zaïre.
According to the alphabetical rotation sequence, the presidency of the Security Council had passed from the United States (a permanent member along with China, France, the Soviet Union and the United Kingdom) to Yemen for December.
The chairmanship would thus pass to Zaïre for January 1991.
Appointment of High Commissioner for Refugees
On Dec. 21 the UN General Assembly unanimously approved the appointment of Sadako Ogata as UN High Commissioner for Refugees until the end of 1993, i.e. for the remainder of the four-year term to which Thorvald Stoltenberg had been elected in November 1989 [see pp. 36989; 37436]; Stoltenberg had resigned to become Norway's Foreign Minister [see p. 37868].
Ogata, 63, was the first woman ever to head a major UN agency.
Hitherto dean of the faculty of foreign studies at Sophia University in Tokyo, she had served from 1976 to 1978 as a diplomat in Japan's UN mission, and subsequently chaired the executive board of the UN Children's Fund.
Prior to her appointment she was a member of the UN Human Rights Commission, in which connection she had investigated human rights abuses in Myanma.
The UN Secretary-General, Javier Pérez de Cuéllar, had nominated Virendra Dayal, his (Indian) chef de cabinet, for the UNHCR post, but this had been opposed strongly by the United States, and in November Dayal withdrew his candidacy, claiming that his opponents were motivated by racial prejudice.
INTERNATIONAL
ANTARCTICA
Antarctic Treaty meeting
A draft protocol on environmental protection for Antarctica was discussed during a meeting in Chile of states party to the 1959 Antarctic Treaty.
In the absence of conclusive consensus, it was agreed to hold a further meeting in Madrid in April 1991.
The meeting, held in the Chilean town of Vina del Mar on Nov. 19-Dec. 6, was attended by delegates from 34 of the 37 party states.
Of these, 25 conducted scientific research on the continent, while seven had recorded territorial claims (Argentina, Australia, Chile, France, New Zealand, Norway and the United Kingdom), and the Soviet Union and the United States reserved the right to do so.
The principal focus of debate was a proposal to ban all forms of mining or mineral exploitation of the continent as part of its declaration as an environmental "world park" , reserved for responsible tourism and research.
This was advocated by Australia, New Zealand and France, and supported by nine other nations, but was opposed in varying degrees by the UK, USA and Japan.
US representatives suggested imposing a lengthy, binding moratorium on all mining activity, while the UK favoured drawing up a revised convention governing conditions under which mining would be permitted.
This would effectively replace the 1988 Convention on the Regulation of Antarctic Mineral Resource Activities (Cramra — see p. 36062), which had met with widespread opposition, and which Japan alone now supported.
As tentatively proposed, the draft protocol to be discussed in Madrid would include measures to protect Antarctica from waste disposal and marine pollution, together with a prohibition on "mineral activity" .
The protocol reflected the continuing shift in favour of environmental protection, while recognizing the extent of differences which remained.
Environmentalists, led by the Greenpeace organization and the World Wide Fund for Nature, had conducted an intense campaign in support of the world park proposals.
While expressing disappointment that the conference had failed to agree to this, they acknowledged that progress towards this goal had been achieved.
INTERNATIONAL
VATICAN
Resignation of Secretary of State
On Dec. 1 a Vatican spokesman announced the resignation of the Secretary of State of the Roman Curia since 1979, Cardinal Agostino Casaroli.
Casaroli was formally succeeded on Dec. 2 by the Curia's Secretary for Relations with States, the Most Rev. Angelo Sodano, 63.
Casaroli, 76, who had been Secretary of State since 1979 [see p. 29852], was widely regarded as the architect of the Vatican's "Ostpolitik" , stressing closer ties with eastern Europe and the creation of diplomatic links with the Soviet Union [see pp. 36830; 37129; 37258; 37394; 37899].
INTERNATIONAL
SPACE RESEARCH
Report's NASA — Space flights
An official report commissioned by Vice-President Dan Quayle and published on Dec. 11 advised that the United States National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) should build no more space shuttles, and should instead develop a new fleet of unmanned rockets to place scientific payloads into orbit.
The report's publication followed further technical problems during the latest flight of the space shuttle Columbia.
The malfunction of computers controlling three astronomical telescopes of the US$150,000,000 Astro-1 observatory, which the shuttle was transporting in its cargo bay, led to a serious reduction in the original programme to observe 250 distant stars, galaxies and quasars at ultra-violet and X-ray wavelengths.
Columbia's 10-day mission ended a day early on Dec. 10.
The Soviet Union's Soyuz spacecraft returned from orbit on Dec. 11.
Launched on Dec. 2, it had attracted media attention because it transported Toyohiro Akiyama, 48, a Japanese journalist, to the Mir space station [see p. 37437].
Moscow's Narodny Bank announced on Dec. 12 that a modified Juno mission, to place a British citizen in space aboard the Mir space station, would go ahead in April or May 1991 [see p. 37437].