

AFRICA
SOUTH AFRICA
Repeal of last apartheid laws
Remaining vestiges of apartheid legislation formally disappeared from the South African statute book at the end of June, in accordance with a pledge given by President F. W. de Klerk on Feb. 1 [see pp. 37991; 38086].
The measures failed to satisfy the African National Congress (ANC) which had been demanding the restitution of land seized from blacks and other reparations for the victims of racial discrimination.
By 112 votes to 30, the House of Assembly (the white chamber of the tricameral Parliament) passed the Repeal of Discriminatory Land Measures Act on June 5, effectively nullifying the Land Acts of 1913 and 1936 and the Group Areas Act of 1950.
The 30 votes against were all cast by members of the right-wing Conservative Party, the main opposition in the House of Assembly, whose spokesman, Jan Hoon, condemned the repeal as "an act of betrayal" .
The new legislation made it possible for all South Africans to purchase freehold tenure to the 87 per cent of South Africa's land hitherto reserved for the white minority, although it placed no obligation on white owners to sell, and commentators pointed out that few blacks had the means to buy.
The legislation offered no compensation for the estimated 3,500,000 blacks dispossessed of their land since 1950.
Nor, critics pointed out, did it give blacks automatic access to home ownership in previously white areas.
Under the controversial Clause 7 of the new act, 100 or more residents would be allowed to draft and enforce "norms and standards" of maintenance and density in their neighbourhood.
Objectors said the clause could enable white residents to prevent blacks moving in.
On June 17, by 89 votes to 38 with 11 abstentions, the Assembly repealed the Population Registration Act of 1950, the legal foundation of apartheid, from which hundreds of other discriminatory laws had derived.
De Klerk told a joint session of the tricameral parliament that the way was now clear for constitutional talks with black leaders to "guarantee participation and representation to all South Africans in a true democracy, with effective protection of minorities" .
Under the repeal measures the government ended the registration by race of newborn babies and immigrants as black, white, Asian or "coloured" (of mixed race).
However, the register, classifying the remainder of the country's 36,000,000 people, only 4,500,000 of them white, was due to remain in force until the agreement of an eventual new constitution which, de Klerk told parliament, was "within our reach within a few years" .
The ANC, the government's main interlocutor, continued to insist on the release of remaining political prisoners and on government action to end factional fighting among blacks, as preconditions to constitutional talks.
Critics also pointed out that the legislation enacted in June left black South Africans, representing approximately 68 per cent of the population, still without the vote.
It retained compulsory military service for whites only, and retained inequalities whereby whites received higher pensions than other races, blacks receiving least of all.
It did little or nothing to remove de facto segregation in certain institutions, and apparently made no impact on imbalances in the distribution of wealth in South Africa.
Nor, it was pointed out, had any action been taken to end the discriminatory "Status Acts" passed between 1976 and 1981 which unilaterally conferred "independence" on the homelands of Transkei, Bophutatswana, Venda and Ciskei, whose people, totalling 8,000,000, had been deprived of their South African nationality.
On June 21, parliament passed the Internal Security and Intimidation Bill to reform the 1982 Internal Security Act under which the government had powers to ban organizations, to restrict publications and individuals, and to detain terrorism suspects without trial.
While retaining some basic provisions of the original act, the reforms severely curbed official powers, including limiting detention without trial to 10 days.
Foreign reactions
Senior officials of the United States administration were quoted on June 20 as saying that the USA expected to lift sanctions against South Africa by mid-July, a lead most other countries and organizations were generally expected quickly to follow.
The issue nevertheless engendered continuing controversy in Washington, where congressional opponents of any relaxation of the 1986 Comprehensive Anti-Apartheid Act (CAAA) argued that South Africa had met only four of the five conditions demanded for sanctions to be lifted [see pp. 36991; 38086; 38132].
There remained, according to a State Department spokesman, the US stipulation that all South African political prisoners had to be released.
The ANC had maintained its opposition to a resumption of negotiations with the government, protesting that its April 30 deadline for the release of all remaining political prisoners had not been met [see pp. 38131; 38179].
It was reported on June 27 that the government and the ANC had finally reached agreement on "the process of release" .
Of about 100 prisoners who had been on hunger strike since May 1 [see p. 38179]protesting at the government's alleged failure to free all political prisoners, 17 who were still fasting began accepting food in the days after Mandela appealed to them to abandon the fast, on June 6.
The Commonwealth Secretary-General, Chief Emeka Anyaoku, was quoted on June 12 as having advised Commonwealth heads to resist any relaxation of sanctions until de Klerk took firm action to end violence in South Africa's townships.
The Organization of African Unity (OAU), some of whose 51 member states had resumed, or intended to resume, diplomatic links with South Africa, maintained at its summit in Abuja, Nigeria, that sanctions should continue until all vestiges of apartheid were removed [see p. 38279].
The European Communities (EC) were reported on June 11 to have warned South Africa that there was increasing disillusionment in Europe over the slow pace of reform.
Japan announced the lifting of a ban on tourism and "non-economic" sanctions on June 21.
Relations with black Africa
In a month which saw South Africa edge significantly closer to normalizing its relations with black Africa, de Klerk paid a two-day visit to Kenya on June 8 and 9, holding talks with President Daniel arap Moi.
Discreet contacts had taken place since an unpublicized trip to Nairobi in January by the Foreign Minister, Roelof "Pik" Botha.
Addressing journalists on June 9, de Klerk said that South Africa, Kenya, Nigeria and Egypt could become leaders of four interlocking African trading regions which could compete with Europe.
He said that South Africa's 1990 gross domestic product (GDP) of US$120,000 million almost equalled the combined GDP of the 40 other countries of sub-Saharan Africa.
During the visit, Botha was quoted as saying that de Klerk might visit Nigeria later in the year.
On June 10, de Klerk visited Swaziland en route for home and told journalists there that South Africa's return to regional multilateral organizations was imminent.
Gen. Ibrahim Babangida, President of Nigeria and current Chairman of the OAU, was reported in a statement on June 20 to have applauded de Klerk's "brave and positive" steps in dismantling apartheid following the repeal of the Population Registration Act.
Reports on June 12 quoted diplomats in Kinshasa as saying that Zaïre, long a covert trading partner of South Africa, was establishing diplomatic relations with South Africa and that an ambassador had been appointed.
In a further sign of improving links with black Africa, it was announced that during the weekend of de Klerk's visit to Kenya, South African Airways flights were routed over west Africa for the first time for nearly 30 years, the government having secured overflight rights with Morocco, Mauritania, Mali and Côte d'Ivoire.
Allegations of dirty tricks campaign
A shadow was cast over perceptions of the government's intentions by the allegations of a "dirty tricks" campaign involving the South African Defence Force (SADF), which was said to have orchestrated violence in South Africa's black townships.
A former SADF intelligence major, Nico Basson, met a group of journalists in Johannesburg on June 10 and made sensational charges against the SADF, including that it had armed and trained killers loyal to the Zulu-based Inkatha Freedom Party to attack ANC supporters.
The aim, Basson alleged, was to split the Zulus off from the ANC, which was substantially supported by South Africa's other major tribe, the Xhosa, and ultimately to ensure that eventual multiracial elections were won by an alliance of Inkatha and others regarded by the SADF as "moderates" .
He claimed that millions of dollars were being spent by the SADF to promote "moderate" black parties and organizations including churches, so as to help ensure continuing white minority domination in post-apartheid South Africa.
Chief Mangosuthu Buthelezi, leader of Inkatha, on June 9 issued a denial of the allegations.
The SADF was reported on June 11 to have initiated legal action against Basson under the Protection of Information Act.
ANC leaders including its president Nelson Mandela had previously made similar allegations against the government, refusing to continue with constitutional negotiations until it acted to halt the violence [see p. 38178], which was reported to have claimed some 2,000 lives over 10 months to the end of June.
Renewed peace effort
There was a month of relative peace in the townships following the "peace summit" which the government had called on May 24 [see p. 38178].
Inkatha and some minority groups had participated, but the ANC and its allies stayed away.
Then, over the weekend of June 22-23, police reported a serious upsurge of factional clashes between ANC and Inkatha supporters, with upwards of 35 deaths in three massacres, and there were further bloody incidents in ensuing days.
The clashes failed to sabotage a new peace meeting on June 22, if indeed that had been the aim, and representatives of all main parties attended, except the right-wing Conservative Party and some of its allies.
The meeting resulted in the formation of a 12-member "preparatory committee" of business people and church leaders, plus three members each from the government, Inkatha and the ANC, receiving encouragement from Archbishops Desmond Tutu and Trevor Huddleston, the veteran anti-apartheid campaigner who returned to South Africa on June 23 after 35 years.
ASIA — PACIFIC
VIETNAM
Seventh party congress
The seventh congress of the ruling Communist Party of Vietnam (CPV) was eventually held in Hanoi on June 24-27 [for previous party congress, in December 1986, see pp. 35067-8], after delays attributed to the intense debate within the party over economic and political policy [see p. 38149].
In the event, the congress avoided discussion of the more controversial policy details relating to the process of renovation (doi moi) under way since the mid-1980s, while approving widespread leadership changes.
The congress was attended by 1,176 delegates representing over 2,000,000 party members.
Delegations from the communist parties of Laos and Cambodia were led by their respective general secretaries (Kaysone Phomvihane and Heng Samrin); the Communist Party of the Soviet Union and the Communist Party of Cuba were also represented.
Political report
The outgoing general secretary, Nguyen Van Linh, delivered a summary of the central committee's political report at the opening session of the congress on June 24.
The report was approved by congress at its closing session on June 27.
Congress also approved the party's second political platform and 10-year socioeconomic plan, both of which had been the subject of widespread, and often contentious, debate following their adoption at the party's 10th plenum held in November 1990 [see p. 37916].
Political report: The socialist countries faced a profound crisis, both theoretically and practically.
Nevertheless, the Vietnamese people had resolved not to accept any path other than the socialist one.
The ongoing renovation of the political system was aimed at producing a fully socialist democratic system.
In order to do so it was not necessary to establish opposition parties; a multiparty system would simply create the conditions for internal and foreign reactionary forces to grow.
The process of renovation had been full of difficulties and although some success had been achieved, shortcomings and blunders had been committed.
Among the successes were a measure of economic progress, particularly in agriculture and especially in terms of grain production.
The pace of inflation had decreased and exports had grown.
However, enormous problems remained: inflation remained high, unemployment was rising and many areas of production were at a standstill.
Among the key general tasks for the 1990s were an acceleration of production, the perfection of new mechanisms of economic management, control of pressing social problems, including those arising from war and poverty, and the firm defence of the fatherland.
More specific tasks relating to the economic renovation process included:(i) the development of agriculture and the increase in pace and scope of industry;(ii) the expansion of the service-based economy to produce consumer and export goods;(iii) the expansion of oil, gas and mineral exploration; and (iv) the development of the infrastructure, particularly electricity, communications and water conservancy.
Vietnam would continue to strengthen co-operation with the Soviet Union, Laos and Cambodia, and would promote the normalization of relations with China.
Vietnam would strive to achieve an early comprehensive political solution to the war in Cambodia.
Appointment of new general secretary
At the closing session of the congress it was announced that Do Muoi, 74, Chairman of the Council of Ministers, had been elected to replace Linh, 75, as CPV general secretary [see p. 35068 for election of Linh at the party's sixth congress in 1986].
Muoi, widely regarded as a conservative force at the time of his appointment as Premier in 1988, had tended to confound his critics by generally supporting Linh's reformist line.
Nevertheless, Muoi was widely regarded as a cautious leader who would be unlikely to speed up the pace of reform.
Linh, along with President of the Council of State and outgoing politburo member Vo Chi Cong and veteran leader Pham Van Dong, agreed to serve the central committee in an advisory role.
Elections to CPV leadership bodies
Linh and six other politburo members were removed from their posts, namely Vo Chi Cong, Nguyen Duc Tam, head of the central committee's powerful organization committee, Nguyen Co Thach, the Foreign Minister, Maj.-Gen.
Mai Chi Tho, the Interior Minister, Dong Sy Nguyen and Nguyen Thanh Binh.
Commentators suggested that Tho, Tam and Thach had been removed from the politburo partly because of their close association with Le Duc Tho, the veteran CPV leader and brother of Mai Chi Tho who had died in October 1990 [see p. 37776].
In the case of Thach, his removal also reflected deep divisions within the leadership over future foreign policy.
Thach had long been in a minority within the party leadership because of his implacable opposition towards normalization of relations with China.
His removal, therefore, was regarded as an important step in the normalization process.
New politburo (in the order as announced on June 27 —indicates new member): Do Muoi, Le Duc Anh, Vo Van Kiet, Dao Duy Tung, Doan Khue, *Vu Oanh, *Le Phuoc Tho, *Pham Van Kai, *Bui Thien Ngo, *Nong Duc Manh, *Pham The Duyet, *Nguyen Duc Binh, *Vo Tran Chi.
Vu Oanh, 67, and Le Phuoc Tho, 64, were both elected to the secretariat in 1986 and had been in charge of mass mobilization and agriculture, respectively; Pham Van Kai, 58, the Soviet-trained Chair of the State Commission for Planning, was one of five southerners in the new politburo and a former mayor of Ho Chi Minh City; Bui Thien Ngo, 62, was Permanent Vice-Minister of the Interior; Nong Duc Manh, 51, a member of the Tay ethnic group and the first minority leader to be elected to the politburo, was head of the central committee's commission for nationalities; Pham The Duyet, 55, was secretary of the Hanoi party committee and a former trade union leader; Nguyen Duc Binh, 64, was director of the Nguyen Duc Binh Institute for training party cadres; Vo Tran Chi, 64, was secretary of the Ho Chi Minh City party committee.
Of those surviving from the previous politburo Le Duc Anh, 71, was Minister of National Defence and deputy secretary of the Vietnam People's Army (VPA) party commission; Vo Van Kiet, 69, First Vice Chair of the Council of Ministers, was a leading reformist; Dao Duy Tung, 62, was in charge of ideological, scientific and educational matters; Doan Khue, 68, was VPA Chief of General Staff and Deputy Minister of National Defence.
New secretariat (in the order as announced on June 27 —*; indicates new member): *Do Muoi, *Le Duc Anh, Dao Duy Tung, Le Phuoc Tho, *Nguyen Ha Phan, *Hong Ha,
*Nguyen Dinh Tu, *Trong My Hoa, *Do Quang Thang.
Nguyen Ha Phan, 58, was the mayor of Hau Giang; Hong Ha, 63, was the director of the office of the party central committee; Nguyen Dinh Tu, 59, was a member of the State Council and director of the National Institute of Atomic Energy; Trong My Hoa, 46, was vice-president of the Vietnam Women's Union and the first woman to reach the party's upper echelons; Do Quang Thang, 64, was secretary of Quang Ngai province party committee.
The central committee was enlarged from 124 to 146 full members; no alternate members were elected.
Only 42 new members were elected to the committee, mostly party or government officials from the central or provincial levels.
Visit by Japanese Foreign Minister
Taro Nakayama, the Japanese Foreign Minister, visited Vietnam on June 11-13 for talks with his Vietnamese counterpart, Nguyen Co Thach, and other high-level Vietnamese leaders [see p. 37776 for Thach's visit to Japan in October 1990].
It was the first visit by a Japanese minister to Vietnam since Vietnamese unification in 1976.
Nakayama's visit was partly aimed at furthering Japan's involvement in the Cambodian peace process [see p. 37532 for Japan's entry into the process in June 1990].
Towards this end Nakayama held a round of talks with the visiting Cambodian Premier, Hun Sen, on June 13.
The Japanese and Vietnamese sides also discussed a number of other issues, including the progress of Vietnam's economic liberalization programme.
EUROPE
SOVIET UNION
 "Grand bargain" — Yeltsin's election victory
An intense campaign of public and private lobbying abroad, by both official and unofficial Soviet representatives, resulted in the June 13 invitation for President Gorbachev to meet leaders of the G-7 group of industrialized countries in London the following month to discuss plans for Soviet economic reform.
Radical proposals by Soviet economist Grigory Yavlinsky envisaged a "grand bargain" with the West, to obtain large-scale technical and financial assistance tied to a five-year plan to create a market economy.
The official "anti-crisis" programme of Soviet Prime Minister Valentin Pavlov, supported by a moderate-conservative alliance, placed less reliance on direct Western economic assistance.
The "battle of the plans" became public and dramatic from mid-June, with Yavlinsky presenting his proposals on June 17 to Gorbachev, to the Russian Republic president Boris Yeltsin and to the Khazakstan president Nursultan Nazarbayev, while on the same day Pavlov in remarks to the USSR Supreme Soviet ridiculed the "grand bargain" and called for wider executive powers for the Soviet Council of Ministers in order to deal with the economic crisis.
Yavlinsky had first outlined his ideas —in effect a revival of the 1990 Shatalin "500 day" plan [see p. 37722]of which he was one of the authors —at a G-7 conference in Washington in April.
Encouraged by US officials, on his return to Moscow he worked with Gorbachev's economic adviser Yevgeny Primakov to draft an open letter to the G-7 leaders which was published at the end of May, proposing the co-ordination of a plan of Soviet economic reform with a G-7 programme of economic assistance.
In the meantime Yavlinsky was also working with a group of Harvard University academics on a more detailed set of proposals, setting out the forms and extent of Western assistance and the timetable of economic (and political) reform.
Details of this proposed political and economic "grand bargain" between the Soviet Union and the West, co-authored by Yavlinsky, Graham Allinson and Jeffrey Sachs, became known in early June.
The first official and public indication that the Soviet Union was seeking large-scale Western aid came at a press conference between Gorbachev and Italian Prime Minister Giulio Andreotti on May 22, when Gorbachev made plain his desire to attend the July G-7 meeting.
At the end of May Primakov and Vladimir Shcherbakov, Soviet First Deputy Prime Minister, arrived in Washington for a week of meetings with IMF, World Bank and senior US administration officials (including Secretary of State James Baker and President Bush) on Soviet economic plans and the prospects for Western aid.
Also in attendance was Yavlinsky.
The question of an invitation to Gorbachev to attend the G-7 meeting was also raised at these meetings.
On June 5 in Oslo, in a speech accepting the 1990 Nobel Peace Prize, Gorbachev said that "now that perestroika has entered its critical phase, the Soviet Union is entitled to expect large-scale support to assure its success" , and warned that "if perestroika fails the prospect of entering a new peaceful period in history will vanish" .
In a related development, the Supreme Soviet on May 29 passed in principle legislation designed to attract foreign investment [see p. 38302].
Pavlov's demands for wider economic powers were rejected on June 21 by Gorbachev, who openly criticized conservative deputies who had used Pavlov's remarks as a platform for launching an attack on Gorbachev's leadership.
Pavlov backed down and the Supreme Soviet voted to refer the proposal for wider Cabinet powers to Gorbachev for further consideration.
In his speech to the Supreme Soviet Gorbachev emphasized that while there might have been misunderstandings between him and Pavlov there were no essential differences between them.
He thus signalled support for Pavlov's "anti-crisis" programme, while continuing to insist that there were no irreconcilable differences between the Pavlov and Yavlinsky plans.
Relations with USA
In June there were a number of developments in Soviet-United States relations designed to repair the political damage caused earlier in the year by differences over the Gulf war, the Soviet crackdown in the Baltic republics, and difficulties in arms control negotiations.
[For early June breakthrough on implementing the Conventional Forces in Europe treaty, and Baker's June 18 speech calling for a "Euro-Atlantic Community" from "Vancouver to Vladivostock" , see p. 38314.]
On June 3 US President Bush announced the waiver for a further year of the so-called Jackson-Vanik restrictions on trade with the Soviet Union.
These restrictions, which dated from a congressional amendment to the US 1974 Trade Reform Act, effectively precluded most-favoured-nation (MFN) trading status for the Soviet Union unless it agreed to relax restrictions on Jewish emigration.
The Jackson-Vanik amendment restrictions were first lifted by Bush in December 1990, following a marked improvement in the Soviet emigration record [see p. 37921].
The extension of this waiver for another year made immediately available US$600 million in US credits and loan guarantees and, in the longer term, could pave the way to permanent MFN status for the Soviet Union.
On June 4 Bush announced the nomination of Robert S. Strauss, a lawyer and a businessman, as the next US ambassador to the Soviet Union.
Despite his background in Democratic Party politics, Strauss was a close friend of both Bush and Baker.
His appointment (subject to Senate approval) was widely interpreted as a sign of the Bush administration's determination to secure still further improvements in US-Soviet relations.
On June 11 Congress approved credits of $1,500 million to the Soviet Union for the purchase of US farm products.
Credits of $1,000 million had already been granted in December 1990.
On June 18 Boris Yeltsin, the newly elected President of the Russian Republic [see below], arrived in the USA for a four-day round of meetings with Bush (on June 20), Vice-President Dan Quayle, and other administration and congressional figures.
While Bush welcomed Yeltsin's visit he made it clear in public remarks that relations with the new Russian leader would not be allowed to undermine "official relations" with Gorbachev.
Russian Presidential elections
Boris Yeltsin was elected President of Russia (RFSFR) on June 12, defeating five other candidates, including the former Soviet Prime Minister Nikolai Ryzhkov, to win a comfortable victory on the first ballot.
The Russian Federation's Congress of People's Deputies had decided on April 5 to create a new, directly elected executive president of the Republic, an idea already overwhelmingly endorsed by a republican referendum held in March on the same day as the all-union referendum on the preservation of the USSR [see pp. 38079; 38130-31].
Presidency Vice-Presidency Political leaning Votes Percentage Boris Yeltsin Alexander Rutskoi Liberal-Radical 45,552,041 57.30 Nikolai Ryzhkov Boris Gromov Centre-Conservative Communist 13,395,335 16.85 Vadim Bakatin Ramazan Abdulatipov Centre-Libera 2,719,757 3.42 Albert Makashov Aleksei Sergeyev Hardline Communist 2,969,511 3.74 Vladimir Zhirinovsky Andrei Zavidia Russian nationalist (Liberal Democratic party) 6,211,007 7.81 Aman-Geldy Tuleyev Victor Bocharov unknown, Kuzbass region 5,417,464 6.81
Russian presidential election candidates and results
The campaign was dominated by the radical-conservative contest between Yeltsin and Ryzkhov and the questions of how many votes the Russian Communist Party could mobilize on Ryzhkov's behalf and whether Yeltsin would secure enough votes to win election on the first round.
Yeltsin's choice of Col. Alexander Rutskoi, the founder of the Communists for Democracy group in the Russian parliament, signified his intention to maximise his support among moderate as well as radical voters.
Bakatin, although he had been dismissed by Gorbachev as Interior Minister in December 1990 as a result of conservative pressure, was seen as the Soviet President's candidate whose role was to win enough votes to deny Yeltsin a first round victory.
Campaigning by the six candidates was intensive —with many public meetings and rallies, much press coverage, and a number of television and radio interviews and debates —but lacklustre.
Campaign expenditure was limited to a maximum of 200,000 roubles (about US$330,000) per candidate.
The only blot on an otherwise clean campaign came on the eve of the poll when the communist newspaper Sovietskaya Rossiya published a report implying that Yeltsin had been involved in an illegal deal to sell billions of roubles at a cheap rate to a British company.
Earlier the paper had published allegations of Yeltsin's involvement with the Italian Mafia.
The turnout was recorded as 74.66 per cent of those eligible to vote.
A total of 79,498,240 ballots were cast, of which 1,716,757 (2.16 per cent) were deemed spoilt or invalid and 1,525,410 (1.92 per cent ) were not counted because the names of all six candidates had been crossed out.
Yeltsin won majorities in more than 80 of the 88 electoral districts.
As expected, his majorities in Moscow, Leningrad and other Russian cities were very big, while in many rural and outlying regions they were much smaller.
Most observers summarised the results as a triumph for Yeltsin, a disaster for the Russian Communist Party which had backed Ryzhkov, and a humiliation for Bakatin who came bottom of the poll.
Yeltsin was sworn in as President of the RFSFR on 10 July.
The ceremony was held in the Kremlin's Palace of Congresses.
Soviet President Gorbachev attended and spoke at the ceremony, as did Alexei, the Patriarch of All Russia.
RFSFR development of foreign links
The development of direct foreign links by the RFSFR, bypassing the Soviet central authorities, was a major theme of the republic's foreign activities in June.
The importance of such links was stressed by Yeltsin during his visit to the USA (on June 18-21 —see above) and on June 23 it was announced that Russia was to have its own counsellor in the Soviet embassy in Washington and to have its own representative at the Soviet UN mission.
Related developments included a direct agreement between Canada and Russia on credits to buy Canadian grain and the RFSFR's decision to establish six economic zones in the republic which would offer special tax and custom duty privileges to foreign companies.
It was also reported in June that the RFSFR was engaged in loan negotiations with a number of European banks.
The Russian Federation government proposed the privatization of 70 per cent of the republic's property and assets in a plan announced by Deputy Premier Mikhail Maley on 2 June.
The privatisation programme, it was proposed, would take place in three stages, with not less than 20 per cent of the republic's assets in private hands by the end of 1992.
Privatization was to be accomplished by a mixed system of "named cheques" given to every Russian citizen, who would be able to redeem them for company shares of their choice, and by the handing over of 30 per cent of all shares in a privatised enterprise to the workforce.
Under the plan, sale of shares to third persons would be banned for three years, but after that period could be bought and sold on the stock exchange.
The privatization plan was subject to further government and parliamentary discussion.
An RFSFR law on employment, to come into effect on July 1, had as one of its main features official recognition of "unemployment" and the establishment of a system for paying "unemployment benefit" .
Reform of Moscow's governmental and administrative structures was announced on June 24, following a meeting of the city council.
The new structures included (i) a city duma headed by the mayor, who would also have his or her own department;(ii) a city assembly;(iii) a city executive government;(iv) 10 administrative districts (in place of the current 33 districts); and 123 municipal councils.
The main thrust of these changes, it was reported, was aimed at strengthening executive authority, particularly that of the newly elected mayor's office.
Moscow city council decided on 27 June to privatize its housing stock.
Subject to certain conditions, the council's flats would be given away to those who currently occupied them.
Referendum on name change in Leningrad
The people of Leningrad voted by 55 per cent to 43 per cent to change the name of their city to St Petersburg in a poll on June 12 (at the same time as the Russian presidential elections).
The name St Petersburg had been given to the city by Peter the Great in 1703; in 1914 it was amended to the Russified form Petrograd, and in 1924 it was renamed in honour of Lenin after his death.
The decision to hold a referendum was taken by the city council in April, following a year-long public debate.
The campaign in favour of the name change was led by Anatoly Sobchak, the radical city council leader, and supported mainly by intellectuals and young people; the head of the Russian Orthodox Church also supported St Petersburg, and Yeltsin too indicated that he favoured this change.
Opposing change were the city's communists, Gorbachev, the USSR Supreme Soviet, and many older citizens who associate the current name with the heroic 900 days' wartime siege of Leningrad.
Despite the referendum result, opponents of the change argued that the vote was only an opinion poll and had no legal force; the original decision to name the city after Lenin having been taken by the USSR Supreme Soviet, they claimed, it could only be rescinded by its modern equivalent —the USSR Congress of People's Deputies.
EUROPE
YUGOSLAVIA
Slovenian and Croatian declarations of independence
The apparent disintegration of Yugoslavia reached the stage of unilateral declarations of independence by both Slovenia and Croatia on June 25.
Slovenians had voted for independence in a referendum in December 1990 [see p. 37924]and the government had announced on May 8 that it would secede by June 26.
Croatians had voted in favour of secession in May [see p. 38024]but at that time had appeared not to favour an immediate declaration.
The joint declarations precipitated several days of military confrontation between the federal army and republican forces.
Federal action was concentrated in Slovenia in order to seal off the two breakaway republics from outside aid.
A flurry of international diplomatic activity, principally involving the European Communities (EC), had achieved a fragile ceasefire by the end of the month.
Federal attempts to halt secession
On June 1, Yugoslav Prime Minister Ante Markovic condemned as illegal the moves by Croatia and Slovenia to secede.
The leaders of Yugoslavia's six constituent republics met in Zagreb on June 6 and agreed to consider a compromise plan to transform the country into a loose alliance of sovereign states, based on a proposal put forward by the presidents of the republics of Bosnia-Hercegovina and Macedonia, Alija Izetbegovic and Kiro Gligorov.
Talks on June 12 between a delegation from the Federal Executive Council (FEC —the Cabinet) and Slovenian government representatives stalled over whether Slovenia would dissociate or secede from Yugoslavia.
At the core of the disagreement was the case for the extraterritoriality of some of Yugoslavia's institutions.
One point at issue for Yugoslav leaders was the extent to which current developments were damaging the relationship built up at federal level with the European Communities (EC).
In two days of talks in Belgrade on May 30-31, during which they met federal leaders and all the presidents of the republics, Jacques Delors, President of the EC Commission, and Jacques Santer, the Luxembourg Prime Minister and current chair of the EC Council of Ministers, had confirmed that the EC was ready to help a democratized and reformed Yugoslavia, with unchanged internal and external borders.
Such a state should be oriented towards a market economy, property and political pluralism and the upholding of human and civil rights; it should be willing to resolve problems in a peaceful manner without the use of force and without the imposition of unilateral decisions.
Santer reported that they had agreed on four essential points:(i) a single market with a joint central bank and currency;(ii) respect for human rights and the rights of national minorities;(iii) defence, and (iv) foreign policy.
The EC leaders had confirmed that the EC was prepared to start talks on Yugoslavia's associate membership of the EC as soon as the constitutional crisis was resolved.
Slovenian moves towards independence
On June 5, the Slovenian Assembly passed the last of the key laws to facilitate "the takeover of actual power" and Radio Ljubljana began a three-day presentation on the Slovenian independence process in which the Slovenian government participated.
During this presentation, Slovenian Prime Minister Lojze Peterle referred to the dispute between himself and Slovenian Foreign Affairs Minister Dimitrij Rupel, of the Slovene Democratic Alliance, over the pace of dissociation.
Peterle said that he did not view the planned date of Slovenia's declaration of independence as the first day of full independence, but rather as a step in a gradual process.
Rupel, however, was advocating a far "brisker approach" .
In early June Slovenia had sworn in its first 300 regular troops.
It was announced that the new Slovenian Territorial Army would be drawn in part from the old territorial defence units, and that its brief was purely defensive.
It was announced that laws were being drafted on borders, on economic and foreign policy, and on the implementation of independence.
It was also revealed that an unnamed Slovenian currency had been printed.
Meanwhile, on June 4 Peterle visited Vienna, where he was received by the Austrian Foreign Minister, Aloïs Mock, who left open the issue of Austrian recognition of an independent Slovenia.
On June 11, the Slovenian Constitutional Commission approved the draft of a special constitutional document transferring the competencies of the Federation to the Republic of Slovenia.
It was decided that the decree would be presented to the Slovenian Assembly on June 19.
The Commission also discussed the republic's draft constitution, but the debate was inconclusive and a number of key issues including the structure of the parliament, and the status of regions and their competencies, were left unresolved.
After the unsuccessful talks on June 12 [see above], Markovic addressed the Slovenian Assembly, urging it to remain part of Yugoslavia.
He warned that if Slovenia went ahead with secession, EC support would be withdrawn —leading to the total economic collapse of Yugoslavia as early as September.
He also emphasised his concern that the FEC was not being included in the process of dissociation and had not been involved in discussions on social and economic issues with Slovenia.
Peterle also addressed the Assembly and expressed Slovenia's willingness to discuss future links with Yugoslavia, but emphasized that it was "difficult to see a promising future in being linked to areas of conflict, where human and national rights are infringed" .
He said that Slovenia proposed the gradual implementation of monetary independence, encompassing the issue of banknotes and coins, and the gradual withdrawal of the Yugoslav National Army (JNA) from Slovenian territory, with the takeover of JNA premises and equipment to be completed by Dec. 31, 1993.
Dispute over customs payments
The dispute between the federal and Slovenian governments over customs payments intensified in June.
On June 13 and 14 the FEC reiterated its demand and Slovenia its refusal to remit customs duties to the federal authorities.
The federal government announced that Slovenian importers would not be allowed to collect their goods unless they remitted customs duties direct to the federal account; outstanding duties from Slovenian importers, it said, amounted to about 2,500 million dinars (US$110 million).
Slovenia announced on June 17 that if the customs war intensified it would employ its own customs officials, but it reportedly backed down after a threat of direct action by the FEC.
Slovenian independence legislation
As efforts intensified for the republic to complete the necessary legislation for independence by June 26, the Slovenian Assembly adopted on June 25 the constitutional law for the implementation of the basic document on autonomy and independence.
The republic proclaimed, as a sovereign and independent state, that the Constitution of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (SFRY) was no longer valid on its territory and that it would be continuing the process of assuming de facto authority.
On June 26, Independence Day celebrations were held.
Croatian independence preparations
Croatia likewise accelerated its preparations for independence, and on June 18 a permanent session of the Croatian Assembly opened with the aim of adopting all the necessary legislation for independence.
On June 24, Markovic visited Zagreb and addressed the Croatian assembly.
He warned that the federal government would use "every legal measure" to prevent the break-up of Yugoslavia.
Nonetheless, on June 25, Franjo Tudjman, the Croatian president, proclaimed the full sovereignty and independence of the Republic of Croatia.
The suspension of over 40 federal laws in the republic was announced the following day.
Ahead of the independence declaration, 230 Serbs from the border region of Croatia were reported to have fled into neighbouring Vojvodina.
Sporadic clashes, killings and shooting incidents involving ethnic Serbs and Croats continued throughout June, with some escalation after the declaration.
Four people were killed in Glina in several days of fighting which began on June 26 when Serbs tried to take control of the police station.
A policeman was killed and four people were injured in a clash in Brsadin at the same time.
Parliament call for army intervention
At an emergency session on June 25 the federal parliament in Belgrade called on the JNA to intervene to "protect Yugoslavia's borders" .
An emergency FEC meeting later the same evening endorsed the call.
The post of President of the Collective State Presidency, which also carried the office of commander-in-chief of the armed forces, was still vacant following the May deadlock [see below; pp. 38203-04], and the government did not have the constitutional authority to order the army to mobilize.
However, justifying the decision several days later, Markovic said: "Slovenia had refused all appeals from the federal government and I could no longer take responsibility for the further development of events in the republic." 
The next day Ljubljana radio reported troop movements, and throughout the day there were reports of overflights at low altitude by military aircraft.
On June 27, the Federal Secretariat for National Defence mobilized 1,990 members of the JNA.
Army movements began at 9 a.m., with columns heading for the Austrian, Italian and Hungarian borders of Slovenia.
The federal authorities reported that JNA troops encountered numerous roadblocks and met heavily armed resistance, but reached the borders by 9 p.m.
Col.-Gen.
Konrad Kolsek, commander of the Fifth Army district, informed Peterle that his command had been "charged with the task of taking over all border crossings and protecting the state borders of the SFRY" .
He added that any resistance would "be crushed" .
At this point, Milan Kucan, the Slovenian President, accused the JNA of carrying out "direct aggression and the attempted occupation of the Republic of Slovenia" and urged the 4,000 Slovenes serving in the federal army to desert and return home.
The federal authorities closed down the Slovenian airports on June 27, through the traffic control based in Belgrade.
The same day, the JNA bombed Ljubljana airport, causing the deaths of two Austrian journalists, and Slovenian troops claimed to have shot down six federal air force helicopters and one aircraft.
Extensive fighting was reported.
An FEC meeting on June 27 called for a three-month moratorium on the implementation of all decisions concerning secession, dissociation and the changing of internal borders between republics.
It also announced that a meeting of the Collective State Presidency would be held as soon as possible to proclaim a president and vice-president and discuss the security situation.
Fighting and air attacks continued until the afternoon of June 28, when Ljubljana radio reported that the JNA had "ceased all activities" on Slovenian territory.
Belgrade radio, reporting an FEC session, said that the federal army had stopped all its activities "as it has accomplished the planned tasks" .
The JNA claimed to have gained control of all 27 Slovenian border crossings, although Slovenian forces were still claiming to hold some of them.
In four days of fighting it was reported that more than 100 people were killed.
EC-brokered ceasefire agreement
An EC "troika" mission of the Foreign Ministers of Luxembourg, Italy and the Netherlands (Jacques Poos, Gianni De Michelis and Hans van den Broek) met federal and republic leaders in Belgrade and Zagreb on June 28.
Austria had meanwhile dispatched several hundred additional troops to its southern border and demanded an explanation for "extraordinary military activities" , saying that its airspace had been violated by JNA aircraft.
On the same day, Italy and Austria called for a meeting of the Conflict Prevention Centre of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe [see also p. 38314]; the EC's European Parliament called for an immediate meeting of CSCE foreign ministers; and German Foreign Minister Hans-Dietrich Genscher proposed invocation of the CSCE emergency procedure agreed the previous week.
The "troika" managed to secure agreement on a ceasefire, requiring the JNA's immediate return to barracks, a three-month suspension in implementation of Slovenia's declaration of independence, and the election of the Croatian, Stipe Mesic, to the rotating office of President of the Collective State Presidency
However, the deal quickly fell apart.
Although Kucan had backed the suspending of independence, he was overruled within 24 hours by the Slovenian Assembly.
Sporadic outbursts of fighting continued, with claims and counterclaims as to who was responsible, and late on June 29 Gen. Marko Negovanovic, a member of the JNA high command, appeared on television to warn Slovenia to stop fighting or face "decisive military action" .
This fuelled concern that the JNA was no longer accountable to the federal government, but within hours Markovic was promising Kucan that there would be no further air raids.
On June 30 the EC troika returned to Yugoslavia to try to salvage the peace deal.
Poos informed Markovic, and the Presidents of Slovenia, Croatia and Serbia, that unless a ceasefire was implemented and JNA forces returned to their barracks the EC's US$1,155 million five-year aid programme to Yugoslavia would be frozen.
After a meeting in Ljubljana between Markovic, Kucan and Peterle, the JNA agreed to withdraw from Slovenia on July 1.
Mesic, the Vice-President of Croatia, was duly proclaimed President of the Collective State Presidency on June 30.
Mesic had been due to take up office on May 15, under the system of rotating leadership, but Serbia, Vojvodina and Bosnia Hercegovina blocked his appointment, thus precipitating a constitutional deadlock.
(A vote of no confidence in the federal government, tabled by the Vojvodina delegation in the Chamber of Republics and Provinces of the Federal Assembly, had failed on May 23.)
Developments in Krajina
On May 29 the self-proclaimed "Serbian Autonomous Region of Krajina" , within Croatia [see pp. 38163; 38203-04]proclaimed its existing "basic statute act" to be a constitution law.
The region's leader, Milan Babic, announced that Krajina was a federal unit in which the laws and regulations of the Republic of Serbia applied.
The deputies of the Krajina parliament approved a package of laws on the judiciary, administration and the formation of ministries, and appointed a government.
On June 6 the region issued warrants for the arrest of the Croatian Defence Minister and Interior Minister for their crimes against Serbs in Croatia.
On June 27 a document was promulgated declaring the unification of the "two Krajinas" —the "Autonomous Region" and the Bosanska Krajina municipal community.
The move was explicitly in response to the "disintegration of Yugoslavia, caused by the secession of Slovenia and Croatia" and in accordance with "the principle that all Serbs should live in one state" .
Developments in Macedonia and Kosovo
The Assembly of Macedonia dropped the attribute "socialist" from the republic's official title on June 7, to become the Republic of Macedonia.
It also adopted four constitutional amendments, one of which specified that only the Macedonian Assembly could proclaim a state of emergency in the republic.
A special amendment stipulated that Macedonia would henceforth regulate its own balance of payments.
On June 22 Macedonia announced a programme in the event of dissociation.
On June 13 in Kosovo a public protest was held in the form of a funeral procession for a symbolic "burial of the current violence" .
The leader of the Kosovo Parliamentary Party, Veton Suroi, was subsequently sentenced to two months' imprisonment for organising the event without seeking permission, or registering it with the police.
The Union of Independent Kosovo Trade Unions called on all firms and institutions to reinstate the ethnic Albanians dismissed from their jobs after taking part in nationalist protests and the general strike of 1990.
The Republic of Serbia responded on June 14 by saying that "far-reaching consequences could ensue if forceful entry into work organisations takes place in Kosovo" .
Baker visit
James Baker, the United States Secretary of State, visited Yugoslavia on June 21 for a series of talks with Markovic, Loncar, the leaders of the six republics, representatives of the Kosovo Albanian opposition movement, and the leaders of the Democratic Alliance, the Parliamentarian Party and the Committee for the Protection of Human Rights.
Baker said that the United States would not recognize Slovenia or Croatia as international subjects, but spoke in favourable terms of the idea of Yugoslavia becoming a loose alliance of states as in the Izetbegovic-Gligorov compromise proposal [see above], and warned, at the end of his visit, of the tragic consequences of Yugoslav instability.
The US State Department declared on June 28 that Belgrade must "find a way to give vent to the national aspirations of the various elements within Yugoslavia in a peaceful way" .
AFRICA
ETHIOPIA
Consolidation of EPRDF control over west and south
Forces of the Ethiopian People's Revolutionary Democratic Front (EPRDF) consolidated during early and mid-June their control over areas to the west and south of Addis Ababa.
They took Dire Dawa in the Harer region on May 31, Harer town on June 2, and Jijiga by June 5, thus securing access to the southern Ogaden region.
There were reports of about 100 people killed during the fighting for Dire Dawa, where the local population had resisted the entry of EPRDF forces.
In Harer town two employees of the UN World Food Programme (UNWFP) were killed in civil disturbances.
Development workers in the towns of Sashemene and Sodo (200 and 280 km south of Addis Ababa respectively) reported that looting which had started on May 21 had ended with the arrival of EPRDF troops in early June.
EPRDF forces entered Moyale, a town on the border with Kenya, on June 12, and 120 Ethiopian army officers surrendered to EPRDF forces in Ilubabor region on June 19.
Explosions in Addis Ababa
Over 100 people were estimated to have been killed, and about 7,000 made homeless, by a series of explosions at an ammunition dump in the southern Addis Ababa suburb of Bekulo Bet on June 4.
The EPRDF attributed the disaster to pro-Mengistu saboteurs; local residents said that a gun-battle had preceded the explosions.
There had been several less serious explosions in or near Addis Ababa since the EPRDF takeover; a number of residents of the Shagolle suburb had been killed on May 28 when a shell hit a munitions plant, and five people, including two EPRDF guards, were killed by gunmen at Addis Ababa University on May 31.
Interim government — Political detainees
Meles Zenawi, the EPRDF leader and acting head of state, arrived in Addis Ababa from London on June 1, having held talks with Sudan's head of state, Lt.-Gen.
Omar al-Bashir in Khartoum, the Sudanese capital, en route.
Zenawi and other EPRDF leaders emphasized throughout June the "interim" nature of the EPRDF administration pending the July 1 conference and the formation of a "broad-based, transitional government" , as reaffirmed in an EPRDF statement of June 26.
On June 1, Seyoum Mesfin was designated Acting Foreign Minister, and on June 6 the Eritrean People's Liberation Front (EPLF) vice-chairman Tamirat Laynie became Acting Prime Minister, responsible to Zenawi.
Official announcements reported the "surrender" of senior officials of the former ruling Ethiopian Democratic Unity Party (EDUP) and army officers in Addis Ababa (on June 2-4) and in provincial towns (until June 19).
By June 6 about 300 such detainees were being held under light security in Addis Ababa, and the interim government had stated that they were to be tried in the presence of international observers.
Abolition of EDUP
On June 18 the EDUP (until May 1990 known as the Workers' Party of Ethiopia —WPE) was declared illegal.
All government ministries except those of the Interior and Defence were to remain intact.
Committees formed at the level of kebele (neighbourhood) by the EDUP were renamed "peace and stability committees" and were ordered on June 16 to decide which of their members should be armed.
On June 23 they were instructed to exclude all former EDUP members.
Ethiopian Jews
On June 10 Zenawi criticized the previous regime for accepting a payment in connection with the migration of Ethiopian Jews to Israel [see pp. 38174-75, which, he said, "should have been handled as a humanitarian problem" .
A report from Israel on June 23 said that the remaining Ethiopian Jews were to emigrate on commercial flights, following the interim government's decree (on June 21) allowing freedom of movement for all citizens.
Relief operations and refugees
Representatives of UN relief agencies in Addis Ababa on June 3 expressed extreme concern over the immediate food needs of 500,000 Ethiopians.
The situation was especially serious in the Harer and Ogaden areas, where UN relief operations were suspended in late May until June 15; on June 21 the office of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees announced from Geneva that it had begun a food airlift to 80,000 people stranded near Gode in the southern Ogaden.
On June 11 the first truck convoy since the fall of Mengistu set out from the port of Assab towards Addis Ababa carrying fuel and food.
In talks held in Assab on June 2-6 EPRDF and EPLF representatives had agreed on access to the port.
The Executive Director of the UNWFP, James Ingram, said on June 15 in Nairobi that the situation in the Horn of Africa demanded "dynamic, quick action" from the international community.
The new authorities in Addis Ababa "could not have been more co-operative" during his recent talks with them.
The armed conflict and change of regime had created fresh groups of displaced people.
By mid-June these included: 5-7,000 Ethiopian refugees in Yemen, including 1,700 naval personnel; 3,000 refugees from Assab in Djibouti; 300,000 people who returned to Sudan from camps near Gambela [see below]; 130,000 Ethiopians in the Sudanese town of Kassala who were reported to be non-Tigreans who had recently left Tigray; and 30,000 Ethiopians who had crossed into Kenya at Moyale.
AFRICA
SUDAN
Refugee influx from Ethiopia — Sudanese government air raids
By June 15 UN World Food Programme (WFP) officials in Nairobi numbered at 400,000 the refugees who had left Ethiopia for Sudan following the overthrow in May of the Mengistu regime.
Many had trekked through swamplands to reach the border towns of Akobo, Nasir and Jekou in Sudan's Upper Nile and Jonglei States.
The refugees were Sudanese who had been living in camps in Ethiopia's Ilubabor region since fleeing the war in southern Sudan in the mid-1980s.
Over 200,000 people had fled from the Itang refugee camp near Gambela in Ethiopia, on May 26.
By some accounts fire had been directed at the camp by Oromo Liberation Front (OLF) forces —an accusation which the OLF denied.
UN officials and journalists based in Kenya claimed that a Sudanese government Antonov transport plane made inaccurately aimed bombing raids on May 30-June 2 on the Jekou and Akobo, where about 65,000 refugees had congregated and which were in territory held by the rebel Sudan People's Liberation Army (SPLA); one casualty was reported.
By June 17 the WFP had secured the co-operation of the Sudanese authorities in allowing relief into the area by river barge and by air from northern Kenya.
Amnesty for rebel fighters
Sudanese radio publicized in June an offer of amnesty for "all those who have been carrying arms against the state" .
First announced on April 30, the amnesty was extended indefinitely on June 7.
 "Returnees" were told that they would be well treated on giving themselves up to the local authorities.
Sudanese radio reported on June 25 that the interim administration in Ethiopia had given SPLA forces based there a deadline (unspecified) before which they had either to disarm or to leave Ethiopian territory.
AFRICA
SOMALIA
Appointment of Somaliland government
On June 4 a radio broadcast from Hargeisa announced the membership of the Somali National Movement (SNM) government of the recently declared secessionist Republic of Somaliland.
Most of the 17 members of the new government were from the Issaq clan.
Africa Confidential of June 14 said that although 13 members of the government were Issaqs, its membership was "carefully balanced" between the main Issaq sub-clans and other clans; the delay in appointing the government underlined the lack of agreement over the secession among SNM leaders, some of whom regarded the measure not as final but as merely a "step towards renegotiating the 1960 unification and redressing an unequal relationship" .
Reconciliation talks in Djibouti
Talks sponsored by Djibouti President Hassan Gouled Aptidon brought together in Djibouti on June 5-15 the leaders of four Somali groups —the United Somali Congress (USC), which had formed an interim administration in Mogadishu in January [see pp. 37946-47]; the Somali Salvation Democratic Front (SSDF); the Somali Patriotic Movement (SPM): and the Somali Democratic Movement (SDM).
SNM leaders had not accepted an invitation to attend which had been extended by the USC's interim government on May 26.
The meeting produced agreement on a ceasefire, on a final assault against remaining supporters of former President Siyad Barre, and on the convening of a further meeting one month later.
On June 13 the four groups were reported to have sent envoys to meet SNM leaders and to attempt to persuade them to abandon secession and join a transitional government for the whole of Somalia.
AFRICA
RWANDA
Constitutional changes
On June 10 President Juvénal Habyarimana signed into law a new Constitution which meant, he said, that "arms are to be replaced by ballot boxes" .
It came into effect immediately, allowing multiparty politics and separating the executive, legislature and judiciary; it also introduced the post of prime minister and limited the tenure of the president.
There was no timetable for elections.
Constitutional changes were first announced on April 28 at the extraordinary congress of the ruling National Revolutionary Movement for Development (MRND) which began on the same day.
During the congress the MRND was restructured and renamed the National Republican Movement for Democracy and Development.
Two opposition groups were formed in response to the constitutional changes.
The Rwanda Patriotic Front (FPR), however, rejected the constitutional changes, and continued fighting (despite the ceasefire agreement signed with the government —see p. 38134) during May and June, describing its actions as "in self-defence" .
Following the Organization of African Unity (OAU) summit meeting in June [see p. 38279]a mini-summit of neighbouring countries was scheduled to settle the conflict.
AFRICA
MADAGASCAR
Demonstrations for reform
A coalition of 16 opposition parties, calling itself the
Comité de forces vives, brought tens of thousands of people on to the streets of the capital, Antananarivo, each day from June 10 to the end of the month to demonstrate for far-reaching political reforms.
Crowds, apparently peaceable, were estimated at up to 200,000 on some days.
President Didier Ratsiraka, in power since 1975, returned to Antananarivo on June 14 from a four-day official visit to France.
He said in a Radio France Internationale interview broadcast on the same day that he had won 62.7 per cent of votes in the March 1989 presidential elections and that his opponents were a minority.
The mass demonstrations demanded his resignation, the abrogation of the socialist constitution, a national conference and a new constitution.
On June 21, the opposition parties announced the formation of a "provisional government" .
By the end of June, however, they had apparently won no concessions from the government.
AFRICA
ANGOLA
Beginning of national reconciliation
Celebrations throughout Angola across the weekend of June 1-2 followed the signing of the May 31 peace agreement between the ruling Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola-Workers' Party (MPLA-PT) and the United States-backed rebel National Union for Total Independence of Angola (UNITA)[for which see p. 38180].
President José Eduardo dos Santos joined an estimated 40,000 people who took part in an ecumenical thanksgiving Mass in a sports stadium in the capital, Luanda, on June 2, marking the end of 16 years of civil war.
As foreseen under the peace agreement, officials of the two parties began the first meeting of their Joint Political and Military Commission, together with Soviet, US and Portuguese representatives, in Luanda on June 17.
The meeting started 12 days late, apparently because of difficulties over housing delegates in the capital.
The Commission's role was understood to include supervising implementation of the peace accord, and organizing national legislative and presidential elections to be held in 1992.
Amid a widespread mood of national reconciliation, sappers of the two armies collaborated throughout the month to neutralize some of the thousands of landmines concealed in wide areas of the country, and began recovering weapons caches and disarming civilians.
There were persistent allegations on UNITA's radio service in the early part of June of attacks on UNITA officials and supporters.
The radio also claimed that some Cuban troops were still present despite reports in May that all had been withdrawn [see p. 38180].
A group of 440 UN troops began arriving to monitor the ceasefire.
AFRICA
GABON
Appointment of new government
President Omar Bongo announced the resignation of Prime Minister Casimir Oye Mba's second government on June 7 and called on opposition parties to join a "government of national consensus" .
Following a meeting on June 15, however, the parties issued a joint statement rejecting the President's invitation.
On June 18 Bongo announced Oye Mba's re-appointment and, three days later, Oye Mba announced his third government.
The resignation followed the introduction of a new Constitution adopted by the National Assembly on March 14, which stipulated that government members had to be aged 35 or above and have held professional responsibilities for a minimum of seven years.
Among those excluded by the provision was Bongo's son, Ali Bongo, aged 33, who had held the portfolio of Foreign Affairs, Co-operation and Francophone Affairs.
He was replaced by his sister, Pascaline Bongo.
Andre Mba Obame, 33, Minister of Human Rights, was also replaced.
Jean Ping, Minister of Mines, Petroleum, Energy and Water Resources, who had failed to win a seat in elections in September 1990, was another prominent figure to leave the government, his post going to his former deputy, Hervo Akendengue.
AFRICA
CONGO
Announcement of elections
The national conference on the political future of the country which began on Feb. 25, 1991 ended on June 10.
The conference decided that the country (hitherto known as the People's Republic of the Congo) should be renamed the Republic of Congo.
The government was to be responsible for executing decisions of the conference during a transition to multiparty democracy.
A constitutional referendum in November 1991 would be followed by local elections in January 1992, legislative elections in March 1992 and presidential elections in May 1992.
Conference delegates were severely critical of Denis Sassou-Nguesso, who was to remain President, but with greatly reduced executive powers, during the transitional period.
He was found to be responsible for the gross mismanagement of oil earnings, and was also implicated in a number of political assassinations.
On June 8 Andre Milongo was elected Prime Minister with the power to appoint members of the government and with control over the armed forces.
Milongo named a 25-member government on June 15 which included Edouard Ebouka-Babackas as Minister of Economy, Finance and Planning; Alexis Gabou as Minister of the Interior and Decentralization; and Jean-Blaise Kololo as Minister of Foreign Affairs and Co-Operation.
AFRICA
BURKINA
New Constitution — Progress to multiparty elections
A national referendum on June 2 was reported to have resulted in a 93 per cent vote in favour of a new Constitution providing for a multiparty system, ending 13 years of military rule.
Nine days later, President Blaise Compaoré issued decrees bringing the Constitution into immediate effect, and dissolving the government.
A transitional government of 28 ministers and six secretaries of state was named by Compaoré on June 16.
The appointments did not include a Prime Minister, but Roch Marc Christian Kaboré was named as Minister of State in charge of Co-ordination of Government Action.
Compaoré had also called a round table meeting of 24 political parties on June 11, but representatives of 13 of them walked out, protesting that Compaoré viewed the meeting as consultative rather than as a sovereign decision-making body.
It was understood that the new government would lead the country to presidential elections in November, and to multiparty legislative elections in December.
AFRICA
SIERRA LEONE
Continuing rebel attacks
Throughout June, Sierra Leonean and Guinean units, bolstered from June 10 by the arrival in the war zone of Nigerian combat troops, maintained their resistance to attacking forces of the National Patriotic Front of Liberia (NPFL)[see p. 38181].
A Sierra Leonean dissident leader, Foday Sankoh and his followers were believed to be siding with the Liberian guerrillas loyal to Charles Taylor [see also this page]with the shared aim of seizing control of mineral-rich areas close to the Liberian border around the towns of Pujehun, Kenema, Segbwema and Bo.
According to West Africa, diamond smuggling into Liberia from Sierra Leone had been estimated to yield about US$100 million annually, even before the conflict, and the mines were now a prime rebel objective.
Government and allied forces claimed to have stemmed rebel attacks on the border towns by the end of the month.
A contingent of Nigerian troops was reported on June 9 to have arrived in Bo.
In their first action, at Pujehun on June 21, Nigerian troops and their Guinean and Sierra Leonean allies claimed to have killed "hundreds" of NPFL fighters.
Nigerian troops were also reported to be guarding key installations in the capital, Freetown.
Some 120,000 Sierra Leonean refugees from the fighting were said to have fled across the Guinean border.
Tabling of new constitution
The government's proposed new constitution, aimed at introducing multiparty democracy after 21 years of one-party rule, was tabled on June 4 in the House of Representatives, which was then adjourned until June 6 to enable members to study the draft.
It was announced on June 8 that the parliamentary term due to end on June 9 was being extended for 12 months in view of the "war situation" .
AFRICA
LIBERIA
Rebel leader's promise of peace
Fighting continued sporadically during late May and much of June, with reports of revenge killings and atrocities following the cancellation of peace talks called for May 23 in Abidjan [see p. 38181].
Two rebel factions, the Armed Forces of Liberia (AFL) and the Independent National Patriotic Front of Liberia (INPFL), had announced at the end of May that they were ceasing hostilities.
It was announced on May 30 that interim President Amos Sawyer, and Charles Taylor, leader of the main rebel group, the National Patriotic Front of Liberia (NPFL), had agreed to meet in Abidjan.
In a conciliatory broadcast to the nation on June 11 Sawyer promised equal treatment for all Liberians under a proposed peace settlement to be supervised by the Economic Community of West African States Monitoring Group (ECOMOG).
At peace talks with Sawyer in Yamoussoukro, Côte d'Ivoire, on June 30 Taylor announced that there would be no more fighting and that the war was over.
The Presidents of Burkina, Côte d'Ivoire, The Gambia, Nigeria, and Togo participated in the meeting, which appeared to set the seal on 19 months of civil war estimated to have cost 15,000 lives including that of former President Samuel Doe.
The conference established a commission to organize national elections.
Despite the apparent goodwill, deep distrust was reported to remain among the factions.
AFRICA
MAURITANIA
Bread riots — Strike
Riots in Nouadhibou, Mauritania's principal port, on June 2 were sparked by "young people of the poor quarters" spontaneously protesting about bread price rises and the allocation of municipal water pipes (according to Radio France International on June 3).
Several people were injured and shops, state-owned companies, public buildings and two police stations were attacked.
The Interior Ministry hinted at "foreign" instigation of the disorder and on June 8 confirmed that eight people placed under house arrest on June 5 in connection with the riots included Djibril Ould Abdallahi (Interior Minister until early 1990) and a former Rural Development Minister Messaoud Ould Boukheir.
According to the Agence France-Presse (AFP) news agency both men had joined a new United Democratic Front formed on June 4 by six opposition movements.
Strike
The Mauritanian Workers' Union (MWU) called a 48-hour strike for June 19-20 in protest at what it claimed was a deliberately manufactured deadlock in tripartite wage negotiations between the government, employers and the MWU.
It was the first general strike call made by the 45,000-member union, and on June 15 about 17 of 32 members of the MWU's national council signed a communiqué denouncing MWU general secretary Mohammed Ould Rahdy for launching what they claimed was a politically motivated strike.
A government communiqué of June 19 declared the strike illegal on the grounds that wage negotiations were still in progress.
Strike leaders claimed "almost complete paralysis" in the ports and mining sectors, but the public sector was also reported as having operated normally.
An AFP report of June 28 said that MWU members protesting against the dismissal of Ould Rahdy as general secretary had clashed that day with police in Nouakchott.
AFRICA
COTE D'IVOIRE
Growing protest
Student and opposition protest recurred during May and June, matched on the Abidjan university campus and in the capital's streets by military and police repression.
The period was also marked by frequent strikes, involving school and college staff, pupils and students.
Most of the trouble appeared to be centred on the Cocody and Yopougon campuses of Abidjan university where, on the night of May 17-18, troops stormed student accommodation.
According to a report by the Ligue ivorienne des droits de l'homme (Lidho), 19 students were seriously hurt; The authorities denied subsequent newspaper reports that four had been killed.
University teachers began a 48-hour strike on May 19 to protest against these events and the arrest of several hundred students.
In the largest public protest seen for over a year, an estimated 10,000 demonstrators marched through central Abidjan on May 31 chanting demands for the resignation of President Felix Houphouët-Boigny.
The march was organized by the FPI, the main opposition party.
Opposition demands for a national conference on the country's political future were denounced on June 1 by the secretary-general of the ruling PDCI, Laurent Dona Fologo, who told a rally in Abidjan that "the national conference is called the National Assembly" .
A French journalist reported that the PDCI had managed to muster only 6,000 supporters at the rally, half the number claimed in official reports.
A PDCI rally on June 22 attracted only 3,000 people.
Student protest was reported as continuing throughout June, with one student, allegedly a pro-government agitator, said to have been murdered by his fellows, provoking the government to dissolve the students' union.
In turn, the university staff union, the Syndicat national de la recherche et de l'enseignement superieur (Synares), declared an indefinite stoppage from June 25, defying a government ban.
AFRICA
GHANA
Slow progress of reform
On June 7, the government named a committee of experts which would draw up proposals for a draft constitution on the basis of previous constitutions and the report of the National Commission of Democracy, which advocated an executive president and a national assembly, both to be elected on the basis of universal suffrage, an independent judiciary and guarantees of human rights.
The committee was to submit its proposals to a 260-member consultative assembly responsible for drafting by the end of the year the new constitution which was expected to be presented for approval in a national referendum.
The government moves failed to win the support of the Movement for Freedom and Justice (MFJ)[see p. 38032]which demanded that an election timetable be set and the ban on political parties lifted.
At the end of May students demonstrated in Accra and in provincial cities in protest at the composition of the consultative assembly claiming that it was packed with government supporters.
AFRICA
OAU
Summit
The 27th Assembly of the heads of state or government of the Organization of African Unity (OAU) met in Abuja, Nigeria, on June 3-5.
The summit was preceded by the 54th ordinary meeting of the OAU Council of Ministers (on May 27-June 2) which prepared the agenda for the summit meeting.
Of the 51 members Benin, Djibouti and Somalia were the only countries not represented, and at the summit itself, 34 delegations were led by heads of state; a delegation representing the new Ethiopian regime [see p. 38276]arrived as the summit began.
The Libyan delegation withdrew following the opening session in protest at "Nigeria's unfriendly stance towards the Arab Libyan people" [for Nigeria's involvement in airlifting of prisoners of war from Chad in December 1990 see p. 37907].
President Babangida of Nigeria, assuming the chair of the organization for the coming year in succession to Ugandan President Museveni, said that his major tasks would be "to dismantle apartheid, restore peace in the troubled parts of the continent and work towards the smooth take-off of the African Economic Community (AEC)" .
The AEC Treaty was signed on June 3 (the concept of an economic community having been first formulated in the 1968 Declaration of Algiers).
The treaty provided for the establishment of a continental framework for the development of resources; for economic and trade co-operation between member states; and for the adoption of a common trade policy in regard to non-member states.
It was given a 34-year six-stage timetable for adoption and would come into force 30 days after ratification by two-thirds of the OAU membership.
On June 5, the summit adopted a declaration that sanctions be maintained against South Africa until "positive, profound and irreversible changes towards the abolition of apartheid" were made.
It thus reaffirmed OAU policy while acknowledging that with, for example, the repeal of the Group Areas Act and Land Acts some progress had occurred [see p. 38270].
The Assembly also examined reports of other continental conflicts.
A committee of heads of state of countries neighbouring Ethiopia was established to aid the process of a return to normality, stability and security there.
The OAU Secretary-General, Salim Ahmed Salim, was asked to assist all parties in Somalia [see p. 38277]to reach an agreement to safeguard national unity and ensure peace and stability.
The people of Liberia were urged to unite in the process of national reconciliation and reconstruction.
AFRICA
DJIBOUTI
French relief workers claimed that the Djibouti government and French army officers stationed in Djibouti had sent back a group of refugees across the border into an inhospitable desert region of Ethiopia on June 2; however, the French Foreign Ministry denied that there had been any forcible expulsions from Djibouti.
AMERICAS
UNITED STATES
Resignation of Attorney General
Dick Thornburgh, the Attorney General, announced his resignation on June 4, in order to contest a Senate seat left vacant by the death of his Republican party colleague John Heinz [see p. 38138].
Thornburgh, 58, a former two-term Governor of Pennsylvania, was appointed Attorney General in 1988 following the resignation of Edwin Meese in the face of investigation for financial and ethical misconduct.
Thornburgh's tenure at the Justice Department was associated with controversy, however, and there were persistent reports of low morale amongst his staff.
In addition to dealing with difficulties such as the forthcoming prosecution of the deposed Panamanian dictator, Manuel Noriega, Thornburgh was also involved in a series of struggles with Congress over several important pieces of legislation including the civil rights bill and an omnibus anti-crime package.
It was widely reported that the Republican party placed considerable pressure upon Thornburgh to contest the Senate vacancy —his Pennsylvanian background was seen as a considerable advantage —which was seen as crucial to the party's hopes of recapturing control of the upper chamber in 1992.
Opinion surveys suggested that he would enter the election as the clear favourite against Harris Wofford, the Democrat who had been appointed by the state governor to fill the vacancy temporarily and who had been selected by the Democrats as their candidate for the forthcoming election.
In announcing his decision, Thornburgh suggested that his resignation would not become effective until such time as he was formally selected as the Republican party's official candidate.
Several leading Democrats reacted to this by claiming that, were Thornburgh to remain in office, it would raise the appearance of a conflict of interest and would allow him to circumvent some of the restrictions on the raising of electoral funds.
One of the reasons for Thornburgh's reluctance to leave office immediately was current litigation in Pennsylvania challenging the system for selecting candidates for a special election by party convention rather than primary election.
On June 10 US District Judge Edward N. Cahn ruled that the use of nomination by party officials, rather than a primary, deprived voters of their right to participate "at all stages of the electoral process" and gave too much control to party activists.
Unless this ruling was overturned by a higher court, the state would either have to enact a new electoral law or would be forced to wait until 1994 (the date upon which Heinz's term would have been completed) to elect a successor to Heinz.
Resignation of House Majority Whip
William H. Gray, the third most senior Democrat in the House of Representatives and the most senior black legislator in the country, on June 20 announced his resignation as Majority Whip.
He also stated his intention to resign his seat in the House (as a representative of Pennsylvania) and to accept the presidency of the United Negro College Fund (UNCF), an organization established in 1944 to help blacks gain access to a college education.
The announcement by Gray, 49, caused widespread consternation amongst political commentators as his successful 12-year congressional career had led many to predict that he would become the first black Speaker of the House.
This, together with his recent decision to turn down the vacant Senate seat for Pennsylvania, led to speculation that there might be a hidden motive for his departure.
Gray explained his decision in terms of wishing to exert influence over the next generation of black leaders, to earn a higher salary, and to spend more time with his family and his local Baptist church.
He declined to comment on the allegation that he had decided to leave in order to deflect a Justice Department inquiry into his finances.
In 1989 Gray had been reported to be under FBI investigation concerning alleged payroll padding.
At the time Thornburgh denied the report and launched a controversial investigation into the source of the leak.
Shortly before the announcement of his resignation there were press reports that FBI agents had reviewed Gray's 1990 financial disclosures and had sought records concerning payments made to him for speaking engagements.
The circumstances of Gray's resignation helped to fuel long-standing allegations that the financial and private affairs of elected black officials were routinely investigated with greater vigour than those of their white colleagues.
The favourites to succeed Gray were David E. Benoir the Chief Deputy Whip, or Steny H. Hoyer, chairman of the Democratic Caucus.
Fresh controversy over Sununu
On June 19 Bush was forced to defend his White House Chief of Staff, John Sununu, from fresh criticism concerning his use of official facilities for unofficial trips.
Bush expressed his confidence in Sununu, but acknowledged that there was "an appearance problem" .
Bush's statement followed reports that he was "upset, angry and perplexed" by Sununu's apparent efforts to circumvent travel restrictions imposed by Bush on May 9, after an inquiry had revealed that Sununu had made widespread use of military aircraft for personal and Republican Party business.
In addition to misinforming the administration of some of his travel arrangements, in mid-June Sununu also used a White House limousine to make a 200-mile trip to New York to attend a rare stamp auction.
The restrictions on Sununu's travel arrangements were tightened still further on June 21.
On the following day the Chief of Staff, in an uncharacteristic act of public contrition, acknowledged that he had made "mistakes" .
He issued a statement in which he regretted the "appearance of impropriety produced as a result of the events surrounding my recent travel" .
The press reported that Sununu blamed his recent difficulties on a vendetta being pursued against him by enemies within the White House, elements of the liberal press and Jewish groups opposed to his Lebanese ancestry and his calls for even-handedness in US policy towards the Middle East.
The controversy caused by this suggestion forced Sununu to contact major Jewish groups towards the end of the month in order to repudiate such suggestions.
Further developments in "October Surprise" allegations
Senator Albert Gore, one of the most respected and influential members of the Democratic Party, on June 24 called for a "formal investigation" of the "October Surprise" allegation —the claim that the Reagan-Bush campaign team had negotiated with the Iranian government in 1980 in order to reap electoral advantage by delaying the release of 52 US hostages held in Iran.
Gore proposed the establishment of a bipartisan committee drawn equally from both houses of Congress, and equipped with investigative and subpoena powers.
Gore's proposal went far beyond the informal investigation begun in May at the request of House Speaker Tom Foley.
Gore justified his demand on the grounds that the evidence accumulated thus far, albeit fragmentary and largely circumstantial, was, nevertheless, "compelling" .
Prior to Gore's entry into the affair, some 75 members of Congress and eight of the erstwhile hostages had called for a full inquiry.
In making his proposal Gore cited new evidence made public by the Financial Times and by ABC News Nightline, which quoted an Iranian arms dealer, Jamshid Hashemi, who claimed to have been present at two meetings between the late William Casey, the Reagan campaign chairman, and members of the Iranian government, held in Madrid in late July and mid-August 1980.
The report also revealed that neither Casey's personal secretary nor any other members of the campaign staff were able to account for his whereabouts on July 27-29, 1980.
The only reference to Casey's whereabouts during this period was in a New York Times article dated July 30 which quoted a campaign official as saying "when he returns today from travelling abroad" .
In response to Hashemi's testimony the government of Iran issued a statement which neither confirmed nor denied that such a meeting had occurred: "The nature of the current controversies in the USA is absolutely domestic and the Islamic Republic of Iran sees no benefit to involve itself in this matter." 
The October Surprise allegations were also strengthened inadvertently by the efforts of former President Ronald Reagan to deny the story.
Speaking to reporters on June 15 in California while playing golf, Reagan dismissed the allegation as "absolute fiction" .
In doing so, however, he admitted for the first time that he had made "every effort" to obtain the release of the hostages.
When asked if this had involved contacts with the Iranian government he replied: "Not by me." 
When asked if his campaign staff had made such contacts he said that he could not "get into details" , claiming that "some of those things are still classified" .
Resignation of Supreme Court Justice
The Supreme Court's most renowned liberal member, Thurgood Marshall, on June 27 announced his resignation, effective upon the confirmation of his successor.
Marshall, 82, the first and only black member of the country's highest court, cited his heavy workload as the reason for his retirement, describing it as incompatible with his advancing age and increasing ill-health.
Marshall's departure provided President George Bush with the opportunity to make his second nomination to the nine-member court, the president having appointed David Souter in July 1990 to replace another staunch liberal, William Brennan, who had also retired on the grounds of age and ill-health [see p. 37604].
Marshall had been appointed to the Supreme Court in 1967 after a successful career as a civil rights lawyer, legal director of the National Association for the Advancement of Coloured People (NAACP) and an Appeals Court judge.
He joined the then liberal majority on the court and was instrumental in the court's many decisions which advanced minority rights.
In the 1980s, when the court's political complexion became increasingly conservative, Marshall fought tenaciously against the overturning of its earlier liberal precedents.
An indication of Marshall's increasing disenchantment with the conservatism of the current Supreme Court was evident in his final dissenting judgement which followed the court's reversal of two recent rulings.
By a 6:3 vote the court overturned a pair of decisions from 1987 and 1989 which had excluded "victim impact" evidence —concerning the character of the victim and the suffering of their survivors —from juries which were considering imposing the death penalty.
Marshall decried the reversal of a ruling made as recently as 1989, and claimed that "power, not reason, is the new currency of this court's decision-making" .
In relation to the specific victim impact cases he wrote: "Neither the law nor the facts…underwent any change in the last four years.
Only the personnel of this court did."
In behaving in such a fashion, maintained Marshall, "the majority today sends a clear signal that scores of established constitutional liberties are now ripe for reconsideration" .
Decisions relating to press freedom
Among other decisions announced by the Supreme Court before its current term ended on June 27 was the ruling in the case of Masson v. New Yorker Magazine.
The court ruled 7:2 on June 20 that writers could be sued for fabricating or deliberately altering quotations if such alterations were sufficiently different from the actual words used by the subject to alter materially their meaning.
The case arose after Jeffrey M. Masson, a psychoanalyst, attempted to sue a journalist, Janet Malcolm, for writing an article about him which included several quotations which were not among the transcripts of the tape-recorded interviews which she had conducted with him.
The federal Appeals Court in San Francisco had dismissed the case prior to trial on the grounds that even if Malcolm had manufactured the quotes, they remained legitimate because they amounted to a "rational interpretation" of what Masson had said.
A further judgment which affected press practices was made on June 24 when the court ruled 5:4 that news organizations might be sued for breaking promises of confidentiality to their sources.
The case, Cohen v. Cowles Media Co., arose from the attempt of Dan Cohen, a Minnesota political operative, to sue two of the state's largest newspapers for revealing that he had leaked information to them.
Although Cohen had been successful, the state's Supreme Court had overturned the result on the grounds that the newspapers were protected by the First Amendment.
Rulings on racial issues
The court ruled on June 20 that the 1965 Voting Rights Act applied to judicial elections, thereby allowing voters to challenge election methods which were alleged to militate against the election of minorities on to the bench.
The case, Chisom v. Roemer, was decided by a 6:3 vote.
The Voting Rights Act was passed in 1965 in response to widespread discrimination —particularly in the South — against black voters, and was expanded in 1982 to cover any election practice which resulted in a diminution of minority voting strength.
The decision, which many commentators suggested could transform the racial complexion of state courts throughout the country, was welcomed by the Bush administration.
On June 3, the court ruled by 6:3 that lawyers in civil cases could not exclude potential jurors because of their race.
The ruling, in the case of Edmonson v. Leesville Concrete Co., extended a landmark 1986 decision, which had prohibited such discrimination by prosecutors in criminal cases.
Respose to abortion ruling
The House of Representatives approved overwhelmingly on June 26 an appropriations bill which included a provision to allow federally funded family planning clinics to discuss the subject of abortion with their patients.
The move followed a Supreme Court ruling by five votes to four on May 23 in the case of Rust v. Sullivan, upholding the constitutionality of a 1988 ban on abortion counselling, even in cases where women asked for information or where their doctors believed that it was medically necessary.
In the Supreme Court's ruling, the normally conservative Sandra Day O'Connor, the only female justice, voted with the liberal minority; the decisive vote proved to be that of David Souter, Bush's only appointee to the Court, whom abortion rights advocates had long suspected of harbouring anti-abortionist views.
Further evidence of the evolution of an anti-abortionist majority on the Supreme Court was apparent in its decision on June 3 not to consider the case of Planned Parenthood v. AID.
The case involved a challenge to the Reagan administration's 1984 ban on family planning aid —administered by the Agency for International Development (AID) —to foreign health-care organizations which performed abortions or provided abortion counselling.
The US family planning programme established in 1970 dealt with more than 4,000,000 low-income women every year through some 4,000 clinics.
Such clinics had always been prohibited from using federal money to perform abortions, but until 1988 they had been allowed to discuss abortion and to provide information about its availability.
A series of legal challenges, based on the constitutional guarantee to free speech, had prevented the regulations from being enforced prior to the Supreme Court's ruling on Rust v. Sullivan.
Legislators who supported the right to abortion immediately took steps to negate the effects of the Rust v. Sullivan ruling.
The abortion counselling clause was included in an appropriations bill for labour, health and human services.
Anti-abortionists in the House, faced with growing defections from their ranks, abandoned the struggle to strike out the clause, and chose instead to rely on a promise by President George Bush, on June 4, to veto the legislation.
Such a move offered the possibility of a major confrontation between executive and legislature over the contentious issue of abortion only a year before the 1992 presidential elections.
Progress of anti-abortion legislation in individual states
In July 1989 the Supreme Court's ruling in Webster v. Reproductive Health Services [see pp. 36809-10]had allowed state legislatures to adopt laws restricting abortion.
Since that date more than 600 bills had been introduced in state legislatures.
Such bills had been enacted in 10 instances —the states of Utah, North Dakota, Pennsylvania, Mississippi, Louisiana, South Carolina, Nebraska, West Virginia and Michigan, and the territory of Guam.
As of the end of June 1991 at least six of these statutes were undergoing the process of appeal which would almost certainly bring them eventually to the Supreme Court, where any of them could serve as the occasion for the reversal of the 1973 landmark abortion rights ruling, Roe v. Wade.
In Louisiana, Republican Governor Buddy Roemer vetoed anti-abortion legislation on June 14.
The bill, the most draconian to have been passed by any state, prohibited abortion in cases other than to save a woman's life or in cases of rape (if reported within five days) or incest, where abortion would be permitted only in the first 13 weeks.
Doctors who performed illegal abortions would be subject to up to 10 years' hard labour and fines not exceeding $100,000.
Following Roemer's rejection of the bill, on June 18 both houses of the state legislature voted by more than the required two-thirds majority to override the veto.
It was the first time that a veto had been overridden in the state in the 20th century.
Within minutes of the law's enactment, the American Civil Liberties Union used a federal court to block its enforcement until its constitutionality could be determined.
In brief A seat in the House of Representatives for Massachusetts, held for 32 years by the late Silvio O. Conte (Republican), was won by the Democrats at a special election on June 4; John Olver, a liberal Democrat and strong supporter of abortion rights, narrowly defeated conservative Republican Steven Pierce, an opponent of abortion.
Lawyers for the deposed Panamanian leader Manuel Noriega were granted more time to prepare their defence when, as announced on June 7, the trial was postponed from July 22 to Sept. 3, the fourth date to have been set since Noriega was charged in January 1990.
An earthquake measuring 6.0 on the Richter scale struck southern California on June 28, killing at least one person and injuring several others; casualties were light because the epicentre of the 15-second tremor was deep beneath the San Gabriel Mountains, 65 km north of Los Angeles.
AMERICAS
CANADA
Continued debate over constitutional reform
Enactment of referendum legislation by Quebec
The national debate concerning Canada's constitutional future —particularly Quebec's role within it —which had been under way since the collapse in June 1990 of the Meech Lake Accord [see pp. 37519-20], continued in June but showed some evidence of a greater willingness to compromise by both the separatist French minority and the English-speaking majority.
In Quebec itself, the Liberal Party administration of Robert Bourassa on June 21 approved a bill which gave the province's government the right to call an independence referendum if an acceptable constitutional reform offer was not devised by October 1992.
In passing the bill Bourassa successfully resisted pressure from the separatist Parti Quebecois for an immediate referendum to capitalize on the post-Meech Lake disenchantment felt by many francophone Quebeckers towards anglophone Canada.
He also expressed optimism that an acceptable constitutional arrangement could be agreed which would obviate the need for Quebec to seek independence.
Bourassa's attitude coincided with opinion poll evidence which suggested that, while a majority of Quebec's population currently supported sovereignty for the province, there was growing concern about the potential negative effects of breaking up the Canadian federation.
Recent warnings by prominent Quebec business leaders concerning the negative economic consequences of independence, coupled with the current economic recession, were thought to have had a sobering effect upon public opinion.
Concern was also expressed in many quarters concerning the possible exodus by the province's English-speaking minority in the event of independence.
Presentation of Spicer Report
The Citizens' Forum on Canada's Future, a 12-member panel chaired by Keith Spicer and established by the federal government in late 1990, delivered its findings on June 27 in a 168-page report.
The "Spicer Report" , based upon discussions with some 300,000 Canadians over an eight-month period following the collapse of the Meech Lake Accord, recommended (i) the recognition of Quebec as a unique province, but one which had a place within a federal Canada;(ii) an independent review of the official policy of bilingualism;(iii) the fair treatment of native land claims and the institution of self-government for aboriginal peoples;(iv) a reduction of government funding of multiculturalism; and (v) the reformation or abolition of the Senate (the non-elected upper chamber of the federal legislature).
AMERICAS
CANADA-MEXICO-USA
Opening of free trade talks
Canada, Mexico and the United States began negotiations on June 12 in the Canadian city of Toronto on an ambitious free trade treaty.
The North American Free Trade Zone (Nafta) was envisaged as stretching from the Yukon to the Yucatán peninsula [for background see pp. 37849; 38140].
Trade ministers and their respective chief negotiators set up working groups to cover six specific topics —market access, trade rules, services, investment, intellectual property and dispute settlement.
Mexico had taken the initiative for this round of talks and had indicated that it would like to see an agreement signed within a year, although ministers were careful not to commit themselves to deadlines.
The US Representative for Trade Negotiations Carla Hills said that the USA was not considering any exclusions from the negotiations, but Jaime Serra Puche, the Mexican Secretary of Commerce and Industrial Development reiterated Mexico's unwillingness to discuss energy issues.
Progress on the treaty was to be reviewed in a meeting in the US city of Seattle in August, and in Mexico in September or October.
AMERICAS
MEXICO
Prison siege
A 13-day siege of a prison by the authorities in the town of Matamoros on the border with the United States in the north-eastern state of Tamaulipas ended on May 30.
Gun battles between rival gangs of inmates had left 18 prisoners dead following an unsuccessful assassination attempt on Olivero Chavez Araujo, a self-styled drug baron serving an eight-year sentence for drug trafficking.
Chavez, who was wounded in the jaw, had previously been running the prison and continued his drug business by cellular telephone from an air-conditioned suite of cells, while the other 1,200 inmates remained in severely overcrowded conditions.
To compensate them for their lack of space, Chavez had paid for all the prisoners' food and provided new plumbing and electricity.
During the siege, the majority of prisoners sided with Chavez, who hosted a banquet for them before surrendering for medical treatment.
The siege, which further highlighted the degree of corruption existing within the prison service and the federal judicial police force [see p. 37770], led to the dismissal of the Attorney General, Enrique Alvarez.
His replacement, Ignacio Morales Lechuga, opened up an immediate investigation into the running of the Matamoros prison, whose prison governor was arrested along with several of his officials.
The state police commander and prison director were also arrested as were a great number of police officers.
AMERICAS
NICARAGUA
Boycott of National Assembly by Sandinistas
The opposition Sandinista National Liberation Front (FSLN) withdrew its 39 delegates indefinitely from the 92-member National Assembly on June 18, protesting over a "reactionary initiative" to remove two 1990 laws on land redistribution and describing it as the first step of a plan to destroy the achievements of the 1979 revolution.
Right-wing parties in the ruling National Opposition Union (UNO), led by Vice-President Virgilio Godoy, had proposed the revocation of laws 85 and 86, passed by the FSLN in March 1990 following their defeat in the February 1990 presidential elections [see p. 37236].
These had conferred squatters' rights over municipal land and property rights on tens of thousands of small farmers; thousands of land expropriations had been made under the Sandinista government's agrarian reforms but not formally legalized.
Sandinista supporters occupied radio stations and municipal buildings throughout the country, including the mayor's office and the conservative Radio Corporation in the capital Managua, and several bomb explosions caused minor damage at the homes and offices of several right-wing politicians and parties in what appeared to be a co-ordinated attack.
The FSLN leader and former President Daniel Ortega Saavedra rejected a request from the Mexican government that he vacate a mansion in the centre of Managua, originally owned by a banker and his Mexican wife; the Mexican ambassador was recalled for "consultations" in late May over this issue.
The mansion subsequently became a symbol for the FSLN and its retention a powerful factor in the confiscation debate.
FSLN leaders had been given farms and houses because, the Sandinistas argued, they had sacrificed good salaries for a decade and dedicated their lives to the defence of the country against the US-backed contra rebels.
The crisis placed an unprecedented strain on the fragile and tacit pact by which the Sandinistas backed the efforts of President Violeta Chamorro de Barrios to promote national reconciliation in return for their continued control of the army and police force.
Godoy's supporters opposed such a conciliatory stance to the Sandinistas and saw the return of properties to their original owners as a test of the government's attitude to the private sector.
The government's own position was that conflicting property claims should, if possible, be resolved by arbitration within the context of a national dialogue between trade unions and business leaders [see p. 37771].
The government had, however, signed in late May a decree easing the procedure for former owners to reclaim confiscated properties, and the FSLN claimed that this violated a pledge to respect existing legislation awarding title to current occupiers of properties [see p. 37370].
The FSLN and Antonio Lacayo Oyanguren, the influential presidency minister, both accused Godoy of fomenting political unrest and linked him to a current mobilization of several hundred former contra rebels [see below].
The Ministry of the Interior had announced on June 11 that it had discovered a plot to assassinate Chamorro, Lacayo and the Army C.-in-C., Gen. Humberto Ortega Saavedra.
Renewed contra activity
FSLN leaders, headed by Daniel Ortega, met former leaders of the contras on June 24, the first such meeting between the two since the Sandinistas relinquished power in April 1990.
Both sides agreed to work together "village by village, town by town, province by province" to bring security to rural areas by disarming peasants and resolving land disputes.
The meeting was held to contain and deal with the mobilization of an estimated 400-500 re-contras (disbanded contras who had again taken up arms) in the northern Jinotega province.
Led by Dimas Tigrillo ( "Wildcat" ), the re-contras had on June 13 forcibly occupied the town of San José Bocay, 250 km north of Managua, to publicize their demands, among which were the restructuring and integration of contras into the predominantly Sandinista police force in the north, and the removal of Humberto Ortega from his post.
The government had reaffirmed its intention of replacing some Sandinista police officers with former contras, during a five-day meeting held earlier in the month with representatives of the UN International Commission of Support and Verification (CIAV) and former contra leaders.
US compensation
The National Assembly on June 5 voted by 49 to one to revoke a previous Sandinista law demanding that the United States pay US$17,000 million in compensation for economic damages incurred during the civil war between the FSLN and the contras.
(The 39 Sandinista delegates had walked out in protest before the vote and three other delegates were absent.)
The compensation claim was of symbolic importance to the Sandinistas and followed a 1986 ruling by the International Court of Justice that the US had broken international law and had committed illegal acts in its support of the former contras.
The June 5 vote left the way open for the government to drop the claim.
AMERICAS
COLOMBIA
Increased prospects for peace and democracy
An end to the worst bloodshed in recent years and the prospect of national peace and increased democracy was widely considered to be dependent on the successful outcome of three events taking place simultaneously.
These were the decision of the Constituent Assembly to dissolve the Congress and call fresh elections, the surrender of the country's most notorious drug trafficker Pablo Escobar Gaviria, and peace talks between the government and the remaining two most important guerrilla groups.
Dissolving of Congress
The 79-member Constituent Assembly, the majority of whose members were directly elected in December 1990 to draft a new constitution [see pp. 37450; 37914], voted by 54 votes to nine on June 8 to dissolve the existing Congress on July 2, although it still had 2@1/2 years to run, and to hold fresh legislative elections on Oct. 27.
A new Congress would be installed on Feb. 2, 1992.
The delegates also agreed that (i) during this interim period, President César Gaviria Trujillo should rule by decree aided by a committee of 18 to be elected by the Assembly on July 2;(ii) current government ministers and delegates of the Constituent Assembly would be barred from running for office; and (iii) congressmen serving three or four consecutive terms would, in the future, be declared ineligible for further office but this norm would not be retroactive.
The Constituent Assembly itself was to be dissolved on July 5 when a new constitution was to be published.
The Constituent Assembly's decision was based on recommendations emanating from a political pact signed by Gaviria with leaders of his Ruling Liberal Party (PL) and the two parties jointly outnumbering the PL in the Assembly, namely the M-19 Democratic Alliance (a left-wing coalition led by the former guerrilla group 19 April Movement (M-19)) and the conservative Movement of National Salvation (MSN).
The pact was ostensibly motivated by a desire to eradicate political dynasties and corruption in favour of political renovation and democratic change.
Some analysts, however, interpreted it as a manoeuvre by Gaviria to seize the initiative from the M-19 and MSN, and to control the reform movement in order to reduce a future threat to PL rule.
Minority Constituent Assembly groups not consulted, along with PL and Social Conservative Party (PSC) delegates in the Congress, strongly criticized the pact, claiming that it amounted to a period of "presidential dictatorship" .
The strongest criticisms came from those congressmen whose regional power bases were now threatened, and from PL and PSC power brokers whose ability to elect and re-elect their own people was endangered.
Congressional threats to resist the dissolution of the Congress, however, were not expected to materialize and the major parties were already preparing for the election campaign.
Surrender of drug cartel chief
Pablo Escobar Gaviria, 42, the leader of the Medellín drug cartel, voluntarily surrendered himself to state authorities on June 19.
He was taken to a private prison, built to his own design and whose security arrangements and guards had been vetted in advance by the cartel, situated near to his home town of Envigado, now a suburb of the city of Medellín.
Escobar characterized his surrender as an act of peace influenced by the efforts of the Constituent Assembly to strengthen human rights and democracy.
Mediated by a well-known priest, Fr Rafael García Herreros, it came, however, within five hours of a Constituent Assembly vote removing the extradition of drug traffickers from the statute book, a decision which the United States government roundly denounced.
The surrender followed that of other Medellín drug cartel leaders [see pp. 37957; 38001]who had accepted a government offer of immunity from extradition to the United States on drug and murder charges, and who faced the prospect of lighter prison sentences if they "confessed" to their crimes [see pp. 37772; 37851].
There was widespread media criticism of the government for capitulating to the drug traffickers, but Gaviria denied that he had entered into negotiations or made any prior deal with Escobar as part of a policy to defuse the costly and violent "drug war" gripping the country.
Escobar, accused of responsibility for the murder of hundreds of people over a 10-year period, including a Justice Minister, an Attorney General, at least one presidential candidate [see p. 36844]and 107 passengers aboard a domestic flight [see p. 37041], was not expected to stand trial for at least a year.
Thomas McNamara, the US ambassador to Colombia, stated that Colombia's drug policy was also on trial, but he expected that the USA would co-operate with the Colombian authorities by handing over evidence against Escobar [see p. 38001].
Six other Medellín cartel leaders also surrendered on June 20-21: Gustavo González, Valentín Jesus Taborda, John Jairo Velázquez Vázquez, Carlos Aguilar Gallego, Otoniel González Franco and Escobar's brother Roberto Escobar.
Hopes that this would to lead to a significant drop in drug trafficking was offset by speculation that the rival Cali cartel, whose drug operations were more sophisticated and less reliant on intimidation and violence, would now step in and increase cocaine production.
There were other unsubstantiated reports, however, that Cali cartel leaders might also take advantage of the government's surrender offer.
Peace talks with guerrillas
Peace talks were held in the Venezuelan capital of Caracas on June 3-9, June 11-15 and June 20-26 between representatives of the government and of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) and the National Liberation Army (ELN)(negotiating jointly as factions of the Simón Bolívar National Guerrilla Co-ordinating Group (CNGSB)).
The talks failed to produce an agreement to end almost 30 years of guerrilla war; both sides remained divided on the scope and location of the areas to which the guerrillas would be restricted prior to a ceasefire coming into operation.
Joint agreement was reached, however, on the creation of an International Supervision Commission to verify possible stages of a future peace process.
This commission would be composed of mutually acceptable and appropriate international personalities and representatives from governments and international organizations.
In addition, non-government regional commissions, whose members would be drawn from the Roman Catholic church, trade unions and social organizations and include recognized local personalities, would oversee the application of a ceasefire.
The peace talks were scheduled to resume in Caracas on July 15.
Demobilization of guerrilla group
The Quintín Lame Movement, an indigenous guerrilla movement founded in 1984 and a member of the CNGSB, formally disarmed and demobilized its estimated 130 members on May 31.
Previously active in the southern department of Cauca, it became the fourth guerrilla group to give up the armed struggle following the example of the M-19 [see p. 37311], the People's Liberation Army (EPL) and the Workers' Revolutionary Party (PRT)[see p. 38094], each of which had returned to mainstream politics.
AMERICAS
PERU
Emergency powers
Congress granted emergency legislative powers to President Alberto Keinya Fujimori, for a 150-day period starting from June 18, to draft a national peace policy to combat increased guerrilla activity and drug-related terrorism, and to foster an improvement in the economic climate, marred by major strikes [see below].
New guerrilla offensive
In mid- to late June the Maoist Shining Path (Sendero Luminoso) guerrilla group brought its latest two-month offensive to a head with well-orchestrated attacks around the country, during which at least 60 people were killed and 15 private banks were bombed in the capital, Lima.
Fujimori announced on June 23 the capture of three Sendero Luminoso central committee members, Yovanka Pardave Trujillo, Víctor García Castano and Tito Valle Travesano, a former president of the Association of Democratic Lawyers specializing in the defence of detainees on terrorist charges.
Apart from this, the principal government response had apparently been a highly publicized campaign to remove Sendero graffiti from the walls of two Lima universities, and the distribution of old-fashioned Winchester rifles to peasant militia self-defence groups (rondas campesinas) during a militaristic ceremony held in the Andean village of Chaquichocha on June 23.
Critics stated that such measures encouraged further guerrilla reprisals against peasant communities [see p. 38188].
A guerrilla offensive launched in May by the Tupac Amaru Revolutionary Movement (MRTA) in the Amazonian San Martín department reportedly led to the capture in early June of Alberto Galvez Olaecbea, one of the MRTA's principal leaders.
The scope of guerrilla activity meant that an estimated 55 per cent of the population currently lived under a state of emergency covering 44 per cent of national territory.
Faced increasingly by better organized guerrillas and with poor pay and conditions, an estimated 40 per cent of army conscripts had deserted, and 550 army officers had resigned, in the first quarter of 1991.
Solidarity tax
A six-month "solidarity tax" on incomes over 210 intis per month (approximately US$242), operable from June to December, was approved by a congressional economic commission on June 7.
It was strongly criticized by a majority of the Congress and by both business and the trade unions.
The measure was primarily designed to raise an additional US$500,000,000 to finance pay increases for 260,000 teachers (on strike for over a month for an 800 per cent pay rise) and 85,000 health workers (on strike for three months for a minimum wage increase of 200 per cent).
Members of the police force had also demanded a pay increase of at least a 100 per cent.
Trade union leaders stated that the poor were being asked to meet the needs of those even poorer than themselves, and accused the government of ignoring the fact that a "poverty basket" of basic goods was currently costing around 250 intis (US$301), well above the lowest wage subject to the new tax.
The employers' association, the National Society of Industries (SNI), said that the tax would lead to a further slowing of economic demand and would deepen the recession.
A call by the National Federation of Miners and Metalworkers (FETIMMP) to 80,000 miners to go on indefinite strike from June 17 was declared illegal by the government and was lifted by the union after two days.
In addition to a demand to raise the minimum monthly wage from the current $211 to $500, FETIMMP also demanded the rejection of the recently signed bilateral drug accord with the United States [see p. 38187], and the non-payment of Peru's foreign debt.
Juan Deza Meza, a miners' leader, was murdered on June 17 (the identity of the killer or killers was not reported) during the stoppage at the state-owned Casapalca mine situated near the central Andean town of Cerro de Pasco.
Most of the major private mines had worked normally.
Resignation of Vargas Llosa
As reported on June 20, Mario Vargas Llosa, the internationally known novelist, had resigned as leader of the right-wing Democratic Front (FREDEMO) apparently because of his other commitments in Europe.
Vargas Llosa had been defeated by Fujimori in the second round of the presidential elections held in June 1990 [see p. 37528].
AMERICAS
CHILE
Demobilization of guerrillas
The Manuel Rodríguez Patriotic Front (FPMR), a major left-wing guerrilla group founded in 1983 to fight against the military regime of Gen. Augusto Pinochet Ugarte, decided to abandon its armed struggle on June 1.
The group had changed its name to the Manuel Rodríguez Patriotic Movement (MPMR) on May 31 in order to facilitate a transition to mainstream politics.
MPMR leaders stated in a news conference that they did not regret their past actions and believed they had assisted in the defeat of the Pinochet dictatorship and the restoration of democracy.
The Interior Minister Enrique Krauss Rusque ruled out a blanket political amnesty, however, and stated that members of the group could be tried for past crimes.
An Autonomous (Autónomo) faction of the FPMR, which had split from the main body in November 1987, vowed, however, to continue the armed struggle.
Economic reforms
Import duties were cut from 15 to 11 per cent on June 17 and the peso was revalued by 2 per cent to stem a huge inflow of US dollars which had artificially lowered the exchange rate.
From June 21 the official exchange rate dropped from 363.39 to 356.12 pesos to the US dollar.
This narrowed the gap with the depressed real dollar rate used by the financial market, which closed at 345.04 pesos to the dollar on June 14.
In order to maintain a balanced budget, a pillar of government policy, the loss of revenue from import duties was to be offset by an extension of the stamp tax on loans, to cover short-term foreign loans as well as domestic loans.
This was intended to eliminate a source of discrimination against national capital and would tax capital movement encouraged by differences between domestic and foreign interest rates.
In addition the tax on petrol was increased by 50 per cent but the government insisted that this rise would not affect industry costs, would encourage the more efficient use of private cars, and would preserve a plan for annualized inflation of 18 per cent for 1991.
Finance Minister Alejandro Foxley Rioseco also assured consumers that the country's excess foreign exchange would be used to reduce the cost of importing more goods.
He estimated that half an average family's budget was affected by the price of imported goods, and predicted that food, clothing, televisions and other appliances would become cheaper.
Mud avalanche
An avalanche of mud, triggered by an intense and unexpected rainstorm, killed 112 people and injured 700 more in the town of Antofagasta (with a population of 250,000), situated 1,370 km to the north of the capital, Santiago.
The government declared the town an emergency zone.
Average annual rainfall in Antofagasta was only some 12.5 mm, but 13 times that amount had fallen in the space of three hours.
More than 30,000 inhabitants were reported to have been affected directly by the mudslide and over 6,000 homes were damaged.
AMERICAS
BRAZIL
Initiatives on Amazon
After an official four-day visit to the United States on June 17-20, President Fernando Collor de Mello announced new environmental initiatives on June 24 and dismissed Cantidio Guerreiro Guimaraes, the head of the National Indian Foundation (FUNAI); his successor was an explorer, Sidney Possuelo.
The suddenness of the announcement was judged to be in response to pressure from US environmentalists and to a letter presented to Collor from nine leading Democrat senators during the visit, urging him to honour previous promises he had given to protect the rain forest and its indigenous tribal peoples [see p. 37528].
The US environmentalists, in a critical report, had accused Guerreiro of failing to act quickly enough to demarcate the boundaries of a proposed reservation for the Yanomami Indians although he had been ordered to do so by the government in mid-April.
Critics of Guerreiro's dismissal, however, stated that this decision was for foreign consumption, and pointed out that it was Collor himself who had delayed the boundary decision by six months in order to give FUNAI more time to study the region.
The delay had been interpreted by thousands of expelled gold prospectors (garimpeiros) as a signal to re-invade tribal lands in the northern state of Roraima, bringing with them malaria which threatened the existence of the Yanomami and many other tribes [see pp. 36459; 36794; 37495].
Collor announced that US$100 million of the $120,000 million foreign debt would be converted annually in "debt for nature swaps" to fund environmental protection, and that he intended to decree the abolition of tax incentives for land clearance and cattle ranching in the Amazon.
These incentives had been suspended before Collor took office in March 1990 but reportedly reactivated in January 1991.
Direct foreign investment — Debt agreement
Foreign investors were allowed direct access into domestic stock markets for the first time from June 5.
Previously they could only buy shares in Brazilian companies through Brazilian-administrated funds.
Anticipation of the decision transformed the Sao Paulo and Rio de Janeiro stock markets from being the world's worst performers in 1990 to currently the best.
Sao Paulo's capitalization alone, which had dropped by 70 per cent to US$15,400 million in 1990, had recovered to $36,900 million by May and the volume of shares transacted had risen from an estimated 17,000,000 a day in January 1991 to an estimated 40-50,000,000 a day by June.
Bargain-hunting foreign funds were held responsible; many top domestic companies, especially state-owned ones intended for privatization, were priced on average at only 35 per cent of their estimated book value.
The Senate on June 20 agreed in principle to ratify the government's April decision to make payments of an estimated US$8,500 million in interest on approximately $60,000 million in medium- and long-term debts to commercial bank creditors [for details see p. 38143].
Collor, during his US visit, had confirmed the government's interest in the US Brady plan for debt reduction [see pp. 36541-42; 37016-17; for Mexico, Venezuela, Costa Rica agreements see respectively pp. 37243; 37313; 37450; for Latin American response see pp. 37914-15].
Report on children
A confidential report prepared by the federal police research department in the capital, Brasília, was obtained and published in a Sao Paulo newspaper in early June, confirming the fears of human rights organizations about the killing of "street children" [see p. 37709].
Using data supplied by local police forces and government ministries, the report stated that (i) 4,611 children and adolescents had died from violence over the previous three years, more than 50 per cent of them shot and the rest killed by stabbing, beating, poisoning or strangling;(ii) young girls were raped and many had died from clandestine abortions after becoming prostitutes;(iii) children were exploited from the age of three by professional beggars, from the age of six by drug traffickers and, if they survived, ended up in armed groups used by criminal gangs and even the police;(iv) the abuse of drugs and solvents was common among street children;(v) an estimated 3,000 children were illegally adopted annually by foreigners, 50 per cent going to Italy and 30 per cent to France, who paid up to US$20,000 for a white child; and (vi) 25,000,000 out of 45,000,000 children were chronically underfed, 30 per cent lived in poverty and 10,000 were child workers.
AMERICAS
ARGENTINA
Cancellation of missile programme — Proposed military cuts
Defence Minister Antonio Erman González confirmed on June 21 that a new commission, the National Aerospace Commission (CONAE), would channel into peaceful use the technical and scientific experience gained in the secret Condor-2 ballistic missile programme, whose "irreversible" cancellation he had announced on May 28; its suspension had been announced in April 1990 [see p. 37501].
The missile programme had been initiated jointly with Egypt in 1982 following Argentina's defeat by the United Kingdom in the Falklands war, and had been financed partly by Iraq.
European firms had sold technology for the project, as had "front" companies based in the United States.
The project had been effectively nullified by the UN embargo on Iraq following its invasion of Kuwait, and by a decision by the US Congress during the ensuing Gulf war to stiffen a sanctions law preventing technology transfers, including non-military, to countries producing missiles.
Some elements in the Argentine military, along with members of the opposition UCR, characterized the abandonment of the missile programme as a capitulation to US demands, and described it as an irresponsible move at a time when Chile was suspected to be seeking a new missile.
In the same broadcast, Erman announced government proposals to cut armed forces numbers from an estimated 75,000 to 55,000 and to reduce the period of conscription from a year to six months, although in the current year the number of conscripts called up was expected to be doubled.
The Economy Minister Domingo Cavallo had already refused a demand for a 27 per cent increase in military salaries, in line with his March efforts to control inflation [see pp. 38095-96].
Pensioners' protests
Four months of picketing by hundreds of pensioners of the Finance Ministry and Central Courts in the capital, Buenos Aires, sustained by popular support in a tent community in Lacalle Square, forced the government, on June 5, to concede a 25 per cent increase in their $120 minimum monthly benefit.
Approximately 12 per cent out of the total population of 32,000,000 currently drew a pension, and the increase in the miminum benefit represented an estimated cost to the treasury of $1,200 million per year.
Pensioners' leaders, however, demanded a minimum monthly pension of between US$250 and $300, basing their case on the level of current wage settlements.
AMERICAS
PARAGUAY
Defeat of Colorado Party in municipal elections
Preliminary results of the May 26 municipal elections showed that the ruling Colorado Party (ANR-PC) had failed to secure a majority of the vote nationwide; this followed the PC's defeat in the contest for the mayorship of Asunción, the capital [see p. 38189].
During June the Central Electoral Junta announced results for 154 of a total of 206 municipalities.
These showed that the PC had taken 43 per cent of the vote, the Radical Liberal Authentic Party (PLRA) 29 per cent and independents and small left-wing parties 28 per cent.
Elections had been suspended for at least 30 days in at least 31 municipalities while the votes were reportedly still being counted in the rest.
President Andrés Rodriguez publicly declared the elections a triumph for democracy.
Interior Minister Gen. Orlando Machuca Vargas stated that the government and the armed forces would support Carlos Filizzola, the Asunción mayor-elect, despite Machuca's personal concern at the scale of the PC's defeat.
Angry demonstrations by the PC youth wing (Juventud Colorada) demanded the resignation of the PC's president Luis María Argana, the Foreign Minister until July 1990, and other "corrupt" leaders.
Argana initially acceded to their demands for the convening of a party congress to select a new leadership, but later described the demonstrators as "hooligans" .
Many local political analysts agreed that the elections, and Filizzola's victory in particular, demonstrated that the PC and other traditional parties had failed to realize how rapid the undercurrent was for national democratization.
AMERICAS
URUGUAY
New Health Minister
In early June Carlos Delpiazzo, previously a Defence Under-Secretary, was appointed as the new Health Minister.
His predecessor, José Alfredo Solari Damonte, one of four opposition Colorado Party (PC) ministers in the National Agreement (Coincidencia Nacional) coalition government, was a member of the PC's Foro Batllista faction.
He was forced to resign when the faction's leader, former President Julio María Sanguinetti Cairolo, withdrew his support from the government in late May over privatization strategy.
President Luis Alberto Lacalle Herrera, whose National Party (PN or Blancos) had failed to secure a majority in the November 1989 congressional elections [see pp. 37039; 37146], tried to compel congressional delegates to decide for or against a bill to privatize all or part of the state-owned telephone company (Antel), the state airline (Pluna), and the national ports administration (ANP).
The ending of state monopolies in the insurance, alcohol, gas and electricity sectors was also proposed.
Sanguinetti's faction of the PC, although not opposed to privatization as such, opposed Lacalle's plan to sell off state assets through direct negotiations with potential buyers rather than putting them up for public tender.
The withdrawal of their support mean that only 13 of 31 senators backed the privatization bill, with 15 (PC and left-wing parties) opposed and three, from the Movimento Nacional de Rocha faction of the Blancos, still undecided.
AMERICAS
LATIN-AMERICA
OAS assembly
The Organization of American States (OAS) held its 21st assembly in the Chilean capital Santiago on June 3-9, attended by delegations from 34 member countries (North, Central and South America and the Caribbean, with the exception of Cuba which was not a member).
The assembly endorsed the Declaration of Santiago, designed to begin the "renovation" of the OAS and initiate a "process of joint reflection about hemispheric security in the light of new world and regional circumstances" .
The Declaration's central point was a resolution instructing the OAS permanent council to convene immediately in the event of any "abrupt or irregular interruption of the democratic, political and institutional process, or of the legitimate exercise of power by a democratically elected government" in any member country.
Some analysts saw this as an attempt by the OAS to affirm its identity as a genuine independent body and to shed the image of being an instrument of United States foreign policy in the region.
Others saw it as marking a shift in US perceptions of the OAS and a readiness to see it perform a new role in encouraging the closer economic and political integration of the hemisphere, in line with the US "Enterprise for the Americas" free trade policy [see pp. 37651-52; 37914].
Lawrence Eagleburger, the US Secretary of State, admitted in a speech to the assembly that past "errors" in US foreign policy had come from viewing the problems of the region through the "sometimes distorting prism of the Cold War" .
The Assembly rejected, however, a proposal that member states, in the event of the forceful removal of a democratic government, should immediately and jointly sever relations with the country concerned.
This proposal, made by four Andean Pact countries —Venezuela, Colombia, Peru and Bolivia —invoked the Betancourt Doctrine (named after the former Venezuelan president).
The Assembly voted instead for Mexico's counterproposal of the traditional Estrada Doctrine of non-intervention, and recognition of a new government if there was proof that it had established its control of internal affairs.
The Assembly also agreed on closer co-operation on the environment, on regional security and in the fight against drug trafficking.
Trade agreements with USA
Member countries of the proposed Mercosur common market [see p. 38096], Brazil, Argentina, Paraguay and Uruguay, signed a framework free-trade agreement with the USA on June 19.
A similar agreement between Nicaragua, Panama and the USA was signed on June 27, binding all three countries to work for freer trade and to consult regularly with one another on trade issues.
On the same day Chile became the first country to sign a debt-reduction agreement under the US "Enterprise for the Americas Initiative" [see above].
This cut Chile's debt on agricultural loans from the USA by 40 per cent to US$23,000,000.
AMERICAS
BELIZE
Diplomatic relations were established with North Korea on June 20 and with the Soviet Union on June 25.
AMERICAS
ECUADOR
Alfredo Vera Arrata, the Education and Culture Minister, accused of alleged irregularities in the purchase of school construction materials, was dismissed on June 22 after a congressional no confidence vote.
AMERICAS
HAITI
Ernst Verdieu, the Minister of Social Affairs, and Smark Michel, the Trade and Industry Minister were dismissed on June 14 and replaced respectively by Myrtho Céleston and Jean François Chamblain; the Justice Minister, Bayard Vincent, had been dismissed in late May and replaced by Karl Auguste.
AMERICAS
LATIN AMERICA
The number of deaths caused by the cholera epidemic rose to 1,800 in Peru, 375 in Ecuador and an estimated 35 in Colombia; the epidemic had spread to Mexico, where 27 people were infected.
AMERICAS
ST VINCENT AND THE GRENADINES
Monty Maule was elected Speaker of the House of Assembly at the start on June 3 of its new session.
ASIA — PACIFIC
INDIA
General election
The Congress (I) Party was returned to government in June 1991, some 17 months after losing power to a coalition led by the Janata Dal (JD)[see p. 37030].
However, the victory in the Lok Sabha election was far from emphatic and owed much to the so-called "sympathy vote" aroused by the assassination of the party's leader, Rajiv Gandhi, soon after voting had started in mid-May [see pp. 38175-76].
Like his two predecessors, V. P. Singh and Chandra Shekhar, the new Prime Minister, P. V. Narasimha Rao, headed a minority government.
The Hindu-revivalist Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) gained well over one-fifth of the Lok Sabha seats and emerged as the main opposition party.
Resumption of polling — Postponement of elections in Punjab
The first round of polling in the general election was held on May 20, but following Gandhi's assassination on May 21 the second and third rounds (due to be held on May 23 and 26) were postponed until June 12 and 15.
Prior to the start of the second round elsewhere, Lok Sabha and State Assembly elections were held in Assam on June 6 and 8 [see below for detailed results].
The remainder of the elections to State Assemblies took place simultaneously with the Lok Sabha elections on June 12 and 15, except in Punjab [see below].
There was little election-related violence during the June polling to compare with that of May 20, when over 100 people were killed throughout the country.
However, there were some outbreaks of violence, particularly in Bihar where at least eight people died on June 12.
According to the Far Eastern Economic Review of June 27 the turnout was "barely 50 per cent" , compared with 88 per cent in 1989 and 63 per cent in 1984.
The postponement of Lok Sabha and State Assembly elections in Punjab was announced on June 21, less than 30 hours before the scheduled start of polling in the state.
T. N. Seshan, the Chief Election Commissioner, set a new date of Sept. 25 for the elections.
He said that recent events in Punjab.
including the murder of candidates and the intimidation of voters, had convinced the Commission that a fair and free poll in the state was not possible.
The state had been declared a "disturbed area" on June 14 and on the following day separatist guerrillas had held up two trains in the state and killed 78 passengers.
Election results
A feature of the election was the almost complete destruction of the traditional Congress (I) support base in the northern "Hindi belt" .
The serious losses suffered by the party in Uttar Pradesh and Bihar in 1989 were repeated on a larger scale, and the rout might have been complete had not the assassination of Gandhi reduced the anti-Congress (I) swing in the June polling.
In the south, this sympathy factor ensured that Congress (I) performed much better than had been expected.
Congress (I) was also successful in the small eastern states, the western state of Maharashtra and the central state of Madhya Pradesh.
As expected, the BJP performed extremely well in the north and was the only party to make a substantial overall gain.
The JD had its support base reduced to Uttar Pradesh, Bihar and Orissa.
However, JD leaders had the satisfaction of seeing the party's dissident wing (the Samajwadi Janata Party —SJP —led by then Prime Minister Shekhar) utterly humiliated.
Congress (I) 226 Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) 119
Lok Sabha election results
*Janata Dal (JD) 55
***Communist Party of India (Marxist)(CPI(M)) 35
*Telegu Desam (TD) 14
***Communist Party of India (CPI) 13
**All-India Anna Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (A-IADMK) 11 Jharkhand Mukti Morcha (JMM) 6 Samajwadi Janata Party (SJP) 5
****Shiv Sena (SS) 4
***Revolutionary Socialist Party (RSP) 4
***Forward Bloc (FB) 3
**Indian Union Moslem League (IUML) 2
*Asom Gana Parishad (AGP) 2 Haryana Vikas Party (HVP) 1 Manipur People's Party (MPP) 1 Nagaland People's Council (NPC) 1 Bahujan Samaj Party (BSP) 1
**Kerala Congress (Mani)(KC(M)) 1
**Sikkim Sangram Parishad (SSP) 1
**Janata Dal (Gujarat)(JD-G) 1 Independent 1 Countermanded due to death of candidate or electoral violence/malpractice 12 Results whithheld 5 Punjab seats (elections not held) 13 Jammu and Kashmir seats (elections not held) 6 Nominated by President 2 Total 545
**Congress (I) allied parties
*National Front parties
***Left Front parties
****Allied with BJP 
Detailed Lok Sabha election results by state
The detailed results of the Lok Sabha elections are given below, with the number of seats at stake shown in parentheses [see pp. 37124-25 for detailed 1989 election results].
Northern states
Haryana (10).
Congress (I) 9, HVP 1.
Himachal Pradesh (4).
Congress (I) 2, BJP 2.
Uttar Pradesh (85).
BJP 50, JD 22, Congress (I) 5, SJP 4, CPI 1, countermanded 3.
Eastern states
Arunachal Pradesh (2).
Congress (I) 2.
Assam (14).
Congress (I) 8, BJP 2, CPI(M) 1, AGP 2.
Bihar (54).
JD 27, CPI 7, JMM 6, BJP 5, CPI(M) 1, countermanded 5.
Manipur (2).
Congress (I) 1, MPP 1.
Meghalaya (2).
Congress (I) 2.
Mizoram (1).
Congress (I) 1.
Nagaland (1).
NPC 1.
Orissa (21).
Congress (I) 12, JD 6, CPI 1, CPI(M) 1, countermanded 1.
Sikkim (1).
SSP 1.
Tripura (2).
Congress (I) 2.
West Bengal (42).
CPI(M) 27, Congress (I) 5, RSP 4, CPI 3, FB 3.
Western states
Goa (2).
Congress (I) 2.
Gujarat (26).
BJP 20, Congress (I) 4, JD-G 1, countermanded 1.
Madhya Pradesh (40).
Congress (I) 27, BJP 12, BSP 1.
Maharashtra (48).
Congress (I) 37, BJP 5, SS 4, CPI(M) 1, countermanded 1.
Rajasthan (25).
Congress (I) 13, BJP 12.
Southern states
Andhra Pradesh (42).
Congress (I) 24, TD 14, BJP 1, CPI 1, CPI(M) 1.
Karnataka (28).
Congress (I) 22, BJP 4, SJP 1, countermanded 1.
Kerala (20).
Congress (I) 13, CPI(M) 3, IUML 2, KC (M) 1, independent 1.
Tamil Nadu (39).
Congress (I) 28, A-IADMK 11.
Union territories
Andaman and Nicobar Islands (1).
Congress (I) 1.
Chandigarh (1).
Congress (I) 1.
Dadra and Nagar Haveli (1).
Congress (I) 1.
Daman and Diu (1).
BJP 1.
Delhi (7).
BJP 5, Congress (I) 2.
Lakshadweep (1).
Congress (I) 1.
Pondicherry (1).
Congress (I) 1.
State Assembly election results
Details of the six state Legislative Assembly elections held in May and June are shown below with information about subsequent leadership changes.
Assam (126).
Congress (I) 65, AGP 19, BJP 10, CPI 4, CPI(M) 2, JD 1, Independents 24, countermanded 1.
Elections held on June 6 and 8.
Hiteshwar Saikia was sworn in as the new Congress (I) Chief Minister on June 30.
The AGP government of Prafulla Kumar Mahanta had been removed in November 1990 with the imposition of President's rule [see pp.37854-55].
Haryana (90).
Congress (I) 51, SJP 16, HVP 12, JD 3, BJP 2, independents 5, other 1.
Elections held on May 20.
Bhajan Lal was sworn in as the new Congress (I) Chief Minister on June 23.
The SJP government of Om Prakash Chauthala had been removed in April 1991 with the imposition of President's rule [see p. 38151].
Kerala (140).
Congress (I) 55, CPI(M) 29, CPI 12, JD 3, independents 2, others 38, countermanded 1.
Elections held on June 12.
K. Karunakaran was sworn in on June 23 as Chief Minister of a Congress (I) -led United Democratic Front (UDF) government.
The UDF ousted the CPI(M) —led Left Democratic Front government headed by E. K. Nayanar.
Tamil Nadu (234).
A-IADMK 163, Congress (I) 61, JD 1, CPI 1, CPI(M) 1, Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (DMK) 1, independent 1, others 3, countermanded 2.
Elections held on June 15.
Jayalalitha, the A-IADMK general secretary, was sworn in as Chief Minister on June 24.
The DMK government of M. Karunanidhi had been removed in January 1991 with the imposition of President's rule [see pp.37964].
Uttar Pradesh (425).
BJP 211, JD 91, Congress (I) 46, SJP 30, BSP 12, CPI 4, CPI(M) 1, Soshit Samaj Dal (SSD) 1, independent 8, countermanded 21.
Elections held on May 20 and June 15.
Kalyan Singh was sworn in as BJP Chief Minister on June 24.
The BJP defeated the JD government headed by Mulayen Singh Yadav.
West Bengal (294).
CPI(M) 188, Congress (I) 43, CPI 6, JD 1, others 56.
Elections held on May 20.
Jyoti Basu was sworn in for a fourth term as Chief Minister on June 29 at the head of a CPI(M)-led government.
In the Union Territory of Pondicherry elections for the 30-seat assembly were held on June 15.
Results: Congress (I) 15, A-IADMK 6, DMK 4, JD 1, CPI 1, independents 2, others 1.
The Congress (I) claim to form a government headed by V. Vaithilingam was accepted by the Lieutenant-Governor, Har Swarup Singh, on June 22 but a government had not been formed as of early July.
President's rule had been imposed in Pondicherry on Jan. 12, 1991, following the resignation of the DMK-JD coalition government in December 1990 [see p. 37915].
Resignation of Shekhar as Prime Minister — Discussions leading to formation of government — Election of Rao as Congress (I) parliamentary leader
The incomplete election results available by June 17 indicated that Congress (I) would be the only party in a position to form a government, albeit a minority one.
Accordingly, Chandra Shekhar informed President Ramaswamy Venkataraman on June 17 that he would like to relinquish the premiership as soon as possible [see p. 37854 for Shekhar's appointment as Prime Minister in November 1990].
At this time Congress (I) leaders entered into discussion with other party leaders to gauge their attitude towards coalition.
On June 17 the Congress (I) general secretary Bal Ram Jakhar told reporters that the party would seriously consider accepting the support of any party other than the BJP.
The BJP leader L. K. Advani had already ruled out his party's support for Congress (I) and had stated that his party would function as an "effective opposition" .
JD and the Left Front parties ruled out participation in a coalition, but agreed to support a Congress (I) minority government from outside on specific issues.
During the negotiations the JD leader, V. P. Singh, was reportedly placed under some pressure from senior figures in the party to agree to merge the JD with Congress (I).
As discussions were held on the formation of a government, deliberations were also taking place within Congress (I) on the issue of the next Prime Minister.
By June 19, by which time most of the newly elected Congress (I) members had congregated in Delhi for a meeting of the parliamentary party, two candidates had emerged, namely Narasimha Rao, who had replaced Gandhi as party president in May [see p. 38175], and Sharad Pawar, Chief Minister of Maharashtra.
Pawar called for an election of the parliamentary party leader by secret ballot.
When he failed to muster enough backing for a secret ballot Pawar announced his support for Rao who was then unanimously elected as leader on June 20. nation
Appointment of Narasimha Rao as Prime Minister — New Council of Ministers — Appointment of Pawar as Defence Minister — Prime Minister's address to the
On June 21 P. V. Narasimha Rao was sworn in as India's ninth Prime Minister by President Venkataraman.
Later that day Rao appointed a new Council of Ministers.
On June 20 President Venkataraman had directed Rao to test his government's strength in the Lok Sabha within 30 days, a requirement he had also placed on the two previous minority governments.
As part of Rao's effort to unite the party, he made every effort to bring his rival Pawar into the Cabinet.
Pawar was eventually sworn in as Defence Minister on June 26 after being replaced the previous day as Chief Minister of Maharashtra by Sudhakarrao Naik.
In his first address to the nation as Prime Minister on June 22 Rao concentrated on the country's economy, which he said was in a state of crisis.
He said that his government attached the highest priority to restoring the health of the economy, and promised that a budget would be introduced within a month and that dialogue with the IMF would continue.
Rao warned that "hard decisions" would have to be implemented to manage the balance of payment situation and to curb inflation.
Cabinet Ministers P. V. Narasimha Rao Prime Minister; Personnel and Public Grievances; Science and Technology; Ocean Development; Electronics; Atomic Energy; Space; Chemicals and Fertilizers; Civil Supplies and public Distribution System; Industry (additional charge) Arjun Singh Human Resources Development Bakram Jakhar Agriculture S. B. Chavan Home Affairs M. L. Fotedar Health and Family Welfare Ghulam Nabi Azad Parliamentary Affairs C. K. Jaffer Sharief Railways Sheila Kaul (f) Urban Development Sitarem Kesri Welfare K. Vijaya Bhaskara Reddy Law, Justice and Company Affairs Madhav Rao Scindia Civil Aviation and Tourism B. Shankaranand Petroleum and Natural Gas V. C. Shukla Water Resources Manmohan Singh Finance Madhavsinh Solanki External Affairs
New Indian Council of Ministers
*Sharad Pawar Defence Ministers of State (independent charge) H. R. Bhardwaj Planning and Programme Implementation P. Chidambaram Commerce Santosh Mohan Deb Steel Ashok Gehlot Textiles Tarun Gogoi Food Giridhar Gomango Food Processing Industries Kamal Nath Environment and Forests Ajit Kumar Panja Information and Broadcasting Rajesh Pilot Communications Kalpnath Rai Power and Non-Conventional Energy Sources K. Ramamurthy Labour P. A. Sangma Coal Jagdish Tytler Surface Transport Balram Singh Yadav Mines Ministers of State Kamaluddin Ahmed Civil Supplies and Public Distribution Margarat Alva (f) Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions M. Arunachalam Urban Development Mamta Banerjee (f) Human Resources Development (Department of Youth Affairs and Sports); **Women and Child Development Eduardo Faleiro External Affairs M. O. H. Farook Civil Aviation and Tourism M. M. Jacob Parliamentary Affairs; Home Affairs Rangarajan Kumaramangalam Parliamentary Affairs; Law, Justice and Company Affairs S. Krishna Kumar Petroleum and Natural Gas; **Defence P. J. Kurien Industry K. C. Lenka Agriculture M. Mallikarjun Railways Chinta Mohan Chemicals and Fertilizers Uttambhai H. Patel Rural Development Shantaram Potdukhe Finance Mullappally Ramachandran Agriculture Dalbir Singh Finance G. Venkat (Swamy Rural Development P. K. Thungon Industry
*Rameshwar Thakur Finance
*D.
K. Tara Devi (f) Health and Family Welfare Deputy Ministers Paban Singh Ghatowar Labour K. Kamala Kumari (f) Welfare Salman Khursheed Commerce P. V. Rangaya Naidu Communications Ram Lal Rahi Home Affairs Girja Vyas (f) Information and Broadcasting
*Nayma Gowda Coal
*Appointed on June 26.
**Additional portfolios added on June 26.
Women are designated by (f).
ASIA-PACIFIC
BANGLADESH
Sentencing of Ershad
The former President, Lt.-Gen. (retd) Hussain Mohammad Ershad, was sentenced in Dhaka to 10 years' "rigorous imprisonment" on June 12 after being found guilty by a special tribunal of illegally possessing firearms.
Ershad, who had 30 days to appeal, also faced trial on charges relating to the embezzlement of public funds.
Ershad had been deposed and arrested in December 1990 [see p. 37906-07]; formal charges were brought against him in January 1991 [see p. 37965], and he was committed for trial on March 19.
Reacting to his sentence on June 12, he said: "I have been denied justice.
I will now go to the Supreme Court and, if necessary, I'll appeal to the people's court."
He had been elected as an opposition Jatiya Party member of the Jatiya Sangsad (parliament) in February [see pp. 38006-07], but was expected to forfeit this office if he lost his appeal.
MPs belonging to the Jatiya Party boycotted the parliamentary session on June 12 in protest against the verdict.
The leader of the opposition Awami League, Sheikh Hasina Wajed, said, however, that "law has taken its course" .
Arrest of former ministers
Former Prime Minister Kazi Zafar Ahmed, former Foreign Minister Anisul Islam Mahmud, and former Minister of Land Reform and Administration, Sardar Amzad Hossain, were arrested in Dhaka on May 16, 19 and 27 respectively.
The former Minister of Communications, Anwar Hussain Manzur, had been arrested on April 29.
Dismissal of air force and navy chiefs of staff
Acting President Shehabuddin Ahmed on June 4 ordered the dismissal of Vice-Marshal Momtazuddin Ahmed as Chief of Staff of the Air Force.
He was replaced by Air Commodore Altaf Hussain Choudhry.
The President also appointed Commodore Muhammad Muhaiminul Islam to replace Rear Adml.
Amir Ahmad Mustafa as Chief of Staff of the Navy.
The dismissals followed a report by a special inquiry into the loss of ships and aircraft during the cyclone in April [see p. 38176].
Announcement of political reform
On July 2 the ruling Bangladesh Nationalist Party (BNP) unexpectedly tabled a constitutional motion in parliament aimed at restoring parliamentary rule.
This move had reportedly been prompted by pressure from Shehabuddin Ahmed who, on June 5, had offered to relinquish his post as acting President due to differences with the government which in turn, he claimed, had undermined national unity.
On June 16 six students were killed on a college campus in Dhaka during a gun battle between rival groups loyal to the BNP and to the Awami League.
The government announced on June 10 that it would grant limited autonomy to the Chittagong Hill Tracts (CHT)[see p. 37205].
According to the International Herald Tribune of June 11 the tribal separatist movement there had killed an estimated 2,000 people since 1975.
Visit by Zia to China and Middle East
Prime Minister Begum Khaleda Zia visited China on June 18-20, signing accords on economic and technical co-operation, and returning via Thailand on June 21.
On May 25-29 she had toured Saudi Arabia, Kuwait and the United Arab Emirates (UAE).
Economy
Budget
The 1991-92 budget, announced on June 12, set revenues at taka85,030 million (US$2,400 million), current spending at taka80,000 million and development spending at taka75,000 million.
The highest allocation, totalling taka12,550 million, was proposed for education.
On June 13 the government announced measures aimed at boosting foreign investment, including the right of foreign investors to purchase shares and easier repatriation of foreign profits.
Cyclone damage
A cyclone which struck southern districts on June 2 was reported by The Times of June 3 to have killed 500 people.
UN sources reported on June 13 that the UN Development Programme (UNDP) had approved US$1,100,000 to help with reconstruction costs following the cyclone in April which killed an estimated 140,000 people [see pp. 38152; 38176-77].
ASIA-PACIFIC
PAKISTAN
Relations with USA
A high-ranking delegation led by the chairman of the Senate, Wasim Sajjad, and acting Foreign Secretary Akram Zaki, held talks with United States State and Defence Department officials in Washington on June 11-14.
The visit marked the first step towards improved relations between the two countries since the suspension in October 1990 of US military aid [see p. 37764].
It followed a statement by Prime Minister Mian Nawaz Sharif on June 6 declaring his intention to remove existing "misunderstandings or misgivings" with the USA.
Reports also suggested that the delegation's visit had been timed to coincide with the period marking the start of US budgetary procedures allocating foreign assistance for the next financial year.
Pakistan was reportedly scheduled to receive US$113,000,000 in military aid, with provisions for buying up to another US$200,000,000-worth of military hardware, in the Bush administration's 1992 budget.
On June 10 a spokeswoman for the US State Department dispelled speculation about a possible reversal of the administration's aid policy by saying that the USA would continue to withhold the sale of conventional military hardware until it had received proof of Pakistan's commitment to a peaceful nuclear programme.
On June 11 Zaki described the first round of talks as "constructive" and denied that Pakistan was seeking to reverse the administration's decision to suspend aid.
He also disclosed that US officials had reacted positively to a proposal by Sharif on June 6, that the USA, the Soviet Union and China should mediate bilateral talks on nuclear non-proliferation between India and Pakistan.
On June 13 the US House of Representatives voted overwhelmingly in favour of preserving strict conditions on US aid to Pakistan.
The outcome of the vote had been determined partly by reports that Pakistan had sought ballistic missile technology from China.
On June 11 Zaki had been quoted as saying that Pakistan "feels vulnerable" to India's long-range missiles.
On June 20 China confirmed that it had supplied short-range tactical missiles to Pakistan.
Appointment of new Chief of Staff
President Ghulam Ishaq Khan on June 11 appointed Lt.-Gen.
Asif Nawaz Janjua to succeed Gen. Mirza Aslam Beg as Chief of Staff.
Lt.-Gen.
Shameem Alam Khan was appointed to the largely ceremonial post of Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
The appointment of the liberal pro-US United Kingdom-trained Gen. Janjua (commonly referred to as Gen. Nawaz), 53, ended months of political speculation that Beg, who was due to retire on Aug. 17, would extend his tenure possibly through a military take-over.
Growing political differences between Beg and Sharif's civilian government [see pp. 38007]also helped fuel rumours of a possible military coup.
1991/92 budget — Other economic developments
The 1991/92 budget totalling Rs258,300 million (US$11,000 million), was passed by the National Assembly on June 16.
Unveiled on May 30, the budget projected an 11.6 per cent increase in defence spending to Rs70,950 million (US$3,002 million) and a rise in debt servicing amounting to Rs80,710 million (US$3,415 million).
The budget deficit was estimated at Rs18,500 million (US$782 million); social spending was reduced by half, with sharp cuts in education, rural development and social welfare.
Privatization
The Middle East Economic Digest of May 31 released a list of 30 companies being considered by the government for privatization [see p. 38007].
According to the Middle East Times of June 11-17, up to 115 of the 150 public-sector companies had been selected for privatization.
On May 27 the government had granted permission to the Aga Khan Foundation for Economic Development (AKFED) to operate a private airline to compete with the state-run Pakistan International Airlines (PIA) on domestic routes.
Economic agreements
According to the Financial Times of June 17, the government signed an agreement, backed by the World Bank, with a consortium of Western companies for the construction of an oil-fired power station worth US$1,300 million, 50 km west of Karachi.
An agreement to establish joint oil and gas ventures with Iran had been signed in Islamabad on May 16.
Murder of Special Court judge
On June 18 masked gunmen in Karachi shot and killed Nabi Sher Junejo, a judge heading the Special Court hearing charges against Asif Ali Zardari, the husband of the former Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto.
By June 21, 750 arrests had been made in connection with the assassination.
New inquiry into Zia's death
The government on June 2 ordered a fresh investigation into the cause of the air crash which killed former President Mohammad Zia ul-Haq in August 1988 [see p. 36217].
A two-year investigation into the crash by the US Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) was reported on June 7 to have been "inconclusive" .
AMERICAS
CUBA
The date for the long-awaited fourth PCC congress was finally set for Oct. 11, 1991.
ASIA — PACIFIC
CHINA
Internal politics and security
Rehabilitation of former Zhao supporters
Three people who had been removed from high-ranking positions within the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) in the aftermath of the June 1989 "counter-revolutionary rebellion" [see pp. 36720-22]were partly rehabilitated in early June.
The Xinhua news agency reported on June 1 that Hu Qili, Rui Xingwen and Yan Mingfu had all been appointed as Vice-Ministers (in charge of Machine-Building and Electronics Industry, State Planning Commission and Civil Affairs respectively).
All three had been supporters of Zhao Ziyang, the former party general secretary who had been held under house arrest since his dismissal in June 1989.
Hu had served on the politburo standing committee and secretariat; Rui and Yan had both served on the secretariat.
Commenting on the move on June 3, politburo standing committee member Li Ruihuan said that the rehabilitation was the result of a "party judgement" .
On Zhao Ziyang, he said: "Zhao's case is more complex and the party is still examining it.
We have to deal with the issue cautiously unless [sic]problems occur."
Death of Jiang Qing
The death by suicide of Jiang Qing, the 77-year-old widow of Mao Zedong and leader of the "Gang of Four" , was officially confirmed in a brief statement issued by the Xinhua news agency on June 4.
Although Jiang had been sentenced to death in 1981 for "counter-revolutionary crimes" [see pp. 30833-36], her sentence was commuted to life imprisonment in 1983 [see p. 32505].
She killed herself on May 14 in the Beijing villa where she had been allowed to live since 1984.
Second anniversary of Tiananmen Square massacre
The second anniversary of the Tiananmen Square massacre on June 3-4, 1989 [see pp. 36720-22; 37531]passed without any major incident.
However, reports in the Hong Kong and Western media alleged that some students carried out various acts of protest in late May and early June.
The Washington Post of June 4 reported that beer bottles had that day been smashed at Beijing University, a gesture aimed at the country's "elder statesman" leader, Deng Xiaoping, whose last name was a homonym for the words "little bottle" .
The report detailed other scattered incidents, including the displaying of an anti-government banner on Beijing University campus.
The Agence France-Presse news agency reported on June 7 that a professor and several students at Beijing University had been arrested following incidents on campus.
The report was denounced on June 8 as "an unfounded rumour" by Beijing University authorities.
Launch of anti-drug campaign
The government launched a "people's war" against heroin and opium abuse in late June and executed a number of drug offenders.
The anti-drug campaign was launched at a conference organized by the National Narcotics Control Commission (NNCC) in Beijing on June 24-26.
Speaking at the opening of the conference, Wang Fang, State Councillor and head of the NNCC, said that China's drug problem had re-emerged during the mid-1980s and that the situation was the grimmest since the 1950s.
Five people were sentenced to death for drug trafficking in Hunan province on June 24; two days later, in Yunnan province, 21 traffickers were executed.
Elevation of Gong Pinmei to cardinal
Ignatius Kung (Gong Pinmei), the former Roman Catholic Bishop of Shanghai and China's most famous dissident cleric, was one of 23 new cardinals elevated by John Paul II on June 28.
Kung had been released from prison in 1985 after serving 30 years for "counter-revolutionary" crimes [see p. 33724].
China criticized Kung's appointment and accused the Vatican of interfering in its affairs.
Visit by Foreign Minister to Japan — Chinese bond issue in Tokyo
Qian Qichen, the Chinese Foreign Minister, visited Japan on June 25-28, and held talks with Japanese officials on a number of issues, including bilateral relations, Cambodia and Korea.
The Japanese Prime Minister, Toshiki Kaifu, accepted an invitation to visit China in mid-August.
Qian's visit coincided with a Chinese bond issue in Tokyo.
It was the first international bond issue by China since the imposition of widespread sanctions in the aftermath of the 1989 Tiananmen Square massacre.
The bonds, valued at US$145,000,000, were issued by the Bank of China, the Chinese foreign exchange bank, on June 28.
Launch of drive to cut birth rate
On June 13 the authorities ordered a nationwide drive to cut the birth rate.
A joint directive issued by the State Council and the CCP central committee stated that "population control must be considered as important as economic construction" .
Provincial and local authorities were ordered to double family planning funding.
ASIA-PACIFIC
MONGOLIA
Draft constitution
A new draft constitution was published on June 6, after it had been approved by committee of the Little Hural (standing body of the parliament) on May 25.
The draft would, after discussion "by the whole nation" , be resubmitted to the Little Hural before Oct. 1.
Its proposals covered the country's name (to become just Mongolia rather than the People's Republic of Mongolia); the composition and term (proposed as six years) of a new, directly elected Great Hural; the procedure by which all parties represented in the Great Hural could nominate presidential candidates; the president's term of office (proposed as four years); and provision for a majority vote of the parliament to override the presidential powers of veto.
Privatization programme
Prime Minister Dashiyn Byambasuren said in a newspaper interview published on June 5 that parallel with the sale of state property and price reforms, foreign investment would be encouraged.
Members of Mongolia's approximately 300 rural co-operatives had to decide on their own approach to privatization.
It was confirmed on June 7 that citizens born before May 31, 1991, would be granted government vouchers worth 10,000 tugriks (US$1,400) with which to buy shares in state properties.
Over 200 key companies in transport, mining, fuel, post and telecommunications sectors would remain state-owned.
Foreign Minister Tserenpiliyn Gombosuren said on June 19 during a visit to London that Mongolia needed aid and loans of US$250,000,000 to cover its budget deficit and hard-currency needs.
ASIA — PACIFIC
TAIWAN
Cabinet reshuffle — Announcement of elections — Resignation of leading opposition politician
The Cabinet (Executive Yuan) was reshuffled on June 1.
Chien You-hsin was appointed as Minister of Communications, replacing Clement Chang who had resigned in April [see p. 38147].
Chien was replaced as Director General of the Environmental Protection Administration by Chao Shao-kang.
Wu Po-hsiung was appointed Interior Minister, replacing Hsu Shui-teh who took on the role of Taiwan's unofficial ambassador in Japan.
Other appointments included: Kao Ming-hui as Minister Without Portfolio; Huang Kun-hui as Chair of the Mainland Affairs Council and Ma Ying-jeou as his deputy; and Sun Te-hsiung as Chair of the Research, Development and Evaluation Commission and Huang Chen-tai as his deputy.
Announcement of National Assembly elections
The Reuters news agency reported on June 20 that elections to a reformed National Assembly would take place on Dec. 21.
The 327 members of the new Assembly would represent Taiwanese (as opposed to mainland Chinese) constituencies and would replace some 500 "senior parliamentarians" elected to mainland seats in the 1940s.
Resignation of Lin from DPP
Lin Cheng-chieh, one of the most prominent members of the opposition Democratic Progressive Party (DPP), resigned on June 2.
According to the Far Eastern Economic Review of June 20, Lin had resigned in protest at the advocation of Taiwanese "separatism" by the party's vocal New Tide faction.
During May Lin had been sentenced to a 22-month term in prison for his involvement in a 1989 peaceful political protest.
ASIA
HONG KONG
Second anniversary of Tiananmen Square massacre
Minor clashes between police and demonstrators occurred on June 2 during a protest rally by some 20,000 people, organized by the Hong Kong Alliance in Support of Democracy in China to mark the second anniversary of the June 1989 massacre of pro-democracy activists in Tiananmen Square, Beijing [see pp. 36720-22].
After three hours of negotiation the police allowed the demonstrators to place a coffin, representing the death of dictatorship, outside the headquarters of the New China News Agency (Xinhua).
A further 70,000 people attended a candle-lit ceremony on June 4.
Bill of rights
The Legislative Council approved a Bill of Rights on June 5 which became law on June 8, the first charter of basic rights and freedoms in the colony's 150-year history.
Based on the UN International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, it contained clauses which attempted to strengthen the legal basis of civil liberties such as freedom of speech and privacy.
Duan Jin, a Foreign Ministry spokesman for the Chinese government, expressed "regret" at the passage of the bill and insisted that the Basic Law, a Chinese-drafted constitution under which Hong Kong would be ruled after 1997, itself guaranteed rights and freedoms.
He stated that China reserved the right to review all existing Hong Kong law.
The new Bill of Rights excluded the right to self-determination, the right to have elected executive and legislative councils, and the right of foreigners to fight deportation [see below].
It also allowed for a renewable one-year freeze on challenges by the courts to six ordinances related to the maintenance of law and order.
(A controversial Public Order Ordinance, controlling public meetings and demonstrations, had, however, already been withdrawn the previous month from the list of protected legislation.)
The freeze on challenges was justified by the Legislative Council as necessary to prevent operational vacuums if the courts decided that the Bill of Rights made key legislation illegal.
The local Bar Association described the bill as "limping and castrated" , and human rights demonstrators staged a sit-in on the day of the debate to press for amendments.
Critics doubted that the freeze period would be used as intended by the Council to resolve possible conflicts between the relevant legislation and the Bill.
Boat people
Following a meeting of United States, United Kingdom and Hong Kong government officials in Washington on June 6, the US government stated that it was to drop its opposition to negotiations between the UK and Vietnamese governments for the "involuntary repatriation" of Vietnamese boat people not considered to be genuine refugees, and to the possible establishment of an internationally managed centre in Vietnam to hold them on their return.
The UK government was also thought to be contemplating using such a camp for the screening of possible future refugees to reduce the flow into Hong Kong.
The USA had previously been opposed to such involuntary repatriation, as had the Vietnamese government, but the latter was expected to go along with the initiative, given its current desire to restore diplomatic relations with the USA.
Discussions between the UK and Vietnam were expected to begin in July.
A delegation of Hong Kong legislators, at a meeting in London on June 11, had warned the UK Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd of a repeat of the 1989 unrest and violence in detention camps if the inflow of refugees was not reduced [see p. 36894].
They also stated that if no help was forthcoming they might later in the year repeal the international law of first asylum under which the boat people were allowed to apply for refugee status and be given a fair hearing.
Forced repatriation was reportedly favoured by public opinion in the colony and the issue of the boat people was expected to be a major issue in the first elections to the legislature due in September.
In June, an estimated 1,800 boat people had arrived in Hong Kong, bringing the total number held in detention camps to over 60,000.
Of these only 6,000 had been classified as refugees while the rest were determined to be "economic" migrants.
ASIA — PACIFIC
SOUTH KOREA
Continued unrest — Local elections
Government crackdown on student protests
The wave of anti-government protests which had begun in late April when riot police beat a student protester to death, continued into June, but was met with a tougher response by the authorities following an incident on June 3 when the Prime Minister was assaulted by student dissidents.
Chung Won Shik, appointed in late May in an effort to secure greater stability [see p. 38177], was mobbed by hostile students while visiting Hankuk University of Foreign Studies.
While attempting to deliver a lecture on "guidance for student life" , Chung was seized by some 500 students and dragged around the campus for 30 minutes, during which time he was kicked, punched and pelted with eggs and flour.
The assault on Chung was greeted with widespread public outrage.
Public Information Minister Choi Chang Yoon claimed that it had turned the tide in the government's struggle with the latest wave of student unrest, the worst to have been experienced by the Roh administration.
The incident also appeared to provide a pretext for the government to institute harsher measures against the student demonstrators.
President Roh Tae Woo denounced the assault on Chung and called for a crackdown on student unrest.
Representatives of the Education Ministry and the ruling Democratic Liberal Party (DLP) immediately drew up a series of "campus stabilization measures" designed to improve security and restrict student political activity.
Arrest warrants were also issued against 16 students directly identified with the assault on Chang.
The 16, who had been identified from seized television news videotape, included Hankuk student chairman Chong Won Taek, who was reported to have gone into hiding.
A further 360 students were randomly detained in the wake of the assault, although all had been released by the evening of June 4.
On June 5 the Minister for Education, Yoon Hyon Sup, submitted his resignation as an act of atonement for the manhandling of the Prime Minister, although this was rejected on June 7 by Roh.
In the ensuing days there were further raids on campuses throughout the country as the authorities sought to arrest those whom they alleged were fomenting the unrest.
Also arrested on June 6 was veteran dissident, the Rev. Moon Ik Hwan, 73, a Presbyterian minister sentenced to seven years' imprisonment in 1989 for making an unauthorized trip to North Korea.
He had been released on parole in October 1990 on the grounds of ill-health.
Hyon Ju Ok, the leader of the radical labour group Chonnohyop, was arrested on June 14 after police surrounded the Myongdong Cathedral in Seoul where he and several other dissidents had taken refuge in mid-May.
At last one of his companions, Kang Ki Hung, a senior member of Chonminnyon —the country's largest dissident organization —was reported to have surrendered on June 24, after police threatened to storm the building.
Government victories in local elections
Despite the protests, local elections for the country's large provincial and metropolitan assemblies went ahead on June 20 as scheduled —the smaller assemblies having been elected in May, the first such elections in more than three decades.
The DLP secured an overwhelming victory, winning 564 of the 866 seats at stake, and thereby securing a mandate to control 11 of the 15 assemblies.
The main opposition force, the New Democratic Party (NDP), won 165 seats.
It secured a council majority in its stronghold of Kwangju and the neighbouring province of Cholla, but fared badly in other areas, leading to speculation that its leader, the veteran dissident Kim Dae Jung, might resign.
The splinter Democratic Party (DP) won 21 seats and the Minjung (People's) Party of Korea gained one seat.
Independents, who constituted one-third of the total candidates, did unexpectedly well, winning a total of 115 seats.
According to the Central Election Management Committee 28.9 per cent of the 28,000,000 eligible voters participated in the elections.
The DLP won 40 per cent of the total vote, the NDP 22 per cent, the DP 14 per cent and the Minjung 1 per cent , with independents taking the remaining 23 per cent .
On June 30, after an eight-hour debate, a caucus of NDP legislators and party executives voted to retain the current leadership of the party.
It had been reported earlier that Kim had offered to resign in order to facilitate the creation of a broad-based opposition grouping which would be capable of defeating the DLP at the 1992 presidential and legislative elections.
ASIA — PACIFIC
JAPAN
Resignation of opposition leader — Selection of new LDP faction leader
Resignation of Takako Doi
The leader of the opposition Social Democratic Party of Japan (SDPJ), Takako Doi, announced her resignation on June 21 at a meeting of the party's top executives.
Her resignation, due to become effective upon the selection of a successor in July, was in direct response to the party's poor showing in the local elections in April, and was accepted by the party's central executive committee on June 24.
Doi, 62, had been elected leader of the SDPJ (then named the Japan Socialist Party —see below) in 1986, thereby becoming the first woman in Japan to head a major political party.
Under her flamboyant leadership the moribund party was transformed into a force capable of offering a serious electoral challenge to the ruling LDP.
During this period the party abandoned aspects of its Marxist ideology, a process which culminated in the change of the English translation of its name in early 1991 [see p. 38010].
Doi ruthlessly exploited the difficulties which the 1989 Recruit scandal caused for the LDP and as the personification of the nascent Japanese women's movement she was successful in attracting female voters who had become disillusioned with the political process and estranged from the ruling party.
In July 1989 her party secured a huge electoral breakthrough by causing the LDP to lose control of the upper chamber of the Diet for the first time in its history.
Since then, however, the LDP had recovered ground under the steady leadership of Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu, while the opposition had been increasingly perceived as divided and as having little policy other than opposing the government.
This reversal in fortunes was demonstrated in the local elections of April 1991 when the SDPJ lost 98 seats [see pp. 38147-48].
Doi's resignation came the day after the party's central executive committee adopted a draft policy document which called for an acknowledgement of the legitimacy of the Japanese Self Defence Forces (SDF) and of the country's right to self-defence.
Despite concessions to the Marxist wing of the party —including a reduction in the size of the SDF and a characterization of the 1960 US-Japan Security Treaty as a "temporary" arrangement —the policy, if adopted by the party as a whole, would amount to a considerable revision of the unilateralist defence programme which the SDPJ had maintained since 1955.
The chief architect of the document was vice chairman Makoto Tanabe, who was widely tipped to succeed Doi as leader.
Selection of LDP faction leader
Hiroshi Mitsuzuka was selected on June 20 as leader of the second-largest LDP faction which had been led by Shintaro Abe until his death in May.
Mitsuzuka, 63, had been Minister of Foreign Affairs until Kaifu's election in August 1989 [see p. 36849].
His selection ended a month of factional discord as he and his chief rival, Mutsuki Kato, the 65-year-old chairman of the LDP research council, struggled to succeed Abe.
Stockbroking scandal
The government of Toshiki Kaifu was seriously embarrassed in late June by the emergence of a major financial scandal involving the four largest securities dealers on the Tokyo stock exchange.
The issue reminded many observers of the Recruit share trading scandal of late 1988, which had led to the collapse of the government led by Noboru Takeshita [see pp. 36463-64], and which had led to a range of measures designed to tighten up on this kind of abuse.
Nomura Securities, Nikko Securities, Daiwa Securities and Yamaichi Securities were accused by the national tax authorities of having attempted to conceal the fact that they had made compensation payments to certain large clients who had made losses after taking their investment advice.
While this was not illegal in Japan, it was discouraged under guidelines issued in 1989, and the ensuing cover-up had entailed a tax evasion.
Nikko admitted paying 17,000 million yen ($125,000,000) in compensation payments, while Nomura confessed to 16,500 million yen, Daiwa to 12,600 million yen and Yamaichi to 753,000,000 yen.
Yoshihisa Tabuchi, the president of Nomura (the world's largest stockbroker), and Takuya Iwasaki, the head of Nikko, resigned their posts on June 24 after their companies had also been accused of lending money to the head of a major gangster syndicate known as Inagawa-Kai, and of taking illegal actions to boost the values of shares which he held.
Ryutaro Hashimoto, the Finance Minister, expressed his "deep regret" over the links with organized crime, but he refused to resign.
The Tokyo regulatory exchange also barred the offending companies from trading on its floor for a period of two days, and the City of Tokyo was reported to have withdrawn some commission work from them.
The broking scandals came at a time when the Japanese government was already under pressure, both at home and abroad, to improve the supervision of its financial markets, to make insider trading illegal, and simultaneously to allow foreign institutions a greater degree of involvement in the domestic securities markets.
M. Yasushi Mieno, the governor of the Bank of Japan, said on June 25 that Japanese securities companies had to accept that "fair competition" was "a necessary part of all successful financial systems" .
The Tokyo stock market staged a limited recovery in the days following the discovery of the scandal, but trade remained generally at much lower levels than in recent years as the depression which had gripped the market since the start of 1989 continued its course.
By mid-July the Nikkei average was trading at only around 23,000, compared with a peak of almost 40,000 at the end of 1988.
Agreement on microchip pact
Japan and the United States agreed on June 4, after some years of often acrimonious debate, to extend for a further five years the deal reached in 1986 on the easing of access to the Japanese market for US manufacturers of chips for use in computer assembly.
Under the original deal, which was to expire on July 31, Japan was to guarantee a minimum 20 per cent market share for US chip manufacturers, but by mid-1991 the US makers were being restricted to only about 12 per cent of the market.
The USA had threatened to impose a 100 per cent retaliatory import tariff on some $165,000,000-worth of Japanese personal computers every year, unless Japan took action to implement the 1986 agreement; it had, however, eventually agreed to give Japan another 18 months, until the end of 1992, in which to build up US imports to the agreed 20 per cent market share.
[For other reports of trade disputes see pp. 37279, 37411.]
Volcanic eruptions
The eruption of Mount Unzen (in Nagasaki prefecture and 976 km south-west of Tokyo) on June 3 killed 39 people, including three foreign vulcanologists, as gases, ash and lava set homes on fire; subsequent eruptions on June 8, 12 and 17 caused no casualties.
There had been minor eruptions of Mount Unzen on Nov. 17, 1990, and on February 12, 1991, after the volcano had lain largely dormant since 1792.
ASIA — PACIFIC
THAILAND
Party affairs — Relations with China and Vietnam
A new political party, the Samakki Tham Party, was officially registered on June 20, with Narong Wongwan, the former leader of Ekkaparb (Solidarity), as its acting leader.
According to some reports the party had been created as a vehicle for the political ambitions of Gen. Suchinda Kraprayoon, Army C-in. -C. and leader of the Feb. 23 coup [see pp. 38003-04].
On June 5 the Chart Thai Party voted to retain Chatichai Choonhaven, the exiled former Prime Minister, as its leader until the next general elections.
Montree Pongpanit and Prayut Siriphanit were elected as leader and secretary general, respectively, of the Social Action Party (SAP) on June 9.
Montree replaced Siddhi Savetsila who had been removed as party leader in mid-1990 [see pp. 37655-56; 37712].
Visit by Chinese President — Visit to Vietnam by Gen. Sunthorn
President Yang Shangkun of China began a six-day visit to Thailand on June 10.
Topics discussed during Yang's visit included bilateral relations and the Cambodian conflict.
Gen. Sunthorn Kongsompong, Armed Forces Supreme Commander and head of the ruling military junta, visited Vietnam on June 7.
The two sides agreed to exchange military attachés.
ASIA — PACIFIC
CAMBODIA
Breakthrough in search for peace
Prince Norodom Sihanouk, leader of the tripartite rebel National Government of Cambodia (NGC), staged a major diplomatic coup in late June by winning agreement from all the warring factions on a permanent ceasefire and a return to the capital, Phnom Penh.
The agreement, although tentative, was the most important breakthrough yet in the search for an end to the 12-year civil war in Cambodia.
However, major problems remained, not least the fact that the Sihanouk initiative effectively bypassed a UN plan which, since mid-1990, had been the focus of diplomatic efforts to bring the war to an end.
Pattaya meeting of SNC
Sihanouk arranged the breakthrough at a meeting of the all-party Supreme National Council (SNC) in Pattaya, Thailand, on June 24-26.
For the first time, the SNC included Sihanouk as one of its 12 members.
The Prince had announced on June 7 his decision to replace Chausen Kosal as one of two Sihanoukist representatives.
Other SNC members included representatives of the other two NGC components (the Khmers Rouges and the Khmer People's National Liberation front —KPNLF) and the Phnom Penh regime —the State of Cambodia (SOC).
The meeting was also attended by Indonesian and French representatives (the co-chairs of the Paris International Conference on Cambodia —PICC) and by a representative of the UN Secretary-General.
Under the terms of a final communiqué issued on June 26 all the factions agreed to implement an indefinite ceasefire and promised not to receive any further foreign military aid.
A SNC headquarters would be established in Phnom Penh and members of each faction would be allocated a compound to be protected by their own forces.
The SNC, of which Sihanouk would be the de facto chair, would in effect act as a "super-government" , above the SOC and NGC, neither of which would be immediately dismantled.
On June 26 Hun Sen, the SOC Premier, announced that his government was prepared to accept a "limited" UN role in supervising the ceasefire.
However, there was no immediate indication of whether the SOC would drop its reservations about the UN peace plan, under which the SNC would assume temporary sovereignty of Cambodia during a UN-supervised transition period to free elections.
The Khmers Rouges, who boycotted the final stages of the Pattaya talks, blocked moves to invite a small UN team to supervise the ceasefire, fearing that the SOC would use such a team to legitimize its own administration and possibly to avoid greater UN involvement in the organization of elections.
Commenting on the Khmer Rouge position at the talks, the Independent of June 27 said that for the first time in three years of diplomacy, the group appeared "unsure of themselves, and nervous of being outmanoeuvred" .
Commentators suggested that the Khmers Rouges had been under pressure from their Chinese backers to accept the Sihanouk plan.
Jakarta meeting
The success of the Pattaya meeting followed a less successful meeting of the four Cambodian factions on June 2-4 in Jakarta, Indonesia, chaired by Indonesia and France.
Initially, some progress appeared to have been made at the Jakarta meeting when Sihanouk and Hun Sen announced that they had finally agreed on a compromise formula on the issue of the SNC chair (Sihanouk as chair, Hun Sen as vice-chair).
The two also agreed to extend a ceasefire which had been in place since early May [see pp. 38194-95].
However, the Khmers Rouges opposed the Sihanouk-Hun Sen arrangement, arguing that the SOC had to agree to the UN plan in full.
They also declined to commit themselves to an extension of the May ceasefire, although the possibility of an outbreak of large-scale fighting was minimized by the onset of the rainy season.
ASIA — PACIFIC
MALAYSIA
New Development Policy
On June 17 the Malaysian Prime Minister, Mahathir Mohamed, announced details of a national policy initiative to replace the New Economic Policy (NEP) which had operated from 1971 to 1990.
According to the Far Eastern Economic Review of June 27, the aim of the new strategy, the New Development Policy (NDP —for March release of working paper see p. 38100), was to provide a theoretical framework for the Second Outline Perspective Plan (OPP2) for 1991-2000.
OPP2 was the initial phase of Mahathir's ambitious plan to build Malaysia into a fully developed state by 2020.
Compared with the NEP, the NDP placed far less emphasis on the use of controversial racial quotas as a basis for national development —an aim of the NEP had been to redistribute 30 per cent of the country's corporate assets to the majority bumiputra community (the Malays and other indigenous people, as distinct from the economically dominant Chinese community).
The proportion actually rose from 2.4 per cent in 1970 to 20.3 per cent in 1990.
The 30 per cent target remained a goal under the NDP, but no date was set for its achievement.
One of the main goals of the NDP was the eradication of poverty from all sectors of society, including Indian plantation workers.
In line with the recent economic policies of the Mahathir government, the NDP pledged liberal incentives for foreign investment and stressed the vital role to be played by the private sector.
The OPP2 set out a series of macro-economic and sectoral targets.
Gross domestic product (GDP) was set to increase by an average annual rate of 7 per cent in 1991-2000.
Manufacturing's proportion of GDP would increase by 10 per cent to 37.2 per cent, whereas agriculture's share would fall from 18.7 per cent in 1990 to 13.4 per cent in 2000.
The proportion of manufactured goods in Malaysia's total exports would rise from 60.4 per cent in 1990 to 81.8 per cent in 2000.
Talks on UK arms deal
The Financial Times of June 14 reported that Malaysia had recently provided the United Kingdom government with a firm commitment that it intended to finalize the outstanding parts of a major defence package agreed with the UK in September 1988 [see p. 36558].
Negotiations had been held up during 1989 by a series of disputes [see p. 37573], and in May 1990 Malaysia had cancelled plans to buy for £400,000,000 (nearly US$700 million) 12 Tornado jet fighters from British Aerospace.
Despite such setbacks a commitment to press ahead with the deal had been provided by the Malaysian Defence Minister, Najib Razak, during a visit to London in early June.
ASIA — PACIFIC
INDONESIA
Internal security — Economy — Foreign relations
Tapol report on Aceh
A UK-based Indonesian human rights campaigning group, Tapol, claimed in its June bulletin that the army had been carrying out public executions of alleged members of the Free Aceh Movement (FAM) in northern Sumatra.
The bulletin cited a number of examples, including the execution of five people in mid-May witnessed by a correspondent for the Reuters news agency.
According to the bulletin, the army offensive had prompted as many as 100 Achinese civilians to flee by boat to Malaysia.
IGGI loans and grants — Tariff reform package
The Intergovernmental Group for Indonesia (IGGI) meeting in the Netherlands agreed on June 12 to provide a record US$4,750 million in aid and credits to Indonesia in 1991/92, a 5.3 per cent increase over the 1990/91 package.
Aid and credits from the World Bank and Japan constituted over half of the total package.
The government unveiled a new package of tariff reforms on June 3, the latest stage of its five-year campaign to lower trade barriers.
Radius Prawiro, Co-ordinating Minister for Economy, Finance, Industry and Development Supervision, said that the package would "boost exports and increase efficiency in all sectors of production" .
The new package reduced import tariffs on 562 items; tariff surcharges were reduced on 365 items and abolished on a further 137 items.
Foreign investment restrictions were also reduced, down from 75 to 60 closed sectors.
Visit by Chinese President
President Yang Shangkun visited Indonesia on June 5-10 [see p. 38293 for his subsequent visit to Thailand].
Yang was the first Chinese head of state to tour Indonesia since the visit of Liu Shaoqi in 1963.
President Suharto of Indonesia had visited China in November 1990 [see p. 37861], three months after the restoration of diplomatic relations between the two countries [see p. 37612].
ASIA-PACIFIC
PHILIPPINES
Eruption of Mount Pinatubo — Evacuation of US bases
On June 9 Mount Pinatubo, a 1,460-metre volcano which had lain dormant for 600 years, began to erupt.
The most serious eruptions, on June 12-15, scattered rock and ash over a 100-km radius and triggered a series of earth tremors (lasting until June 18) of up to 5.34 on the Richter scale.
The eruption of Mount Pinatubo (about 90 km north-west of Manila, the capital, on the main island, Luzon) combined with the effects of a tropical storm on June 15-16 to make an estimated 100,000 to 200,000 people homeless.
At least 343 people were killed, many of them by buildings collapsing under the weight of rain-soaked ash and mud.
On June 21 the Philippine government estimated that 600,000 Filipinos, including 65,000 employed by US forces, had lost their means of livelihood.
On June 10, 14,500 US service personnel and their families had been evacuated from Clark Air Base, 15 km east of Pinatubo, to Subic Bay naval base, about 40 km south-west of the volcano.
By June 15 all remaining US service personnel had abandoned Clark.
A Guardian report of June 13 to the effect that underground bunkers containing conventional and nuclear weapons had been left unattended at Clark produced denials from US service sources and the Philippine government.
On June 17-22, 20,000 dependents of US service personnel based at Clark and Subic were evacuated to the United States, leaving behind 15,000 US military personnel; on June 21, 4,500 US airmen were evacuated overseas from Subic Bay.
It was anticipated that the damage to both Clark and Subic Bay bases would dramatically alter the agenda of negotiations between the Philippine and US governments over the future of the bases.
ASIA — PACIFIC
AUSTRALIA
ALP leadership election — Cabinet reshuffle — Prohibition of mining on Aboriginal site — ALP conference
Re-election of Hawke as ALP leader
Prime Minister Bob Hawke, 61, was re-elected as leader of the Australian Labor Party (ALP) at a specially convened meeting of the 110-member party caucus (members of the federal parliament) on June 3.
Hawke received 66 votes compared with the 44 cast in favour of his challenger, Paul Keating, 47, the federal Treasurer and Deputy Prime Minister.
The leadership challenge occurred against a background of economic recession —including rising unemployment and high interest rates —and consistent opinion poll evidence that the ALP was likely to lose the next election.
Although Keating, as Treasurer, was responsible for much of the current economic position —it was widely accepted that in 1987 he had allowed the economy to overheat, and had been forced to use high interest rates to cool it, thereby exacerbating the impact of the world recession —he was also widely perceived as the only Cabinet member with the experience and stature to provide an alternative to the leadership of Hawke.
The catalyst for the leadership contest was Keating's revelation on May 30 that Hawke had made a secret promise in November 1988 to resign as Prime Minister in favour of Keating after the 1990 election.
Keating had been appointed Deputy Prime Minister after the 1990 election in preparation for this transition.
When pressed upon the issue, Hawke admitted the deal, but claimed that he had withdrawn from the arrangement in December 1990 after Keating had made "treacherous" remarks to the press about his leadership.
At a caucus meeting on May 31, Hawke tried to force an open vote on the leadership issue but was eventually forced by Keating's supporters to concede a secret ballot on June 3.
Although Hawke prevailed with a substantial majority, most political commentators believed that it was a pyrrhic victory which had left him considerably weakened and vulnerable to a future challenge.
The revelation of the 1988 leadership deal left Hawke with the appearance not merely of having reneged upon his arrangement with Keating, but of having lied to the electorate.
During the 1990 election campaign he had promised on at least eight occasions that if victorious he would serve the entire term as Prime Minister.
In addition to the damage to his integrity, the leadership challenge resulted in the immediate resignation of Keating, whose intellect and skills of debate had made him the ALP's most formidable performer in parliament.
The partnership between Hawke and Keating was the foundation of the ALP's record-breaking run of four consecutive election victories.
Cabinet reshuffle
Following Keating's resignation from the Cabinet Hawke immediately replaced him as Deputy Prime Minister with Brian Howe, Minister for Community Services and Health.
A former Methodist minister from Victoria and a leading member of the ALP's left wing, Howe's appointment was widely interpreted as a reward for the left's support of Hawke in the leadership contest.
On June 4, however, Hawke appointed John Kerin, the right-wing Minister for Primary Industry and Energy, as the new Treasurer.
Kerin, 53, a trained economist, was reputed to be more flexible than his fiscally conservative predecessor, but he quickly sought to reassure the business sector that there would be no change in Treasury policy, stating that it was important to preserve "all the benefits of the hard decisions" taken over the past few years.
Other Cabinet changes prompted by Keating's resignation were: the appointment of Simon Crean in place of Kerin; the appointment of Ross Free to replace Crean as junior Minister for Science and Technology; and the addition of responsibility for Housing to the portfolio of Brian Howe.
Banning of mining on Aboriginal land — Reconciliation Council bill
Speculation that Hawke was in the grip of the left increased on June 18 when he forced the majority of the Cabinet to endorse a permanent ban on mining at Coronation Hill, in the Northern Territory.
Most ministers, including Kerin, were believed to have favoured exploiting the rich gold, platinum and palladium deposits within the Hill.
Coronation Hill lay within the remote Kakadu Conservation Zone, adjacent to the 1,900,00-hectare Kakadu National Park.
It was mined on a small scale in the 1960s, but applications to reopen operations were resisted in the late 1980s on environmental grounds.
In 1990 Hawke asked the newly created Resources Assessment Commission to adjudicate on the issue; the report, filed in 1991, recommended that mining should not be prohibited on environmental grounds, but it pointed out that the Hill was sacred to an Aboriginal group, the Jawoyn people.
Despite considerable controversy over whether the Hill was truly a sacred site for the 600 Jawoyns and appeals by some of their number for the development to go ahead, Hawke forced his view upon the Cabinet that mining the area would amount to "desecration and sacrilege" of Aboriginal beliefs and should, therefore, be prohibited in perpetuity by incorporating the site into the adjacent national park.
The chief executive of Newcrest Mining, the joint-venture partner which had planned to mine the site, denounced Hawke's decision as a dangerous precedent.
He estimated that it would cost the country some A$500 million (US$380 million) in lost minerals, and called for compensation for the "expropriation" of the assets of Newcrest shareholders.
Parliament approved a bill on June 5 to establish a 25-member Council for Aboriginal Reconciliation, designed to operate until 2001, which would redress Aboriginal disadvantages and create a greater level of awareness of Aboriginal history and culture.
ALP conference
The ALP's biannual conference opened on June 24 in Hobart, Tasmania.
Although designed as a celebration of the 100th anniversary of the party's foundation, the conference immediately became embroiled in a bitter struggle over the election of the ALP president, a largely ceremonial position.
Of the 101 delegates, 100 evenly divided their support between Senator Stephen Loosley, the candidate of the right, and Barry Jones who was backed by the left.
The remaining vote was declared invalid due to a technicality, although it had apparently been cast for Jones.
After a protracted procedural wrangle it was agreed to hold a second ballot on June 25, but shortly before the vote Jones withdrew from the contest and Loosley was declared president.
The debacle, whilst illustrating the depth of divisions between the party factions, also reaffirmed that the traditional dominance of the party's right wing had not been undermined by the leadership contest.
The left suffered further defeats including the rejection of its attempt to make the reduction of unemployment a greater priority than the control of inflation.
Delegates also approved a resolution "to begin community debate to enable Australia to become a republic on Jan. 1, 2001" , the centenary of the foundation of the Australian commonwealth.
The creation of a republic had been ALP policy since 1981, but no date had previously been set.
It was agreed to establish a public inquiry into methods of limiting the concentration of newspaper and magazine ownership.
The left's only significant victory came when delegates voted to reject any expansion of the current limit of three uranium mines.
Although Australia possessed some 30 per cent of the world's known uranium, it provided only 10 per cent of output, largely because of the left's traditional hostility to the nuclear industry.
Hawke, who had been expected to speak in favour of a party report recommending the approval of new mines on a case-by-case basis, made no contribution to the debate.
In his keynote speech to the conference on June 26 Hawke savagely attacked the Liberal-National Party opposition and promised to lead his party to a fifth election victory.
Although he received a standing ovation from the delegates, supporters of Keating continued to predict that —the denials of the former Treasurer notwithstanding —a second challenge to Hawke's position would be delivered before the end of the year.
ASIA — PACIFIC
AFGHANISTAN
Kabul Radio announced on June 21 that President Najibullah had dismissed a Deputy Prime Minister, Mahmud Barialay.
ASIA — PACIFIC
NORTH KOREA
In an apparent effort to improve relations with the United States, the government of North Korea on June 24 returned the remains of 11 US servicemen killed in the 1950-53 Korean War, and promised to help search for a further 9,000 allied military personnel still officially listed as missing in action [see also p. 37456].
ASIA — PACIFIC
MYANMA
Myanma acceded on June 11 to the UN 1988 Vienna Convention against illicit traffic in narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances; Myanma's eastern border with Thailand and Laos formed the so-called Golden Triangle, one of the world's major sources of opium.
ASIA — PACIFIC
LAOS
Laos, Thailand and the UN High Commissioner for Refugees on June 29 agreed to a plan under which all 60,000 Lao refugees living in Thai camps would be either repatriated or resettled in third countries by the end of 1994.
ASIA — PACIFIC
SINGAPORE
in a Cabinet reshuffle on June 29 Prime Minister Goh Chok Tong relinquished the Defence portfolio to Yeo Ning Hong, hitherto Second Minister for Defence and Minister for Communications.
EUROPE
EC
Luxembourg summit
Heads of state and government of the 12 member countries of the European Communities (EC) met in Luxembourg on June 28-29 to take stock of progress in the negotiations on economic and monetary union (EMU) and European political union (EPU) which had opened at the Rome summit in December 1990 [see pp. 37905-06].
They discussed a draft treaty put forward by Luxembourg [see below p. 38154]but postponed any firm decisions on contentious issues until the December 1991 EC summit in Maastricht.
(Those attending the Luxembourg summit were as in December 1990.)
The meeting was in part overshadowed by the crisis in Yugoslavia.
On June 29 the "troika" of foreign ministers of Italy, Luxembourg and the Netherlands reported on their visit to Yugoslavia the previous day, on the recurrence of violence the troika returned to Yugoslavia on June 30 [see p. 38275].
WEU meeting
Immediately before the summit Foreign and Defence Ministers of the Western European Union (WEU —comprising the EC member countries except Denmark, Greece and Ireland) met on June 27 in Vianden castle on the Luxembourg border with Germany.
While reaffirming the WEU's objective of contributing to "solidarity within the Atlantic alliance" , the Vianden meeting also accepted that "European political union implies a genuine security and defence identity and thus greater European responsibility for defence matters" [see also p. 38313].
The meeting reportedly agreed to investigate the establishment of a WEU rapid deployment force [for NATO agreement in May 1991 on a similar force see p. 38216]and of a satellite data interpretation centre to reduce European dependence on US intelligence.
Presentation of draft union treaty
The Luxembourg government, which held the presidency of the Council of Ministers for the first half of 1991, presented a redrafted draft union treaty on June 20.
Its first draft, presented in April 1991 [see p. 38154], had been discussed at an informal meeting of EC Foreign Ministers in Dresden on June 2-3, and had been criticized by Jacques Delors, the President of the EC Commission, supported by the Netherlands, Belgium and Germany.
It proposed a three-part structure whereby ordinary EC business (including EMU) would be one of three "pillars" in a European "temple" .
The two others —a common foreign and defence policy, and police and judicial co-operation —would be decided by meetings of relevant EC government ministers and thus remain outside the EC decision-making machinery.
Delors instead proposed a "tree" with "branches" where decisions would be made through the EC institutions.
The first draft also met with opposition at an EC Foreign Ministers' meeting on June 17 when the United Kingdom, supported by Denmark and Portugal, called for the removal of a phrase in the preamble describing the treaty as "a new stage in the gradual process leading to a union with a federal goal" .
Inclusion of the word "federal" , which the UK government insisted had connotations in English, if not in other EC languages, of a "superstate" was described by the Independent of June 18 as "effectively the price being demanded of Britain, incidentally also of France, for insisting between them that the two main new areas for common action —foreign and security policies and judicial affairs —should be kept separate from the traditional EC constitutional structure as laid down in the Treaty of Rome [see pp. 15951-59]" .
The UK also reiterated its opposition to references to a common defence policy, and to a single currency (as opposed to the UK's proposal for a "hard ECU" as a 13th currency —see p. 37969).
The new 132-page Luxembourg draft retained references to a "federal goal" , to an eventual common defence policy, to a Commission reduced in size from 17 to 12, to European citizenship as proposed by the Spanish government, and to the European Parliament having a right of "co-decision" with the Council of Ministers [see p. 38154].
It also extended the EC's areas of competence on which qualified majority voting would apply, to include energy, trans-European communications, health, education, culture, consumer rights, tourism and industrial policy.
It introduced the requirement that any country joining the EC had to accept all its activities including the "pillars" outside normal EC decision-making.
It gave the European Court of Justice the power to fine governments contravening EC law.
The draft declared that "the policy of the Union aims at covering all areas of foreign and security policy…including, eventually, the framing of a defence policy" .
Areas to be covered by a common foreign security policy would be decided by consensus by the European Council but thereafter decisions on these issues could be decided by a weighted majority.
The Union's decisions on defence could "be wholly or partially carried out through the WEU" but this could be reviewed in 1996 in a general revision of the treaty.
The Financial Times of June 28 described this review clause "ploy" as designed "to hold out the hope to countries which feel their aspirations unsatisfied in this constitutional revision that they may do better next time" .
Divisions among UK Conservatives on European union
In the weeks before the Luxembourg summit the governing Conservative Party in the UK showed itself to be seriously divided over the pace and goals of UK integration in Europe.
On June 11 a memorandum from the right-wing anti-federalist Bruges Group, leaked to the London Evening Standard, described Prime Minister John Major as too "frightened" to veto the draft EMU treaty.
Major, addressing the Welsh Conservative Party conference on June 14, dismissed those "sulking on the fringe of talks about the destiny of Europe" and declared that "the British government and the British parliament would only move to a single currency if they took a further, separate and explicit decision to do so, not just when to do so but whether to do so at all" .
[See p. 38201 for May 1991 Delors compromise offer on EMU.]
Former UK Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher broke her silence on the issue during a visit to the United States.
In Chicago on June 17 she attacked those attempting "to create a new artificial state by taking powers away from national states and concentrating them at the centre" .
In New York on June 18 she proposed the creation of a free-trade "Atlantic Economic Community" and reiterated her opposition to fixed exchange rates, under which, she said, interest rates and domestic monetary conditions would "go where they will" and would leave Finance Ministers "like innocent bystanders at the scene of an accident" .
These speeches were denounced by Edward Heath (from whom Thatcher had won the Conservative leadership in 1975) as "full of falsehoods —in ordinary English —lies" .
Heath accused her of being "entirely out of touch with events in this country" , and of leaving Major a "ghastly economic legacy" .
Major's difficult domestic position was one of the factors leading German Chancellor Helmut Kohl, who met Major on June 9, and President Mitterrand of France, who had talks with Major on June 24, to agree that the Luxembourg summit should not attempt to enforce binding decisions.
For its part the German government was currently advocating a slower pace on EMU (as did the UK), so that greater convergence of EC economies could be achieved.
[See pp. 38109; 38155-56 for economic upheaval in Germany resulting from unification.]
Summit conclusions
Extracts from the communiqué are given below.
"Intergovernmental conferences…
The European Council confirms that the proceedings of these two conferences [on EMU and EPU]should continue in parallel.
The final decision on the text of the Treaty on Political Union and on Economic and Monetary Union will be taken by the Maastricht European Council [in December 1991]so that the results of the two conferences can be submitted for ratification simultaneously during 1992 and the new treaty can enter into force on Jan. 1, 1993.
The European Council considers that the presidency's draft forms the basis for the continuation of negotiations…on the understanding that final agreement by the member states will only be given to the treaty as a whole.
"Political union…
The European Council considers that the Union should be based on the following principles…: full maintenance of the acquis communautaire and development thereof, a single institutional framework with procedures appropriate to the requirements of the various spheres of action, the evolving nature of the process of integration or union, the principle of subsidiarity and the principle of economic and social cohesion…
"Common foreign and security policy.
The presidency's draft reflects the unanimous desire to reinforce the identity and role of the Union as a political entity on the international scene, as well as the concern to ensure the consistency of all its external activities.
The decision-making process for implementation of the common foreign and security policy has still to be examined…
"…
The question of strengthening the defence identity of the Union will be decided at the final stage of the conference.
That identity will take account of the traditional positions of certain member states.
The role of the WEU, which is an essential part of the process of European integration, will be clarified.
"The [NATO]Community member states…, in accordance with the guidelines established at the recent meeting of NATO foreign ministers in Copenhagen [see p. 38313], regard the ultimate reinforcement of a European defence identity as an important contribution to the strengthening of the Atlantic Alliance…
"Democratic legitimacy.
The European Council considers the Presidency's draft to contain significant proposals strengthening the European Parliament's political, legislative and monitoring role, which must go hand in hand with development of the Union…
"Social policy…
The Community's role in this area should be stepped up and its action made more effective, with due regard for the principle of subsidiarity and the respective roles of the member states and the social partners, in accordance with national practices and traditions [the last phrase being inserted at the insistence of the UK which consistently opposed any extension of EC powers into areas it regarded as relating to employment law rather than to social policy]…
"Economic and social cohesion.
The European Council believes that ever closer economic and social cohesion is an integral part of the general development of the Union…
"Economic and monetary union.
The intergovernmental conference has revealed…that there are broad areas of agreement on the basic components of EMU.
At the next European Council these draft texts should be finalized according to the guidelines worked out there and in keeping with the European Council's conclusions of Oct. 27-28, 1990, recalling the UK reserve attached thereto [when the Eleven agreed on January 1994 as the starting date for "stage two" of EMU —see p. 37783].
"In this context, the European Council notes that in the near future several governments intend to submit specific multi-annual programmes designed to secure the requisite progress on convergence [see also p. 38201]…
The European Council would encourage other governments to submit such programmes…
"Internal market.
The European Council…notes that three-quarters of the measures provided for in the White Paper [on establishing a single internal market]have been decided.
In particular it welcomes the agreement…on the alignment of VAT [value added tax]rates and excise duties [see below]which opens the way to the completion of an area without frontiers on Jan. 1, 1993…
"In this context, the following deserve particular attention during the next half-year: public procurement in the service sector, financial services, co-operation between undertakings, and in particular the statute of the European company, definitive arrangements in the field of insurance, pharmaceuticals and the veterinary and plant health sectors.
"Social dimension.
The European Council notes that the progress made in the completion of the internal market has not been accompanied by comparable progress in the field of social policy.
It emphasizes that the Community, the member states and the representatives of employers and employees should play a role in the implementation of the principles contained in the "Social Charter" according to their respective responsibilities.
"Free movement of persons.
The European Council welcomes the fact that all the member states have signed the Convention on Asylum…
[At a meeting of EC immigration ministers on June 13-14 Denmark announced that it had signed the convention, which was designed to deal with difficulties resulting from asylum seekers moving from one EC country to another and to give asylum seekers a guarantee that their application would be examined by one member country.
However, ministers failed to agree by the end of June on a complementary Convention on External Frontiers harmonizing immigration policy.
Although Denmark and the UK won temporary exemption from lifting internal border controls, Spain refused to sign at the last minute on the grounds that the agreement might prejudice its claims to sovereignty over Gibraltar.]
"Drugs.
The European Council has taken note of the first report from the relevant committee on the implementation of the European plan to combat drugs.
It emphasizes in particular the importance of the recent adoption of Community legislation on money laundering [approved by EC Finance Ministers on June 10 and effective from Jan. 1, 1993]."
On external relations the heads of state and government adopted a declaration on the Soviet Union (noting inter alia that deliveries had begun of the food aid worth ECU750,000,000 pledged in December 1990 —see p. 37906).
They welcomed the start scheduled for July 15 of negotiations on a European energy charter to institute "long-term European co-operation in the energy sectors" .
Other statements included one on negotiations with EFTA for a European Economic Area [see p. 38307].
Annexes
On the basis of proposals put forward by Kohl the heads of state and government committed themselves in an annexed document to reach unanimous agreement by Dec. 31, 1993, on a treaty to establish a Central European Criminal Investigation Office ( "Europol" ).
Kohl had called for a European federal police force modelled on the US Federal Bureau of Investigation but the UK favoured an inter-governmental rather than a supranational force, although Major himself called for a "strong perimeter fence" around the EC to prevent a wave of illegal immigrants.
[For January 1991 conference on east-west European migration see p. 37969; for March 1991 OECD migration conference see p. 38122; for May 1991 introduction of visa requirements for Maghreb visitors see p. 38201.]
Other annexes approved by the Luxembourg summit were declarations on the peace process in the Middle East, the situation in Iraq, South Africa, human rights, the improvement of emergency assistance within the UN framework, nuclear non-proliferation, and arms exports.
Linkage of Finnish markka to ECU
From June 7 the Bank of Finland linked the markka to the ECU.
Sweden and Norway had linked their currencies to the ECU in May 1991 and October 1990 respectively [see pp. 38202; 37782].
Environmental issues
A meeting on June 13-14 of EC environment ministers agreed (i) on stricter car exhaust emission standards,(ii) on the substance of a directive to reduce nitrates pollution, and (iii) on a proposal to ban from 1995 the import of fur from animals caught by inhumane "leghold" traps.
The exhaust emissions standards could only be met with current technology by installing three-way catalytic converters in petrol-driven vehicles.
The new standards, which corresponded to those in force in the USA since 1983, would apply for new models from July 1, 1992, and for all new cars from Dec. 31, 1992.
Agreement in principle on these standards was reached in December 1990 but formal approval was held up by attempts to introduce tougher standards.
Tax harmonization
EC finance ministers agreed on June 24 on a declaration committing all member countries to a minimum standard VAT rate of 15 per cent from Jan. 1, 1993 (when the single internal market was due to be completed).
All member countries except the UK also committed themselves to translate this commitment into law.
The UK government, which currently levied a standard 17.5 per cent VAT rate, maintained that "taxation should be determined by national parliaments" and that the rate between EC countries should be regulated by market forces.
Ministers also agreed on minimum excise duty rates for cigarettes, beer, and wine, but not spirits.
Schengen agreement
On June 25 Spain and Portugal signed the Schengen agreement abolishing internal border controls between signatory countries [see also p. 38201].
The accord had been signed by Belgium, France, Germany, Luxembourg and the Netherlands in June 1990 [see p. 37535]and by Italy in November 1990 [see p. 37870].
The agreement was scheduled to come into force in 1992, once ratified by all signatory countries.
France became the first country to complete the ratification process when the accord was approved by the National Assembly on the night of June 3-4 and by the Senate on June 27-28.
EUROPE
GERMANY
SPD victory in Hamburg
In elections to the Bürgerschaft (city parliament) in Hamburg on June 2, the Social Democratic Party (SPD) regained the absolute majority of seats which it had lost in the elections of June 1987 [see p. 35208].
The result represented the third successive regional election defeat for the federal Christian Democrat (CDU), Christian Social Union (CSU) and Free Democrat (FDP) coalition since the all-German election in December 1990.
[See p. 37966 for January 1991 Hesse election and pp. 38155-56 for April 1991 Rhineland-Palatinate election.]
The turnout of 66.1 per cent was the lowest for any post-war Hamburg Bürgerschaft election.
Percentage of votes Seats 1991 1987 1991 1987 SPD 48.0 45.0 61 55 CDU 35.1 40.5 44 49
Hamburg Bürgerschaft election
*Greens 7.2 7.0 9 8 FDP 5.4 6.5 7 8
**Others 4.3 1.0 0 0
*Greens —Green Alternative List (GAL).
**Percentages for other parties included Republicans –1.2; the Greys (a pensioners' party —see pp. 37676-77) –0.9; Hamburg List to Stop Immigration –0.7; Party of Democratic Socialism/Left List –0.5; Alternative List –0.5.
The SPD's one-seat majority in the city parliament would enable Henning Voscherau, mayor since June 1988 [see p. 36045], to form an SPD government, the FDP having ruled out a renewal of the SPD-FDP coalition in place since 1987 [see p. 35723].
Tax increases
The Bundesrat (upper house of the federal parliament, controlled since April 1991 by the SPD —see p.38156) refused on June 7 to approve tax increases introduced in March 1991 by the government to meet the costs of unification and the Gulf War and accepted by the Bundestag [see p. 38109].
However, a subsequent compromise reached in the Vermittlungsausschuss (joint mediation committee consisting of an equal number of members from the Bundesrat and Bundestag) enabled the government to apply the increased taxes on July 1, while abandoning certain reductions in company taxation.
Limitation of arms exports
The Bundesrat also voted on June 7 to reject a bill to limit arms exports.
Although the SPD agreed with the bill's intention and much of its detail, it used its majority in the Bundesrat to reject the bill because it empowered the government to use telephone-tapping and mail-interception to gather evidence of illegal arms sales.
The bill would therefore have to be considered by the mediation committee.
The attempt to impose stricter limits on arms exports followed criticism at the time of the Gulf War of German weapons sales to Iraq over a long period [see pp. 37639; 37471; 36498].
The criticism was reinforced by Germany's constitutional inability to contribute militarily to the UN forces deployed in the Gulf war [see pp. 37941-42; 38199-200].
Vote on Berlin as seat of government and legislature
On June 20, after a long debate, 377 Bundestag deputies voted in favour of Berlin as the seat of the united German legislature and government, while 320 deputies voted in favour of Bonn.
Although the 1990 unification treaty had confirmed Berlin as the German capital, the issue of whether the organs of government located in Bonn should move to Berlin had been left unresolved [see pp. 37832; 37661].
Compromise proposals to leave the government ministries in Bonn but move the Bundestag to Berlin failed to find sufficient support.
There had been intensive campaigning by the proponents of each city over the preceding months.
Two former Berlin mayors (Federal President Richard von Weizsäcker and former West German Chancellor Willy Brandt) as well as Foreign Minister Hans-Dietrich Genscher supported Berlin.
Public opinion remained closely divided on the question.
Kohl's eventual support for Berlin was thought to have been influential in swaying several Bundestag members.
The federal government created a working group to oversee preparations for the move to Berlin, which was scheduled to take eight to 12 years to complete, although the Bundestag would be located there within about five years.
Cost estimates ranged from DM50,000 million to DM100,000 million.
The decision was expected to cost about 100,000 jobs in Bonn, and would affect property prices both in Bonn and in Berlin.
Sentencing of extremists
In the first trial of members of the extreme left Red Army Faction who had been given refuge in the former East Germany [see p. 37828], Susanne Albrecht was sentenced to 12 years' imprisonment by a Stuttgart court on June 3.
The principal charges against her concerned her participation in the 1977 murder of a banker, Jürgen Ponto, and in the 1979 attempted murder of Gen. Alexander Haig, then NATO Commander-in-Chief.
Albrecht was given from a reduced sentence because she had turned state's witness.
A Palestinian, Hafez Kassem Dalkamoni, and a Jordanian, Abdel Fatar Ghadanfar, were sentenced on June 3 by a Frankfurt court to 15 and 12 years' imprisonment for attempted murder and possession of explosives similar to those involved in the Lockerbie air disaster in December 1988.
They had made two attempts to bomb United States military trains in Lower Saxony in 1987 and 1988.
Sentencing of Tisch
Harry Tisch, the former chair of the East German Free German Trade Union Federation (FDGB), was sentenced on June 6 by a Berlin court to 18 months' imprisonment on charges of misappropriation of union funds for personal benefit.
However, since he had served nearly a year in prison whilst awaiting trial he was released on completion of the trial, the sentence being reduced for good conduct.
Tisch was acquitted of charges relating to diversion of funds to finance a youth festival, although the public prosecutor appealed against the verdict.
The case was seen as demonstrating the legal difficulties involved in using the judicial system of unified Germany to deal with cases which occurred under the East German legal system.
[For details of other cases pending against former East German leaders see p. 38199; for Erich Honecker's flight to the Soviet Union in March 1991 see p. 38110; for the investigation into abuses of office see p. 37107.]
Assassination of Berlin official
Hanno Klein, an official of the Berlin city administration, was killed by a letter bomb on June 13.
Klein had been responsible for a controversial sale to the Daimler-Benz engineering firm of city-owned land in central Berlin, and had co-operated closely with the Treuhand agency responsible for administering and selling-off state-owned industrial property in eastern Germany.
[See p. 38155 for April 1991 murder of Treuhand chief executive Detlev Rohwedder.]
Neo-Nazis in eastern Germany
A leader of neo-Nazi groups in Saxony, Rainer Sonntag, was shot dead by two assailants on the night of May 31 in Dresden, whilst involved with a gang of about 50 other radical right-wing youths in a gangland battle.
Two Germans were arrested in Bangkok in June and were to be extradited to Germany to face charges relating to Sonntag's murder.
Sonntag's murder prompted rallies of 1,500-2,000 extreme right-wing supporters in Dresden on June 15 and 22.
The Dresden city government gave permission for the rallies to be held, insisting that refusal might have provoked violent demonstrations in the city, which had become a centre of radical right-wing activity since the end of the East German communist regime.
A Berlin police spokesperson on June 11 estimated membership in eastern Germany of radical right-wing organizations at about 1,500-2,000 and supporters at about 30,000.
Manifestations of right-wing violence included football hooliganism, anti-Semitism, attacks on foreigners (leading in one instance to the death in Dresden of a man from Mozambique, flung from a tramcar by skinheads) and on their hostels and clubs, and violence directed against Poles visiting Germany [see p. 38164].
EUROPE
AUSTRIA
Dismissal of Haider as governor of Carinthia
On June 21 Jörg Haider, 40, the populist leader of the Freedom Party of Austria (FPÖ), was obliged to step down as provincial governor (Landeshauptmann) of Carinthia.
Haider, in office since 1989 [see pp. 37688; 36596], had caused a furore by declaring on June 13 during a Landtag (provincial parliament) debate that "an orderly employment policy was carried out in the Third Reich, which the government in Vienna cannot manage" .
On June 18 the federal coalition parties —the Socialists (SPÖ) and the People's Party (ÖVP) —called for Haider's resignation on the grounds that his comments "defamed the millions of people who endured unending suffering under the Nazis" .
The ÖVP in Carinthia, although it was part of the provincial governing coalition dominated by Haider's FPÖ, nevertheless supported an SPÖ resolution passed by the Landtag calling for Haider's resignation.
On June 25 Haider was elected as deputy governor, with the ÖVP abstaining and the SPÖ walking out of the chamber; the provincial ÖVP leader Christof Zernatto became governor.
Waldheim's renunciation of second presidential term
On June 21 Kurt Waldheim, 72, announced that he would not be standing for a second term as President in the elections due in 1992.
[For controversy during the 1986 presidential election surrounding Waldheim's wartime activities see pp. 34690-92; 35089; 35527-30; 35790-91].
In a statement on Austrian television he said: "After weighing the interests of our republic, the experiences of the past years, and also my personal plans for the future, I have decided not to offer my candidacy for re-election." 
Waldheim, a former UN Secretary-General, had been banned from entering the United States, and during his term as President had only paid visits to various Islamic countries (including Iraq and Iran —see pp. 37759; 38309) and to the Vatican.
SPÖ congress — New ÖVP leader
At a congress in Linz on June 14-15 the SPÖ changed its name to become the Social Democratic Party of Austria (Sozialdemokratische Partei Österreichs —SPÖ) rather than the Socialist Party of Austria.
Federal Chancellor Franz Vranitzky was re-elected SPÖ chair by 98.5 per cent of delegates' votes.
On June 28 Erhard Busek, 50, was elected president of the ÖVP in place of Josef Riegler.
Busek, who was Minister of Science and Research in Vranitzky's government and was seen as coming from the ÖVP's progressive wing, won 325 votes against 252 for Bernhard Görg, an economist.
Riegler, the Federal Vice-Chancellor, had led the party since May 1989 [see p. 37688]but announced his resignation as party leader on May 23.
[For the ÖVP's poor performance in the October 1990 general election see p. 37785.]
Burgenland elections
An early election to the Burgenland Landtag was held on June 23.
The SPÖ, led by Hans Sipötz, the provincial governor [see p. 35792], had called the election following the April 15 upholding of the conviction for perjury of former Chancellor Fred Sinowatz [see p. 38164], whom Sipötz and others in the party leadership had supported in court.
The SPÖ won 17 seats (as in October 1987 —see p. 35792), the ÖVP won 15 (16 in 1987) and the FPÖ four (three in 1987).
EUROPE
SWITZERLAND
Referendums on tax reform and conscientious objection
In a referendum on June 2, voters rejected by 790,754 votes (54.3 per cent) to 664,271 (45.7 per cent ) financial reforms designed to bring the country's fiscal system more in line with the rest of western Europe.
A key proposal in the reforms would have introduced value added tax (VAT) to replace a corporate tax in 1994.
A proposed cut in the securities stamp tax was also rejected; Swiss banks claimed that the tax made the country less competitive as a financial centre.
Only three cantons (Zürich, Basel City and Graubünden) voted in favour of the reforms, which were backed by the four government parties, the trade unions, and the bankers' associations.
The vote was widely seen as a test of voters' attitude to greater integration into western Europe.
It was the third time proposals to introduce VAT had been turned down.
In a simultaneous referendum, voters approved by 818,364 votes (55.7 per cent) to 650,374 (44.3 per cent ) the so-called Barras reform abolishing prison sentences for conscientious objectors to military service.
Conscientious objectors would now be required to work for 1@1/2 times the length of their refused military service.
The turnout in the referendums was 32.6 per cent.
Women's strike
Thousands of Swiss women went on strike on June 14 to mark the 10th anniversary of the country's equal rights law.
The protest was called by the Swiss Trade Union Federation, supported by a wide range of church, political and business organizations, to renew demands for equal pay and employment for women, better child care and fairer social security laws.
According to government statistics women earned on average one-third less than men in 1989, and less than 4 per cent of top business jobs were held by women.
Protesting under the slogan "When women stop, everything stops" , housewives were encouraged to put pans and brooms on window sills; seminars and demonstrations were held locally and other activities included the "modification" of street names and statues honouring male heroes.
EUROPE
FRANCE
Further deaths and tension in suburbs
Violent incidents in early June on the Val Fourée estate in Mantes-la-Jolie, 50 km west of Paris (where a young Frenchman of Arab origin had died in police custody following riots in late May —see p. 38198) fuelled a growing controversy over immigration and urban housing policy.
A policewoman, Marie-Christine Baillet, was run over and killed, allegedly deliberately, in the early hours of June 9 by youths taking part in a "rodeo" (using stolen cars to raid shops-windows).
Minutes later the policewoman's colleagues shot dead Youssef Khaïf, 23, a Frenchman of Algerian descent, who was riding in another car.
The police claimed they had acted in self-defence.
Three young men were arrested on June 11 to await charges in connection with the incidents.
On June 20-24 in Narbonne police (and, later, CRS riot police) clashed with "Harki" youths —the children of Algerians who had fought on the French side during the Algerian war of independence.
The young people were from June 22 demanding the release of three people arrested following the erection of a barricade on June 21.
Emergency spending programme
On June 12 Prime Minister Edith Cresson announced a F140,000,000 (about US$23,000,000) emergency plan to help 300,000 young people in 400 low-income suburbs, and to counter police organizations' complaints of lack of policy planning and inadequate resources.
Five hundred sports grounds would be built in 18 months; young people would be offered training courses with the army, fire brigades and charities and would be encouraged to join the police.
One thousand police would be posted to the suburbs that summer and 12 more "houses of justice" would be built as centres for dispute settlement and advisory services.
Remarks made on June 19 by Jacques Chirac, mayor of Paris and leader of the Gaullist Rally for the Republic (RPR), were attacked as racist by Cresson, who had already accused Chirac of plumbing racist feeling in order to win over voters from the far-right National Front (FN).
In response to after-dinner questions at an RPR function in Orléans, Chirac had said that the immigration policies of the Socialist Party (PS) had led to an "overdose" , and described a hypothetical immigrant with multiple wives and 20 children, living off social security payments.
Alignments on left and right
A renewed alliance between the French Communist Party (PCF) and the ruling PS was widely predicted after PCF secretary-general Georges Marchais publicized his meeting over dinner, on June 6, with PS first secretary Pierre Mauroy.
At a meeting of the PCF central committee in Paris on June 4-5, Marchais and others had argued in favour of lending tactical support to the PS under Cresson (the PCF had participated in Socialist governments under Mauroy's premiership from June 1981 until July 1984 —see pp. 31039; 33174).
On June 17 the PS survived a vote of no confidence with the help of the 27 PCF deputies, who abstained.
The opposition votes were 14 short of the majority needed.
On June 12 an accord was signed between the RPR and the Union for French Democracy (UDF) allowing for the two parties to put up joint candidates at local and legislative elections.
A joint candidate for the next presidential elections would be selected through the holding of "primaries" .
Re-election of Chevènement
Former Defence Minister Jean-Pierre Chevènement was re-elected deputy for the constituency of Belfort at a by-election on June 2 and June 9, with 52.06 per cent of the vote.
His campaign was endorsed by Cresson, who visited the constituency on June 7.
Chevènement had resigned as a deputy in 1988 on becoming Defence Minister, a post from which he resigned in January 1991 [see p. 37941].
EUROPE
ITALY
Referendum on electoral reform
A national referendum held on June 9 and 10 resulted in an unexpectedly large majority of 95.6 per cent in favour of a package of reforms to the voting procedure for parliamentary elections.
Almost 30,000,000 people (62.5 per cent of those eligible) participated in the referendum.
Voters were asked whether they wished to change the current system —by which voters indicated four candidates from their chosen party in a descending order of preference —and to use instead a system allowing one vote for one candidate only.
This change was designed to limit the scope for corruption; the system of "preferences" had made for easily identifiable blocs of voters who could be organized —especially by the Mafia and other such groups in the south —to swing behind a particular candidate in return for future favours.
The complicated ballot sheet was also relatively easily altered for the purposes of electoral fraud.
The Socialist Unity Party (PSU) and some Christian Democrats had called on voters to boycott the referendum, on the grounds that a reduction of choice for the electorate could result.
The majority in favour meant that the changes would become law once published by presidential decree in the official gazette.
Regional elections in Sicily
Elections to the 80-seat Sicilian regional parliament and 12 town councils were held on June 16, with the CD winning 42 per cent of the vote (up from 38.8 per cent in 1986).
The PSU won 14 per cent, compared with 15 per cent in 1986.
This result, together with the local election results of May [see p. 38200], nevertheless confirmed its position as Italy's second strongest party.
The re-formed Democratic Party of the Left (PDS) won 10.8 per cent and the Communist Refoundation (RC) 3.5 per cent, their combined vote being well below the 19.4 per cent for the Communist Party (PCI) in 1986.
A new party styled La Rete ( "the Network" ), headed by a former CD mayor of Palermo, Leoluca Orlando, won 7.8 per cent.
Heavily backed by the Catholic hierarchy, it had an agenda of combating Mafia crime.
Socialist Party congress
The 48th congress of the PSU began in Bari on June 28.
Party secretary Bettino Craxi appeared to rule out the formation of an electoral alliance with the PDS when he told the congress that "the conditions for a leftist alternative are not there on the horizon" .
This was interpreted as a response to a speech by President Francesco Cossiga on June 26, advocating a "democratic revolution" to modernize the political system.
EUROPE
SPAIN
Resignation of PSOE leader
Carlos Navarro, resigned on June 20 as treasurer of the parliamentary group of the ruling Socialist Workers' Party (PSOE), as a result of allegations that two Madrid consulting companies with which he had been associated were fronts for the channelling of illegal donations to the PSOE from corporations and banks.
Navarro kept his seat in the Congress of Deputies.
The party's overall treasurer, Guillermo Galeote, was suspended from his duties pending an external investigation into PSOE financial records since 1986.
The two consultancies —Filesa and Time Export —had received payments totalling over US$10,000,000 from a number of companies (including Asea Brown Boveri (ABB), the oil refiner Cepsa and the Banco Bilbao Vizcaya) supposedly for "reports" on a range of commercial subjects.
The two consultancies were said to have then paid for parts of the PSOE election campaigns in 1988 and 1989.
Spanish law limited to 10,000,000 pesetas the amount an individual or a company might donate to a political party, with a maximum of 1,000,000 ptas for donations to campaigns (US$1.00=111.689 ptas as at June 24, 1991).
Spanish press comment detected in the handling of the affair an ongoing struggle between Prime Minister and PSOE secretary-general Felipe González and supporters of Alfonso Guerra, who had resigned as Deputy Prime Minister in January 1991 but continued as PSOE deputy secretary-general [see p. 37968].
 "Guerrists" among the PSOE "aparato" (bureaucracy) felt that officials using unorthodox but previously tolerated methods of fund-raising were not guilty of personal corruption.
[For May 1990 PP financial scandal see p. 37469.]
ETA attacks
The bombing campaign by the Basque separatist organization ETA continued during May and June.
Among attacks claimed by (in most cases) or attributed to factions of the organization were: a car bomb outside a civil guard barracks in Casalarreina, Rioja, on May 20; a car bomb outside the civil guard barracks in Vic, near Barcelona, on May 29 (nine people were killed, including four children); three bombs outside Spanish targets in Rome on May 28, followed by two more in Rome and one each in Milan and Bologna on June 11; and a parcel bomb inside Seville's main prison on June 28 (when four people were killed).
Following the explosion at Vic two key ETA members of its Barcelona cell were killed by the civil guard in a raid on a house at Llica de Munt, 30 km from Barcelona, on May 30.
EUROPE
UNITED KINGDOM
Scottish electricity privatization
In June the entire share capital of the two Scottish integrated electricity companies was sold to the public, thus completing the privatization of the non-nuclear electricity supply industry.
[For electricity privatizations in England and Wales see p. 38111.]
The nuclear assets and liabilities of the former nationalized Scottish electricity boards had already been transferred to Scottish Nuclear which, as with the English nuclear power industry, remained wholly government-owned.
As announced on June 17 the offer to the general public was 3.2 times subscribed; accordingly some of the shares allocated for institutional investors (in part by tender) and for overseas investors were "clawed back" to favour (i) customer applicants; and (ii) other individuals who had applied for fewer than 1,000 shares.
The total proceeds of the sale were approximately £2,900 million.
When dealings opened on June 18, shares traded initally at a premium of up to 23 per cent.
EUROPE
NORTHERN IRELAND
Brooke initiative talks
All-party talks on the future of Northern Ireland, initiated by Peter Brooke, the UK Northern Ireland Secretary [see p. 38156], which were due to start on May 7, were delayed as a result of procedural disputes mainly concerning the venue and chairing of the second strand of discussions.
The first phase of the process eventually began on June 17 at Stormont (the parliament building) in Belfast, with leaders of the four constitutional parties in Northern Ireland meeting, in closed session, for the first time since 1975.
The meeting began with a minute's silence for those who had died in Northern Ireland in the past 23 years.
Brooke had originally envisaged three rounds of talks lasting 10 weeks: the first involving the constitutional parties in Northern Ireland, the second phase including the Irish government, and the third round between the governments in Dublin and London.
Brooke issued an ultimatum on May 14 for all parties to accept his compromise formula for a venue by the following day or accept responsibility for wrecking the talks.
(As announced on May 22, this formula involved most of the second phase meetings taking place at Stormont, but with an initial second-phase meeting in London and an end-of-phase meeting in Dublin.)
The leaders of the two Unionist parties, James Molyneaux (of the Ulster Unionist Party) and the Rev. Ian Paisley (of the Democratic Unionist Party), effectively bypassed the ultimatum by announcing that they would fly to London on May 15 in the hope of meeting John Major, the UK Prime Minister.
Against the advice of Brooke, Major met them on May 15 in an attempt to break the deadlock, after which Paisley said that the talks would "definitely" continue.
The leaders of the Alliance Party and the Social and Democratic Labour Party (SDLP) made clear their dissatisfaction that the Unionists had been allowed to ignore the Brooke ultimatum.
With the issue of the chair still unresolved, the SDLP representatives withdrew temporarily from meetings on May 21, saying that they would return once Brooke reached agreement with the Unionists.
This led to Unionist accusations that the SDLP was boycotting the process; however, the Ulster Unionist Party announced on May 29 that it was also withdrawing until Brooke cleared up the procedural issues.
Brooke met Gerry Collins, the Irish Foreign Minister, on May 31 amid a public controversy over the disclosure on May 30 that the Unionist parties had rejected Lord Carrington, a former UK Foreign Secretary, as a possible chair of the second phase of talks, describing him as having a "deplorable" record on Northern Ireland.
Eventual agreement was reached in June on the choice of Sir Ninian Stephen, a former Governor-General of Australia.
Overturning of convictions of "Maguire Seven" 
The Court of Appeal on June 26 overturned the convictions of the "Maguire Seven" , who were imprisoned in 1976 for possession of explosives in connection with the 1974 Guildford and Woolwich public house bombings (see pp. 26870-71; 27739).
The seven had been sentenced to between five and 14 years' imprisonment on the basis of forensic evidence from hand swabs indicating they had handled nitroglycerine.
The Director of Public Prosecutions had conceded in June 1990 that the convictions were unsafe, thereby halting a judicial inquiry begun that March by Sir John May [see pp. 37536-7].
The three judges dismissed five of the six grounds of their appeal, quashing the verdicts only on the possibility that their hands could have been "innocently" contaminated with nitroglycerine, perhaps by drying their hands on a contaminated towel in Anne Maguire's bathroom (although no towel was tested).
The judges dismissed suggestions that government scientists had deliberately withheld evidence, suggesting that there had been "material irregularity" which fell short of contributing to a miscarriage of justice.
(Sir John May had been highly critical of the scientists, concluding that they had concealed evidence and misled the trial.)
The Maguire family expressed disappointment at the appeal court's decision and said they would seek justice from Sir John May, when he reconvened his inquiry in September.
EUROPE
IRELAND
Local elections
Elections were held on June 27 for 883 seats on 32 local councils.
Both the two largest parties suffered losses; Fianna Fáil, the major party in the ruling coalition, won 358 seats (437 in the last local elections in 1985) and lost control of the city and county councils in Dublin.
The opposition Fine Gael won 270 seats (283 in 1985).
The Progressive Democrats (junior partners in the government coalition), contesting local elections for the first time, won 37 seats.
Gains were made by the Labour Party, which won 90 seats (58 in 1985), and by the Workers' Party, which won 24 seats (20).
The Green Party won representation locally for the first time with 14 seats; and Sinn Féin won seven seats (10 in 1985).
EUROPE
TURKEY
New Prime Minister
On June 17 former Foreign Minister Mesut Yilmaz was asked by President Turgut Özal to head a new administration.
He was to replace Yildirim Akbulut, whom he had ousted as chairman of the ruling Motherland Party (ANAP) two days earlier.
Akbulut had resigned as Prime Minister on June 16, following his defeat in the party leadership contest, but continued as acting Prime Minister until June 24.
At ANAP's third congress on June 15 Akbulut had won 523 votes against Yilmaz's 631 in the voting for party chairman.
(In November 1989 Akbulut had succeeded Özal as both Prime Minister and ANAP chairman —see p. 37051.)
Yilmaz, 43, had been Foreign Minister from 1987 until his February 1990 resignation [see p. 37263].
Regarded as more independent of the President than Akbulut had been, his appointment as Prime Minister was nevertheless interpreted by some observers as an attempt by Özal to boost the influence within the ANAP of a secular, liberal tendency against that of the Islamic fundamentalists.
On June 23 Yilmaz announced a new Cabinet; of the 30 ministers 19 had not been in the previous Cabinet.
Safa Giray, who had resigned as Defence Minister in October 1990 [see p. 37786]became Foreign Minister.
Ekrem Pakdemirli, who had been Finance Minister until March 1990, became Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of State with responsibility for economic affairs.
Mesut Yilmaz Prime Minister Ekrem Pakdemirli Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of State Fahrettin Kurt Minister of State
New Turkish Cabinet
*Mustafa Tasar Minister of State
**Imren Aykut(f) Minister of State
*Vehbi Dincerler Minister of State
*Kamran Inan Minister of State
**Ilhan Akuzum Minister of State
**Cengiz Tuncer Minister of State Sabahettin Aras Minister of State Ersin Kocak Minister of State Mehmet Cevik Minister of State Cenap Gurpinar Minister of State Birsel Sonmez Minister of State Ali Talip Ozdemir Minister of State Sakir Seker Justice Barlas Dogu National Defence Mustafa Kalemli Interior Safa Giray Foreign Affairs
*Adnan Kahveci Finance and Customs
*Avni Akyol National Education
**Husamettin Oruc Public Works and Housing Yasar Eryilmaz Health
**Ibrahim Ozdemir Transport Ilker Tuncay Agriculture, Forestry and Village Affairs Metin Emiroglu Labour and Social Security Rustu Kazim Yucelen Industry and Commerce Muzaffer Arici Energy and Natural Resources Gokhan Maras Culture Bulent Akarcali Tourism
*Held same portfolio in outgoing Cabinet.
**Altered portfolio.
Women are designated by (f).
Visit of Tariq Aziz
Iraqi Deputy Prime Minister Tariq Aziz met with Özal on June 12, although diplomatic relations between the two countries remained officially suspended.
Discussions included the subject of the re-opening of the twin oil pipelines (closed since August 1990) which ran from Kirkuk in Iraq to the Mediterranean port of Iskenderun in Turkey.
The Turkish government continued to maintain that any re-opening could only follow the lifting of sanctions against Iraq by the UN Security Council.
EUROPE
SOVIET UNION
Appointments to Council of Ministers
On June 5 the USSR Supreme Soviet approved the appointment of Valery Serov as Chairman of the USSR State Committee for Construction and Investments and of Vladimir Gusev as Chairman of the USSR State Committee for Chemistry and Biotechnologies.
On June 21 the Supreme Soviet approved the appointment of Lev Dmitriyevich Churilov as Minister of the Petroleum and Gas Industry.
The Council of Ministers as envisaged under the new leadership structure [see p. 37904]had still to be fully appointed [see also pp. 37970; 38103-04].
Legislation on recall of deputies
The USSR Supreme Soviet passed legislation on June 3 setting out procedures for constituents seeking to recall their People's Deputy.
A request by at least 10 per cent of voters was necessary for a ballot to be considered, and a vote by at least 50 per cent would then be needed to pass a recall motion.
Economy
Budget deficit
It was revealed in June that the USSR budget deficit had exceeded the planned level in the first quarter of 1991 by 360 per cent.
Reasons given for this included a 10 per cent fall in production as compared with the same period in 1990, lower than expected revenue from taxes, the cost of social compensation for price rises, high wage settlements, and the conflict between the republics and the centre which was preventing the implementation of unified financial policies.
Income indexation — Wage increases in oil and gas sector
The USSR Supreme Soviet passed legislation on June 25 indexing wages to prices (both state and market) which had doubled since 1990.
On June 11 the Supreme Soviet authorised a 40 per cent pay rise to workers in the oil and gas industries.
The increase was to be backdated to June 1 and would rise to 75 per cent by the last quarter of 1991.
The Oil and Gas Workers' Union had threatened to disrupt production by collective resignations and by shutting leaking pipelines as required by safety regulations.
The government rejected the union's proposal to finance the pay rise by increasing the domestic price of oil, deciding instead to cut taxation of oil enterprises.
In addition, 500 million hard-currency roubles (about US$270 million) and revenues from the export of 8,000,000 tonnes of oil were to be invested in the oil and gas industry.
Cut in income tax
In order to stimulate growth and encourage privatization, the Supreme Soviet on June 11 ordered a cut in income tax.
Progressive taxation had been introduced after the April price rises; June's amendments allowed 160 rather than 100 roubles of non-taxable income per month; reduced the rate of taxation from 13 to 12 per cent on earnings of under 1,000 roubles per month; and set an upper tax rate of 30 per cent(rather than 50 per cent as originally proposed).
Taxes were to be uniformly imposed, whereas previously the self-employed paid up to three times as much as state employees.
As an impetus to privatization, money to buy shares in enterprises was to be tax-exempt.
Foreign investment legislation
The Supreme Soviet passed legislation on May 29 allowing wholly foreign-owned companies to operate in the Soviet Union.
Subsidiaries were to be no more than 50 per cent foreign-owned, in order, according to Prime Minister Valentin Pavlov, to prevent the monopoly of branches of industry by foreign companies.
The bill exempted foreign investors from customs duties and from the need to have import/export licences.
Compensation for farmers
In the context of a reported shortfall of 35-36,000,000 tonnes of food and feed grain for 1991, a residential decree, effective from July 1, aimed to improve the food supply by giving concessions to enterprises in the agro-industrial sector.
Enterprises were to be compensated for expenditure on equipment and construction and for outlay incurred because of the price reforms, and concessions were to be made in their hard-currency and social insurance contributions to the state budget.
Official report on violence in Lithuania
A preliminary report by the Soviet Procurator General, Nikolai Trubin, on the events in Vilnius, the Lithuanian capital, on Jan. 13, when 13 civilians were killed [see pp. 37944-45], was distributed to deputies at the USSR Supreme Soviet on June 3.
The report, ordered by President Mikhail Gorbachev in January, exonerated Soviet troops of blame for the deaths.
It blamed the shootings on "armed Lithuanians" rather than soldiers, and suggested that cars rather than tanks were responsible for running over several civilians (contradicting television footage of the affair).
Trubin accused the Lithuanian Procuracy of obstructing the investigation and stressed that the events had been provoked by the "anti-constitutional activity" of the Lithuanian leadership in seeking independence.
Further attacks on Lithuanian targets
On June 4 Soviet troops surrounded the parliament building in Vilnius and set up checkpoints in the city, raising fears of a forced takeover.
After several hours of random identity checks, the troops dispersed.
Two members of the recently formed Lithuanian defence force were briefly detained.
The Soviet military claimed that the troop movements had been connected with the spring draft for the army —in Lithuania only 1,000 out of 11,000 had responded.
Attacks on Baltic republics' border posts by Soviet troops continued during June, although OMON (the special Interior Ministry troops) officers on June 26 denied charges of involvement in more than 20 such attacks.
A force of 20 armed OMON troops entered the Vilnius central telephone exchange on June 26, claiming to be carrying out presidential orders in searching for illegal weapons and found a pistol, ammunition and explosives.
Telephone contacts with Vilnius were interrupted for several hours as was Lithuanian radio, broadcasting from temporary premises since the occupation of the radio and television centre in January 1991.
The Soviet Interior Ministry denied responsibility for the affair, claiming that the Lithuanian Procurator subordinate to Trubin had ordered the search (there were currently two Lithuanian Procurators, one subordinate to Trubin and the other to the Lithuanian President).
A spokesman for Gorbachev condemned the attack as an attempt to spoil his meeting with G-7 leaders in London, and said that Interior Minister Boris Pugo had been ordered to investigate the affair.
Developments in other republics
Proposals for direct presidential elections
The Supreme Soviets of the Ukraine, Byelorussia and Armenia voted at the end of June to create the posts of directly elected president in their republics.
Georgia: Adzharia elections
Elections to the Supreme Council of the Autonomous Republic of Adzharia were held on June 23.
According to preliminary results, the Adzharian regional organization of the Round Table Free Georgia bloc won 48 per cent of votes cast; the Adzharian Electoral Bloc 19 per cent; and the Adzharian Organization of the Independent Communist Party of Georgia 18 per cent ; 60 per cent of the electorate voted and elections were to be repeated in 24 of 40 constituencies, with a second round of voting in 11.
Kazakhstan
A. Askarov, the former first secretary of the Communist Party of Chimkent oblast was sentenced to 11 years' imprisonment on May 28 for receiving 19 bribes totalling 112,000 roubles.
President Mikhail Gorbachev visited Kazakhstan on May 28-30.
In a speech in Alma Ata, he praised Kazakhstan's programme of land reform and privatization.
Kazakhstan's economic reform programme envisaged privatizing housing and the services sector and transferring key industries to republican jurisdiction.
The president, Nursultan Nazerbayev, was advised by economists from South Korea and Singapore.
A Higher Economic Council for Instituting Market Relations was set up on June 23.
Crimean Tatar Congress
The first all-union Congress (Kurultay) of Crimean Tatars began in Simferopol, Ukraine, on June 26.
On June 28 the congress proclaimed the Crimea to be "the national territory of the Crimean Tatar nation, on which it alone has the right to self-determination" .
The Crimean Tatars, deported in 1944, constituted less than 2 per cent of the population of the Crimean Autonomous Republic.
On June 29 they elected a 31 member Majlis as a representative body for the Crimean Tatar nation and a structure for local self-government.
Mustafa Dzhemilev, a leader of the Crimean Tatar National Movement, was elected chairman.
EUROPE
ALBANIA
General strike — New government
The government appointed on May 12 [see p. 38208]resigned on June 4, in the face of a general strike backed by the main opposition Democratic Party (DP).
From late May the formation of a "pluralist" government, with or without the resignation of Prime Minister Fatos Nano, had been under discussion in the People's Assembly, and on June 12 a non-party "government of national stability" took office in preparation for a general election.
The general strike was called on May 16 by a recently formed independent union umbrella group, the Union of Independent Trade Unions of Albania (UITUA).
The government had refused seven of 17 demands which had first been presented by the UITUA on April 9 (although receiving little news coverage).
The principal demands were for a 50 per cent increase in wages and pensions, a six-hour working day (and no night-shifts) for women, and the bringing to justice of those responsible for the deaths in Shkodër in April [see p. 38160].
On May 15 the UITUA leaders rejected a government offer to increase wages by 22-30 per cent.
Numbers of workers on strike throughout Albania in the latter half of May were variously put at between 140,000 and 350,000, out of a workforce of 700,000.
Essential services continued to operate but lack of transport meant that the food supply situation became critical.
On May 20 a 50 per cent wage and pension increase for state workers was accepted by union negotiators, but UITUA subsequently rejected the agreement as inadequate.
Valer Xheka, chairman of the UITUA central strike committee, appeared to be responding to grassroots pressure from certain groups of workers who were continuing on strike.
The Council of Ministers said on May 26 that "certain levels" of the movement were "using for political purposes…working people's fair economic demands" .
Hunger strike at Valias
On May 25 a number of miners —variously given as 40 and 100 —at Valias began a hunger strike underground [for January 1991 strike, see p. 37972].
Tirana home service radio initially denounced the hunger strike as having "nothing to do with a loyal strike struggle" , but in subsequent days the radio detailed the hunger strikers' demands and deteriorating health, and by June 1 had swung round to emotional support for them and for the UITUA.
On May 29 tens of thousands of demonstrators in Tirana's Skanderbeg Square, calling for the overthrow of the government and expressing support for the hunger strikers, attacked police with rocks, bottles and fire-bombs.
On May 31 President Ramiz Alia appealed in the People's Assembly for patience: the strikers' demands were just but they could not be met immediately, he said.
The UITUA said that those calling for "burning and destruction" were to be repudiated, and the DP issued a similar rejection of demonstrations in front of the People's Assembly building.
Replacement of Nano by Bufi
In the early hours of June 4 (the day on which miners were to launch a mass hunger strike in Tirana) it was announced that the government would resign, and a new Prime Minister nominated by the ruling Party of Labour (PLA) would replace Nano and would form an apolitical administration.
Although the hunger strikes ended, many workers were reported to be continuing on strike.
Nano (appointed Prime Minister in February and reappointed on May 3 —see pp. 38016; 38208) said on resigning that fresh elections might be possible in May or June of 1992.
On June 5 Ylli Bufi, 42, became Prime Minister.
He was a member of the PLA who had been appointed Minister of the Foodstuff Industry as part of political liberalization measures in July 1990 [see p. 37618].
Government of national stability
Bufi's "government of national stability" was announced on June 12, including PLA members but incorporating for the first time the DP as well as the Republican Party, the Social Democratic Party and the Agrarian Party; nine members were non-party.
Gramoz Pashko (DP leader) was Deputy Prime Minister and Economy Minister and Muhamet Kapllani (PLA) continued as Foreign Minister.
Eleven of the 23 government members were either members of, or proposed by, the PLA.
Seven ministers, including Pashko, Minister of Defence Perikli Teta and Minister of Finance Genci Ruli, were members of or proposed by the DP.
Programme of new government
On June 12 Bufi told the People's Assembly that priority would be given to restoring supplies of food and industrial goods; privatization would be speeded up and public expenditure cut; international financial aid would be sought; legislation would provide social assistance for those made unemployed by economic restructuring; the health service would be privatized and the depoliticization of education and of the military would be encouraged.
On June 17 the Council of Ministers secured from trade union representatives an agreement consolidating a no-strike understanding reached on June 9, which had brought a return to work on June 10.
Wage increases of 15 to 70 per cent, depending on sector, would be implemented in two stages (on July 1 and Sept. 1).
Price control mechanisms would be instituted, along with a liberalization of certain consumer prices from Sept. 16.
PLA name change — Appointment of Nano as party chairman
The 10th PLA congress was held in Tirana on June 11-13.
Delegates expressed unprecedented criticism of party policies and of Enver Hoxja (PLA first secretary from 1944 until his death in 1985).
On June 12 nine former politburo members were reported expelled from the PLA.
They included Hekuran Isai (appointed Deputy Chairman of the Council of Ministers and Minister of Internal Affairs in July 1990) and Rita Marko (ousted from the politburo in July 1990).
The party was on June 13 renamed the Socialist Party of Albania and the following day Nano was elected party chairman.
He announced that he would resign as Minister of Foreign Economic Relations in the new government.
Personnel changes in the Democratic Front (DF, which under the communist regime had brought together the PLA and the various mass organizations) were implemented on June 19, with the chair of the general council passing from former Prime Minister Adil Carcani to Aleks Luarasi, and Vesil Lushaj becoming secretary-general.
Restoration of relations with UK — Relations with EC — Visit by Baker
Diplomatic relations were re-established with the United Kingdom on May 29.
They had been broken off in 1946 following the sinking of two British frigates off Corfu; on Albania's refusal to pay compensation, the UK refused to hand over Albanian gold (currently estimated to be worth US$18,000,000) seized by the Nazis during the Second World War and held in trust by the UK ever since.
It was agreed that resolution of this issue would be shelved for the time being.
On June 20 diplomatic relations were established with the European Communities.
On June 22 US Secretary of State James Baker paid a one-day visit to Tirana.
Prime Minister Bufi spoke at a rally for Baker attended by a jubilant crowd packing Skanderbeg Square.
Baker was reported to have spoken with Bufi about human and political rights and to have promised US$6,000,000 in immediate humanitarian aid.
He also met with DP leaders.
Expulsion of refugees by Italy
On the night of June 11 a fresh wave of would-be emigrants left Albania for Italy in small boats.
On June 14 the Italian government announced that 680 Albanians who had recently arrived aboard makeshift craft would be repatriated.
Two Italian ferry boats took over 800 Albanians back to Durres on June 17 and 18.
The hardening of the Italian official attitude reflected growing local tensions in the south of Italy, where over 20,000 Albanian refugees were still in temporary accommodation following their influx in March [see pp. 38105-06].
The Italian government had earlier announced that it would repatriate all Albanians who had not found jobs or obtained political refugee status by July 15, the deadline for a new immigration law.
On June 13 Italian Foreign Minister Gianni de Michelis on an official visit to Tirana promised Albania further material aid worth 60,000 million lire (US$45,000,000).
Two Albanians were killed aboard a boat which reached Otranto, Italy, on June 12; it had come under fire from an Albanian coastal patrol.
EUROPE
BULGARIA
Political and economic developments
Cancellation of monarchy referendum
The Grand National Assembly (parliament) on June 5 voted by 177 votes to 35, with 33 abstentions, to cancel a decision which it had taken on May 28 to hold a referendum "on the country's future state system" as a step towards adoption of a new constitution.
At issue in the referendum, scheduled for July 6, would have been whether Bulgaria should remain a republic or revert to being a monarchy.
The decision to hold the referendum, part of a package of resolutions concerning the draft constitution, had been passed on May 28 by 198 votes to 29 with 37 abstentions.
Although it was officially denied, commentators suggested that the decision had been taken in order to settle the lingering controversy surrounding the referendum of 1946, widely believed to have been rigged by the communists, whereby the monarchy had been abolished.
The reversal of the decision followed intense public criticism of the referendum idea, and statements by several political parties that it would prove socially divisive.
Opinion polls showed that fewer than one in six Bulgarians supported restoration of the monarchy.
Tsar Simeon II, who had succeeded to the throne in 1943 at the age of seven, had been forced into exile by the 1946 referendum result and currently lived in Madrid.
He had never been stripped of his Bulgarian citizenship, and it was officially reported on June 12 that he had been granted a Bulgarian passport.
Sentencing of Ovcharov — Adjournment of Zhivkov trial
Stoyan Ovcharov, who had been removed as Minister of Economy and Planning and as a candidate member of the former Bulgarian Communist Party politburo immediately after the fall from power of Todor Zhivkov in November 1989, was found guilty on June 6 of "taking undue advantage of his authority in favour of a third person" to the detriment of the state.
He was sentenced to two years in prison, and was ordered to pay back to the state several thousand Swiss francs which he had used illegally to arrange a place at a Swiss university for Zhivkov's grandson [see p. 38017].
The trial of Zhivkov, which had opened in February [ibid.], on charges of gross embezzlement and abuse of power, was adjourned indefinitely on June 12 because of his state of health.
A medical certificate showed Zhivkov, 79, to be suffering from a range of physiological and nervous complaints.
The court ordered a commission of experts to be appointed by the Ministry of Health to rule on whether Zhivkov could be expected to appear in court again.
Trial proceedings had already been adjourned since April 15 because of Zhivkov's failure to attend court on grounds of ill health.
Statements on Markov killing and papal assassination attempt
Internal Affairs Minister Khristo Danov declared on June 5 that he was convinced that Bulgaria's former secret police had carried out the murder in 1978 of Georgi Markov.
His statement coincided with the arrival in Sofia of two United Kingdom police detectives to work with Bulgarian police on the Markov investigation.
Markov, an exiled writer and broadcaster, had been killed by a poisoned pellet fired into his leg from a fake umbrella on London's Waterloo Bridge [see p. 32997].
Danov said: "I certainly assume that Zhivkov and some other people in his government who have paraded their innocence in the last few years will be indicted." 
Danov also confirmed allegations that 17 key files on the Markov case had disappeared, and he suggested that these had been destroyed by Gen. Vladimir Todorov, who had been chief of intelligence at the Interior Ministry in 1978 and who in May had fled to Moscow in defiance of an order not to leave Bulgaria.
(On June 27 it was reported that extradition proceedings were being prepared against Todorov.)
Danov also declared his conviction that Bulgarian agents had not been involved in the 1981 assassination attempt against Pope John Paul II.
Rejecting recent allegations in the Bulgarian and Italian press concerning the supposed involvement of Konstantin Karadzhov, a former mayor of a Sofia municipality, Danov stated that he was inclined to believe the scenario put forward in some sections of the Western press that forces inside the Vatican had been behind the assassination attempt.
Economic developments
The government on June 13 signed with the Confederation of Independent Trade Unions and the Podkrepa Labour Confederation a "social peace" agreement covering the second stage of economic reform.
The two trade union confederations undertook to refrain from general strikes in return for minimum wage and unemployment benefit guarantees.
The government on June 3 liberalized the prices of liquid fuels, producing price increases of between 70 and 113 per cent.
To counter the inflationary effect of the price rises, it was announced on June 5 that bank interest rates were to be increased from 45 to 52 per cent.
The Grand National Assembly on June 6 passed legislation making the National Bank of Bulgaria independent of government direction, albeit accountable to the Assembly.
The legislation transformed it into a new central bank and introduced a new tier of commercial banks and other lending institutions.
EUROPE
CZECHOSLOVAKIA
Screening bill
The Czechoslovak federal government on June 27 submitted to the Federal Assembly a bill on screening for past collaboration with the Statni Bezpecnost (StB —State Security), the secret police under the previous communist regime.
On June 13 it had agreed to provide federal Interior Ministry archive material for screening deputies in the Czech and Slovak National Councils (parliaments).
President Vaclav Havel had suggested on June 2 a time limit of two years on the screening process, while proposing also that the courts should have special sections to provide citizens with copies of their secret police files on request, and that applicants for high government and state jobs should be required to produce a certificate of non-collaboration.
Havel's suggestion of a time limit was supported by federal Prime Minister Marian Calfa, who also proposed that the law should protect the civil rights of those screened, and by Petr Pithart, the Czech Premier.
The Chamber of the People of the Federal Assembly had on May 30 failed to endorse a resolution (which had already been passed by the Chamber of Nations) requesting that the names of all former StB agents be published.
On the same day a group of 26 Federal Assembly deputies sent a protest to the European Commission for Human Rights about the method of screening used, which was described as being carried out without proper legal basis.
The protest was signed by among others, eight of the 10 deputies who had been named on March 22 as having been StB collaborators [see p. 38107], although not by Jan Kavan.
Launch of privatization of large enterprises
Jan Vrba, the Czech Minister of Industry, in London on June 13 announced a privatization programme affecting over 50 large industrial enterprises with a total combined workforce of 800,000 and annual income of between US$50,000,000 and $500,000,000.
The enterprises would be offered for partial or complete sale to foreign investors.
This was the first wave of privatization of large enterprises, which was intended to raise $1,500 million in foreign investment in 1991 and $3,000 million in 1992.
Vrba said that about 30 per cent of the workforce of the enterprises concerned would probably be made redundant after their sell-off.
New Roman Catholic Archbishop of Prague — New head of Hussite Church
Miloslav Vlk (59) was enthroned in Prague on June 1 as Archbishop of Prague and Primate of the Roman Catholic Church in Czechoslovakia, succeeding Cardinal Frantisek Tomasek, who had retired at the age of 91.
On the same day Vratislav Stepanek was installed as Bishop-Patriarch of the Czechoslovak Hussite Church, succeeding Bishop Vlastimil Zítek.
The Hussite Church, founded in 1920, was the second largest religious denomination in Czechoslovakia, with some 400,000 adherents.
Constituent Congress of Movement for Democratic Slovakia
The constituent congress of the Movement for Democratic Slovakia (MFDS) ended in Banska Bystrica on June 22 with the election of Vladimir Meciar as chairman of the Movement.
The MFDS had developed from the Platform for a Democratic Slovakia, which had split from the Public Against Violence (then the dominant party in the ruling Slovak coalition) on April 27 after the dismissal of Meciar as Slovak Prime Minister [see p. 38161].
EUROPE
HUNGARY
Approval of modified compensation law
On June 26 the National Assembly approved by a substantial majority a modified bill to compensate former owners of land and property expropriated by the communist regime.
The original bill had received parliamentary approval on April 24 [see p. 38161]but was found by the Constitutional Court on May 29 to be unconstitutional, in a ruling requested by President Arpad Göncz.
In particular the Court found unconstitutional the differentiation between levels of payment for lost land and those for other property, and also the restriction of compensation to claims for property expropriated after June 8, 1949.
The new bill fixed a limit of 200,000 forint for full compensation for former owners of both land and property (the previous limit for full compensation for land owners being 1,000,000 forint —ibid.).
(US$1.00=76.8132 forint as at June 24, 1991.)
Property worth more than this would be partially compensated on a sliding scale up to 5,000,000 forint.
Former land owners could still gain full compensation for land up to a value of 1,000,000 forint if they undertook to cultivate the land for five years and registered themselves as entrepreneurs under a system of "entrepreneurial assistance" .
Additionally the new bill applied to all confiscations since May 1939 (rather than June 1949).
The Finance Ministry estimated that this was likely to add between 40,000 million and 50,000 million forint to the previously estimated cost of 100,000 million forint.
1996 World Fair
On June 3 the National Assembly adopted a resolution approving the holding of the World Fair (EXPO) in Budapest in 1996 (rather than 1995 as originally planned) with 192 votes in favour, 72 against and 24 abstentions.
A referendum in Vienna, Austria, in May had rejected holding a World Fair jointly with Budapest [see p. 38209].
POLAND
Impasse in Walesa's relations with Parliament
Throughout June President Lech Walesa and the Sejm (the lower house of parliament) remained deadlocked over the passage of a bill to establish procedures for the country's first democratic general election, expected to be held in October.
The outcome was a humiliation for Walesa when, on June 28, members voted to override his second attempt to block the legislation.
The issue dominated parliamentary business for the whole month, against a background of worsening economic crisis, strikes and growing social tension.
Walesa, addressing his former workmates at the Gdansk shipyard on June 3, stated that he advocated rule by decree during a transitional period but that parliament opposed this.
He was, he said, determined that elections, which were crucial to normalizing Poland's economic and political life, should take place in October.
On June 6 he wrote to the Speakers of the Sejm and of the Senate, the upper house, citing his constitutional right to reject legislation, and seeking the reworking of an electoral law in time for October elections.
As approved by parliament in May, he complained, the legislation was "too complicated" , would create a fragmented parliament, and discriminated against the Catholic church (by forbidding the use of church property for political purposes) and against Poles abroad.
According to Reuters news agency, the draft apparently provided for the election of fewer than a quarter of the 460 Sejm deputies by a first-past-the-post majority vote; most of the seats would be distributed to parties proportional to the votes won by their national lists of candidates.
Walesa claimed that this threatened to confuse people and to produce an indecisive parliament of many small parties, and apparently preferred a system where voters would choose a party first and then candidates from a party list.
The speaker of the lower house, Mikolaj Kozakiewicz, in an immediate reply to Walesa's letter, refused the presidential demand to have the bill redrafted.
On June 10, Walesa formally used his veto.
The following day Walesa proposed in a letter to the Prime Minister, Jan Krzysztof Bielecki, that the government be given special powers for a year to issue decrees in order to tackle Poland's economic problems.
Walesa's move caused alarm among those who feared that he was aiming to rule without parliament as a virtual dictator, on the basis that he had been democratically elected and that 65 per cent of Sejm members, under the 1989 compromise provisions establishing the parliament [see pp. 36578; 36722-24], had not.
His supporters pointed to the chaotic state of the economy —beset by strikes among workers resisting government austerity measures —and argued the need to preserve confidence among foreign investors.
Commentators pointed out that not one of the 27 bills presented by Bielecki's government since taking office in January had yet been passed.
On June 12 Walesa announced to leaders of the Solidarity trade union that he was ready to use force if necessary to prevent the economic situation deteriorating into social unrest and anarchy.
He said that he was under pressure from his own supporters to change radically the government's approach to the economic problems.
On June 13 the Sejm failed by only seven votes to reach the necessary two-thirds majority to override Walesa's veto.
Next day Walesa threatened that he would dissolve parliament unless it passed the amendments he wanted, in time for an October election.
He said he had promised the nation an election then and would fulfil the pledge using all constitutional means.
On June 15 the Sejm, having rushed through a redrafting process in two days, voted to adopt a revised version of the electoral law.
A senior aide of the President was quoted as saying that the new version still did not meet Walesa's demands.
The following day he threatened to veto the law again and, if necessary, to dissolve parliament.
On June 20, however, the 99-seat Senate, in which Walesa's supporters were a majority, voted to accept Walesa's amendments.
On June 21, by a majority of 268 to 88, the Sejm threw out the amended version.
Kozakiewicz said that he hoped that the President would now "act constitutionally and sign the draft law" .
Meeting supporters in Gdansk on June 24 Walesa said, to applause, that he was "on the borderline between sticking with democracy and pluralism, and having a little less democracy" .
The following day he told a rally of factory workers that the parliament was "imposed, nominated and illegitimate" , but that he did not have a right to dissolve it.
On June 26, Walesa again vetoed the Sejm's vote, requesting that the amended bill be allowed a further passage through parliament.
On June 28, he suffered a major setback when the lower house voted by 283 votes to 100, with nine abstentions, to overrule his veto, thus requiring him to sign the bill into law within six days.
Efforts to control industrial unrest
A succession of government-union talks throughout June failed to reach conclusive settlements of widespread union demands for higher wages, settlement of outstanding overtime pay, reform of the excessive wage tax, compensatory payments for the 140 per cent and 110 per cent increases respectively in gas and electricity charges introduced on May 27, and cancellation of government plans for higher rents and other charges anticipated in the July budget.
On June 24, however, it was reported that talks between the government, Solidarity and the National Trade Union Accord had resulted in agreement on a new minimum monthly wage of Zl632,000 (US$55) with effect from July 1.
Walesa stepped in personally to halt a strike on June 10 by the country's 200 air traffic controllers who demanded salaries comparable with colleagues in other European countries.
The strike ended after 10 hours when Walesa agreed to meet their delegation.
He subsequently accused them of attempting to blackmail the government, and threatened to place their operations under military control if they attempted further action.
Costs of economic restructuring
Government statistics announced on June 11 showed end-May unemployment of 1,434,000 or 7.7 per cent of the working population.
The World Bank announced a $100 million loan on June 6 to help develop unemployment compensation, job placement and training programmes.
On June 7 Poland missed a $17,200,000 debt interest repayment on its 1984 revolving trade facility, causing a two-week delay in scheduled talks with commercial creditors.
Talks with commercial bank creditors over two days were reported on June 21 to have failed to produce concrete results.
The country's commercial debt was said to stand at $10,600 million, plus $1,200 million in interest arrears, to some 500 banks.
The European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD), formed in April, announced its first loan to a post-communist east European country on June 25, with a $50 million package to the Wielkopolski Bank Kredytowy (WBK) of Poznan, for heating enterprises in 10 Polish cities.
The loan was intended to supplement a $20,000,000 World Bank credit for the same purpose.
Plan for mass privatization
The government on June 27 announced plans to privatize 400 state-owned industrial companies, a quarter of the total, by the end of the year, in what commentators suggested was a programme unparalleled in the world.
Janusz Lewandowski, the Minister of Ownership Transformation, said that each of Poland's 27,000,000 adults would receive a voucher for a stake in each of 20 investment groups, or National Wealth Management Funds, to be set up and allotted shareholdings in the privatised companies.
The plans were the result of consultation between Lewandowski's ministry and S.G. Warburg, the British merchant bank.
Day-to-day management of the groups was expected to be in the hands of experienced Western managers, with board chairmen being Polish nationals.
The state was expected to retain a 30 per cent share in each factory, with employees receiving 10 per cent of the equity.
The so-called Massive Privatization Programme was expected to be presented to parliament for approval in the autumn.
Visit of Pope John Paul II
A nine-day visit by Pope John Paul II, his fourth to his native Poland, began on June 1.
In repeated calls for a spiritual crusade by believers to reclaim for Christianity the states of Europe which had been lost to communism, the Pope attacked abortion, implicitly criticizing the Sejm<RO for its decision two weeks before his arrival to reject Church-inspired anti-abortion legislation [see p. 38207].
He drew strong criticism from Jews and many gentile Poles, by comparing abortion with the Holocaust of the Second World War, when 600,000 Polish citizens were murdered.
He attacked the "sensuality" of western European lifestyles, and appeared to urge Poles to enshrine Catholic principles in their future constitution.
Commentators suggested that the Church's role vis-à-vis the state would become a divisive issue in the expected October elections.
EUROPE
POLAND-GERMANY
Treaty on good-neighbourliness
On June 17, nearly nine months after German unification, Helmut Kohl, the German Chancellor, and Jan Krzysztof Bielecki, the Polish Prime Minister, signed in Bonn a treaty of good-neighbourliness and friendly co-operation.
The treaty, with a 10-year durations and which required ratification by both parliaments, followed that confirming the Oder-Neisse border between the two countries signed in November 1990 [see p. 37867].
It was concluded as agreed in the Treaty on the Final Settlement on Germany signed in September 1990 [see p. 37834].
The treaty committed both parties to "close, peaceful co-operation in a spirit of partnership" and to mutual non-aggression.
The German government gave its support to eventual Polish membership of the European Communities (EC) and to Poland's moves to gain relief on its foreign debt.
For the first time the treaty formally recognized the rights of the 500,000-strong German minority in Poland to their own language, culture, family names and religion.
Three separate agreements established a German-Polish youth group and joint border and environmental protection commissions.
In an exchange of letters the Polish government declared among other things that the "prospect" of Poland joining the EC "will increasingly create opportunities to make it easier also for German citizens to settle in the Republic of Poland" .
The Christian Social Union (CSU, part of Kohl's coalition government) and organizations specifically representing the 12,000,000 Germans who fled what became Polish territory after 1945, had called for the treaty to include a "right of return" , and for German "topographical designations" to have official status in the traditional settlement areas of the German minority in Poland.
However, the CSU had agreed on May 28 that it would support ratification of the treaty if these issues were raised in an exchange of letters.
[For anti-Polish sentiment in Germany see pp. 38164; 38298.]
ROMANIA
Reduction of sentence on Nicu Ceausescu
A military appeal court in Bucharest ruled on June 3 that a 20-year prison sentence passed on Nicu Ceausescu, the son of the overthrown and executed President Nicolae Ceausescu, should be reduced to 16 years, followed by eight years' loss of civil liberties.
The earlier court had convicted him on Sept. 16, 1990, of aggravated murder, after finding that he had ordered troops to fire on demonstrators during the December 1989 riots which led to his father's overthrow and death [see p. 37725].
The appeal court, overturning this conviction, found him guilty only on what was described as the lesser charge of genocide.
Meanwhile, investigations continued into related offences under the Ceausescu regime.
Gen. Marin Neagoe, a former divisional chief of the Securitate security forces, was imprisoned for seven years on May 29 for his role in suppressing the riots; on May 10 the former Securitate chief Julian Vlad had been among those sentenced to prison terms of up to five years [see p. 38207].
Opening of Soviet Moldavian border
Some 500,000 residents of the Moldavian Republic in the Soviet Union were allowed on June 16 to cross the border into the Romanian region of Moldavia, for one day only, in a symbolic reunion of the community divided since 1940.
The move reciprocated an occasion in June 1990 when Romanian Moldavians had been allowed into Soviet Moldavia.
The former Romanian regions of Bessarabia and northern Bukovina had been annexed from Romania in June 1940 in the course of the Soviet advance against the pro-German troops of the Romanian government, and after 1947 they had become the Moldavian Soviet Socialist Republic; in practice, the dispute was much older, dating back to Russia's liberation of the region from Turkish rule in the early 19th century.
In the early 1970s the then Brezhnev regime had instituted a rigorous Russification programme in the region, but two-thirds of its 4,300,000 residents continued to speak the Romanian dialect which Brezhnev had tried to suppress.
President Ion Iliescu met the Soviet Moldavian president, Mircea Snegur, in Bucharest on June 20, when the two agreed to prepare a political treaty on relations between the two Romanian-speaking Moldavian cultures.
Foreign Affairs Minister Adrian Nastase affirmed to Parliament on June 24, however, that Romania had no territorial ambitions toward the Soviet Union, and added that it "had to accept the idea that there are two Moldavian nations developing in their separate directions" .
Strike movement
Popular disappointment with the slow pace of economic reform was expressed in a wave of strikes and demonstrations in mid-June, as the two main trade union groups, the National Confederative Union and the Fratia trade union bloc, sought the resignation of Prime Minister Petre Roman over the rapidly rising unemployment level (conservatively estimated at 1,100,000).
EUROPE
EUROPE
Confederation conference
A conference on the concept of a "European confederation" , hosted by Czechoslovak President Vaclav Havel, was held in Prague, Czechoslovakia, on June 12-14.
French President François Mitterrand had put forward the idea of a European confederation in a speech on Dec. 31, 1989, shortly after the fall of eastern Europe's communist regimes; he reiterated his ideas in Prague in September 1990 [see p. 37724].
Although Mitterrand had reportedly originally intended to exclude the United States, Havel persuaded him during a visit to Paris in March 1991 that delegates be invited from members of the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) and would thus include the USA, Canada and Japan [see p. 38155 for EBRD membership].
The meeting, which had no decision-making powers, was attended by over 150 prominent individuals, ranging from political leaders to artists.
Working parties considered such issues as energy, communications, environment, the movement of people and culture.
Opening the conference Havel stressed that "in the extremely sensitive and risky stage of economic transformation of the post-communist countries, any attempt to treat them as a more or less institutionalized zone of semi-developed countries surrounding the prosperous countries of the European Communities [EC]and the European Free Trade Association [EFTA]would be an extremely dangerous step for all concerned" .
He declared: "The new confederation should therefore, on the contrary, make the path to the EC easier for these countries and in its own way prepare it and act as its mediator." 
At the closing ceremony Mitterrand expressed the hope that the conference would act as an impulse for ideas to become concrete steps.
He was, according to Le Monde of June 16/17, obliged to accept a "modest and pragmatic approach" .
It was agreed to establish a small permanent secretariat in Prague.
EUROPE
EFTA-EC
Delay of EEA agreement
Foreign Ministers from the seven European Free Trade Association (EFTA) member countries and representatives of the 12-member European Communities (EC) reached a compromise agreement at a protracted negotiating session on June 18-19 in Luxembourg, entering a political commitment to finalize by Aug. 1 (rather than June 25) the arrangements for a common European Economic Area (EEA —see p. 37906) to become operative in January 1993.
It was claimed that this compromise represented significant progress since a May 13 EFTA-EC meeting in Brussels, when the main dispute had been over Norwegian and Icelandic reluctance to allow EC countries improved access to fish in their waters.
At a Salzburg meeting on June 24-25, originally timetabled with the intention that it would mark the conclusion of the EEA negotiations, the fisheries issue again proved intractable, and was referred for further discussion by the joint high-level negotiating group (HLNG), while in the joint communiqué ministers "reaffirmed their joint commitment to conclude the negotiations before the summer break" .
The Brussels meeting in May had agreed on creating a separate court, drawn from the European Court of Justice (five judges) and EFTA (three judges), to rule on disputes arising from EEA rules.
The Luxembourg session was represented as a "political agreement" and the subsequent Salzburg disagreement as reflecting different interpretations of how this was to be translated into concrete terms; "on some outstanding questions the respective positions were converging, while on others further work remained necessary" .
The HLNG would meet on July 11 and 24, on fish, on the other principal stumbling block —an EFTA financial mechanism or "cohesion fund" to make contributions to development in the less developed regions, principally Spain, Portugal, Greece and also Iceland —and on finalizing competition rules, state aid regulations, and rules of origin.
An EEA agreement was also regarded as being dependent on the successful resolution of separate negotiations between the EC and Austria and Switzerland on trans-Alpine road freight.
EUROPE
BALKANS
The first Conference of Balkan Democratic Parties in Athens on June 14 was attended by nine non-communist parties from Albania, Bulgaria, Greece, Romania and Yugoslavia as well as observers from smaller groups; the participants agreed to establish a secretariat in Athens to promote co-operation among Balkan parties which had espoused democracy and a free market economy.
EUROPE
EBRD
On June 6 Ronald Freeman, 51, was appointed first vice-president of the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development; the United States, with the largest stake in the EBRD, had insisted that a US citizen be appointed as deputy to the bank's (French) president Jacques Attali.
EUROPE
FINLAND
President Mauno Koivisto of Finland visited Moscow on June 24-25 for talks with Soviet politicians including President Gorbachev and Russian President-elect Boris Yeltsin; talks centred on trade, the Soviet Union having accounted for as much as 25 per cent of Finland's foreign exports in the 1980s but for only 12 per cent in 1990 and an expected 5 per cent in 1991.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
IRAQ
UN resolution on disarmament funding
The UN Security Council on June 17 unanimously adopted Resolution 699 ordering Iraq to bear the full cost of the destruction of weapons proscribed under Resolution 687 [see pp. 38164-65].
The Security Council voted on the same day to adopt Resolution 700 issuing guidelines to facilitate implementation of the international arms embargo against Iraq [see p. 38165].
Both resolutions were on June 18 described as "unjust" by the state-controlled Iraqi News Agency (INA).
On June 9 the government had agreed to destroy its chemical weapons stocks on condition that the operation was supervised by Iraqi, not UN, officials.
Acceptance of inspection of weapons sites
President Saddam Hussein on June 28 granted UN weapons inspectors [see pp. 38165; 38211]permission to "see or inspect what they wish" .
The decision followed strong reactions by the US administration and the UN to an incident earlier in the day, when Iraq troops had fired shots in the air allegedly to deny UN inspectors access to a nuclear weapons site, which was itself the culmination of a series of such refusals by Iraq.
UN and International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) officials had returned to Iraq on June 9 to oversee the destruction of non-conventional weapons [see p. 38211].
On June 25 they had been prevented from visiting a site at Abu Gharaib, near Baghdad, and on June 27 the UN Security Council ordered Iraq to disclose the whereabouts of nuclear bomb-making equipment after viewing US reconnaissance photographs which suggested that nuclear-related material had been removed from the research site of Tuwaitha to Abu Gharaib.
On June 28 after the shooting incident US President Bush, describing Saddam Hussein as a "brutal bully" , refused to rule out speculation concerning a possible US-led military attack against Iraq to enforce compliance.
The Iraqi government's refusal to allow access to nuclear weapons sites, he said, constituted an "unarguable" violation of Gulf ceasefire resolutions [see pp. 38165; 38211].
For its part the UN Security Council agreed to send a high-level mission to Baghdad to demand immediate, total access to facilities, and stated that it was considering issuing Iraq with an ultimatum to produce objects spirited out of the military base where the shots were fired, east of Al Falluja.
Concern over a covert Iraqi nuclear weapons programme had grown after US intelligence sources claimed that a senior Iraqi nuclear scientist, who recently defected to the USA, had confirmed that a substantial portion of Iraq's nuclear and chemical weapons stocks remained intact.
In a separate development, a UK court on June 12 and 13 sentenced two UK-based business executives, Ali Daghir and Jeanine Speckman, to prison terms of five years and 18 months respectively for conspiring to export to Iraq 40 capacitors used in the manufacture of nuclear bombs.
US rejection of war reparations proposal
On June 3 the USA rejected a proposal by UN Secretary General Javier Pérez de Cuéllar recommending that "compensation to be paid by Iraq [as war reparations]should not exceed 30 per cent" of the annual value of its oil exports [see pp. 38165; 38211].
Reports said that while US preference for a higher ceiling of between 40 per cent and 50 per cent[see p. 38211]had been favoured by Kuwait, none of the other members of the Security Council had so far expressed public support.
Iraq's permanent representative at the UN, Abdul Amir al-Anbari described the recommended ceiling as "unrealistic" , adding that "it is an impossible percentage to implement" .
Meanwhile, in its first full-scale review since the end of the Gulf war, the UN Security Council on June 11 agreed to maintain international sanctions [see pp. 37639; 37695; 38083; 38165; 38211].
The decision came amidst continuing reports of severe malnutrition and health epidemics.
The Middle East Economic Digest of July 12 reported that more than 17,000 people suffering from infectious diseases had been hospitalized in April and May.
Reported typhoid cases in 1991 had risen from virtually none to 60-70 a day.
According to the Independent of June 13, the Soviet Union, China and India were pressing for a relaxation of sanctions.
Postponement of agreement on Kurdish autonomy
The leader of the Democratic Party of Kurdistan (DPK), Masoud Barzani, said on June 29 that an accord on Kurdish autonomy [see pp. 38126-27; 38211] "still needs to be discussed" .
His statement came after reports that Kurdish leaders, including the head of the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan (PUK), Jalal Talabani, had agreed to resume talks with the government following their rejection of new conditions for Kurdish autonomy.
The latest conditions, which emerged just before the end of the last round of talks on June 16, were that Kurdish leaders suspend links with the West and side with the ruling Ba'ath party against Shia insurgents and other "artificial" organizations, in return for joint Iraqi-Kurdish administration of the oil city of Kirkuk and exclusive Kurdish control over Dohuk, Sulaimaniya and Arbil.
Reports also suggested that the call for fresh talks had been prompted by disagreements, first reported on June 24, between Barzani and Talabani over Barzani's reported acceptance of an autonomy deal involving the suspension of Kurdish requests for continued Western assistance.
On June 8 Talabani had emphasised that any agreement on Kurdish autonomy would have to be underwritten by the Western allies and backed by military force.
Withdrawal of allied forces from northern Iraq — Reports of renewed threats to Shias
US troops suspended their planned withdrawal from northern Iraq [see p. 38211]on June 21 amidst reports that the Western allies were considering the deployment of a rapid reaction force (RRF)[see pp. 38170; 38216]based in southern Turkey to ensure continued protection for Kurdish refugees.
US Secretary of State James Baker had indicated on June 7, after talks with UK Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd in Copenhagen, that the USA would consider postponing troop withdrawals until "the security of the Kurdish population is assured" .
On June 25, UK Prime Minister John Major said that UK forces would remain in northern Iraq until the Kurdish population received assurances guaranteeing their safety.
A report on June 1 quoting US official figures said that about 13,000 Kurds who had sought refuge in the mountains on the Iraqi-Turkish border [see p. 38126]had died before reaching allied "safe havens" [see pp. 38127-28].
According to US figures on June 7, up to 6,700 Iraqi refugees, mostly children under five, had died during a two-month period in mountain camps along the Turkish border.
The last Turkish border camp, at Cukura, was closed on June 3.
The Guardian of June 20 reported that 20,000 Iraqi Kurds in a transit camp near the border in Silopi were refusing to leave for Iraq without guarantees of their safety, and the Turkish authorities reported that a further 12,200 refugees from Iraq were still accommodated in other camps inside Turkey.
On June 12 Bush endorsed the allocation of US$555,500,000 to help Kurdish refugees and pay for UN peacekeeping activities in Iraq.
In an appeal on June 11 Iran called on the UN to protect between 500,000 and 900,000 Shias who were reportedly trapped in the marshes of southern Iraq surrounded by 100,000 Iraqi troops and airborne units [see pp. 38081-82; 38211].
Appointment of Oil Minister
Usamah Abd al-Razzaq Hummadi al-Hithi was appointed Oil Minister on May 27, replacing acting Oil Minister Gen. Amir Hammoudi al Saadi [see p. 38165].
Reports said that the appointment of al-Hithi, formerly Minister of State for Oil and a senior official at the Ministry of Industry and Military Industrialization (MIMI), suggested the continued domination of the oil sector by MIMI [see p. 38165].
Reports on June 19, quoting the Iraqi publication Alif Ba, said that Lt.-Gen.
Hussain Rashid had been replaced as Army Chief of Staff by Lt.-Gen Iyad Fathi al-Rawai, commander of the Republican Guard.
Rashid, who was appointed in November 1990 [see p. 37872], had been responsible for negotiating Iraq's acceptance of Gulf ceasefire terms in February [see p. 37986].
Reports using Kurdish opposition sources said that Saddam Hussein had named Brig. -Gen.
Abdul Khader Salman Khamis as military chief of intelligence to replace Maj.-Gen.
Wafiq Jassim, who was dismissed for "anti-regime activities" .
Opposition sources also claimed that a number of senior civil and military officers had recently been detained or executed for anti-government activities.
Release of UK engineer
Douglas Brand, a British engineer who was on May 13 sentenced to life imprisonment on charges of spying, was released on June 20.
Brand, 51, who was arrested in September 1990 while attempting to flee from Iraq, was released after the former UK Prime Minister Edward Heath made a personal request for clemency to Saddam Hussein.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
KUWAIT
Lifting of martial law — Commuting of death sentences
The Prime Minister, Shaikh Saad al Abdullah as Salim as Sabah, commuted on June 26 the death sentences imposed on 29 people (three of them women) for collaborating with the Iraqi authorities.
On the same day the government lifted martial law, imposed at the end of the Gulf war [see pp. 37987-88; 38212].
Reacting to the lifting of martial law, Abdullah Nibari of the Kuwait Democratic Forum [see pp. 38166; 38212]said that the decision was unlikely to encourage greater political freedom, adding that "the only difference is [that]under martial law the penalties are more severe" .
The announcement of the commuting of death sentences was made after talks in London between Shaikh Saad and the United Kingdom Prime Minister John Major.
It was confirmed by Justice Minister Ghazi Obeid as Sammar, who said that all other sentences handed down by martial law courts would be upheld.
On June 25 the government transferred proceedings against alleged collaborators to civilian courts.
Between 200 and 250 alleged collaborators —mainly Jordanians of Palestinian origin, Iraqis and stateless Arabs —had appeared in court since the trials began on May 19 [see p. 38212].
On June 8 a martial law court passed its first death sentence, on a stateless resident accused of joining the Iraqi Popular Army.
The first death sentence passed on a woman, a Lebanese, was passed on June 13.
A further 27 people, including six journalists accused of publishing the newspaper al-Nidaa [see p. 38212], received death sentences between June 15 and 20.
The conduct of the trials and the imposition of death sentences had provoked widespread international concern [see p. 38212].
On June 18 UN Secretary-General Javier Pérez de Cuéllar deplored the death sentences and appealed for clemency.
France, Germany and the UK also expressed concern at the courts' verdicts.
United States officials refrained from commenting directly on the death sentences, but a State Department spokesman said on June 20 that the Bush administration had called on the government to respect human rights.
Earlier, on June 12, US Secretary of State James Baker had told a Senate committee that although the Kuwaiti government "may not be the optimum type of regime" , the USA did not seek to transform Kuwait into a Western-style democracy.
On June 17 Jordan launched an international appeal to halt the trials and to help save five Jordanians who were among those sentenced to death.
On June 23 a group calling itself the Islamic Liberation Front threatened to carry out terrorist attacks against the Kuwaiti government unless it cancelled the death sentences.
An official Soviet spokesman said on June 24 that "the trials must not be transformed into reprisals" .
Amnesty International appealed on June 11 for an end to the "iniquitous" trials and for the commuting of the death sentences.
On June 18 the Washington-based Human Rights Watch demanded that those convicted be released or granted re-trials.
Expulsion of foreign nationals
Reports said that more than 400 Iraqis and Palestinians had been deported across the border to Iraq since June 9, in contravention of Gulf ceasefire regulations [see pp. 38164-65]and of the fourth Geneva Convention prohibiting the forcible repatriation of civilians who feared persecution.
Meanwhile, it was reported that the number of Palestinians in Kuwait had fallen to between 150,000 and 200,000 (half the number resident before the Iraqi invasion) following a mass exodus prompted by fears of continued harassment [see pp. 38118; 38166].
Announcement of elections
In a decree issued on June 2, the Amir of Kuwait Shaikh Jabir al Ahmad al Jabir as Sabah ordered elections to "a new National Assembly" to be held in October 1992.
He also directed the National Council, elected in June 1990 as an interim body and boycotted by the opposition [see pp. 37549-50], to convene on July 9 in order to discuss and organize the elections.
Opposition politicians denounced the decree as "a facade of democracy" .
Many were reportedly angered by the Amir's decision to restore the National Council despite their request not to do so at a meeting on May 28 between opposition leaders and government ministers.
On June 4 an estimated 1,000 people attended an opposition rally held to demand the immediate restoration of democracy.
The rally came amidst reports of dissatisfaction among army officers, some of whom had threatened to resign unless senior defence staff, blamed for Kuwait's defeat by Iraq in August 1990, were dismissed.
Resumption of oil exports
Oil exports were resumed on June 11 for the first time since the outbreak of the Gulf war [see pp. 37934-43].
The Oil Minister Hamud Abdullah al Raqaba said in Vienna on June 3 that oil-sector damage, which apparently included the value of lost oil revenues and the cost of capping oil fires, was estimated at US$40,000 million-US$50,000 million.
Al Raqaba was quoted in Le Monde of June 24 as saying that 170 burning oil wells had so far been capped while the majority were expected to be under control by March 1992 [see pp. 37988; 38119; 38166; 38212].
On June 23 the veteran Texan oil firefighter Red Adair had claimed that the task of capping oil fires would take five years.
Meanwhile, it was reported on June 3 that the Gulf Co-Operation Council (GCC) had turned down the government's recent request for an oil loan saying that GCC states did not have enough oil to allocate to Kuwait.
Foreign relations
According to the state-controlled newspaper al Fajr of June 3 the government had recalled its ambassadors from six Arab states —Tunisia, Mauritania, Algeria, Yemen, Sudan and Jordan —reportedly for siding with Iraq during the Gulf war.
Al Fajr said that "this step did not mean severing diplomatic relations…but reducing the level of diplomatic relations" .
King Fahd of Saudi Arabia visited Kuwait on June 9 for the first time since the end of the Gulf war.
According to the KUNA news agancy, the King praised Shaikh Jabir's "wise policy" of reconstruction.
President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt paid his first visit to the emirate since the end of the Gulf war, on June 18.
Mubarak confirmed after talks with Shaikh Jabir that Egypt had agreed to join a planned Arab peacekeeping force in the Gulf.
In May Mubarak had announced the withdrawal of all Egyptian troops from Kuwait [see p. 38213].
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
IRAN
Visit by Saudi Arabian minister
The Saudi Arabian Foreign Minister Prince Saud al-Faisal visited Iran on June 5-6, the first senior Saudi minister to do so since the resumption of diplomatic relations in March [see pp. 38119; 38166].
The Iranian Foreign Minister, Ali Akbar Vellayati, who had met King Fahd in Riyadh in April, visited Saudi Arabia again on June 15-24 to perform the Islamic pilgrimage (hajj).
Teheran Radio reported on June 6 that President Ali Akbar Rafsanjani had welcomed "the new page in bilateral relations" , and it quoted Prince Saud as saying that the rapprochement would "have important effects for the Islamic community" .
Relations between the two countries were criticized by Iranian hardliners, however, with former Interior Minister Hojatolislam Ali Akbar Mohtashemi being quoted in a report in Le Monde of June 7 as expressing strong opposition to the Saudi regime.
Visit by Waldheim
President Kurt Waldheim of Austria visited Tehran on June 9-11, the first West European head of state to do so since the 1979 revolution.
Resumption of US oil imports
Iranian oil sales to the United States, which ceased in 1987, were officially resumed on June 11 following approval by the US Treasury for US oil companies to purchase 2,500,000 barrels of Iranian crude oil worth an estimated US$35-40,000,000.
Iran's earnings from oil exports worldwide rose by 28 per cent to US$16,500 million in the year ending March 20.
On May 30 Le Monde quoted a US State Department spokeswoman as saying that "normal relations between the USA and Iran would serve the interests of both countries" .
The comment was reportedly prompted by conciliatory statements made by government ministers during an international oil conference held in Isfahan on May 27-29 and attended among others by representatives from US oil companies.
However, on June 3 the Iranian spiritual leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei rejected the prospect of normal relations with the USA, saying that it could "never take place" while "the US continues to impose its will upon other people and nations" .
Assessment of war damage
A team headed by the UN Secretary-General's special envoy, Abdulrahim Farah, arrived in Tehran on May 31 to assess damage resulting from the eight-year war with Iraq.
According to figures released by the Planning and Budget Organization on June 9, total war-related losses were estimated at 65,353,000 million rials (US$916,340 million).
Meanwhile, Rafsanjani criticized Germany's decision announced on June 30 not to help rebuild a war-damaged nuclear plant at the Gulf port of Bushehr.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
ISRAEL
Internal political and security affairs — Foreign relations
Settlements issue — "Linkage" between aid and discontinuation of settlement
The controversial issue of Israeli settlements in the occupied territories [see pp. 38168; 38213]continued to affect Israel's relations with the USA during June.
Press reports in June claimed that the United States had threatened to withdraw aid to Israel for immigration absorption if the settlements policy was not terminated.
Nevertheless, speaking on June 18, Prime Minister Itzhak Shamir said that the settlement drive was "unstoppable" .
The Peace Now movement claimed on June 17 to have documentary evidence of Israeli plans for greatly increased settlement in the occupied territories.
US officials publicly denied that the Bush administration intended to link the settlements issue with absorption aid.
However, the Washington Post of June 23 reported that Israeli officials had made "private assessments" that the USA intended to create such a linkage "behind the scenes" .
Israel, which was hoping to win US congressional approval during 1991 for loans worth some US$10,000 million, had also been actively seeking contributions from Germany.
However, a report in the Jerusalem Post of June 21 claimed that Germany, at the behest of the USA had decided to withhold up to US$1,000 million in financing for Israel's absorption effort in an attempt to halt settlement of the occupied territories.
Visit by US Defence Secretary
Dick Cheney, the US Defence Secretary, visited Israel on May 30-31, and unexpectedly announced that the USA was currently stockpiling arms in Israel for use in any future conflict in the Middle East.
Cheney's announcement was made shortly after US President Bush had unveiled an arms control plan for the Middle East [see p. 38217].
Cheney's visit also resulted in an agreement on the continued joint development of the "Arrow" anti-tactical ballistic missile project.
Israeli Defence Minister Moshe Arens told reporters that the second phase of the arrow programme would be financed on the basis of 72 per cent US support and 28 per cent Israeli support.
Agreement was also reached on the supply to Israel of 10 used US F-15 A or F-15B jet fighters.
Increased Soviet immigration
Some 13,000 Soviet immigrants arrived in Israel during the last week of June, bringing the total for the month to more than 20,000, one of the largest monthly influxes yet.
The sudden increase in immigration was a direct result of the impending implementation on July 1 of a new emigration regulations which required all emigrants to leave on a Soviet passport.
Prior to July 1 Soviet Jews had been able to leave for Israel with only a visa.
Controversial report on army undercover units
A report on Israeli television on June 21 interviewed members of special undercover army units who had infiltrated Palestinian groups in the occupied territories.
The report, which was approved by military censors, provoked a strong response from a number of senior politicians who questioned the wisdom of the army's decision to disclose the existence of the undercover squads.
The disclosure was strongly criticised by right-wing Cabinet members.
Rehavam Ze'evi, Minister without Portfolio, threatened to withdraw his small Moledet party from the ruling coalition.
Senior army officers, however, defended the move as a necessary warning to Palestinian activists.
Hunger strike by Abie Nathan — Meeting with Arafat
On June 6 Abie Nathan, the veteran Israeli peace campaigner, ended a 40-day hunger strike in protest at legislation banning Israeli contacts with the PLO.
In late June Nathan travelled to Tangier where he held a meeting with PLO chair Yassir Arafat.
Visit to Hungary and Bulgaria by Herzog
President Chaim Herzog arrived in Hungary on June 11 at the start of an historic seven-day visit, the first by an Israeli President to an eastern European country.
During his visit, Herzog held talks with his Hungarian counterpart, Arpad Göncz, and with the Hungarian Premier, Jozsef Antall.
On June 17 Herzog left Hungary for a four-day visit to Bulgaria where he held talks with President Zhelyu Zhelev.
First official agreement with China
Heads of the Israeli and Chinese Academies of Sciences signed an agreement on scientific co-operation in Jerusalem on June 4.
It was the first official agreement between the two countries.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
PALESTINIAN AFFAIRS
PLO-Syrian relations — Internal affairs
PLO-Syrian talks
A high-level PLO delegation visited Syria on May 26-28 for talks with, amongst others, President Hafez al-Assad, Vice-President Abdel Halim Khaddam and Foreign Minister Farooq ash-Shar".
The talks signalled a possible end to a dispute which began in 1983 when Syria backed Fatah rebels in a revolt against Fatah leader and PLO chair, Yassir Arafat [see pp. 32457-59; 32649-51].
The release of a number of Palestinian prisoners from Syrian prisons in March 1991 indicated that a possible thaw in relations was under way, although some commentators claimed that the move was part of a plan by Assad to wrest control of the PLO from Arafat.
The Palestinian delegation included four PLO Executive Committee members, namely Farouk Qaddumi of Fatah (the PLO's Foreign Minister), Yasser Abd ar-Rabbuh of the Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine (DFLP), Mustafa az-Zibri of the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (PFLP) and Sulayman an-Najjab of the Palestinian Communist Party.
The PLO Executive Committee met in Algiers on May 29-30 to discuss the talks, which were described in an official statement as "positive" .
The Committee expressed its appreciation of the "fraternal Syrian stance" and stressed the importance of continuing consultation and developing relations.
Reported establishment of Abu Nidal office in Jeddah
The Times of June 7 reported that the Revolutionary Council of Fatah (the Abu Nidal Group) had recently established an office in the Saudi Arabian city of Jeddah.
The report described the move as a deliberate Saudi ploy to undermine Arafat's leadership of the PLO.
Arafat's decision to side with Iraq during the Gulf War had incensed the Saudis, who had previously been among his strongest financial backers.
Death of ALF leader
Abd ar-Rahim Ahmad, leader of the pro-Iraqi Arab Liberation Front (ALF), died of cancer on June 30.
Ahmad had been a member of the PLO Executive Committee, heading the Labour and Population Organization Department.
Progress of intifada
Re-evaluation
Palestinian activists initiated a re-evaluation of the intifada during June, partly in response to an increase in intra-Palestinian violence.
A number of Palestinians were injured in serious armed fighting on June 2 in the West Bank city of Nablus between supporters of Fatah and those of the Islamic fundamentalist Hamas.
At the same time there was increasing concern over the numbers of so-called Palestinian collaborators being killed.
The Economist of June 8 reported that 45 Palestinian collaborators had been killed during April and May, compared with 18 Palestinians killed by the Israeli security forces.
The June 6 edition of the East Jerusalem daily Al-Fajr carried articles from a number of Palestinians calling for a re-evaluation of the intifada.
Adnan Damiri, a student leader who had recently been released from Qeziot prison, contended that the constant killing of alleged collaborators was undermining the intifada.
A Palestinian forum held in East Jerusalem on June 11 heard calls from moderates for a complete reassessment of the intifada.
Calls were made for an end to commercial strikes and to the involvement of children in the process.
Chamber of commerce elections in Hebron
Members of the Palestinian business community voted in elections to the Chamber of Commerce in the West Bank city of Hebron on June 18.
The election was viewed by some commentators as a trial contest by the Israelis, to establish a precedent for wider municipal elections throughout the occupied territories.
Candidates identified with fundamentalist Islamic groups won six of the 11 contested seats; four seats were won by candidates with PLO links and one by an independent.
Commenting on the success of the fundamentalist candidates, the Independent of June 20 speculated that many merchants had cast anti-PLO votes in protest at the endless strikes and closures imposed by the intifada leadership.
Emergence of new Palestinian party
A number of Israeli media reports in June mentioned that a Palestinian political party, the Palestine National Unity Party (PNUP) or Hizb al-Ittihad al-Watani al-Falastini, had been operating secretly in the occupied territories since mid-1989.
A report on IDF radio on June 11 claimed that the party was "about to begin overt activities in the territories" in view of the call for a reassessment of the intifada.
According to this report, the party had no links with the PLO, opposed the armed struggle, and favoured the achievement of a Palestinian state within the 1967 borders on the basis of a direct dialogue with Israel.
Decree aimed at encouraging economic growth in occupied territories
The co-ordinator of Israeli government activities in the occupied territories, Maj.-Gen.
Dani Rothschild, issued a decree on June 9 which was aimed at encouraging investment.
Among the measures announced was a three-year tax holiday for new industrial investments.
The package, although modest, nevertheless marked a change of policy by the Israeli authorities towards the stagnated Palestinian economy.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
JORDAN
Appointment of new Cabinet
In a decree issued on June 19 King Hussein accepted the resignation of the government of Prime Minister Mudar Badran and announced a new Cabinet headed by Taher al-Masri.
[For January reshuffle see p. 37976.]
Masri, 49, the country's first Palestinian-born Prime Minister since 1972, who had held the post of Foreign Minister intermittently for five years, most recently in the previous government [see p. 37976], was widely known for his liberal, pro-Western views.
Analysts interpreted Masri's appointment as an indication of King Hussein's commitment to a liberal democracy [see pp. 37052; 37392-93]and to recent efforts to revive a Middle East peace process [see pp. 38116-17; 38210].
Badran's resignation was reportedly precipitated by royal disapproval of his sympathy for the fundamentalist Moslem Brotherhood, whose members had held five seats in his government [see p. 37976].
The Brotherhood said after al-Masri's appointment that it did not wish to participate in a government likely to make territorial concessions to Israel.
Reports indicated, however, that it had been excluded on the direction of the King who, in a veiled attack on Brotherhood policies on June 19, condemned those who engaged in "intellectual and psychological terrorism" and portrayed suicide as "martyrdom" .
Jordanian Cabinet
**Taher al-Masri Prime Minister and Minister of Defence
*Ali al-Suhaymat Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Transport and Communications
*Abdullah Nusur Foreign Affairs
*Jawdat al-Subul Interior
*Taysir Kanan Justice
*Raif Najm Waqfs (religious endowments) and Islamic Affairs
*Id Duhayyat Education
*Muhammad al-Hammuri Higher Education Basil Jardana Finance
**Ziyad Fariz Planning
*Abd al-Karim Kabariti Tourism and Antiquities Abdel-Karim al-Dughmi Labour and Cabinet Affairs Thabit al-Thair Energy and Mineral Resources
**Khalid al-Karaki Information and Culture
**Saad Hayel al-Srour Public Works and Housing
*Salim al-Zubi Municipal, Rural and Environmental Affairs
*Awni al-Bashir Social Development
*Samir Qawar Water and Irrigation
*Subhi al-Qasim Agriculture
*Ali Abu al-Raguib Industry and Trade
*Mamduh al-Abbadi Health
*Salih Irshidat Youth
*Abd al-Salam Furayhat Minister of State for Parliamentary Affairs
*Muhammad Faris al-Tarawinah Minister of State for Cabinet Affairs
*Jamal Hadithah al-Khurayshah Minister of State
*New appointment.
**Altered responsibilities.
Endorsement of national charter
King Hussein and representatives of the country's main political movements endorsed a national charter on June 9 lifting the ban on political parties in return for allegiance to the monarchy.
Initiated in 1989 and subsequently entrusted to a royal commission for drafting [see pp. 37053; 37392], the national charter also reaffirmed Islamic law or sharia as the basic source of legislation and Arab Islamic civilization as the foundation of national identity.
In his address to more than 2,000 delegates, the King said that pluralism remained the only guarantee against dictatorship, adding that "there is not a single party that can claim to possess the truth" .
Critics of the charter had reportedly expressed fears that the opposition's allegiance to the monarchy would reduce pressure for further democratization.
On June 3 between six and eight members of left-wing parties were reported to have been arrested.
Suspension of US aid
The United States House of Representatives on June 20 voted by 410 to eight to cut off military aid to Jordan worth US$27,000,000, pending assurances that "the government of Jordan has taken steps to advance the peace process in the Middle East" [see p. 38119].
A US State Department spokesman said on June 21 that "the administration is strongly opposed to legislation that would prohibit US assistance to Jordan" .
King's health
Hussein was treated in hospital in Amman on June 11-13 for an irregular heartbeat.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
LEBANON
Israeli raids — Appointment of deputies — Foreign relations
Israeli air raids into Lebanon
Israel escalated its attacks into southern Lebanon during early June [see p. 38214 for May attacks].
The attacks, directed at Palestinian positions around the southern port of Sidon, were the heaviest carried out by Israel since its invasion of Lebanon in 1982.
They occurred only weeks after Lebanon and Syria had signed a friendship treaty [see p. 38214].
Israel claimed that the treaty placed Lebanon under total Syrian control and as such posed a major security threat.
The first attack occurred on June 3, when Israeli fighters hit the Fatah military intelligence headquarters in the Miyeh Miyeh refugee camp, killing two guerrillas and a civilian.
The next day a series of fighter attacks was launched against Palestinian positions, killing as many as 20 guerrillas and wounding up to 60 other people, including a group of 10 schoolchildren in Abra.
Among the targets were positions held by the Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine (DFLP), the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (PFLP) and the Fatah Revolutionary Council.
In a rare night-time raid early on June 5, Israel air force jets attacked a base of the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine —General Command (PFLP -GC), killing three guerrillas and wounding four others.
Appointment of deputies
The Cabinet appointed 40 new parliamentary deputies on June 7 under an amendment of the election law to comply with the provisions of the 1989 Taif Accord [see p.38214].
Of the 40, nine were appointed to ensure equal representation of Moslems and Christians; the remainder filled seats left vacant by the death of representatives elected at the last general election in 1972.
The new National Assembly had 107 members; under the original plan the Assembly was to have had 108 members, but one deputy died during the appointments process and his seat remained vacant.
The 40 were selected from 348 candidates approved by the Interior Ministry.
They included Umar Karami (Prime Minister); Mohammed Jarudi (Oil and Industry Minister); Elie Hubayqah (Minister of State and Al-Waad Party representative); Walid Jumblatt (Minister of State and Progressive Socialist Party —PSP —representative); Marwan Hamadah (Economy and Trade Minister); Michel al-Murr (Deputy Prime Minister and National Defence Minister); Talal Arslan (Minister of Tourism); Faris Buwayz (Foreign and Expatriate Affairs Minister); Nabi Berri (Minister of State and Amal representative); Mohammed Baydun (Housing and Co-operative Minister); Abdullah al-Amin (Minister of State and Ba'ath representative); Muhsin Dallul (Agriculture Minister and PSP representative); and Sulayman Franjiyah (Minister of State and Marada representative).
Visit to Beirut by British Minister and former Italian Premier
Douglas Hogg, a Minister of State at the United Kingdom Foreign and Commonwealth Office, visited Lebanon on June 9-12.
His visit coincided with a visit to Beirut by the former Italian Prime Minister, Bettino Craxi, acting on behalf of the UN Secretary-General Javier Pérez de Cuellar.
Hogg was the most senior UK official to visit Lebanon since 1985.
Hogg and Craxi discussed a number of issues with a variety of Lebanese leaders, including the hostage situation and the country's reconstruction requirements.
At the end of his visit Hogg said that he had been assured by Lebanese leaders that all three British hostages in Lebanon were alive.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
ALGERIA
Violent disturbances — Replacement of Prime Minister
Continuing demonstrations in Algiers following the strike call by the fundamentalist Islamic Salvation Front (FIS)[see p. 38215]led to the resignation of Prime Minister Mouloud Hamrouche on June 4 and the postponement of the general election.
The new Prime Minister, Sid Ahmed Ghozali, promised early presidential elections and a review of electoral legislation.
On June 18 a non-party government was announced, the first since independence not to be dominated by mainstream FLN (National Liberation Front) politicians.
From May 29 to June 4 (except for Friday May 31) there were daily clashes in Algiers between the police and FIS demonstrators demanding the creation of an Islamic state, the application of the Sharia legal code and the resignation of President Chadli Benjedid (whose third five-year term would not expire until 1993).
Services run by FIS-controlled local councils remained suspended, although according to the Economist of June 8 "the strike fizzled, partly because so many of the FIS's young followers have no jobs to strike from" .
The universities of Bab Ezzouar (Algiers), Annaba, Constantine and Batna were on June 2 reported as closed.
Some reports said that police fired on stone-throwing demonstrators with live ammunition and rubber bullets in Algiers on June 4; this was denied by the authorities, who said the police had been fired on.
Hundreds were hospitalized suffering from the effects of tear gas.
The government and the FIS claimed respectively that 17 or 20 people had died by June 10.
The official figure for the whole of June was 42 police and demonstrators killed; some foreign observers estimated up to 70 deaths.
On the night of May 29 the consultative council of the FIS had issued a communiqué calling off the strike and obliquely denouncing the principal strike leader, FIS president Abassi Madani.
Madani, 61, and his colleague Ali Belhadj in turn rejected the communiqué as inspired by the security services.
In a broadcast address on June 2 Chadli said that he had confidence in the "political maturity" of Algerians, and claimed that "some elements" had been misleading "their activists…who are loyal nationalists" .
Replacement of Hamrouche — Postponement of elections
The resignation of Hamrouche and his government was announced at 2 a.m. local time on June 5, and the general election (originally scheduled for June 27 and July 18) was postponed.
After troops had moved into Algiers in the early afternoon Chadli declared a state of siege, giving the military emergency powers for the following four months, including the power to ban strikes in services and to dissolve municipal councils and political parties.
The June 5 announcement that Foreign Minister Ghozali was to be the new Prime Minister prompted favourable international press comment; Tehran radio said that he was "recognized by the Islamists as someone who has been away from domestic confrontation" .
Foreign Minister since 1989, Ghozali, 54, had been president of Sonatrach, the state oil and gas company from 1966 until 1977, and then Minister of Energy.
On June 7 he met with opposition party leaders, including Madani and Mahfoud Nahnah, leader of the fundamentalist Hamas party.
Official radio reported that evening that "early and separate legislative and presidential elections" would be held before the end of the year.
Madani and Belhadj, citing this concession, asked their followers at evening prayers in Algiers to end the strike.
New government
On June 18 Ghozali announced the composition of a transitional government —the product of intensive consultations with at least 13 of the 42 opposition parties, and also with academics, human rights activists and news media executives.
Six members of the previous administration were in the 29-member cabinet, but no senior FLN politician was included.
New appointments were made to the key ministries of the Interior (Abdellatif Rahal), Economy (Hocine Benissad) and Foreign Affairs (Lakhdar Brahimi).
The Energy portfolio, which was separated from those of Mines and Industry, went to Nordine Ait-Laoussine.
There were two women ministers, and ministries for Human Rights, for Relations with Parliament and Associations, and for Communications and Culture were created.
Technically "non-party" , the administration was described by the Middle East Economic Digest of June 28 as "largely drawn from establishment figures no longer closely associated with the National Liberation Front [FLN]" ; some ministers were "linked" with opposition parties or dissident currents within the FLN.
Press reports said that Ghozali had promised opposition parties that the controversial electoral laws introduced in April would be reviewed by the transitional government.
Madani gave the new government a guarded welcome at a June 18 news conference, and said that the FIS would respect election results.
On June 28, Chadli, in a move designed to emphasize his political independence, resigned as FLN chairman.
Arrests of FIS leaders
Hundreds of FIS activists were arrested during June (some sources reported 2,600 arrests).
There were exchanges of fire between the army and fundamentalists on June 24-26, and a total of 23 deaths were reported in Algiers and surrounding areas in the final week of June.
On June 29 members of the consultative council of the FIS denounced Madani and Belhadj in lengthy televised statements, after Madani had the previous day told thousands of worshippers at a mosque in Kouba, east Algiers, that a jihad (holy war) might be necessary to force the army's withdrawal.
Madani and Belhadj were detained on June 30 and accused of organizing an "armed conspiracy" .
Loan agreements
On June 25 a $US350,000,000 World Bank loan for the restructuring of banks and industry was announced.
The IMF on June 3 announced approval of a standby loan of SDR300 million (US$404,000,000) in support of the government's economic reform programme.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
LIBYA
UK rejection of Libyan donation
Between June 3 and June 6 Teddy Taylor, a United Kingdom Conservative MP, informed the UK Foreign Office that he had met with Col. Moamer al Kadhafi and Foreign Minister Ibrahim Bishara on a recent visit to Libya; he had brought back a "package of proposals" for restoring relations between the two countries, and a £250,000 cheque for a UK police charity from the Libyan police union.
News of the donation reached the UK press by June 6 and prompted a hostile reaction, as it was interpreted as an attempt to compensate for the killing of a policewoman, Yvonne Fletcher, outside the Libyan People's Bureau in London in April 1984 [see pp. 33004-05].
Diplomatic relations between the UK and Libya had been broken off since that year.
A Foreign Office statement of June 6 said that any "improved relations" had to be preceded by "convincing evidence that the Libyans have renounced their support for international terrorism, including the IRA [Irish Republican Army]" and Libyan co-operation in bringing Fletcher's murderers to justice.
In a speech to the General People's Congress on June 17 Kadhafi responded: "To hell with Britain and relations with it until the day of judgement…
To hell with Britain and America, as children would say."
Amnesty International report
A report published by the human rights organization Amnesty International on June 26 said that nearly 400 political prisoners, mostly Islamic fundamentalists, had been imprisoned in Libya between January 1989 and April 1990.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
GULF CO-OPERATION COUNCIL
Foreign Ministers' meeting
The Ministerial Council of the Gulf Co-Operation Council (GCC), composed of Foreign Ministers from six Arab states, held its 39th session in Khubar, Saudi Arabia, on June 3.
The Financial Times of June 18 reported that GCC states along with Egypt and Syria had finalized an agreement based on the Damascus Declaration [see pp. 38116-17]to supply ground forces to protect Kuwait after the withdrawal of Western troops [see p. 38213].
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
EGYPT
US Defence Secretary Richard Cheney visited Egypt on May 31-June 3 for meetings with senior government ministers on military co-operation and the limitation of conventional and nuclear weapons in the region.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
IDB
The Islamic Development Bank held its annnual meeting in Cairo on May 28-29 which was attended by Finance Ministers representing all 44 member countries except Iraq.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
SAUDI ARABIA
Reports in mid-June said that a group of religious conservatives, including the country's most senior religious figure, Abdulaziz bin Abdullah bin Baz, had signed a 12-point petition in late April asking King Fahd to create a "consultative council" to deal with "internal and external affairs" [see also p. 38166], which should be free of "any pressure that might affect its responsibilities" .
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
WESTERN SAHARA
2,000 delegates, including tribal leaders, attended the eighth congress of the Polisario Front in Tindouf, southern Algeria, on June 17-20.
INTERNATIONAL
NATO
Foreign Ministers' meeting
The North Atlantic Council (NAC), composed of Foreign Ministers of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), met in Copenhagen on June 6-7.
For the first time, ministers formally acknowledged the security aspirations of the 12 members of the European Communities (EC), some of whom had urged a greater defence role for the nine-country Western European Union [see pp. 37212; 37931; 38216].
A final communiqué issued on June 7 said that a European "defence role, reflected in the strengthening of the European pillar within the Alliance, will reinforce the integrity and effectiveness of the Atlantic Alliance" .
In a reference to Iceland, Norway and Turkey, which belonged to NATO but neither to the EC nor to the WEU [see p. 38216], ministers said that "Allies that are not participating in the development of a European defence identity…should be adequately involved in decisions that affect their security" .
However, in a key passage intended to highlight the Alliance's "transatlantic" character, the communiqué also stipulated the "necessary transparency and complementarity between the European security and defence identity as it emerges in the Twelve and the WEU, and the Alliance" .
A separate document also released on June 7, on NATO's "core security functions" , was widely regarded as representing the United States perspective, and reiterated that "the security of North America is permanently tied to the security of Europe" .
The communiqué also committed Alliance members to the "early ratification" of the Conventional Forces in Europe (CFE) Treaty [see pp. 37838-39; 38027; 38122; 38217]and called for the revival of the "Open Skies" negotiations on aerial reconnaissance [see pp. 37201; 35267; 37393; 37466; 37838].
Reports indicated that agreement on the final communiqué was reached only after France had decided not to press for a clearer recognition of a European defence identity distinct from NATO.
Fears that France would withhold its co-operation had grown after French officials expressed opposition to the recently proposed Rapid Reaction Force (RRF)[see pp. 38170-71; 38216], claiming that it "pre-empted" defence arrangements being made at a purely European level.
The French Foreign Minister Roland Dumas told a meeting of the WEU on June 5 that the RRF would create "many problems" , and he criticized NATO's failure to "define political objectives" before "deciding on force structures" .
Offer of co-operation with former Warsaw Pact countries
In a significant statement on "partnership with the countries of central and eastern Europe" released on June 6, ministers offered to increase economic and political co-operation aimed at "a Europe whole and free" .
The statement noted the end of "long decades of European division" , and declared that "our own security is inseparably linked to that of all other states in Europe" .
It maintained that "the CSCE [Conference on Security and Co-Operation in Europe]process and its institutions play a central role in expanding the network of co-operative relationships across Europe" .
The declaration committed NATO members "to support reforms undertaken in the central and eastern European states to establish democratic systems of government" and to "related efforts to create modern competitive market-orientated economies" .
In a move reportedly designed to reassure the Soviet Union, ministers stressed that "we will neither seek unilateral advantage from the changed situation in Europe nor threaten the legitimate interests of any state" .
Elaborating on the Alliance's offer of co-operation, Baker said in an address to ministers on June 6 that "our goal is to reach out to the Soviet Union and to the emerging democracies of central and eastern Europe" .
He indicated that Soviet leaders had themselves to clarify their agenda for economic and political reform and added that "if they do…we can serve as a catalyst" .
Although the declaration refrained from offering membership of the Alliance to former Warsaw Pact countries, it assured those countries, notably Czechoslovakia, which had expressed concern about a security vacuum in a post-Cold War Europe, that "freedom from any form of coercion or intimidation" was of "direct and material concern to us" .
INTERNATIONAL
DISARMAMENT
Agreement over conventional forces
United States President Bush said on June 1 that an agreement "in principle" on Soviet compliance with the November 1990 Conventional Forces in Europe (CFE) treaty "cleared the way for an important step towards a super-power summit" .
Earlier that day, US Secretary of State James Baker and Soviet Foreign Affairs Minister Aleksandr Bessmertnykh had met for talks in Lisbon, focusing on Soviet requests for economic assistance [see p. 38272], on prospects for a Middle East peace conference and on the CFE issue.
Neither Baker nor Bessmertnykh elaborated on how their CFE agreement was reached, but Baker stressed later that it respected "the full integrity and credibility" of the treaty.
The US side had hitherto accused the Soviet military of evading the impact of CFE force reductions, in particular by transferring tank units east of the Urals (i.e. simply removing them from the area covered by the treaty, rather than destroying them —see pp. 38027; 38122; 38217).
A pledge by the Soviet Union was accepted formally on June 14 in Vienna by the 21 other parties to the CFE treaty (concluded in November 1990 between the NATO and Warsaw Pact countries —see p. 37838).
The chief Soviet negotiator Oleg Grinevsky delivered an undertaking that the Soviet Union would adhere to the treaty's prescribed weapons ceilings, destroying (with proof) 6,000 tanks, 1,500 armoured combat vehicles and 7,000 artillery pieces from its stocks east of the Urals, and including as part of its treaty totals three motorized divisions, comprising some 3,700 tanks, artillery and armoured personnel carriers, which it had previously classified as "naval infantry" not subject to the CFE treaty [see p. 38027].
Remaining differences over START
Baker and Bessmertnykh failed during talks in Geneva on June 7 and in Berlin on June 20 to settle remaining differences over a strategic arms reduction treaty (START)[see pp. 37979; p. 38255].
Baker said at a press conference in Berlin on June 20 that three main problems remained to be resolved before the conclusion of a START agreement: a common definition of new types of missiles; agreement on the number of warheads allocated to each ballistic missile; and greater transparency of telemetric inscription (the coded electronic information carried by strategic weapons).
Summarising prospects for a US-Soviet summit, Baker said: "I think we are right where we were the last time." 
On June 17, however, Bush had announced that he had received a "positive response" from Soviet President Gorbachev concerning new US proposals to help resolve disagreements on START.
Endorsement of NPT
France announced on June 3 that it would sign the 1968 Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT), which it had hitherto refused to endorse on the grounds that it compromised France's nuclear independence.
The announcement, released by aides to President Mitterrand, formed part of wider proposals for global disarmament aimed at abolishing chemical and biological weapons and drastically reducing the world's nuclear arsenals.
The plan emphasised, however, that "the use of nuclear power for peaceful purposes is justified" .
South Africa's President de Klerk announced on June 27 that South Africa had agreed to sign the NPT.
INTERNATIONAL
CSCE
Foreign Ministers' meeting
Foreign Ministers from 34 countries participating in the Conference on Security and Co-Operation in Europe (CSCE) met in Berlin on June 19-20 for the first time since the adoption in November 1990 of the Charter of Paris [see p. 37838].
The ministers' first act was the unanimous endorsement on June 19 of Albania's admission as the 35th member of CSCE [see also pp. 37385; 37746-47; 37838].
In a letter addressed to CSCE leaders on June 14, the new Albanian government had affirmed its "commitment to European democratic and pluralistic values" .
A more detailed mandate for the CSCE's Conflict Prevention Centre (established in Vienna —see pp. 37838; 38171; 38216) effectively suspended the Conference's unanimity rule, allowing a minimum of 13 members to convene an emergency meeting if they deemed events in a member state to constitute "a major disruption to peace, security and stability" .
This procedure would not require the consent of the country involved.
No recommendation adopted under these emergency procedures could be implemented, however, in the absence of a consensus.
The Soviet Union had initially opposed suspending the unanimity rule, arguing that this would undermine the principle of non-intervention embodied in the 1975 Helsinki Final Act [see pp. 27301-09].
A Soviet Deputy Foreign Minister, Yuli Kvitsinsky, reportedly told a closed session on June 20 that the status of the Baltic republics was beyond the jurisdiction of the CSCE.
However, the Soviet Union did not demand the expulsion of representatives of Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia, who attended public sessions as guests of the German government [for their expulsion from the Paris CSCE summit see p. 37838].
(In what was interpreted as a veiled reference to political events in the Soviet Union, United States Secretary of State James Baker had called in a speech to the Aspen Institute in Berlin on June 18 for a democratic "Euro-Atlantic community that extends east from Canada to Vladivostok" .)
On June 19, Foreign Ministers issued a joint statement calling on Yugoslavia's leaders to "resolve their disputes peacefully" and expressing support for the "territorial integrity of Yugoslavia" .
Representatives of Slovenia attended the meeting as guests of the Austrian delegation, but the Yugoslav Foreign Ministry reportedly refused the Slovene request to be part of the Yugoslav delegation.
Earlier in the month, Ministers of Culture from the then 34 CSCE countries met in Kracow, Poland, and adopted on June 6 a declaration calling for international co-operation to protect members' cultural heritage.
INTERNATIONAL
INDUSTRIALIZED COUNTRIES
Meeting of G-7 Finance Ministers
Finance Ministers and central bank governors from the Group of Seven (G-7) industrialized countries met in London on June 23.
Concern over rising dollar
The meeting, reportedly called at the instigation of Japan, was dominated by concern over the recent advance of the US dollar which, according to the Financial Times of June 24, had risen by up to 20 per cent against the German deutschmark and other currencies in recent weeks [see pp. 37978; 38170].
In their communiqué, ministers "reaffirmed their commitment to co-operate closely, taking account of the need of orderly markets, if necessary through appropriately concerted action in exchange markets" .
Karl Otto Pöhl, the outgoing president of the Deutsche Bundesbank [see p. 38198], hinted that the communiqué intended to convey G-7 readiness to endorse central bank intervention in currency markets to stem the dollar's rise.
Japanese Finance Minister Ryutaro Hashimoto said during a news conference after the meeting that "the G-7 countries share the view that [the dollar]is nearing its ceiling" .
US Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady claimed, however, that the "recent movement" of the dollar "fits within orderly [foreign exchange]markets" .
Continued US pressures for an early cut in interest rates to encourage growth [see pp. 37977-98; 38170]were firmly resisted by Japan and Germany, which were reportedly concerned that the weakness of their currencies in relation to the dollar would add to inflationary pressures.
In their final statement ministers "recognized" that changes in "fiscal and monetary policies which provide the basis for lower real interest rates…would need to reflect the situation in each country" .
Assessing the prospects of world economic growth, ministers "noted with satisfaction the increasing signs of global economic recovery" but stressed that "sustained expansion in global trade [which]is an important engine of growth" required "a swift and successful conclusion of the Uruguay Round [of trade talks]" [see pp. 37796; 37930; 38027].
Agreement on Soviet associate membership of IMF
Ministers agreed to offer associate membership of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) to the Soviet Union, although their final statement made clear that they were not prepared to sanction massive financial assistance, the so-called "Grand Bargain" without evidence of substantial economic reform.
Addressing a press conference on June 23, French Finance Minister Pierre Bérégovoy said that while some countries favoured associate membership for the Soviet Union, others had regarded it as a transitional status.
Reports indicated that US pressure to grant associate membership to the Soviet Union had been opposed by Germany, which feared that it would delay granting the Soviet Union full IMF membership.
The United Kingdom Chancellor of the Exchequer Norman Lamont said on June 23 that G-7 ministers had concluded that it was more important for the Soviet Union to initiate a programme of domestic economic reform than to be the recipient of massive financial aid.
According to The Times of June 24 ministers also disagreed on whether the Soviet Union should be allowed to borrow from the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) in excess of its borrowing limit of 6 per cent —the same as its shareholding in the bank.
On June 23 Brady had reiterated US opposition to any raising of the borrowing limit, while acknowledging that some countries wanted to reconsider this.
INTERNATIONAL
OPEC
89th meeting
Oil Ministers from the 13-member Organization of Oil Exporting Countries (OPEC) held their 89th meeting in Vienna on June 4.
Ministers agreed to maintain the overall production ceiling set in March at 22,300,000 barrels per day (bpd)[see p. 38122]despite attempts by some members to cut output further in order to restore the reference price of US$21 per barrel.
(On June 4 OPEC oil was trading at around US$18 per barrel.)
Reports indicated that resistance to further cuts in production had come principally from Saudi Arabia which had withstood similar pressure in March [see p. 38122].
The Saudi Arabian Oil Minister Hisham Nazer was quoted before the meeting as saying that while Saudi Arabia would continue to support the US$21 reference price, it would not "force that on the market by a deliberate creation of shortage" .
Nazer did not, however, declare Saudi Arabia's intention to increase oil production, as had been done in March [ibid.].
Saudi Arabia's stance on OPEC's pricing policy had reportedly been strengthened by support from Iran which, in turn, had been prompted by the recent improvement in relations between the two countries [see pp. 38119; 38166; 38309].
Resistance to cuts in production was fuelled by expectations of increased demand based on official OPEC estimates which set third-quarter (September) demand at 22,810,000 bpd, rising to 23,710,000 bpd in the fourth quarter (December).
On June 10 OPEC's Secretary-General Subroto said in Madrid that the resumption of Kuwaiti and Iraqi oil exports would be co-ordinated by the organization, which did not expect this to affect the stabilization of prices later in 1991.
Ministers reiterated the right of Iraq and Kuwait to their export quotas set in November 1989 at 3,140,000 bpd and 1,500,000 respectively [see pp. 37053; 37632].
An attempt by Iraq's Oil Minister Usumah Abd al-Razzaq Hummadi al-Hithi to persuade ministers to issue a formal request to the UN Security Council to lift the oil embargo on Iraq was rejected after being opposed by Saudi Arabia and Kuwait.
Kuwait's Oil Minister Hamud Abdullah al Raqaba disclosed that Kuwait had asked for an 800,000 bpd oil loan from the Gulf Co-Operation Council (GCC), worth US$14,000,000 a day, to help meet reconstruction costs incurred by the Iraqi invasion of August 1990 [see pp. 37631-41].
Election of new President
Ministers elected Venezuela's Energy and Mines Minister Celestino Armas as OPEC President to succeed Algeria's then Mines and Energy Minister, Sadek Boussena.
Subroto was re-appointed Secretary-General for a further three years after his re-appointment was initially opposed by Iraq.
INTERNATIONAL
ENVIRONMENT
Experts from 64 governments and 17 non-governmental organizations (NGOs) attended the second meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the 1985 Vienna Convention for the Protection of the Ozone Layer [see p. 34270]in Nairobi on June 17-19.
Delegates warned that ozone depletion had increased significantly since the signature of the Convention and the entry into force of the 1987 Montreal Protocol [see pp. 35678; 36412].
According to the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) there had been a 3 per cent decline in the ozone layer, at all except equatorial latitudes, during the last decade.
Arctic anti-pollution pact
A conference of the eight Arctic seaboard countries —Canada, Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway, Soviet Union, Sweden, and the United States —on June 13-14 in Rovaniemi, northern Finland, ended with a joint pledge to limit pollution, and calls for the creation of co-operative pollution monitoring programmes covering oil, radiation, heavy metals, organic contaminants, acidification and noise.
They also set forth joint plans to conserve wildlife and to cope with environmental emergencies such as oil spills in Arctic waters.
Germany, Poland, the United Kingdom and Arctic indigenous peoples' representatives attended the conference as observers.
US unwillingness to sign Antarctic mining ban
The April 1991 Madrid agreement on a 50-year Antarctic mining ban [see p. 38171], tentatively scheduled for formal agreement in June, was jeopardized when the US government, although supportive of the moratorium, proved unwilling to sign the agreement (a protocol to the Antarctic Treaty) without acceptable procedures to set the rules applicable after the end of the 50-year period.
The April meeting had decided that the mining ban would remain operative unless overturned by a vote of at least 75 per cent in favour.
At a round of talks in Madrid on June 22-23 the US side proposed that any country should have the right to resume mining if the signatory nations could not reach agreement within three years.
A further meeting was scheduled for September.
Tropical timber conference
On June 6 the International Tropical Timber Organization (ITTO), comprising 19 wood producing countries and 24 consumer countries, concluded its nine-day annual conference in the Ecuadorean capital, Quito, by reaffirming its goal of ensuring that all exports of tropical timber should come from sustainable sources by the year 2000 [see p. 38257].
However, it agreed to postpone until 1994 the negotiation of a new agreement between tropical timber producers and consumers.
A UN forestry expert estimated that 17,000,000 hectares of the world's rainforests had been destroyed in 1990 (as against 11,000,000 hectares in 1980).
There were 4,000 million hectares of forest left in the world, including 2,000 million hectares of rainforest, of which more than half was in Latin America.
INTERNATIONAL
WHO
Seventh AIDS conference
The seventh international conference on AIDS (acquired immune deficiency syndrome) held in Florence on June 16-21 was attended by 8,000 delegates.
James Chin, head of the AIDS surveillance and forecasting unit of the World Health Organization (WHO), estimated that by 1995 more than 15,000,000 adults worldwide would be infected with HIV (human immunodeficiency virus), while 500,000-1,000,000 people would die of AIDS each year in developing countries by the end of the decade.
Chin said on June 17 that by the year 2000 around 90 per cent of global AIDS cases would be among heterosexuals.
He predicted that while AIDS cases in Europe and North America, resulting from infections contracted in the early 1980s, would peak in the mid-1990s, there would be a dramatic escalation in AIDS cases in the next several decades in the Third World, especially in Asia, with India and Thailand showing sharp increases.
A report published on June 7, citing a recent US congressional study, had said that AIDS cases in Asia would exceed those in Africa by the year 2000.
Addressing the inaugural session on June 16, Italy's Health Minister Francesco De Lorenzo appealed to the United States not to jeopardize the 1992 international AIDS conference, to be held in Boston, by continuing its immigration ban on entry by HIV-infected individuals.
Members of the international AIDS pressure group Act-Up staged street protests against the US immigration restrictions.
INTERNATIONAL
ILO
The 78th International Labour Conference held in Geneva on June 5-26 adopted new international labour standards for workers in hotels and restaurants.
INTERNATIONAL
OECD
Ministers representing the 24-country Organization for Economic Co-Operation held their annual ministerial meeting under the chairmanship of the Netherlands Finance Minister Wim Kok in Paris on June 4-5.
INTERNATIONAL
COMECON: The nine-member Council for Mutual Economic Assistance (CMEA or COMECON) was formally dissolved following its 46th session in Budapest on June 28; a liquidation committee was given 90 days to oversee the organization's dissolution.