

AFRICA
SOUTH AFRICA
Repeal by Bush of CAAA
On July 10 United States President George Bush repealed the 1986 Comprehensive Anti-Apartheid Act (CAAA), thus lifting the bulk of US trade and investment sanctions against South Africa.
Making the announcement, Bush said that there had been "a profound transformation" in the apartheid system which he believed was "irreversible" .
He added that the USA would double its assistance to black South Africans to US$80,000,000 for housing, economic development and education programmes, and he called on the international community to support the process of political change.
The CAAA was passed by Congress, overriding a veto by then President Ronald Reagan [see pp. 34727-28].
It prohibited new corporate investment and loans to government agencies, forbade imports of iron, steel, uranium, coal, agricultural products and textiles, and banned air services between the two countries.
The CAAA provided for the removal of sanctions without a further congressional vote once five conditions were met by the South African government.
Bush said that all five of the conditions had already been met, and that the USA accepted the argument of the Pretoria regime that all "true" political prisoners had been released [see p. 38324].
President F. W. de Klerk welcomed the decision, praising Bush as "a man of courage" .
He hoped that it would lead to similar moves by other countries.
It provoked criticism, however, from the African National Congress (ANC) and anti-apartheid groups in South Africa and internationally.
ANC president Nelson Mandela was informed by Bush of his decision personally and tried to dissuade him.
Although the ANC at its national conference earlier in the month had agreed to the phased lifting of sanctions [see p. 38324], the organization considered that the step was premature since two of the conditions stipulated in the CAAA had not been fully met — first, the political violence in the country was not conducive to a "climate for free political activity" , and second, the ANC disputed the US view that all political prisoners had been released.
The ANC was especially concerned that the State Department had excluded 164 prisoners in the Bophuthatswana "homeland" when interpreting the legislation.
It believed that by accepting the South African government view that it had no jurisdiction there, the USA was giving implicit recognition to the nominally independent homeland of Bophuthatswana.
The ANC noted that the Gramm Amendment which prohibited US support for loans to South Africa from the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank was still in force, and that the arms embargo and non-federal sanctions were not affected by the lifting of the CAAA.
It was also encouraged that Bush had made clear his intention to maintain pressure on the South African regime through other means.
Measures by other countries
Finland had lifted sanctions and resumed commercial relations with South Africa on July 1.
On July 14 the Israeli Cabinet voted to revoke economic and cultural sanctions in place since 1987, but the ban on military contracts was not affected.
On July 15 the Soviet Chamber of Commerce and Industry signed an agreement on mining co-operation with the South African Chamber of Mines which it believed would "lay down the basis for future economic relations" .
On July 19 the Japanese Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs, Muneo Suzuki, said during the first official government visit to South Africa since 1969 that Japan was considering lifting economic sanctions, having lifted its ban on tourism and non-economic sanctions in June [see p. 38270].
In Denmark on July 19, the minority government failed to win support from opposition parties for the lifting of European Community (EC) sanctions, thus blocking a decision in principle agreed by EC foreign ministers in April [see p. 38132], since the lifting of EC sanctions required the approval of all 12 member states.
The Organization of African Unity (OAU) ad hoc committee on South Africa, meeting in Nigeria on July 29, agreed to maintain sanctions and all other forms of pressure until apartheid was abolished.
Diplomatic relations
Argentina announced that it would resume relations with Pretoria before the end of the year.
On July 18 the Czechoslovak government agreed to the establishment of embassy-level diplomatic ties with South Africa.
A similar decision was taken by Hungary on July 24, and the Polish Foreign Ministry indicated that Poland might follow suit.
Renewed sporting links
On July 9 the International Olympic Committee (IOC) meeting in Lausanne announced that South Africa would be invited to participate in the Barcelona Olympics in July 1992.
South Africa's readmission after 21 years followed a letter from the IOC to Sam Ramsamy, the new president of the South African Olympic Committee and former leading campaigner for the isolation of South African sport, setting out conditions to break down racial barriers in sport.
South Africa faced suspension, however, if Ramsamy's committee was not satisfied that facilities were indeed being opened to all.
On July 10, the International Cricket Council meeting in London re-elected the United Cricket Board of South Africa to full membership after 21 years of exclusion.
The first test match in South Africa was expected to be against India, which proposed South Africa's membership.
South Africa was also readmitted to the Davis Cup when the International Tennis Federation met on July 12.
Inkatha funding scandal
Revelations in the press in July about covert police funding of Inkatha, the Zulu-based organization led by Chief Mangosuthu Buthelezi, led to a crisis in the National Party government, dubbed in the media "Inkathagate" .
As the ANC renewed its calls for a transitional government, President F. W. de Klerk was forced to make Cabinet changes in an attempt to restore credibility to his government.
The press disclosures, which began on July 19, centred on the funding by the South African Police (SAP) of two Inkatha rallies, held in November 1989 and March 1990.
It was revealed that the SAP provided R100,000 (US$25,000) for the first meeting and R150,000 ($40,000) for the second.
The second rally was an attempt to help Inkatha counter the impact of the mass meetings being held by the ANC following its unbanning and the release of Nelson Mandela in February 1990 [see pp. 37232-34].
One of the documents leaked to the press was a memorandum written by Maj. Louis Botha of the Durban security police in which he set out both his and Buthelezi's concerns about the political impact of the ANC.
Noting that Buthelezi's own organization's membership was falling, and his anxiety about the growing popularity of the ANC, Maj. Botha warned that Buthelezi could "seriously consider throwing in his lot with the ANC with far-reaching implications for Natal and the RSA [Republic of South Africa]" .
The memorandum went on to discuss a rally to be held in Durban in March 1990 at which Buthelezi would urge the lifting of sanctions and support President De Klerk.
Maj. Botha believed that it was of "cardinal importance" that the rally should prove a success and that a "donation" should be made to Inkatha to finance it.
Also on July 19 Adriaan Vlok, then Minister of Law and Order, admitted that the police had provided covert funding to Inkatha but described it as "non-political" .
Vlok said that the money had come from a fund established to combat international sanctions.
He argued that support for Inkatha, which had consistently opposed sanctions, was thus "non-party political" .
Similar admissions were made by Foreign Minister Roelof "Pik" Botha who had in June vehemently denied accusations that the government was funding Inkatha.
He said that he had authorized the payments which were "strictly within the mandate to combat sanctions" .
He disputed the claim that the funding in any way promoted Inkatha.
He did not feel that he needed to apologize, and said that if similar circumstances arose he would act in the same way.
Botha also admitted that pro-South African parties had received funds in the November 1989 elections in Namibia [see pp. 37031-32].
Gerrit Viljoen, Minister of Constitutional Development and the government's chief negotiator in talks with the ANC, led a high-ranking National Party delegation at an Inkatha conference on July 20.
He dismissed the sums of money paid to Inkatha as "insignificant" compared with the "vast sums of money" given to the ANC by foreign organizations and governments.
Vlok also conceded, on July 21, that the SAP had provided the United Workers Union (UWUSA), the trade union wing of Inkatha, with as much as R1,500,000.
He said that the money had been given to counter "intimidation and related violence on the labour front" .
Security police documents in the hands of the press suggested that as well as funding the union, the police collaborated with Inkatha in the management and control of the union.
The foundation of UWUSA in May 1986, six months after the launch of the pro-ANC Congress of South African Trade Unions (COSATU), was followed by a wave of shopfloor violence and the killing of several COSATU activists.
Although Vlok insisted that "every cent" of the money given to UWUSA could be accounted for, it was later acknowledged that the union had not kept financial records.
The ministers denied that de Klerk knew about the payments, arguing that prodecures at the time had not required him to know.
However, a statement by the Auditor General suggested that both the President and the Finance Minister would have had to sign the final audit report of the government fund for "secret services" which was budgeted at R380,000,000 for the current year.
In spite of the government admissions, Buthelezi denied knowledge of any payments.
However, another memorandum obtained by the press indicated that Buthelezi at least knew of the financing of the rally in November 1989.
The document, written at the time, quoted Maj. Botha as saying that the"Chief Minister was very emotional when a copy of the receipt was handed over to him.
He couldn't thank me enough".
On July 23 Buthelezi's personal assistant, Zakhele Khumalo, resigned.
In a written statement, Khumalo said that he had organized the transfer of the covert funds, claiming that he had deliberately kept the source of the funding from Buthelezi because "I knew he would have rejected the proposal out of hand" .
The statement also announced that Inkatha would refund R<T250,000 to the government.
On July 28, Maj. Botha issued a statement in which he said he had not spoken to the Inkatha leader about the funding, but to his assistant, Khumalo.
He said that he had presumed that Khumalo was speaking on behalf of Buthelezi, but realized that he was incorrect.
Reacting to Maj. Botha's statement anti-apartheid groups said they believed that he had succumbed to government pressure to protect Buthelezi.
Continuing allegations of dirty tricks
According to the ANC and monitoring groups, the disclosures appeared to substantiate months of allegations that the security forces were involved in the violence in the black townships [see pp. 38270-71].
As the funding scandal broke, there were fresh allegations of police and army involvement in the conflict between supporters of Inkatha and the ANC.
Apart from continuing reports of the police failing to intervene during attacks by Inkatha supporters on township residents, more sinister claims were made.
A former member of the South African Defence Force (SADF), Sgt. Felix Ndimene, said that he had served in a special forces unit which had carried out the massacre in September 1990 of 26 passengers in a Johannesburg-Soweto train [see p. 37698], an incident which had provoked weeks of violence in the Johannesburg region between ANC and Inkatha supporters.
Ndimene said that black commandos, recruited in Mozambique, Angola and Zaïre, were instructed to kill the commuters as part of the war against the ANC.
Calls for interim government
Responding to the disclosures, the ANC said that the government's admission that it had funded Inkatha to pursue anti-ANC activities threatened the peace process.
It believed that the revelations about the SADF were "inextricably linked" to the financing of Inkatha.
Nelson Mandela, the newly elected ANC president [see p. 38324], said that talks with the government could not continue while the government conducted "a double strategy of talking peace but waging war" against the ANC.
In a statement on July 22, the organization renewed its call for an interim government, first made in the Harare Declaration of August 1989 [see p. 36837].
The government, the statement said, did not have the confidence of the people of South Africa.
The original thinking behind the demand for an interim administration, namely that the National Party would otherwise use its power to influence the political process, had proved correct.
The ANC demanded that Vlok and Gen. Magnus Malan, as Defence Minister responsible for the SADF, should be dismissed.
It also sought (i) a multiparty commission of inquiry to investigate the full extent of government involvement in the violence and in the secret funding of political activities;(ii) the public dismantling of all special forces of the SADF and SAP, including those composed of foreign mercenaries;(iii) immunity from prosecution and protection to be given to state employees who gave evidence about covert operations;(iv) the trial of all police officers and SADF personnel identified by past commissions as culpable for perpetrating violence.
The ANC's statement also claimed that the disclosures demonstrated that the lifting of economic sanctions [see p. 38318]had been premature.
Cabinet changes
On July 29 de Klerk announced a Cabinet reshuffle in which Vlok and Malan were demoted, although he later expressed his confidence in them both.
Vlok was appointed the Minister of Correctional Services and of Budget; he was succeeded as Minister of Law and Order by Hernus Kriel, a conservative.
Malan, Minister of Defence for 11 years, was reassigned to the Ministry of Housing and Works and also of Water and Forest Affairs, replacing Gert J. Kotze in the latter post with effect from Oct. 1; the Defence portfolio was taken by his former deputy, Roelf Meyer, who was from the left of the National Party.
Three other liberals were given Cabinet positions.
Leon Wessels became the Minister of Planning, Provincial and Housing Affairs and of Local Government, replacing Kriel.
Sam de Beer took over from Stoffel van der Merwe as Minister of National Education.
Van der Merwe, also a liberal, was given the newly created job of preparing the National Party for the forthcoming constitutional negotiations.
Piet Marais became Administration Minister and Education and Culture Minister (the latter with effect from Oct. 1).
The changes were effective from Aug. 30.
Undertaking to end secret funding
At a press conference on July 30, de Klerk undertook to end the secret funding of political organizations.
A document released at the conference revealed that security forces had trained 150 Inkatha members, but claimed that the operation had ended in 1989.
It also stated that public money had been used to fund two other black organizations, the Federal Independent Association (FIDA), a conservative group strongly opposed to sanctions, and the Eagles, which anti-apartheid activists alleged was responsible for vigilante actions in the townships.
The State President also made a commitment to review covert funding operations.
Until the review was completed, a civilian advisory committee would assist him in controlling existing secret projects and would decide which should continue.
He reiterated his position that he had not been aware of the clandestine funding.
Although denying the allegations that either the government or the SADF were involved in the instigation or promotion of township violence, he conceded the possibility that individuals in the security forces might have acted unlawfully.
He said "relentless action" would be taken against them.
He also announced the investigation of such allegations by a commission of inquiry, the composition of which would be agreed by the main political organizations.
On the issue of a transitional government, De Klerk said that he had an open mind on arrangements to ensure fair government until full democracy was achieved.
INTERNATIONAL
US — SOVIET SUMMIT
The Presidents of the Soviet Union and the United States, George Bush and Mikhail Gorbachev, held their third summit meeting in Moscow on July 30-31.
The meeting, originally scheduled for Feb. 11-13 [see p. 37945], was jointly announced by Bush and Gorbachev on July 17 when they met in London during a brief visit by Gorbachev who had been invited to meet assembled heads of the Group of Seven (G-7) countries [see pp. 38321-22].
Despite acknowledged differences between the two sides over the pace of Soviet economic reform and policy towards the Baltic republics, the meeting was hailed by a Soviet government spokesman as "an outstanding international event" .
The most significant outcome of the summit was the signing of the Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty (START) which committed each side to reduce its nuclear weapons by 30 per cent.
Other concrete results of the summit were the granting by the USA to the Soviet Union of most favoured nation (MFN) status, and the signing of five bilateral agreements on the prevention and management of industrial accidents and natural disasters, on technical co-operation in the economic sphere, on civil aviation safety, on medical supplies and on housing construction.
The two sides held wide-ranging talks on international and regional issues and announced that "the United States and the Soviet Union, acting as co-sponsors, will work to convene in October a [Middle East]peace conference" [see p. 38358].
While in Moscow Bush also addressed a meeting of the Moscow State Institute for International Relations and held separate talks with the President of the Russian Federation, Boris Yeltsin and the Kazakh President, Nursultan Nazarbayev.
On Aug. 1 Bush visited Kiev where he addressed a session of the Ukrainian parliament.
Background to summit
In Washington on July 10-14 a Soviet delegation led by the Soviet Foreign Minister, Aleksandr Bessmertnykh, met high-ranking US officials including the US Secretary of State, James Baker.
Their intensive talks produced hints that the two sides could resolve remaining differences over START in time for a US-Soviet summer summit.
Reports indicated that the arrival of the Soviet delegation had been prompted by an urgent message, conveyed on July 6, from Bush to Gorbachev asking the Soviet President to "energize" Soviet arms negotiators in order to clear the way for an early summit.
Assessing the outcome of the Washington talks on July 14, Baker said that the two sides had made "outstanding" progress in clearing up three principal areas of disagreement [see p. 38314].
It was understood, however, that crucial differences still remained on the question of defining new missile types permitted under START: in particular the question of "throw-weight" or payload as determining a missile as a new type.
According to the Washington Post of July 18, the final breakthrough leading to the announcement of a summit later that month came after US officials agreed to a Soviet proposal on the definition of "throw-weight" .
In his welcoming address at the Kremlin in July 30, Gorbachev stressed that "we are starting to realize that we need each other" .
But, at a state banquet later that evening, Gorbachev stressed that "we expect reciprocity and count on America's continued support and understanding" .
Describing the summit as "historically important" , Bush praised Gorbachev for "his unusual insight and boldness in replacing the old orthodoxy with glasnost and perestroika" .
He acknowledged, however, that "we do have differences" concerning "Cuba, the future of the Baltic republics and the territories that Japan calls the Northern Territories" (the Kurile islands).
Signing of START treaty
On July 31 the two leaders signed the START treaty, the product of almost 10 years of continuous negotiation.
Describing the treaty as "an event of global significance" , Gorbachev said that it would be "absurd" for the USA and the Soviet Union to reduce their nuclear arsenals to zero while nuclear-armed "renegades" moved in the opposite direction.
Summarizing the "central idea" underlying START, Bush said that "stabilizing reductions in our strategic nuclear forces reduces the risk of war" .
START committed both sides to the following provisions:
— cutting Soviet strategic nuclear weapons by more than 35 per cent, from about 11,000 warheads to 7,000;
— cutting US strategic weapons by about 25 per cent, from about 12,000 war-heads to 9,000;
— cutting "accountable" warheads on strategic nuclear weapons by both sides to 6,000;
— undercounting bombs and missiles on grounds that they took 10 to 20 times longer to reach their destination than ballistic missiles;
— imposing a limit of 1,540 warheads, out of the total of 6,000 "accountable" war-heads, on 154 heavy intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs), entailing a halving of the Soviet SS-18 arsenal (the US possessing no heavy ICBMs);
— limiting to 1,600 strategic nuclear delivery vehicles, ballistic missiles (as opposed to warheads) and bombers;
— limiting to 4,900 ballistic missile warheads;
— limiting to 1,100 warheads on deployed mobile ICBMs;
— accepting short-notice and continuous monitoring of mobile ICBM production;
— ceasing transfer of strategic weapons to third countries without affecting existing arrangements eg. US supply to the United Kingdom;
— enforcing the treaty for 15 years, renewable for successive five-year periods;
— accepting that arsenal limits imposed did not apply to sea-launched cruise missiles (SLCMs) because of the difficulty of verification;
— undertaking annual declarations on long-range SLCMs for the next five years with each side limiting its SLCMs to 880.
The signing of START came amidst embarrassing revelations from US officials who claimed that the Soviet Union had attempted to circumvent the 1987 Intermediate Nuclear Forces (INF) treaty by stationing SS-23 missiles in three Warsaw Pact countries.
Concessions on bilateral trade
On July 30 Bush announced a "new beginning" in US-Soviet relations by promising trade concessions, most notably the granting of MFN status to the Soviet Union which was expected to boost bilateral trade currently estimated at only US$5,000 million annually.
Speaking to a gathering at the Moscow State Institute for International Relations, Bush stressed, however, that the Soviet Union's full membership in the world economic community depended on a programme of political reform including a commitment to freedom for the Baltic states, a return of the four Kurile islands to Japan, an end to Soviet military aid to Cuba and deeper cuts in defence expenditure.
Reports indicated that the USA had sharply criticized the Soviet Union's July 23 application for full membership of the International Monetary Fund (IMF), claiming that the offer of "special association" with the IMF, offered at the recent G-7 summit [see p. 38322]was sufficient pending a comprehensive programme of economic liberalization.
Responding to Bush's initiative, Gorbachev said during a banquet speech on July 31 that "a more determined reciprocal movement is needed" , in particular, the lifting of restrictions applied through the 17-member Co-ordinating Committee for Multilateral Export Controls (COCOM) on the transfer of technology from the West to the Soviet Union.
Joint concluding press conference
At their joint press conference on July 31 the two leaders agreed that substantial progress had been made in developing closer US-Soviet relations.
Gorbachev disclosed that "for the first time in recent years we laid quite a strong stress on what our economic relations should be like" , although he failed to provide details on the precise content of the talks.
Expressing satisfaction at the signing of START, Gorbachev said that "mechanisms" would shortly be established to discuss how to proceed further.
For his part, Bush said that the participation of the Soviet Union in the IMF and the World Bank on the basis of the special status granted to it at the G-7 meeting was "the most important thing that the Soviet Union could do right now" .
The two sides agreed to a joint statement on Yugoslavia calling for "peace negotiations and constructive dialogue" .
US stance on Baltic republics
In a speech widely considered by observers to represent a delicate balancing act regarding the Soviet centre and the republics, Bush told members of the Ukrainian parliament on Aug. 1 that the USA would not support "suicidal nationalism" .
The message, which apparently tempered earlier calls for a more radical approach to the Baltic republics was, however, received differently by Ukrainian leaders who highlighted the significance of Bush's visit, the first undertaken by a US leader on a state visit.
The deputy head of the Ukrainian parliament, Ivan Pliusch, said that "the visit shows, intentionally or not, that President Bush acknowledges…the Ukrainian people's struggle for independence" .
Meanwhile, the killing of six Lithuanian border officials at Medininkai on July 31 [see p. 38350]led to renewed speculation about underlying tensions in US-Soviet relations.
INTERNATIONAL
G-7 SUMMIT
Heads of government of the Group of Seven (G-7) Western industrialized countries held their 17th annual economic summit in London on July 15-17 [for 1990 summit see p. 37629].
The summit's historic significance, anticipated in a formal invitation by G-7 leaders to Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev [see p. 38272], was underlined by a series of unprecedented post-summit meetings between G-7 leaders and Gorbachev on July 17-19.
Hosted by the United Kingdom Prime Minister, John Major, the summit was attended by the Italian Prime Minister, Giulio Andreotti; the United States President, George Bush; the Japanese Prime Minister, Toshiki Kaifu; the German Chancellor, Helmut Kohl; the French President, François Mitterrand; and the Canadian Prime Minister, Brian Mulroney.
The European Communities (EC) were represented by European Commission President Jacques Delors and by the current President of the EC Council of Ministers, Ruud Lubbers (the Prime Minister of the Netherlands).
Discussions were dominated by the question of Western assistance to the Soviet Union.
Fundamental differences were reported between those G-7 states willing to consider some financial assistance in the near future, especially Germany, and those, notably the USA and Japan, which opposed any substantial financial aid.
The depth of Japanese opposition was reportedly rooted in its claim to four islands in the Kurile chain seized by the Soviet Union at the end of the Second World War [see also pp. 38148; 38342].
Reports also indicated continuing differences over interest rates [see pp. 37977-78; 38170; 38314]following a rise in inflation over the last year in six of the G-7 countries.
However, in an optimistic assessment following a G-7 Finance Ministers' meeting on July 15, the US Treasury Secretary, Nicholas Brady, said that the recent fall in the cost of borrowing in the UK [see p. 38355]and Japan indicated that the aim of lower interest rates was beginning to be achieved.
In a keynote address on July 15, Major called on G-7 leaders to "build a world partnership and strengthen international order" by adopting a five-point plan covering global arms control, a strengthened UN, international free trade, support for the democratic movements in eastern Europe and the Soviet Union, and increased trade with these countries.
G-7 political statement
In a political communiqué issued at the end of the first full day of talks on July 16, G-7 leaders undertook to revitalize the United Nations by rendering it "stronger…and more effective" .
They also recommended "the designation of a high-level official, answerable only to the UN Secretary-General" , to co-ordinate relief efforts for "major disasters" .
Reports indicated that the Kurdish crisis, and the scale of the relief programme resulting from it, had prompted G-7 leaders to press for clearer guidelines sanctioning UN intervention, which would include the right to cross international borders when there was evidence of human rights violations.
On Iraq, G-7 leaders agreed to "maintain sanctions…until all the relevant [UN]resolutions…have been implemented in full and the people of Iraq…can live without fear of intimidation and repression" .
The declaration supported "the concept of a [Middle East]peace conference" .
It called for an end to the Arab boycott of Israel, and for Israel to end the "policy of settlement in the Occupied Territories" .
On South Africa, the communiqué welcomed the dismantling of apartheid but drew attention to "mounting social problems and declining economic prospects for the majority of the population" .
Reports said that Canada, one of the strongest advocates of sanctions, had resisted US and UK pressure to recommend a full resumption of international lending to South Africa.
G-7 leaders agreed that "it was for the people of Yugoslavia to decide on their future" and noted that "military force and bloodshed cannot lead to a lasting settlement" .
Declaration on controlling arms trade
In a separate statement on arms control issued on July 16, G-7 leaders called for a "universal register of arms transfers under, the auspices of the UN" and greater "transparency" of the international trade in conventional arms.
Reports said that a Japanese- and Canadian-backed proposal to establish a G-7 working group to follow up the implementation of the latest arms control proposals was opposed by France which was against any move to grant the G-7 a permanent institutional role.
Summit economic declaration
In their economic declaration issued on July 17, G-7 leaders noted "increasing signs of economic recovery" and undertook to pursue a programme of "sustained recovery and price stability" .
Ignoring reported differences over interest rates, the statement called for a "medium-term strategy" containing "inflationary expectations" and creating "the conditions for sustainable growth and new jobs" .
In what was regarded by observers as a decisive gesture, G-7 leaders also agreed to "intervene with one another" to ensure "the successful conclusion of the Uruguay Round [of General Agreement on Trade and Tariffs (GATT) talks]…before the end of 1991" .
Some reports suggested that the communiqué concealed sharp differences between G-7 leaders over trade policy, with European leaders stressing disagreements in areas relating to intellectual property and financial services as opposed to US and Canadian grievances over the issue of European farm subsidies [see pp. 37796; 37930].
At a post-summit press conference on July 17, however, Major said that he would convene an emergency G-7 summit "if it looks as if the GATT talks will fail" .
With regard to debt, the communiqué said that "the poorest, most indebted countries need very special terms" and entrusted the "Paris Club" (an informal grouping of 17 Western creditor countries) to determine measures on a case-by-case basis.
A UK-backed debt plan based on the so-called Trinidad terms agreed at a Commonwealth finance ministers' meeting in Trinidad in September 1990, enabling the poorest debtor countries to have two-thirds of their debt written off and the remainder rescheduled over 25 years, failed to win support after opposition from Japan and the USA.
Regarding the environment, G-7 leaders undertook to achieve "an effective framework convention on climate change, containing appropriate commitments" .
A move by six of the G-7 countries to set targets controlling greenhouse gas emissions was reportedly opposed by the USA, which challenged the claim that carbon dioxide emissions contributed to global warming.
G-7 leaders agreed to support "moves towards the political and economic transformation in the Soviet Union" and expressed their readiness "to assist the integration of the Soviet Union into the world economy" .
Endorsement of Soviet aid package
After a meeting with Gorbachev in London on July 17, G-7 leaders approved a programme of assistance designed to help "the Soviet Union become a full member of the world economy" .
Outlining the aid package at a press conference on July 17, Major said that it offered the Soviet Union:(i) special association with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and World Bank [see p. 38314];(ii) increased co-operation with international bodies including the IMF, the World Bank, the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) and the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD);(iii) increased technical assistance;(iv) promotion of Soviet trade, particularly with eastern Europe;(v) follow-up reports by the chairs of G-7 summits in 1991 and 1992 (Major and Kohl respectively); and (vi) follow-up visits to the Soviet Union by G-7 Finance Ministers.
Responding to the offer at a joint press conference with Major on July 17, Gorbachev said that "the ice has started moving" and, in an oblique reference to plans for more regular meetings between Soviet and G-7 officials, claimed that "this is now a seven plus one" .
Commenting on the absence of any immediate offer of large-scale Western financial assistance, Gorbachev said that "we shall extricate ourselves from our difficulties, whether we have assistance or not" .
G-7 leaders had reportedly reacted frostily to a pre-summit message from Gorbachev outlining a programme of reform, including minor privatization and the conversion of military plants to peaceful commercial use, in return for large-scale financial assistance involving debt relief and Western investment.
Nevertheless, it was understood that G-7 leaders had been deeply divided over the shape of the final aid package approved for the Soviet Union.
In a series of press conferences on July 17, European G-7 leaders complained that the USA and Japan had blocked moves to facilitate large-scale financial assistance to the Soviet Union by refusing to increase the Soviet Union's borrowing limit from the EBRD [see also p. 38314]or to endorse full Soviet membership of the IMF.
On July 25 Brady was quoted as saying that the Soviet Union's application for full membership of the IMF, reported on July 23, was "counter-productive" .
AFRICA
ETHIOPIA
Approval of charter
A "conference for peace and democracy" to discuss the formation of a "broad-based transitional government" was organized by the Ethiopian People's Revolutionary Democratic Front (EPRDF) in Addis Ababa on July 1-5.
Hundreds of delegates from around 25 political groups amended a charter presented by the EPRDF, and as a first step towards its implementation elected an 87-member Council of Representatives.
The charter was to remain in force until a general election (scheduled for 1993).
It decreed that a council of representatives would elect a president and would be responsible for drafting a constitution.
The president (who would also chair the Council of Ministers), the vice-president, the prime minister, and the secretary and vice-chairman of the council of ministers were to be elected from different ethnic backgrounds and political groups.
The absence of serious discord at the conference raised hopes for Ethiopia's political future.
On July 3 delegates amended sections of the charter dealing with respect for the rights of individuals and of nationalities, workers' rights, access to the mass media, and the independence of the judiciary.
On July 4 the conference approved a proposal for a referendum in Eritrea in 1993, with the port of Assab meanwhile being declared a free port.
Among groups not attending the conference were Eritrean groups other than the Eritrean People's Liberation Front (EPLF — which attended with observer status) and Afar groups other than the Afar Liberation Front (ALF).
In his opening address, EPRDF leader and acting head of state Meles Zenawi explained that "peaceful and democratic forces" which had failed to gain accreditation would not be excluded from future debate.
On July 3 he told the conference that individual and group rights were inseparable.
Discounting fears of secessionism he said: "If we clean our room, then no one will want to leave since the room is not dirty." 
Council of Representatives — Government appointments
In the 87-member Council of Representatives elected on July 5, EPRDF members held 32 seats (10 of these going to the Tigray People's Liberation Front — TPLF).
The best-represented ethnic group were the Oromos; the Oromo Liberation Front (OLF) held 12 seats and 16 went to four other Oromo organizations.
On July 17 all five Oromo groups signed an agreement for unity and co-operation among themselves.
The Council of Representatives elected Meles as President on July 21.
On July 24 Fekadu Gedamu (described as a member of the Gurage nation) was elected Vice-president.
EPRDF vice-chairman and acting Prime Minister Tamirat Laynie (previously incorrectly described as EPLF vice-chairman) was elected Prime Minister on July 29 (apparently not a contravention of the charter as the EPRDF was composed of various organizations).
Relief operations — Repatriation of non-Eritreans
The UN High Commissioner for Refugees Sadoko Ogata visited Ethiopia on July 21-28.
She released a statement calling for the international community to make good a US$70,000,000 shortfall in the US$376,000,000 of aid planned for victims of famine and war in the Horn of Africa.
The provisional government's relief and rehabilitation commissioner Yilma Kasaye told her that 7,000,000 Ethiopians were affected by drought and famine.
Over 250,000 former government soldiers awaited rehabilitation and 1,500,000 people had been displaced by the war.
The EPLF denied reports that former government soldiers in Eritrea had been mistreated and, along with Amharas and Tigrayans resident in Eritrea for many years, had been forcibly expelled.
In Asmara on July 27 EPLF secretary-general Issaias Afewerki (now described as secretary-general of the provisional government of Eritrea) discussed relief operations with UN Assistant Secretary-General James Jonah.
A statement by the provisional government of Eritrea on Aug. 1 said that over 82,000 prisoners of war and former government officials, and over 43,000 of their relatives, had been repatriated from Eritrea; it said that in view of severe food shortages it had been impossible to feed them.
AFRICA
SOMALIA
Efforts towards national reconciliation
The United Somali Congress (USC), which had taken control of the capital, Mogadishu, when former president Siyad Barre's regime collapsed in January 1991 [see pp. 37946-47], held its third congress on July 4-5.
Gen. Mohammed Farah Aydid was elected party chairman and the new central committee was elected.
It was reported that internal differences had been resolved.
On July 20, the central committee unanimously decided that the Koran would be the basis of the USC's constitution.
The latest round of reconciliation talks, held in Djibouti on July 15-21, was attended by members of six Somali groups and by representatives of a number of governments in the region.
The Somali National Movement (SNM), which in May had announced the formation of a secessionist Republic of Somaliland [see pp. 38182-83], again declined to attend.
The latest groups to join the talks were the Somali Democratic Alliance (SDA) and the United Somali Front (USF)— reported to represent, respectively, the northern Gadabursi and Issa groups.
Also present were the four groups which had taken part in the June talks (the USC, the SDM, the SSDF and the SPM — see p. 38277).
On July 21 the six groups formally agreed on a continued ceasefire and on maintaining opposition to forces of former President Siyad Barre in the south, and on respect for "coexistence and national unity" .
The constitution in force from 1961 to October 1969 (when Siyad Barre seized power) was readopted.
(On July 24, however, the USC and SDM commands in the Bay, Bakool, and Gedo regions accused the two Darod groups, the SSDF and the SPM, of launching attacks against them with help from Siyad Barre loyalists.)
Confirmation of Mahdi Mohammed as President
The Djibouiti talks ended with an endorsement of Ali Mahdi Mohammed, interim President since January, to hold office for two years.
The USC central committee subsequently gave him its backing (as reported on Aug. 7) and he was formally sworn in on Aug. 18 in Mogadishu.
The posts of the two Vice-presidents, the Prime Minister and the chairman and vice-chairman of the People's Assembly were to be allocated among various of the six groups.
According to Radio France Internationale on July 21, of the 123 seats in the People's Assembly "one-third would be reserved for northerners" .
Somaliland Republic
On July 5 the Sudanese news agency, Suna, reported that President of the secessionist republic, Abdel-Rahman Ahmed Ali, had said he was in daily contact with the USC and that "we believe that the Somali nation is one" .
He had said in an interview that after 1960 "the southerners had assumed exclusive power…with 94 per cent of the development allocations going to the south and 6 per cent to the north" .
Ahmed Ali denied on July 23, in an interview with BBC radio, a claim made by the Sudanese ambassador to Djibouti four days earlier that the SNM had revoked the secession in an agreement signed with the Sudanese government.
On July 24 the Djibouti government rejected suggestions by Ahmed Ali that it sought territorial expansion at the expense of Somaliland.
Also on July 24, an SNM delegation arrived in Mogadishu for talks with the USC.
The delegation's leader, Sulayman Gulayman Gal, told a reporter that "there was hope that a nation would emerge from the Somali people" and that the SNM was interested in forming a united front against forces loyal to Siyad Barre.
AFRICA
SUDAN
Diplomatic activity by government and Garang
On July 2 a Revolutionary Command Council (RCC) member Col. Mohammed al-Amin Khalifah, while on a visit to Addis Ababa, discussed with United States Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs Herman Cohen a peace initiative sponsored by the Organization of African Unity (OAU) and launched in June.
Khalifah was reported by the official media also to have briefed Cohen on "the application of federal rule in all the various states" .
On July 22 Khalifah told foreign journalists in Khartoum that over 800 members of the rebel Sudanese People's Liberation Army (SPLA) had recently surrendered, and that negotiations with the SPLA were imminent.
Agreement already existed, he said, on "the need for national unity, the prevalence of freedoms and the direct election of the president" .
Intensified diplomatic activity from mid-June around the possibility of peace negotiations had not inspired much optimistic comment.
On June 13 Cohen was reported to have proposed a partial withdrawal of rebel forces from the south and the opening of land routes to the town of Juba.
On June 14 SPLA leader Col. John Garang met with President Babangida of Nigeria, the new OAU chair.
Garang had called for a constitutional conference, involving all political parties.
Later in June Garang met with US State Department officials in Washington and on June 26-28 he spoke with United Kingdom government and relief agency officials in London.
According to Africa Confidential of July 12, US officials, while pessimistic about the possibility for a breakthrough, had suggested interim negotiations, possibly under OAU auspices, to allow for a military standoff in the south and the passage of relief supplies.
Government's defence of human rights record
During celebrations to mark the anniversary of the 1989 coup which brought the current Sudanese regime to power, the Libyan leader Col. Moamer al-Kadhafi on July 1 took part in the demolition of the infamous Kobar prison in Khartoum, the capital.
The prison's 1,300 inmates — many of them political detainees — were reported to have been released.
On July 3 Sudan Radio denied a report in June by the human rights organization Amnesty International to the effect that at least 60 political prisoners remained in custody [for April amnesty see p. 38136].
On July 26 the Sudanese government presented a report to a meeting of the UN Human Rights Committee in Geneva.
According to Le Monde of July 25, the three-page document was regarded by committee members as insufficiently detailed.
The Sudanese delegation explained to the committee the application in Sudan of sharia (Islamic) law.
AFRICA
KENYA
Moves against opposition
Three leading opposition figures were prevented from leaving Kenya in the first week of July to attend a human rights conference in London.
Former Vice-President Oginga Odinga was forced to cancel his trip after being told that his passport had been withdrawn; former member of parliament Martin Shikuku and trade unionist Dennis Akumu were both stopped by security officers at Nairobi airport.
Odinga was represented at the conference by lawyer James Orengo, whose own passport was withdrawn on his return.
The moves were linked by observers to sensitivity on the part of the authorities at the approach of the anniversary of the anti-government riots of July 1990 [see p. 37603].
Earlier, on June 30 and July 1, the universities at Nairobi and Eldoret had been closed following confrontations between students and police.
On July 11 a Nairobi court sentenced four men to seven years' imprisonment for sedition.
The four, including former MP George Anyona, had been charged with holding a seditious meeting with intent to overthrow the government.
Anyona immediately announced his intention of setting up an opposition party.
The High Court on July 17 rejected Odinga's appeal against the government's refusal to allow him to register his National Democratic Party, formed in February as a challenge to the 1982 constitutional amendment which made Kenya a one-party state [see p. 38182].
The human rights organization Africa Watch on July 30 published a highly critical report on Kenya, stating that the government was continuing to use torture, to manipulate the judiciary and to harass supporters of democracy.
The report also criticized the Kenyan authorities for violent action against squatters and against nomadic Somali communities in north-east Kenya.
Twenty-nine teenage boys were charged on July 29 with the manslaughter of 19 schoolgirls at St Kizito mixed secondary school in Meru on the night of July 13-14.
The boys pleaded not guilty.
AFRICA
ZAIRE
National conference
A national constitutional conference opened in Kinshasa on July 31 but was immediately suspended for one week after opposition delegates complained that rural areas were inadequately represented.
Opposition parties, clearly suspicious that the conference had been packed with supporters of President Mobutu Sese Seko, hoped that the postponement would allow time for delegates to arrive from rural areas.
The status of the conference remained unclear.
Mobutu had agreed in April to opposition demands for the holding of a conference to discuss a new constitution and the holding of multiparty elections [see p. 38133], but the conference had been repeatedly postponed and the government had decreed on July 15 that it would not be sovereign on constitutional matters.
Following this decree, a meeting of representatives of 130 opposition parties said that they would not participate in the conference unless it had sovereign powers.
The parties formed themselves into a "Sacred Union" to present a united front against the government.
On July 22, Mobutu announced the appointment of one of his main opponents, Etienne Tshisekedi wa Mulumba, leader of the Union for Democracy and Social Progress, as Prime Minister of a government of national unity.
After demonstrations outside his home and threats to his life, Tshisekedi refused the position, denying that he had agreed to take it at a secret meeting with the President.
Following the announcement that Mobutu had re-appointed the outgoing Prime Minister, Mulumba Lukoji, the opposition announced that it would, after all, take part in the national conference.
At a rally held by the Sacred Union on July 30, attended by 80,000 people, Tshisekedi said that the opposition would call for the resignation of the government, the dissolution of parliament and of the ruling Popular Movement of the Revolution, the dismissal of Mobutu and the installation of a transitional government.
He further said that Mobutu had lost the people's confidence and could be imprisoned if he remained in the country.
Death of Foreign Minister
Foreign Affairs Minister Inonga Lokonga L'Omé died on June 19 in South Africa, where he had been flown after suffering a stroke.
Ipoto Eyebu-Bakand"Asi, hitherto ambassador to Poland, was appointed his successor on July 15.
AFRICA
ANGOLA
Appointment of prime minister
Fernando José França Van-Dúnem, hitherto Planning Minister, was appointed on July 19 as Angola's first Prime Minister since 1977, the post having been restored in March.
Rafael Caseiro, hitherto Van-Dúnem's deputy, was given the Planning Portfolio.
In addition to these appointments President José Eduardo dos Santos, who remained head of government, made six other government changes.
AFRICA
NAMIBIA
South African anti-SWAPO funding
The South African government admitted on July 25 that it had spent R100,000,000 in an attempt to prevent the victory of the South West African People's Organization (SWAPO) in pre-independence elections in Namibia in November 1989 [see pp. 37031-32].
The revelations came in the wake of the "Inkathagate" funding scandal in South Africa [see pp. 38318-19].
Foreign Minister Roelof "Pik" Botha said that the funds had been approved by the Cabinet because "we were against SWAPO" .
He said that seven political parties were covertly assisted, but insisted that the funding operations "never subverted the independence of Namibia" .
The Foreign Minister's admissions were made as Maj. Nico Basson, a former South African Defence Force (SADF) intelligence officer, gave details of his involvement in the Namibian operation.
Basson, who in June had made allegations about SADF involvement in violence in South African townships [see pp. 38270-71], said that he was part of an operation to help the Democratic Turnhalle Alliance (DTA) win the election partly by discrediting SWAPO.
He said that the South African government provided US$22,800,000 of the DTA's $25,600,000 election budget as well as supplying massive logistical support.
The DTA admitted that it received money from the South African government but argued that there was nothing wrong with obtaining money from abroad, just as SWAPO had done.
A similar statement was made by the United Democratic Front of Namibia.
AFRICA
SOUTH AFRICA
ANC national conference
The African National Congress (ANC) on July 2-7 held its 48th national conference in Durban, the first inside South Africa for 32 years, and elected a new 55-member national executive committee (NEC).
Nelson Mandela, 72, hitherto deputy president, was elected unopposed as president, with Walter Sisulu, 79, a former political prisoner and close associate of Mandela, as deputy president.
The former ANC president Oliver Tambo, who had only partially recovered from a stroke, was given the largely honorary position of national chairman.
Cyril Ramaphosa, 38, general secretary of the National Union of Mineworkers since 1982 and an important figure in the Mass Democratic Movement, became secretary-general.
Widely regarded as the ANC's most able negotiator, he was expected to play a key role in talks with the government.
A number of young activists who had been involved in internal politics since 1976 were also elected.
A large proportion of the new NEC were members, or believed to be members, of the South African Communist Party.
Nine women were chosen, including Winnie Mandela [see also pp. 38377].
The conference decided that the ANC would, at this stage, remain a liberation movement rather than transform itself into a political party.
Delegates also agreed to the phased lifting of sanctions in categories to be determined by the newly elected NEC.
Release of prisoners
Several thousand prisoners were released in July after the Ministry of Justice announced a one-third remission of sentence for all prisoners except in certain limited categories.
Similar amnesties had been granted in December 1990 and in May.
An estimated 50,000 people had been released as a result.
The releases, however, failed to win the support of anti-apartheid groups which claimed that almost all those released were criminals and that the government "was putting up a smokescreen" to avoid releasing political offenders.
The ANC said that at least 900 political prisoners remained.
Granting of leave to appeal toWinnie Mandela
On July 16 Winnie Mandela was granted leave to appeal against her conviction and six-year sentence for kidnapping and being an accessory to assault [see p. 38179].
Mr Justice Stegmann, who sentenced her in May, said that it was possible that another court might reach a different verdict.
AFRICA
MADAGASCAR
Dismissal of government
President Didier Ratsiraka announced on July 28 that he had dismissed his government and would organize a referendum on a new constitution before the end of the year.
He also invited opposition leaders to join discussions on new electoral laws.
Although the concessions met the demands made at the start of an unprecedented national protest campaign on June 10, they now failed to satisfy the opposition, who responded by continuing to call for Ratsiraka's resignation.
Opposition spokesman Richard Andriamanjato told Radio France International on July 29 that conditions for talks with the government included the release of opposition leaders arrested in the days before Ratsiraka's statement and agreement on the participation of opposition members in a new government.
 "The natural course of events," he added, "would be for [Ratsiraka]to leave as soon as possible." 
Ratsiraka's concessions followed seven weeks of strikes and demonstrations organized by the opposition Comité de forces vives, a coalition of 16 opposition parties, which on June 21 announced that it had formed a "provisional government" [see p. 38277].
A general strike called by the opposition on July 8 attracted wide support, with up to 400,000 demonstrators in the streets of Antananarivo, the capital.
The strike was called off on July 15, when the opposition met Ratsiraka for talks, but their dissatisfaction with the results prompted a resumption of strike action and the announcement that a retired general, Jean Rakotoharison, had been appointed president of the opposition provisional government, with Albert Zafy as prime minister.
The response of the security forces to the peaceful demonstrations had been generally restrained, but on July 23, following several unsuccessful attempts by the opposition to take over government buildings and install its "ministers" in office, Ratsiraka declared a state of emergency, including a night-time curfew, and issued warrants for the arrest of opposition leaders.
Those detained included Zafy and several of the opposition's shadow ministers.
Following Ratsiraka's statement, three of the detained opposition leaders, including Zafy, were reported to have been released on July 29.
On the following day, Ratsiraka said that he had made all the concessions he was able to make and would form a new government, with or without the opposition's participation, within a week.
AFRICA
MALI
National conference — Resurgence of Tuareg rebellion
A national conference on the country's future political system opened in Bamako on July 29, attended by more than 1,000 delegates from 42 political parties and 100 organizations.
It ended in mid-August, reporting that a new constitution, providing for multiparty elections within six months, would be put to a referendum.
The conference, called by the transitional government set up following the overthrow of former President Moussa Traore in March [see pp. 38083-84], was to debate the new draft constitution.
Addressing the opening session, acting head of state Lt.-Col. Amadou Toumani Touré, who was elected chair of the conference, said that national reconciliation and tolerance were imperative and that it was the conference's task to build unity and security.
Discussion of the draft constitution, which stressed the rule of law, separation of the powers of the executive, legislature and judiciary, and a multi-party system, began on July 31.
An electoral code and a charter for political parties were also to be discussed.
Meanwhile, the transitional government continued to face challenges to its authority.
It announced on July 15 that an attempted coup had been foiled the previous night.
In a broadcast, Touré said that a group of soldiers at the Kati army base had planned to march on the capital.
The attempt was said to have been led by former Minister of Territorial Administration Maj. Lamine Diabira; eight other officers were reported to have been arrested.
Local press reports said that former President Traore had been hurriedly moved from the Kati barracks, where he had been held in detention.
(Traore had appeared in court on June 6, charged with being an accomplice in the murder of demonstrators killed in the events leading to his overthrow, but his trial had been deferred by the court to an unspecified date.)
The arrest of two members of the ruling Transition Committee for the Salvation of the People (CTSP) was announced in late June.
They were Anatole Sanagare, director of state security under Traore, and Lt.-Col. Oumar Diallo, a former aide to Traore.
Sanagare was released on July 27.
Over 60 army officers, including Traore and several former members of his government, were relieved from active duty by the CTSP with effect from Aug. 1.
Tuareg rebellion
A resurgence of the rebellion among the nomadic Tuareg communities of northern Mali, and the army's efforts to contain it, had become a source of growing concern to the government and international human rights organizations.
In mid-June Touré announced the appointment of a commission to inquire into allegations that the army had summarily executed at least 36 Tuaregs in northern Mali in May.
The human rights organization Amnesty International had called for a full investigation of the incident, thought to have been a reprisal for recent attacks by the rebel Popular Front for the Liberation of Azawad, which marked the collapse of a peace agreement signed in January 1991 [see p. 37947].
Amnesty International reported in July, however, that reprisals had continued against the civilian population, at least 50 of whom had died in the past two months.
Visiting Gao on July 23 during a tour of the north, Touré called on the rebels to lay down their arms and to hold talks with the government.
However, a further rebel attack, in which several people were killed, took place the following day at Tonka in the Tombouctou region.
AFRICA
MAURITANIA
Referendum on constitution
A new constitution was put to a referendum on July 12.
The Interior Ministry reported 97 per cent approval, in an 85 per cent turnout.
A multiparty system would be headed by an executive president elected every six years, with a prime minister appointed by the president, a legislature consisting of a National Assembly and a Senate, and an independent judiciary.
Mauritania was to be an "Islamic, African and Arab republic" .
The new constitution recognized Arabic as the official language, and three other languages (Poular, Wolof and Soninke) as national languages.
The new institutions were to be in place within nine months.
On July 21 the new constitution was reported to have been signed into law by President Moaouia Ould Sidi Taya.
Laws on political parties and press
The ruling Military Committee of National Salvation (CMSN) on July 25 adopted a law which allowed for the setting up of political parties, with the exception of specifically Islamic parties or parties based on race or region.
Another law adopted on the same day recognized the principle of press freedom and decreed that the news media should abstain from encouraging intolerance between tribes or races.
On July 29 a general amnesty was reported for detainees accused of harming state security.
On July 30 the African Liberation Forces of Mauritania (FLAM) announced in a communiqué released in Dakar the "immediate suspension of armed struggle" .
The previous Constitution (and the National Assembly) had been suspended in favour of a Constitutional Charter in 1979.
When the CMSN decided on June 10, 1991, to put a new draft constitution to a referendum, the FLAM had called for a boycott of the referendum; other opposition groups, including the National Democratic Movement, had expressed reservations.
Agreement with Senegal
The restoration of relations with Senegal was agreed on in principle at a meeting between the Foreign Ministers of the two countries in Bissau (Guinea-Bissau) on July 18.
It was agreed to abstain from hostile media campaigns, and a joint committee to meet in Paris on July 22 would discuss compensation for those who had lost property during the events of 1989.
It was hoped to open the border and renew diplomatic ties by the end of 1991.
Senegal had broken relations with Mauritania in August 1989, after attacks on Mauritanians in Senegal and on Senegalese in Mauritania the previous April [see pp. 36579-80; 36840].
AFRICA
NIGER
National conference
The long-awaited national conference opened in Niamey, the capital, on July 29, with an address by President Ali Saibou.
About 1,200 delegates, representing the government, political parties, professional and labour bodies and farming and nomadic communities, attended the conference, which had been transferred to Niamey's sports centre following the collapse of the main roof of the city's conference centre the previous day.
The conference, due to last 40 days, was expected to make fundamental decisions about a new constitution in preparation for the country's first multiparty elections, scheduled for 1992.
On its second day, the conference's declaration of its sovereignty in making executive decisions on the country's future political system was followed by a walk-out by government delegates.
Delegates from the armed forces had failed to attend.
Saibou had in November 1990 yielded to opposition demands for the introduction of a multiparty system and for the holding of a national conference [see pp. 38085; 37841].
Originally scheduled for late May, the conference was postponed by the government to July 15.
A second postponement, announced in mid-July, was greeted by demonstrations in the capital.
Earlier, on July 12, Saibou had announced that he would stand down as chairman of the National Movement for a Development Society (the sole party until the legalization of opposition parties in March), saying that he had decided to place himself above party politics.
AFRICA
COTE D'IVOIRE
Apparent coup attempt
With the government and ruling Parti Démocratique de la Côte d'Ivoire (PDCI) under continuing pressure from opposition parties, unions and students [see pp. 38278-79], it was given out on July 30 that disaffected junior soldiers had attempted a coup d'état a week earlier.
From the start, doubts surrounded the claim.
The armed forces Chief of Staff, Gen. Robert Guëi, who had been appointed in May 1990 with a mandate to eradicate indiscipline in the army, was quoted as saying that 20 men, the most senior a sergeant, had been caught red-handed.
An opposition newspaper, La Voie, reported that 15 soldiers may have been killed and that two of those arrested had died in detention, which was denied.
Reports quoting diplomats in Abidjan, the capital, said that the general's claim that disaffected civilians were behind the affair seemed to be an attempt to discredit the opposition.
Imprisonment of journalists
Two journalists on the opposition weekly Liberté, Jacques Kacou, the editor, and Georges Koffi, author of an article attacking President Félix Houphouët-Boigny, were detained on June 5 and sentenced to three months' imprisonment on July 23 after being found guilty of insulting the head of state.
They were ordered to pay fines of 1,800,000 francs CFA (about US$6,000) each.
(On Aug. 13 the Abidjan appeals court freed Kacou but ordered that Koffi should serve the remainder of his sentence, until Sept. 7.)
AFRICA
GUINEA
Flight of opposition leader
Alpha Conde, the secretary-general of the illegal Rassemblement du peuple de Guinée (RPG), left the country for renewed political exile in Senegal on July 10.
He had sought and received asylum in the Senegalese embassy in Conakry only a month after his return home from a long period of exile [see p. 38181].
In mid-June Conde had been questioned by police in connection with the discovery of parcels of weapons and political leaflets at the airport; his summons provoked clashes between his supporters and the security forces, after which some 60 people were arrested and all demonstrations in the capital banned.
AFRICA
TOGO
Start of national conference
The long-awaited national conference to formulate Togo's future political structure finally opened in Lomé on July 8.
President Gnassingbe Eyadema, whose regime was facing mounting opposition, had agreed to the terms of the conference at a meeting on June 12 with the Democratic Opposition Front, representing illegal opposition groupings.
Eyadema refused to accede to demands that he resign as head of state prior to the conference, but agreed to abide by its decisions.
The Front subsequently suspended a general strike order issued on June 6.
The 900 delegates, who were to elect an interim Prime Minister, were chaired by a Roman Catholic bishop, Mgr.
Sanouko Kpodzro.
On July 16 the conference declared itself sovereign, announcing the dissolution of the National Assembly and the abrogation of the 1980 Constitution.
The government responded by temporarily suspending its participation; this was resumed, with "reservations" , on July 23.
Gilchrist Olympio, the son of Togo's first President Sylvanus Olympio (killed in Grunitzky's 1963 coup), returned on July 7 to participate in the conference after 25 years in exile.
AFRICA
SIERRA LEONE
Resignation of minister — Party divisions
Musa Kabbia, Minister of Social Services, Rural Development and Youth, resigned in mid-July, reportedly as a consequence of divisions within the ruling party, the All-People's Congress (APC), over the proposed new constitution [see p. 38278].
He was replaced by A. G. N. Koroma.
Kabbia was among 10 members of the House of Representatives who were later suspended from the APC by the party's governing council "pending further investigations into their conduct" .
These also included Abass Bundu, currently executive secretary of the regional grouping ECOWAS.
AFRICA
NIGERIA
Expulsion of journalist
William Keeling, a freelance journalist working for the Financial Times, was declared persona non grata by the government on July 1.
The government statement said that Keeling had been expelled because of unsavoury reports about the Nigerian government, which it said had been "fraught with inaccuracies and outright fallacies apparently intended to cause mischief and disharmony among Nigerians" .
Keeling had been arrested the previous day and put on a flight to London.
Keeling's expulsion was particularly linked to a report in the Financial Times of June 27, which claimed that Nigeria had already spent more than half the windfall earnings which it had received from higher oil prices during the Gulf crisis.
Higher prices had resulted in a 76 per cent rise in Nigeria's earnings from oil exports in 1990, to US$13,200 million from $7,500 million in 1989.
Keeling quoted donor agency sources as saying that at least $3,000 million was not accounted for in the recently published annual report of the Central Bank of Nigeria and speculating that the money had been spent on costly commitments such as Nigeria's participation in the ECOWAS peace-keeping force in Liberia, the holding of the Organization of African Unity summit in Abuja in June, and the start of work on construction of an aluminium smelter.
Information Minister Alex Akinyele, describing the report as "totally false" , said that the government had set up a special fund to receive oil earnings in excess of budgeted levels.
This had begun receiving payments in October 1990 and had reached a peak of $2,100 million in March 1991, he said.
The central bank report showed that Nigeria recorded a balance of payments surplus of US$2,100 million in 1990, the second consecutive year of surplus, with gross domestic product growing by 5.2 per cent, the same rate as in 1989.
Almost 65 per cent of government expenditure in 1990 was consumed by debt service.
Bilateral debt rescheduling agreements with the United Kingdom and Germany were signed in Lagos in June, following on from the agreement reached with the "Paris Club" of creditor countries in January.
Party congresses in June
Nigeria's two political parties, the National Republican Convention and the Social Democratic Party, held congresses throughout the country on June 15 to select delegates for primary elections scheduled for Aug. 24.
Scattered violence was reported, but the meetings resulted in the selection of 144,950 delegates for the primaries, which would choose gubernatorial candidates for the state elections due in 1992.
Relations with Cameroon
Vice-President Augustus Aikhomu on July 17 ruled out the possibility of war with Cameroon over the two neighbours' long-running border dispute.
A series of incursions by Cameroonian forces into isolated areas of eastern Nigeria had been reported during June, including the occupation of a total of nine small fishing settlements on offshore islands.
The two sides were due to meet in Yaoundé to discuss the issue in August.
Reductions in forces
A further 6,000 soldiers from Nigeria's army were demobbed at the end of June, bringing the total reduction so far to 15,000.
The moves formed part of President Ibrahim Babangida's plans to "civilianize" Nigeria by reducing the army's total strength from 120,000 to 60,000.
Babangida told a television interviewer in June that Nigeria needed a small, hard-hitting and effective army.
Plans to establish a national guard, with specific responsibilities for controlling civil violence and resisting potential coup attempts, were still under consideration by the government, although observers speculated that the proposals were being resisted by members of the military establishment.
AFRICA
GHANA
Amnesty for political exiles
An amnesty was signed into law on July 2, following the announcement on June 19 that political opponents of the regime in voluntary exile were free to return "to assist in the national reconstruction effort" .
The amnesty, which excluded anyone who had been convicted of a criminal offence, including that of "subversion" , was greeted coolly by government opponents.
A spokesman for the Movement for Freedom and Justice (MFJ) called for an unconditional amnesty and the repeal of the law authorizing indefinite detention without trial, in order to facilitate the return of exiles.
AFRICA
ECOWAS
Summit
Representatives of the 16 member states of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) met on July 4-6 in Abuja (Nigeria) for their annual summit [for membership see p. 36991].
Eleven heads of state attended, the exceptions being the presidents of Côte d'Ivoire, Ghana, Mauritania, Niger and Togo.
The principal preoccupations of the summit were political rather than economic, focusing on Liberia and the continuing role there of the ECOWAS-sponsored peace-keeping force, ECOMOG [see p. 38278].
The final communiqué reported the decision to establish an observation committee to monitor the cease-fire as well as the forthcoming elections.
The continued popular pressure for political reform throughout the sub-region was reflected in the adoption by the summit of a "Declaration of political principles" , whereby the leaders committed themselves to respecting "human rights and fundamental freedoms" .
On economic issues, notably the elimination of trade barriers in order to promote intra-regional trade, and the achievement of monetary union, there was little to report.
Under regulations which came into operation in January 1990 [see p. 36807]some 70 products were now traded tariff-free within the sub-region.
All barriers to trade in community-originated goods were to be eliminated by January 1994, but there remained problems with implementation in individual member states of decisions made at regional level.
Intra-regional trade represented only 4 per cent of all trade transactions by ECOWAS members, with the bulk of trade being carried out between member states and the European Communities.
A review of the organization's Charter was currently being undertaken and was to be submitted to the 1992 summit in Dakar (Senegal).
AFRICA
DJIBOUTI
There were conflicting accounts of clashes between Issa and Oromo groups in Djibouti and Ethiopia on July 9-15; the UN High Commissioner for Refugees' representative in Djibouti apologized to the government for what he said was an incorrect report from the UNHCR that as many as 250 people had been killed.
AMERICAS
UNITED STATES
Postponement of confirmation hearings for proposed CIA Director — Developments in Iran-contra and October
Surprise investigations 
Postponement of confirmation hearings for Gates
The Senate intelligence committee decided on July 11 to delay the confirmation hearings for Robert Gates, President George Bush's choice as director of the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA).
The decision followed the uncovering of new evidence indicating an official cover-up of the Iran-contra arms-for-hostages scandal.
The evidence was in the form of testimony by an ex-CIA employee, Alan Fiers, who reached a plea bargain arrangement with independent counsel (special prosecutor) Robert E. Walsh [see below].
The deal appeared to result from evidence contained in hundreds of tapes of telephone conversations between the CIA's headquarters and its agents in central America who were involved in the illegal operation to supply arms to the Nicaraguan contra rebels through profits made from the clandestine sale of arms to Iran.
Although the tapes had been in the possession of the Walsh investigating team for some time, their significance concerning Fiers had apparently surfaced only recently when the investigators turned their attention away from members of the administration of former President Ronald Reagan in favour of concentrating on the connection between senior CIA officials and the Iran-contra affair.
Bush, who was Vice-President at the time of the operation, and Gates, who was deputy director of the CIA, had both denied any knowledge of the operation until shortly before it became public in November 1986.
Doubts concerning Gates's role in the affair were sufficiently strong, however, that in 1987 he had withdrawn his name after being nominated as CIA director (having served as acting director from late 1986 because of William Casey's incapacitation through illness), in view of doubts about his likely confirmation [see p. 35187].
He was renominated for the post in May 1991 following the decision of the current director, William Webster, to resign.
Speaking from his holiday home in Kennebunkport on July 12, Bush angrily denounced the Senate's decision and reaffirmed his full confidence in his nominee.
Of the senators involved Bush said: "They ought not to panic and run like a covey of quail because somebody has made an allegation against a man whose word I trust, and who, as I understand it, hasn't been fingered by what's coming out of this process…
I don't think it's the American way to bring a good man down by rumour and insinuation."
The Senate intelligence committee voted on July 16 to begin the confirmation hearings for Gates on Sept. 16.
Senator David L. Boren, the committee's chairman, said that the delay would give the panel time to examine the "flurry of allegations" concerning Gates, especially those relating to the Iran-contra affair.
Separate allegations against Gates — suggesting that he might be implicated in illegal efforts to supply US arms and technology to Iraq via third countries such as South Africa and Chile — were also believed to have been made to congressional investigators and federal law enforcement officials.
It was announced on July 23 that Webster had agreed to delay his departure from office — scheduled for July 31 — by at least a month because of the delay over Gates's confirmation.
In announcing the decision, White House Press Spokes-man Marlin Fitzwater described Bush as "frustrated and angry" over Gates's position.
On the following day Bush reiterated his determination to "stand by" his nominee.
Prosecution of Fiers
Alan Fiers, 52, who headed the CIA's Central American Task Force in 1984-88, reached a plea bargain arrangement with Walsh whereby he promised to co-operate with the investigation in return for pleading guilty to lesser charges.
Fiers appeared in a federal District court on July 9 and pleaded guilty to two misdemeanour counts of withholding information from Congress.
He admitted that he had learnt of the Iran-contra operation in mid-1986 and had passed the information to his superiors, including Clair C. George, the agency's deputy director for covert operations and a subordinate to Gates.
According to Fiers, he was ordered by George to testify falsely to Congress in order to protect the Reagan administration.
The Senate panel decided that it wanted to question Fiers and George concerning whether they had passed the information on to Gates.
In the past Gates had claimed to have heard rumours of the operation only on Oct. 1, 1986, less than seven weeks before it became public.
The testimony of Fiers also undermined the longstanding declaration of former Attorney General Edwin Meese that the only government officials to have known of the Iran-contra operation prior to his revelation of it on Nov. 25, 1986, were three senior White House aides.
Walsh described the testimony of Fiers as "a significant advance" in his 4@1/2-year investigation.
Further October Surprise developments
During his impromptu press conference at Kennebunkport on July 12, Bush also referred to the "October Surprise" scandal, the allegation that members of the Reagan-Bush 1980 presidential election campaign met with Iranian representatives in Paris in order to promise arms sales to Iran in return for the Iranian government's agreement not to free 52 US hostages held in Teheran until after the November 1980 presidential election.
Likening the allegations against Gates to those of the October Surprise story Bush said: "You're talking to somebody who had to prove his innocence — me — on the basis of rumour…
Who's making these allegations?
What's the evidence?
What have we come to in this country when a man has to prove his innocence against some fluid, movable charge?"
Earlier in the month Meese, a senior member of the campaign team, had issued the most comprehensive denial yet to have been made in connection with the affair.
Speaking on television on July 7, he said: "At no time did anyone in the campaign, connected with the campaign, associated with the campaign, meet or negotiate or agree or conspire with anyone to delay the release of the hostages." 
He also claimed that there was "no independent constitutional authority for Congress to go off on investigatory frolics of its own" .
Nevertheless calls for a congressional inquiry into the October Surprise allegations increased throughout the month as further circumstantial evidence was uncovered.
It was discovered that hotel records appeared to confirm the claim by Iranian arms dealer Jamshid Hashemi that he was indeed in Madrid in late July 1988, one of the occasions upon which he claimed to have met representatives from the Reagan campaign.
According to the Economist, the record also showed that Robert Gray, a senior campaign aide, was staying in the same hotel at that time.
An investigation by the Financial Times and ABC News discovered that William Casey, then Reagan's campaign director — who, it was claimed, was also at the Madrid meeting — was in London on July 27-29.
Although photographed attending a conference on July 29, his whereabouts on July 27 and much of July 28 remained uncertain, and fuelled speculation that he might have used the opportunity to make an undisclosed trip to Madrid.
The Speaker of the House, Thomas S. Foley, on Aug. 5 announced the establishment of a two-pronged official inquiry into the October Surprise allegations.
A Senate foreign relations subcommittee was due to work in tandem with a task force drawn from the House.
Nomination of Supreme Court Justice
President George Bush on July 1 nominated Clarence Thomas, a black federal Appeals Court judge with strong conservative views, to the US Supreme Court.
Thomas was chosen to succeed Thurgood Marshall, the nine-member court's only black justice and its leading liberal, who had announced his retirement in June.
Thomas, 43, was born in a sharecropper's shack in rural Georgia and was educated in a series of Catholic schools before reading law at Yale.
He practised as a lawyer, and worked for Republican Senator John Danforth, before serving in 1981-82 as Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights in the Department of Education under President Reagan.
From 1982 to 1990 he was chairman of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission.
During his tenure he was accused by many civil rights groups of not being sufficiently conscientious in enforcing anti-discrimination legislation.
In 1990 he was appointed to the federal Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia.
Thomas was renowned as a vigorous opponent of affirmative action or reverse discrimination, espousing minority self-help rather than racial quotas.
Although his views on abortion were not entirely clear, there were clear indications that he had endorsed the position of those who opposed the constitutional right to abortion.
Bush rejected suggestions that he had chosen Thomas because he was black.
Nevertheless, it was widely suspected that Thomas's race was an important consideration in his nomination, for not only was it politically expedient to maintain a black representative on the Supreme Court, but to have secured confirmation from the Democrat-controlled Senate for a white male conservative would have been almost impossible.
The suggestion that Thomas's race was a consideration in his nomination was highly embarrassing for Bush as it coincided with the president's unrelenting opposition to a civil rights bill passed by Congress which he had pledged to veto on the grounds that it supported minority quotas.
Opposition to Thomas — Preparations for Senate confirmation hearings
If confirmed Thomas would reinforce the Supreme Court's conservative majority which had been created as a result of appointments made during the Reagan-Bush era.
With the court having recently begun to reverse key aspects of civil rights legislation and to undermine the constitutional foundation of the right to abortion, many liberals opposed the appointment of Thomas.
The National Organization of Women announced on July 5 that it would contest Thomas's confirmation.
The members of the 26-strong congressional black caucus voted overwhelmingly on July 11 to oppose the nomination.
The Alliance for Justice, a liberal group which was in the forefront of the campaign to prevent the 1987 confirmation of Justice Robert Bork, on July 30 announced that it would oppose the confirmation.
On the following day the National Association for the Advancement of Coloured People (NAACP), the country's oldest and largest civil rights movement, voted to oppose the confirmation because of the reactionary record of Thomas.
In an attempt to prevent any repetition of the campaign which led to the Bork's rejection, the Bush administration — together with Thomas's supporters in Congress, led by Danforth — undertook an intensive lobbying campaign in his favour.
This high-profile strategy to shape the public perception of Thomas was based upon that which had been successfully deployed prior to the confirmation of Bush's previous appointee to the court, David Souter [see pp. 37703-04].
On July 10 a White House spokeswoman, acknowledging that Thomas had taken "several puffs" of marijuana whilst a student, said that Bush considered such youthful experimentation as "inconsequential" .
It should not, in the administration's view, disqualify Thomas as a Supreme Court Justice, unlike the case of Douglas Ginsburg, who in 1987 had withdrawn his nomination to the Supreme Court after it was revealed that he had smoked marijuana while a teacher at Harvard Law School.
The Senate judiciary committee on July 23 scheduled the confirmation hearings for Thomas to begin on Sept. 10, the day that Congress returned from its summer recess.
If confirmed, Thomas would take office prior to the start of the Supreme Court's autumn session on Oct. 7.
Election of Democrat chief whip
Democrat members of the House of Representatives on July 11 elected David E. Bonior as Majority Whip, the party's third-ranking leadership position within the lower chamber of the US legislature.
He defeated Steny Hoyer, the chairman of the Democratic caucus and fourth-ranking member of the leadership, by 160 votes to 109.
Bonior, 46, renowned as a blunt-spoken liberal, had represented a blue-collar district of Michigan since 1977 and had been appointed as deputy chief whip in 1987.
His candidature was strongly supported by those Democrats who were dissatisfied with the conciliatory style of the Democratic Speaker of the House, Thomas Foley, and who wanted a clearer definition of the party's differences with the Bush administration.
The Bonior-Hoyer contest marked the fourth occasion in the last five years on which the Democrats had chosen a senior leader.
The election was precipitated by the resignation of William H. Gray in order to take up a job with the United Negro College Fund.
Following his election, Bonior was due to take office in September 1991, when Gray's resignation became effective.
Senate pay rise and honoraria ban for members
The Senate voted by 53 to 45 on July 17 to increase the annual pay of senators by $23,200 to $125,100 in exchange for the prohibition of its members accepting honoraria for speeches to special interest groups.
(Under existing rules senators could supplement their salaries with fees for speeches to outside groups of $2,000 per appearance, up to an annual total of $23,068.)
The change, which was to become effective from Oct. 1, also limited additional earnings from outside sources (such as farming or teaching) to 15 per cent of salary, but did not affect unearned income from sources such as investment portfolios.
Although some 40 senators had refused to accept any honoraria, the remaining 60 accepted a total of more than $1,400,000 in 1990.
The pay rise and honoraria ban were proposed by Senate appropriations committee chairman Robert C. Byrd with the support of Majority Leader George J. Mitchell and Minority Leader Robert J. Dole.
Once their canvasses showed majority support for the proposal, they moved quickly to bring it to a vote, thereby avoiding the public debate which had accompanied past efforts at prohibiting honoraria.
The change, supported by 28 Democrats and 25 Republicans, came in the form of an amendment to the legislative appropriations bill for fiscal 1992, which was subsequently passed by a voice vote.
It meant that senators fell into line with their colleagues in the House of Representatives who, in 1989, had voted to accept a large pay rise (effective from Jan. 1, 1991) in return for the ending of honoraria.
Approval of omnibus crime bill by Senate
The Senate on July 11 approved a wide-ranging anti-crime bill which included new gun controls, a reinstatement of the federal death penalty, a limitation on appeals by condemned prisoners and harsher penalties for crimes involving firearms and drugs.
The bill was passed by a bipartisan vote of 71 to 26.
Its opponents included liberals who were opposed to the death penalty and conservatives who objected to the gun control provisions.
The eagerness of senators to address voter anxiety over the current level of crime in advance of the 1992 elections was demonstrated by the manner in which both Democrats and Republicans attempted to claim credit for the anti-crime package.
The bill had also been endorsed in general terms by President George Bush, whilst the House of Representatives was due to consider its own anti-crime bill in September 1991.
Specific aspects of the crime bill included:
Gun control.
A mandatory waiting period of five working days would be required for the purchase of a handgun, during which time checks would be required to screen applicants for those with a criminal background.
In order to facilitate the screening process a national computerized network would be established which, once fully operational, would provide instant checks on applicants for all firearms and would obviate the need for a waiting period.
The manufacture and sale of nine types of foreign and domestic semi-automatic assault weapons would also be prohibited for three years.
Death penalty.
Federal courts would be empowered to impose the death sentence for 51 crimes.
New capital crimes would include the use of firearms; hostage-taking; torture; sale of drugs to minors and racketeering.
Drug "kingpins" (leading figures within large-scale drug operations) would be liable for execution.
Under some circumstances federal prosecutors would be empowered to seek the death penalty even in the 14 states which had prohibited capital punishment.
Appeals by condemned prisoners.
In a drastic curtailment of the appeal process for condemned prisoners, federal courts would be required to deny appeals against state-imposed death sentences if they determined that the prisoner had received a "full and fair" trial.
Even in cases where the trial was considered deficient, the prisoner would be allowed to appeal to federal court only once, unless the petition involved issues of innocence or guilt.
Admissibility of evidence.
Evidence seized with a defective warrant could be admissible if police had acted in "good faith" that the warrant was legal.
Law enforcement assistance.
Almost $3,300 million was authorized for fiscal 1992 to assist in state and local law enforcement.
Criminal penalties.
Prison sentences would be increased for many offences, particulary those involving the use of guns.
Budget crises in states
Several states experienced financial crises during July as a result of failure to agree upon budgets for fiscal 1991/92, which began on July 1.
At the beginning of the month at least 10 states (including California, Illinois, North Carolina, Pennsylvania, Ohio and Louisiana) did not have a budget.
Most of those affected managed to avoid closing down state government and making their employees redundant by drawing on their reserves, although 10,000 non-essential state employees were laid off in Maine and 20,000 in Connecticut as state government was temporarily reduced to health and safety functions only.
In the short term the crises resulted from state governors (of both political parties) becoming involved in wrangles with their state legislatures after recommending deficit reduction measures such as increased taxes and reductions in entitlement programmes to which the elected legislators were not keen to agree.
In the longer term the problems arose from a combination of factors including the economic recession (which had badly affected the revenues from corporate, property and sales taxes which provided the bulk of state incomes), the legal obligation of states to balance their budgets, the recent trend of the Reagan and Bush administrations to transfer financial obligations from central to local government, and a rapid escalation in the demands on welfare and prison programmes.
California faced a budget deficit for 1991/92 of $14,300 million, the largest in the history of any state.
Required by the state constitution to produce a balanced budget, Republican Governor Pete Wilson recommended a record $7,700 million tax increase, $5,500 million in spending cuts and $1,600 million in borrowing from a public employee retirement fund.
The Governor's room for manoeuvre in devising a budget was restricted by the fact that 92 per cent of the state's budget was beyond his control.
Spending levels had been already set by democratically agreed initiatives (such as Proposition 98, which guaranteed that 40.3 per cent of state outlays be spent on schools), federal rules and court decisions.
On July 17 Wilson's budget was approved by the Democratic majority in the legislature against the wishes of many of his local Republican colleagues.
Agreement of New York City budget
After months of wrangling, Mayor David Dinkins and the New York city council reached a budget agreement on June 30 which alleviated the city's financial crisis by imposing deep cuts in services.
Faced with a deficit of $3,500 million for the 1991/92 fiscal year, the city's administration was obliged by law to agree upon a balanced budget or face the prospect of being forced to allow the Finance Control Board (a state watchdog) to take over its finances.
The agreement involved service reductions of around $1,500 million (although unpopular measures such as the closure of Central Park zoo were dropped), the loss of at least 10,000 city jobs and the raising of income and property taxes.
The agreement was assisted by the last-minute conclusion of a budget for the state of New York — after months of haggling between Governor Mario Cuomo and the legislature — which assured the city $633 million in state funds.
Census
Commerce Secretary Robert A. Mosbacher decided on July 15 not to adjust the final figures of the 1990 census [see p. 38225]to include those — many of them blacks and Hispanics — who were missed during the 1990 count.
According to the census the official population figure of the USA was 248,700,000, although the Census Bureau itself estimated that this figure was too low by 5,300,000.
Mosbacher justified his decision on the grounds that to substitute population estimates in place of actual figures would be to "abandon a 200-year tradition of how we actually count people" .
The representatives of several cities and states immediately announced their intention to challenge Mosbacher's decision in court.
The issue was important because the final census figures were used to apportion federal funds and political representation between individual states and districts.
Reports on police brutality
An independent commission established to investigate the circumstances of the videotaped beating of a black motorist, Rodney King, on March 3 by members of the Los Angeles Police Department (LAPD), issued its report on July 9.
It concluded that a small but "significant number of LAPD officers…repetitively misuse force" and that the record of communication between patrol cars demonstrated racism and a glorification of brutality by some officers.
(A former street gang member, Anthony Ennis, on Aug. 2 gave the Los Angeles Police Department a copy of a video tape which allegedly showed the beating of a black youth, David Flores, by two white police officers in 1988.
According to Ennis's lawyer, her client was in fear for his life as a result of threats from one of the officers involved in the beating, Andrew Teague, but had decided to make the tape public after the district attorney dropped intimidation charges against Teague because of insufficient evidence.)
Although the 10-member commission — led by attorney and former diplomat Warren Christopher — did not link LAPD chief Daryl Gates directly to its findings of misconduct, it called upon him to retire, and for future police chiefs to serve no more than two five-year terms.
It also called for an overhaul of the LAPD's disciplinary procedure, more emphasis on community-based policing, and the removal of at least two city police commissioners.
Gates praised the report, but made no apology for the aggressive style and reputation of his force.
He also indicated that, after 42 years in the force, including 13 as police chief, he would not be "hounded out" of his $168,793-a-year post.
In the face of growing public pressure, however, Gates, who had been temporarily suspended in the immediate aftermath of the March 3 incident, finally announced that he would retire in April 1992, provided that a replacement had been found.
A report by the New York-based Human Rights Watch, also published on July 9, claimed that the problem of police brutality was widespread within the USA and that the federal government had "systematically avoided" taking steps to combat it.
The report called for better police training and accountability, and suggested that Congress should grant the Attorney General power to seek injunctions against police forces which were persistently guilty of the excessive use of force.
In brief Republican candidate Thomas Ewing on July 2 secure election to the House of Representatives seat for Illinois which had been left vacant by the appointment, confirmed in March, of Edward Madigan as Secretary for Agriculture.
The US Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit on July 12 upheld the August 1990 conviction of former DC mayor Marion Barry for cocaine possession, but referred the case back to the original trial judge for resentencing, on the grounds that the judge had not given sufficient explanation for his decision in October to impose a sentence of six months' imprisonment.
On July 17 the US Senate passed legislation to overturn a ban on abortion counselling by federally funded clinics.
A similar provision had been approved by the House of Representatives in June.
President Bush had earlier warned Congress that he would veto any legislation which interfered with the ban, originally imposed by the Reagan administration.
AMERICAS
MEXICO
Presidential tour of Europe
President Carlos Salinas de Gortari signed trade and oil agreements estimated to be worth US$1,000 million in Italy on July 8.
The agreements included a framework agreement between the state agency Petióleos Mexicanos (PEMEX) and its Italian counterpart Ente Nazionale Idrocarburi (ENI) to collaborate on a range of refining projects.
Italy's export guarantee agency SACE reportedly agreed to remove Mexico from its high risk list, and had abolished its ceiling on investments there.
This credit upgrading, coupled with a general accord on economic co-operation, was expected to resulted in Italian investments of at least $500,000,000.
This was the last leg of Salinas's European tour which had taken him to Czechoslovakia, the Soviet Union and Germany.
German companies had pledged $3,000 million in new investments in Mexico, chiefly in the petrochemicals and tourism sectors.
AMERICAS
GUATEMALA
Progress in peace talks
A third round of peace talks between the government and the Guatemalan Revolutionary Unity (URNG) guerrillas, mediated by the National Reconciliation Commission headed by Rodolfo Quezada Toruño, the Bishop of Zacapa and president of the Bishops' Conference, took place in the Mexican city of Querétaro on July 22-23 [see pp. 37372; 37527; 37707 for previous rounds].
Both sides signed a four-point framework agreement.
The agreement emphasised that the strengthening of a functional and participatory democracy required (i) the development of institutional democracy;(ii) the effective functioning of state law;(iii) the total elimination of political repression, electoral fraud, military coups and all anti-democratic destabilizing activity;(iv) strict respect for human rights;(v) the subordination of the armed forces to civilian rule; and (vi) recognition and respect for the identity and rights of indigenous peoples.
It also stated that democratization required the guaranteed promotion and participation of civilian society in general in the drafting, implementation and evaluation of government policies at the different administrative levels.
The framework agreement was to be made widely known among the population, and other topics under negotiation were to be handled within the context of the framework agreement.
Cholera cases
Guatemala's first cases of cholera in the epidemic spreading across the continent [see p. 38286]were reported in late July.
Four cases were definitely confirmed and 53 others suspected.
AMERICAS
NICARAGUA
First Sandinista congress
The Sandinista National Liberation Front (FSLN) held its first congress on July 19-21.
The congress marked 12 years since the FSLN came to power, and 30 years since its foundation.
It was also the first opportunity for the Sandinistas to assess their opposition role after losing elections in February 1990 to the right-wing National Opposition Union (UNO) coalition of President Violeta Chamorro de Barrios [see p. 37236].
The variety of guests present, who included Chamorro's Presidency Minister Antonio Lacayo Oyanguren, Joaquín Villalobos, the leader of the general command of the Farabundo Martí National Liberation Front (FMLN) in El Salvador, Luís Inácio da Silva ( "Lula" ), president of the Workers' Party (PT) in Brazil, and Guatemala's former President Vinicio Cerezo Arévalo, was seen as reflecting different political currents within the FSLN and its desire for increased political respectability.
The main debate among the 581 delegates was between those who favoured the transformation of the FSLN into a more traditional democratic party, and those who supported the existing structure based on leadership by a revolutionary vanguard.
Many analysts agreed however, that opposing wings of the party were now in practice, if not in name, social democratic in their political outlook.
The leadership formally reaffirmed a commitment to socialism, but accepted criticisms of its own past authoritarian practices, and criticized the lifestyles of some comrades which had "contrasted with the difficult conditions the majority of our people faced" .
Allegations that some Sandinistas had embezzled state property in the final weeks in power [see also p. 38282]had led to expectations, subsequently unrealized, that a purge of the leadership would be demanded.
Leadership calls for party unity in difficult political circumstances prevailed, however, and were reinforced by a common underlying belief in the congress that the Sandinistas continued to exercise political influence in a tacit pact with the government.
In the absence of an alternative slate of candidates, seven comandantes of the old leadership were re-elected to a nine-member national directorate (DN), headed by former President Daniel Ortega Saavedra who was also elected to the new post of FSLN secretary-general.
The size of the abstention vote was not disclosed.
The remaining DN members were two Sandinista veterans and known moderates: Sergio Ramírez Mercado, the country's former vice-president and René Núñez Téllez, the former secretary of the FSLN.
Former DN member Gen. Humberto Ortega Saavedra, the current C.-in-C. of the re-formed Armed Forces, had declined to be renominated for the leadership, claiming that his national responsibilities obliged him to abandon his previous FSLN posts.
He warned the congress that old dogmas had to be abandoned and new principles adopted for the changing times.
Ortega promised that at the next congress, scheduled for 1995, the DN would be elected by individual votes directly cast in a secret ballot and that a woman would be elected to the leadership.
He argued that nomination of Dora Maria Téllez for the current DN had not been accepted because a "traditional" directorate was needed "during this period of transition" .
A 120-member policy-making Sandinista assembly was also elected and was formally elevated to be the FSLN's superior body despite expectations that the DN would not be answerable to it.
AMERICAS
EL SALVADOR
UN monitoring team
The UN Observers for El Salvador human rights monitoring team (Onusal), with a first-year budget of US$23,000,000 and an initial team of 113 members, began work in six regional centres on July 26.
Headed by Iqbal Riza, a Pakistani UN political officer, and Philippe Texier, a French senior appellate court judge, this was the first mission of its type the UN had set up inside a member country [see p. 38187].
Onusal was also to monitor any future ceasefire in the 11-year civil war.
All the political parties in the Legislative Assembly and the guerrilla Farabundo Martí National Liberation Movement (FMLN) formally supported the UN initiative.
The United States government expressed reservations, US diplomatic sources being quoted as saying that Onusal would be a check on the government and not the FMLN.
The USA had finally released US$21,000,000 in military aid in June which had previously been frozen by the US Congress [see pp. 37770; 37957].
The conservative pro-government newspaper El Diario de Hoy denounced the UN mission as an insult to national sovereignty and accused the UN mediators in the current peace process of being pro-communist.
Leaflets from an anonymous "Salvadorean Anti-Communist Front" threatened reprisals against retailers and restaurateurs who served UN staff.
The launch of Onusal had been brought forward due to pressure on the UN from international and national human rights groups and the slow progress in the ongoing peace talks between the government and the FMLN.
Both sides had agreed in principle in May 1990 to the creation of a UN mission [see p. 37449]but had specified at that time that its establishment was conditional on the agreement of a ceasefire.
Major banking scandal
In what was described as the biggest fraud in the country's history, a judge ordered the arrest of 21 prominent businesspeople in early July for allegedly obtaining loans of between US$20,000,000 and $50,000,000 for illicit purposes from the Commercial Agricultural Bank, one of eight state-owned commercial banks.
Many of the 21 had reportedly fled the country.
They included members of the richest families in the country, relatives of two former presidents, former presidents of the bank and the country's electricity authority, and a former leading advisor to President Alfredo Cristiani.
The Commercial Agricultural loans were made in 1985 at the high point of US aid when some $683,000,000 was deposited with state banks.
Abduction of politician
Bartolome Umana de Paz, a leader of the centre-left opposition Democratic Convergence (CD) and a candidate in the March legislative elections [see p. 38093], was abducted by suspected right-wing paramilitaries from his home in San Vicente, 60 km east of San Salvador, on July 10.
Human rights groups also accused right-wing paramilitaries opposed to any peace settlement, or the military, of the brutal murder on July 8 of a nightwatchman at the headquarters of the Council of Marginal Communities (CCM); his wife was critically wounded in the attack.
Guerrilla offensive — Peace talks
The FMLN launched a major offensive on July 8 and took control of several towns in the northern province of Chalatenango before announcing a three-day truce in San Salvador to coincide with a Central American summit [see p. 38336].
On July 22, the guerrillas announced that they had seized the town of Guazapa, situated to the north of San Salvador.
The offensive had also been designed to influence the current round of peace talks between the government and the FMLN which took place in the Mexican city of Queratato on July 9-11.
The FLMN's Radio Farabundo Martí reported on July 12 that "important progress" had been made in the talks, but gave no further details.
AMERICAS
PANAMA
Anti-drugs treaty with USA
The Legislative Assembly approved a controversial legal assistance treaty with the United States on July 16 which opened the way for co-operation in operations against drugs and money laundering [see pp. 37771; 38237].
The powerful Banking Association reportedly welcomed the treaty as an important step in improving Panama's international image despite the fact it had successfully lobbied to preserve regulations guaranteeing banking secrecy which the USA had wanted removed.
A report presented to the US Congress's General Accounting Office in late July indicated that drug trafficking and money laundering were on the increase in the country since the removal of the regime of Gen. Manuel Noriega Moreno in December 1989 [see pp. 37112-13].
AMERICAS
CUBA
Moncada anniversary speech
In a broadcast speech on July 26 marking the 38th anniversary on the assault on the Moncada barracks, a landmark in the Cuban revolution, President Fidel Castro called on the population to redouble their efforts to stand up to the continuing economic blockade by the United States and to the economic and political collapse of the Eastern bloc, characterizing the latter as a "disaster" [see p. 38229].
Warning that if times were difficult now, they would be worse in the future, Castro called for "heroism and courage" in the face of exterior pressures to return the country "to capitalism, to prostitution, to the sack of the public treasury and to racial discrimination" .
He also claimed that Western imperialism was pressurizing the Soviet Union and China to break off links with Cuba and said that he was surprised by the terrible wave of "neoliberalism" currently "scourging" the world and especially Latin America.
He welcomed, however, the constructive political atmosphere and his treatment by other political leaders at the recent Ibero-American Summit in Mexico [see p. 38336].
Present at the ceremony were the former Nicaraguan president Daniel Ortega Saavedra, Negale Kisiliov, a member of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the Soviet Union, and Nelson Mandela, president of the African National Congress (ANC), who was presented with the Order of José Marti, Cuba's highest decoration.
Kisiliov carried a message from Soviet President Gorbachev promising the renewal and development of bilateral links and collaboration in areas of mutual interest [see also p. 38229].
National Assembly election postponement
Elections to the 450-seat National Assembly were postponed following the Assembly's decision on July 5 to extend its five-year mandate by a further year, in order to provide more time for it to study improvements to the one-party state.
The 2@1/2-year mandates for the provincial and municipal assemblies were similarly extended.
Sentencing of plotters
Two medical doctors, Julio Bientz Saab, 42, and Julián Arana Rosainz, 35, were imprisoned for 12 and eight years respectively on July 9 for plotting to kill Castro by blowing up the Institute of Neurology and Neurosurgery in the capital, Havana, where they both worked, on his visit in September 1990.
The State prosector had demanded heavier sentences but the court judged that the two had not carried out their plan but had only discussed it.
Release of political prisoner
Mario Chanes de Armas, 65, who took part in the 1953 assault on the Moncada Barracks and was one of the original rebels who had landed in the Granma in 1956 to launch the revolution, was released from prison on July 16, after serving 30 years for allegedly plotting to assassinate Castro.
He maintained his innocence and claimed he had been willing to give his life for Castro but had never been a communist.
He expressed a wish to go to the United States.
<N
AMERICAS
HAITI
Sentencing of coup leader
Roger Lafontant, a former Interior Minister and alleged leader of the Tontons Macoutes, the much feared and hated Duvalierist private army, was sentenced to life imprisonment with hard labour on July 30.
He was found guilty of staging a coup attempt in January to prevent Fr Jean-Bertrand Aristide, the country's first democratically elected President, from taking office [see p. 37955].
Twenty-one of Lafontant's alleged accomplices were also standing trial on the same charge.
Alleged coup attempt
The police were reported on July 17 to have arrested a total of 31 people in the capital Port-au-Prince and in the town of Gonaives and to have seized a warehouse full of "homemade" weapons following what the government described as a "conspiracy against the internal security of the state" by former members of the Tontons Macoutes.
Those reported to have been arrested included a naval officer and Daniel Narcisse.
An opponent of the former Duvalier regime, Narcisse had later supported Gen. Prosper Avril, who staged a military coup in September 1988 but was forced to resign the presidency in March 1990 [see pp. 37313-14].
Changes in army high command
The C.-in-C. of the Army, Gen. Hérard Abraham, was dismissed on July 2 but later claimed that he had retired "for personal reasons" .
He was replaced by Gen. Raoúl Cedras who had supervised security during the December presidential elections [see pp. 37911-12]and whose appointment was subject to congressional approval.
In addition Col. Alix Sylva was appointed acting Assistant Army C.-in-C., replacing Gen. André Jean Pierre.
Col. Joseph Lemoine Florestant was appointed as the Chief of General Staff; Col. Michel Louis as Inspector-General and Lt.-Col. Pierre Cherubin as head of the Port-au-Prince police, replacing Col. Ramus Saint-Vil who was appointed as director of the Military Academy.
Creole requirement
In a speech on July 29 Aristide announced that all official papers would be written in both Creole and French and that all ministers and state and government employees had to be able to read and write Creole, "in memory of all the peasants who had died for the country's sake" .
Debt cancellation
A bilateral treaty was signed with the French government in Port-au-Prince cancelling the US$55,000,000 debt owed to France.
On July 11 at an extraordinary meeting of the Consultative Group for Economic Co-operation in the Caribbean, held at the European headquarters of the World Bank in Paris, Haiti was granted a "soft" development loan of US$340,000,000 to encourage the development of a free marker economy.
AMERICAS
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC
Deportations
Foreign Minister Joaquín Ricardo García was quoted by local radio as saying on July 18 that a total of 13,000 Haitian citizens, most of whom were migrant workers, had left the country "in the last few days" , 2,000 of them forcibly repatriated and the rest having left "voluntarily" .
Ricardo reportedly stated that the government did not have to participate in any type of negotiation on the matter and defined repatriation as a sovereign act of any government over the status of illegal aliens residing in its territories.
Jean Claude Bajeux, a member of a fact-finding team from the human rights group Caribbean Rights investigating the deportations, stated on July 18 that the situation demanded "urgent and decisive negotiations" between the Dominican Republic and Haiti and "firm solidarity" for other Caribbean governments and organizations.
AMERICAS
TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
Re-opening of parliament
Parliament was re-opened on July 27, one year after it was damaged in a six-day siege during a coup attempt [see pp. 37606-07].
The ceremony was attended by Roderick Rainford, the Secretary-General of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM), and representatives of eight CARICOM states.
New Union Confederation
After several months of discussions the leaders of 32 trade unions agreed in mid-July to join forces and sanctioned the creation of the National Trade Union Centre (NATUC).
Failure to achieve unification during talks in 1987 had, in the opinion of several union leaders, been used by the government and employers to divide the labour movement.
NATUC's interim president Errol McCleod described the new organization as a "quantum leap forward" for the unions but cautioned that "miracles" should not be expected.
AMERICAS
COLOMBIA
New Constitution — Lifting of state of siege
A new Constitution — with 397 articles one of the longest in the world — came into effect at midnight on July 5, replacing one which dated back to 1886.
The product of five months' work by a specially elected Constituent Assembly [see pp. 37450; 37914; 38283], it was hailed on all sides as marking the opening of a new democratic chapter in the country's history, previously marred by decades of political and drug-related violence and the domination of power by a small political elite.
To coincide with the launch of the Constitution, the government lifted the state of siege, imposed in 1984 in response to the violent activity of drug traffickers, right-wing paramilitary groups and left-wing guerrillas; this had curtailed civil liberties and had given extraordinary power to the President to re-establish public order.
Military sources stated that lifting the state of siege would not affect the fight against internal subversion.
Provisions of new Constitution
President César Gaviria Trujillo would have special legislative powers until the installation on Dec. 1 of a new Congress, to be elected on Oct. 27.
There would be new posts of Vice-President, Fiscal General and Defender of the People (El Defensor del Pueblo).
The bicameral Congress was reduced overall in size.
The Senate, reduced from 114 to 100 seats, was to be elected nationally rather than by departments; each of the 32 departments would elect a minimum of two members of the House of Representatives, reduced from 199 to 160 seats, with further seats allotted to each department on the basis of population.
Members of the Congress could not hold any other public post, and there were sanctions against absenteeism.
All departmental governors would be directly elected.
A new independent prosecution system was created to strengthen the often weak and corrupt judicial system; extradition was banned.
All marriages came under civil jurisdiction and all, including Roman Catholics, had the right to a civil divorce.
New rights were specified for women and young people.
The indigenous population had the right to elect two congressional representatives in special elections.
They would have certain recognised lands, with judicial autonomy in minor internal disputes.
Disbanding of Extraditables
In response to the confirmation that extradition was now banned by the constitution, the leaders of the Medellín drug cartel, who called themselves the "Extraditables" , stated in a communiqué released on July 5 that they had decided to disband themselves and the cartel's military structure and were ending all action against those they had previously considered as enemies.
Four more of the cartel's prominent leaders had surrendered to the authorities on July 4 bringing the total number in custody to 13, including the cartel's leader Pablo Escobar Gaviria [see p. 38283].
Guerrilla offensive
The Colombian Revolutionary Armed Forces (FARC) and the National Liberation Army (ELN) guerrillas, acting in consort as the Simón Bolívar National Guerrilla Co-ordinating Board (CNGSB), on the eve of the inauguration of the new constitution launched a fresh offensive which severed links between the capital, Bogotá, and the densely populated Caribbean coast and disrupted electricity supplies throughout the country.
In an attempt to disrupt tourism, the guerrillas also blasted a huge crater in the runway of the international airport of Cartagena on the Caribbean coast.
The offensive appeared, initially, to have been intended as a tactical show of strength designed to secure a better bargaining position in peace talks, due to resume on July 15 but "indefinitely suspended" by the government [see p. 38283].
The offensive gained impetus, however, allegedly due to the predominance of an ultra-radical wing within the ELN who were opposed to negotiations.
An alleged attempt to assassinate President Gaviria was foiled.
Demonstrations against the guerrillas were reported in several towns.
Speculation about an impending military offensive against the guerrillas grew when the government announced in July the delivery of specialist US-made anti-guerrilla Bronco OV-10 aircraft.
The Colombian Presidential Peace Advisory Office announced on July 19, however, that the peace talks would resume in the Venezuelan capital of Caracas on Aug. 26.
AMERICAS
VENEZUELA
Cabinet changes
Cabinet changes were announced on July 13.
Affected ministries were: National Defence: Gen. Fernando Ochoa Antich replaced Adml.
Héctor Jurado Toro who retired from active service; Justice: Alfredo Ducharme replaced Jésus Moreno Guacarán; Labour: Jesús Rubén Rodríguez replaced Germán Lairet who resigned; Information: Andrés Eloy Blanco replaced Luis Vezga Godoy as head of the Central Office of Information; Tourism: Víctor Gamboa replaced Vladimir Gessen, who became ambassador to Canada, as Minister of State, President of Corpoturismo.
Drug measures
In early July President Carlos Andrés Pérez declared an "all-out war" against drug trafficking and the creation of a joint command to co-ordinate the anti-drug trafficking efforts of the Ministries of the Interior, Defence and Justice and the National Commission Against the Illicit Use of Drugs (CONACUID).
The move was provoked by evidence that Venezuela was fast becoming a major centre for the laundering of drug profits and the storage and shipment of cocaine abroad, especially to growing markets in Europe.
It was believed that Colombian drug cartels, harried by the Colombian authorities, had shifted their operations across the border to take advantage of the sophisticated Venezuelan banking system which made the business side of drug trafficking difficult to detect.
Evidence that drug-related corruption had penetrated Venezuelan institutions came with the arrest in June of Adolfo Ramirez Torres, a former governor of the Federal District of Caracas, who was accused of being part of a cocaine smuggling ring.
In addition Gen. Herminio Fuenmayor, the Director of Military Intelligence (DIM), was dismissed for alleged involvement in drug trafficking.
In early July Gen. Manuel Heiz Azpúrua replaced Gen. Raúl Giménez Gainza as head of the Intelligence and Prevention Services Directorate (DISIP).
Gainza had resigned claiming that agents from the United States Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA) were intent on supplanting the Venezuelan police force in the fight against illegal drugs.
Pérez promised, however, to promote closer co-operation with the DEA which had opened a branch office in the western city of Maracaibo, but maintained a smaller presence there than in neighbouring countries.
Lifting of price controls — Tax changes
The government on July 5 lifted price controls on private goods and services, and deregulated business operations, in an effort to attract domestic and foreign investors and to set clear economic rules to all sectors.
The controls had first been installed in 1963.
On July 20-21 the Congress approved the lowering of the maximum corporate tax from 50 per cent on operating profits to 30 per cent.
Maximum tax rates were cut in the mining sector and in certain parts of the petroleum sectors, and an annual inflationary adjustment mechanism was established for corporations.
The income level at which individuals were required to file tax returns was also raised from US$813 per month to $5,084 per month.
AMERICAS
GUYANA
Cabinet reshuffle
President Hugh Desmond Hoyte reduced the size of his cabinet from 18 to 11 ministers on July 6 on the advice of British accountants KPMG Peat Marwick McLintock who had made a detailed study of the country's public services.
The accountants discovered that the responsibilities of several ministries overlapped.
In the resulting reshuffle Seeram Prashad (Planning and Development), Jeffrey Thomas (Regional Development), Yvonne Harewood-Benn (Office of the Presidency) and Urma Johnson (Junior Minister, Regional Development) lost their portfolios and all four were given special assignments within the election campaign structure of the ruling People's National Congress (PNC).
Viola Burnham resigned from her posts as Deputy Prime Minister and Vice President for Culture and Development.
Hoyte retained responsibility for Foreign Affairs.
World Bank loan
The World Bank's Consultative Group for Economic Co-operation in the Caribbean on July 11 allocated a "soft" loan of US$250,000,000 to encourage the development of a free-market economy.
Guyanese Cabinet
Hamilton Green First Vice-President and Prime Minister (Youth and Sports, Housing, Health)
**Winston Murray Deputy Prime Minister; Trade and Tourism; Industry
Keith Stanislaus Massiah Attorney General; Justice
**Faith Harding Office of the President
**Robert Corbin Deputy Prime Minister; Public Works, Communications, and Regional Development ***
Patrick McKenzie: Agriculture
Carl Greenidge Finance
**Gowkarran Sharma Office of President
**Deryck Bernhard: Education, Culture and Social Development
*Rabbian Ali-Khan: Labour, Human Services, Social Security*** Stella Odie-Ali: Home Affairs
*New appointment.
**Altered responsibilities.
***New or reorganized ministry.
AMERICAS
PERU
Anti-drug accord with USA
The government announced on July 24 that it had signed a bilateral anti-drug accord with the United States government which specifically linked the fight against drug trafficking with that against domestic guerrilla insurgency [see pp. 38187-88 for May outline agreement].
The agreement, similar to one which President Alberto Keinya Fujimori had rejected in September 1990 [see p.37708], provided for US$34,900,000 in military equipment and training for the army and police force — the first such funding since the USA funded anti-guerrilla operations in 1965 — and $60,000,000 in economic aid (expected to be increased in 1992 to $100,000,000) to assist coca growers to switch to other crops.
Doubts about the military agreement centred on whether the army and the police could work together, given the traditional animosity between the two and pervasive drug-related corruption in both forces as a direct result of low pay.
In addition a future crop substitution programme was expected to be seriously hampered by the July 6 murder of Walter Tocas, the leader of the Upper Huallaga Defence Front, a 150,000-strong organization of coca growers in the country's principal coca growing region, by either drug traffickers or Shining Path (Sendero Luminoso) guerrillas, who were known to work in tandem in the region.
Tocas had reportedly obtained the signed commitment of 40,000 growers to support a crop substitution programme.
Army massacre
An attack on July 9 in the Andean community of Santa Barbara was seen as the clearest evidence yet of military involvement in extra-judicial killings, allegedly sanctioned by the Armed Forces Joint Command as part of "special intelligence operations" against the guerrillas.
A leaked document from within the military stated that "anti-subversive" operations should be of a "highly aggressive and offensive character" and that "the best subversive is a dead subversive; therefore no prisoners need be taken" .
Villagers, who denied any previous association with any guerrilla group, stated that the army was responsible for the massacre of at least 14 peasants abducted in the July 9 raid, and for burning houses and stealing personal belongings, vegetables and over 700 domestic animals.
The remains of bodies destroyed by explosives were later discovered and identified in a nearby abandoned mine.
Restructuring of police force
The Interior Minister, Gen. Victor Malca Villanueva announced on July 12 that he would present a proposal to the Congress on July 15 for the "total restructuring of the national police force" owing to "enormous corruption within its ranks" .
He stated that since April 25 officers and 600 other ranks had been dismissed on charges of indiscipline and involvement in criminal activities.
In the latest incident, on July 10, six policemen, part of an allegedly drunken patrol, were arrested and charged with the murder of 17 passengers after shooting down a civilian aircraft, which they claimed to have mistaken for a drug smuggling plane, as it took off from Bellavista, 800 km to the north-west of the capital Lima.
Ian Martin, the director of the human rights organization Amnesty International, stated on July 8 during a three-day visit that Peru was one of the worst abusers of human rights in Latin America.
He said that 120 people had "disappeared" under the present government and that 3,700 had disappeared since 1980.
The Defence Ministry announced on July 16 that 71 members of the armed forces had been dismissed in the last year for human rights abuses and drug trafficking.
Attacks on Japanese — Loan from Japan
The Japanese government on July 27 asked its 131 aid workers to leave the country with their families following a series of violent attacks on Japanese nationals and on Peruvians of Japanese descent.
Sendero Luminoso was believed to be responsible for the murders of three Japanese engineers at the Peruvian-Japanese Farming and Research Training Centre in Huarai, 120 km north of Lima, and of Manuel Inamine, a businessman of Japanese descent, on the outskirts of Lima on July 12, and for the kidnapping of a farmer of Japanese descent on July 16.
The attacks were viewed as attempts to sabotage an agreement with Japan for a loan of US$403,000,000 to support the balance of payments and guarantee Peru's re-entry to the international financial community.
Fujimori stated, however, that the loan had been approved on July 29-30 and would be repayable over four years with one year's grace.
Cabinet change
The entire Cabinet resigned as was customary prior to the independence day anniversary on July 28.
All were reappointed by Fujimori, but Félix Canal Torres, the Minister for Fisheries, subsequently resigned over accusations of favouritism and incompetence, and was replaced by Augustín Sobero.
AMERICAS
BOLIVIA
Offer to drug traffickers
Interior Minister Carlos Saavedra Bruno announced on July 17 a 120-day amnesty period for drug traffickers to surrender voluntarily in return for a guarantee that they would not be extradited to stand trial in the United States.
Shorter prison terms would be considered for traffickers who acknowledged their crimes, identified accomplices and turned over their assets.
The government stated that the decision had been made in order to prevent the spiral of drug-related violence which had eventually persuaded the Colombian government to end extradition [see pp. 37772; 37851; 38332].
The new policy was seen, however, as one more setback for US anti-drug efforts in the Andean region and its failure to persuade the government to update a 1901 extradition treaty to include drug offences.
Surrender of leading drug trafficker — Criticism of USA
Erwin Guzmán Gutiérrez, one of the country's leading drug traffickers thought to be closely linked with the Colombian Calí cartel, surrendered on July 11 after having been given a guarantee of "juridical security" .
Guzmán had escaped capture, along with two other leading traffickers, during the country's largest drugs raid, "Operation Safe Haven" , launched on June 28 on the town of Santa Ana del Yacuma, a major drug dealing centre, in the eastern Amazonian province of Beni.
Over 600 anti-drugs police and 20 agents from the US Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA) took part in the action which provoked local resentment and during which a Bolivian naval lieutenant Carlos Revollo Alcoreza was allegedly kicked, bound and gagged by two DEA agents.
The Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces, Gen. Jorge Moreira Rojas, called this an "affront" against the military and demanded the expulsion of the DEA agents from the country.
In response, Robert Gelbard, who ended his three-year term as US ambassador on July 5, stated that Alcoreza was corrupt and that the whole naval contingent in Santa Ana was protecting the drug traffickers and had informed them of the raid.
Gelbard in turn was accused by the government of meddling in national affairs.
US aid
On June 30, Gelbard announced that the USA would donate $140,000,000 in "alternative development" aid, including $120,000,000 specifically to create alternative sources of employment for those involved in the production of coca in rural, semi-urban and urban areas in the department of Cochabamba and the neighbouring regions of Santa Cruz, Potosi, and Chuquisaca.
The government's controversial decision in April to militarize the fight against drug trafficking [see p. 38143]had led rural workers to form a Single Union Confederation of Rural Workers of Bolivia (CSUTCB) on May 15.
The CSUTCB's intention was to establish an independent multinational and socialist state, with its own flag and army, and responsive to the needs and aspirations of the indigenous Indian population.
In June peasant communities had attempted, unsuccessfully, to block all major roads into coca growing areas; they claimed that the military was more intent on repressing coca producers in the Chapare, Yungas and Cochabamba regions, than on tackling the drug traffickers.
IMF loan
The IMF announced on July 3 approval of a loan of SDR45,350,000 (about US$60,000,000) in support of its third annual arrangement under the IMF's enhanced structural adjustment facility (ESAF), of which the first SDR22,680,000 was immediately available.
The loan would further the current economic reform programme, initiated in 1985.
Constitutional Advisory Commission — New electoral law
President Jaime Paz Zamora announced the formation of a Presidential Advisory Commission on July 7 to set out the basis for a constitutional reform programme to modernize the state.
Its members included two former presidents, constitutional experts and three Spanish jurists.
Paz Zamora had already announced a new electoral law and a single national register (RUN) on June 30, designed to guarantee the impartiality of electoral procedures and to increase the number of registered voters, especially among ethnic minorities and those resident abroad.
<N
AMERICAS
CHILE
Resignation of Air Force
C.-in-C.
President Patricio Aylwin Azócar accepted the resignation of Gen. Fernando Matthei Aubel as C.-in-C. of the Air Force in early July.
On July 12, he named as Matthei's successor Gen. Ramón Vega, who was to take up the post on July 31.
This was the first change in senior military personnel since the ending of the Pinochet dictatorship and the return to democratic rule in March 1990.
Matthei had been in post since 1978, but in the late 1980s he had been the first among the military leadership to recognize the strength of the democratic opposition and the inevitability of political change and, as a result, began to distance himself from the military hardliners.
Matthei had welcomed the Rettig human rights report in March and had offered support for the government's policy of national reconciliation [see p. 38095].
Letelier murder case
The Supreme Court in a nine votes to seven ruling in mid-July appointed Judge Adolfo Bañados to rule on whether to re-open the case of Orlando Letelier, an ambassador to the United States under the regime of Salvador Allende, who was murdered in Washington in 1976 [see pp. 28273-74; 34989; 36097].
Under Chilean law a 15-year deadline for such cases to go to court would expire on Sept. 21.
Two retired Chilean army officers, Gen. Manuel Contreras, the head of Pinochet's secret police, and Col. Pedro Espinoza were wanted in the USA in connection with the crime.
A Cuban exile Virgilio Paz Romero, held in custody in the USA, had reportedly admitted on July 30 to his part in a conspiracy to murder Letelier.
In early July, the Senate approved a bilateral accord with the USA instructing a commission of jurists, to be designated by both countries, to rule on the amount of compensation to be paid by the Chilean government to the families of Letelier and his secretary Ronni Moffitt who was murdered with him.
In 1980 a US judge had suggested a figure of $3,000,000, while the US government had demanded in 1988 that Chile pay $12,000,000 in compensation [see p. 36346].
Strike by copper miners
A two-week strike by 8,000 miners at the Chuquicamata copper mine, the world's largest, run by the state-owned enterprise Corporación Nacional del Cobre de Chile Company (CODELCO), ended on July 15.
The first major union challenge to Aylwin's coalition government, the stoppage was the first at the mine since the military coup in 1973.
The strike had initially sent copper prices soaring on international metal markets.
Union leaders accepted a deal offering miners a 2 per cent share (approximately US$5,000,000) of CODELCO's expected annual profit of $1,600 million, a 5-day increase in the previous 20-day annual holiday allowance, and an additional special bonus payment worth an estimated $990.
The company had refused to give miners a real increase in wages, a demand made by miners at three other CODELCO mines which were scheduled to hold strike ballots at the end of July and August.
AMERICAS
BRAZIL
Suspension and resumption of IMF talks
Sterie Beza, head of the IMF's Western Hemisphere department, was appointed on July 23 as head of the IMF mission negotiating the rescheduling of Brazil's US$122,000 million foreign debt.
President Fernando Collor de Mello had demanded the replacement of Beza's predecessor, the Argentinian economist José Fajgembaum, for making comments which he considered to be blatant interference in Brazilian national affairs.
As reported in the local press on July 18, Fajgembaum had suggested (i) that if the government wished to obtain a $2,000 million extended IMF loan it should eliminate a constitutional law guaranteeing individual states a share of federal tax income; and (ii) that inflation could only be sharply reduced if the federal deficit were reduced.
Collor had suspended current talks with the IMF until Fajgembaum was replaced, and on July 22 recalled Alexandre Kafka, the Brazilian representative at the IMF.
A first instalment of $886,000,000 in interest was paid to international commercial creditor banks on July 1 in accordance with an April agreement to repay interest on the $60,000 million medium- and long-term commercial debt [see pp. 38143, 38285].
Removal of import restrictions
The government on July 11 renounced its right as a developing country under the General Agreement of Tariffs and Trade (GATT) to impose certain temporary restrictions on imports.
Such measures as quotas or licensing arrangements were allowed by GATT to a developing country running into balance of payments problems.
Recent agreements with creditor banks [ibid.]had, however, reduced such balance of payment uncertainties.
AMERICAS
ARGENTINA
Drug-related scandals
Amira Yoma, the sister-in-law of President Carlos Saúl Menem and his former appointments secretary, was detained in a psychiatric clinic on conditional bail equivalent to US$40,000 following her indictment on July 25 by an Argentine court on drug money laundering charges.
Menem, who had accepted Yoma's resignation only a few days before, had been forced to suspend her from her post in March when a report by a Spanish investigative judge, hearing evidence in the Spanish capital, Madrid, accused her of being part of an international drug laundering ring.
Menem had characterized the report as being "politically motivated" .
Yoma's former husband Ibrahim al Ibrahim, appointed by Menem as Chief of Customs at Buenos Aires international airport, along with a former government official, Mario Caserta, had also been accused of drug laundering in the same report.
Both men were currently free on bail.
Yoma's brother Emir Yoma, a presidential aide, had also been dismissed in January after he was implicated in corruption charges.
Despite being separated from his wife Zulema, Menem had shown remarkable loyalty to her family in the face of such scandals, so much so that his judgement in appointing aides and ministers began to be widely questioned.
It was expected that from now on the government would attempt to distance itself from any further scandals in the run-up to the autumn's critical gubernatorial and congressional elections.
Dismissal of air attaché
Brig.
Héctor Sambrizzi, the Argentine air attaché in Washington, was dismissed on July 16 for his alleged involvement in an improperly awarded defence contract.
Eight other senior air force officers, including Air Force Commander-in-Chief Brig. -Gen.
José Juliá and his former second-in-command Brig.
Tomás Rodríguez were currently under investigation for their part in bribery scandals involving air force contracts.
Sale of airline
The sale of the state-owned airline Aerolíneas Argentinas, was finally agreed after a year of negotiations in Buenos Aires on July 4, at a price well below what the government had predicted [see pp. 37608; 37773 for background].
A consortium headed by the Spanish state-owned carrier Iberia agreed to pay US$130,000,000 in cash, to buy $142,000,000 in Argentinian government external bonds, to make a debt-for-equity exchange of $840,000,000, and a further debt-for-equity exchange of $770,000,000 reduced to $619,000,000 in real terms since the government had conceded that Aerolíneas carried existing debts of $151,000,000.
Two major Spanish banks, the Banco Español de Crédito (Banesto) and the Banco Hispano Americâno, obtained between them 19 per cent of Aerolíneas capital.
This, added to Iberia's own stake, placed 49 per cent of the airline in Spanish ownership, the most allowed to foreign buyers under Argentine company law.
Two private domestic companies in the controlling consortium, Amadeo Rivas and Construcciones Devicenzo, now owned 36 per cent of the capital, with the Aerolíneas workforce retaining a 10 per cent stake and the government 5 per cent.
IMF loan
Approval of a standby credit agreement authorizing drawings of up to SDR780 million (about US$1,040 million) was announced on July 29 by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) in support of the government's economic programme.
This was the sixth IMF loan to Argentina since 1983, a level of support which recognized the move away from traditional state-led economic policies and support of the welfare state in favour of austerity, tight fiscal control and an ambitious privatization programme [see pp. 37500; 37529; 37608; 37710; 37773; 38096; 38003].
The government was now, in addition, seeking a new medium-term IMF agreement carrying less stringent conditions [see pp. 37040; 37244; 37451; 38242 for details of previous IMF loan].
The terms of the IMF agreement, which immediately unlocked US$325 million in loans from the World Bank, required the Argentine government to set aside one-quarter of the money for use in future commercial bank debt reduction agreements, and to accept an ambitious target of a primary budget surplus equivalent to 3.5 per cent of GDP, or $4,900 million, in the year to June 1992, out of which to pay interest on domestic and foreign debts.
The token repayment of $60 million per month on the $40,000 million commercial debt was not expected to be increased.
At the end of 1990, the overall foreign debt stood at $60,970 million.
AMERICAS
CENTRAL AMERICA
Regional summit
The 10th regional Central American summit, attended by the Presidents of Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua and Panama, was held in San Salvador on July 16-18.
This was the first time Panama had attended such a meeting as a full participant, its President Guillermo Endara Galimany guaranteeing Panama's future active, if "gradual" , participation in the process of Central American integration.
Several agreements were incorporated in the final Declaration of San Salvador.
Participants signed a protocol to a treaty creating a Central American Parliament, providing that deputies should be elected no later than 36 months after the treaty was constitutionally ratified by each state, and that such elections should take place in accordance with the electoral laws of the respective countries.
Each country was allocated 20 parliamentary observers until such elections were concluded.
Panama was invited to "adhere" to the protocol at any time.
Tariff barriers on basic grains were to be eliminated across the region by the end of the year, and duties on all agricultural produce by June 1992; duties on most other products should be held below a 20 per cent ceiling from the beginning of 1993.
During the summit, Guatemala and El Salvador also signed a declaration of intent to establish a bilateral free trade zone
A joint request was made to the United States to begin talks on a "fast track" free-trade agreement with the region which did not compromise the bilateral trade process of individual countries with the US.
Venezuela was accepted as a member of the Central American Bank of Economic Integration (BCIE).
Regional health, housing and drug commissions were set up.
Costa Rica and Panama agreed on ecological protection measures for their joint border areas.
The participants reaffirmed previous commitments to a regional peace process, and called for the disarmament and demobilization of the Farabundo Martí National Liberation Front (FMLN) guerrillas in El Salvador under UN supervision.
The FMLN in turn stated that the presence of the Presidents could be constructive in promoting the democratization process if they recognized the existence of a state of dual power in the country created by popular and democratic opposition to the government and the military.
AMERICAS
CARICOM
Annual summit
Attention was focused at the 12th annual summit of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM), held in St Kitts on July 1-5, on the urgency of achieving the economic integration of the region.
Repeated statements to this effect at previous summits had been followed by inaction and the continuation of intra-community trade barriers.
The Prime Minister of Barbados, Erskine Sandiford, agreed this time, however, to co-ordinate efforts to create a single market by 1994.
A special ministerial regional free trade meeting was agreed for October.
The 13 member countries also set a new target date of October 1991 for the implementation of a common external tariff (CET) on imports.
They insisted that there was no long-term contradiction between a common tariff structure to protect fledgling industries, and CARICOM taking advantage of such free trade areas as that proposed in the US Enterprise for the Americas Initiative [see pp. 37526; 37914].
Other joint agreements included the assignment of individual leaders of member countries to supervise and take responsibility for "implementing action" in six key areas identified by an independent West Indian commission.
These were (i) intra-regional travel;(ii) the free movement of skilled and professional people;(iii) the creation of a Caribbean Investment Fund within 12 months with an initial capitalization of approximately US$50,000,000;(iv) the creation of a common currency;(v) the creation of a single common market (see above); and (vi) "mobilization for international negotiations" .
Venezuela also signed an agreement to begin discussions by mid-September on conditions for the future access of CARICOM products to the Venezuelan market.
AMERICAS
LATIN AMERICA
First Ibero-American summit
Presidents of the 19 Spanish- and Portuguese-speaking American countries, along with the President and Prime Minister of Portugal, and the Prime Minister and King Juan Carlos of Spain, participated in the first Ibero-American summit held in the Mexican city of Guadalajara on July 18-19.
The United States was not invited to attend.
Portugal had only agreed to participate at the last minute, reportedly fearing that the summit would otherwise be geared to increasing the influence of Spain in the region.
Also present as observers were Rafael Hernández Colón, Governor of the Associated Free State of Puerto Rico, Joao Baena Soares, Secretary-General of the Organization of American States (OAS), Enrique Iglesias, President of the Inter American Development Bank (IDB), Gert Rosenthal, Executive Secretary of the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC), Federico Mayor Zaragoza, the Director-General of UNESCO, and the UN Secretary-General Javier Pérez de Cuéllar.
Contrary to the declared wishes of the host government, the presence of the Cuban leader Fidel Castro dominated press coverage.
A dissonant voice among the presidential addresses to the summit, Castro pledged his commitment to Latin American unification but characterized the prevailing faith in United States style models to achieve this, such as the free trade Enterprise for the Americas Initiative [see p. 37526], as "illusions" which would not alleviate such critical regional problems as poverty and unemployment.
Cuba, he claimed, remained in the "front trench" against the US domination of Latin America.
In private talks, and in public statements, several heads of government urged Castro to hold elections in order to bring Cuba into line with other Ibero-American governments.
The summit's concluding Declaration of Guadalajara was considered by analysts to be more of an historical document than a blueprint for combined action.
It reflected a central theme that common historical and cultural affinities be forged into an instrument of unity and development to promote closer political and economic integration and co-operation in regional and international affairs.
In political matters, this was represented by a joint commitment to reinforce and promote democracy and political pluralism while retaining full respect for national sovereignty.
At the economic level a similar commitment was given to support the "profound readjustment" of the region's economies in order to achieve recovery and growth.
The Declaration recognized that such radical economic readjustment policies in several of the countries present had already entailed widespread "sacrifice" and that this had to end if true social justice were ever to be achieved.
Joint commitments were also given to promote human rights, to respect international law, to support an international summit on children, to protect the environment and to call on further international assistance to fight the spread of cholera and drug trafficking.
The more tangible results of the summit included agreements (i) to set up a common fund to promote the welfare of threatened indigenous populations; and (ii) to establish an Ibero-American Chamber of Commerce designed to facilitate regional trade.
Spain and Portugal stressed during the proceedings their willingness to continue to act as bridges for Latin American access to the European Communities; the Spanish government also announced that during the next four to five years it would invest over US$14,000 million in the Latin American region.
During the summit Colombia and Chile announced that they had restored relations at consular level with Cuba.
Brazil and Argentina signed a bilateral treaty renouncing the use of their domestic nuclear technologies for the manufacture of nuclear weapons [see p. 37914].
Colombia, Mexico and Venezuela also signed an agreement "of intent" , scheduled to be finalized in Colombia in December 1991, to establish a common free trade zone operative from January 1992.
The meeting agreed to formalize annual Ibero-American conferences of heads of state and government (in Spain in 1992, Brazil in 1993, Colombia in 1994 and Argentina in 1995).
Mercosur meeting
The Economy Ministers of Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay and Uruguay met on July 20 in the Uruguayan capital, Montevideo, and agreed to work out a joint set of rules to combat the dumping and sale of subsidised goods by non-members of their prospective common market agreed under the Mercosur Treaty of March 1991 [see p. 38096].
AMERICAS
ECUADOR
In July, the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) granted a loan of US$176,000,000 to help finance education programmes and the Andean Corporation for Development (CAF) approved a $40,000,000 loan to assist in the modernization of the industrial sector.
AMERICAS
HONDURAS
Marco Tulio Hernández, 28, a member of the Honduran Human Rights Defence Committee and of the Committee of Relatives of Missing Detainees in Honduras was shot dead in San Pedro Sula on July 22; the military was widely believed to be responsible.
AMERICAS
JAMAICA
Howard Cooke, the current President of the Senate and a veteran politician of the People's National Party (PNP), was chosen by the government in late July to be the next Governor General; the opposition Jamaica Labour Party (JLP) stated that it should have been consulted and expressed disappointment with the choice.
ASIA — PACIFIC
INDIA
Internal political affairs
Vote of confidence for Rao government — Appointment of speaker
The minority Congress (I) government of P. V. Narasimha Rao which came to power in June [see pp. 38286-88]won a vote of confidence in the Lok Sabha (the lower house of parliament) on July 15, at the end of a two-day debate.
Voting was 241 in favour and 111 against, with 112 abstentions.
The votes against were cast by the opposition Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP); members of the National Front-Left Front grouping abstained.
Shivraj Patil, the Congress (I) nominee, was elected unopposed as Speaker of the Lok Sabha on July 10.
Patil's victory was assured after Congress had struck a deal with the BJP.
Once the agreement had been reached the National Front-Left Front grouping withdrew its nomination which had been in support of the outgoing Speaker, Rabi Ray.
Resignation of Labour Minister
K. Ramamurthy resigned as Minister of State (independent charge) for Labour on July 29 after accusing Rao of failing to solve a dispute between the neighbouring southern states of Tamil Nadu and Karnataka over the sharing of the waters of the Cauvary River.
Economic affairs
The new Rao government introduced a series of reform measures in July aimed at tackling India's economic crisis.
Besides a US$70,000 million foreign debt, the country was struggling with a foreign-exchange crisis that had reduced reserves to under one month's worth of imports.
The measures included the devaluation of the rupee and the raising of interest rates, and the introduction of radical and far-reaching reform packages for trade and industry.
Many of the measures were in line with IMF "structural reform" strictures leading to speculation that India would soon receive a long-term loan from the IMF of between US$5,000 million and $7,000 million.
The most basic of the "structural reforms" reportedly being demanded by the IMF was the reduction of India's overall fiscal deficit from approximately 8.3 per cent of gross domestic product (GDP) to under 6.5 per cent.
Devaluation — Trade reform package — Shipment of gold abroad
The Reserve Bank of India (RBI, the central bank) devalued the rupee on July 1 and 3 by 8 per cent and 10 per cent respectively against the US dollar (as at July 8, 1991, the rate was US$1.00=Rs25.1842).
Also on July 3 the RBI raised the bank rate by 1 percentage point to a record 11 per cent in what the Financial Times of July 4 described as an attempt to "slow money supply growth and cool the economy" .
The Finance Minister, Manmohan Singh, said that the "adjustment" was intended to demonstrate that the new government was capable of taking "quick, hard and sensible decisions" .
On July 4 P. Chidambaram, Minister of State (with independent charge) for Commerce, announced a package of measures aimed at reforming India's foreign trade policy.
Chidambaram said that the aim was to make the rupee convertible for trade purposes in three to five years.
The two main reforms announced by Chidambaram were the withdrawal of subsidies on exports and the linking of foreign-exchange allocations for imports to export sales.
The RBI announced on July 18 that it had recently sent a total of 46.9 tonnes of gold from its reserves to the Bank of England as collateral for raising loans.
Commentators suggested that the shipment was designed to shore up the confidence of the international community in the face of India's precarious foreign exchange position.
New industrial policy — 1991 budget
Finance Minister, Manmohan Singh, presented details of a new open and liberal industrial policy to the Lok Sabha on July 24.
Singh proposed that industrial licences be abolished except in certain strategic sectors such as the arms industry, atomic energy and strategic minerals.
He also called for the removal of limits on the assets of industrial houses covered by the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices (MRTP).
Singh proposed the liberalization of foreign investment by raising the limit on foreign equity holdings in Indian firms from 40 to 51 per cent.
On July 26 he announced that the government was willing to offer foreign "high tech" companies up to 100 per cent ownership of Indian ventures.
Immediately after announcing details of the new industrial policy Singh presented his first budget to the Lok Sabha.
The presentation of the 1991/92 budget had been postponed from February 1991 under Congress (I) pressure because of the approaching general election [see p. 38006].
The budget aimed to increase revenue by raising corporate taxes steeply, increasing excise duties on luxury goods and introducing fresh measures aimed at attracting remittances from Indians abroad and reducing tax evasion.
On the expenditure side, subsidies were cut in some areas, most notably fertilizers.
Defence spending was increased by only 4 per cent, which, given a rate of inflation of around 12 per cent , represented a cut in real terms.
The budget was attacked by opposition leaders as highly inflationary and a "command budget of the IMF" .
On July 29 the Lok Sabha approved funds to meet government spending for two months while the government attempted to secure the passage of the budget and the new industrial policy.
1990 1990 1991 (forecast)(revised)(forecast) Receipts Revenue 579,380 573,810 675,290 Capital 341,650 385,640 381,740 Total 921,030 959,450 1,057,030 Expenditure Non-plan 688,430 767,610 796,970 Plan 304,660 299,560 337,250 Total 993,090 1,067,170 1,134,220 Budgetary deficit 72,060 107,720 77,190 Source: India Weekly.
Budget details (000,000 rupees)
IMF funding
On July 22 the IMF approved a US$220,000,000 drawing under its compensatory and contingency financing facility (CCFF).
An earlier request for compensatory financing, together with a request for the first tranche of a standby arrangement, had been approved by the IMF in January 1991 [see p. 38006].
A high-level IMF team arrived in New Delhi on July 30 to begin negotiations on the second tranche under the standby arrangements.
State developments
Jammu and Kashmir
Armed separatist guerrillas of the Jammu and Kashmir Liberation Front (JKLF) kidnapped six Israeli tourists in Srinagar, the summer capital of Jammu and Kashmir, on June 26.
Soon afterwards one of the tourists attempted to escape and in the ensuing battle one Israeli and a guerrilla died.
The other five Israelis escaped, but one, Yair Yitzhaki, was again abducted by another JKLF group which eventually released him to a group of journalists on July 3.
Two Swedish engineers kidnapped by the Moslem Janbaz "Crusader" Force (MJF) in March 1991 [see p. 38151]escaped from their captors on July 5.
The group later claimed that they had released the two men.
Pakistan's official APP news agency reported on July 26 that separatist guerrillas of the Hezb-ul-Mujahedeen group had recently launched a devastating attack on an Indian troop convoy.
According to the report, over 100 Indian troops were killed when the group launched a rocket and machine gun attack on the 350-vehicle convoy travelling along the Srinagar-Jammu highway, near Qazi Gund.
An Indian Defence Ministry spokesman said on July 26 that he had no information about such an ambush.
Other states
Over 400 people drowned when the embankment of the River Wardha in Maharashtra was breached on July 30.
In the union territory of Pondicherry a six-member Congress (I) ministry led by V. Vaithilingam was sworn in on July 4 [see p. 38287 for Congress (I) assembly election victory in June].
ASIA — PACIFIC
PAKISTAN
Passing of constitutional amendment
The National Assembly on July 18 overwhelmingly approved a bill amending the Constitution and granting the government special powers to combat terrorist crimes.
The 12th Amendment Bill authorizing the government to establish "special speedy courts" with the power to hang perpetrators of "heinous crimes" within 30 days, was proposed after Prime Minister Mian Nawaz Sharif announced on July 13 that he would seek "more legal and constitutional powers to fight terrorism" .
A presidential decree ordered the surrender of all illicit firearms by July 15.
The latest measures came amidst reports of escalating violence in three of the country's four provinces.
On June 26, 16 people belonging to one family were massacred in the Punjab provincial capital, Lahore.
A further seven people were killed in the province shortly afterwards.
Cases involving murder and burglaries were also reported from the capital, Islamabad.
In Sind 12 people were killed during gun battles involving factions of the Mohajir Qaumi Movement (MQM) and the Pakistan People's Party (PPP) in late June and early July.
In the North-West Frontier Province (NWFP) between 20 and 30 people were reported killed in tribal shootouts in late June, while election violence in Azad Jammu and Kashmir [see below]resulted in the deaths of another 20 people.
Reports of mass arrests
Reports in mid-July indicated that the government had intensified its campaign against members of the PPP suspected of terrorism.
On July 1 the government ordered the re-arrest of all convicted members of the pro-PPP militant organization Al Zulfiqar who had been released under the orders of the government of former Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto.
In late June several hundred PPP supporters had been arrested in Sind on charges of being responsible for a series of recent terrorist incidents in the province.
According to the Economist of July 27, more than 1,000 alleged terrorists, mostly PPP activists, had been arrested in one district of Sind alone.
Allegations of illegal nuclear-related imports
Reports in early July indicated illegal attempts to import sensitive mini-computers with nuclear application from Norway via the United Kingdom.
Norwegian police confirmed the arrest of two Norwegian businessmen suspected of selling the computers to a UK-based company which subsequently arranged for their shipment to Pakistan.
Reports added that UK customs officials had ordered an investigation after seizing a consignment of computer-related equipment destined for Pakistan in late June.
A Pakistan Foreign Office spokesman said on July 6, however, that Pakistan was not party to any attempt to evade export controls.
Meanwhile, on July 11 Prime Minister Sharif issued a threat to "any country whose soil is used" to attack Pakistan's nuclear sites.
The statement followed press speculation that a group of Israelis in Indian-ruled Kashmir were preparing to attack the nuclear plant at Kahuta, near Islamabad.
On July 22 Army Chief of Staff Gen. Mirza Aslam Beg claimed that an Indo-Pakistan war was looming, and the following day the Indian Defence Minister Sharad Pawar said that India would retaliate if Pakistan continued to support armed rebels in Kashmir, a charge denied by the Pakistan government.
New governor of Baluchistan
Radio Pakistan announced on July 12 that Sardar Gul Mohammad Khan Jogezai had been appointed Governor of Baluchistan.
Dismissal and arrest of AJK Premier
The government on July 5 ordered the dismissal and detention of the Prime Minister of Azad Jammu and Kashmir (AJK), Mumtaz Hussain Rathore, after he ordered fresh polls claiming that the results of the State elections held on June 29 had been rigged.
Rathore was released on July 17.
Rathore's allegations, which came in the midst of growing political tension between the AJK and Pakistan governments [see p. 38152], were apparently prompted by the defeat of his party, the Azad Kashmir People's Party, allied to the PPP, which won only two seats in the 40-seat assembly.
Sardar Abdul Qayyum Khan, current AJK President and leader of the All Jammu and Kashmir Moslem Conference which had won 32 Assembly seats, was named Prime Minister on July 11 after resigning the presidency and being elected unopposed to a parliamentary seat reserved for the ulama.
ASIA — PACIFIC
BANGLADESH
Introduction of constitutional amendment bills
In the most recent of a series of constitutional amendments [see also p. 38289], the ruling Bangladesh National Party (BNP) proposed on July 16 a bill proposing the holding of a referendum on whether presidential assent was necessary for any law seeking to amend the Constitution.
The opposition Awami League opposed the motion, which followed attempts in early July to restore parliamentary rule and to ratify the appointment of acting President, Shehabuddin Ahmed, and all actions taken by him during his tenure.
Reports indicated that the Awami League had also opposed some provisions of the government's earlier bill abolishing presidential rule, including the disqualification of MPs acting in defiance of party mandates and the induction of one-fifth of the Cabinet from outside parliament.
Arrest of former minister
M. A. Sattar, Commerce Minister under the Ershad regime, was arrested on July 14.
Visit by Foreign Minister to Soviet Union
Foreign Affairs Minister A. S. M. Mustafizur Rahman visited the Soviet Union on July 9-12, holding talks with Soviet Foreign Minister Aleksandr Bessmertnykh and signing a consular convention.
UN estimate of flood damage
A UN report released on July 16 estimated at US$1,780 million costs incurred by the cyclone which hit the country in April [see pp. 38152; 38176-77].
According to the Financial Times of July 17, foreign aid agencies had so far donated US$400,000,000 while an additional US$400,000,000 had been generated from internal sources.
ASIA — PACIFIC
AFGHANISTAN
Conditional acceptance by mujaheddin of UN peace plan
In an apparent reversal of recent policy [see pp. 37855; 38194], mujaheddin leaders agreed on July 30 to consider a UN peace plan [see p. 38194]as "a possible basis for a settlement for the Afghanistan problem" .
A communiqué issued after talks in the Pakistan capital, Islamabad, on July 29-30 between mujaheddin leaders and ministers from Iran and Pakistan said that the participants "had recognized positive points" in the UN plan.
The Iranian Foreign Minister, Ali Akbar Vellayati, who attended the meeting, told a press conference that the talks were a "turning point" endorsed by "more than 90 per cent of active Afghan groups" .
Some reports indicated, however, that the meeting had been boycotted by leading mujaheddin representatives, including the former Interior Minister in the Afghan Interim Government (AIG) and a member of the fundamentalist Hezb-e-Islami, Yunus Khales [see p. 38194].
Visit by Swiss peace mission
A delegation led by the Swiss State Secretary for External Affairs, Klaus Jacobi, met government ministers and mujaheddin leaders on June 30-July 3.
At a news conference on July 3, Jacobi said that Switzerland was ready to "provide all facilities" for a peace conference on the basis of the latest UN peace plan [see p. 38194].
On July 8 he was quoted in Berne as saying that he was still awaiting a response from opposition groups.
Renewed intra-mujaheddin fighting
Reports from Kabul Radio indicated that almost 200 people were killed in July during heavy fighting between mujaheddin factions belonging to the Hezb-e-Islami (Gulbuddin group), the Ittehad-e-Islami and the Jamiat-e-Islami.
Resignation of AIG minister
The Education Minister in the AIG, Farooq Azam was reported on July 2 as having resigned claiming that it was "more or less a dead organization" .
Further attacks on aid workers
Reports on July 20 said that the United States had tightened restrictions on aid to the mujaheddin after the abduction of two US aid workers in mujaheddin-held territory.
On July 17 a French aid worker Xavier Rouan had been released after being held by mujaheddin guerrillas since July 5.
Meanwhile, the International Committeee of the Red Cross announced on July 13 that two of its workers had been killed during an armed ambush in Paktia province.
Cut in UN aid
UN officials confirmed on July 30 that the UN had cut its 1991 rehabilitation budget for Afghanistan from US$136,000,000 to $105,000,000.
ASIA — PACIFIC
NEPAL
Upper house elections — Cabinet appointments
The ruling Nepali Congress won a majority in elections on June 26 to the newly formed 60-member National Council, the country's upper house.
Of the 60 members, 35 were elected by the members of the House of Representatives, 15 were selected from the country's five development zones and 10 were directly appointed by King Birendra [see p. 38193 for May election of House of Representatives].
Seats Nepali Congress 31 United Nepal Communist Party 16 United People's Front 2 Nepal Sadbhavana Party 1 Appointed by King Birendra 10 Total 60 
Composition of Nepali National Council
Cabinet appointments
The Agence France-Presse news agency reported on July 5 that Mahesh Acharya and Ram Badan Yadav both recently elected to the National Council, had been appointed as Minister of Finance and Minister of Health respectively.
Both posts had been previously been held by the Prime Minister, Girja Prasad Koirala, who retained the Defence, Foreign Affairs and Royal Palace Affairs portfolios.
Cholera epidemic
The Press Trust of India reported on July 14 that Nepal was suffering from a serious cholera epidemic.
According to the report, at least 300 people, mostly women and children, had recently died of the disease and a further 7,000 were ill.
Devaluation
The Nepalese rupee was devalued against the US dollar by 20.96 per cent in two moves on July 2 and 3 in order to keep it in line with the recently devalued India rupee [see p. 38334].
As at July 8, 1991, its value was US$1.00=42.72 Nepalese rupees.
ASIA — PACIFIC
CHINA
Floods — Appeal for international aid
Following over two months of torrential rain and the worst floods since 1954, China on July 11 issued an urgent appeal for US$200 million in international aid, the first such appeal for outside assistance since the Communists took power in 1949.
Since early May, floods had affected 18 provinces and some of China's most fertile land, killing over 1,700 people and leaving another 10,000,000 homeless, and causing losses of $7,500 million, according to a report on July 16 by the official news agency Xinhua.
Anhui and Jiangsu provinces lost 60 per cent and 20 per cent respectively of their summer grain harvests.
Damage to road and rail communications, power plants and local industries was also reported in many areas.
Dams in Jiangsu and Hunan were blown up to divert floodwaters into surrounding farmland.
By July 13 the waters of the Yangtze, Huaihe, Haihe and other rivers as well as Taihu Lake had reached record levels, threatening the cities of Wuhan, Nanjing, Suzhou and Wuxi.
While the eastern and central provinces, including Sichuan and Guizhou, were the worst hit, rains and flooding also affected Beijing, Heilongjiang, Inner Mongolia and Guizhou.
Jiang Zemin, the general secretary of the Chinese Communist Party (CCP), Premier Li Peng and Vice-Premier Tian Jiyun inspected the flood situation in Shanghai, Anhui, Jiangsu and Zhejiang and promised central government aid.
Some 600,000 People's Liberation Army (PLA) troops as well as several million people's militia were dispatched to reinforce dykes and assist flood refugees.
State grain reserves were opened in Anhui and Jiangsu while medical teams fought water-borne diseases such as dysentery and cholera, which were reported to have affected up to a quarter of the flood victims.
An emergency meeting of the CCP's Politburo, chaired by Jiang Zemin, on July 16 stressed the importance of publicizing the role of the PLA in forging close ties between the army and the people in its disaster work.
The meeting urged cadres to work at the frontline as "vanguard models" to demonstrate the "strong leadership provided by the superior socialist system" in triumphing over natural disasters.
The appeal for international aid drew a limited response from the major Western countries.
UN officials reported a total package of US$1,800,000, including US$600,000 from Japan and US$200,000 jointly from the United States, the United Kingdom and Australia.
The Taiwan Red Cross offered US$1,000,000 in cash and 10,000 tonnes of rice, while donations from Hong Kong totalled $25,600,000.
An appeal for voluntary donations within China raised 50,000,000 yuan (about $9,357,000).
At a meeting in Shanghai on July 23 a new flood control plan for the Huaihe River and Taihu Lake was announced as part of the eighth five-year plan (1991-96).
At the meeting, Li Peng criticized existing flood control defences as "inadequate" .
Sino-US relations — MFN status renewed
The US House of Representatives on July 10 approved the extension of most favoured nation (MFN) trading status to China, but linked its renewal in 1992 to China meeting stringent conditions on improving human rights, ending the export of goods produced in prison labour camps, and strictly controlling the sale of ballistic missiles to the Middle East.
The 313 to 112 vote gave Congress the two-thirds majority required to obviate a presidential veto.
Earlier, on May 28, President Bush had announced his support for unconditional extension of MFN status.
Another resolution passed by Congress which denied MFN status failed to achieve a veto-proof majority.
The Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman called the conditions "gross interference in China's internal affairs" and warned of "serious retrogression" in Sino-US relations.
Earlier, Chinese officials had indicated that they were resigned to worsening relations rather than accept conditions on MFN renewal.
On July 23 China welcomed the US Senate's 55 to 44 vote for the conditional renewal of MFN status, which had opened the way for a presidential veto.
However, in the intensive lobbying prior to the vote in both houses, Bush had agreed to concessions on his policy of unconditional renewal of MFN status, including "strong action" if China did not lower import tariffs, end illegal textile shipments via a third country, and strengthen the protection of intellectual property rights.
On April 28 the USA had placed China on its "301 list" of unfair trade partners, with the threat of trade retaliation.
In response, China had passed copyright and computer software protection legislation, although it was criticized as "inadequate" by the USA in trade talks in Beijing on June 11-15.
Also, to counter US criticisms of a trade imbalance, China had dispatched a buying mission which signed contracts worth $1,200 million.
On June 16, Reginald Bartholomew, US Under-Secretary of State for International Security Affairs, had held three days of talks in Beijing on controlling Chinese sales of ballistic missiles to Pakistan, Iran and Syria, which he linked with the renewal of MFN status.
Although China gave no guarantee that it would end missile sales, it indicated that it was "seriously considering" signing the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT).
(France had announced on June 3 that it would sign the NPT — see p. 38314 — leaving China as the only permanent member of the UN Security Council not bound by the treaty).
70th anniversary of CCP
A rally to mark the founding of the CCP in 1921 was held on July 1 in Beijing.
Jiang Zemin, CCP general secretary, addressed the 10,000-strong gathering, which was also attended by President Yang Shangkun, Li Peng and other senior leaders.
Deng Xiaoping was not present.
In his one hour and 40 minute speech, Jiang Zemin reviewed the CCP's major achievements.
Stressing China's hard-won independence and unity, Jiang said: "The past 70 years prove that only by following the leadership of the CCP and taking the socialist road can our country become powerful and prosperous, our nation be rejuvenated and our people enjoy a prosperous life." 
He continued: "This experience boils down to one point: we must integrate the fundamental principles of Marxism with the concrete realities of the Chinese revolution and national development and keep to our own road." 
Dismissing the collapse of communism in Eastern Europe as a "temporary" setback, Jiang said that economic development was the key to the CCP retaining power.
He said that China would develop a "creative" socialist planned commodity economy based on public ownership, and thus ruled out capitalism or a multiparty democracy, "national nihilism" or "wholesale westernization" .
In the fight against "peaceful evolution" by "hostile forces at home and abroad" and against "bourgeois liberalization" , Jiang called for building a "great wall of steel" , and urged the study of the works of Lenin and Mao.
On July 4, the CCP central committee issued circulars launching national campaigns to study the newly published second edition of Mao Zedong's Selected Works (Vols I-IV) and Jiang Zemin's party anniversary speech.
Li Peng's Middle East tour
On July 2, Li Peng began a "goodwill" tour of the Middle East intended to increase China's influence in the region following the Gulf War.
During the 13-day visit to Egypt, Jordan [see p. 38360], Iran, Saudi Arabia, Syria and Kuwait, Li Peng was accompanied by Foreign Affairs Minister Qian Qichen and Minister of Foreign Economic Relations and Trade Li Lanqing.
Li Peng and the Egyptian Prime Minister, Atef Sidki, agreed in talks that the Middle East should be declared a zone free from weapons of mass destruction.
In Saudi Arabia, Li Peng spoke of the "vast potential" for trade and economic ties, during "fruitful" talks with leaders including King Fahd.
Economy in first six months
Despite increasing debt defaults among enterprises and devastation caused by flooding, in the first six months GNP increased by 6.1 per cent, according to the State Statistical Bureau on July 22.
The bureau said growth in capital construction, commodity retail prices and export volume had topped 10 per cent thus "enhancing the vitality of the economy" .
The bureau said that despite flooding the summer grain harvest was down by only 1.8 per cent, although "severe" economic losses were expected in the second half.
Industrial output had shown a 13.4 per cent increase over the same period in 1990, exports an 18.5 per cent increase, and imports a 15.9 per cent increase.
Earlier, on July 19, Guo Zhenqian, the vice-governor of the People's Bank of China, told a banking conference in Beijing that the financial situation allowed "no room for optimism" , and warned of the threat of inflation unless there was improvement in the use of circulating funds, economic returns and the situation of enterprises "squeezing, seizing and diverting" bank loans.
He called for strict control over loans and debt defaults in the next six months.
China's second stock exchange officially opened in the Shenzhen Special Economic Zone on July 3 following the opening of the Shanghai exchange in December 1990.
The Shenzhen exchange had begun trial operations in May 1990.
Neither stock market allowed direct foreign investment.
ASIA — PACIFIC
HONG KONG
Signing of airport agreement
A Memorandum of Understanding on the construction of a vast airport project in Hong Kong was issued by the Chinese and United Kingdom governments on July 4, after five days of secret talks between Sir Percy Cradock, a senior UK foreign policy adviser, and senior Chinese officials.
Ending 20 months of negotiations, the agreement eased the tension between the UK and China over consultation on Hong Kong's affairs in the period leading up to 1997 when the colony was to revert to Chinese control, and ended the uncertainty over the US$16,200 million airport project, announced in 1989, whose funding had been threatened by China's opposition.
China had been concerned that the project might leave Hong Kong bankrupt [see pp. 37960; 38147; 38192.
Hailed by Sir David Wilson, the Governor of Hong Kong, as "a good agreement for Hong Kong" , the memorandum was widely seen as the UK acceding to China's demands for a greater say in Hong Kong's affairs, although Sir David claimed that it would not give China a veto over the Hong Kong government.
The memorandum provided assurances that the incurring of any debts exceeding US$641 million after 1997 would have to have China's agreement, and that at least $3,200 million would remain in government reserves at the handover date.
In return, China promised to support the construction with a "positive" attitude to "necessary and reasonable" borrowing by the Hong Kong government on loans extending beyond 1997.
The agreement also provided for an airport committee under the Sino-British Joint Liaison Group, with a Hong Kong-based Bank of China official on the board, and a consultative committee with no decision-making powers.
The airport committee would give "full weight" to Chinese views.
Outside the airport issue, the UK said that it would intensify consultation and co-operation over Hong Kong issues in the approach to 1997.
The memorandum also instituted twice-yearly meetings between the UK and Chinese Foreign Secretaries on "matters of mutual concern" , and set up a link between the governor of Hong Kong and the director of the Hong Kong and Macao Affairs Office under China's State Council.
It was announced at the same time that the UK Prime Minister, John Major, would travel to Beijing to sign the agreement, making him the first Western head of government to visit China since the crushing of the pro-democracy movement in June 1989.
ASIA — PACIFIC
MACAO
Publication of draft Basic Law
The Draft Basic Law of the Macao Special Administrative Region of the People's Republic of China, which was to become the territory's constitution when it reverted to Chinese rule in 1999, was published on July 13.
According to the Far Eastern Economic Review of July 25, good relations between China and Portugal in preparing the draft law had led China to make important concessions on nationality to preserve confidence in the territory.
Like Hong Kong, Macao would retain its capitalist system after 1999 and would have a high degree of autonomy, except in foreign affairs and defence which would be the responsibility of the Chinese central government.
In contrast to the Hong Kong Basic Law, the Macao draft law imposed no restrictions on foreign passport holders taking key posts in Macao after 1999 except for the chief executive who could not gain right of abode in a foreign country during his term of office.
About one-quarter of Macao's residents qualified for Portuguese passports.
Immigration from the mainland was to be strictly controlled while Macao's entertainment industry, centred around gambling casinos, was to be preserved as a major support to the territory's economy.
Another major concession in the draft law was that it made no provision for stationing Chinese troops in Macao after 1999.
ASIA — PACIFIC
MONGOLIA
Revision of budget — Visit by US Secretary of State
A 30 per cent cut in the 1991 state budget, reducing revenue expectations to 3,260 million tugrik and expenditure to 4,990 million tugrik, was reported in early July.
Other indicators of an economic crisis included a dramatic drop in livestock numbers, a reduction by 3.9 per cent in industrial production in January-June compared with January-June 1990, and a reduction by 63 per cent by value in foreign trade, largely because of switching to hard-currency trade with the Soviet Union.
In late June the tugrik had been devalued to a fixed rate of US$1.00=40 tugriks.
United States Secretary of State James Baker, visiting Mongolia on July 25-28, in the first address by a leading Western politician to the Little Hural promised international aid for economic reforms [for President's January 1991 visit to USA see p. 37960].
ASIA — PACIFIC
NORTH-SOUTH KOREA
Improvement in relations
The government of South Korea on July 11 accepted an invitation from North Korea to hold a fourth round of premiers' talks in Pyongyang on Aug. 27.
The talks, which had begun in September 1990 with the objects of easing political and military tension on the Korean peninsula and of promoting greater links between the two states, had involved three meetings between delegations led by the premiers of the two countries, thereby representing the highest level of contact ever achieved by the two countries.
They were suspended in February 1991 as a protest by the North against the South's annual military exercises with the United States.
The decision to resumetalks was one of several indications of improving relations during July.
On July 1 the South Korean Foreign Ministry had departed from its previous position by announcing that it was willing to discuss nuclear non-proliferation with the North.
While reiterating that the demand for international inspections of North Korea's nuclear facilities could not be linked to other issues, the government stated its willingness to discuss the nuclear issue "for the purposes of reducing tension and building confidence" .
In a speech on July 12 to the inaugural meeting of the fifth Advisory Council for Democratic and Peaceful Reunification, the South Korean President Roh Tae Woo reiterated previous calls for the negotiation of a non-aggression declaration and a peace treaty between the two states.
As a prelude to eventual reunification, he also proposed increased social and cultural contacts including the exchange of radio and television broadcasts and joint sponsored border rallies to celebrate Korean Independence Day on Aug. 15.
On July 15 both countries issued specific proposals designed to increase cultural contacts.
The South urged the North to participate in a "Grand Unification Gala" to celebrate Aug. 15.
The proposed events included a cultural festival at the truce village of Panmunjom and a cross-country march by 2,000 people, as well as unification symposiums and prayer meetings.
The proposed gala contained many elements of reunification activities organized by Southern dissidents but banned by the government.
The North proposed convening a "political consultative conference for national reunification" in either Seoul or Pyongyang, to be attended by 50 delegates drawn from political parties and public organizations from each side.
First direct trading contact
A South Korean ship laden with 5,000 tonnes of rice left the south-western port of Mokpo on July 27 for the North Korean port of Najin.
Under the terms of the deal, which marked the first direct trading contact between the two Korean states since the Korean War of 1950-53, the North would supply 30,000 tonnes of anthracite and 11,000 tonnes of cement in exchange for the rice.
The shipment had originally been scheduled for May — the first of some 10,000 tonnes of rice which the South had agreed to barter during 1991 — but had been delayed by US objections.
Indirect trade between the two Koreas had amounted to US$25,600,000 in 1990.
The South exported textiles and electronic goods in return for zinc and semi-finished products from the North.
On July 29 the South Korean government revealed that it had been invited by the North to attend talks in China on a development project in the Tumen River region, on the Sino-North Korean border.
The move, which was welcomed by South Korea, represented the first occasion upon which the North had sought the South's participation in talks on a development project in its territory.
ASIA — PACIFIC
NORTH KOREA
Application to join UN
It was reported that on July 8 North Korea had submitted an application (dated July 2) to join the UN.
The application, made under the name of Deputy Premier and Minister for Foreign Affairs, Kim Yong Nam, followed a decision announced at the end of May that North Korea was dropping its previous insistence on a single Korean seat at the UN.
In a statement issued on July 9, the South Korean Foreign Ministry welcomed the North's move.
On July 13 the South Korean National Assembly unanimously passed a bill which accepted the UN Charter and thereby opened the way for a South Korean application for membership, which was expected to be filed on Aug. 5.
ASIA — PACIFIC
SOUTH KOREA
President's visit to North America
President Roh Tae Woo made a three-day state visit to the United States beginning on July 1, the first such trip by a South Korean leader for 26 years.
After talks with government and congressional leaders, including President George Bush, Roh travelled on to Ottawa, on July 3, for an official visit to Canada.
Roh and Bush affirmed on July 2 the mutual security ties between their two countries, whilst also discussing bilateral trade issues, particularly US access to South Korea's financial and agricultural markets.
The two Presidents also exchanged views on the changing political complexion of north-east Asia.
They called upon North Korea to submit to international inspection of its nuclear facilities as an act of compliance with international law, stressing that the issue could not be linked to other matters such as the payment of Japanese compensation for Korea's pre-1945 colonization.
During the course of the visit it was reported that US Secretary of State James Baker had made it known that the USA rejected recent suggestions that it should alter its deployment of nuclear weapons currently sited in South Korea as an inducement to North Korea to allow international inspection.
ASIA — PACIFIC
JAPAN
Kaifu's US visit
Japanese Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu visited United States President George Bush at the latter's holiday home at Kennebunkport, Maine, on July 11-12.
The two leaders conducted "informal" talks in a "family-like atmosphere" before leaving the USA in order to attend the G-7 summit in London [see pp. 38<188
Shortly before he left Japan, Kaifu's Cabinet approved an additional US$500 million contribution to the cost of the allied war effort against Iraq.
This amount represented a shortfall — caused by currency fluctuations — on the $9,000 million which Japan had agreed to pay [see pp. 38010-11].
In return the USA reportedly dropped its demand for a further $700 million from Japan, representing sums paid to the United Kingdom, France, and the Arab states which Japan had insisted should be set against the original pledge of $9,000 million.
During their talks the two leaders discussed Japan's protection of its domestic markets and its trade surplus with the USA.
They also discussed at length the issue of aid for the Soviet Union.
Kaifu reiterated the position of the Japanese government that the industrialized countries should not provide massive aid to the Soviet Union until there was greater evidence of a genuine commitment towards the creation of a market economy.
Japan, moreover, was locked into a territorial dispute over the Soviet occupation of what the Soviet side called the southern Kurile islands, and what Japan called the northern territories, north-east of Hokkaido [see p. 38148].
Bush accepted an invitation from Kaifu to visit Japan in late November 1991.
A visit scheduled for earlier in the year had been postponed because of the Gulf war.
Readoption of nationalist symbols
It was reported on July 1 that the Japanese government had given its official approval for the use of the country's old imperial hymn — Kimi ga Yo ( "Your majesty's reign" )— as the Japanese national anthem, despite the song's past association with the period of Japanese military expansionism.
The familiar Hi no maru ( "round sun" ) flag was also formally designated as the national flag.
The decision was made in the form of new guidelines issued by the Education Ministry in approving school textbooks for the next three years.
Although commonly used in recent years the red sun flag, like the anthem, had been banned by the post-Pacific War forces of US occupation because of its association with Japanese imperialism.
The new textbooks tended to deal more candidly with Japan's pre-1945 aggression than had been the case previously.
During the screening process, however, the Education Ministry made some changes which were criticized by liberals.
In covering the notorious Rape of Nanjing in 1937, a book stated that "over 70,000 people were reportedly killed by the Japanese Imperial Army" .
Following ministry advice the passage was altered to read: "A large number of Chinese people were killed." 
Securities scandal
A major scandal involving Japan's four largest securities houses continued to unfold in July, and increasingly acquired a political dimension which seriously undermined the reputation of Kaifu's Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) government.
In a manner reminiscent of the Recruit scandal — which destroyed the government of Noboru Takeshita in 1989 — the scope of the securities scandal appeared to spread inexorably.
In addition to implicating members of the Japanese establishment and of the Finance Ministry, the scandal also threatened to imperil Kaifu's plans for constitutional reform, and highlighted the lack of effective government supervision over the securities industry.
The securities scandal, which broke in June [see p. 38292], centred upon the discovery that the Nomura, Nikko, Daiwa and Yamaichi securities houses had made compensation payments to important clients who had suffered financial losses as a result of taking their investment advice.
The firms were also accused of subsequently attempting to conceal the payments which, although not illegal, violated the non-binding guidelines of the Ministry of Finance which had been in effect since December 1989.
It was also discovered that Nomura and Nikko had lent money to a major gangster syndicate and had attempted to boost the value of shares held by the syndicate's head.
The information led to the resignations of the presidents of the two brokerage firms on June 24 [ibid.].
The four firms were also penalized by being forced to curtail their commercial activities for four days, held liable for tax due on the compensation payments, and fined by the Tokyo Stock Exchange.
The four securities houses — together with some smaller firms — admitted making compensation payments to corporate clients amounting to at least 128,300 million yen (about US$900 million).
The houses claimed, however, that they had informed the Ministry of Finance of the payments in 1990, and that the ministry had chosen not make the information public, preferring to instruct the securities houses to discipline those personnel responsible.
The involvement of the ministry led Finance Minister Ryutaro Hashimoto to accept a 10 per cent cut in his salary for three months in order to assume responsibility for the scandal.
Several other senior ministry officials took pay cuts and were subject to disciplinary action.
The scandal also increased calls for the creation of an independent securities regulatory body similar to the Securities Exchange Commission in the USA.
Such a body would relieve the Finance Ministry of its current, and often vaguely defined, powers of "administrative guidance" over the securities industry.
Revelation of clients involved
The list of favoured clients who received compensation was believed to exceed 200 names.
The president of Nomura, Setsuya Tabuchi — who resigned his position on July 22 — declared that he would not publicly disclose the names of such clients, a stance endorsed by his counterparts in the other securities houses.
However, in a rare display of unity, the country's four main opposition parties — the Social Democratic Party of Japan (SDPJ), the Komeito (Clean Government) Party, the Japanese Communist Party (JSP) and the Democratic Socialist Party (DSP)— threatened to disrupt the special Diet session scheduled to begin on Aug. 5 unless a full legislative inquiry was undertaken.
The special session had been called to discuss a far-reaching LDP-sponsored electoral reform package, the success of which was seen by many commentators to be crucial to Kaifu's chances of retaining the party leadership (and, therefore, the premiership) when his current term expired in October 1991.
In the face of increasing political and media pressure — and the proliferation of unofficial lists based on leaks and speculation — the presidents of the four securities houses released the list of favoured clients on July 29.
Among the 231 names were giant corporations such as Hitachi, Matshushita and Nissan, but also a number of small firms, savings banks and some individuals.
There was no immediate explanation as to why such obscure clients were favoured with compensation payments, although there was considerable speculation that some names on the list could be facades created to conceal the true identity of investors.
On July 31 a further 13 brokerage houses released the identity of 380 institutions and the initials of six individuals who had received a total of 43,697 million yen (about S320 million) in compensation payments.
Among the names on the list was that of a former Finance Ministry official and that of Soka Gakkai, a lay Buddhist group which had close links to Komeito.
Another name was that of a property services company headed by a son of Shin Kanemaru, one of the LDP's most senior members.
The Diet agreed on Aug. 1 to establish a special committee later in the month to investigate the scandal.
Itoman and other financial scandals
Six men were arrested on July 23 in connection with a scandal involving Itoman, a Japanese trading company which encountered severe financial trouble as a result of its involvement in speculative art and property investments.
When the scandal broke in 1990, it forced the resignation of Ichiro Isoda, the chairman of Sumitomo Bank, Itoman's main bank.
Those arrested included Yoshihiko Kawamura, who had served as Itoman's president until his dismissal earlier in 1991.
He was accused of improperly acquiring 8,280,000 Itoman shares between October 1989 and November 1990 with loans obtained from Itoman subsidiaries.
The company's former vice-president, Sadamu Takagaki, was also arrested on similar charges.
It was alleged that the two men had improperly attempted to support the company's share price after the revelation of its financial difficulties.
The other four men arrested were accused of selling art objects to Itoman at inflated prices founded upon forged valuation certificates.
In addition to the securities scandal, the Japanese financial establishment was embarrassed during July by a separate scandal involving the Marubeni Corporation, and bank scandals including a huge illegal loans scheme at the Fuji bank.
A team from the Tokyo public prosecutor's office raided the headquarters of Marubeni, the country's fourth-largest trading company, on July 2, arresting four senior executives and seizing numerous boxes of documents.
The four were alleged to have participated in a 3,600 million yen swindle to extract payment for bogus steel shipments.
The company denied all responsibility for the fraud, insisting that the staff involved had acted without the knowledge of their superiors.
It was revealed on July 25 that Fuji Bank, the country's fourth-largest commercial bank, had dismissed four employees at the centre of an illegal loans scheme using forged deposit certificates worth 260,000 million yen (about $2,000 million).
Three of the four employees were formally accused of fraud and forgery, and Fuji admitted to having suffered losses of 27,100 million yen (about $200 million) as a result of the scheme which had begun in 1987.
The Kyowa Saitama Bank on July 26 sued a former employee and two companies involved in an alleged 8,000 million yen ($60,000,000) swindle.
Japan's seventh-largest bank, Tokai Bank Ltd, announced on July 27 that it had uncovered a 63,000 million yen ($450 million) fraud involving deposit certificates.
Election of Doi's replacement as SDPJ leader
The Social Democratic Party of Japan (SDPJ), the country's main opposition grouping, on July 31 formally confirmed Makoto Tanabe as its new leader on the second day of a two-day emergency party conference.
He succeeded the charismatic Takako Doi, who had announced her resignation in June, in the aftermath of the party's poor showing in the local elections.
Tanabe, 69, a reformist from the right wing of the party, had narrowly defeated the centre-left candidate, Tetsu Ueda, in a leadership ballot of the party's 83,000 members on July 23.
Tanabe was the author of a recent policy review which was designed to steer the party away from its traditional position of pacifism (including opposition to the country's Self Defence Force on the grounds that its existence was unconstitutional) and international neutrality.
He also had close links with some senior members of the ruling Liberal Democratic Party (LDP), notably its elder statesman Shin Kanemaru.
The fact that Ueda — campaigning on a platform of no policy revision — secured more than 40 per cent of the vote in the leadership contest, however, suggested that the party was deeply split over its future direction.
In addition to confirming Tanabe's election, the extraordinary party conference confirmed its new leader's policy review, but did so only after altering its substance to such an extent that it contained little in the way of significant policy shifts.
ASIA — PACIFIC
MYANMA
International human rights award for opposition leader
On July 10 the European Parliament awarded its Sakharov prize for freedom of thought to Aung San Suu Kyi, Myanma's main opposition figure.
Suu Kyi had led the National League for Democracy (NLD) to a landslide election victory in May 1990 [see pp. 37457-58], but the country's ruling military junta, the State Law and Order Restoration Council (SLORC), which had placed her under house arrest in mid-1989, prevented the party from forming a government.
Further moves against NLD Assembly members
On July 10 the SLORC approved legislation amending the country's election law, to be applied retroactively from May 1989, the date of its original enactment.
The new legislation added to the grounds on which a People's Assembly representative could be disqualified or banned from standing for future election.
These included convictions for law and order offences or offences relating to "moral turpitude" .
A Reuters report on July 13 stated that the new legislation would be used to remove NLD members from their Assembly seats.
At least 82 Assembly members, most from the NLD, had died, been imprisoned or had fled Myanma since the May 1989 election.
Non-renewal of US textile agreement
The United States announced on July 22 that it would not renew a bilateral textile agreement with Myanma in protest at human rights violations and the junta's refusal to hand over power to the NLD.
The USA had already imposed a series of trade sanctions against the government.
ASIA — PACIFIC
CAMBODIA
Diplomacy — Internal affairs
July was a month of hectic diplomatic activity following the partial peace agreement reached by the warring Cambodian factions in Pattaya, Thailand, in late June [see p. 38293].
 "Informal" SNC meeting in Beijing
The all-party Supreme National Council (SNC) held an "informal" meeting in the Chinese capital, Beijing, on July 16-17.
It was agreed that a full SNC session would take place in Bangkok, Thailand, in late August.
The meeting was attended by Hun Sen, Premier of the State of Cambodia (SOC) and SNC member, who was the first leader of the Phnom Penh regime to visit China.
The Chinese government stressed that the invitation to Hun Sen did not signify Chinese recognition of the Phnom Penh regime.
The SNC unanimously elected Prince Norodom Sihanouk as its chair.
Accordingly, Sihanouk resigned as president of the tripartite rebel National Government of Cambodia (NGC) in order to "remain neutral as a conciliator" .
The SNC also elected a delegation to represent Cambodia at the forthcoming UN General Assembly (Hun Sen, SOC Foreign Minister Hor Nam Hong, NGC Vice-President and Khmer Rouge leader Khieu Samphan and NGC Prime Minister and leader of the Khmer People's National Liberation Front (KPNLF), Son Sann).
The SNC agreed to contact the UN Secretary-General, Javier Pérez de Cuéllar, requesting him to send personnel to control the ceasefire which had been in force in Cambodia since early May.
Meeting of UN Security Council members and PICC in Beijing
Representatives of the five permanent members of the UN Security Council and of the two co-chairs of the Paris International Conference on Cambodia (PICC), France and Indonesia, met in Beijing on July 17-18.
The meeting was held to discuss the future of the UN draft peace plan which remained a point of dispute between the opposing factions.
The plan, which proposed the establishment of a UN Transitional Authority in Cambodia (UNTAC) in the run-up to a general election, had been accepted by the NGC, but the SOC remained opposed to proposals for the total dismantling of its armed forces.
A communiqué issued at the end of the meeting noted the "significant progress towards a comprehensive political settlement" made by the SNC and agreed to recommend the dispatch of a UN survey mission to Cambodia to begin the process of preparing for the "military aspects" of UNTAC.
According to Western media reports, the meeting agreed in principle to allow the SOC to retain some of its armed forces during the period prior to elections.
An overland UN convoy transporting medical aid arrived in Phnom Penh on July 25 from Bangkok, the first such mission since 1975.
Hun Sen-Sihanouk talks in Pyongyang — Creation of foreign aid commission — Further visit by Hun Sen to China
Hun Sen and Sihanouk left China together on June 20 and travelled to the Prince's residence in Pyongyang, North Korea.
During their meetings in Pyongyang the two agreed to establish a commission to obtain foreign aid for economic and social rehabilitation and development in Cambodia.
The 12-member commission was headed by Sihanouk but the 11 other members were all SOC officials.
The three commission vice-presidents were Hun Sen, SOC President Heng Samrin and National Assembly Chair Chea Sim, while SOC Vice-Premier Kong Samol was its general secretary.
Hun Sen and his delegation returned to China for a visit on July 22-24.
Hun Sen met with Foreign Minister Qian Qichen and other senior Chinese leaders.
On his way back to Cambodia Hun Sen stopped in Vietnam to brief Vietnamese leaders on his talks.
Report of coup attempt — Devaluation of riel
Kyodo news agency, citing "informed Vietnamese sources" , reported on July 27 that a group led by Chea Sim had staged a coup attempt in Phnom Penh.
However, the report was denied by a variety of Cambodian and foreign sources.
Reports had emerged in 1990 of an alleged power struggle within the ruling Kampuchean People's Revolutionary Party between a "hardline" faction led by Chea Sim and Hun Sen's "liberal" faction [see pp. 37598-99].
The Cambodian currency was devalued by 25 per cent on July 3; as at July 29 US$1.00=802.15 riel.
ASIA — PACIFIC
VIETNAM
MIA issue
A United States pressure group released a photograph in mid-July which purported to show United States servicemen alive in Indo-China in 1990.
The publication of the photograph led to increased speculation over the contentious issue of the fate of those 2,273 US servicemen listed as officially missing in action (MIA) in the Vietnam war.
The photograph was released on July 15 by the American Defence Institute, a group headed by former prisoner of war Eugene "Red" McDaniel, which had previously accused the US government of covering up evidence of "live sightings" of MIAs in Indo-China.
The photograph apparently showed three servicemen, Air Force Col. John Robertson, Maj. Albro Lynn Lundy and Lt. Larry Stevens, holding a sign with the date 25:5:90 and the cryptic message"NNTK!
K.B.C.-19".
In a statement issued on July 18 the Vietnamese government denied that the three men were being held in Vietnam, Laos or Cambodia.
The statement said that Col. Robertson had died when his plane crashed over North Vietnam in 1966 and that his remains had been handed over to the USA in April 1990.
However, a Defence Department (Pentagon) spokesman quoted in The Washington Post of July 19 said that the set of remains alleged to be Col. Robertson had in fact been those of a "non-human mammal" .
Kenneth M. Quinn, US Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs, visited Vietnam and Laos in late July to discuss matters related to the photograph.
Vietnamese officials provided Quinn with military evidence "proving" that Col. Robertson was dead, according to a Vietnam News Agency report on July 26.
Meanwhile, in Washington, National Security Adviser Gen. Brent Scowcroft said on July 26 that he was convinced that no American MIAs were alive.
The previous day the Pentagon had issued a statement claiming that the photograph had passed through the hands of a "ring of Cambodia opportunists led by a well-known and admitted fabricator" of information about MIAs.
ASIA — PACIFIC
MALAYSIA
Sixth Malaysia Plan
Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamed, who had unveiled in June Malaysia's Second Outline Perspective Plan for 1991-2000 (OPP2 — see p. 38293), presented to the House of Representatives on July 10 the first of the decade's two more detailed five-year plans, the Sixth Malaysia Plan (SMP).
[See p. 34295 for details of 1986 Fifth Malaysia Plan.]
Under the SMP, development spending was set at 104,000 million ringgits (US$1.00=2.7804 ringgit as at July 8, 1991), up from 61,850 million ringgits under the fifth plan.
Some 55,000 million ringgits were allocated to the federal government, largely to implement improvements in transport and communications, education, health, defence and internal security.
The remaining 49,000 million ringgits were allocated to state governments, local authorities, statutory bodies and public enterprises such as the state oil company Petronas.
New member of ruling coalition
The ruling National Front coalition (Barisan Nasional — BN) admitted another party on July 29, bringing the total number of parties in the coalition to 12.
The BN supreme council voted to accept the application of the Sabah-based Liberal Democratic Party and to endorse the application of another Sabah-based party, the People's Justice Party (Angkatan Keadilan Rakyat).
An application to join the coalition by a Sarawak-based party, Persatuan Rakyat Malaysian Sarawak (Permas — the Malaysian Sarawak Party), was rejected and the decision to admit the Terengganu-based Parti Ikatan Masyarakat Islam (Islamic Alliance Party) was deferred.
BN victory in Penang state by-election
The opposition Democratic Action Party (DAP) was defeated in a Penang State Assembly by-election held on July 27.
The Prai seat, won by the DAP in the 1990 elections, was taken by the Malaysian Indian Congress, a BN component.
ASIA — PACIFIC
PHILIPPINES
Cabinet resignations — Agreement reached on future of US bases
Resignations of Orbos and Ramos
Oscar Orbos, one of the most energetic and respected members of the Cabinet, resigned as Executive Secretary on July 5.
His departure came the day after a "frank" meeting with President Corazon Aquino with whom his relations had become increasingly strained.
Unconfirmed reports suggested that Orbos had alienated many of his Cabinet colleagues through his forceful personality, his tendency to leak information for his own ends and his ambitions for the presidential elections of 1992 (in which Aquino had stated her intention not to run).
Shortly before his resignation he clashed with Finance Secretary Jesus Estanislao over the country's recently formulated economic stabilization programme.
Orbos, 40, an unabashed populist, had made a meteoric rise since his election to Congress in 1987, and was widely credited with having injected new life into the Aquino administration.
He was appointed Executive Secretary of the Cabinet — a position known colloquially as "the little presidency" — in December 1990.
On July 11 another key member of the Cabinet, Defence Secretary Fidel Ramos, submitted his resignation.
Ramos, 63, a former chief of staff, had played a critical role both in enabling Aquino to take office in 1986 — by deposing her predecessor, Ferdinand Marcos — and in crushing the numerous military rebellions which had been launched against her administration.
He explained his resignation on the grounds that he wanted to spend more time preparing his candidacy for forthcoming presidential elections.
It was known that Ramos had been seeking Aquino's endorsement as her favoured successor as president, but she had stated that she would not announce her choice until 1992.
Aquino appointed Justice Secretary Franklin Drilon as Executive Secretary on July 13.
Ramos was replaced on July 17 by his close friend, Gen. Renato de Villa, a former Chief of Staff.
Agreement on future of US bases — Continued eruption of Mount Pinatubo
Fourteen months of negotiations between the Philippines and the United States were concluded on July 17 when the two sides agreed upon the terms of a new treaty which allowed the US military to continue to use its huge naval base at Subic Bay for a further 10 years after the expiry of the current lease.
The treaty provided for a US base "compensation" package to the Philippines and the return of the other chief military site — Clark Field air base — by September 1992.
The agreement ended the arduous bargaining process between the two negotiating panels led by US envoy Richard Armitage and Philippine Foreign Affairs Secretary Raul Manglapus.
A key factor in reaching the agreement was the volcanic eruption of Mount Pinatubo [see p. 38294]which lowered the value of the bases to the USA and undermined the strength of the negotiating position of the Philippines.
The eruption, which began on June 9, severely damaged the nearby Clark and Subic Bay sites, and resulted in the deaths of at least 450 people and the evacuation of a further 500,000.
Under the terms of the new bases agreement Clark Field was to be handed over to the armed forces of the Philippines by Sept. 16, 1992, the date which the USA claimed marked the expiry of the current agreement.
During the interim period the USA promised to attempt to make good the damage caused by Mount Pinatubo's eruption.
The other, smaller US facilities would be returned by Sept. 16, 1991.
Upon the expiry of the new lease, unless the Philippines decided unilaterally to grant continued US access to the bases, there would be "an orderly and expeditious US withdrawal" beginning at the end of the 10th year; no timescale for the completion of the evacuation was specified.
The agreement provided US compensation of US$323,000,000 in 1992, together with "other assistance" worth $227,000,000.
During subsequent years the Philippines would receive an annual sum of $203,000,000 in cash and an unspecified amount of assistance in the form of food, equipment and developmental aid.
It was believed that many of the functions of Clark Field — including the provision of transit facilities for special operations forces — were to be transferred to the Cubi Point Naval Air Station at Subic Bay.
Clark's most important function, the provision of sophisticated air combat training at the adjacent Crow Valley range, was to be transferred to a site in Alaska.
Crow Valley had been covered in several metres of ash and mud from Mount Pinatubo.
To be fully implemented the agreement required confirmation by a two-thirds majority in the Senates of both the USA and the Philippines.
Jovito Salonga, president of the Philippine Senate, predicted that the treaty would "face stiff opposition" , as a majority of the 23-member upper house were known to oppose the continued presence of US bases.
As the agreement was announced Mount Pinatubo erupted for a 39th day, spurting clouds of steam and ash 14,000 metres into the air, and showering Manila — about 90 km south of the volcano — with quantities of ash and grit sufficient to cause the temporary closure of the city's domestic and international airports.
The effects of the volcano were aggravated by Typhoon "Brendan" , as torrential rain and high winds caused mudslides which consumed entire villages.
It was reported on July 26 that the landslides were also worsened by an earthquake registering 5 on the Richter scale which shook central Luzon, the main island of the Philippines.
ASIA — PACIFIC
NEW ZEALAND
Dismantling of welfare state — Relations with France
New Zealand's National Party government unveiled a highly controversial budget on July 30 which severely curtailed the country's welfare state by designating about one-half of the population as sufficiently affluent to pay for its health, education, housing and retirement needs.
Finance Minister Ruth Richardson justified the move on the grounds that the country could no longer afford to fund one of the most comprehensive welfare systems in the world, and that it was necessary to replace it with "a true enterprise society living within its means" .
The budget slashed government spending — aiming to reduce it from 42.9 per cent of GDP in 1990/91 to 37 per cent in 1992/93 — and announced ambitious targets for debt reduction and for the cutting of the budget deficit from NZ$1,739 million in 1990/91 to NZ$528 million by 1993/94 (US$1.00=NZ$1.7576 as at July 29, 1991).
Apart from those deemed to be in genuine need, the budget required patients to pay for all or part of the cost of their medical treatment.
A new means-tested superannuation scheme was announced to replace the existing guaranteed retirement income — thereby reneging upon a National Party election promise — the age of entitlement lifted progressively from 60 to 65 years.
Rents for state housing were to be increased to market levels, students in higher education were to pay part of their fees, and there would be further privatization of state assets.
The budget also sharply raised rates of duty on alcohol and tobacco, and increased the price of petrol.
Condemnation of French honouring of Mafart
The French government disclosed on July 5 that it had decorated Lt.-Col. Alain Mafart, one of the two French agents convicted for the bombing of the Greenpeace flagship, Rainbow Warrior, in Auckland harbour in 1985 [see pp. 33852-55; 34565-68].
New Zealand's Foreign Affairs Minister, Don McKinnon, said that he was "appalled and disgusted" to learn that the agent had been made a knight in the National Order of Merit.
The award — together with a further French nuclear test at Mururoa Atoll, condemned by the governments of both New Zealand and Australia — had the effect of neutralizing much of the diplomatic rapprochement achieved as a result of the tour of New Zealand by the then Prime Minister Michel Rocard in April [see p. 38153].
In a sign of discontent within the National Party over economic policy and particularly over the budget, two backbench MPs, Gilbert Mylesand Hamish MacIntyre, resigned on Aug. 15, stating their intention to remain in parliament and to found a new party "that brings honesty back into New Zealand politics" .
ASIA — PACIFIC
KIRIBATI
Election of President — Appointment of Cabinet
Teatao Teannaki, the outgoing Vice-President of Kiribati, was elected Beretitenti (President) on July 3 after winning 46.3 per cent of the votes cast.
His chief rival, Roniti Teiwaki, an independent member of the House of Assembly for South Tarawa, polled 41.9 per cent, with the remainder of the vote being shared by Beniamina Tinga and Boanareke Boanareke.
The presidential election followed the legislative elections of May 1991 [see p. 38196].
Under the country's constitution the President was elected by popular vote from a list of three or four candidates drawn up from amongst members of the legislature.
The candidature of Teannaki was supported by the outgoing President Ieremia Tabai, whom Teannaki included within the Cabinet which he announced on July 8.
Tabai, who had been President since independence, was constitutionally prohibited for serving a further term in office.
New Cabinet
*Teatao Teannaki: President; Minister of Foreign-Affairs and International Trade
*Taomati T. Iuta: Vice-President Minister of Finance and Economic Planning
*Ieremia T. Tabai: Environment and Natural Resources Development
**Baitika Toum: Health, Family Planning and Social Welfare
**Boanareke Boanareke: Line and Phoenix Development
**Binata Tetaeka: Home Affairs and Rural Development
**Inatoa Tebania: Transport, Communications and Tourism
**Anterea Kaitaake: Education, Science and Technology
**Remuera Tateraka: Commerce, Industry and Employment
**Teaiwa Tenieu: Works and Energy
*Altered portfolio.
**New appointment.
ASIA — PACIFIC
ASEAN
Meeting of Foreign Ministers
Foreign Ministers of the six member countries of the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN, comprising Brunei, Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore and Thailand) held their 24th annual meeting in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, on July 19-20 [see p. 37613 for 23rd annual meeting held in Jakarta in July 1990].
For the first time the Soviet Union and China were represented at the meeting.
As in previous years the Cambodian issue was a major topic of discussion.
However, the principal debate concerned plans for enhanced economic co-operation.
Various proposals were discussed, including Malaysian Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamed's suggestion for an East Asian economic grouping (EAEG) aimed at allying ASEAN with its prosperous northern neighbours, Japan, Taiwan and South Korea.
Also discussed was a Thai proposal for ASEAN to move towards establishing a free trade area by the end of the 20th century.
No proposals were actually adopted but it was agreed to examine them further in working groups and at the fourth ASEAN summit due to be held in Singapore on Jan. 27-28, 1992.
South Korea was accepted as ASEAN's seventh full "dialogue partner" at the post-ministerial conference (PMC) between ASEAN and its major trading partners held on July 22-23.
At the meeting Japan proposed that the annual PMC be made a regular forum for dialogue focused on regional security issues.
ASIA — PACIFIC
SOUTH EAST ASIA
Spratly Islands talks
A three-day "non-official" workshop meeting in Bandung, Indonesia, on "managing potential conflicts in the South China Sea" ended on July 18 with agreement from Brunei, China, Malaysia, Taiwan, the Philippines and Vietnam that they would not use force to settle their conflicting claims to the Spratly Islands.
Officials from Indonesia, Laos, Singapore and Thailand also attended the meeting, which discussed the environment, navigation, shipping, resource management, politics and security, territory and jurisdiction, and an institutional mechanism for co-operation.
The six-point joint statement also agreed on co-operation in shipping, communications, scientific surveys, and combating piracy and drug trafficking.
Speaking in Beijing on July 12, a Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman said that the participation of Chinese experts in the talks did not signal any change on China's "indisputable" sovereignty over the Nansha (Spratly) and Xisha (Paracel) Islands.
The Bandung talks were the second workshop to be held since Indonesia launched its South China Sea initiative in 1990.
Indonesia had no claim to any of the islands, which were believed to be rich in oil.
ASIA — PACIFIC
SOUTH PACIFIC FORUM
Annual conference
The leaders of the 15-country South Pacific Forum met in Kalonia, on the island of Pohnpei (one of the four constituent states comprising the Federated States of Micronesia — FSM), on July 30-31, for the Forum's annual heads of government conference.
Those countries represented were Australia, the Cook Islands, the FSM, Fiji, Kiribati, the Marshall Islands, Nauru, New Zealand, Niue, Papua New Guinea, the Solomon Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu, Vanuatu and Western Samoa.
As in previous years the conference discussed key regional environmental issues including global warming, the depletion of fish stocks through driftnet fishing, nuclear testing and the disposal of toxic waste.
A 14-page communiqué issued at the end of the two-day conference expressed "deep dismay" over France's continued nuclear testing in French Polynesia, and stated the Forum's intention to consider an expanded programme of opposition to the tests, although no specific action was outlined.
The communiqué stressed the urgency of securing international commitments "to control the adverse effects of climate change" (an issue of particular concern to those low-lying islands such as Tuvalu, Kiribati and some of the Marshall Islands which could become submerged if ocean levels rose as a result of the "greenhouse effect" ).
It called for "significant and immediate reductions in emissions of industrially generated greenhouse gases, particularly carbon dioxide" .
The communiqué also called upon the United States to implement its recently announced decision to dismantle its chemical-weapons incineration plant at Johnston Atoll, and criticized the US government's "inadequate" consultations before beginning the destruction project.
Although the Forum praised the French government's efforts to bring "peaceful evolution to self-determination" in the French territory of New Caledonia, its desire to monitor the situation was rebuffed by the French government.
Fiji Prime Minister Ratu Sir Kamisese Mara said that his colleagues wanted to send a delegation to New Caledonia each year to monitor implementation of the Matignon Accord (the 1988 pact which ended fighting between French settlers and pro-independence indigenous Kanaks by promising a 10-year process leading to a referendum on self-determination — see pp. 36348-49), but the proposal was rejected by the French government.
The Forum chose former Kiribati President Ieremia Tabia to replace Henry Naisali as the next secretary-general of its Secretariat.
Meeting with dialogue partners
Following the summit, the Forum held two days of talks on Aug. 1-2 with its seven "dialogue partners" , comprising Canada, China, France, Japan, the United Kingdom, the United States and the European Communities.
During the talks the USA acknowledged the environmental concerns of South Pacific countries but did not respond to Forum calls for an immediate and significant reduction of greenhouse gas emissions.
Richard Solomon, US Assistant Secretary of State for East Asia and the South Pacific, repeated assurances that his country was committed to easing the environmental concerns highlighted by the Forum in its final summit comminuqué: the greenhouse effect, driftnet fishing and chemical weapons incineration on Johnston Atoll.
On security issues, Solomon reassured the leaders that the US would not abandon its commitment to a strong regional presence.
He said that the USA was "a Pacific nation and we intend to remain in the Pacific for the long haul" .
The Forum turned down an application by Taiwan to join the Forum's dialogue partners, but acknowledged that it was interested in discussing economic development with Taiwan.
Chinese Vice-Foreign Minister Liu Huaqiu expressed unease at the situation, stating that "China's reunification is an irresistible historical trend" and that the Chinese government was "opposed to any official relations, contacts and exchanges of an official nature between Taiwan and countries that have diplomatic relations with the People's Republic" .
A proposal to establish a commission, initially based in Hawaii, which would promote trade and develop free markets within the region, ran into difficulties over the issue of finance.
When US President Bush had first proposed the Joint Commercial Commission in late 1990, Pacific leaders had responded favourably.
During the meeting with the dialogue partners, as it became clear that the USA expected Pacific countries to meet some of the costs involved in such an initiative, this initial enthusiasm waned.
ASIA — PACIFIC
AUSTRALIA
A Greek oil tanker caught fire and broke up off the west coast of Australia on July 21, spilling at least 20,000 tonnes of its cargo of light crude oil.
ASIA — PACIFIC
FRENCH POLYNESIA
Gaston Flosse, President of French Polynesia since March 1991, stepped down on July 13 following riots over the imposition of new taxes ordered by France, turning over his duties to Vice-President Michel Buillard; refusing to characterize his move as a resignation, claiming that he was acting to create "the necessary distance for reflection" on the territory's current conflict, Flosse had criticized his predecessor, Alexandre Leontieff, for forcing the unpopular measure through the territory's Assembly.
ASIA — PACIFIC
PAPUA NEW GUINEA
It was reported on July 18 that the National Parliament had finally passed a bill extending the period within which a new government was immune from votes of no-confidence; the amendment, due to come into effect after the general election due in 1992, would prevent no-confidence motions within the first 18 months of a government's new term.
EUROPE
SOVIET UNION
Challenges to Communist Party — New party programme
Democratic Reform Movement
Nine prominent political figures issued a statement on July 1 announcing the formation of a Democratic Reform Movement (DRM) to unite the various democratic factions, including those in the reform wing of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (CPSU), in order to save the country from "a revolt by reaction, blinded by hatred for freedom and progress" .
The nine authors were Eduard Shevardnadze, Aleksandr Yakovlev, the economists Nikolai Petrakov and Stanislas Shatalin, Gavriil Popov and Anatoly Sobchak, mayors of Moscow and Leningrad respectively, Arkady Volsky, president of the Scientific-Industrial Union, and the Prime Minister and Vice-President of the RSFSR, Ivan Silayev and Col. Aleksandr Rutskoi.
Many of them had worked closely with President Mikhail Gorbachev and five were still CPSU members.
A spokesman for Gorbachev described his reaction to the new movement as "positive" .
On July 11 Shevardnadze became chairman of the committee to organize the DRM's constituent conference, scheduled for September 1991, when participants would decide whether or not to form a political party.
Yakovlev, Volsky and Ivan Laptev, Chairman of the USSR Soviet of the Union, became vice-chairmen.
Shevardnadze [for whose resignation as Foreign Minister in December 1990 see p. 37903]resigned from the CPSU on July 3, objecting to the central control commission's investigation of his remarks in Vienna on June 10 on the need for "a strong organized democratic party" to act "in parallel with the CPSU" .
On July 28 Yakovlev, "the architect of perestroika" , announced his resignation as Gorbachev's senior advisor.
[For his resignation from the CPSU in mid-August, and his warning of an impending coup, see p. 38368.]
Within the Russian republic the Communists for Democracy movement, led by Rutskoi and formed at the March-April 1991 Russian Congress of People's Deputies [for which see pp. 38130-31], announced on July 10 that it was to form a political party.
Rutskoi subsequently led a Democratic Party of Communists of Russia (DPCR), formed at a conference on Aug. 2-3.
The DPCR saw itself as in opposition to the conservative Russian Communist Party (RCP), and as aiming to replace it while remaining part of the CPSU.
The CPSU, however, condemned the formation of the DPCR as a "party within a party" , declared its conference resolutions invalid, and on Aug. 6 expelled Rutskoi from the party.)
On July 16 Shatalin broke with the DRM and announced the formation of a new political party, together with Svyatoslav Fedorov, Nikolai Travkin, leader of the Democratic Party of Russia, and representatives of the Democratic Parties from republics which were planning to sign the Union Treaty.
Travkin had been involved in the talks on founding the DRM, but had withdrawn his support when it was decided not to form a separate party, thus allowing DRM supporters to remain in the CPSU.
Limitation on party activity within Russian Federation
The President of the Russian Federation, Boris Yeltsin (who had resigned from the CPSU in July 1990 — see p. 37617), issued a decree on July 20 banning the activities of all party political organizations from enterprises and government bodies, both republican and union, within the Russian Federation, with effect from Aug. 4.
The decree specified the precedence of government bodies over the parallel system of CPSU administrative bodies.
It would not affect trade union activity and public associations.
Yeltsin also called for the USSR Supreme Soviet to ban political activity from the USSR Supreme Court, Constitutional Court, Procuracy, armed forces, KGB and Interior Ministry — all still largely controlled by Communist Party members.
The CPSU politburo called the decree "an unconstitutional, anti-democratic act" , and on July 24 the USSR Supreme Soviet asked the Constitutional Supervision Committee to examine whether the decree contradicted Soviet law.
Yeltsin, however, refused to suspend the decree during the investigation, and warned that any attempt by Gorbachev to countermand it would result in renewed antagonism.
CPSU Plenum — New party programme
A CPSU central committee plenum opened on July 25 to discuss a draft new party programme, adopting socialist democracy in place of orthodox Marxism-Leninism.
Predictions that the party would split at the plenum were not realised, despite conservative opposition to Gorbachev and the moves towards formation of new democratic parties [see above].
The programme entitled "Socialism, Democracy, Progress" , written by Gorbachev and his aide, Georgii Shakhnazarov, after drafting by a commission set up at the 28th Party Congress in July 1990 [see pp. 37614-17], unequivocally condemned Stalinism, and committed the party to forming a "controlled market economy" (including the principle of private ownership), and to converting the Soviet Union into a "democratic federation of sovereign republics" , thereby recognizing "the principle of independence of the republican parties included in the CPSU" .
Addressing the plenum on July 25, Gorbachev criticised "the representatives of communist fundamentalism who are unable to escape the grip of dogmatic conceptions" and said that the party had to move away from Marxism-Leninism to "include in our ideological arsenal all the riches of our and the world's socialist and democratic thought" .
He also admitted that party membership had fallen by 4,200,000 in the previous 18 months to 15,000,000 — the level of 1973.
The draft programme was endorsed by the plenum on July 27 by 358 votes to 15 as a basis for further discussion — the final decision on its adoption and on changing the party's name to be taken at a party congress in November or December 1991.
The CPSU draft programme as published on Aug. 8 contained alterations to the version endorsed at the July plenum, as a concession to conservatives designed to prevent a split in the party.
A criticism of Bolshevism was removed, and the wording was edited in several places, to include the word "communism" , a reference to the "teaching of Marx, Engels and Lenin" , and an appeal for unified and centrally led armed forces.
Economy
Privatization bill
A bill "on the basic principles of destatization and privatization of enterprises" was passed by the Supreme Soviet on July 1, after bitter debate, by 304 votes to 14 with 26 abstentions, as part of the government's anti-crisis legislation [see below].
The law envisaged the denationalization of 40-50 per cent of state assets by the end of 1992, rising to 60-70 per cent by 1995, which would bring in revenue of up to 400,000 million roubles.
The provisions of the bill distinguished destatization — meaning the transfer of state assets to joint stock companies — from privatization (the sale of shares to private individuals).
A state property fund was to be set up to administer the sale of enterprises, and the workforce would be given priority in buying shares in their enterprises (except in cases of forced destatization or bankruptcy), with quotas set for sales to Soviet and foreign investors.
Certain assets were excluded from privatization: defence industries not marked for conversion to civilian production, railways, air and sea ports, space research and power plants.
Republics would be able to determine their own forms of privatization.
(For RSFSR legislation see p. 38273; Moldava's Supreme Soviet passed a privatization law on July 4 providing for non-transferable bonds to be distributed to citizens in proportion to how long they had worked.
It was reported on July 6 that the Ukrainian Supreme Soviet had voted to suspend seven all-union laws, including the privatization plan, which, it was claimed, hampered the republic's own anti-crisis programme.
It was reported on July 10 that a supradepartmental committee to oversee the use and conservation of land in Kazakhstan had been established.
Its duties included redistributing land belonging to state and collective farms in the event of their privatization, and monitoring USSR Ministry of Defence land in Kazakhstan, amounting to approx. 10,000,000 hectares.)
Deputies opposing the bill, led by Yegor Ligachev, feared it would lead to the re-emergence of a class society and allow criminal elements to buy up industries.
Liberal deputies countered this argument by pointing out that "rampant privatization" was already in progress at all levels, including the state administration [see dacha scandal below].
Economic conference
Soviet Prime Minister Valentin Pavlov gave warnings of impending economic collapse, including a prediction of a sharply reduced grain harvest, when he addressed a conference on July 2 attended by representatives from all 15 union republican governments and by President Gorbachev.
Gorbachev called for the preservation of "the common economic space" and increased co-operation and stability, which were essential conditions if help were to be expected from the G-7 industrialized countries.
[For Gorbachev's meetings following G-7 summit in London see pp. 38321-22].
Predictions of 1991 agricultural output by Deputy Minister of Agriculture and Food Nikolai Averyanov were reported by Komsomolskaya Pravda on July 23.
He forecast a grain harvest of 190-200 million tonnes, compared with what was a bumper harvest of 218 million tonnes in 1990, in view of adverse weather conditions, particularly drought in the Urals, Kazakhstan and the south.
Grain imports would be necessary, he said, although there had been a fall in the Soviet oil revenues used to pay for them.
He also reported a 13 per cent decline in milk and meat production because of a lack of feed, but saw the possibility of a potato harvest big enough to avoid imports.
Imports of vegetables from the former COMECON (Council for Mutual Economic Assistance) countries had fallen, and fruit imports from Cuba had been reduced by 75 per cent.
An emergency presidential decree, reported on Aug. 6, offered imported consumer goods, bought for hard currency, as an incentive to farmers to deliver grain to the state.
It was estimated that up to 80 per cent of grain was hoarded by farms to barter for machinery and other goods [see p. 38302].
Anti-crisis programme
The joint union-republic anti-crisis programme was published on July 11, having been formally approved by Gorbachev on July 8 and signed by all the nine republics negotiating the Union Treaty [see below], plus Armenia.
Its stated aim was "to build a socially oriented market economy within a single, unionwide economic space" .
The provisions of the programme included co-ordinating the actions of union and republican bodies and revoking administrative decisions which hindered the movement of goods between republics, fulfilling existing economic contracts, cutting budget expenditure, putting investments on a commercial bank basis rather than non-repayable central financing, a privatization bill [see above], and social protection for the population.
The programme, which Gorbachev was to present to the G-7 summit in London, was said to combine elements of the rival plans widely canvassed in June [see p. 38272], i.e. the official "anti-crisis" programme of Prime Minister Pavlov, and the radical "grand bargain" proposals of economist Grigory Yavlinsky.
Pavlov insisted that the major difference between the plans was that an integral part of Yavlinsky's "grand bargain" was Western economic assistance, whereas, he said, "we shall implement the programme, reflected in the Yavlinsky variant, whether or not we receive aid from the West" .
Yavlinsky refused Gorbachev's invitation to the G-7 summit because, he claimed, his programme had been weakened too much to make it viable.
Membership applications to IMF and World Bank
On July 23 the Soviet Union made public its intention to apply for full membership of the IMF and the World Bank.
The decision to apply had been taken by the government in May 1991.
While the G-7 members had endorsed associate membership for the Soviet Union (and thus technical economic assistance), the immediate US reaction to the idea of full membership, which would also mean financial aid for the Soviet Union, was cool.
However, on July 26 Managing Director of the IMF Michel Camdessus welcomed the Soviet application.
Membership would entail the release of detailed information on the Soviet economy, and observers saw the publication of Gosbank (Soviet State Bank) accounts on July 16 for the first time since 1936 as the beginnings of this.
The figures showed assets of 638,364 million roubles, backed by over 374 tonnes of gold, but the bank was said to be overburdened with credit of 462,060 million roubles to union and republican finance ministries (only 23,646 million roubles of which went to republican ministries).
New customs rates
On July 1 new customs duties for Soviet citizens bringing goods into the country came into force.
The Customs Service claimed that this was to prevent commercial traders evading duty by importing goods as private individuals.
(The USSR Customs Committee, however, suspended the increased tariffs as of Aug. 10.)
The July regulations imposed tariffs up to 20 times higher than before on goods not intended for personal use.
A Union-Republican Customs Committee was to have been established by July 1 to reach agreement with the republics on the new tariffs.
However, on June 24 the USSR Ministry of Finance had approved the tariffs without consultation with the republican governments.
The Ukrainian government refused to implement the new rates, considering them a violation of sovereignty, and the RSFSR government called their introduction contrary to the proposed new Union Treaty.
Law on employment
From July 1 unemployment was officially registered in the Soviet Union for the first time since 1930 (when Stalin declared that it had been eliminated).
The level of unemployment benefit to be paid varied between republics, with the RSFSR among the most generous guaranteeing between 45 and 75 per cent of wages with a minimum of 160 roubles per month (a living wage was estimated as 350 roubles).
Central government paid 10 per cent of the cost of unemployment benefit, the remainder coming from the republican government.
The law also envisaged the creation of 2,000 labour exchanges.
All enterprises contributed 1 per cent of their wages fund to the State Employment Fund, established in May 1991, to cover the cost of implementing the new law.
Unemployment statistics varied widely, but Soviet economists were quoted as predicting 10,000,000 unemployed by the end of 1991 (8 per cent of the workforce).
Dacha scandal
On July 12 it was reported that Prime Minister Valentin Pavlov had been ordered to take measures against officials involved in buying their state-owned dachas (country houses) at vastly reduced prices.
On Aug. 1, the Council of Ministers ordered the privatization of dachas to be stopped until corresponding legislation had been passed.
This "privatization by stealth" was traced to former Prime Minister Nikolai Ryzhkov's decree of March 1990 permitting the sale of dachas to government officials.
In July 1990, it was revealed, Ryzhkov bought his dacha for 35,359 roubles, but three days later it was valued at 78,017 roubles.
Criminal code
The Supreme Soviet passed on July 2 by 321 votes to five with four abstentions, legislation allowing republics to draft their own criminal codes within certain guidelines.
A proposal to abolish capital punishment was defeated; the death penalty could be imposed for treason, aggravated murder, rape of a minor, and "crimes against peace and the safety of mankind" .
Prison terms were limited to a maximum of 15 years.
Union Treaty negotiations
Gorbachev announced on July 24 that, after 12 hours of negotiations with delegations from nine of the Soviet Union's fifteen republics, work on the draft Union Treaty had been completed.
This third draft of the Treaty, the most radical so far in devolving powers to the republics ( "states" ), had been sent for discussion to the USSR Supreme Soviet and the Supreme Soviets of the republics at the end of June 1991.
It stated that matters of defence, foreign policy, energy, communications, transport and the union budget would be decided jointly between the centre and the republics but in all other matters republican laws would have priority over union laws.
Republics would have control of their own resources, except gold, diamonds and hard currency.
The USSR would drop the word "socialist" from its title to become the "Union of Soviet Sovereign Republics" .
Its President would be directly elected: for election he or she would have to receive at least 50 per cent of total votes cast nationally, andmoreover receive at least this percentage in a majority of states, and might not serve more than two consecutive five-year terms.
There would still be a bicameral Supreme Soviet.
Within this, the Soviet of the Union (elected by the whole population from constituencies of equal population size) would be subordinate to the Soviet of the Republics: the latter would be elected from the republican parliaments retaining the same number of seats as in the current Soviet of Nationalities but with a single block vote for each republic.
A Constitutional Court would judge disputes between the union and republics and between republics.
Gorbachev's hopes of signing the Union Treaty in time to present to the mid-July G-7 Summit an agreement on the future shape of the USSR, were disappointed by the actions of Ukraine.
The Ukrainian government voted on June 27 by 402 to 345 votes to postpone debating the Treaty until Sept. 15, in order to examine possible contradictions with Ukraine's declaration of independence of July 1990 [see p. 37617].
Deputies called for Ukraine's constitution to be decided before uniting with other republics.
As the Supreme Soviet debated the issue, 2,000 protesters against Ukraine's signing the Union Treaty were attacked outside the parliament building by militia and by Soviet Interior Ministry "Black Beret" or OMON troops with batons and tear gas.
In further negotiations with the centre on July 3, the republics' delegations demanded more concessions, including republican control over local defence industry enterprises and over import-export licensing, joint control of customs, and the guarantee that autonomous republics would not be allowed to sign the Union Treaty independently — an important clause for the Russian Federation which included 16 autonomous republics.
The draft Union Treaty was debated in the USSR Supreme Soviet and approved on July 12 by 307 to 11 votes with 18 abstentions, after having been approved by eight of the nine republican parliaments but not by that of Ukraine.
The Supreme Soviet recommended changes to the draft treaty which would allow direct elections to the Soviet of the Republics and federal taxes to be levied by the centre.
The Soyuz (Union) group of deputies consistently opposed the Treaty as "leading to the state's disintegration" , but was defeated in an attempt to have the Treaty submitted for approval by the USSR Congress of People's Deputies.
The chairman of the Supreme Soviet, Anatoly Lukyanov, said that the approval of the Treaty was the prerogative of the republics.
The issue of taxation was the major block in reaching agreement.
The RSFSR, Ukraine and Kazakhstan had objected to allowing the federal government to impose taxes, demanding that the union budget should be financed from taxes collected by individual republics.
Kazakhstan conceded the issue of federal taxation in June, however, and on July 25 the Russian Federation agreed that a fixed percentage of taxes raised from enterprises by the RSFSR government (rather than a predetermined amount as earlier demanded) would go to the union budget.
Gorbachev stated that the Treaty remained open for signature by the six republics which had declared their independence from the USSR (Armenia, Estonia, Georgia, Latvia, Lithuania and Moldavia).
The presence at the negotiations for the first time of Armenia's President, Levon Ter-Petrosyan, raised the possibility of Armenia's signing the Union Treaty.
According to the Treaty, non-signatories would have to pay hard currency for their imports from the new Soviet Union.
Developments weakening Treaty
Foreign trade officials from all 15 union republics met on July 26 and signed an agreement to divide among the republics Soviet diamond, gold and hard currency reserves, and foreign credits to the Soviet Union, as well as sharing responsibility for the Soviet Union's $65,000 million foreign debt.
The shares would be proportional to population and gross national product.
(The five Central Asian republics — Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan, Kirgizia, Tadjikistan and Turkmenia — reached a further agreement on Aug. 14 to set up direct trading links between them and to reduce their dependence on central economic planning.
Kirgizia had signed an economic agreement with Turkmenia on July 16, and a treaty with the RSFSR on July 21, granting Russian credit to Kirgizia and expanded economic co-operation between the republics.)
The presidents of the RSFSR and Lithuania signed a 10-year co-operation treaty in Moscow on July 29.
The first clause, of indefinite duration, stated their mutual recognition of sovereignty.
Agreements were also signed on Kaliningrad (administratively part of Russia but separated from it by Lithuanian territory), and on the rights of each population in the other republic.
Gorbachev's invitation for Yeltsin and Nazarbayev to attend US-Soviet summit
The importance of the Union Treaty was emphasised by Gorbachev's invitation to the presidents of the RSFSR and Kazakhstan to attend some of the summit meetings in Moscow on July 30-31 [see pp. 38320-21]with US President Bush.
Yeltsin, however, refused to attend negotiating sessions jointly with Gorbachev.
Developments in republics
Election of chairman to RSFSR Supreme Soviet
The main issue on the agenda of the Russian Congress of People's Deputies, which opened in Moscow on July 10 with Yeltsin's formal inauguration as Russian President [see p. 38273 for his election in June], was the election of a chairman to the Supreme Soviet (standing parliament) to replace Yeltsin who resigned from this post on becoming President.
In six rounds of voting, deputies repeatedly failed to elect a candidate by the required majority of 531 votes.
Despite prolonging the Congress (due to end on July 13) in order to elect a chairman, on July 17 the decision was postponed until the autumn, leaving former deputy chairman Ruslan Khasbulatov to continue as acting chairman of the Supreme Soviet.
The voting showed a split in the democratic movement and potential problems for Yeltsin, who had ensured that under the new constitution his presidential powers would be limited by those of the Supreme Soviet and its chairman.
The two main candidates had been Khasbulatov, nominated by the Democratic Russia group, and Sergei Baburin, nominated by the centrist Rossiya group of deputies and supported by the Communists of Russia group.
Baburin repeatedly polled more votes than Khasbulatov, because a group of about 150 deputies in the Smena ( "change" ) group, a part of Democratic Russia, refused to support Khasbulatov, accusing him of an authoritarian style of leadership.
By the final round the gap had narrowed to three votes, with Baburin polling 412 and Khasbulatov 409.
The question of appointing judges to a constitutional court (an independent body to examine the legality of presidential decrees and laws) was left undecided, since only the Congress chairman could nominate the judges.
The Congress did decide to reappoint Ivan Silayev as RSFSR Prime Minister, electing him on July 13 by 827 votes to 69 with 33 abstentions.
German autonomous region
It was reported on July 3 that the RSFSR Supreme Soviet had decided to create an autonomous German raion in the Altai region of Siberia, historically an area of German settlement where 127,000 ethnic Germans were now living.
The raion would include the regions of Slavgorod and Chabary, with its administrative centre at Galbstadt.
Militia patrols in Leningrad
In Leningrad there was controversy over the introduction of joint militia and army patrols of the city [see also p. 38013].
The mayor Anatoly Sobchak's decision to introduce patrols from July 15 was revoked by the presidium of the city soviet, to which a new chairman, Aleksandr Belyayev, formerly chairman of the city soviet's planning and budget commission, had been elected on July 2.
Sobchak said the presidium's decision was illegal since his instruction had been made in accordance with the presidential decree of January 1991.
Ukraine: Coupons — Agricultural protection — Khmara trial
Coupons to prove Ukrainian residence in order to buy food and consumer goods were abolished on July 1, but a new type of coupon was introduced from Aug. 1 as a measure to prevent stocks being bought up by consumers from outside the republic.
There had been plans to introduce a separate currency, in the form of Soviet roubles stamped with a letter "U" (Ukraine) for purchasing basic goods, but it was claimed that the Soviet authorities had thwarted the plans at the last minute, forcing the reintroduction of coupons instead.
Protectionist measures were enacted to ensure the republic's food stocks, including freezing the commodity exchange and establishing customs posts along the borders with the RSFSR and Moldavia, as well as banning the export of above-plan produce to other republics until Ukraine had completed its state purchase.
In an attempt to get farms to sell their above-plan harvest to the republic, scarce consumer goods were earmarked for sale to farms in return for grain (such as a television set for 30 tonnes of grain).
The trial of the Ukrainian nationalist leader Stepan Khmara, which began in May [see p. 38205], was repeatedly postponed as Khmara claimed that the judges were biased against him.
On June 5, 50 troops had dragged Khmara's co-defendants from the courtroom after one of them, Kovalchuk, attacked the chairman.
When Khmara refused to appear in court, an order was issued for his appearance, and on July 18, 30 OMON troops and militia broke into his hotel bedroom and rearrested him.
Twenty-three people were injured; Oleksandr Serhienko, Khmara's colleague in the Republican Party, was beaten up and arrested on July 20.
The trial resumed on July 22, when Khmara was again removed from the courtroom for expressing his distrust of the judges.
Byelorussia: Suspension of Union law
On July 18, Byelorussia, regarded as one of the more compliant republics, refused to recognise a resolution of the USSR Cabinet of Ministers on production during the transition to a market economy, because it contradicted Byelorussian legislation.
Lithuania: Price rises, border killings
The Lithuanian government raised retail food prices by an average of between 20 and 56 per cent from July 1.
On July 29, a system of coupons was introduced to regulate the market of basic consumer goods in high demand.
They would be worth one-fifth of residents' pay and cover half the value of the goods.
Six Lithuanian border guards were shot dead at a border post at Medininkai on July 31.
A seventh died later.
The sole survivor, Tomas Cernac, said that OMON troops were responsible.
The Ministry denied involvement.
The killings, on the Lithuanian-Byelorussian frontier, coincided with Gorbachev's summit with US President Bush [see pp. 38320-21].
Gorbachev ordered an investigation.
On Aug. 3 a group called the "Security Service in Defence of the Interests of the Russian People" claimed responsibility.
The Lithuanian government said that it believed the group to be a "protective cloak for OMON or more likely the KGB" .
On Aug. 5 the soldiers' independent "trade union" Shchit ( "Shield" ) accused the KGB of involvement, a charge denied by the KGB.
OMON troops had been blamed for a series of attacks on over 20 Baltic border posts over the previous few months.
Estonia: Free prices — border problems
Prices of agricultural products were freed in Estonia from July 1 (except for milk products which remained under state control).
RSFSR Prime Minister Silayev complained to Lithuania and Estonia that their pricing policy violated inter-governmental agreements since, as a consequence of the price rises, cheaper foodstuffs were being exported to the Baltic from the RSFSR.
Three towns on the border with the RSFSR (a Russian-speaking area), Narva, Sillamae and Kohtla-Jarve, issued a statement on July 23 demanding special status within Estonia.
The demand followed demonstrations at Narva protesting against Estonia's refusal to grant free economic status to the area, and the reimposition of customs posts after the Narva town soviet had abolished them.
The residents wanted to continue barter deals with RSFSR traffic to help offset the sharp price increases.
The Estonian Interior Minister, Olev Laanjarv, agreed to close temporarily the Narva customs post on July 19.
It was reported on July 28 that Estonia had set its own internal rouble exchange rate at 33 roubles to the US dollar.
Azerbaijan: violence at Nagorno-Karabakh — Treaty with Georgia
In an operation on July 15 intended, according to the USSR Interior Ministry, to confiscate illegally held weapons in three Azerbaijani villages with large Armenian populations, four people were reported killed and the population of the villages was driven out.
The renewed violence [see p. 38205 for previous outbreak], in which the Soviet Interior and Defence Ministries and the KGB denied involvement, came after Gorbachev had issued a decree lifting the state of emergency in two areas of Nagorno-Karabakh, noting Azerbaijani President Ayaz Mutalibov's guarantee to ensure the safety of the population.
Georgia and Azerbaijan signed a co-operation treaty on July 12, recognising each other 's sovereignty and the principle of non-interference.
Kaganovich's death
Lazar Kaganovich, one of Stalin's closest aides and the man responsible for carrying out the forced collectivizations of the 1930s, died in Moscow on July 25, aged 97.
EUROPE
BULGARIA
New constitution — Calling of elections
Bulgaria adopted a new Constitution on July 12 when, following several months of parliamentary debate, 309 of the 400 members of the Grand National Assembly signed the final draft document.
President Zhelyu Zhelev announced on July 16 that local and general elections would be held on Sept. 29.
Under the new Constitution, which came into effect on July 13, Bulgaria was defined as a republic with a parliamentary form of government and as a "democratic, constitutional and welfare state" .
It provided for a separation of powers, the establishment of a constitutional court and the holding of direct presidential elections.
A five-year residency qualification for presidential candidates meant that Simeon II, pretender to the Bulgarian throne which was abolished in 1946, would not be able to stand.
The ceremony adopting the Constitution was boycotted by a number of Union of Democratic Forces (UDF) and other opposition Assembly members and accompanied by mass protests in Sofia.
Earlier, on July 10, a group of 23 opposition Assembly members began a 10-day hunger strike demanding the holding of a referendum on the new Constitution and the setting of a date for new elections, and protesting against a requirement that they swear an oath of constitutional loyalty.
The hunger strike was called off following the scheduling of elections [see above]and the dropping by parliament of strict adherence to the oath requirement.
The type and nature of the voting system under which the elections would be held had yet to be agreed by the Assembly.
Bulgaria's first constitution, the Tirnovo Constitution of 1879, had established the country as a parliamentary democracy with a constitutional monarchy.
After the communist takeover this was replaced by the "Dimitrov Constitution" of 1947, modelled on the 1936 Soviet Constitution.
An updated version of the 1947 Constitution (the "Zhivkov Constitution" ) was adopted in 1971.
Trade agreement with Byelorussia
On July 11 Bulgaria signed a US$180,000,000 trade agreement with Byelorussia.
The deal, which was basically a barter arrangement for 1991, was Bulgaria's first intergovernmental agreement with a Soviet republic.
Closure of nuclear reactors
The Bulgarian government announced on July 10 that it would close down its two oldest nuclear reactors, following a highly critical report on their safety commissioned by the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA).
The offer to close down the reactors was conditional on the receipt of economic aid to help modernize Bulgaria's nuclear industry, which supplied over one-third of the country's electricity requirements.
A team of experts had examined the nuclear plant at Kozloduy, north of the capital, Sofia, and warned that four of the six reactors there were so unsafe that "continued operation would be imprudent" .
All four were VVER 230 models — the oldest type of Soviet-designed pressurized water reactor.
According to an IAEA spokesman, the experts found numerous leaks of oil, water and radioactive steam throughout the plant, as well as leakages in the water cooling system common to all four reactors.
They criticized the lack of an automatic shut-off mechanism in the cooling system.
The European Commission announced on July 18 that US$13,000,000 would be made available as emergency aid for modernization work at the Kozloduy plant.
EUROPE
ALBANIA
Emergency assistance
The European Communities (EC) decided at the end of July to launch an emergency food and medical aid programme to Albania.
Under the programme, which was drawn up by the EC Commission, Albania was to be given 50,000 tonnes of EC wheat; further donations amounting to 100,000 tonnes of wheat were to be canvassed from other Western countries.
The first shipments were not expected to arrive in the country until the autumn.
In the meantime the EC would supply Albania with medicine and baby food worth ECU500,000 (as at July 29, 1991 ECU1=US$1.17476).
The EC initiative followed a visit to Tirana, the Albanian capital, on July 22 by the EC's external affairs commissioner, Frans Andriessen.
[For establishment of EC-Albanian diplomatic relations in June see p. 38303.]
While in Tirana Andriessen was told that Albania had only one week's supply of grain stocks left.
In mid-July Hungary began shipping to Albania emergency aid of tinned food worth 500,000 forints and medicines worth 1,500,000 forints (about US$19,600).
Towards the end of the month the United States air force began shipping 120 tonnes of food from military stocks left in Saudi Arabia after the Gulf war.
Continuing refugee problem in Italy
Albanian-Italian relations continued to be dominated by the issue of Albanian refugees in Italy.
On July 3 at a meeting in Rome the Albanian Prime Minister Ylli Bufi discussed the problem with Margherita Boniver, the Italian Immigration Minister.
Further discussions took place in Tirana on July 24, during which Boniver announced that Italy hoped that 50 per cent of the 24,000 refugees would be in employment by the end of July.
Under Italy's immigration laws refugees still unemployed by the end of July would be declared illegal immigrants and subject to deportation back to Albania.
The Italian government announced on July 20 that it was ending financial support for illegal refugees — a move seen as marking the beginning of a tougher policy.
[For Albanian refugee issue see pp. 38105; 38160; 38303.]
Re-establishment of diplomatic relations with Vatican
Bufi met Pope John Paul II in the Vatican on July 4, when Albania and the Holy See agreed to re-establish the diplomatic relations broken off following the communist takeover in Albania in 1946.
Parliamentary visit to Soviet Union
A parliamentary delegation headed by Kastriot Islami, chair of the Albanian People's Assembly, visited Moscow on July 4-8.
Invited by the USSR Supreme Soviet, the delegation's visit was the first by Albanian parliamentarians since the breakdown in diplomatic relations between the two countries in 1961 [see p. 18528].
The delegation met a number of Soviet officials and leaders, including President Gorbachev.
Friendly messages were exchanged and it was anticipated that political and economic treaties would be signed during the course of a planned visit to Moscow by President Ramiz Alia.
Pardon for last political prisoners
On July 2 Alia signed a decree pardoning the last political prisoners in Albania [for earlier releases of political prisoners see pp. 37972; 38017].
EUROPE
CZECHOSLOVAKIA
Referendum law
On July 18 the Federal Assembly approved a bill to permit the calling of a national referendum on the future shape of Czechoslovakia (i.e. on the possibility of a republic seceding from the federation).
A proposal to hold such referendum could be submitted by either the Czech or the Slovak parliament, or by the Federal Assembly, but it could be vetoed by the federal President, Vaclav Havel.
The law followed an agreement reached on June 17 at Kromeriz in talks between federal and republican representatives on the new constitution.
It was decided that the constitution was to be based on a "voluntary union" , confirmed by a treaty prepared by the Czech and Slovak National Councils, with the hope that the new federal and republican constitutions would be elaborated in advance of parliamentary elections in June 1992.
Slovakian independence calls
Growing calls for Slovakian independence were emphasised in July by the alleged support of two leading politicians for the Slovak nationalist opposition.
The Slovak Prime Minister, Jan Carnogursky, confirmed a statement he made in an interview with the French paper Libération that Slovakia aimed to be in the European Communities as an independent state by 2000.
He denied, however, being an ally of the nationalists.
Alexander Dubcek, chairman of the Federal Assembly, resigned as a member of Public Against Violence (VPN, the senior party in the Slovak ruling coalition) on July 21, because the party which he co-founded had "abandoned centrist policies" .
Dubcek faced calls from right-wing forces for his resignation as Assembly Chairman in view of his "practical support" for the opposition party Movement for a Democratic Slovakia (HZDS), a group which had split from VPN in March 1991 [see p. 38106].
HZDS had declared itself in favour of a confederation, while VPN supported the continued federal constitution.
Czech agricultural problems
The Czech Prime Minister, Petr Pithart, called on his Agriculture Minister, Bohumil Kubat, to resign on July 12 for having failed to act to solve the problems of marketing agricultural produce.
Farmers were finding difficulties in marketing their produce because of the change in prices.
The federal government proposed to buy surplus agricultural produce from farmers in order to keep prices at agreed levels, although this would cost 1,000 million crowns (US$33,000,000) in grain subsidies alone.
Kubat, who was also accused of having withheld information about a threatened farmers' protest, nonetheless refused to resign.
Danube hydroelectric scheme
On July 25 the federal government approved the Slovak government's decision to go ahead with the Gabcikovo hydroelectric project, originally part of a joint Hungarian-Czechoslovakian scheme from which Hungary had withdrawn in 1989 [see p. 37048]and to put the power station into operation from October as "a temporary measure" .
Talks in July had resulted in stalemate, with the Slovak side insisting that the power station could not be left in its unfinished state and rejecting the Hungarian proposal to construct instead a gas power station on Slovak territory.
Environmental protests against the hydroelectric scheme had continued throughout the negotiations.
The Slovak side was considering diverting the Danube to finish the project.
Agreement with RSFSR
The Finance Ministers of Czechoslovakia and the Russian Federation signed an agreement in Prague on July 13 covering forms of payment for trade.
In what was seen as a model for similar deals with the other Soviet republics, payment was to be made by barter or by cash settlements in both hard and national currencies.
EUROPE
POLAND
Illicit foreign debt buy-back
Evidence emerged in July of an illicit operation by a Polish government agency to buy back the country's foreign debt at a discount, as Poland discussed resheduling its debt repayments to Western banks.
The agency, the Fund for Servicing the Foreign Debt (FOZZ), used intermediaries to channel money held by Polish companies abroad to merchant banks and companies which bought up Poland's debts for as little as 20 cents for every US$1 owed, contrary to an agreement between Poland and its bankers.
The fund, which was set up in February 1989 to collect money to service Poland's foreign debt, was closed at the end of 1990 after reports of mismanagement.
The Warsaw Province Prosecutor's Office had begun investigations on May 7 into possible fraud by the fund involving US$375,000 and a further DM1,700,000 (about $1,000,000).
In March Poland had begun a concerted effort to reduce its foreign debts of $48,500 million, winning concessions on interest payments from the United States and the "Paris Club" of 17 creditor countries [see p. 38107].
Signing by Walesa of electoral law
On July 1 President Lech Walesa signed the law governing procedures for Poland's first democratic elections, after a month of disputes with the Sejm (lower house of parliament).
The Sejm's draft bill provided for the direct election of less than a quarter of the 460 Sejm deputies, with the remaining seats distributed to parties proportional to the votes won by their national lists of candidates.
Walesa said that this would lead to a fragmented and weak parliament and that he preferred a system in which voters would choose a party first and then candidates from a party list.
Walesa twice used his veto in attempts to force through his amendments but was overruled on June 28 [see p. 38305].
On July 4 Walesa submitted a new election law, which included the provisions of the version signed on July 1 as well as his amendments.
On July 11 the Sejm voted to reject Walesa's electoral law and a constitutional amendment to remove a five-year residence qualification for candidates, which Walesa claimed discriminated against opposition figures who had fled abroad during the 1980s.
The election was scheduled for Oct. 27.
Dismissals over Ursus bankruptcy
Six senior Industry Ministry officials were dismissed on July 23 over the bankruptcy of the Ursus tractor company.
The factory had been in effect bankrupt since March; losses in 1991 had reached 600,000 million zloty (about $55,000,000).
Prime Minister Jan Krysztof Bielecki complained of business ineptitude, if not sabotage, on July 22.
The factory's Solidarity union leader Janusz Sciskalsi said that management and the ministry had ignored warnings about the condition of the business.
The officials dismissed were: Zdzislaw Miedziarek, Secretary of State, Jozef Lochowski, Franciszek Gajik and Jerzy Modrzewski, Under-Secretaries of State, and Krzysztof Szewczak, Director-General, all at the Ministry of Industry, and Janusz Padlowski, Plenipotentiary in the Ministry for Co-operation with Trade Unions and Self Management Organisations.
Janusz Bienek, chairman of the State Bank of Credit, which was Ursus's main creditor, was dismissed on July 24.
Industry Minister Andrzej Zawislak resigned on July 29 after a decision to merge the trade and industry ministries.
A government spokesman declined to comment upon reports linking the resignation with the Ursus bankruptcy.
Zalewski Affair
Presidential aide Maciej Zalewski secretly visited the USA to win the approval of the IMF for the introduction of a state of emergency so that the economy could be run by decree, adding to evidence of a rift between the government and the presidency.
Reports suggested that he also took a message from Walesa asking for approval for the sacking of Finance Minister Lescek Balcerowicz, the architect of Poland's "shock therapy" free-market economic programme.
The Warsaw daily Sztandar Mlodych quoted Zalewski as saying that the President might introduce a state of emergency in the event of economic collapse.
Walesa told the paper on July 25: "If I was to face anarchy, or widespread strikes, I would have to rely on force to save the country." 
He said that he would impose a state of emergency if necessary, but did not want to do anything which would have a negative effect on democracy.
Introduction of income tax
The Sejm decided on July 5 to introduce income tax from Jan. 1, 1992, at a basic rate of 20 per cent, with a 40 per cent rate for those on higher incomes.
Exchange of medicines for oil
Poland and the Soviet Union agreed on July 22 for Poland to pay for 22 per cent of its Soviet oil imports with medicines.
Poland's exports to the Soviet Union had fallen sharply since the two countries began trading in hard currency in January.
Acquittal of Urban
On July 16 a Warsaw court acquitted Jerzy Urban, the former spokesman for Poland's communist government, of spreading pornography by reprinting an explicit picture from Penthouse magazine in his satirical weekly magazine Nie ( "No" ).
He said that the authorities had brought the case to hinder a paper which was awkward to them.
Re-opening of exchange
The Warsaw Securities Exchange reopened on July 2, after a break of 52 years.
EUROPE
HUNGARY
Property and trade union laws
On July 10 the Országgyülés (National Assembly) passed by 194 to 95 votes, with 23 abstentions, a law for the return of property to the churches over a period of 10 years.
The buildings in question, used for educational or cultural purposes by the churches before their nationalization in 1948, currently belonged to the state.
Liberal and socialist Assembly members opposed the bill on the grounds that it was unconstitutional and unfair to citizens who were occupying former church property.
The National Assembly passed a law on July 12 obliging trade unions and registered employees' organizations to declare their property, which would then be divided according to the level of support in trade union elections.
Socialist MPs protested by boycotting the debate.
Trade union bodies demanded a ruling on the bill by the Constitutional Court, which on July 11 had annulled a 1979 decree giving trade unions the right to establish working conditions within an enterprise.
Hungarian-Soviet joint venture
Ikarus, the Hungarian bus manufacturing and exporting company, announced on July 1 a deal with a Soviet consortium, ATEX, and a guaranteed Soviet order of 6,000 buses per year until 1995.
The consortium paid US$50,000,000 for a 30 per cent stake in Ikarus, with an option to increase the stake to 48 per cent.
Ikarus had made a loss of 1,000 million forint (about US$13 million) in 1990, because of bank debt interest payments and falling Soviet orders.
During Hungarian-Soviet trade talks it was revealed that total Hungarian exports to the Soviet Union were expected to reach $1,500 million by the end of 1991.
EUROPE
BLACK SEA COUNTRIES
Conference
For the first time representatives from the Soviet Union's republics (the Deputy Foreign Ministers of Armenia, Azerbaidjan, Georgia, the Russian Federation and Ukraine) formed part of the Soviet delegation to the conference of Black Sea countries, which took place on July 11-12 near Moscow.
The talks centred on economic co-operation between the Black Sea countries, and involved Bulgaria, Romania, the Soviet Union and Turkey, with Greece and Yugoslavia having observer status.
EUROPE
EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
Agricultural reform
On July 9 the European Communities (EC) Commission announced further proposals to reform the EC's common agricultural policy (CAP).
[For February 1991 proposals see p. 38023.]
Reforms were widely seen as essential if the current deadlock in trade negotiations under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) were to be broken [see p. 38411], but the Commission's proposals were criticized on July 15-16 by EC agriculture ministers, notably by the Netherlands and the United Kingdom on the grounds that they favoured inefficient smaller farmers.
The Commission proposed retaining the principle of paying farmers direct subsidies to compensate for significant cuts in price support from 1993 to 1996.
Cereal prices would be cut by 35 per cent, beef and butter by 15 per cent and milk by 10 per cent .
Farmers would benefit from compensatory payments if they took 15 per cent of their land out of production; farmers over 55 (representing nearly half the EC's 10,000,000 farmers) would benefit from a new early retirement programme.
The proposals would increase agricultural spending by 10 per cent in real terms by 1997 when compared with expected 1992 expenditure.
The Commission claimed that only the top 4 per cent of EC cereal producers would lose income (although this minority produced around 50 per cent of EC output), that consumers would benefit from lower prices, the environment would be better protected and global markets would not be distorted by EC surpluses.
(Surpluses currently amounted to 24,000,000 tonnes of cereals, 750,000 tonnes of beef and 900,000 tonnes of dairy products.)
Overruling of UK fisheries legislation
The European Court of Justice (ECJ), overruling UK legislation for the first time, ruled on July 25 that the UK Merchant Shipping Act 1988 contravened EC law.
The Act sought to preserve UK fishing quotas for UK fishermen by stipulating that UK-registered boats had to be 75 per cent British-owned and that 75 per cent of the crew had to be UK residents.
The Act had been suspended following a preliminary ruling on the case in June 1990 [see p. 37535], and would now have to be repealed or amended.
Swedish application for EC membership — Enlargement issues
On July 1 Sweden applied for membership of the EC.
The Riksdag (parliament) gave final approval to the application on June 14 [see p. 37925 for December 1990 debate].
All the main parties except the communist Party of the Left and the Greens expressed their support for the move.
On June 14 Prime Minister Ingvar Carlsson said that he hoped Sweden would be able to join by January 1995 and maintained that Sweden's policy of neutrality would not be changed by membership of the EC.
Sweden was the second member of the European Free Trade Association (EFTA — which was collectively seeking to negotiate a European economic area with the EC — see pp. 38307; this page) to apply for EC membership, Austria having done so in July 1989 [see p. 36822].
Other applications outstanding were those of Turkey in April 1987 (effectively stalled following the Commission's December 1990 opinion — see p. 37133) and Cyprus and Malta in July 1990 [see p. 37625].
The UK government reportedly supported broader EC membership with a looser structure.
Germany favoured extending EC membership, especially eastwards to assist eastern Europe's transition from communism.
France, however, was concerned that enlargement would detract from moves towards European union and increase the influence of Germany in the EC.
Mediterranean EC members were concerned that enlargement would divert regional aid from the south to the east.
Frans Andriessen, the EC Commissioner responsible for foreign relations, favoured "affiliate membership" for Europe's "orphan countries" , which would have members in the European Parliament, observer status at the Commission, participation in the EC's single internal market and links to the EC's planned single currency.
On July 31 the Commission issued an "essentially positive" opinion (or recommendation to EC governments) on Austria's application, although it said that the government needed to give assurances that its neutrality policy would not obstruct EC moves towards a common foreign and security policy.
The Commission recommended that negotiations should not start before 1993, to allow existing EC members to complete their negotiations on economic and monetary union and on political union.
On July 1 Andorra became the first non-EC country to join the EC customs union, when a treaty signed in June 1990 [see p. 37592]came into effect.
Henceforth Andorra would apply the EC's common external tariff and trade policy, although the principality remained a third country for trade in agricultural goods.
EC-Japanese summit
Japanese Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu, EC Commission President Jacques Delors and Ruud Lubbers, the Netherlands Prime Minister who held the presidency of the EC Council of Ministers for the second half of 1991, held their first formal EC-Japanese summit in The Hague on July 18 immediately after the London G-7 summit [see pp. 38321-22].
As discussed during Delors' visit to Tokyo in May 1991 [see p. 38202], the three leaders issued a joint economic and political declaration pledging closer co-operation, intended to elevate their relations to a new level.
[For joint EC-United States declaration in November 1990 see p. 37838.]
A key section on trade called for the EC and Japan to have "equitable access to their respective markets and to remove obstacles, whether structural or other, impeding the expansion of trade, on the basis of comparable opportunities" .
The French government had argued in favour of "balanced trade" between the two blocs but at the last minute accepted this wording.
On July 31 the EC announced agreement on phasing out limits on Japanese car imports by the end of 1999, when the EC market would be open.
Japan would "monitor its exports to the EC as a whole in accordance with a forecast level of exports in 1999 of 1,230,000 [cars], based on the assumption of demand in the EC of 15,100,000" in that year.
Within this overall figure of 1,230,000 there were sub-ceilings for France, Italy, Portugal, Spain and the UK, which all currently imposed national ceilings on Japanese car imports.
As regards the contentious issue of "transplant" cars (Japanese models primarily assembled in the UK and Spain — see p. 36713 for earlier disputes) the deal expressed the "expectation" that this production would not exceed 1,200,000 vehicles annually by 1999, although Andriessen stressed that there was "no relation between imports and this number" .
ECJ ruling on night work
On July 25 the ECJ upheld the right of a French businessman to employ women on night work in his factory, ruling that countries such as France and Italy which banned night work for women were in breach of a 1976 EC directive on the equal treatment of women and men at work [see p. 28070].
EUROPE
EFTA
Further delays on agreement with EC on EEA
Despite several meetings in July, negotiators failed once again to meet their deadline for agreement on a common European Communities (EC) -European Free Trade Area (EFTA) European Economic Area (EEA), scheduled to become operative in January 1993.
Finnish Foreign Minister Pertti Salolainen, leading the EFTA side since Finland had taken on the rotating EFTA chairmanship on July 1, confirmed on July 30 that the talks would restart in September.
In late August he invited the EFTA ministers to Helsinki for informal talks on Sept. 8-9 on the main outstanding issues, namely fisheries, the financing of a "cohesion fund" to assist the less developed regions, and trans-Alpine road freight.
Fish: The EC sought some access to EFTA country territorial waters, Spain having originally proposed a 90,000 tonne annual cod catch quota.
Iceland, the most-affected EFTA country, wanted to keep exclusive rights to its fisheries (and announced on July 31 a 10 per cent reduction in catch quotas for the coming year for its own fishermen), but wanted free access to sell its own fisheries products in the EC.
Norway offered a compromise formula in June, allowing EC trawlers increasing access as fish stocks grew, with a 2 per cent ceiling, in return for free access to the EC market.
The EC side currently sought a quota of 3 per cent of the total Norwegian catch (i.e. a projected 21,000 tonnes rather than 14,000 tonnes projected by 1997), while EC countries advocating some continuing protection of the fisheries market included notably the UK and Ireland.
EUROPE
GERMANY
1992 draft budget
On July 10 the Cabinet approved a draft budget for 1992 which increased spending by 3 per cent to DM422,560 million.
Of this eastern Germany would receive DM109,000 million as compared with DM93,000 million in 1991.
The second largest item of expenditure would be DM52,500 million for defence (a fractional reduction on 1991).
New federal government borrowing was to be cut by 25 per cent from DM66,400 million in 1991, to DM49,860 million in 1992 and to DM25,000 million by 1995.
The draft budget incorporated cuts in government subsidies for western Germany approved the previous day and totalling DM33,000 million by 1994; cuts of DM10,000 would be made in 1992 (US$1.00=DM1.7527 as at July 29, 1991).
July 1, the date of the introduction of new tax increases [see pp. 38297-98], marked the first anniversary of the introduction of the deutsche mark in East Germany [see p. 37660].
Unemployment in eastern Germany was 9.5 per cent in June (842,504) and over 1,900,000 were on "short-time work" [see also p. 38109]; in addition the eastern German engineering industry's one-year ban on redundancies, affecting over 1,000,000 jobs, expired from July 1 [see p. 37660], while up to 400,000 former East German civil servants were also faced with unemployment.
The rate of emigration to western Germany was still 20,000 a month, according to The Times of July 1.
The Financial Times of June 28 estimated that manufacturing output in eastern Germany had fallen by about two-thirds since the first half of 1990.
Resignation of Saxony-Anhalt government — Imprisonment of CDU leader
On July 2 the Christian Democrat-Free Democrat (CDU-FDP) coalition government in Saxony-Anhalt resigned, and on July 4 the outgoing Minister President, Gerd Gies (CDU), was replaced by his former Finance Minister Werner Münch.
The CDU parliamentary group had accused Gies (who had headed the CDU list but had not won a direct seat in the October 1990 Landtag election) of obliging three other CDU delegates to resign after that election by alleging that they had worked for the former East German "Stasi" security police.
On July 9 the Berlin Landgericht (state court) sentenced Gerald Götting, leader from 1966 to 1989 of the East German CDU [see p. 37024], to 18 months' imprisonment for diverting over DM100,000 of party funds to build a holiday home.
Bundesrat vote to retain its seat in Bonn
The Bundesrat (upper house of parliament) voted on July 5 by 38 votes to 30 to remain in Bonn, the former West German capital, although the Bundestag (lower house) had voted in June to move its seat to Berlin [see p. 38298].
The motion called on the chamber to reconsider the issue in a few years' time.
Sentencing of RAF members
On July 3 a court in Koblenz sentenced Henning Beer to 6@1/2 years' imprisonment for attempted murder on several counts, involvement with explosives, serious robbery and membership of a terrorist organization.
Beer was the third member of the Red Army Faction (RAF) arrested in mid-1990 [see p. 37828]who had been brought to trial.
[For January 1991 sentencing of Werner Lotze wee p. 37967; for June 1991 sentencing of Susanne Albrecht see p. 38298.]
Kohl's visit to Soviet Union — Withdrawal of Soviet troops from Germany
Chancellor Helmut Kohl met Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev as well as Ukrainian leaders for lengthy talks near Kiev on July 5, prior to the July 15 London summit of G-7 countries [see pp. 38321-22].
He pledged to "advocate [in London]that, to the extent of our capabilities and strength, we give joint support to the process of reform and process of openness" .
During the visit, which came shortly after the 50th anniversary of the start of the Nazi invasion of the Soviet Union ( "Operation Barbarossa" ) on June 22, 1941 [see pp. 4667-69], both leaders confirmed their countries' friendship.
In recent months bilateral relations had also been concerned with the withdrawal, due to be completed by December 1994, of more than 370,000 Soviet troops from eastern Germany.
On June 26 and again on July 5 the Soviet military command in Berlin threatened to slow down the repatriation of Soviet soldiers because construction of accommodation for returnees had not yet begun.
The delay was partly because of disagreements over the allocation of contracts for the construction of 36,000 apartments for returning soldiers at a cost to Germany of DM7,800 million.
These contracts were initially awarded exclusively to Finnish and Turkish firms, but German Economics Minister Jürgen Möllemann had announced in late May, after a visit to Moscow, that two-thirds of the contracts would in fact go to (mostly eastern) German firms.
A total of 44,000 Soviet troops plus vehicles and materiel had been withdrawn from eastern Germany between Jan. 1 and May 12, 1991; a further 22,000 service personnel left in June.
On July 15 the last Soviet warship left German waters.
During his first official visit to Bonn on June 12-13 Soviet Foreign Minister Aleksandr Bessmertnykh had confirmed that Soviet nuclear weapons were still on German territory, although Soviet Defence Minister Marshal Dmitry Yazov had denied this the previous week.
(The treaty on Soviet troop withdrawals from Germany, signed on Oct. 12, 1990 — see pp. 37762; 37717-18 — was ratified in April 1991 — see p. 38110.)
EUROPE
FRANCE
Government statements on immigration — Racial tensions — Overturning of deportation of Diouri
Racial tensions came to the fore in several French cities during June and July, as a growing public backlash against North African immigrants placed the government of Edith Cresson under severe political pressure.
Following the publication on July 4 of a government survey showing that 71 per cent of the population felt there were "too many Arabs" in France, Cresson announced on July 11 that border controls would be stepped up, and that foreigners seeking political asylum would no longer be allowed to stay in France solely because of economic difficulties in their home countries.
Cresson had originally demanded even tougher measures.
On July 8 she had announced a stepping-up of the deportations of illegal immigrants, and had said that the state would charter special aircraft for the task.
This move attracted statements of support from the ultra-right-wing National Front of Jean-Marie Le Pen, while some civil rights groups accused Cresson of seizing right-wing solutions to rescue her Socialist Party government from political unpopularity.
On July 10 President François Mitterrand issued an effective rebuttal, stressing that France had not changed its policy on immigration.
On July 29 the state economic studies institute INSEE, in a report described by the opposition Republican Party as a "provocation" , warned that up to 142,000 additional immigrants might be needed after 2000, if France's working-age population were not to shrink to dangerously low levels.
Racial tensions
Violent disturbances erupted during June and July in the Mediterranean port of Narbonne, among groups of Harkis — ethnic Algerians who had acquired French citizenship after fighting for France in the Algerian independence struggle.
Protesting against what they described as years of neglect by the French authorities, young militants among the 420,000-strong community engaged in repeated clashes with police, and some 15 people were injured on July 23-25.
Despite efforts by older Harkis to moderate the militant groups, and despite government promises to examine their claims, racial tensions continued to grow as the month progressed.
On July 24 a group of paratroopers received suspended sentences in nearby Carcassonne for attacking North African immigrants with clubs.
Le Pen, meanwhile, had been cleared by a Versailles court on July 2 of "publicly insulting" the Minister for Public Services, Michel Durafour in September 1988, by using the word-play "Durafour-crematoire" ( "four crematoire" having been the normal description for the furnaces used for burning bodies in Nazi Germany)[see pp. 36230; 37683].
Overturning of deportationof Diouri
A Paris court ruled on July 10 that the state had acted unconstitutionally in deporting Abdelmoumem Diouri, a prominent Moroccan dissident, to Gabon on June 20.
Diouri was re-admitted on July 17, still accusing King Hassan of Morocco of complicity in his deportation.
The government had claimed that Diouri had maintained illegal contacts with Libya and with Iraq while staying in France.
EUROPE
BELGIUM
Assassination of André Cools
André Cools, 63, currently a Minister of State and mayor of the Flémalle suburb of the city of Liège, was shot dead in a car park in Liège in the early hours of July 18.
Marie-Helène Joiret, a council member in Flémalle, who was with Cools, was shot in the abdomen and subsequently taken to hospital in a serious condition.
The gunman escaped.
Police said that the motive for the shooting was not clear, adding that it could have been politically motivated or a crime of passion.
A Deputy Prime Minister from 1969 to 1973 and leading francophone socialist, Cools had been a major force in Belgian politics in the 1960s and 1970s, helping to shape the decentralization of the country's state structure.
EUROPE
UNITED KINGDOM
BCCI scandal
The Bank of Credit and Commerce International (BCCI) was closed down by banking authorities on July 5, and direct action was taken to seize assets estimated at US$20,000 million.
Evidence of fraud within the bank uncovered at the beginning of 1991 prompted the Bank of England to commission a report from BCCI's auditor, Price Waterhouse.
This produced evidence that large losses in the bank's lending and treasury operations had been concealed by false accounting devices, and that large-scale fraud extended back several years.
A secret operation to close down BCCI was co-ordinated by the Bank of England and international banking authorities, and within a week of the report's submission, most of the bank's assets were seized.
The structure of the bank was complex.
BCCI SA was registered in Luxembourg, but ran its international operations from London, which accounted for nearly half of its assets.
BCCI Overseas, with similar assets, was based in the Cayman Islands.
The bank was 77 per cent owned by Sheikh Zaid bin Sultan al-Nahayan, Ruler of Abu Dhabi and President of the United Arab Emirates, and was supported mainly by Arab shareholders.
It operated in 69 countries worldwide.
Founded in 1972 by Agha Hasan Abedi, previously head of the United Bank in Pakistan, BCCI was launched with initial capital of $2,500,000 and claimed to have assets of $20,000 million by 1980.
During the 1980s several newspaper articles made allegations of corruption against the bank.
BCCI was associated with drug money laundering in the United States, and allegedly handled accounts for the Palestinian terrorist organization, Abu Nidal.
In 1990 BCCI pleaded guilty to laundering charges in connection with $32,000,000 of drug money in Florida.
In 1989 BCCI faced losses of $489 million, and was forced to restructure.
Sheikh Zayed injected $1,000 million of capital into the bank, and control of BCCI moved to Abu Dhabi in May 1990.
Abedi resigned as president of the bank in October 1990.
BCCI expected further losses for 1990 of around $450 million, and was reportedly planning a radical rationalization when its assets were seized.
In the UK, BCCI had 25 branches, 1,200 employees, and a total of 120,000 accounts with total deposits estimated at around £2,000 million.
As many as 40 local councils stood to lose up to £100 million from the collapse of BCCI, the largest likely loss being that of the Western Isles which had £23 million invested in the bank.
The Bank of England sought to have the bank declared insolvent, to allow depositors compensation from the UK's Deposit Protection Fund (which paid 75 per cent of deposits up to £15,000).
However, after a £50,000,000 compensation package for UK depositors and employees had been put together by the Abu Dhabi government on July 30, the High Court in London granted the bank a four-month delay to allow more time for majority shareholders to explore ways of reviving BCCI.
Under the rescue package, the 48,400 eligible small depositors in the UK would get back three quarters of their sterling deposits up to a ceiling of £5,000, and BCCI's employees would continue to be paid weekly in advance.
UK Prime Minister John Major, whose critics claimed that he had known of fraud within BCCI when he was Chancellor of the Exchequer in 1990, announced on July 22 that Lord Justice Bingham would head an inquiry into the BCCI affair.
Major insisted that he knew nothing of the BCCI fraud before June 28, 1991, when he was informed by the Bank of England.
The governor of the Bank of England, Robin Leigh Pemberton, had also come under intense criticism for not acting more quickly when he became aware of fraud within BCCI.
In the United States, a New York grand jury on July 29 brought criminal indictments against BCCI, against its founder Abedi, who was currently living in poor health in Sind province, Pakistan, and against its former chief operating officer Swaleh Naqvi.
The bank and four of its affiliates were charged with $20,000 million in global banking fraud, following a two-year inquiry by the Manhattan district attorney, Robert Morgenthau.
An initiative launched from Abu Dhabi aimed to salvage the three Pakistani branches of BCCI which continued to trade in defiance of an earlier order for closure.
Allegations continued to emerge linking the BCCI affair with the Pakistani government.
Walton by-election — Imprisonment of MP over poll tax
In a parliamentary by-election in Liverpool Walton on July 4 Peter Kilfoyle, the official Labour candidate, was returned with 53 per cent of the vote.
The seat had become vacant upon the death on May 27 of Eric Heffer [see p. 38200], who had held the seat for Labour since 1964 [see p. 38200]and had won 64.2 per cent of the vote at the 1987 election.
The Liberal Democrat candidate Paul Clark obtained 36 per cent of the vote on July 4, while the Conservative candidate Berkeley Greenwood obtained only 2.8 per cent.
The "Real Labour" ( "Broad Left" ) unofficial Labour Party candidate Lesley Mahmood polled 6.5 per cent of the vote.
Mahmood's rival candidacy for the Walton seat had angered the Labour Party leadership, which had sought to eliminate the unofficial left-wing Labour supporters' group Militant Tendency with which she was associated.
After the election the Labour leadership announced a further crackdown on Militant, suspending some 145 party members including Mahmood and two MPs, Terry Fields (Liverpool Broad Green) and Dave Nellist (Leicester East).
A court in Bootle sentenced Fields on July 11 to 60 days' imprisonment for refusing to pay the community charge or "poll tax" .
Fields claimed that he was refusing to pay on principle, because the tax was unjust; Neil Kinnock, the Labour Party leader, said that he had "absolutely no sympathy" with Fields, and that "law makers must not be law breakers" .
Citizen's Charter — Cut in base lending rate
The Prime Minister, John Major, presented on July 22 a 50-page white paper which he called a "Citizen's Charter" , incorporating some 70 proposals for the improvement of public services.
The paper included plans to privatize British Rail and London buses, to increase competition for the Post Office, to expedite the contracting out of local authority services to the private sector, and to shorten waiting times for hospital admissions.
Full details, he said, would be published in a succession of "mini-charters" at a later date.
Kinnock dismissed the proposed Charter on July 23 as "an election gimmick" designed to boost the Conservatives' electoral ratings rather than tackle the relevant issues, and said that it was an implicit admission that the government had allowed the quality of public services to decline during its years in office.
Most UK banks announced on July 13 that they were lowering their base lending rates by 0.5 per cent, from 11.5 to 11 per cent , upon a signal from the Bank of England.
The new rate, which compared with levels of 14 per cent in October 1990, followed news that factory-gate prices had risen only 5.7 per cent year-on-year in June, compared with 6 per cent in May.
News that the current account on the UK balance of payments had moved slightly into surplus during June, for the first time since February 1987, also helped to increase dealings on the London stock market, where the FT-Actuaries All-Share Index reached a new all-time peak of 1,238 on July 29.
EUROPE
NORTHERN IRELAND
Breakdown of all-party talks
The United Kingdom Northern Ireland Secretary, Peter Brooke, announced on July 3 that inter-party talks on the future of the province should be brought to an end without agreement having been reached on any substantial issue.
The immediate cause of the collapse was the Unionist demand for postponement of a meeting of the Anglo-Irish Intergovernmental Conference planned for July 16.
Brooke had originally envisaged that the all-party talks would take place within 10 weeks, during which time the workings of the Anglo-Irish Agreement would be suspended.
However, the round table talks between the constitutional parties ran into procedural difficulties and started seven weeks late on June 17 [see p. 38300].
Brooke refused to postpone his scheduled Anglo-Irish conference meeting with Irish Foreign Minister Gerry Collins, suggesting that the all-party talks continue afterwards.
On July 3 Brooke refused to describe the talks as having broken down, saying that he hoped they could be revived in the autumn.
He said that he had acted because of lack of time, rather than insurmountable disagreement.
Freeing of IRA suspects in Netherlands
The Netherlands Court of Appeals on July 5 overturned the murder conviction of Gerald Harte and upheld the acquittal of three other Irish people, Sean Hick, Paul Hughes and Donna Maguire.
All four had been accused of involvement in the murders of two Australian lawyers on holiday in the Dutch town of Roermond in May 1990 [see p. 37537].
The Irish Republican Army (IRA) had said that the two Australians were killed in mistake for British soldiers.
The court ruled that the case against Harte had not been "conclusively or legally proven" and quashed the 18-year sentence passed against him on April 2 [see p. 38157].
A lower Dutch court on July 12 acquitted all four of belonging to an illegal organization.
Harte was freed and flew to Ireland, where he was arrested on arrival in Dublin.
Hick and Hughes were extradited to Germany on July 16 to face charges connected with the bombing of barracks at Langenhagen, near Hannover in May 1990, and with the murder of a British army major in Dortmund four days after the Roermond shootings [see p. 37537].
Imprisonment of Eksund master
Adrian Hopkins, the master of the IRA gun-running ship, the Eksund, was sentenced to eight years in prison by the Special Criminal Court in Dublin on July 29.
However, five years of the sentence were suspended after the judge took into consideration the length of time Hopkins had already spent in custody, and his plea of guilty of possession of guns and explosives in French territorial waters in 1987.
Eleven other charges against him were dropped.
The Eksund was seized by French customs off Brittany in October 1987 when carrying 150 tonnes of weapons [see p. 36238].
It had been travelling from Libya with the last of five arms shipments for the IRA.
The five crew had been sentenced and fined by a court in Paris in March 1991 [see p. 38112].
Escape of two IRA suspects from prison
Two armed IRA suspects, Nessan Quinlivan, 28, and Pierce McCauley, 25, escaped from Brixton prison in London on July 7.
The two men, both facing terrorist charges, escaped after producing a gun, which had been hidden in one of their shoes, as they were being escorted back to the prison's secure unit from attending mass in the chapel.
They shot and wounded a man before hijacking his car, which was later found abandoned.
The UK Home Secretary, Kenneth Baker, announced on July 8 that there would be an inquiry into the escape and into the issue of prison security.
EUROPE
ITALY
Law to combat money-laundering — Mafia detentions
New legislation approved by the Senate on July 4 decreed that from July 8 all cash transactions of over L20,000,000 (about US$15,000) had to be made through recognized intermediaries.
The measure was designed to make it more difficult for crime syndicates to launder illegally acquired funds.
The law reportedly came in response to recommendations by the United States authorities that controls on cash transactions similar to those in force in the USA should be adopted by other industrialized countries.
An Italian government proposal to establish a central register of suspicious operations failed to gain parliamentary approval.
On July 9, 24 people were detained in Milan, Turin, Rome and in the region of Calabria after an official inquiry led by High Commissioner Domenico de Sica concluded that around L15,000 million had been laundered annually through a regional bank, the Banco Populare di Scilla.
The money was said to have been the profits from drug-trafficking and kidnappings.
Press reports variously said that the N'drangheta — the Calabrian equivalent of the Mafia — or the Camorra clan of Naples had been involved.
EUROPE
SPAIN
Completion of city governments
On July 5 it was announced that the ruling Socialist Workers' Party (PSOE) had secured five of the 10 mayoralities of provincial capitals which had been left undecided in June pending investigations into alleged voting irregularities.
The elections for municipal administrations on May 26 [see p. 38201]had been followed in most cases by the appointment of mayors on June 15.
The delay in 10 cities had in many instances allowed more time for local coalitions to be negotiated.
PSOE victories were now confirmed in Barcelona, Alicante, Badajoz, Salamanca and Ciudad Real.
In Madrid, where the PSOE had accused the conservative Popular Party (PP) headquarters of fraudulently processing over 10,000 postal votes, the accusation was dismissed and the new mayor José María Alvarez (PP) took office on July 5.
Gonzalez"visit to Moscow
Prime Minister Felipe González made a second visit to the Soviet Union on July 7-9.
He met with President Gorbachev and more briefly with Russian Federation President Boris Yeltsin.
González was accompanied by Foreign Minister Francisco Fernández Ordóñez.
On July 9 he signed a treaty of cultural, economic and scientific co-operation with the Soviet Union.
The Spanish press noted as significant a meeting between Fernández Ordóñez and the former Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard Shevardnadze.
Dissolution of Terre Lliure — Bomb attacks — Prison riot
The Catalan separatist group Terre Lliure ( "Free Land" ) announced on July 15 that it was to dissolve.
Its members had been accepted into the left-wing party Esquerra Republicana de Catalunya (ERC).
Terre Lliure, which was reported to have 60-100 members, had renounced its armed campaign on July 6, as it negotiated integration with the ERC.
On July 11, bombs exploded outside the Spanish consulates in the German cities of Munich and Dusseldorf, causing extensive damage but no serious injuries.
A third bomb at a Spanish bank in Munich was defused.
The explosions were attributed to the Basque separatist group Euzkadi ta Askatasuna (ETA), as were three others in Spain during July in which three people were killed and 20 injured.
One prisoner of Algerian origin was killed during a riot at the Herrera de la Mancha prison, in the centre of Spain, on July 10-11.
Prisoners were demanding improvements in medical treatment, work opportunities and food.
EUROPE
GREECE
Bush visit
United States President George Bush visited Greece on July 18-19, before going to Turkey [see p. 38357].
The Cyprus question was reported to have headed the agenda in his talks with Prime Minister Konstantinos Mitsotakis [see p. 38402].
In violent protests against the visit in Athens on the night of July 18, six banks were burned and six people were injured.
On July 17 the Turkish consul, Deniz Bolukbasi, and two other members of the consulate staff had been injured when a car bomb exploded near the Turkish consulate in Athens.
The attack was attributed to the leftist November-17 group.
Security was intensified in preparation for Bush's visit; there were six bomb attacks, in which no-one was injured, against US targets in Athens on July 16-17.
On July 19 the two leaders addressed Greek and US naval personnel at the US naval base at Souda bay, Crete.
Bush thanked the Greek navy for its co-operation with coalition forces in the Gulf war [see p. 37640].
He announced that the USA would be sending Greece surplus tanks and artillery and would lease two frigates to the navy.
Mitsotakis' visit to Moscow — Resignation of Industry Minister
During an official visit to Moscow, Kiev and the Ukraine on July 24-26, Mitsotakis met with President Gorbachev and with Russian Federation President Boris Yeltsin.
A package of bilateral agreements signed by Gorbachev and Mitsotakis on July 23 included accords on avoiding "dangerous military activity" , on combating drug trafficking, and on customs co-operation.
Talks between Foreign Ministers Antonis Samaras and Aleksandr Bessmertnykh on July 22 centred on the situation in Yugoslavia and the creation of "all-European structures" , in security and other fields.
Stavros Dimas, the Minister of Industry, Energy and Technology, resigned on July 26 whilst accompanying Mitsotakis in the Soviet Union.
Dimas had reportedly clashed with the Prime Minister's wife, Marika Mitsotakis, who had publicly reprimanded him for his behaviour towards Greek industrialists accompanying the official party.
Papandreou trial
The former chairman of the Bank of Crete, Giorgos Koskotas, gave evidence at the trial in which four leading politicians, including former Prime Minister Andreas Papandreou, faced charges of corruption in their dealings with the bank.
He presented his testimony before the 13-member special tribunal on June 10 and on July 15-22.
The trial had begun on March 11.
Koskotas, 36, had agreed on June 1 to return to Greece from the United States, dropping his fight against extradition [see pp. 38158; 37514].
He now appeared as a prosecution witness whilst himself facing prosecution in separate proceedings.
On June 10 he detailed a tortuous series of corrupt dealings between Papandreou and himself allegedly dating back to a threat made in 1985 by Papandreou's Pasok party to nationalize the Bank of Crete.
He claimed that after 1987 he had been blackmailed by Papandreou into channelling interest on deposits from public corporations into Pasok election funds.
His increasingly dramatic testimony from July 15 onwards, implicating Pasok in an international arms-dealing network, was backed by little hard evidence.
The trial continued.
Left Alliance conference — KKE withdrawal
The Greek Communist Party politician Maria Damanaki was re-elected as chair of the Left Alliance (or Coalition of the Left and Progress — Synaspismos) on July 1, during its first national conference.
Other members of the leadership of the Communist Party (Kommunistikon Komma Ellados — KKE-Exterior) refused to attend the conference of the Alliance, which was now effectively without KKE support.
At the conference a new 141-member political committee with a strong reformist tendency was elected.
Damanaki said that the Alliance would henceforward be an "autonomous political party" with its own strategies.
On June 15 KKE secretary-general Aleka Papariga, who was from party's conservative current, had announced that she was pulling the KKE out of the Left Alliance.
On June 24 a group of seven reformers — including Damanaki, who had resisted Papariga's decision to withdraw from the Alliance — had been suspended from the KKE's central committee.
There were further expulsions of reformers from the committee on July 14.
EUROPE
TURKEY
Negotiation over rapid reaction force
As allied troops began to withdraw from northern Iraq [see p. 38361], the stationing of a multinational rapid reaction force on Turkish territory was still under negotiation by the Turkish government and those of the anti-Iraq coalition which fought the Gulf war.
The force was regarded as a necessary guarantee to deter incursions by the Iraqi army into the zone of northern Iraq where coalition troops had from April until July been providing protection for Iraqi Kurds [see pp. 38127-28; 38211; 38308].
From mid-July the force was in the process of formation, although details of deployments were not publicized.
Paul Wolfovitz, the United States Under-Secretary of Defence, visited Turkey and northern Iraq on June 29-July 3, when he represented the coalition in negotiations with the Turkish government.
The Turkish government was wary of domestic right-wing and Islamic fundamentalist opposition to the proposal, especially prior to a parliamentary vote of confidence won on July 5 by the administration of Prime Minister Mesut Yilmaz.
On July 23 the Foreign Ministry confirmed the terms it considered acceptable for an "allied multinational force" to be based in south-eastern Turkey: the force was to come under the joint command of Turkish and US commanders; its ground element would be based at the US/NATO airfield at Incirlik and its air element at Silopi, with some facilities available at Batman in south-east Turkey; any intervention against Iraq would need Turkish government approval; and initial Turkish permission for the presence of the force would expire on Sept. 30.
As well as the USA, Belgium, France, Italy, the Netherlands and the United Kingdom, were to participate in the operation — initially entitled "Poised Hammer" but now rechristened "Provide Comfort — II" .
One thousand Turkish troops were also to be stationed at Silopi as part of the operation.
Talks with Turkish and Iraqi Kurdish leaders
In the week July 22-28 US Maj.-Gen.
Jay Garner, head of the coalition forces, met with representatives of the (Turkish) Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK).
According to the Middle East Times of July 23-29 Garner "stressed that Western soldiers' presence would not involve action against the PKK" .
Jalal Talabani, leader of the Iraqi Kurdish Patriotic Union of Kurdistan (PUK), discussed border security with Turkish officials in Istanbul on July 26 [for March meeting see p. 38116], after a meeting with the regional governor of south-east Turkey, Hayri Kozakcioglu, on the previous day.
Tension in south-east Turkey
Tension escalated in Kurdish areas of south-eastern Turkey following the torture and murder on July 7-8 of Vedat Aydin, 36, a Kurdish human rights activist and local chairman of the People's Labour Party (HEP).
Three people were killed in clashes with the police as a crowd of 20,000 gathered for his funeral in Diyarbakir on July 10.
Large demonstrations in support of the PKK were also reported in Silopi and Cizre.
Clashes in rural areas between PKK guerrillas and the Turkish army meanwhile continued: eight PKK fighters were reported killed in Siirt province on July 10.
On the weekend of July 13-14 nine civilians, five of them children, who were related to pro-government militia members, were killed when PKK forces attacked two villages in Karamanmaras province.
Bush's visit
US President Bush visited Ankara and Istanbul on July 20-22.
The Cyprus issue was discussed [see also p. 38402], but priority was given to the relationship between Turkey and the USA in the aftermath of the Gulf war.
On July 19 about 1,000 supporters of Islamic organizations had demonstrated in Istanbul against the visit.
President Özal reportedly sought increased military aid and the lifting of restrictions on the importation of Turkish goods to the USA.
On July 20 he told the press of plans for regular consultations between Turkish Foreign Ministry and US State Department officials, appropriate to "the strategic dimension that our relations have already reached" .
Action against Dev Sol
On July 12-13, 10 alleged members of the left-wing Dev Sol group were killed and 12 detained in police raids reportedly aimed at pre-empting attacks on US targets.
On July 18-21 there were petrol bomb attacks on 12 bank branches and a supermarket.
Rulings on political prisoners and UTCP
On July 22 the Constitutional Court, by cancelling two items from the country's controversial anti-terrorist law, made possible the future conditional release of about 1,000 political prisoners.
Those accused of separatist propaganda were excluded, and the court also ruled that the United Turkish Communist Party (UTCP), formed in 1988, was illegal.
EUROPE
CENTRAL EUROPE
The "Pentagonale" group of central European countries (Austria, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Italy and Yugoslavia) became the "Hexagonal" group with the admission of Poland at its meeting in Dubrovnik on July 27; the group issued a second statement on Yugoslavia [see p. 38209], on this occasion omitting any mention of Yugoslavia's territorial integrity.
EUROPE
ENERGY
Officials from 35 countries held preliminary discussions on July 15-17 on working out a European Energy Charter, planned for signature in mid-December 1991, which would link the Soviet Union's oil and gas supplies with Western countries' financing and technological expertise.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
MIDDLE EAST
Progress towards peace conference
The possibility that a Middle East peace conference would be convened during 1991 increased markedly in July, with Egypt, Saudi Arabia and Jordan all welcoming Syria's positive response on July 14 to a United States-sponsored conference plan.
The Israeli government, reportedly taken by surprise by the Syrian move, had failed to provide the USA with a similar positive response as of the end of July.
Bush's "compromise" letter to Assad and Shamir
US President Bush wrote to a number of Middle Eastern leaders on June 1 in an attempt to advance moves toward the convening of a peace conference.
Those receiving letters included Israeli Prime Minister Itzhak Shamir, President Assad of Syria, President Mubarak of Egypt and King Fahd ibn Abdul Aziz of Saudi Arabia.
In the letters Bush suggested compromise terms for the two issues which had been holding up an agreement on a conference, namely the question of UN representation and the nature of the conference itself.
He suggested that the conference be chaired by the USA and the Soviet Union, and should be attended by Israel, Syria, Egypt, Lebanon and a joint Jordanian/Palestinian delegation; the UN and the European Communities would attend as "silent observers" .
Bush suggested that the conference would dissolve into a series of bilateral negotiations, but would be periodically reconvened.
In his letter to Shamir, Bush reportedly promised to support Israel's insistence that neither Palestinians from East Jerusalem nor overt supporters of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) be allowed to attend the conference.
He also called on Israel to freeze its policy of building settlements in the occupied territories (the USA was reported to have subsequently theatened Israel with financial penalties if it failed to halt its settlement activity — see pp. 38310; 38359).
In his letter to Assad, Bush reportedly promised never to recognize Israel's 1981 annexation of the Golan Heights.
He was also reported to have assured Assad that "all fronts" , including the Golan Heights, were subject to UN Security Council Resolutions 242 and 338 and would therefore be proper subjects for discussion at a conference.
Israeli and Palestinian response
Shamir delivered a speech on June 4 which appeared to indicate that he was ready to accept Bush's compromise package.
Shamir told a group of religious teachers in Tel Aviv that the issue of sovereignty of the West Bank and the Gaza Strip was negotiable, despite his past insistence that the territories were integral parts of Israel.
The Egyptian Foreign Minister Amr Mohammed Moussa said on June 7 that Shamir's remarks were "a positive development and a step in the right direction" .
Israel also agreed "in principle" on June 5 that the European Communities (EC) should play a direct role in a conference, as announced during a visit to Paris by Israel's Foreign Minister, David Levi, and subsequently confirmed by Shamir, despite opposition from hardliners within his Cabinet.
However Shamir's formal reply on June 6 to Bush's letter rejected Bush's compromise, according to press reports, and accused Arab countries of "derailing the real purpose" of the proposed conference.
He ruled out a UN role in the conference and insisted on Israel's right to veto all members of any joint Jordanian-Palestinian delegation.
Meanwhile, the PLO Executive Committee met in Tunis on June 8-9 and issued a statement rejecting any compromise which would exclude the city of Jerusalem from Middle East peace negotiations.
Visit by Assad to Cairo — Visit by Levi to Washington
President Assad visited Cairo on June 5 for talks with Mubarak aimed at achieving a common Arab front [see p. 38169 for visit by Assad to Egypt in April].
Mohammed Moussa visited Syria on June 10-11 for further talks.
David Levi met with US Secretary of State James Baker in Washington on June 13 during a private visit to the United States.
After the meeting he insisted that both governments would keep searching for ways to convene a conference and declared that the "process is not stuck" .
Syrian acceptance of US peace conference proposal
It was reported on July 14 that President Assad had finally replied to Bush's letter of June 1.
Syrian television reported that Assad, in his reply, said that he considered Bush's proposals as "positive and balanced" and as "constituting an acceptable basis for achieving a comprehensive solution and a peace process in the region" .
Baker immediately praised Assad's response as positive, saying that it had demonstrated that Syria was now more willing to enter direct peace talks with Israel than at any time in the past.
On July 16 Baker confirmed that Syria had dropped its insistence on a significant role for the UN at the conference and was prepared to settle for a UN observer.
Syria also appeared to have accepted the US proposal that the conference could be reconvened only with the full approval of all participants.
In a statement on July 15 Shamir's office said that Israel would take a "positive view" of Assad's reply if it enabled Israel to conduct "direct and unmediated negotiations with Syria" .
Assad's reply was also welcomed by Jordan, Egypt and Saudi Arabia.
The PLO quickly dispatched delegations to Cairo, Amman and Damascus and made it known that it would not disrupt the process.
Assad and Mubarak conferred in Damascus on July 17-18, and the Syrian government daily Al-Thawrah stated on July 18 that their meeting formed the basis of a "joint Arab action" on the conference.
Iran, Syria's "strategic ally" in the region, reacted angrily to Assad's move.
A commentary on Tehran radio on July 19 said that Syria's "accommodating the plan comforts US imperialism and hegemonism in the region and weakens the sacred cause of Moslem Palestine" .
Baker's fifth Middle East tour
On July 18 James Baker embarked on his fifth tour of the Middle East since March.
He arrived in Syria on July 18 when he conveyed President Bush's"appreciation for…
[Assad's]…answer to his message…which boosts the cause of peace".
Baker travelled to Egypt on July 19 for talks with Mubarak, who expressed his support for the US plan, as did the visiting Lebanese Foreign Minister Faris Buwayz.
During the talks Mubarak became the first Arab leader to accept the US suggestion that the Arab countries should drop their economic boycott of Israel in return for an Israeli freeze on its settlement activities.
Baker visited Saudi Arabia and Jordan on July 20-21 and both King Fahd and King Hussein announced their support for the US plan and for the Egyptian initiative.
In Jordan Baker was informed that discussions were under way with "the Palestinians" on"the umbrella of a joint…
Palestinian-Jordanian delegation".
The Jordanian House of Representatives reacted angrily to the US plan, however.
Only hours after Baker left Jordan on July 21 the House condemned the peace efforts for excluding the PLO and for being biased in favour of Israel.
Baker visited Jerusalem on July 21-22, when he held talks with Shamir, Levi and Defence Minister Moshe Arens.
During his time in Israel Baker received no formal response from Shamir to the Syrian acceptance of the US plan.
Baker met for talks with a three-member Palestinian delegation led by Faisal al-Husseini, director of the East Jerusalem Institute of Arab Studies, on July 21.
The Palestinian group refrained from approving the US plan, saying that it was for the PLO to do so.
Before leaving Israel Baker told reporters that it was "a moment of historic opportunity" .
 "For 43 years," he went on,"Israel has sought direct negotiations with its neighbours…
Now there is real opportunity to get those face-to-face negotiations".
The Israeli Cabinet met shortly after Baker's departure on July 22.
Shamir told the Cabinet that the time had not yet arrived for Israel to provide an answer as to whether or not it would attend a peace conference, as the US position on the composition of a Palestinian delegation was not yet clear.
However, in a statement on July 23, Shamir described Assad's response as "a phenomenon similar to what happened in Egypt with President Sadat when a revolution occurred in his concepts that ultimately led to negotiations with Israel and to peace" .
He anticipated talks "in a month or two" , but insisted that sharp differences remained over the question of Palestinian representation and said that Israel would maintain a veto on anyone it considered to be associated with the PLO.
Visit by Levi to Egypt
Israeli Foreign Minister Levi visited Egypt on July 29-31.
Although he declared the start of a "new era" in relations after his visit, Egyptian officials expressed disappointment at their failure to broker a compromise with Levi on Palestinian representation at the peace conference.
A Western diplomatic source was quoted by the Agence France-Presse news agency on July 31 as saying it had been a "dialogue of the deaf" .
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
ISRAEL
Settlements issue
Israel continued to reject requests from the United States to freeze its policy of settlement in the occupied territories [see pp. 38309-10].
The Housing and Construction Minister, Ariel Sharon, inaugurated a new neighbourhood in the settlement of Mevo Dotan in the West Bank on July 2, the day after US President Bush had publicly criticized Israeli settlement building as counterproductive to peace.
During his speech at the inauguration ceremony, Sharon said that Jewish settlement was not an obstacle to peace, but was instead an obstacle to war.
There was, he said, no connection between territory and peace.
The Financial Times of July 27 reported that the Israeli Defence Ministry had confirmed that plots of land in the occupied territories were to be given free of charge to Jewish people wishing to settle.
This followed reports that Israel had expropriated over 8,000 hectares of land in the occupied territories so far in 1991, compared with only some 600 hectares in the whole of 1988.
On July 27 the Housing Ministry approved the construction of 380 new apartments on the Golan Heights, where there were currently some 3,200 apartments housing Jewish settlers.
Two days later Sharon announced that work had begun on what he hoped would be the largest Jewish settlement in the West Bank, Avneh Hafetz, near the town of Tulkarm.
Judicial report into Temple Mount massacre
A judicial report into the Haram al-Sharif or Temple Mount massacre of October 1990 [see pp. 37759-60]directly contradicted the government's account of the affair, blaming police incompetence and not Arab provocation for the violence in which 17 Palestinians were shot dead and over 100 others were injured.
The report, compiled by Judge Ezra Kama and issued on July 18, claimed that rioting had broken out at the Temple Mount after the accidental discharge of a police tear-gas canister near a group of Palestinian women.
Only after that did Palestinians begin stoning the police and Jewish worshippers at the Wailing Wall situated at the foot of the Mount.
The Kama report contradicted a government report into the massacre released in late October 1990 which alleged that Palestinians had planned a confrontation [see p. 37760].
Although Judge Kama concluded that some of the police and border paramilitary police had acted improperly, he nevertheless said that there were insufficient grounds to bring charges against any members of the security forces.
Amnesty International report on treatment of Palestinian detainees
A report published by the human rights organization Amnesty International on July 30 condemned the treatment of Palestinian detainees by the Israeli security forces.
According to the report many of the 30,000 Palestinians tried by military court since the start of the intifada in 1987 "have been convicted after confessions allegedly coerced by torture or other forms of ill-treatment" .
The report also claimed that "secret official guidelines" allowing "moderate physical pressure during interrogation" had been endorsed by the Israeli government in 1987.
Request for increased US military aid
On July 4 Defence Minister Moshe Arens told a visiting group from the Zionist Organization of America (ZOA) that Israel had asked the USA to increase its annual military grant by US$700 million to US$2,500 million to ensure that it maintained a "qualitative advantage" over its Arab neighbours.
The US had agreed to provide Israel with an additional US$700 million in military grants, for 1991 only, to offset extra costs caused by the Gulf War.
Arens said that he had made the request for a permanent upgrade during talks with the US Defence Secretary, Dick Cheney, in late May [see p. 38310].
Guerrilla attack from Syria -Infiltration from Jordan
An Israeli soldier was killed on July 3 when unidentified guerrillas attacked an army post on Mount Hermon, near the Syrian border.
The soldier was the first to die along the Syrian-Israeli border since 1975.
An Israeli army statement said that "there is no certainty of any Syrian involvement" in the attack.
Voice of Israel radio had reported on June 1 that the army had that morning shot dead a "a terrorist" who had infiltrated from Jordan.
A second "terrorist" had fled back to the eastern bank of the River Jordan.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
JORDAN
Ending of martial law
King Hussein issued a royal decree on July 7 repealing almost all the martial law provisions in force since the 1967 Arab-Israeli war.
The decree stated, however, that martial law courts would continue to investigate cases which they were already handling and that the Economic Security Committee would continue investigating mismanagement and corruption by former officials.
The King had signalled his intention to cancel the emergency laws in November 1989 at the opening of Parliament [see pp. 37052; 37136]and the majority of the measures had been suspended since that date.
His decision to repeal them followed, according to the state news agency, a request to do so from the government of the new Prime Minister Taher al-Masri [see p. 38311], to be in line with moves "to continue building our democratic march and to give greater political freedoms" .
Under martial law, large public meetings and political activity had been banned and the government had broad powers to restrict freedom of speech and of the press.
Government vote of confidence — Lifting of ban on political parties
The government on July 18 won a vote of confidence in the 80-member House of Representatives (lower house of parliament) by 47 votes to 31, with one abstention and one deputy absent from the chamber.
The vote put an end to speculation that the new administration, sworn in on June 19 [see p. 38311], might not win the approval of the majority of deputies.
At an extraordinary session of parliament on July 8, held to discuss the programme of the new government, there had been criticism from Islamist and nationalist deputies and the Constitutional Bloc, a new parliamentary grouping formed by 13 deputies on July 14, had declared its intention of joining the Moslem Brotherhood in opposing the government in a vote of confidence.
Intensive consultations with ministers and the intervention of King Hussein, however, succeeded in overcoming most of their opposition, and only two Constitutional Bloc members ultimately voted with the Moslem Brotherhood.
(The bloc included nationalists and former ministers with no apparent ideological differences with the government, which prompted press speculation that their initial stance was founded largely on their exclusion from the Cabinet.)
The Moslem Brotherhood, which held five seats in the previous Cabinet and had declined to join the present one, was concerned that the Prime Minister was preparing to change the policies of the previous administration, particularly in the areas of relations with Israel and of agriculture and water policy.
Masri, however, presenting his policy statement to parliament on July 11, had insisted that "we are a continuation of previous administrations" .
Masri's position had been strengthened by the lifting of martial law and the decision of the Council of Ministers on July 14 to approve two draft laws, one amending the state security court law and the other sanctioning political parties.
King Hussein had approved a national charter on June 9 lifting the ban on political parties [see p. 38311], which had been in place since 1957.
Visit of Chinese Premier
The Chinese Premier Li Peng, visited Amman, the capital of Jordan, on July 6-7 and held talks with Masri on regional arms control, the Middle East peace process and ways to boost co-operation between the two countries.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
LEBANON
Deployment of Lebanese troops in Palestinian strongholds
In July the Lebanese government continued with its Syrian-sponsored plan to extend its authority throughout the whole of Lebanon, deploying its army in force in the Palestinian-controlled areas of the south despite having failed to reach an agreement with the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO).
The PLO had been attempting to formalize its relations with the Lebanese government since the latter's 1987 abrogation [see p. 35348]of the 1969 "Cairo agreement" granting Palestinian fighters the right to bear arms and to conduct cross-border raids into Israel.
The PLO refused to accept government demands to disarm, even though the government had successfully disarmed militias based in and around Beirut in April and May [see pp. 38168; 38214], on the grounds that PLO fighters in the south were not a militia but an army, engaged in a war with Israel and its proxy South Lebanon Army (SLA).
The Lebanese Cabinet, meeting on June 12, instructed Deputy Prime Minister and National Defence Minister Michel al-Murr to begin a full deployment in the south on July 1.
The PLO, however, had stated that it could not endorse the deployment until an "official Palestinian-Lebanese agreement" had been reached.
The deployment effectively placed the Lebanese army on the "front line" facing the SLA (and Israeli troops) at Jezzin, the strategically important SLA-occupied town north of Israel's self-declared "security zone" .
Following the deployment, the Lebanese government made it clear that its next step would be to place diplomatic pressure on the United States to persuade Israel to allow Lebanese army deployment in Jezzin, as a first step towards compliance with UN Security Council Resolution 425, which called for an Israeli withdrawal from Lebanon.
Fighting during deployment of army forces around Sidon — Subsequent deployment around Tyre
At dawn on July 1 Lebanese army units crossed the Awali River and took up positions around the port of Sidon.
The town itself was controlled by the Nasserite Popular Organization (NPO) which allowed the troops to enter.
As the army shifted eastward, however, into the suburbs and villages surrounding the Palestinian camps of Ayn al-Hulwah and Miyah wa Miyah, they began to encounter opposition from Palestinian guerrillas, which escalated on subsequent days.
Contacts made locally, from a string of hill villages overlooking the camps, and in Damascus and Tunis, failed to secure Palestinian agreement to disarm and withdraw to the camps.
Early on July 2, fierce fighting erupted between the army and Palestinian guerrillas.
The PLO then issued a statement calling for a ceasefire and for a "serious political dialogue…to normalize relations between the two sides" .
Fighting continued on July 3, but the army had clearly gained the upper hand and by the end of the day it controlled most of the area surrounding the two camps.
Some 60 people had died in the fighting and a further 150 had been injured, mostly Palestinians.
A further 450 Palestinians had been taken prisoner.
On July 4 Shawqi Fakhuri and Abdullah al-Amin, both Ministers of State, met with a Palestinian delegation at the Sidon home of the NPO leader, Mustafa Sa'd.
The Palestinian side agreed to withdraw all of its men to the camps and to hand over all heavy and medium-calibre weapons.
The Ministers of State agreed to negotiate an agreement on Palestinian civil and social, but not political, rights.
On July 6 Palestinian fighters started handing over their weaponry to the army.
Although large quantities had been handed over by July 8, the government maintained that items remained in the camps.
As of late July both camps were surrounded by army units and Murr insisted that the blockade would continue until all heavy and medium-calibre weaponry had been turned over to the government.
On July 10-11 the army was deployed south of Sidon, in the Tyre area, hitherto the PLO's southernmost refuge.
Hezbollah's presence in south — Israeli attacks
The disarming of the Palestinian fighters in early July meant that the Shia fundamentalist Hezbollah was the sole group which remained unaffected by the government's recent actions.
In general, the army had avoided Hezbollah strongholds during its deployment in the south.
Commentators suggested that Hezbollah had been immune from the disarming process because of its close connections with the Iranian government, which itself had close, but increasingly tense, relations with Syria.
Hezbollah forces launched at least three attacks in Israel's "security zone" during early July.
On July 16-17 Hezbollah forces killed one SLA and three Israeli soldiers in an attack on a village in the northern part of the zone.
Israel responded on the morning of July 17 with air attacks on Hezbollah villages north of the zone.
Such villages also suffered attacks from Israeli and SLA ground artillery.
Israeli fighter planes launched another attack on July 24 against Palestinian positions near Damour, north of Sidon.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
IRAQ
Accusations over nuclear and chemical weapons
Iraq was accused by the United States administration of failing to meet a UN July 25 deadline to give a full disclosure of its nuclear capabilities.
Iraqi Prime Minister Sa'adoun Hammadi had said on July 15 that the government had disclosed all information about its nuclear facilities.
However, the UN Secretary General, Javier Pérez de Cuéllar, said on July 25 that the Iraqis had "unfortunately not revealed all they have as far as their nuclear capabilities are concerned" .
The UN Security Council ultimatum, which came amidst renewed US threats of a military offensive against Iraq [see p. 38307], had been handed to government officials by a delegation of UN weapons inspectors who arrived in Baghdad on June 30.
Pérez de Cuéllar's July 25 statement stressed that a US-led military attack was unlikely.
Earlier in the week US President George Bush had emphasised that the expiry of the UN deadline would not signify "D-Day" in the sense of imminent military action.
Bush's remarks apparently indicated a softening of the US stance.
On July 13 the Guardian, quoting US officials, had claimed that the Bush administration had approved a list of 100 targets for possible air strikes against Iraq.
Reports of a vigorous US campaign to win support for military action against Iraq had gained further credence after France, Germany and the UK publicly endorsed the possibility of allied military intervention during the G-7 summit in London on July 15-17 [see p. 38321].
The apparent change in US policy was reportedly prompted by the refusal of some Arab states, notably Egypt and Syria, to back punitive strikes against Iraq, following an invitation on July 15 by President Saddam Hussein to the Arab League asking it to inspect Iraqi nuclear facilities to prove that nothing was being concealed from the UN.
Moreover, on July 28 Turkey announced that it would refuse permission for the use of Turkish bases to launch allied attacks against Iraq.
IAEA investigations
A team of senior UN officials, including the Director-General of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), Hans Blix, left Iraq on July 3 after failing to gain access to a secret store of material allegedly used for making nuclear bombs [see p. 38307].
UN inspectors headed by an IAEA official, Demetrios Perricos, arrived in Baghdad on July 7, following a fresh undertaking by Saddam Hussein to co-operate with UN officials.
The inspectors claimed that they had discovered "essential elements" for manufacturing enriched uranium.
On July 8 the IAEA confirmed that Iraq had acknowledged work on three parallel programmes "for uranium enrichment" although the Foreign Affairs Minister, Ahmad Husayn Kudayyir, claimed on July 9 that the government had destroyed all its nuclear weapons capability.
The IAEA, holding an emergency meeting in Vienna, passed on July 18 a motion censuring Iraq for failing to allow inspection of its nuclear programme (the UN's Special Commission on Iraq having reportedly described as "premature" a claim by Perricos that Iraq had "come clean" on its nuclear programme).
On July 15 Blix had told the UN Security Council that the government's latest list of nuclear facilities, issued on July 14, was inadequate.
Later, on July 25, Blix said that three inspection teams had so far visited more than 30 sites in Iraq and had taken over 300 samples of nuclear material, but that "there are many more things to answer" .
The IAEA motion was dismissed by Khuddayir as "unfair" and a prelude to "a new aggression on Iraq" .
On July 28, however, the Iraqi government provided fresh evidence of its nuclear programme to a fourth UN inspection team, which had arrived in the country on July 27.
Disclosure of more chemical weapons
The controversy over undisclosed Iraqi nuclear capabilities coincided with revelations that the government had also failed to divulge the full extent of its chemical weapons stocks.
UN officials said on July 30 that Iraq had admitted to holding four times as many chemical weapons as those disclosed in April [see p. 38164].
The head of the UN Special Commission on Iraq, Rolf Ekeus [see pp. 38165; 38211; 38307], said that an inspection of the Muthanna State Establishment, 100 km north-west of Baghdad, had revealed 46,000 pieces of chemical munitions instead of the 10,000-11,000 pieces which the government claimed in April to possess [see p. 38164], and 3,000 tonnes of chemicals used to make such weapons instead of 650 tonnes originally declared.
Ekeus also confirmed that the UN would reopen its investigation into Iraq's biological weapons programme, the development of which was denied by the government in April [see p. 38164].
Meanwhile, reports on July 20 said that Iraq had admitted to building a "super-gun" capable of firing shells more than 1,000 km [see pp. 37332; 37390-91; 37471].
UN report on effect of sanctions
A UN report released on July 15 warned that Iraq faced "calamity" and recommended that the country be allowed to sell oil and spend some of its estimated US$3,500 million of frozen assets to pay for urgently needed food and medicines [see pp. 38165; 38211; 38308].
The head of the UN's Inter-Agency Humanitarian Programme for Iraq and Kuwait, Prince Sadruddin Aga Khan, who commissioned the report during a visit to the country on July 8-12, told the UN sanctions committee on July 22 that Iraq's humanitarian needs were "undeniable" .
On July 23 Bush signalled US willingness partially to relax the ban on Iraqi oil exports, saying that the USA was "not going to see the suffering of innocent women or children" .
Earlier, the Iraqi government had told the UN sanctions committee that 6,000 children had died as a result of the embargo.
Reports on July 30 said that France had indicated its support for a partial easing of sanctions against Iraq after the UN sanctions committee failed on July 24 unanimously to agree to an Iraqi request to sell oil worth US$2,400 million to buy food and medicines.
On July 23 the government had informed the UN that "the minimum requirements for imports of foodstuffs [was]estimated at US$2,600 million for 1991" .
Government figures indicated that total foreign exchange reserves stood at only US$14,750,000.
New round of Kurdishautonomy talks
Negotiations between Kurdish leaders and senior government officials resumed in the northern town of Arbil on July 6 [see pp. 38126-27; 38211; 38308].
Further meetings, including talks between Kurdish leaders and Saddam Hussein on July 11 and 13, were held in Baghdad.
Reports suggested that the latest round of talks, attended by the head of the Democratic Party of Kurdistan (DPK), Masoud Barzani, and the leader of the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan (PUK), Jalal Talabani, reflected a hardening of Kurdish demands including the incorporation of 80 per cent of historically Kurdish areas into an autonomous Kurdish zone and Kurdish control over security forces in these areas.
On July 18 Barzani denied that there were disagreements between the Kurdish leaders [see p. 38308], after unconfirmed reports on July 17 that Talabani had left the talks in Baghdad following the government's insistence on Kurdish allegiance to the Ba'ath Party.
On July 30, Talabani met the UK Prime Minister John Major in London, on the first leg of a European tour, before holding talks on July 31 with French officials in Paris.
Withdrawal of allied forces
Allied forces completed on July 15 their withdrawal from northern Iraq (temporarily suspended in late June — see p. 38308), amidst clashes between Kurdish guerrillas and government forces which reportedly killed or wounded 500 people.
Denying that the allies were "abandoning anyone" , the commander of US forces in the north, Gen. John Shalikashvili, indicated on July 15 that "Operation Poised Hammer" was on the verge of being finalized [see also p. 38357].
Endorsement of multiparty system
In a speech marking the 23rd anniversary of the Baa'th Party, Saddam Hussein undertook on July 17 to usher in "pluralism…[as]the main pillar of the next new phase" .
On July 4 the National Assembly had endorsed a political parties bill guaranteeing a limited form of democracy.
The Revolutionary Command Council (RCC) on July 21 granted an amnesty to all army deserters and political dissidents.
On July 9 the government denied reports, based on UN sources, that 18 senior army officers had been executed in June [see p. 38308].
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
KUWAIT
Inauguration of National Council
The 75-member interim National Council [see pp. 37549-50; 38309], including five Cabinet Ministers and two Ministers of State, reconvened in Kuwait City amidst protests by opposition parties on July 9.
Addressing the Council's opening session, the Amir of Kuwait, Shaikh Jabir al Ahmad al Jabir as Sabah reminded members of their commitment to hold elections in October 1992 [see p. 38309].
Appealing for national reconciliation, the Prime Minister, Shaikh Saad al Abdullah al Salem as Sabah said that "the co-operation of all is the basic pillar of shura (government by consultation) and popular participation" .
On July 24 the National Council formally pledged support for the government.
Opposition parties in a communiqué issued on July 8, following a mass rally, denounced the National Council as fraudulent and called for a democratically elected body.
Abdullah Nibari of the Kuwait Democratic Forum [see pp. 38166; 38212; 38308]said that the Council was more of "a propaganda organ than a real consultative body reflecting public opinion" .
Opposition parties also expressed concern over the Council's plans, as announced on July 17, at a time of rising costs for national reconstruction, to endorse a cash payment of KD20,000 (US$65,000) to each Kuwaiti family as compensation for damage during the occupation.
An estimated 350,000 Kuwaitis were reported to have left the country at the time of the Iraqi invasion.
Royal decree authorizingborrowing
In a decree issued on July 15, Shaikh Jabir authorized for the first time in the emirate's history the borrowing of up to KD10,000 million ($34,000 million) on international finance markets to rebuild the country's economy and pay allied military bills.
The sum, substantially in excess of estimates by the country's central bank which had recently estimated borrowing to pay for war costs at around $10,000 million [see also pp. 37987; 38166; 38212], was expected to cover current expenditure reported to be running at some $20,000 million.
On July 21 the Finance Minister, Nasir Abdel allah al Rawdan indicated that the government did not intend to borrow the entire sum authorized by the decree; he expected the actual amount borrowed to be less than $24,000 million.
On July 23 Kuwait told a meeting of the UN Compensation Commission meeting in Geneva that the country's war losses were between $50,000 million and $100,000 million.
Meanwhile, a Foreign Office official confirmed on July 29 that Iraq and the UN had reached agreement on the return of over 3,000 gold bricks to Kuwait.
Creation of reparations committee
A former Minister of Public Works, Abdel-Rahman Ibrahim al Houti, was named chairman of a war reparations committee established on July 3.
Five additional members were added to an existing committee entrusted with monitoring, fighting and controlling oil fires.
The country resumed shipments of crude oil from its Al-Ahmadi terminal on July 27, the first from a national port since the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait.
Exports from the neutral zone shared with Saudi Arabia had started in June [see p. 38309].
Plans formalizing expulsion of Palestinians
It was confirmed on July 3 that the government intended to reduce dramatically the number of resident Palestinians.
Claiming that the decision had been prompted by popular demand, Kuwait's ambassador to the USA, Shaikh Saud Nasir al Sabah, said in an interview with the Washington Post that only 50,000 to 60,000 out of an estimated 380,000 Palestinians living in Kuwait were working.
The rest, he said, "did not represent a necessity to us" and were unlikely to be "helpful to our security" .
He predicted that the percentage of foreign nationals in Kuwait would eventually be reduced to less than half the population.
On July 7 the Foreign Minister and Deputy Prime Minister, Shaikh Salem as Sabah as Salim as Sabah, said that the government intended to make Kuwaitis "a majority in our own country" .
(Palestinian sources had recently estimated their total numbers in Kuwait at only some 107,000.)
On July 9 more than 300 Arabs, said to be Palestinians and Iraqi citizens, were reportedly expelled in the presence of International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) officials.
Iraqi government sources claimed on July 16 that 1,200 Arab citizens had been deported from Kuwait over the previous 24 hours [see pp. 38118; 38166; 38309].
On July 4, an estimated 2,000 Jordanians demonstrated in the Jordanian capital, Amman, calling for an end to Kuwaiti mistreatment of Palestinians and Jordanians.
Meanwhile, a fundamentalist Palestinian Moslem group, Islamic Jihad Beit al-Makdess, based in Amman, sanctioned on July 3 the killing of Kuwaiti officials who mistreated Palestinians.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
BAHRAIN-QATAR
Dispute over Hawar islands
Qatar instituted proceedings at the International Court of Justice (ICJ) in The Hague against Bahrain on July 8, claiming sovereignty over the Hawar islands and the shoals of Fasht al Dibal and Qitat Jaradah, and a delimitation of the maritime boundary.
Bahrain rejected the claims on July 13.
The dispute over the cluster of potentially oil-rich islands had flared up in 1986 [see p. 34766]when Qatar contested a 1939 decision by the United Kingdom, then the colonial power, to award the islands to Bahrain.
Qatar had sent troops to the coral reef of Fasht al Dibal, where the Bahraini government had ordered the building of a coastguard station.
Quatar announced in February 1988 that both sides had agreed to resort to arbitration by the ICJ.
Prospects of an imminent settlement resurfaced in early July after sections of the Bahraini press quoted Bahrain's Crown Prince, Shaikh Hamad bin Isa al-Khalifa, as saying that recent contacts between Bahrain and Qatar mediated by Saudi Arabia, had "develop[ed] for the better" .
Shaikh Hamad's observation that borders within the Arab world should remain as they were at independence was, however, interpreted as an indication of Bahrain's continued claim to the islands.
Bahrain and Qatar were both members of the Gulf Co-operation Council (GCC), and reports emerged on July 29 that a series of GCC ministerial meetings scheduled for July had been postponed due to "rising tension" between the two countries.
Meanwhile, other GCC states, notably Oman, urged international arbitration while recognizing Qatar's sovereignty over the Hawar islands and Fasht al-Dibal.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
UNITED ARAB EMIRATES
Approval of revised budget
A revised budget for 1991, approved at a meeting of the federal Cabinet on July 8, reduced by 17 per cent the proposals for federal expenditure made in May, to Dh16,400 million (US$4,470 million).
The Finance Ministry announced on July 9 that the budget deficit for 1991 was estimated at Dh155,600,000, compared with Dh666,700,000 for 1990.
The breakdown of the budget showed a contribution by Abu Dhabi of Dh11,872 million (US$3,232 million), amounting to 72 per cent of the total budget.
Appointment of ambassador to Iran
The Iranian News Agency (IRNA) reported on July 1 that Ahmad Muhammad Abu Rahimah had been appointed as the United Arab Emirates' (UAE) first ambassador to Iran since the 1979 revolution.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
SAUDI ARABIA
Cabinet changes
A minor Cabinet reshuffle was announced by royal decree on July 31.
Three new ministers were appointed.
Abdul al Wahhab Abdul Salam Attar became Minister of Planning, a portfolio held in an acting capacity by Shaikh Hisham Nazer since his appointment in 1986 as Minister for Petroleum and Mineral Resources [see p. 35289].
Khalid bin Muhammad al-Anqari took over the hitherto vacant portfolio of Higher Education, and was replaced as Minister for Municipal and Rural Affairs by Muhammad bin Abdul Aziz bin Abdullah bin Hasan al-Shaikh.
Reports indicated that the relatively minor changes reflected the royal family's reluctance to introduce major changes despite a recent commitment to political reform [see p. 38166].
Arms sale agreement with USA
The US Defence Department (Pentagon) confirmed on July 29 that it had agreed to sell arms, including laser-guided bombs, worth US$365,000,000 to Saudi Arabia, a move following the announcement by the Pentagon in early July of plans to sell the kingdom $473,000,000 worth of army jeeps and aircraft support services.
The latest proposal brought the value of US-Saudi arms deals signed or announced in 1990-91 to US$17,865 million.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
IRAN
Failure to resolve financial dispute with France
Negotiations aimed at settling Iran's long-standing financial dispute with France [see p. 37929]were suspended after the Foreign Minister Ali Akbar Vellayati, who visited France on July 2-4, failed to sign a formal agreement.
This was regarded by some observers as a major setback in Franco-Iranian relations [see pp. 37424; 37929; 38212]with implications for a planned visit by French President Mitterrand later in the year.
Vellayati, who held talks with Mitterrand and French Foreign Minister Roland Dumas, said after his return on July 4 that although most differences had been resolved, there remained "one last point to settle" .
Reports quoting French officials indicated that France had refused a last-minute Iranian demand for supplies of enriched uranium from the European consortium Eurodif.
Through the Societé Franco-Iranienne pour l'Enrichissement de l'Uranium, Iran held a 10 per cent share in Eurodif, whose uranium enrichment plant at Tricastin in the south of France had been partly financed through Iranian loans extended before the 1979 revolution to the French Atomic Energy Commissariat (CEA).
The Director General at the French Foreign Office, Francois Scheer, held talks with government officials in Tehran on July 9-10, and said that an agreement was expected within "a couple of weeks" ; he denied reports of disagreements over Iran's access to uranium supplies and stressed that the difficulties been "technical" .
On July 18 Vellayati claimed that the dispute "was not merely on receiving all our claims from France" , but on Iranian participation in Eurodif.
He said that although "the French did not agree to that issue initially…now we have managed to secure their agreement that we should remain in Eurodif as a shareholder in the company which enriches uranium" .
Meanwhile on July 7, President Ali Akbar Rafsanjani said that Iran was determined to complete the war-damaged nuclear reactor at Bushehr despite Germany's recent refusal to help rebuild the plant [see p. 38309].
Protests over price rises
Thousands of demonstrators protested in Tehran on July 6-12 against recent price rises including a 500 per cent rise in bus fares.
Addressing a prayer meeting on July 12, Rafsanjani defended the price rises as necessary to avoid any further massive borrowing by the government from the Bank Markazi (central bank).
Despite the price increases, Rafsanjani disclosed, government borrowing was expected to reach IR400,000 million (US$5,700 million) in 1991; the 1990 total had been IR600,000 million.
According to the Middle East Economic Digest of July 26, spiralling prices had been aggravated by an effective devaluation of the rial in January.
Meanwhile, 300 women were arrested in Isfahan on July 26 after protesting against the Islamic dress code.
Introduction of birth control measures
New measures including the distribution of free contraceptives and ration cuts for families with more than three children, were announced on July 14 in an attempt to curb the country's annual growth rate of 3.9 per cent which had raised the country's total population to almost 60,000,000.
Killing of Rushdie translator
Professor Hitoshi Igarashi, the Japanese translator of Indian-born British writer Salman Rushdie's controversial novel The Satanic Verses, was found stabbed to death on July 12 on the campus of Tsukaba University in Mito, outside Tokyo.
In December 1990, Iran's spiritual leader Ayatollah Seyed Ali Khamenei had reaffirmed the late Ayatollah Khomeini's February 1989 call for a death sentence to be carried out on Rushdie [see pp. 36450-51; 37266; 37549; 37929].
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
EGYPT
World Bank aid
The World Bank announced on July 10 that Egypt was to receive a total of US$8,000 million from about 30 governments and international institutions over the following two years.
The agreement came at the conclusion of a two-day meeting in Paris of the World Bank's Egypt consultative group — the first time it had met since 1981.
The meeting had been called in order to clarify the situation on funding for Egypt's IMF-inspired economic reform programme and followed the concessions announced in May by members of the "Paris Club" of creditor countries (in many cases the same countries as were involved in the World Bank announcement).
According to the Middle East Economic Digest of July 19, about US$1,200 million of the total was to take the form of grants, with the remainder composed of loans at concessional or close-to-market rates of interest.
US$140,000,000 already pledged by the International Development Association towards a social fund set up to cushion the impact of economic reforms [see p. 38209]was to be topped up to US$500,000,000.
Deputy Prime Minister Kamal Ganzouri said that Egypt had emerged as "the biggest loser" economically from the Gulf War: in the 10 months from August 1990 it had lost an estimated US$20,000 million in export earnings, workers' remittances and earnings from tourism.
Weapons sale
On July 19 the planned sale of modernization kits for 12 Egyptian Hawk anti-aircraft missile batteries, worth US$146,000,000, was announced in Washington.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
TUNISIA
Mitterrand visit
A visit to Tunis by President Mitterrand of France on July 11 was regarded as a gesture towards repairing relations between the two countries following the popular feeling in Tunisia against the anti-Iraq coalition during the Gulf war.
Mitterrand had talks with President Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali.
At a press conference he referred to the "phantasms and psychoses" aroused in the region by the Gulf war, but said that France wished to "turn the page" .
In an interview with Le Monde of July 12 Ben Ali said that he was appealing to France to allow aid to be directed with greater flexibility towards job creation.
Measures against Islamic fundamentalists — Human rights investigation — Agreement with Israel
It was announced on July 10 that nearly 200 Islamic fundamentalists arrested in recent months would be brought to trial in military courts.
On July 13 five members of the fundamentalist Nahda ( "renaissance" ) group accused of attacking offices of the ruling Democratic Constitutional Rally in February [see p. 38026]had a judicial appeal against their death sentences rejected.
The five death sentences, delivered on June 27, had provoked protests at a time when the Tunisian government was already countering accusations of illegal detentions and torture in its May-June crackdown against the Nahda movement [see p. 38215].
Two detainees were said to have died in custody.
In late June Ben Ali appointed as "first adviser to the President on human rights" Sadok Chaabane and announced an inquiry into the allegations in co-operation with the Tunisian League of Human Rights (LTDH).
Two student detainees who died in the week July 8-14 were said by official sources to have in one case jumped from the third floor and in the other to have died of wounds inflicted during arrest.
A security agreement signed by the Tunisian and Egyptian governments on July 13 envisaged a regular exchange of information and co-operation in the training of security personnel; the main focus of co-operation was expected to be Islamist groups.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
ALGERIA
Continuing disturbances — FIS refusal to attend conference
Continuing disturbances in Algiers and other cities met with a further military crackdown on June 30-July 2.
The need for "dialogue" nevertheless became the keynote in pronouncements by Prime Minister Sid-Ahmed Ghozali, and on July 11 he invited all opposition groups to attend a national conference at the end of the month "to define the framework and forms of dialogue" .
State of siege — Opposition criticism
On June 30 to July 2 the army occupied the Algiers headquarters of the opposition fundamentalist Islamic Salvation Front (FIS), closed two mosques and reported 700 arrests.
Sporadic clashes between riot police and FIS supporters centred on the Bourouba section of Algiers.
In Mostaganem, 290 km west of Algiers, residents reported many injured on July 2 after riot police backed by army tanks forced back demonstrators.
Demonstrations were also broken up by the police in Annaba, Constantine, Bordj Bou-Arreridj and Chlef.
Partial troop withdrawals from Algiers began on July 4.
The secular opposition joined the FIS in its criticism of detentions made since June 5.
The Algerian League of Human Rights on July 8 criticized the use of military tribunals, prompting the military authorities the following day to release figures: 2,046 people remained in detention, of whom 262 had so far been consigned to six internment camps.
Former President Ahmed Ben Bella, leader of the Movement for Democracy in Algeria (MDA), said on July 14 that the state of siege should be lifted; he also said that the FIS had just demands, but its methods were wrong and it should join in supporting the recently appointed transitional government [see p. 38312].
The leader of the Front of Socialist Forces (FFS) Hocine Aït Ahmed (quoted in El Pais of July 19) said that the army should withdraw to avoid being drawn into a power struggle within the ruling National Liberation Front (FLN); FIS leaders should be brought to trial before civil rather than military tribunals.
Ghozali's economic proposals
Seeking to focus debate on Algeria's economic crisis, Ghozali claimed in interviews with the Belgian news media on July 16 that a change in the law to allow foreign companies increased access to oil and gas production was the only way to avoid a debt rescheduling; servicing the foreign debt at present absorbed 74 per cent of foreign exchange earnings.
FLN central committee meeting — Cabinet change
The FLN's central committee met in closed session on July 17-23.
Ghozali, anxious to emphasize the non-party nature of his transitional government, did not attend.
A new 14-member FLN political bureau was elected following reportedly fierce internal debate.
The only Cabinet member to attend the meeting, Justice Minister Ali Benflis, on July 21 resigned from his post "for personal reasons" and was replaced by Hamadani Benkhelil.
Split in FIS leadership
The split within the FIS deepened as a faction led by Hachemi Sahnouni and Said Guechi sought to sustain its existing dialogue with the government.
Another faction, which included Mohammed Said and Abdelkader Hachani, demanded first the release of FIS leaders Madani and Belhadj (arrested in June — see p. 38312).
Mohammed Said was arrested by the army on July 7 while announcing to the press that in Madani's absence he would be provisional leader of the FIS.
On July 12 Guechi claimed that Madani had given him a mandate to lead the FIS.
Two days later he called for a purge of FIS ranks; only those "who believed in the new era for the country and in others' right of expression" should be retained.
At a meeting of the FIS consultative council on July 25-26, however, the hardliners prevailed and it was announced that the FIS would not participate in the conference called by the transitional government.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
MOROCCO
Treaty with Spain
King Juan Carlos of Spain paid a state visit to Morocco on July 4.
A treaty of "friendship, good neighbourliness and co-operation" between the two countries was signed in Rabat by Spanish Prime Minister Felipe González, who accompanied Juan Carlos, and by Moroccan Prime Minister Azzedine Laraki.
It was the first such treaty to be concluded between Spain and an Arab country.
In a section of the treaty concerning respect for human rights the Moroccan government secured the inclusion of a limiting clause stipulating that it would act in conformity with existing domestic legislation.
El País of July 8 noted González"reticence on the question of human rights, which it said resulted from the Spanish government's hopes of turning to its advantage a downturn in Morocco's relations with France [see p. 38354].
The treaty guaranteed the peaceful settlement of disputes between the two countries.
This section was identified as particularly relevant to the Spanish enclaves of Ceuta and Melilla, which were claimed by Morocco.
On July 6 Interior and Information Minister Driss Basri and Emigration Minister Rafik Haddaoui visited Ceuta at the invitation of Spanish Interior Minister José Luis Corcuera.
Their visit drew strong criticism from the newspaper of the Moroccan opposition Socialist Union of Popular Forces (USFP).
Creation of Ministry of Foreign Investment
Mohammed M'Daghri Alaoui was appointed Minister Delegate for Foreign Investment on July 2, in a move designed to encourage foreign investment.
In preceding weeks a seven-member committee had been formed to prepare for the privatization of 76 state companies, in which foreign investors would be able to acquire minority holdings.
Purchase of F-16s from USA
In late July it was announced that Morocco's air force was to be upgraded through the purchase of 20 F-16 fighter aircraft, worth in total US$250,000,000, and drawn from United States air force stocks.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
GULF CO-OPERATION COUNCIL
Foreign Ministers' meeting
Foreign Ministers from eight Arab countries party to the March Damascus Declaration [see pp. 38116-17]— the six Gulf Co-Operation Council (GCC) states and Egypt and Syria — met in Kuwait City on July 15-16 but failed to reach agreement on the formation of a joint security force to defend Kuwait.
Ministers agreed, however, that individual countries could seek military help from their allies when necessary.
A communiqué issued after the meeting, originally scheduled for July 9, said that ministers had agreed to "hold a meeting in September 1991 to follow up the implementation of the Damascus Declaration and to determine the priorities suitable for that" .
Attempts to piece together the Declaration [see also p. 38313]had reportedly been fraught with disagreements between the Gulf states, on the one hand, and Egypt and Syria, which were allegedly keen to assume a greater regional role entailing substantial remuneration.
Reports citing delegates said that Kuwait and Saudi Arabia had been particularly reluctant, ostensibly on grounds of cost, to endorse large numbers of permanently stationed Egyptian and Syrian troops and had favoured instead a commitment to deploy forces rapidly to the area in times of crisis.
Other Gulf states led by Oman had expressed a preference for an Arab force drawn exclusively from GCC countries.
According to some observers the growing alienation of Syria and Egypt, which recently reversed its decision to withdraw all its troops from Kuwait [see p. 38309], was due also to Kuwait's insistence on Western military guarantees to underwrite its security.
In statements issued on July 16 the Foreign Ministers of Egypt, Kuwait and Saudi Arabia stressed that there had been total agreement on the articles of the Damascus Declaration notwithstanding some "minor amendments" .
Differences were also reported to have stemmed from Egypt's opposition to any Iranian participation in a Gulf security system [see p. 38213].
On July 13 the Egyptian Foreign Minister, Amr Mohammed Moussa, said in Cairo: "It is first and foremost for the Arab countries and for the Gulf countries to play a central role [in an Arab security system].
As for Iranian aspirations we are ready to listen to them."
In a commentary broadcast on July 16, Tehran Radio said that the Damascus Declaration had become an "axis of discord within the Arab community" due to the pull of opposing forces representing Egypt's claim to a prominent position in future Gulf politics, to United States determination to maintain its supremacy in the region and to the belief on the part of some Gulf Arabs that only a strictly regional system could guarantee their security.
Meeting of central bank governors
GCC central bank governors meeting in Manama (Bahrain) on July 16 agreed to co-operate to reduce banking risks in their countries.
The talks followed the seizure on July 5 of the assets of the Luxembourg-based Bank of Credit and Commerce International (BCCI — see p. 38355) in which Abu Dhabi's ruling al-Nahayan family held a majority share.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
AMU
The ninth conference of the Arab Maghreb Union (AMU) Foreign Ministers was held in Rabat, Morocco, on July 22-23, Morocco having assumed the chairmanship of the AMU Presidential Council on July 1.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
BAHRAIN
In a move virtually unprecedented among Gulf states, the government announced on July 2 that it was amending its trade laws to allow the establishment of wholly foreign-owned companies.
INTERNATIONAL
WARSAW PACT
Formal dissolution
The Warsaw Treaty Organization or Warsaw Pact was formally dissolved by its six remaining members — Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Poland, Romania, and the Soviet Union — in Prague, the Czechoslovakian capital, on July 1.
The protocol disbanding the treaty, which called for the promotion of a gradual shift towards all-European security structures on the basis of agreements achieved at the Paris CSCE (Conference for Security and Co-operation in Europe) summit in November 1990 [see pp. 37838-39], was expected to come into effect by the end of the year, once it was ratified by all six parliaments.
The Warsaw Treaty of Friendship, Co-operation and Mutual Assistance was signed in 1955 [see pp. 14250-51].
Albania (withdrew in 1968) and East Germany (withdrew in September 1990 prior to unification with West Germany) were original signatories [see p. 38268].
The six countries had already agreed on Feb. 25 to disband the Pact as a military alliance [see pp. 38026-27]after the Pact and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) declared in November 1990 that they no longer regarded each other as enemies.
The Soviet Union abandoned its demand for a clause to be inserted in new treaties between the Soviet Union and its former allies, preventing them from entering alliances which the Soviet Union might have regarded as hostile.
Gen. Eduard Vorobyov, the last Soviet soldier serving in Czechoslovakia, left on June 30, two weeks after his troops.
The Soviet Union agreed to pay the equivalent of US$160 million to Czechoslovakia in compensation for damage done to the country since the 1968 invasion.
The last Soviet forces left Hungary on June 19.
The financial cost of environmental damage caused by Soviet troops since the 1956 uprising was estimated by Hungary at more than 60,000 million forints ($780 million).
The Soviet Union admitted damages of 3-3,500 million forints, a figure rejected by the Hungarians.
Officials from the Hungarian and Soviet Defence Ministries met in Budapest on July 24 and 25 to discuss a military agreement.
Hungary expressed its readiness to sign an agreement on co-operation in the near future.
Negotiations between Poland and the Soviet Union on a deadline for the withdrawal of 50,000 Soviet troops collapsed on July 24.
Poland wanted the troops out by the end of the year, but the Soviet side wanted until the end of 1993 to complete a withdrawal.
INTERNATIONAL
DISARMAMENT
Announcements of military cuts
The United States government announced on July 30 that it was to scale down or close 79 of its defence bases in Europe, following its January 1991 decision to halve its military presence in Europe.
Of the sites affected 38 were to be closed in Germany, 13 in the United Kingdom, eight in Italy, seven in Turkey, five in Spain and one in the Netherlands.
Tom King, the UK Defence Secretary, announced a range of sweeping cuts in the UK's defence staff on July 9, in line with what he said was the reduced defensive requirement after the ending of the Cold War.
King said that the existing army strength of 155,000 personnel would be reduced to 116,000 by 1992, and the combined armed forces would shrink by 62,000 from its present level of 308,000.
He added on July 23 that the current 55 army battalions, many of which were undermanned, would be amalgamated into 38 units, while armoured reconnaissance regiments would be reduced from 19 to 11.
The Life Guards and the Blues and Royals were to be merged, and one of the five Gurkha battalions would be cut.
Four of the seven Scottish infantry regiments were to be amalgamated into other regiments, while the Ulster Defence Regiment was to be combined with the Royal Irish Rangers.
The French government also announced a major personnel reduction on July 22.
France's existing army personnel of 285,000 would be cut by 50,000-70,000 men in "five or six years" ; the reduction was partly due to the withdrawal of some 48,000 French troops from Germany.
It was also announced, however, on July 24 that the French government had agreed to scrap the S-45 mobile nuclear missile project, in favour of a new ground-to-ground missile, named Hades, which was to be used by both army and navy.
A special army brigade was to be formed to control the missiles, which would replace the ageing S-3 (Pluton) models.
On Aug. 6 Gerhard Stoltenberg, the German Defence Minister, gave final details of the government's plans to reduce the German army from its existing strength of 461,000 to 370,000 by the end of 1994 (as agreed in the "Two-plus-four treaty" on German unification — see pp. 37659; 37834).
By that date 116 of 720 existing bases in western Germany would be closed, bringing the number of personnel stationed in that part of the country to 310,000.
In answer to a parliamentary question on Aug. 5 the government said that it expected its NATO allies to withdraw around 133,000 troops over the next few years, of which 75,000 would be from the USA and 25,000 from the UK.
First ratification of Conventional Forces Treaty
President Havel of Czechoslovakia became the first head of state on July 19 to ratify the Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe (CFE), signed by the six Warsaw Pact and 16 NATO member countries in November 1990 [see p. 37838], and which entailed sharp reductions in troops, tanks and weaponry.
Meanwhile the fourth round of the Vienna talks on conventional armed forces ended on July 17, as an increasing number of Western countries announced major cuts in their respective armed forces.
INTERNATIONAL
ARMS TRADE
Conference on control of arms trade
Senior officials representing the five permanent members of the UN Security Council (China, France, the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom and the United States) which between them accounted for 85 per cent of international arms exports, agreed at a meeting in Paris on July 8-9 to establish a weapons-free zone in the Middle East and to endorse an international arms register [see also p. 38321].
In a joint communiqué issued after the meeting, the five countries said that they would establish guidelines seeking to "freeze, and as a final goal, to eliminate surface-to-surface missiles from the [Middle East]region" .
Noting "the special situation of the Middle East as a primary area of tension" , the five also undertook to observe "rules of restraint" and develop modalities of consultation and exchange of information concerning arms transfers to the region.
The meeting, convened at the initiative of US President Bush following his appeal in May for an end to nuclear proliferation in the Middle East [see p. 38217], was reported to have received strong backing from French President Mitterrand who launched his own arms control programme in June [see p. 38314].
In their statement, the five countries called upon all states in the Middle East to accept international controls on their nuclear activities and to sign the global treaty banning chemical weapons, currently being finalized at the Geneva Conference on Disarmament [see p. 38217].
They also urged all Middle Eastern states to cease the import of weapons-grade nuclear materials.
Reports on July 9, quoting French officials, said that the talks had been "long, complex and delicate" and hinted that US and French insistence on the doctrine of "minimum deterrence" (the capability legitimately needed by countries to defend themselves — see p. 38217) had prompted suspicion that it was a ploy to secure existing shares in the international arms market.
A French government report released on July 2 showed that foreign orders for French weapons had soared by 70 per cent in 1990 to F33,400 million (US$5,400 million), largely because of the Gulf war.
Differences were also reported centring on Soviet and Chinese fears that an immediate arms reduction plan for the Middle East would imply a freeze of Israeli weapons superiority over Arab states.
On July 10 China expressed "reservations" over the arms communiqué, saying that passages relating to arms transfers and disarmament were "not well balanced" .
Conference participants agreed that regular meetings would be preceded in the first instance by a meeting in September of arms control experts who would finalize details of an agreement in time for a plenary session scheduled for October.
IMF appeal for arms control
A study by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) released on July 4 called on industrialized countries to back curbs on arms exports and impose tighter controls on the use of financial aid for military purposes.
Elaborating on the study in an address to the UN'S Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC) in Geneva on July 8, the Managing Director of the IMF, Michel Camdessus, urged governments to cut their military budgets by 20 per cent in order to generate savings of US$100,000 million and meet costs incurred by German unification, economic reforms in eastern Europe and the Gulf war.
INTERNATIONAL
CSCE
Minority rights conference
The Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE) held a conference on problems of national minorities in Europe in Geneva on July 1-19.
The conference was convened on the initiative of Switzerland and the Soviet Union and was attended by representatives from all 35 CSCE member countries.
At its conclusion the conference adopted a document on minority rights and protections.
The conference was punctuated throughout by disputes between east European delegates about the treatment of minorities in their own or neighbouring states.
Correction
The report on p. 38314 stated erroneously, on the basis of press reports, that the June 1991 CSCE Foreign Ministers' conference in Berlin had adopted a mandate for convening emergency meetings of the Vienna-based Conflict Prevention Centre without the requirement of unanimity.
The Conflict Prevention Centre does have an emergency mechanism, under which a consultative committee can call crisis meetings, but the Centre's actions remain bound by the requirement of unanimity.
The provisions as described on p. 38314, however, were in fact adopted for the (separate) emergency mechanism of the Prague-based CSCE committee of senior officials.
A member state may call upon the chair of the committee of senior officials to make contact with the state or states involved within 24 hours if its concerns about another member's "major disruption to peace" are not adequately answered; the committee's chair in turn calls an extraordinary committee meeting, involving the full CSCE membership, within 2-3 days if 13 members support such a meeting.
[See p. 38373 for first application of CSCE emergency mechanisms in early July with regard to the Yugoslav crisis.]
INTERNATIONAL
WORLD BANK
World Development Report
The 1991 edition of the World Bank's World Development Report, released on July 8, called for fresh initiatives to encourage a market-oriented approach to economic development and a substantial reduction in defence spending in the developing world.
Economic thinking over the last 40 years, the report observed, had shifted dramatically away from the promotion of state-directed industrialization towards a more "market-friendly" approach to development, but "markets sometimes prove inadequate or fail altogether" and "governments must, for example, invest in infrastructure and provide essential services to the poor" .
The internal and external threats faced by many countries "hardly justify the sums being spent on armed might" , and finance agencies were "entitled to ask whether it makes sense to help governments whose first priority is not to develop, but to add to, military strength" .
It was estimated that annual defence spending by developing countries totalled around US$170,000 million, or 5 per cent of their combined gross domestic product (GDP), and more than three times the total value of aid transfers from the industrialized world.
Underlining the relationship between investment in health, education and infrastructure and sound economic policies, the report noted that growth in the developing world had been highest where good education had been combined with undistorted economic policies.
The report urged industrialized countries to assist the developing world by speeding up the completion of the "Uruguay Round" of trade liberalization talks under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT)[see p. 38411]and by reducing the burden of commercial debt.
Unrestricted access to industrialized country markets, the report said, would increase developing countries' export earnings by US$55,000 million, as much as they received in aid [see p. 37476].
The report projected a 3 per cent annual growth of per capita incomes in the developing world in the 1990s, with wide variations between east Asia, where income per capita was set to grow at 5.3 per cent, and sub-Saharan Africa, where the rate was expected to be only 0.5 per cent .
Finally, the report noted that the claim that only authoritarian governments could handle Third-World reform had been shown to be "patently false" .
INTERNATIONAL
HUMAN RIGHTS
Amnesty International annual report
In its 1991 annual report published on July 10, the human rights organization Amnesty International claimed that human rights violations had occurred in 141 countries and had actually worsened in some cases.
Observing that "governments of the world stand in danger of sabotaging the hope of a new era of human rights" , it asserted that "some are sabotaging it by the violations they commit directly, others by the selectivity with which they exert their influence" .
Human rights abuses in Iraq had received worldwide attention, but grave violations in countries such as Chad, China, Colombia, Mali, Myanma, Syria and Turkey were accorded little publicity.
In about half the countries in the world governments had imprisoned people for their beliefs, while more than 100 governments had resorted to torture or the maltreatment of prisoners; thousands of people had "disappeared" or were extra-judicially executed in 29 countries, most notably in Sri Lanka, Brazil, El Salvador, Guatemala and Peru.
Death sentences had been judicially imposed or carried out in 1990 in 90 countries; the death penalty was retained by every country in the Middle East, with Iran showing the region's highest number of death sentences (estimated at more than 700), while in China the report recorded 750 executions, the highest number since 1983.
Thousands of Chinese pro-democracy protesters arrested the previous year continued to be detained without charge or trail.
Numerous cases of arbitrary detention, often without trial, were recorded in Israel and the Israeli-occupied territories where an estimated 25,000 Palestinians had been arrested since the start of the intifada, including 4,000 without charge or trial.
In Syria and Iran thousands of political prisoners were unlawfully detained.
As in its 1990 report [see p. 37630], Amnesty International again accused the United Kingdom government of seriously undermining human rights, especially in Northern Ireland.
Detailing its allegations, which included the ill-treatment of suspects, unfair trails, killings of suspects without warning and the abuse of asylum seekers, the report concluded that the UK's record on many of these issues had actually worsened in recent years despite its stated commitment to international treaties.
INTERNATIONAL
WHO
Report on cholera epidemic in Africa
World Health Organization (WHO) officials in late July described as "catastrophic" the cholera epidemic in Africa, the worst in recent years.
As of mid-July the WHO had received 45,159 reported cases of cholera and 3,488 deaths from 10 African countries.
(In 1990 there had been a total of 39,211 cases of cholera reported throughout Africa.)
In Nigeria a total of 22,901 people had been reported infected and 2,161 as having died since the outbreak of the disease in May.
According to local health officials quoted on Aug. 3, the disease had killed 843 people in Nigeria in the past 10 days alone.
Other severely affected areas were Zambia and Ghana, where cholera was reported to have infected 10,500 people and killed 300 since January.
The high death toll associated with cholera cases in Africa was described by WHO officials as the result of poverty, mass migration to areas with inadequate sanitation, and limited access to health care.
According to the WHO, there had been 303,504 reported cholera cases worldwide in 1991, as of mid-July.
The Latin American epidemic [see pp. 38002; 38094; 38218]accounted for 251,568 cases, or more than 80 per cent of the total, with some 2,600 deaths.
INTERNATIONAL
SPACE RESEARCH
First discovery of planet outside solar system
Professor Andrew Lyne and two colleagues, Matthew Bailes and Setnam Shemar, astronomers from the University of Manchester in the United Kingdom, announced in the British science journal Nature of July 24 that they had made the first discovery of a planet orbiting a star outside the solar system.
Using the Jodrell Bank Radio telescope in Cheshire, they had observed the super dense pulsating radio star (pulsar) PSR18219-10 for 18 months and deduced from variations in its radio signature that it was being orbited by a planet every six months at approximately the same distance as that from Venus to the Sun.
Preliminary evidence suggested that a second planet was also orbiting the star further out.
Neither planet could be seen optically, the star being 30,000 light years distant from the Earth.
Longest solar eclipse
An estimated 40,000,000 people witnessed the longest total eclipse of the Sun visible anywhere on Earth on July 11 in a 150-mile path stretching from Hawaii, through central America and into the north-east of south America.
In Mexico the moon covered the Sun for 6 minutes and 54 seconds; the next comparable solar eclipse would not occur for 140 years.
INTERNATIONAL
AVIATION
Air crashes
A total of 261 people were killed on July 11 when a Canadian McDonnell Douglas DC-8 carrying Nigerian Moslems back to Sokoto after their Haj pilgrimage, crashed near Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, shortly after take-off.
The aircraft had been leased to a Nigerian company Holdtrade on a short-term basis by Montreal-based Nationair.
A fire broke out minutes after take-off; the pilot reportedly called the control tower at Jeddah airport and was told to dump his fuel and return, but the plane crashed a kilometre from the runway and burst into flames.
The 247 Nigerian passengers and 14 Canadian crew were all killed.
Canada's Transportation Safety Board sent a team of inspectors to help the Saudi authorities investigate the crash.
This was the second plane crash of the year involving Moslems making the pilgrimage to Mecca.
In March, 92 Senegalese soldiers were killed when their Hercules C-130 transport plane crashed in Saudi Arabia.
An aircraft with nine people on board crashed on the Pacific island of Espiritu Santo, Vanuatu, on July 29, killing all passengers.
The International Air Transport Association (IATA) reported on June 21 that international passenger traffic was down 13 per cent for the year to April.
INTERNATIONAL
ECOSOC
Israel was admitted as a member of the UN Economic and Social Council in late July; it was also to join ECOSOC's European arm, the Economic Commission for Europe.
INTERNATIONAL
WAR CRIMES
An appeal court in Paris on July 11 ordered the release on bail of Paul Touvier, who had been held on charges of war crimes committed in 1944 during the Nazi occupation of France [see also p. 37899].