

EUROPE
SOVIET UNION
Attempted coup — Suspension of CPSU
On the morning of Aug. 19, tanks were sent on to the streets of Moscow and other major cities as it was announced that President Mikhail Gorbachev had effectively been deposed.
The first news of the coup was a statement signed by Yanayev, Pavlov and Baklanov and distributed bythe official news agency Tass on the morning of Aug. 19, saying that, in keeping with the Constitution, presidential power had been transferred to Vice-President Gennady Yanayev "due to Mikhail Gorbachev's inability to perform his duties for health reasons" , and that a state of emergency had been introduced in (unspecified) parts of the Soviet Union for six months to overcome "the profound crisis, political, ethnic and civil strife, chaos and anarchy that threaten the lives and security of the Soviet Union's citizens" .
The statement listed the members of the State Committee for the State of Emergency (SCSE), formed "to run the country and effectively exercise the state of emergency" .
The takeover of power by conservative politicians lasted only three days.
In this time it became clear that the military and state security forces were not all solidly behind the coup, especially in the face of popular resistance, with Russian Federation (RSFSR) President Boris Yeltsin setting himself at the head of protesters apparently willing to fight for the new freedoms brought about by the reforms of perestroika.
As soon as Gorbachev was reinstated as President on Aug. 21, he was compelled by the increase in Yeltsin's political standing and the fact that most state bodies were at least partially compromised in the coup attempt to acknowledge the need for a new state structure; the majority of the republics proclaimed independence from the Soviet Union, and fundamental reforms began of the government and the State Security Committee (KGB).
Gorbachev resigned on Aug. 24 as the general secretary of the CPSU (Communist Party of the Soviet Union), a post which only two days earlier he had appeared unwilling to renounce; the party's activities were suspended and its central committee dissolved.
Mikhail Gorbachev President of Soviet union, then also CPSU general secretary Boris Yeltsin RSFSR President Valery Boldin then head of Gorbachev's staff Gen. Yuri Plekhanov then head of KGB security Oleg Shenin then CPSU secretariat member GavrilPopov mayor of Moscow Anatoly Sobchak mayor of Leningrad Yevgeny Primakov security council Aleksandr Bessmertnykh then Foreign Affairs Minister Vadim Bakatin security council Gen. Vladimir Lobov Aleksandr Yakovlev former Gorbachev adviser Ivan Silayev RSFSR Prime Minister Anatoly Lukyanov then chairman of USSR Supreme Soviet Grigory Yavlinsky radical economist Arkady Volsky head of Scientific industrial league Gen. Pavel Grachev paratroop commander Gen. Viktor Samsonov then commander of Leningrad military district Gen. Valentin Varennikov then Deputy Interior Minister Gen Yevgeny Shaposhnikov then air-force commander Gen. Fyodor Kuzmin then commander of Baltic military district Maj-Gen.
Aleksandr Rutskoi Vice-President of RSFSR Ruslan Khasbulatov acting chairman of RSFSR Supreme Soviet Volodymyr Ivashko deputy general secretary of CPSU Gen. Mikhail Moiseyev then chief of general staff Vitaly Doguzhiyev then Deputy Prime Minister Aksar Akayev Kirghiz President Nursultan Nazarbayev Kazakh President Gennady Yanayev Vice-President Valentin Pavlov Prime Minister Vladimir Kryuchkov Chair KGB Marshal Dmitri Yazov Defence Minister Oleg Baklanov Deputy Chair of Defence Council Boris Pugo Interior Minister Vasily Starodubtsev Chairman of the USSR Farmers' Union (heads of collective and state farms) Aleksandr Tizyakov president of the Association of State Enterprises Valery Boldin chief of Gorbachev's staff Gen. Yury Plekhanov head of presidential security, KGB Oleg Shenin CPSU secretariat member 
Dramatis personae Members of SCSE
Warnings of coup
With hindsight, there had been several signs of an impending conservative takeover.
The SCSE's "Message to the Soviet people" [see below]echoed a letter in the ultra-conservative newspaper Soviyetskaya Rossiya (the organ of the CPSU central committee) on July 23, entitled "A word to the people" , signed by 12 prominent figures including Tizyakov and Starodubtsev, and criticizing leaders "who grovel to foreign patrons and seek advice and blessing abroad" .
It called on all sections of society, including the armed forces, to join a patriotic movement "to stop the chain reaction of disastrous disintegration" .
Among the authors were also the Deputy Interior and Defence Ministers, Gen. Gromov and Varennikov, leading some commentators to see in it the veiled threat of a military coup.
Observers also pointed to Prime Minister Valentin Pavlov's demands in June for extended powers [see p. 38272]and to the closed sitting of the USSR Supreme Soviet on June 17, when Marshall Dimitry Yazov, Boris Pugo and Gen. Vladimir Kryuchkov respectively Defence Minister, International Affairs Minister and KGB Chair, supported these demands, Kryuchkov warning of continued danger from United States intelligence agencies.
Aleksandr Yakovlev, who had resigned as Gorbachev's adviser on July 28 [see p. 38347], warned explicitly of an impending coup on Aug. 16.
In a statement announcing his resignation from the CPSU after its central control commission had recommended his expulsion because of "actions contravening Party statutes and leading to a schism in the Party" [for Yakovlev's leadership of the Democratic Reform Movement see p. 38347], he said: "I want to warn society that an influential Stalinist clique has been formed within the leading nucleus of the party, which is against the political course of 1985 [the year of Gorbachev's accession]…
The truth is that the party leadership, in contradiction to its own declarations, is ridding itself of the democratic wing of the party and is preparing for social revenge and for a party and state coup."
Observers conjectured that a takeover was attempted because of fear that the Union Treaty [see p. 38348-49], due to be signed on Aug. 20 by the Russian Federation, Byelorussia, Kazakhstan, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan, would end effective central control of the country.
Pavlov had warned on Aug. 13 of a potential power vacuum, unless the centre retained sufficient economic leverage.
SCSE members
The members of the SCSE represented the bodies of power most likely to resist the challenge posed to the status quo by perestroika and the Union Treaty.
Military, KGB and Interior Ministry forces were all represented, as were the powerful military-industrial complex, and the collective farms.
Yanayev's nomination as Vice-President had been forced through by Gorbachev at the Congress of People's Deputies on Dec. 27, 1990 [see p. 37904].
Pavlov became Prime Minister on Jan. 14, 1991 [see p. 37970].
Kryuchkov had been KGB chairman since October 1988 [see p. 36256]and Yazov had been Defence Minister since 1987.
Before becoming deputy chairman of the Defence Council under Gorbachev, Baklanov had been in the CPSU secretariat [see p. 38131], and had worked for the military-industrial complex.
Pugo became Interior Minister on Dec. 2, 1990 [see p. 37902], having been first secretary of Latvia's CP and chairman of the CPSU control commission since 1988.
All were CPSU members and Yazov, Yanayev and Kryuchkov had been politburo members, though after the reorganization of the party in July 1990 [see p. 37614-17], following the March abolition of its constitutional monopoly on power [see p. 37299], government ministers could no longer be on the party's ruling bodies.
All had been personally appointed by Gorbachev, except Tizyakov and Starodubtsev.
SCSE decrees
The SCSE's statements made no mention of socialism, emphasizing instead a type of Soviet patriotism.
In the "Message to the Soviet People" , broadcast on the morning of Aug. 19, the SCSE referred to "extremist forces" , exploiting national feelings and attempting to "destroy the Soviet Union" .
The economy had been harmed by the"destruction of the
unified machinery of the national economy ", and" only irresponsible people can put their hope in some sort of help from abroad".
The SCSE promised to restore order, and to solve the food and housing problems, while "supporting private enterprise" , to honour the Soviet Union's international obligations and to restore pride in the motherland.
It attempted to take control by ordering all local authorities to comply with the state of emergency or risk suspension, and by banning political parties, demonstrations and strikes.
Television and radio channels were restricted and only seven conservative newspapers and Izvestiya (the organ of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet) were allowed to publish.
The measures proposed in the first SCSE resolution seemed designed to gain popular support, and, according to a report in Le Monde of Aug. 22, food unavailable for months suddenly appeared in Moscow's shops during the coup.
The SCSE proposed emergency measures to "save the harvest" and to provide housing and fuel, giving small plots of land to city dwellers, price freezes on basic goods, allowing the free circulation of goods (some areas had introduced legislation preventing export of produce — see pp. 38349-50), giving priority in food distribution to hospitals and children's homes, and regulating salaries.
Lukyanov's role
A statement by Anatoly Lukyanov, chairman of the Supreme Soviet, about the proposed Union Treaty was distributed by Tass together with the SCSE's first decree.
This said that the Treaty should be discussed further, since it did not reflect the people's wish, as expressed in the March referendum [see pp. 38078-80], to preserve the Soviet Union as a federation.
Lukyanov criticized the Union Treaty for giving away too much central power to the republics, especially in the areas of banking, taxes and property.
Although he was not a member of the SCSE, Lukyanov was accused by the RSFSR leadership of being the "main ideologist" behind the coup.
Reports of SCSE's formation
At a press conference he gave after the collapse of the coup (on Aug. 21) Gorbachev recounted that a delegation, consisting of Boldin, Gen. Plekhanov, Shenin and Gen. Varennikov, had visited him at his holiday dacha in the Crimea on Aug. 18 and placed him under house arrest because he had refused to endorse a state of emergency.
This delegation apparently then returned to Moscow and told the members of the future SCSE (excluding Tizyakov and Starodubtsev), as well as Lukyanov and Foreign Affairs Minister Aleksandr Bessmertnykh, that they had found Gorbachev seriously ill.
Kryuchkov apparently claimed that there was an armed revolt in process in Moscow, forcing the imposition of the state of emergency and the appointment of an eight-man committee.
Opposition to coup
Opposition was concentrated in the Russian Supreme Soviet and the pro-democratic forces around Yeltsin, who accused the SCSE of "treason" and called troops to obey the RSFSR leadership.
He appealed to Aleksi, Patriarch of All Russia, for support.
On Aug. 19 he made a dramatic call for resistance, standing on one of the tanks stationed outside the Supreme Soviet building (10 tanks went over to Yeltsin on the night of Aug. 19 — see below; the commander of tanks stationed outside the Russian Supreme Soviet building was reported as saying that he would not order an attack on Yeltsin.)
He called for a general strike to oppose "the rightist, reactionary, anti-constitutional coup" .
From 5 p.m. on Aug. 20, he declared himself in command of the Soviet Union's security forces on Russian territory until the restoration of constitutional legality.
Yeltsin's decrees countering the SCSE were relayed around the country by foreign radio stations.
However, the Soviet television, its two channels merged, broadcast only the official statements of the SCSE, as did Moscow radio.
Independent radio stations had been shut down, while troops stationed themselves outside newspapers offices and took over transmission towers.
Radio Russia was suspended by SCSE decree on Aug. 20, but its correspondents broadcast from inside the Russian Supreme Soviet building, on a wavelength called Radio-3 Anna.
Huge demonstrations in front of the Russian Federation Supreme Soviet building, the "White House" , on Aug. 20, were addressed by Yelena Bonner, human rights campaigner and widow of Andrei Sakharov, by former Foreign Minister Eduard Shevardnadze, and by other pro-democracy figures.
In an atmosphere of great tension on the night of Aug. 20, Muscovites defied the curfew in force from 11 p.m., remaining assembled in large numbers to defend the "White House" against a rumoured impending attack by pro-coup forces.
They built makeshift barricades against tank attacks and were reported to be forming "defence units" .
The building was also defended by armed KGB and police loyal to Yeltsin.
KGB commanders in Leningrad and Sverdlovsk were known to have opposed the coup, and Popov later said that a tip-off from a KGB officer had allowed him and Yuri Luzhkov (later appointed to the interim economic council — see below) to escape arrest.
That night, three men were killed — one shot and two crushed by tanks on the Moscow ring road moving in the direction of the Russian Supreme Soviet — but the feared attack on the building itself did not take place.
Military resistance
The opposition of some of the armed forces was a major reason for the failure of the coup.
The Defence Ministry Collegium decided at a meeting on the morning of Aug. 21 to withdraw the troops.
It emerged also that air force commander Gen. Yevgeny Shaposhnikov and air force paratroopers commander Pavel Grachev had disobeyed the SCSE, Grachev ordering the Svirskaya paratroop division to withdraw from an attack on the Russian Supreme Soviet building.
The Baltic fleet declared against the coup.
Tank units from the Taman and Tula divisions, with about 10 tanks in all, took up positions outside the Russian Supreme Soviet building on Aug. 19 in support of Yeltsin.
The elite KGB Alpha anti-terrorist group had refused to obey orders to storm the Russian Supreme Soviet building.
Leningrad
Leningrad was a centre of resistance led by mayor Anatoly Sobchak, despite the state of emergency imposed by the military commander of the Leningrad district, Gen. Viktor Samsonov.
Reports on Aug. 19 from Budapest radio spoke of the city surrounded by troops, with radio and television headquarters cut off.
However, Sobchak and Samsonov reached an agreement that armed forces would not enter the city, although Vitebsk KGB and Pskov military divisions were reported to be moving towards Leningrad on Aug. 20, according to Lithuanian radio.
Leningrad OMON and police, loyal to Sobchak and the city council, defended its buildings and, according to the Interfax news agency, regained control of Leningrad television station and local newspapers.
Twenty factories obeying Yeltsin's strike call were asked to return to work by Sobchak.
There was a rally of 200,000 people on Aug. 20 on Palace Square.
Reaction elsewhere in RSFSR
Reaction to Yeltsin's strike call was patchy: mines in the militant Kuzbass and Donbass regions went on strike, as did five of the 13 mines in Vorkuta, but the oil and gas industries of Tyumen (Siberia) were working normally.
Five enterprises in Yeltsin's home town of Sverdlovsk came out on strike.
Local authorities in most regions supported the RSFSR leadership's defiance of the coup, although in several regions, for example in Kamchatka and Krasnodar, they appealed against strikes because of the already difficult economic situation.
Other Republics
There were fears of a crackdown in those republics demanding their independence, especially the Baltic states given the events of January 1991 [see p. 37944-45]and more recent attacks on border posts [see pp. 38302; 38350].
In Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia, tanks were stationed in all three capital cities on Aug. 19.
Telecommunications and broadcasts were interrupted in Lithuania and Latvia, although not in Tallinn (Estonia).
The port of Tallinn was briefly closed on Aug. 19.
Gen. Fyodor Kuzmin, commander of the Baltic military district, declared the government to be subordinated to himself.
All Baltic leaders declared the SCSE illegal, but appealed for calm, fearing the consequences of provoking military action.
Government representatives were given authority to establish governments in exile, should legitimate government be taken over.
Kazakhstan and Ukraine, the two largest republics after the RSFSR, issued decrees revoking the SCSE's authority on their territory, which sharply reduced the chances of the coup's success.
President Nursultan Nazarbayev of Kazakhstan said that although the situation in the Soviet Union "required immediate intervention" , being close to collapse, the decrees of the SCSE were illegal and unconstitutional.
He called for the convening of the Congress of People's Deputies and the immediate signing of the Union Treaty.
In the Ukraine 15 of the 25-member Presidium of the Ukrainian Supreme Soviet voted on Aug. 20 that the SCSE had no jurisdiction in the republic.
According to the Independent on Sunday of Aug. 25, the delay in taking this decision was due to the efforts of Gen. Varennikov, who had offered not to interfere in Ukrainian affairs if Ukraine accepted SCSE government.
In Moldava President Mircea Snegur declared SCSE resolutions ineffective and banned the SCSE-approved newspapers; there were large anti-coup demonstrations in the capital, Kishinyov.
President Askar Akayev of Kirghizia condemned the "anti-constitutional coup" and Yeltsin's decrees were repeatedly broadcast, but the Kirghiz CP expressed its support for the SCSE.
Azerbaidjan welcomed the SCSE takeover, which President Ayaz Mutalibov characterized as "the natural consequence of the policies that had brought chaos into the Soviet Union during the past few years" ; tanks were reported in the capital, Baku.
The other republics (Uzbekistan, Tajikistan, Belorussia, Georgia, Armenia) reported the situation in their republics to be "stable" , and neither welcomed nor condemned the coup.
However, Dniestr and Gagauz districts in the fiercely separatist republics of Moldava, and the autonomous republic of Abkhazia and the autonomous region of South Ossetia in Georgia declared support for the SCSE, as did the Russian-speaking communities in the Baltic states.
International reaction
In a statement on Aug. 19 Yanayev informed heads of state that the emergency measures in the Soviet Union were temporary and would not affect her international obligations under existing treaties.
The coup was, however, perceived worldwide as a development of the greatest significance, challenging the basis for the recent profound changes in superpower and East-West relations, and possibly calling into question the validity of arms control agreements, the continuation of the process of Soviet troop withdrawal from eastern Europe, oil and gas supplies, and the future of a Middle East peace conference.
Yeltsin was repeatedly in contact with heads of government during the days when the crisis was at its height.
The North Atlantic Council, the highest authority of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), met on Aug. 19 to discuss NATO's response to the coup.
It called on the Soviet Union to honour its international commitments.
The extraordinary NATO Foreign Ministers' meeting in Brussels on Aug. 21, overtaken by events as the coup collapsed [see below], called for the immediate restoration of Gorbachev and stated support for "the democratically elected leaders" , mentioning Yeltsin by name.
They agreed to do nothing which could be construed as recognition of the current Soviet government.
By Aug. 23, with Gorbachev's return to Moscow, the measures agreed by the NATO foreign ministers — suspension of official exchanges with the Soviet Union, refusal to participate in the forthcoming Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE) conference on "The Human Dimension" in Moscow, and the threatened suspension of aid — had been rescinded and diplomatic ties restored.
At an emergency European Communities (EC) meeting in The Hague on Aug. 20, Foreign Ministers demanded the re-establishment of constitutional government in the Soviet Union and suspended aid worth ECU900,000,000 (about US$1,000 million).
Humanitarian aid of ECU250,000,000 (US$280,000,000) would continue, given its just distribution.
An emergency EC summit was called for Aug. 23, but was cancelled after the coup collapsed.
Germany's particular concern was the 275,000 Soviet troops still stationed there and due to be withdrawn by the end of 1994.
Germany had committed DM60,000 million in aid to the Soviet Union since 1989.
The United Kingdom Prime Minister John Major, who was in telephone contact with Yeltsin during the evening of Aug. 20, endorsed Yeltsin's demands for Gorbachev's release.
Yeltsin had given a dramatic description of tanks closing in and said that he believed that he had not much time left.
The United States put economic aid "on hold" on Aug. 19 (it had provided $78,000,000 in loans).
Robert Strauss, the new US ambassador to the Soviet Union sworn in Washington on Aug. 20, was sent to Moscow to judge the situation, and instructed to visit Yeltsin but not to present his credentials to acting President Yanayev.
However, as he arrived in Moscow on Aug. 21, these instructions turned out to be unnecessary.
Strauss met Gorbachev officially on Aug. 24.
Cuba stressed Soviet self-determination and China reaffirmed non-interference in Soviet internal affairs.
Libya, Sudan, and Iraq supported the coup, saying that it would lead to the restoration of "international balance" .
Reactions in eastern Europe
Representatives from Czechoslovakia, Hungary and Poland met in Warsaw on Aug. 20.
They discussed the impact of the Soviet coup on their countries, as well as the goal of fuller integration into the EC, and co-ordination of their refugee policy.
Czechoslovakia, it was reported on Aug. 19, tightened security on its border with the Soviet Union, although the situation on all Soviet borders with eastern Europe was reported as normal.
A Polish television report on Aug. 19 said that the remaining 450,000 Soviet troops were continuing to withdraw from Poland as planned, and President Walesa remarked that the coup proved the need for a continuing NATO military presence in Europe.
A border crossing with Finland was briefly closed on Aug. 19.
The Romanian government expressed its concern for "our brothers in the republic of Moldava [Moldavia]" , and warned that "any nostalgia for communist totalitarianism is nothing but the harmful consequence of a dangerous lapse of memory" .
Collapse of coup — Gorbachev's return
On Aug. 21 troops began withdrawing from Moscow and media restrictions were lifted.
A statement by Gorbachev, saying that he was again in control of the country, was broadcast before his return to Moscow that evening.
On the same day Yeltsin told the Russian Supreme Soviet that the members of the SCSE had left for Moscow's Vnukovo airport.
Troops were reported to be leaving Moscow, according to Sobchak, on Yazov's orders.
Yeltsin, Rutskoi and Khasbulatov had, according to Tass, gained Lukyanov's agreement to this during a meeting on Aug. 20, when they reiterated their other demands to him, including disbanding the SCSE and an independent medical examination of Gorbachev.
Press restrictions, imposed by what Tass called the "former" SCSE, were lifted and Russian Radio and Television resumed broadcasting.
As it became clear that the coup was not holding, the bodies which had been silent, most importantly the CPSU, voiced their opposition to it.
The USSR Supreme Soviet's Presidium declared the actions of the SCSE illegal on Aug. 21, and the Procurator General's office announced that criminal proceedings for high treason had been instigated against members of the committee.
The KGB Collegium issued a statement on Aug. 22: "The staff of the KGB have nothing to do with the unlawful acts of the group of adventurists." 
Bessmertnykh was dismissed as Foreign Minister on Aug. 23 for "passivity" during the coup, during which he had claimed to be ill.
He had called it "unconstitutional" only on Aug. 21, and claimed that he had resigned and had not been dismissed.
It was reported that Yazov, Kryuchkov, Baklanov and Tizyakov had flown to meet Gorbachev in the Crimea, where Gorbachev had had them arrested (his 32-strong bodyguard having remained with him).
Lukyanov and Ivashko also arrived, shortly before an RSFSR delegation comprising Rutskoi, Silayev and USSR Security Council members Primakov and Bakatin; 30 armed interior ministry troops in the delegation which came to "rescue" Gorbachev, were not needed.
Gorbachev ordered Chief of Staff Gen. Mikhail Moiseyev to withdraw troops to barracks, although this had already been done.
Criminal proceedings against coup leadership — Suicide of Pugo and Akhromeyev
By the end of August, 14 people involved in the coup had been charged with high treason, which carried the death penalty.
SCSE members were arrested on Aug. 21 and 22 (Baklanov and Starodubtsev's immunity as people's deputies being removed).
Pugo committed suicide on Aug. 21.
Pavlov, who was reported to have developed high blood pressure on Aug. 19 and was replaced by his deputy, Vitaly Doguzhiyev, was put under guard in hospital.
A joint team from the Union and Russian procuracies, later joined by Ukrainian and Byelorussian investigators, was appointed to investigate the affair.
The order for the arrest of Boldin, Varennikov and Shenin (also people's deputies) was given on Aug. 22.
Lukyanov resigned as Supreme Soviet chairman on Aug. 26 and was arrested on Aug. 29.
Procurator General Nikolai Trubin resigned on Aug. 29, because of the Procuracy's "unprincipled behaviour" during the coup.
Marshal Sergei Akhromeyev, chief military adviser to Gorbachev, committed suicide on Aug. 24.
According to Trubin, he had been implicated in the plot by SCSE members in custody.
Yeltsin's additional powers
Yeltsin was awarded additional powers on Aug. 21 by the RSFSR Supreme Soviet, which strengthened his position vis-à-vis Gorbachev, and on Aug. 23, at the RSFSR Supreme Soviet, Gorbachev agreed to Yeltsin's demands that he sign decrees confirming the measures undertaken by the RSFSR government during the coup, thus making them constitutionally binding.
A key decree of Aug. 23 transferred all union enterprises and natural resources on RSFSR territory to RSFSR jurisdiction "to ensure the economic basis of RSFSR sovereignty" .
Yeltsin had already asserted on Aug. 13 that, after signing the Union Treaty, the Russian Federation should control its own resources.
Government communications on RSFSR territory were transferred to RSFSR KGB and Communications Ministry jurisdiction on Aug. 24.
Chairmen of RSFSR regional soviets which had supported the coup (Rostov, Krasnodar, Lipetsk, Samara) were removed from office.
On Aug. 22, in a decree strengthening Yeltsin's central executive authority within the RSFSR, he created a system of specially appointed "presidential representatives" to the regions, reporting to the control board of the presidential administration, and replacing the executive boards of the local soviets.
This measure reflected plans unveiled by Yeltsin on Aug. 11 to appoint "governors general" to enforce presidential rule in the regions.
Yeltsin also announced that he had taken control of Soviet armed forces on Russian territory and on Aug. 23 he banned party organizations in them.
He also replaced Leonid Kravchenko as Chairman of the USSR Broadcasting Company by RSFSR press minister Mikhail Poltoranin, temporarily banned newspapers which had only printed SCSE decrees, dismissed the chairmen of Tass and Novosti, and replaced Samsonov as commander of Leningrad military district by Rear-Adml.
Vyacheslav Shcherbakov.
Role of Communist Party
At his press conference on Aug. 22 Gorbachev took a position of continuing support for the CPSU, saying: "I shall fight to the end for the renewal of the party." 
However, on Aug. 24, Gorbachev announced his resignation as CPSU general secretary and said that as the CPSU Central Committee had failed to condemn the coup, it should "take the difficult but honourable decision to dissolve itself" .
Republican communist parties and local branches were to determine their own fate, but all CPSU property was to be put under the control of local soviets.
Party cells in the armed forces, the Interior Ministry and the KGB were to be disbanded.
The CPSU control commission expelled the coup leaders from the party on Aug. 23, condemning their actions, but at the same time warned against "anti-communist hysteria" .
CPSU headquarters in Moscow and Leningrad were sealed on Aug. 23 and documents seized, as demonstrations against the party continued.
It was only on Aug. 21 that the CPSU had stated its opposition to the coup, when Ivashko demanded to see Gorbachev, because the party could not define its attitude to recent events without its leader.
Yury Prokofyev, leader of the Moscow party organization, and Shenin resigned from the politburo on Aug. 22, in protest against its lack of support for the SCSE.
It was revealed that Prokofiev had called for a central committee plenum to be held on Aug. 20 to remove Gorbachev as general secretary.
Leading democratic figures resigned from the party, including Khasbulatov (Aug. 23) and economist Grigory Yavlinsky (Aug. 19).
Resignation of Council of Ministers — New appointments
At the RSFSR Supreme Soviet on Aug. 23, Yeltsin obliged Gorbachev to read out the record of the USSR Cabinet of Ministers meeting of Aug. 19, at which Pavlov gained its endorsement of the state of emergency.
None of the ministers responsible for defence issues had spoken or been asked to speak by Pavlov.
Only Nikolai Vorontsov, the Minister of Nature Utilization and Environmental Protection, and not a party member, was consistent in his opposition to the coup.
After attempting to defend ministers who had been hesitant in their support of the coup, Gorbachev agreed that the whole Cabinet should resign, and that the new Prime Minister should be a Russian — possibly Silayev.
This reflected Yeltsin's demands (reported in Nezavisimaya Gazeta) before the coup for the right to nominate the Soviet Prime Minister.
A vote of no confidence in the Pavlov Cabinet as a whole was passed formally on Aug. 28 by the USSR Supreme Soviet by 402 votes to 16 and 26 abstentions.
The Cabinet, which had been in the course of formation since March 1991 [see p. 38103]and was still not complete, was therefore dissolved.
Meanwhile, on Aug. 24 Gorbachev set up a committee for the interim management of the economy, headed by Silayev with three reformers as his deputies — Arkady Volsky, head of the Scientific Industrial Union, Yuri Luzhkov from Moscow's city soviet, and Yavlinsky.
On Aug. 28 Silayev announced the composition of the interim committee.
Of the 21 people who had been invited to join it, six were RSFSR ministers, three were Russians in industry and the remainder ministers from the other republics (although not the Prime Ministers, who had been ex officio members of the dissolved Cabinet of Ministers).
The three Baltic states sent a minister with observer status to the new committee.
Meanwhile on Aug. 26 it had been announced that, with Gorbachev's agreement, Silayev had transferred the functions of several USSR ministries and two central banks to the control of the relevant RSFSR ministers.
There was confusion, however, over the position of the two central banks, Gosbank and Vneshekonombank (Bank for foreign economic relations), whose responsibilities were transferred back from RSFSR to central control on Aug. 29, and whose chairmen, respectively Viktor Gerashchenko and Yuri Moskovsky were reinstated, according to the Financial Times of Aug. 30, partly as a result of pressure from European banks.
I. Lazarev Finance A. Khlystov Trade Y. Saburov Economics and forecasting V. Mangazeyev Foreign economic relations M. Kuryachev Chamber of trade and industry A. Zakharova Apparatus of USSR Cabinet of Ministers 
RSFSR ministers taking over USSR ministries
Foreign Affairs, Interior, Defence, and KGB leadership changes
Gorbachev announced at the RSFSR Supreme Soviet on Aug. 23 that he and Yeltsin had each agreed to take over the other's functions if an emergency so demanded.
He also announced leadership changes to the three state organizations commanding troops.
These were made in consultation with Yeltsin, and replaced the latter's interim appointments of the day before.
The Interior Ministry was to be headed by Viktor Barannikov, RSFSR head of police, replacing Lt.-Gen.
V. Trushin.
Gen. Shaposhnikov was appointed Minister of Defence, replacing Gen. Moiseyev, whose former position as Chief of General Staff went to Gen. Vladimir Lobov, a known reformer; Grachev was made Deputy Defence Minister.
Kryuchkov's former deputy at the KGB, Leonid Shebarshin, was replaced as its chairman by Bakatin, with a brief to reform the organization.
Reorganization of state bodies
After the coup, the former pillars of the state rushed to dissociate themselves from it.
Personnel changes confirmed the new liberalism in the Soviet Union and the attempt to break links with past behaviour.
Despite calls to reinstate Shevardnadze as Foreign Minister, Boris Pankin, ambassador to Czechoslovakia, was appointed to the post on Aug. 28; Pankin had publicly dissociated himself from the "barbarous acts" of the coup on Aug. 21.
About 30 ambassadors were recalled to Moscow to explain their conduct in the coup.
Bessmertnykh was accused of having recommended ambassadors to be "guided" by the SCSE documents.
Communist party bodies in the Foreign Ministry were dissolved on Aug. 23.
Armed forces
Shaposhnikov and Lobov said in interviews that they intended to reduce the period of compulsory military service to 18 months, and to replace 80 per cent of the 15-member Defence Ministry Collegium.
There was talk of having a professional army and allowing more republican independence in military affairs while leaving the nuclear forces under single control.
Political parties were banned from the armed forces by presidential decree on Aug. 24, following Yeltsin's decree to the same effect [see above].
Reform of KGB
In a symbolic gesture of the KGB's demise, the statue of Felix Dzerzhinsky, first head of the Cheka (forerunner of the KGB), in front of its Moscow headquarters (the Lubyanka) was torn down on Aug. 22.
Fundamental reform of the KGB (motto — "the sword and shield of the party" ) was seen as essential in an attempt to break the "state within a state" .
Party cells within the KGB were banned on Aug. 23.
On Aug. 28 Gorbachev removed the KGB leadership (Collegium), placed KGB troops under the control of the Defence Ministry, and established a commission to investigate KGB responsibility for the coup.
Bakatin announced fundamental reforms of KGB duties on Aug. 30.
The presidential guard had been removed from KGB authority, and government communications transferred to the aegis of a State Committee, and there was a proposal to remove the border guards from KGB control.
However, because of the possibility of personal reprisals, KGB archives would not be opened.
The KGB would now operate in four areas: intelligence, counter-intelligence, fighting terrorism and serious crime, and protecting key state installations.
Bakatin also announced, in a sign of the changes, that he was overruling KGB objections and would allow Oleg Gordievsky's wife and children to join him in London, where he had defected in 1985 [see pp. 34004-05].
Suspension of REP and CPSU
Yeltsin presented Gorbachev with a fait accompli at the RSFSR Supreme Soviet, when on Aug. 23 he signed in front of him a decree suspending the activity of the Russian Communist Party (RCP), "pending the investigation by juridical bodies of its involvement in all these events" .
On Aug. 6, the RCP had replaced its hardline first secretary Ivan Polozkov by the moderate Valentin Kuptsov, who had promised to co-operate with Gorbachev and Yeltsin.
Yeltsin pointed out that the RCP had not yet registered as a political party.
The CPSU's activity was suspended throughout the Soviet Union from Aug. 29 on the mandate of the USSR Supreme Soviet.
The voting was 283 to 29 in favour, with 52 abstentions.
CPSU bank accounts and financial operations were frozen until the Supreme Court decided on the party's continued existence after an investigation of its conduct during the coup.
It was reported on Aug. 26 that the chief administrator of the CPSU, responsible for party finances, Nikolai Kryuchina, had committed suicide.
Proposed disbanding of Komsomol
A Komsomol (young communist league) statement of Aug. 23 condemned the CPSU leadership, which it considered beyond reform, for its part in the coup.
The Komsomol was to be split into republican bodies, and it was proposed to disband it, replacing it with youth wings of several parties and a non-political youth organization.
Extraordinary USSR Supreme Soviet session
The extraordinary USSR Supreme Soviet session opened on Aug. 26, the date it had been called by Lukyanov during the coup to approve the "new leadership" .
In his opening address to the Supreme Soviet, Gorbachev admitted his responsibility for the coup in having appointed conservatives to head the organizations which controlled troops, and for "liberalism and indulgence" , despite warnings of conservatives' discontent.
It was agreed that an extraordinary USSR Congress of People's Deputies should be convened for Sept. 2.
Its agenda would include constitutional changes and the recognition of the Baltic states' independence.
Deputies to the Supreme Soviet voted by 375 votes to four that the Congress should elect the 542 members of the Supreme Soviet afresh, from among the 2,250 congressional deputies.
The emergency powers granted to Gorbachev on Sept. 24, 1990 [see p. 37721], were removed by a vote of 279 to 37, with 38 abstentions.
On Aug. 29, Gorbachev made nominations to the Security Council, on which Yazov, Pugo, Pavlov, Yanayev, Kryuchkov and Bessmertnykh had served hitherto [see p. 38103].
The nominations included prominent reformers Aleksandr Yakovlev, Popov, Sobchak, and also Shevardnadze who, however, immediately refused the invitation.
Media developments
An important reason for the failure of the coup, in the view of analysts, was the recent growth of media freedom.
Increased numbers of photocopying and facsimile transmission (fax) machines and computers contributed to the evasion of media restrictions.
After the coup, Yeltsin banned six newspapers allowed by the SCSE.
The official news agency Tass became independent, and Gorbachev's spokesman Vitaly Ignatenko was appointed to head it.
The Novosti news agency was brought under RSFSR government control, and headed by Andrei Vinogradov.
Several newspapers became independent, including Izvestiya, where staff dismissed editor Nikolai Yefimov, who had attempted to force the newspaper to act in support of the SCSE.
Pravda reappeared on Aug. 31, having severed its connection with the CPSU.
Yegor Yakovlev, editor of the liberal Moskovskiye novosti (Moscow News), was appointed head of the Union Broadcasting Company.
The second Central television channel was transferred to Russian administration.
The republics
By the end of August, the majority of republics had declared independence from the Soviet Union.
There was nevertheless a growing realization of the need to create common economic structures.
Gorbachev met with Yakovlev, Nazarbayev, Akayev and Yeltsin on Aug. 27 and called for the Union Treaty process to be renewed, threatening to resign at the Supreme Soviet in September if the uncontrolled dissolution of the Soviet Union continued.
Fears of Russian expansionism
A statement issued by Yeltsin on Aug. 26 said that in view of the recent declarations of independence by several republics, the RSFSR "reserves the right to raise the issue of a revision of borders" with all contiguous republics, except the Baltic states.
This statement provoked angry replies from Ukraine and Kazakhstan, which both had large Russian populations.
Nazarbayev warned of the danger of civil war.
Delegations from Russia, led by Rutskoi, went to negotiate with Ukraine and Kazakhstan.
Russia and Ukraine agreed on Aug. 29 to abide by their treaty of Nov. 19, 1990, guaranteeing borders, and promised to work on an economic agreement with the "states-subjects of the former Soviet Union" .
On Aug. 30 Kazakhstan and Russia agreed to act to prevent "the uncontrolled disintegration of the union state" .
Ten of the 16 autonomous republics within the RSFSR made a joint declaration of their wish to stay in the RSFSR on Aug. 29.
Among the others, Kabardino-Balkar was reported on Aug. 31 to be without government after the resignation of its president and dissolution of the Supreme Soviet.
After 12 days of protest in Chechen-Ingushia, the National Congress dissolved the Supreme Soviet and formed an interim administration, charged with organizing presidential elections.
In Tataria, which was demanding to sign the Union Treaty separately from Russia, President Mintimer Shaymiyev resigned from the CPSU central committee, and the Supreme Soviet abrogated the Council of Ministers' decision to nationalize CPSU property.
Baltic states
Estonia and Latvia declared independence on Aug. 20 and 21 respectively (Lithuania having done so on March 11, 1990 — see p. 37300).
Russian-speaking deputies to the Estonian Supreme Soviet complained of the unilateral nature of the declaration.
Soviet security forces began to withdraw from the Baltics, including the Vilnius television tower which had been occupied in January 1991.
OMON troops were to be redeployed in Russia, it was announced on Aug. 25.
Kuzmin was replaced by the deputy commander of the Leningrad military district, Lt.-Gen.
Valery Mironov, and on Aug. 29 Sherbakov ordered the demobilization of all Baltic conscripts in the armed forces.
KGB activities were suspended and its property handed over to the republican governments.
The CPSU was banned in Lithuania and Latvia from Aug. 23 and in Estonia on Aug. 24.
Latvian CP first secretary Alfred Rubiks, was arrested the same day.
The RSFSR recognised Latvian and Estonian independence on Aug. 24.
Yeltsin visited Latvia on Aug. 29.
Moldava
An independence declaration was made by Moldava (which had changed its name from Moldavia in June 1990) on Aug. 27, and was recognised formally by Romania, with which diplomatic links were established on Aug. 29.
The Moldavan CP first secretary, Grigory Yeremey, resigned from the CPSU politburo on Aug. 22, and President Snegur banned party activity at work from Aug. 23.
Trans-Caucasus
Azerbaidjan declared independence on Aug. 30, and lifted the state of emergency imposed on Baku by Soviet authorities in January 1990 [see pp. 37168-70].
A demonstration organized by the People's Front to protest against the leadership's support of the coup was violently broken up by militia on Aug. 23.
The republican CP left the CPSU on Aug. 29, intending to continue as an independent party.
Mutalibov resigned from the CPSU politburo, and Azerbaidjani members left central CPSU bodies.
In Georgia, which had declared independence on April 9, 1991 [see p. 38159], the Supreme Soviet banned the CP on Aug. 27, and it was reported on Aug. 28 that a Georgian ministry of defence was being created.
Armenia announced its intention to secede according to consitutional procedure.
Ukraine
A resolution on Ukrainian independence was adopted by the Supreme Soviet on Aug. 24, pending a referendum on Dec. 1.
Resolutions were adopted on departization and on subordination of military units in Ukraine to republican control, with the intention of creating a separate Ukrainian army.
Ukraine proclaimed itself a nuclear-free republic on Aug. 28, seeking the removal to Russia of nuclear weapons currently stationed on its territory.
Byelorussia
Byelorussia's President, Nikolai Dementei, who had expressed support for the coup, resigned on Aug. 25, and the Supreme Soviet voted to declare "the political and economic independence of Byelorussia" .
The republican communist party left the CPSU, and its first secretary Anatoly Malofeyev resigned from the CPSU politburo on Aug. 25; its property was nationalized.
The members of the republican governments suspended their party membership on Aug. 28, and the CP was "temporarily suspended" by the Ministry of Justice.
Byelorussia was planning to have its own national guard.
Central Asian republics
In Kazakhstan the CP dissolved itself on Aug. 28 to create an organization uniting progressive forces.
Nazarbayev resigned his post as first secretary and thus membership of the CPSU politburo on Aug. 22.
Party officials were banned from holding senior state posts.
On Aug. 29 Nazarbayev closed the nuclear testing site at Semipalatinsk where over 500 nuclear explosions had been carried out since 1949.
On Sept. 1 it was reported that President Kakhar Makhkamov of Tajikistan had resigned after a vote of no confidence and after democracy demonstrations in Dushanbe.
CPSU property in the republic was nationalized on Aug. 28 and parties banned in the Supreme Soviet's administrative bodies.
The CP resolved to leave the CPSU on Aug. 29.
The republic dropped "soviet socialist" from its name to become "Republic of Tajikistan" .
On Aug. 28 President Akayev of Kirghizia left the CPSU, and the republican CP politburo and secretariat were retired.
Party property was nationalized and funds frozen.
The CP's activities were suspended for six months on Aug. 30.
Uzbekistan
At an extraordinary session of the Supreme Soviet on Aug. 31, Uzbekistan declared its independence and changed its name to "Republic of Uzbekistan" .
President Islam Karimov disagreed with the dissolution of the CPSU but resigned from the politburo on Aug. 23.
CP property was nationalized on Aug. 24 and on Aug. 28, the republican party decided to break away from the CPSU.
Uzbekistan took control of all union enterprises on its territory and was to conduct its own foreign policy.
Karimov issued a general amnesty, but a rally organized by democratic movements on Aug. 26 was broken up by militia.
President Saparmurad Niyazov was reported to have said that the CP would continue in Turkmenia.
Komsomolskaya Pravda claimed that democratic activists were being arrested for proclaiming Niyazov's support for the coup.
EUROPE
YUGOSLAVIA
Approach of civil war
Yugoslavia slid into a state of virtual civil war after Croatia and Slovenia declared their independence from the Yugoslav federation on June 25.
In response to the immediate outbreak of fighting in Slovenia, a fragile ceasefire had been negotiated on June 28 by a "troika" of ministers representing the European Communities (EC)[see pp. 38274-75].
Although fighting in Slovenia continued in early July, it was quickly over after a successful campaign of resistance by the well-organized Slovenian Territorial Defence Force against the Yugoslav National Army (JNA).
Fighting was more protracted in Croatia, where some 300 people had been killed by mid-August.
Serbian fighters backed by the Serb-dominated JNA, ostensibly acting to protect the population of some 600,000 Serbs concentrated in Slavonia in the east of Croatia, took control of almost one-fifth of Croatian territory.
The Serbian President, Slobodan Milosevic, was suspected by non-Serb opponents of exploiting the crisis to establish the basis for a Greater Serbia which would incorporate Serb-populated parts of Croatia (principally the self-proclaimed "Serbian Autonomous Region of Krajina" stretching along part of the border between Croatia and Bosnia-Hercegovina, and Glina and other majority-Serbian areas south of the Croatian capital, Zagreb), as well as Montenegro, the provinces of Vojvodina and Kosovo and parts of Bosnia-Hercegovina.
CSCE and EC meetings on crisis
The first-ever emergency meeting of the committee of senior officials of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE), of which Yugoslavia was a member, was convened on July 3-4 in Prague, at the instigation of the EC, to discuss the Yugoslav situation.
It agreed after a difficult session (marked by objections from Yugoslavia and the Soviet Union over terminology) to recommend the dispatch of an EC-based mission to Yugoslavia to supervise the fragile ceasefire, and also to send a CSCE "good offices" mission to assist political dialogue.
Earlier, the new Conflict Prevention Centre of the CSCE met for the first time in Vienna on July 1-2, as requested by Austria, and called for an immediate ceasefire and the return of the JNA to barracks, but failed to reach the necessary unanimity on sending a CSCE observer mission.
[See correction on p. 38366]concerning CSCE emergency mechanisms, as brought into operation for the first time in this crisis.]
EC Foreign Ministers also met on July 5 in extraordinary session and decided to dispatch the ministerial troika (the Foreign Ministers of Luxembourg, the Netherlands and Portugal) to Yugoslavia again, to impose an arms embargo, and to freeze EC financial aid (worth ECU 807,000,000 — about US$915,000,000).
EC members differed over whether the EC should recognize Slovenia and Croatia, as advocated by Belgium and Denmark.
German Chancellor Helmut Kohl, in a marked shift of attitude, stated before the meeting that the peoples of Europe had to be free to choose their own future, while Foreign Minister Hans-Dietrich Genscher warned that Germany would press for severe political and economic sanctions against Yugoslavia if the army continued to defy the federal authorities.
The final EC statement simply acknowledged a "new situation" in the country and agreed to review its attitude if the ceasefire was breached or unilateral military action taken.
In line with the CSCE's conclusions and by request of the Yugoslav authorities, provision was made to send a delegation of up to 50 members to help stabilize the ceasefire together with officials to support the CSCE's good offices mission.
The United States, which like Germany had hitherto strongly favoured maintaining Yugoslav integrity, made it clear on July 2 that it did not support the use of force to preserve this integrity, and on the same day President Bush indicated in a letter to the recently installed (Croat) head of the Collective State Presidency, Stjepan Mesic [see p. 38275], that it would accept the republics' independence if achieved peacefully.
The US administration endorsed the EC arms embargo on July 8.
Fighting in Slovenia — July 3 ceasefire — Zagreb incidents
The more serious fighting in early July was in Slovenia, notably in the region of the Krsko nuclear power station (eastern Slovenia), where the Slovene authorities also reduced capacity to 25 per cent on July 2 in preparation for a possible emergency shutdown after it was buzzed by military aircraft.
The air force bombarded Ljubljana, the Slovenian capital, on July 2.
After talks between Mesic and members of the Slovenian leadership on July 2, however, Slovenia agreed to release prisoners, and to allow the JNA federal troops (effectively besieged by the Slovenian Territorial Defence Force) to return to barracks with all their arms and equipment.
A tentative ceasefire came into operation and some JNA units began to withdraw late on July 3 in compliance with the EC-arranged agreement.
Gen. Blagoje Adzic, the hardline JNA Chief of Staff, vowed in a television appearance on July 2 to establish control and bring to an end the war which he said had been forced upon the army.
The Collective State Presidency, excluding the Slovene representative Janez Drnovsek, met on July 4 for the first time with Mesic as President [see p. 38275].
It called on Slovenia to comply fully with the ceasefire, to relinquish control of its international borders by noon on July 7, to release all army prisoners and equipment, to withdraw its armed units by midnight on July 4 and to lift the blockade of army units by noon on July 5.
While officially rejecting the deadlines as an ultimatum and conceding only that it would negotiate over the vexed issue of border controls, Slovenia announced on July 5 that it had demobilized 10,000 members of its defence forces.
Moreover it began to free captured troops on July 5 and to lift blockades.
According to the Slovene Red Cross, 36 soldiers had been killed and 160 wounded since the declaration of independence, compared with 10 Slovene civilians and 10 foreigners killed, and 2,316 soldiers and 129 federal police had been captured.
In the first incidents in Zagreb seven soldiers were killed on July 2.
Brioni talks with EC troika
Talks held on the island of Brioni in the Adriatic sea on July 7 between the EC troika and representatives from Slovenia, Croatia and the Federal Presidency resulted in an agreement late that night.
Slovenia and Croatia agreed to suspend implementation of their independence declarations, but not the declarations themselves.
During a three-month cooling-off period, negotiations would begin on the future of all the republics and provinces.
Hostilities would end immediately, and by midnight on July 8 the JNA would return to its bases, the Slovenian militia would be demobilized and its blockades of JNA units lifted, and prisoners would be released.
Slovenian police would be allowed control of the republic's international border, with the JNA taking responsibility for security for the three months, and customs receipts would be jointly administered.
Up to 50 European observers would be brought in to protect the ceasefire in Slovenia and "possibly" in Croatia (an advance party arriving on July 9).
All monetary restraints imposed by the National Bank after June 25 were to be lifted (but in practice these continued to be blocked).
The Brioni agreement was ratified by the Croatian parliament on July 9, and by the Slovenian parliament on July 10.
The Collective State Presidency, after several abortive attempts to meet, also finally endorsed it at the end of a 14-hour session on July 12 (again not attended by Drnovsek), but imposed new demands and deadlines.
These were for the demobilization of all irregular "armed formations" throughout Yugoslav territory (by midnight on July 18), for the return of Slovenia's borders to the situation prior to June 25 (by midnight on July 16), the release of all troops and the return to the JNA and the police of goods and equipment seized in Slovenia (by midnight on July 15) and the lifting of blockades (by midnight on July 13).
The republics were ordered to resume sending their conscripts into the army by July 20 (which Slovenia and Croatia had been refusing to do, in addition to which the army had been depleted by the desertion of many current young conscripts during the recent conflict).
A commission was set up to oversee the new decisions.
Mesic, while asserting that the Croatian National Guard was not one of the "armed formations" whose demobilization was required, warned that the state would intervene with all the means at its disposal if the republics failed to comply with these demands.
Slovenia's airports, which had been closed by the federal authorities on June 27, were reopened on July 26.
In the meantime the Slovenian government had on July 17 cut off electricity to five military bases as a protest.
On July 30 Slovenia's Defence Minister Janez Jansa failed to force the removal of Prime Minister Lojze Peterle.
July 18 agreement on Croatia amid intensifying fighting
With fighting involving Croatian National Guards, Serbian fighters and the JNA intensifying in the Slavonia area of Croatia in early July, thousands fled into neigbouring Vojvodina amid fears that an army attack on Croatia was imminent.
The Collective State Presidency failed to convene in Brioni on July 15 or 16 due to the refusal of the Serbian block to participate; when it finally met in Belgrade on July 18 with all members present as well as the Federal Prime Minister (Ante Markovic) and the Ministers of Defence, Interior and Foreign Affairs, a surprise agreement was reached (with Mesic voting against and the Bosnian representative abstaining) to begin immediately to pull all troops out of Slovenia within three months to the neighbouring republics of Bosnia-Hercegovina and Serbia.
On July 19 the Defence Minister, Gen. Veljko Kadijevic, proposed on behalf of the JNA that the Presidency should open talks immediately on the future of Yugoslavia and that they should be completed by Aug. 15.
New Croatian Prime Minister
Franjo Greguric, formerly the Deputy Prime Minister, was appointed Prime Minister of Croatia on July 18 in succession to Josip Manolic who became head of a new war cabinet in the republic.
In an earlier reshuffle on July 3 Onesin Cvitan was appointed Minister of Internal Affairs and Sime Djodan Minister of Defence, while Martin Spegelj became commander of the National Guard.
Ohrid peace talks
Talks on the future of the Yugoslav federation began on July 22 in Ohrid, Macedonia, attended by the members of the Collective State Presidency and by the Presidents of the six republics.
The agreement which emerged contained similar provisions to earlier peace plans, but called in EC observers to monitor the demobilization of all illegal paramilitary groups in Croatia, after which the JNA would be required to return to barracks.
As the meeting was in progress, battles raged in eastern Croatia, killing up to 21 people in the worst day of violence so far.
Croatian President Franjo Tudjman, who refused to sign the agreement, returned to Zagreb where he warned that "all-out war" could be imminent and convened a crisis session of the war cabinet.
Nine Croatian National Guardsmen were killed in an army attack on their barracks on July 25 in the east Slavonian border village of Erdut, and three others died in nearby Dalj.
A German journalist was killed in northern Croatia on July 26.
In a violent bout of fighting between Serbs and Croats at least 36 people (and possibly up to 100) were killed on July 26-27.
Tudjman boycotted a meeting of the Presidency on July 30 which Mesic also left in anger in objection to the proposed appointment of Branko Kostic Montenegro's representative in the Collective State Presidency, as head of a commission to supervise a ceasefire in Croatia.
Croatia declared a partial mobilization of its National Guard and police, but admitted that the republic's resources were not sufficient for a full-scale mobilization.
As fighting continued, thousands of refugees fled to Zagreb to escape from Serbian fighters who were seizing territory and advancing amid the supportive bombardment of the army.
Croatian forces on Aug. 2 won back Kostajnica (in the Banija region) but lost the villages of Erdut, Dalj and and Aljmas near Osijek with about 80 people, most of them Croatians, being killed in the tank bombardment.
Croatia on Aug. 4 broke off all relations with Serbia.
Offer of home rule to Croatian Serbs
Apparently after two weeks of secret negotiations with prominent Croatian Serbs, Tudjman announced on July 31 that legislation had been prepared to offer home rule (with its own police force) to the Serbian community in the self-proclaimed "Autonomous Region of Krajina" .
At the same time Lazar Macura, the "Information Minister" for Krajina, proposed a territorial corridor across Bosnia-Hercegovina to link Krajina and Serbia.
Macura claimed that talks were taking place in Bosnia with the Serbian Democratic Party and the small Organization of Moslems in Bosnia (MBO), the latter pulling out of the talks on Aug. 29.
A Serbian Autonomous Region of Western Slavonia was established on Aug. 13.
In a Serbian government reshuffle on July 31 Budimir Kosutic became Deputy Premier and Minister for International Co-operation.
Appointment of Croatian government of democratic unity
In a major government reorganization in Croatia on Aug. 1 Tudjman included opposition politicians for the first time in a new "government of democratic unity" which continued to be dominated by the Croatian Democratic Union (HDZ) with 11 out of 27 posts.
The Cabinet also contained two Communists, two Social Democrats, seven independents and five members of smaller parties.
The new appointments included Luka Bebic (Defence), Zvonimir Separovic (Foreign Affairs), Ivan Vekic (Interior) and Bosiljko Misetic (Justice), while Zivko Juzdbasic, a Serb, was appointed without portfolio to represent the Serbian population.
Branko Salaj was later appointed Information Minister.
Meeting of Pentagonale /Hexagonale grouping
Representatives of the Pentagonale central European grouping — Yugoslavia (represented by Markovic) and its neighbours Italy, Austria, Hungary and Czechslovakia — met for their second annual summit in Dubrovnik on July 26-27.
The grouping was joined by Poland, and thereby expanded into the Hexagonale [see also p. 38358].
A statement was issued endorsing EC proposals to end the violence in Yugoslavia.
Brussels and Hague meetings — Failure of early August EC mission
Federal Prime Minister Markovic, Foreign Minister Budimir Loncar and the Presidents of Macedonia and Bosnia-Hercegovina attended a meeting in Brussels with EC Foreign Ministers on July 29 at which the EC offered to quadruple its numbers of observers to 200 plus 400 support staff.
The EC observers would, however, go into Croatia only if their safety was guaranteed and if all parties accepted a ceasefire under joint JNA-Croatian National Guard patrols who would report back to EC monitors.
(An EC helicopter was subsequently hit by gunfire east of Zagreb on Aug. 16 and forced to land.)
The EC troika arrived in Zagreb on Aug. 2 but talks in Belgrade broke down after the third round on Aug. 4 which Milosevic boycotted.
EC Foreign Ministers met again in The Hague on Aug. 6 and agreed to consider unblocking loans (frozen in July and worth ECU900 million) only to those republics which accepted mediation.
A call from the Presidency on Aug. 6 for a ceasefire from 6 a.m. on Aug. 7 and for the withdrawal of Serbian and Croatian forces out of each other 's range within 12 hours had little impact and fresh attacks were launched near Glina and in Vukovar.
WEU and CSCE meetings
At France's instigation the Western European Union (WEU) convened in London on Aug. 7 to confer on a possible monitoring role.
The CSCE's committee of senior officials also met again under its emergency procedures on Aug. 8-9 in Prague.
It called for all parties to stabilize the ceasefire by separating their forces and withdrawing them from areas of conflict, and to set talks in motion involving all parties in the conflict by Aug. 15.
It condemned the use of force and demanded that human rights be respected "including the rights of national minorities" .
A follow-up CSCE meeting was scheduled for the first week of September.
Continued fighting in Croatia — Refugee numbers in mid-August
The official news agency Tanjug reported on Aug. 13 that nearly 90,000 people had left their homes in Croatia since the start of the clashes, quoting Red Cross figures of 48,161 Serbs who had fled to Serbia and 30,651 Croatians to Croatia plus some 10,000 people who had fled to Bosnia.
Several thousand refugees had also fled to Hungary.
Two large bombs exploded in Zagreb on Aug. 19, one at the offices of the Jewish community and another in the Jewish graveyard.
Three-republic summit — Future of Bosnia-Hercegovina, Kosovo and Macedonia
Milosevic met with the President of Montenegro, Momir Bulatovic, and the parliamentary Speaker of Bosnia-Hercegovina, Momcilo Krajisnik (an ethnic Serb), for a summit in Belgrade on Aug. 12 to which representatives of Macedonia, Croatia and Slovenia were not invited.
The three proposed drafting a new constitution for those republics which wished to stay in Yugoslavia as a "conferation of equal republics and peoples" and the signing of a "historic agreement" between the Serbian and Moslem communities in Bosnia.
The Moslem President of Bosnia-Hercevgovina, Alija Izetbegovic, protested at the holding of the meeting which he saw as unrepresentative and as a move to split Moslems in the republic, and on Aug. 16 he announced that a referendum would be held on the future of Bosnia-Hercegovina at a date to be determined by Bosnia's parliament.
Izetbegovic appealed to Turkey and the EC for support in resisting Serbian plans to divide up Bosnia-Hercegovina between Serbia and Croatia with a Moslem buffer state between the two, a proposal in which Tudjman had also expressed interest.
Moslems made up some 43 per cent of the population in Bosnia, Serbs 31 per cent and Croats 17 per cent.
In predominantly Albanian Kosovo, which had been under direct Serbian rule since 1989, "temporary measures" were imposed by Serbia in early August to place the councils of several towns previously administered by Albanians under Serbian control.
Serbia also took over control of radio and television centres in the capitals of Kosovo (Pristina) and Vojvodina (Novi Sad).
The Albanian Democratic Party on Aug. 8 proposed the incorporation of Kosovo into Albania if the break-up of Yugoslavia continued, and the Democratic Alliance of Kosovo on Aug. 16 announced that a referendum would be held for Albanians in the region on their future within Yugoslavia.
Macedonia, which had declared a state of emergency on Aug. 4, on Aug. 7 decided to hold a referendum on independence on Sept. 8.
A new draft constitution was approved on Aug. 23.
The republic's Defence Minister Risto Damjanovski was replaced on Aug. 22 and Education Minister Dimitar Dimitrov resigned on Aug. 26.
Economic measures at federal level
The Presidency and the leaders of the six republics agreed measures on Aug. 20-21 to keep the federation functioning at a minimum economic and political level for a further three months, with trade continuing between the republics and a monetary policy which would allow the country to pay its foreign creditors.
A four-point agreement laid down that borders could be changed only by democratic and legal procedures, and that the democratically expressed will of nations and republics to self-determination including secession and association should be respected.
On July 11 the government had passed an emergency budget to prevent the economy from collapsing.
Financed by customs revenues and the National Bank, the budget would solely finance the administration and the army.
Hitherto the republics and provinces had been unable to agree on a budget and international financial institutions had accordingly blocked credits.
A tight monetary policy was also announced and a plan to keep inflation below 80 per cent was revised.
New ceasefire efforts
Following two days of heavy fighting around Osijek, the main town in Slavonia, with heavy army involvement, Tudjman on Aug. 22 issued an ultimatum to the Presidency warning that unless Serbian aggression against Croatia stopped and the army left Croatia by Aug. 31, "all necessary steps" would be taken to protect the republic and the army would be declared an occupying force (which would be equivalent to a declaration of war).
Vukovar and Vinkovci south of Osijek were bombarded on Aug. 25 on a scale unprecedented in the conflict, possibly in retaliation for the shooting down of two air force jets by Croatian forces in the area on Aug. 24.
Fighting also continued around Knin where Serbian rebels ordered the general mobilization of every male under 60.
The presidential ceasefire commission collapsed when its secretary resigned on Aug. 26 after stating that the Aug. 7 ceasefire had been breached some 200 times and that over 70 people had been killed.
Croatia and the JNA late on Aug. 27 agreed to a new ceasefire after talks in Brioni between Tudjman, Defence Minister Kadijevic and Chief of Staff Gen. Adzic but this broke down within hours as fighting resumed in Vukovar.
EC and US emphasis on Serbian responsibility
EC Foreign Ministers meeting in Brussels on Aug. 27 were outspoken on Serbia's responsibility for the conflict (a feeling which was echoed by the United States State Department on Aug. 29).
Fresh EC proposals envisaged a monitored ceasefire with effect from Sept. 1, the formation of an EC arbitration committee, and an international peace conference.
Tudjman accepted the proposals "in principle" , but Milosevic rejected EC accusations that Serbia was the aggressor in the conflict and refused to give his endorsement to the plan.
AFRICA
SOUTH AFRICA
New disclosures in Inkathagate scandal
Further details emerged in August of the so-called "Inkathagate" scandal [see pp. 38318-19], including revelations about the covert training of Inkatha members by the South African Defence Force (SADF).
Following press reports, on Aug. 8 the SADF confirmed that it trained Inkatha members at a camp in the Caprivi Strip in northern Namibia.
The reports were based on sworn statements of graduates of the camp, whose seven-month training including the use of explosives.
They were told that "the enemy is the African National Congress [ANC]and the Pan Africanist Congress" .
Although some of them were used as guards, others were placed in bases and used for attacks on anti-apartheid activists.
The SADF statement contradicted an earlier admission by President F.W. de Klerk that the SADF had trained 150 Inkatha members in 1986 in "VIP protection" .
According to Martin Dolinchek, a former intelligence officer with the now defunct Bureau of State Security (BOSS), South African intelligence played a key role in building the credibility of Inkatha from its launch in 1974.
He said that a rival to challenge the leadership of Chief Mangosuthu Gatsha Buthelezi, was set up and then deliberately brought down in order to promote Buthelezi.
He also said that BOSS had established an office "with the specific purpose of servicing Chief Buthelelzi's Inkatha office" .
His claims were dismissed by Buthelezi.
Umkhonto we Sizwe conference
In response to the new revelations and to the government's reaction to the scandal, the ANC president Nelson Mandela renewed his call for the State President's resignation and demanded that control of the security forces be surrendered to an interim government of national unity.
Mandela's demand was made at the Aug. 9-11 conference of the ANC's military wing Umkhonto we Sizwe (Spear of the Nation — MK), of which he was commander-in-chief.
The MK conference was held at Thohoyandou, the first such conference inside South Africa.
The 250 delegates were reassured by Mandela that despite the year-old agreement to suspend the armed struggle [see p. 37642], MK would not dwindle away, and MK members should prepare for integration into the armed forces of a democratic South Africa.
Draft accord to end violence
On Aug. 15, meeting in the wake of the disclosures of government and Inkatha anti-ANC political activity, government, ANC and Inkatha representatives agreed upon a draft accord in an attempt to end the country's violence.
It was hoped that a formal accord would be signed at a national multiparty peace conference on Sept. 14.
The draft went some way to meeting ANC demands for curbs on political parties and the security forces.
It introduced a code of conduct for political parties, banning the use of language likely to incite violence or hatred.
Strict control on the police and military would include a code of conduct for the police, holding them responsible to the public, and mechanisms to investigate complaints against the police.
Between Aug. 9 and 13, 24 people were killed in the Alexandra township of Johannesburg after Inkatha supporters arrived, armed with spears and clubs, to take part in what was billed as a non-political clean-up operation to remove rubbish from the township.
Clash between AWB and police
Shooting broke out between the police and the neo-fascist Afrikaner Resistance Movement (AWB) on Aug. 9 in Ventersdorp, 120 km west of Johannesburg, as AWB members tried to prevent President F. W. de Klerk from addressing a meeting.
Three AWB members were killed and about 60 people, including black residents, were injured.
The clash marked only the second occasion in 70 years on which police had opened fire on a white crowd.
The first incident, in May, also took place in Ventersdorp, where the headquarters of the AWB was located [see p. 38179].
The violence erupted after Eugene Terreblanche, leader of the AWB, and more than 1,000 of his uniformed supporters confronted police, who were surrounding a hall where de Klerk was to speak.
Initially rounds of tear gas were exchanged but later shots were fired.
Terreblanche accused de Klerk of being deliberately provocative in holding a National Party (NP) meeting in Ventersdorp.
The AWB, he said, was now preparing for revolution and its main priority would be the strengthening of its commandos.
He challenged de Klerk to hold a whites-only election.
Finance Minister Barend du Plessis defended the right of the NP to hold the rally, and accused Terreblanche of being responsible for the deaths.
However, the government was criticized by a number of political parties and organizations.
The ANC reminded the government of its call for the banning of all dangerous weapons at public gatherings and accused the government of allowing "this paramilitary force to become a law unto itself" .
The South African Communist Party (SACP) accused the President of provoking the violence in an effort to redeem its position following the Inkathagate scandal, whilst the Conservative Party said that responsibility lay with de Klerk.
Restructuring of ANC
A major restructuring of the ANC leadership was reported in August.
The changes, thought to have taken place in July when ANC president Nelson Mandela was on an overseas tour, apparently excluded him and his deputy, Walter Sisulu, from official policy-making bodies.
Of crucial importance in the period of transition to democracy was the setting up of a specific negotiations commission under Cyril Ramaphosa, secretary-general of the ANC.
Several key portfolios in the national working committee (NWC), the ANC's "shadow cabinet" , were taken by a younger generation of ANC leaders, who were thought to believe that Mandela had assumed too much personal power since his release from prison.
NWC members included Thabo Mbeki, head of the international affairs department, Joe Slovo, general secretary of the SACP, and Mohammed Valli Moosa, who were also the other members of the negotiations commission; Patrick "Terror" Lekota was named as assistant to the head of the security and intelligence department; and Cheryl Carolus as convenor of the health, welfare and human resources commission.
The streamlining of the leadership also involved the establishment of precise chains of command as well as a standing evaluations commission to measure performance against resolutions and mandates.
Chris Hani, chief of staff of MK, was not allocated a portfolio, pending a request by the SACP to release him to take up the post of deputy SACP general secretary full-time.
Speculation that Hani would take over as head of the SACP at the end of the year increased following the announcement on Aug. 27 that Slovo was suffering from cancer.
Amnesty for exiles
On Aug. 16 the government agreed to a UN-brokered amnesty for political exiles, clearing the way for as many as 40,000 exiles to return to the country, thus removing the largest obstacle to direct constitutional negotiations.
Whilst welcoming the agreement, the ANC questioned the government's commitment to the amnesty, pointing out that although the UN stipulated unconditional amnesty for all political crimes, the government retained the exclusive prerogative to grant or refuse amnesty for crimes ranging from leaving the country illegally to murder.
Release of ANC prisoners
On Aug. 16 the ANC released 32 people, "all suspected agents and infiltrators" , held in camps in Uganda and Angola.
Several claimed to have been tortured whilst in custody.
Responding to the complaints, Mandela, who had previously acknowledged that there had been abuses, said that all the allegations would be thoroughly investigated.
He added that 17 of the former detainees were being reintegrated into the organization.
Dissolution of UDF
The United Democratic Front (UDF) was disbanded on Aug. 18.
Formed in May 1983 and formally launched that August, it had grown rapidly into a mass-membership anti-apartheid organization, its initial focus being its opposition to the regime's "tricameral" constitutional plans [see p. 32599].
At its final meeting in Mitchell's Plain in Cape Town, the UDF publicity secretary Murphy Morobe said that its affiliates would henceforth work to build the ANC, "our ideological senior and mentor, into a mighty force for justice, democracy and peace" .
Appointment of black judge
Ismail Mahomed became the first black judge in the country's history when he took his seat in the Supreme Court on Aug. 12.
Mahomed had appeared for the defence in a number of political trials, became the first black Senior Counsel in 1974, and had since become president of the Lesotho Court of Appeal, a member of Swaziland's Court of Appeal, and a member of the Supreme Court in Namibia, whose Constitution he helped to draft.
AFRICA
MOZAMBIQUE
Frelimo conference — Suspension of peace talks
The ruling Front for the Liberation of Mozambique (Frelimo) held its sixth congress in Maputo on Aug. 12-23, re-electing President Joaquim Chissano as party chairman and electing a new central committee — chosen by secret ballot for the first time — of 160 members, 58 of them women.
Feliciano Gundana, Minister in the President's Office without Portfolio, was elected party secretary-general.
The seventh round of peace talks in Rome between the government and the rebel Mozambique National Resistance (MNR or Renamo) had been suspended on Aug. 9, with the two sides agreeing to meet again in September.
The talks had begun on Aug. 1, having originally been due to start in mid-July.
Their suspension was described by Transport and Communications Minister Lt.-Gen.
Armando Guebuza, the leader of the government delegation, as being designed to give the MNR time to consider proposals made by the talks' mediators.
The proposals were reported to have offered the MNR a privileged status, allowing it to start political activities within Mozambique as soon as a ceasefire had been concluded, but requiring it to recognize the Mozambican Constitution.
In his speech at the opening of the Frelimo congress on Aug. 12, Chissano accused the MNR of adopting delaying tactics, repeatedly putting forward proposals which compromised Mozambique's independence and sovereignty.
The MNR was reported to have made new demands for forthcoming elections to be supervised by the UN.
MNR leader Afonso Dhlakama had cancelled a July 19 meeting in Rome with US Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs Jeffrey Davidow, claiming that the government planned to assassinate him.
A member of the government delegation described this claim as ridiculous, adding that the removal of Dhlakama would damage the peace process by rendering the MNR "even more incoherent" .
Reports of atrocities had followed the takeover by the rebels of the town of Lalaua in Nampula province on 29 June.
Initial claims by refugees fleeing the area that 1,000 people had been massacred were later denied by the local authorities, who said that 49 people had died.
Arrest of minister over coup plot
Interior Minister Col. Manuel José Antonio was arrested on Aug. 11 for questioning in connection with an attempted coup uncovered on June 24 and said to have been planned for June 25 (the 16th anniversary of Mozambique's independence).
Antonio (whose ministerial duties were taken over by his deputy, Edmundo Carlos Alberto) was the first member of the government to be held in connection with the plot; he was also a member of the Frelimo central committee.
A government statement on June 27 had named 18 individuals allegedly involved, including Col.-Gen.
Sebastiao Mabote, a veteran of the independence war who was Armed Forces Chief of Staff until 1986, and two brothers of the late President Samora Machel.
Press law and security reorganization
The Assembly of the Republic in July approved new laws guaranteeing press freedom and reorganizing the state security services.
The former People's National Security Service was to be replaced by a new State Information and Security Service, whose duties would be confined to intelligence and counter-intelligence.
AFRICA
ANGOLA
Slow implementation of peace process
On Aug. 1 the Joint Political and Military Commission (CCPM) overseeing the peace process between the Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola-Workers' Party (MPLA-PT) government and the rebel National Union for the Total Independence of Angola (UNITA)[see p. 38180], reported delays in the implementation of the accord.
Only 10-20 per cent of prisoners had been exchanged and not all monitoring mechanisms were in place.
On Aug. 10 the liberation of prisoners resumed with simultaneous releases by the government and UNITA, and further exchanges during the month.
On Aug. 13 the CCPM reported that assembly points were ready to accept troops from both sides.
An estimated 250,000 soldiers were expected to be demobilized or integrated into a 50,000-strong national non-political army.
Privatization of coffee plantations
Officials of Secafe, the Angolan coffee secretariat, announced in August plans to sell off all 33 state-owned coffee plantations.
Prior to independence in 1975 Angola was the world's fourth-largest coffee exporter, but since that time there had been a dramatic drop in production.
The plantations would be open to foreign acquisition but overall foreign ownership would be limited to 30 or 40 per cent.
Amongst those groups bidding for the farms were Lonrho, the United Kingdom-based multinational, and the Portuguese group Espírito Santo which had considerable land holdings in the colonial period.
AFRICA
MADAGASCAR
Appointment of new Prime Minister — Bloody suppression of demonstrations
President Didier Ratsiraka, who on July 28 had dissolved the Cabinet and promised a referendum on constitutional reform [see p. 38324], announced on Aug. 8 the appointment of Guy Willy Razanamasy, the mayor of Antananarivo, as Prime Minister.
Ratsiraka handed over many of his responsibilities to Razanamasy, although retaining the portfolios of Defence and Foreign Affairs.
The move was apparently intended to deflect the current wave of protests, increasingly directed at Ratsiraka personally as the 16-party opposition Comité de forces vives coalition pressed for his resignation.
However, the mainly peaceable daily demonstrations for democratic reform, which had brought tens of thousands on to the streets in the capital and other centres [see pp. 38277; 38324]for the wave of strikes and demonstrations launched on June 10], continued in the days following Razanamasy's appointment.
On Aug. 10, when crowds marched on the presidential palace, troops of Ratsiraka's North Korean-trained presidential guard opened fire, using a helicopter gunship and grenades to halt marchers along the 13-km route to the palace, at Iavoloha.
Casualty figures, initially put at 10 dead and several hundred wounded, later rose to 31 dead in the capital and 20 dead and many more wounded in the northern town of Mahajanga, according to Red Cross figures.
Albert Zafy, "prime minister" in the opposition's provisional government formed on June 21 [see p. 38277], was reported to be among the wounded.
Subsequent reports put the numbers of dead and wounded far higher, the opposition daily Madagascar Tribune claiming that 138 people had been killed by the guard, and that, in addition, 40 to 80 corpses had been found in a mass grave.
The government version said that 12 people had been killed and more than 200 injured as a result of "general panic" after a grenade went off, and that 11 had died "on our side" .
Crowds estimated at several tens of thousands massed in central Antananarivo daily in the week after the killings, as most workers apparently supported opposition calls for a general strike.
On Aug. 12 it was reported that the air and naval high commands had withdrawn their support for the President, dissociating themselves from the incidents of Aug. 10.
On Aug. 14 the opposition called three days of national mourning.
On Aug. 14, the French government, effectively turning its back on Ratsiraka, called for "a rapid and controlled popular consultation" on the island's future.
On Aug. 18 Ratsiraka declared Madagascar to be a federation of six states with himself as President, claiming to have the support of the five provinces where his ruling Arema party continued to hold majorities in the regional councils.
On Aug. 19, however, the opposition spokesman, Pastor Richard Andriamanjato, announced, to wild cheers, the "dismissal" of Ratsiraka and his "replacement" by the opposition coalition.
Andriamanjato proposed democratic elections under a new constitution within 18 months.
The same day the armed forces were reported to have threatened to seize power unless a solution to the national crisis was found soon.
The Roman Catholic Archbishop of Antananarivo, Cardinal Victor Razafimahatratra, appealed to Ratsiraka to stand down.
On Aug. 26 Razanamasy announced that he was forming a 24-member government which included two senior military officers, most ministers being "unknown" technocrats.
Neither the opposition parties nor the churches were represented.
The following day, the opposition again called a general strike and a rally which attracted a crowd independently estimated at 300,000.
AFRICA
COMOROS
Attempted coup
Ibrahim Ahmed Halidi, President of the Supreme Court, attempted, with the support of the Court, to seize power from President Said Mohammed Djohar on Aug. 3, proclaiming himself interim president.
The coup was declared illegal by the government and its allies, among them France, the French officer responsible for presidential security declaring the coup unlawful in a statement made at the main square in Moroni, the capital.
The coup also failed to win the support of the opposition Comoros Democratic Front.
However, Abbas Djoussouf, leader of the Movement for Democracy and Progress (MDP), praised "the legitimate process launched by the Supreme Court" .
Djohar rapidly reasserted his position and Halidi, the Attorney-General and other members of the Court were arrested.
On Aug 5. it was reported that Djoussouf would be arrested and the MDP banned, however, this was not confirmed.
Djohar reshuffled his Cabinet on Aug. 27, appointing nine new people; two members of the new 15-member Cabinet resigned on Aug. 29.
In the days immediately following the coup attempt there were a number of demonstrations in support of Djohar.
On Aug. 5 security forces shot and wounded at least three supporters of Halidi who allegedly disturbed a meeting of government sympathizers in Mutsamudu, Nzwani (formerly Anjouan) island.
On Aug. 13 an indefinite ban on all public demonstrations was announced.
AFRICA
ZAMBIA
New constitution
On Aug. 2 a new Constitution Act was passed, allowing for multiparty democracy, after months of argument between the ruling United National Independence Party (UNIP) and the Movement for Multiparty Democracy (MMD).
The new Constitution, which had still not been made public as of late August, removed the right of the president to act above the law, to declare martial law or to appoint a cabinet from outside parliament.
President Kenneth Kaunda invited foreign observers to monitor the October election campaign and on Aug. 21 gave freedom of movement to all diplomats.
However, MMD officials said that the possibility of UNIP rigging of the polls had not been ruled out.
On Aug. 21, senior members of the defence and security forces ceased membership of UNIP's central committee, and a commitment was made not to use defence or security facilities for political activities.
UNIP congress
On Aug. 9, at an extraordinary national congress of UNIP, Kaunda was unanimously re-elected party leader.
On Aug. 7 Enoch Kavindele had withdrawn his candidature, the first such challenge to Kaunda; he had said that he wanted to breathe new life into the party, but had little visible support among delegates at the congress.
The congress, held above all to counter the election challenge of the MMD, adopted a new manifesto which replaced the description "vanguard of revolutionary peasants and workers" with "party of all the Zambian people" .
AFRICA
ZAIRE
National conference
The national conference, scheduled to last a month, opened on Aug. 7, with the first plenary session on Aug 12-13.
However, the conference, whose start had already been postponed several times [see p. 38323], only managed to complete its first session.
Following the election of Isaac Kolonji Mutambay as president of the provisional office of the national conference on Aug. 12, the conference was postponed.
It resumed on Aug. 15 for only two hours before being postponed again, amid continuing disputes and a second boycott of the conference by opposition parties because of the presence of more delegates than had been authorized (4,288 as opposed to 2,850).
They accused the government of trying to manipulate the composition of the conference.
On Aug. 21 the Sacred Union, an alliance of opposition parties [see p. 38323], presented its demands to Mutambay.
On the same day a committee was established to verify the mandate of each delegate.
It was reported on Aug. 30 that the Sacred Union had decided to end its boycott.
AFRICA
TOGO
Election of Prime Minister
The national conference ended on Aug. 28 after delegates had continued to meet in defiance of an attempt by President Gnassingbe Eyadema to suspend its proceedings two days earlier.
Eyadema had ordered the suspension of the conference on Aug. 26 because of its efforts to exercise "unlimited sovereignty" .
Soldiers surrounded the conference building, telephone lines were cut and land borders closed.
The conference, which had adopted an electoral timetable on Aug. 24 involving a referendum on the new constitution on Feb. 9, 1992, followed by local, legislative and, finally, presidential elections, elected a Prime Minister on Aug. 27 to head a transitional government.
Executive powers, stripped from Eyadema, were transferred to the new Prime Minister, Koukou Koffigoh.
The conference also announced the dissolution of the Rally of the Togolese People (RPT), the sole legal political party.
On the closing day of the conference, Eyadema recognized Koffigoh as Prime Minister of the transitional government.
AFRICA
CAMEROON
Continuing civil disobedience
As the government of President Paul Biya continued to resist demands for democratic reform, opposition groups decided on Aug. 12 to maintain their call for civil disobedience as part of their campaign for a national conference.
What was effectively a general strike by civil servants and private-sector workers — the so-called "Dead City Campaign" — had virtually shut down most towns from each Monday to Friday since June 24, with commercial activity resuming on Saturdays and Sundays to allow people to shop.
Several demonstrations across the country were broken up by police using tear gas during August.
A group of 700 people were arrested during a demonstration on Aug. 4 in Doula.
On Aug. 9 Celestin Monga had his passport withdrawn and was placed under house arrest.
Monga was tried in January, given a three-year suspended prison sentence and fined for the publication of an "open letter to President Biya" .
A ban on the weekly Le Messager was announced on Aug. 17, although no official explanation was given.
The paper, a frequent subject of censorship, had been printed in Nigeria in July because of difficulties with government printers.
Return of opposition leaders
Bello Bouba Maigari, Prime Minister in 1982-83, returned to Cameroon on Aug. 17 after seven years of self-imposed exile.
Bello Bouba said that he was returning to join his "fellow countrymen who are struggling for the institution of a real democracy" .
Jean-Michel Tekam, who was sentenced in absentia during the April 1990 Yondo Black trial for subversion [see p. 37477]was expected to return on Aug. 24.
Tekam, who led the co-ordination of Cameroonian opposition in France, said that he intended to establish a political party.
AFRICA
EQUATORIAL GUINEA
PDGE congress — Harassment of opposition members
The ruling Equatorial Guinea Democratic Party (PDGE), the sole legal party, held its first national extraordinary congress in Bata on Aug. 4-6.
It called for a revised constitution and the legalization of other political parties.
It also urged the lifting of media restrictions.
On Aug. 17 the Equatorial Guinean embassy in Madrid refused to renew the passport of Severo Moto, leader of the Progress Party.
Moto had planned to return on Aug. 18 to demand the legalization of political parties and the holding of free elections.
He denounced the arrests on Aug. 14 of opposition leaders, which, he noted, came on the same day as the release of Sgt. Venançio Mikó Obiang, who was convicted in July 1983 of participating in an attempted coup the previous May [see pp. 32299-300].
Miko's pardon was welcomed by the government of Spanish Prime Minister Felipe González, who was due to visit in September.
On Aug. 23 Moto reported the arrest in Malabo, the capital, of Eduardo Ndong Elo Nzang, the ambassador to Spain, which he linked to increasing repression in the country.
AFRICA
NIGER
Suspension of Constitution
The national conference continued to deliberate during August under André Salifou who was elected chair of the presidium on Aug. 5.
On Aug. 9, the conference suspended the Constitution, stripping President Ali Saibou of his executive power, although he remained head of state.
Until the election of a Prime Minister and the creation of a transitional government, the existing government, under the control of the conference, retained responsibility for day-to-day activities.
The conference also took charge of the security and armed forces.
A decisionwas taken on Aug. 7 to ban ministers, former members of the Supreme Military Council, and senior government officials from leaving the country.
On Aug. 29 the conference suspended four senior civil servants, including the armed forces inspector, who were involved in the killing of students in February 1990 [see p. 37308].
The following day Col. Toumba Boubacar, the Chief of Staff, threatened a coup against the conference, which he said was trying to humiliate the army.
AFRICA
LIBERIA
Difficulties of peace process
The peace accord reached at Yamoussoukro, Côte d'Ivoire, on June 30 [see p. 38278]held during July and August, but a split in the interim government appeared to threaten the country's reunification after 19 months of civil war.
The agreement, under the aegis of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and largely through the mediation of President Félix Houphouet-Boigny of Côte d'Ivoire, brought the main factions into the interim government headed by Amos Sawyer.
It called for the disarmament and return to their bases ( "encampment" ) of all factions, pending a general election within six months, under the supervision of former United States President Jimmy Carter's International Negotiation Network (INN).
The INN's involvement had been requested by Sawyer and by Charles Taylor, leader of the National Patriotic Front of Liberia (NPFL), whose forces continued to control virtually everywhere outside Monrovia, the capital.
Reports throughout July and August asserted that Taylor was refusing to disarm his forces.
On Aug. 6, the rival Independent National Patriotic Front of Liberia (INPFL), led by Prince Yormie Johnson, announced that it was withdrawing from the interim government, accusing Sawyer of giving senior posts to people from parties "which have failed the Liberian people in the past" .
On Aug. 13, the interim Vice-President, Peter Naigow, a member of the INPFL, announced his resignation.
The INPFL's withdrawal followed severe criticisms by interim government officials of Johnson's action in ordering the execution of a senior commander whose offence appeared to be that he unilaterally complied with provisions of the peace agreement, arranging for his men to hand over their arms to troops of the 7,000-strong Ecowas Monitoring Group (ECOMOG).
Three guerrillas were executed at about the same time for offences against civilians, according to the INPFL newspaper Scorpion on Aug. 2.
Faced with Taylor's continuing hostility to the ECOMOG force, Côte d'Ivoire was reported to have proposed its replacement by a UN force, but the idea was rejected by Sawyer on Aug. 19.
AFRICA
GHANA
Constitutional proposals
Constitutional proposals were published on Aug. 12 by the committee of experts established in June by the Provisional National Defence Council (PNDC) government [see p. 38279].
On Aug. 26 the Consultative Assembly began to consider the committee's proposals.
The committee proposed (i) an executive comprising a directly elected President, a Prime Minister who would be the leader of the majority party in parliament, and a Security Council consisting of the senior ministers, members of the security forces and three presidential nominees;(ii) a non-partisan Council of State, including leaders of all parliamentary political parties and regional representatives, which would deal with matters of "constitutional or national significance" ;(iii) a single directly elected legislature; and (iv) a Special Committee on Human Rights and Administrative Justice which would promote and monitor the enforcement of such rights.
Flt. -Lt.
Jerry Rawlings, chair of the PNDC, said that if the assembly completed its work on schedule a referendum on the constitution would be held in January or February 1992 and, if it won support, parliamentary elections would be held "by the last quarter of 1992 at the latest" .
New opposition alliance
The Co-ordinating Committee of Democratic Forces of Ghana (CCDFG), an alliance of 11 opposition groups including the Movement for Freedom and Justice, was launched on Aug. 6.
Rejecting the PNDC's constitutional programme, the alliance called for a constitutional conference to form a sovereign constituent assembly to produce a new constitution and establish an impartial administration.
It also demanded the immediate lifting of the ban on political activity, claiming that the government was openly organizing its political forces under the name of "The Eagle Club" .
AFRICA
SIERRA LEONE
Referendum on multiparty constitution
In a radio announcement on Aug. 1, a referendum on a draft multi-party constitution was set for Aug. 23-30, with voting to take place on different days in Eastern, Southern, Northern and Western provinces.
The draft constitution had been submitted to the House of Representatives on June 4 [see p. 38278]but could not become law until it had been approved by referendum, according to President Joseph Momoh.
He was quoted in West Africa on Aug. 16 as warning newly formed political parties that their activities were still illegal.
At least 10 parties had been formed following publication of the National Constitution Review Commission's (NCRC's) recommendation in March that multiparty politics should be legalised, ending 21 years of one-party rule by the All People's Congress (APC).
On Aug. 21 Momoh was quoted in a Sierra Leone Broadcasting Service report as saying that the invasion of eastern areas by Liberian rebels [see p. 38278]might mean a long delay before a general election could be held.
AFRICA
SUDAN
Alleged coup attempt
The Sudanese Armed Forces' official spokesman, Maj.-Gen.
Muhammad Tulbah Uwaydah, announced on Aug. 23 that 10 serving and retired army officers and a number of civilians had been arrested following an attempted coup.
Leaders of the banned Umma and Democratic Unionist parties were among those detained, the Middle East News Agency (MENA) reported the same day.
According to Maj.-Gen.
Uwaydah, quoted by Radio Omdurman, the "reckless coup attempt" had been undertaken "at the instigation and financing of some foreign powers" by "the remnants of the moribund sectarianism and some former, dismissed army men" .
Government changes
The Acting Chairman of the ruling Revolutionary Command Council (RCC), Maj.-Gen.
Zubir Mohammed Saleh, was reported on Aug. 6 to have switched some government appointments, in the absence of the RCC Chairman and Head of State Lt.-Gen.
Omar Hassan Ahmad al-Bashir.
The latter was reported by the Sudanese News Agency (SUNA) to have gone to London the previous week for medical treatment.
The Minister for Presidential Affairs, Lt.-Col. Tayib Ibrahim Mohammed Khayr, was appointed Governor of Darfur province.
The Presidential Affairs portfolio was taken over by Awad Ahmad al-Jaz, formerly Commerce, Co-operation and Supply Minister; al-Jaz was replaced by Abd el-Munim Khujali, whose former Energy and Mining portfolio was taken by Uthman Ab al-Wahhab.
At the same time, the governors of the troubled southern provinces of Bahr al-Ghazal and Equatoria were reported to have been replaced.
AFRICA
ETHIOPIA
Appointment of Cabinet
Tamirat Layne, elected as Prime Minister by the 87-member Council of Representatives in July [see p. 38322], appointed 16 ministers to his "broad-based transitional government" on Aug 10.
A 17th minister was expected to be named later, Voice of Ethiopia radio reported.
Members of the Ethiopian People's Revolutionary Democratic Front (EPRDF), whose forces took Addis Ababa in May [see pp. 38174-75], were appointed to the Defence and Foreign Affairs ministries (Seyoum Mesfin, who had been named as Acting Minister of Foreign Affairs in June 1991, being confirmed in the latter post).
Zegeye Asfaw, appointed Agriculture and Environmental Protection and Development Minister, had previously been named as Minister of Labour and Social Affairs in a radio broadcast on May 9.
Argaw Tiruneh, appointed Minister of Housing and Town Development and of Construction, had been referred to by the radio on May 9 as Construction Minister.
Leule Selase Tamamum was appointed to the Cabinet, but it was unclear what portfolio he was to hold.
Ethiopian Cabinet Tamirat Layne Prime Minister
*Shiferaw Wolde Mikael Justice
*Dima Nogo Information
**Seyoum Mesfin Foreign Affairs
*Adanech Kidane Mariam Health
*Ibsa Gutema Education
*Bekele Tadese Industry
*Kuma Demeska Internal Affairs
*Izz al-Din Ali Mines and Energy
*Ahmad Husayn Commerce
*Hassan Abdullah State Farm, Coffee and Tea (Development)
*Siye Abraha National Defence
**Zegeye Asfaw Agriculture and Environmental Protection and Development
**Argaw Tiruneh Housing and Town Development, and Construction
*Leule Selase Tamamum
*Negaso Gidada Labour and Social Affairs
*Belachew Mekbib Transport and Communications
*New appointment.
**Altered responsibilities.
AFRICA
SADCC
Arusha summit
The Southern African Development Co-ordination Conference (SADCC) held its 11th annual summit meeting in Arusha, Tanzania, on Aug. 25.
It was attended by the Presidents of Botswana, Mozambique, Namibia, Tanzania, Zambia and Zimbabwe, and senior representatives from Angola, Lesotho, Malawi, Namibia and Swaziland.
The summit discussed co-operation and relations between members states and with a post-apartheid South Africa.
Acknowledging that South Africa's economy was far bigger and more sophisticated that their own, members agreed that South Africa's eventual membership would increase the organization's resources and the developmental pace of the region.
However, they called for the maintenance of international sanctions until a new political dispensation was in place.
Faced with a possible food shortage amounting to 2,800 million tonnes in 1991, the summit called on the international community for assistance, particularly in Angola and Mozambique.
SADCC ministers of agriculture were directed to improve the region's long-term food supply.
The meeting also received reports on the peace processes in Angola and Mozambique, as well as on Walvis Bay, the port enclave within Namibian territory which was still in South African hands.
The 1992 SADCC summit was to be held in Namibia.
AFRICA
THE GAMBIA
Col. Abubakar Dada, seconded from the Nigerian army, arrived in Banjul on Aug. 4 to take up his position as commander of the national army of The Gambia, succeeding Col. Momodou Ndow Njie, who resigned following demands by his forces for his removal; there was no formal defence treaty between The Gambia and Nigeria.
AFRICA
KENYA
An extradition treaty was signed with Rwanda on Aug. 16 aimed at improving effectiveness in combating crime; the treaty excluded individuals wanted for political offences, and both governments reserved the right to refuse to surrender their own citizens, in which cases they agreed to prosecute the individuals themselves.
AFRICA
LESOTHO
Maj.-Gen.
Justin Lekhanya, the former Chair of the Military Council, was placed under house arrest on Aug. 1 following allegations that he was plotting to return to power; he was prohibited from associating with anyone other than his family and his doctor.
AFRICA
SOMALIA
Omar Arteh Ghaleb, who had been Prime Minister of Somalia's interim government since February, resigned on Aug. 20; Radio Mogadishu reported, however, that President Mahdi, who had been sworn in himself on Aug. 18 [see p. 38323], had asked him to continue with his responsibilities until a successor was appointed.
AFRICA
TANZANIA
On Aug. 19 the first of 23,108 prisoners were released from prison as a result of a presidential pardon issued on Peasants' Day, July 7.
AMERICAS
UNITED STATES
National debate over civil rights bill
Breakdown of attempts to agree upon compromise legislation
Hopes for a compromise between the Democratic majority in Congress and President George Bush over the highly contentious issue of civil rights legislation appeared to collapse on Aug. 1.
Republican Senator John C. Danforth, the self-appointed mediator between the two sides, expressed his dismay over Bush's opposition to a provision of Danforth's proposed compromise bill which would prohibit employers from adopting employment standards which were not directly related to job performance.
In a letter to Danforth, Bush claimed that such a provision would "seriously if not fatally" undermine efforts to improve US education standards by ignoring general educational qualifications.
He called instead for a broader provision which would permit employers to adopt hiring practices which "serve legitimate employment goals" .
In a press conference on Aug. 1 Danforth stated that he "had given up on the administration" but that he intended to introduce his compromise bill when Congress reconvened from its summer recess.
He predicted that Democrats would support it because it had the greatest chance of securing enough backing to become law by overriding a presidential veto.
Background to civil rights bill
Danforth's efforts to draw up a compromise bill followed the approval of a Democrat-sponsored civil rights bill by the House of Representatives and a pledge by Bush that he would veto the measure if it was endorsed by the Senate.
The catalyst for the Democrat civil rights bill was the decision in 1989-90 by the newly-created conservative majority on the Supreme Court to reverse five key rulings, each of which had assisted minorities to press employment discrimination law suits.
In an effort to retrieve the lost ground the Democratic majority within Congress approved a civil rights bill in 1990 which was vetoed by Bush [see p. 37769].
The Senate failed by a single vote to override this veto.
Undeterred, supporters of civil rights legislation drew up a similar bill for consideration in 1991.
The aim of the Democrat civil rights legislation was to prevent employers from discriminating against minorities even if such discrimination was unintentional.
Therefore, the bill placed the burden of proof upon employers, who could be required to show that their hiring procedures were rooted in business necessity.
Many Republicans, including Bush, opposed the bill on the grounds that in order to avoid law suits alleging discrimination employers would be forced to ensure that their workforces corresponded to the racial composition of the local community.
This subordination of all other considerations — including qualifications — to race, it was argued, would amount to a system of de facto racial job "quotas" , a term much used but with several different meanings.
At this point the debate over the civil rights bill merged into a wider national debate concerning the legitimacy of reverse discrimination.
Many Democrats argued the need to "compensate" for the centuries of white male dominance, and, in so doing, to address the many "disguised" job barriers which continued to hamper the progress of minorities within the labour market.
The traditional association of the Democrats with minority interests was seen by many Republicans as an issue which would continue to erode the former party's support in the South, a crucial common factor in the Democratic candidate's defeat in five of the six presidential elections since 1968.
As recently as the congressional mid-term elections of November 1990, the arch conservative North Carolina senator Jesse Helms had used the reverse discrimination and quotas issue to great effect in mobilizing the support of white voters against his black Democrat opponent [see p. 37846].
Approval of bill by House
The House of Representatives began debating the legislation on June 4 by defeating alternative bills, one of which was supported by Bush and another proposed by a group of black legislators.
On the following day, after a bitter debate, the bill was passed by 273 votes to 158, a level of support identical with that achieved in 1990 and 15 votes short of the two-thirds support required to override the anticipated presidential veto.
The vote was split along party lines with the exception of 15 Democrats who opposed the measure and 22 Republicans who supported it.
The key provisions of the bill were as follows.
Intentional discrimination.
The bill amended the 1964 Civil Rights Act to enable victims of intentional discrimination based on sex, religion or disability to claim not only their back pay and legal costs, as hitherto, but also compensatory and punitive damages.
Under existing law only victims of racial discrimination were eligible for such damages.
Unintentional discrimination.
The bill made it easier for victims of unintentional discrimination — those affected by employment practices which were superficially neutral but had a disproportionate impact on minorities — to win job discrimination lawsuits against their employers.
In 1989 the Supreme Court had assisted employers to defend themselves by ruling that it was up to the worker to prove that such practices did not constitute a "business necessity" .
The bill reversed this decision and returned the burden of proof concerning a business necessity to the employer.
Quotas.
In an effort to make the bill more acceptable, its Democratic sponsors included a provision which specifically prohibited the establishment of quotas, defined by its supporters as the hiring of a fixed proportion of minority workers regardless of their qualifications.
Opponents of the bill — defining quota in terms of any hiring practice in which race was a determining factor — argued that this prohibition would be useless in preventing the development of informal de facto quotas as a necessary defence against law suits alleging discrimination.
 "Race norming" — the adjustment of employment test scores according to race, sex, religion or national origin — was also prohibited by the bill.
Following the bill's approval by the House of Representatives the Senate delayed its consideration of the issue pending the outcome of the negotiations between Danforth and the Bush administration.
Danforth's failure to construct a compromise, however, fuelled Democrat charges that the President was interested not in achieving a civil rights bill based upon consensus, but in creating a potent campaign issue — the concept of quotas — for the 1992 elections.
Enactment of legislation governing covert action
On Aug. 15 President George Bush approved a bill which aimed to improve the mechanisms regulating the country's intelligence-gathering activities.
It included new restrictions on covert action which were designed to prevent a repetition of the actions which led to the Iran-contra scandal.
The legislation, which amounted to a substitute for that which had been vetoed by Bush in November 1990, required written presidential approval before covert action was undertaken by any component of the US government.
Under the terms of the new law (much of which remained classified) covert action was defined as any "activity or activities of the United States government to influence political, economic or military conditions abroad, where it is intended that the role of the United States government will not be acknowledged or apparent" .
In an apparent attempt to codify existing practice, the bill exempted "traditional counterintelligence activities" , "traditional diplomatic or military activities" , "traditional law enforcement activities" and "activities the primary purpose of which is to acquire intelligence" .
The previous law relating to covert action, the Hughes-Ryan amendment enacted in 1974, had applied only to actions undertaken by the CIA and had never been rigorously applied.
In announcing that he had signed the legislation, Bush issued a statement in which he expressed strong distaste for several (unidentified) provisions, and criticized as "unnecessary" the bill's central attempt to define covert action.
However he welcomed the manner in which the new law had resolved the "most serious" objections which had led him to veto the 1990 version, and had made it clear that US government "requests" to third countries or private citizens for help in covert actions did not need to be reported to Congress.
The new law provided only that Congress be notified when third countries or private citizens were to be used to finance or take part in covert activity "in any significant way" .
Retirement of Schwarzkopf — Revision of friendly fire casualty figures
Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf, the successful commander of the allied forces in the war against Iraq, handed over the US Central Command to his successor, Lt.-Gen.
Joseph P. Hoar, on Aug. 9.
During the transfer ceremony Schwarzkopf, who was due to retire from the Army on Aug. 31, conducted a final review of his troops and spoke emotionally of his pride in having served in the US Army for 35 years.
On Aug. 13 the Defence Department (Pentagon) disclosed that 35 of the 148 US service personnel killed during the Gulf conflict died as a result of "friendly fire" — they were killed accidentally by US or allied forces.
Such accidental attacks also accounted for 72 of the 467 US personnel wounded in the conflict.
The figures represented an extraordinary proportion by historical standards (some 10 times higher than the estimated percentage of US friendly fire casualties sustained in any other 20th century war), and were three times higher than had been previously admitted.
Few details were released of the precise circumstances of the friendly fire incidents which caused the casualties.
Progress of party nominations for 1992 presidential election
Announcement that Albert Gore would not seek nomination
Albert Gore Jr, 43, one of the leading figures in the Democratic Party, announced on Aug. 21 that he would not seek his party's nomination for the 1992 presidential elections.
Gore stated that his decision was based not upon political considerations but personal issues, particularly the welfare of his family.
Referring to an automobile accident which seriously injured his son in 1989, he stated that his family had "been through a lot in the last two years" and that they were "more important than politics and personal ambition" .
Notwithstanding Gore's insistence that his decision was based on personal considerations, the decision was widely seen as of great political significance.
Gore was seen to have the advantages of youth, good looks, and increasing political stature — as a candidate in the 1988 contest he did unexpectedly well and had increased his reputation since.
He was on the centre-right of the party, had been one of the few Democrat leaders to endorse the use of military force against Iraq prior to the launching of the Gulf War, and was a native of the South — where the party had to improve its electoral showing in order to win the presidency.
Thus, Gore was seen by many as an ideal candidate and was widely expected to have won the nomination if he had sought it.
The fact that he chose not to do so was seen as a tacit admission of the widely held view that the foreign policy successes of President George Bush had made his re-election an inevitability.
Rather than risk a humiliating defeat — and with it the end of presidential aspirations — Gore, and other senior Democrats, were thought to be reserving their challenges for the 1996 contest.
Decisions by other senior Democrats
Gore's decision meant that he joined several senior Democrat who had announced that they were unwilling to run for the 1992 nomination.
The list included House Majority Leader Richard Gephardt; Sam Nunn, Chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee; and Lloyd Bentsen, the party's 1988 vice-presidential candidate.
Another senior Democrat, Senator John "Jay" Rockefeller, ruled himself out of the contest on Aug. 7.
Rockefeller, a member of the oil and banking family, explained his decision on the grounds that there was too little time to organise a successful campaign and to be ready to form an administration which would meet his "own high standards" .
The only declared candidate for the nomination remained former Senator Paul Tsongas, from Massachusetts [see pp. 38138].
The two Democrats thought most likely to join the contest soon were conservative Governor Bill Clinton of Arkansas; and Iowa Senator Tom Harkin, an unabashed liberal populist.
It was also known that Douglas Wilder, the first black Governor of Virginia, was considering mounting a challenge which, with the probable absence of the Rev. Jesse Jackson from the contest, was likely to attract support from minority groups.
As was the case throughout the 1988 nomination process, the role of New York Governor Mario Cuomo remained uncertain.
On Aug. 9 Cuomo stated that Bush could be defeated by an aggressive campaign which focused on domestic issues, but suggested that he was not interested in seeking the nomination, although he did not entirely rule out the possibility.
Opinion polls indicated that whilst Cuomo was the best known and most popular of potential Democratic candidates, he commanded only 23 per cent support compared with 66 per cent for Bush.
Preparations by Bush for re-election campaign
President Bush had stated on Aug. 2 that only a health problem — which he stressed did not currently exist — would deter him from seeking re-election for a second term.
He was speaking on the eve of a meeting at the Camp David presidential retreat with 30 political advisers to formulate a strategy for the 1992 election campaign.
Largest ever bank merger
BankAmerica Corp. of San Francisco and Security Pacific Corp. of Los Angeles announced plans for a US$4,500 million merger, the largest in US history.
The new bank, still to be known as BankAmerica, would have assets of $190,000 million, making it the second largest in the country.
It would also have branches in 10 Western states.
The move was the third major banking merger in five weeks.
On July 15 the Chemical Banking Corp. and its New York rival Manufacturers Hanover Trust, already respectively the sixth and ninth largest in the country, had announced an agreement to merge as Chemical Banking Corp.
NCNB Corp. of Charlotte, North Carolina, also announced plans to merge with C&S/Sovran Corp. of Atlanta and Richmond to create NationsBank.
The trend was driven by the need to cut costs through regional consolidation and by the prospect of changes in the banking regulations which would make it easier and more profitable for banks to operate across state lines.
Name Headquarters Assets ($bn) Citicorp New York $217 BankAmerica* San Francisco $190 Chemical Banking Corp* New York $135 NationsBank* Charlotte, N.C. $118 Chase Manhattan Corp.
New York $98 J. P. Morgan & Co.
New York $93
Six largest banks in USA
*Assumption that proposed mergers were completed.
Securities scandal involving Salomon Brothers
Salomon Brothers Inc., the most powerful broker in the US Treasury securities market, announced on Aug. 16 that its three most senior executives were to resign as a result of a bond trading scandal.
John Gutfreund, chairman and chief executive, Thomas Strauss, president, and John Meriwether, vice chairman, formally submitted their resignations to an emergency meeting of the board on the following day.
Warren Buffett, an Omaha billionaire with a formidable Wall Street reputation, took over as temporary chairman and chief executive.
The resignations followed a series of admissions by Salomon of a string of illegal trade and rigged bids for Treasury securities.
On Aug. 9 the firm admitted that on several occasions in 1990 it had manipulated auctions of US securities by bidding for more than 35 per cent of the securities on offer, thereby exceeding the government's ceiling on acquisitions by primary dealers.
It had attempted to conceal its breach of the limit by making the bids in the names of clients and by not reporting its acquisitions to the Federal Reserve.
The firm announced that it had suspended two of the managing directors responsible for the violations.
On Aug. 15, however, it was admitted that Gutfreund, Strauss and Meriwether all knew of the irregularities at least four months before they were reported to the authorities in early August.
Following news of the scandal the Treasury banned Salomon from bidding at future auctions of government securities, but stopped short of stripping the firm of its prestigious rank as primary dealer with the Federal Reserve.
The ban was partially rescinded on Aug. 18, after the resignations, the dismissal of the two suspended directors, and a direct appeal from Buffett to Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady.
Under the new terms Salomon was permitted to participate in auctions but only on its own account and not on behalf of clients.
Anti-abortion protests in Wichita — Court ruling on Louisiana abortion law
Mass blockade of Wichita abortion clinics
Throughout August the anti-abortion group Operation Rescue conducted a mass blockade of three abortion clinics in Wichita, Kansas.
During the course of the campaign more than 2,600 people were arrested, and a dispute over jurisdiction was sparked off which embroiled the federal government.
The overall effect of the campaign was to intensify the politics of the abortion issue at national level prior to the campaign for the 1992 legislative and presidential elections.
Operation Rescue was an organization notorious for its confrontational tactics and its implacable opposition to abortion under all circumstances.
The group began its "Summer of Mercy" campaign on July 15 by mobilizing mass blockades of Wichita's abortion clinics, one of which was one of the few in the USA to perform late-term abortions.
In response to a motion by the clinics, US District Judge Patrick F. Kelly, a liberal Democrat, declared the blockades illegal and, on July 23, issued an injunction prohibiting Operation Rescue from blocking access to the clinics and physically harassing staff and patients, or encouraging others to do so.
The protests continued, however, and Kelly called in some 100 federal marshals in order to reinforce local police, whom he considered inadequate to enforce his injunction.
Kelly, a federal judge, was intervening in what was essentially a local state issue — the offence of trespass — by using an 1871 federal statute which outlawed conspiracies to interfere with an individual's civil rights.
The law, originally intended to combat Ku Klux Klan members intent upon harassing freed slaves, had also been used in the 1960s in support of civil rights campaigners.
Challenge to Kelly's jurisdiction — Intervention by Justice Department
Lawyers acting for Operation Rescue challenged Kelly's jurisdiction by appealing to the 10th US Circuit Court of Appeals in Denver.
They were supported in this on Aug. 6 by the US Attorney for Kansas, Lee Thompson.
Kelly declared himself "disgusted" by Thompson's intervention, which appeared to confer legitimacy upon the position of Operation Rescue, as did the decision by Dick Thornburgh, the US Attorney General, to support the challenge to Kelly's authority.
Thornburgh, who was about to leave the government in order to contest a Senate vacancy, insisted that he was concerned only with the jurisdiction of federal judges, and not with the rights or wrongs of the abortion issue.
The fact that precisely this point of law was already due to be considered by the Supreme Court in relation to a separate abortion clinic case (also arising from an Operation Rescue blockade), however, led many commentators to see the intervention by the Justice Department as primarily political in motivation.
Speaking from his holiday home in Kennebunkport, President George Bush sought to distance himself from the controversy, stating that it was not "a matter for the president to be concerned about, especially on the first day of his vacation" .
As he spoke the figure for those arrested in the Wichita protests rose to 1,906.
As the protests intensified during August, Kelly faced increasing personal harassment and death threats.
Nevertheless, he maintained his position and took an increasingly hard line with the protesters, imprisoning for contempt those who were repeatedly arrested for violating the injunction.
On Aug. 20 Kelly imprisoned three of Operation Rescue's leaders and fined each of them and the organization itself $10,000, for failing to post a $100,000 bond (ordered at the time of the injunction) to cover potential damage caused by the protests.
The three were also ordered to pay an additional $500 per day until they swore to abandon the protests.
The three were released on Aug. 29 after undertaking to abide by Kelly's injunction.
On the following day Kelly ordered the three, together with two other leading members of Operation Rescue, to leave Wichita.
On Aug. 23 the appeal court upheld Kelly's original injunction against the blockades.
The effect of this decision, together with the targeting of the leaders of Operation Rescue, meant that by the end of the month the protests had subsided.
Nevertheless, Mike McMonagle, one of the leaders banned from Wichita, claimed that the campaign had "rejuvenated the pro-life movement nationally" and had placed Operation Rescue in the mainstream of that movement.
Striking down of Louisiana abortion law
US District Judge Adrian Duplantier on Aug. 7 declared unconstitutional a Louisiana abortion law which would allow abortions only in cases of grave maternal risk or, under some circumstances, in pregnancies resulting from rape or incest.
The law, one of the most draconian in the country, provided for prison sentences of up to 10 years and fines of up to $100,000 for doctors who performed illegal abortions.
In striking down the law Duplantier made it clear that he hoped that his decision would provide the opportunity for the Supreme Court to overturn the landmark 1973 judgement Roe v. Wade which provided the foundation of legal abortion in the US.
On Aug. 30, however, the 5th US CIrcuit Court of Appeals denied motions by the Attorney General of Louisiana to expedite a hearing on the issue in order to obtain an early consideration by the Supreme Court.
The appeals court ruling meant that several laws restricting abortion passed by other states were more likely to provide a vehicle for a reconsideration of Roe v. Wade than the Louisiana statute.
Growing racial tension in New York
Fighting between black and Jewish communities
A huge police presence, backed by helicopters and mounted officers, imposed an uneasy peace in the Crown Heights area of Brooklyn on Aug. 22 after three nights of violent clashes between members of the black community and Hasidic Jews.
The influx of police marked a departure from the policy of restraint hitherto adopted by Police Commissioner Lee Brown; 93 people were arrested or charged on Aug. 22, compared with 49 arrests in the previous three days.
Some 105 civilians and police officers were reported to have been injured in the disturbances.
The trouble began on Aug. 19 when a car from the motorcade of Rebbe Menachem Mendel Schneerson — the leader of the Orthodox Jewish Lubavitcher sect — ran through a red traffic-light, went out of control and mounted the pavement.
It killed Gavin Cato, a seven-year-old black child playing outside his home, and seriously injured his seven-year-old cousin.
Members of the local black community were enraged by reports that the driver of the vehicle, Yoseph Lisef, 22, who had sustained only minor injuries, was quickly taken away from the scene of the accident by a private Jewish ambulance service, whilst the more seriously injured children were left to wait for attention from a city ambulance crew.
A few hours after the accident, Yankel Rosenbaum, 29, an Australian Hasidic Jew, was stabbed to death by a black Brooklyn gang in what appeared to be a retaliatory attack.
A 16-year-old black youth, Lemrick Nelson, was later charged with second-degree murder in relation to the stabbing.
There followed three nights of violence in the 80 per cent black area of Crown Heights, during which cars and barricades were burnt, shops looted, and running battles fought between youths and police.
The centre of the fighting was the headquarters of the Hasidic Lubavitcher sect where blacks and Jews exchanges volleys of bricks and bottles, whilst police in riot gear tried to keep the two groups separated.
The violence marked one of the most serious crises in the 20-month administration of David Dinkins, New York City's first black mayor, who was accused by members of the Hasidic community of being reluctant to take decisive action to quell the disturbances.
Dinkins attempted to visit the area on Aug. 21, but was repelled by hostile crowds.
Controversy over speech by black professor
The incident was indicative of the high degree of racial tension in New York City, particularly between the black and Jewish communities.
Only weeks before the death of Cato, tensions had been inflamed by the publicity given to a speech by Leonard Jeffries Jr of the City University of New York, one of the country's leading black academics.
Speaking to the Empire State Black Arts and Cultural Festival in Albany, New York, on July 20, Jeffries made statements which were widely considered to be racist and anti-semitic.
Jeffries accused the Jews, in collaboration with "their financial partners, the Mafia" , of plotting the "financial destruction" of black people.
He stated that the conspiracy was "planned and plotted and programmed out of Hollywood" — itself controlled by "Russian Jewry" — by "people called Greenberg and Weisberg" .
He also accused whites of "racial pathology" , warning his audience that "you can't trust the white boy" .
The speech caused outrage in many quarters and, following the fighting in Crown Heights, there were widespread calls for the dismissal of Jeffries.
However, the professor was defended by many advocates of Afrocentric education who characterized criticism of his stance as indicative of anti-black racism.
In the past Jeffries, who had served as a consultant to the New York state Department of Education during its efforts to revise the high school syllabus, had attracted controversy by asserting that blacks — "sun people" — were genetically superior to whites — "ice people" — because of the greater quantity of the pigment melanin to be found in blacks.
Conviction of head of alleged Mafia "family" 
The alleged head of the Patriarca "family" — reputed to be a component of the Mafia — was found guilty on Aug. 8 on racketeering charges which carried a maximum sentence ranging from 40 to 80 years.
The conviction of Nicholas L. Bianco, along with that of seven of his subordinates, was believed to have inflicted a severe blow to a family which was believed to have engaged in organized crime in Rhode Island, Massachusetts and Connecticut since the 1940s.
All eight defendants were each convicted on at least one count of racketeering, defined as committing crimes to support a continuing criminal enterprise.
Three were also found guilty of the 1989 murder of William "the Wild Guy" Grasso, the leader of the Connecticut branch of the Patriarca family.
The eight were amongst 21 members and associates of the family who were indicted in March 1990.
Six had reached plea bargain arrangements with the authorities and the remaining seven were due to be tried later in the year.
Massacre at Buddhist temple
Nine people — six monks, two novices and an elderly nun — were found dead in a Buddhist temple in Arizona on Aug. 10, each having been shot in the back of the head.
The execution-style killings occurred at the Wat Promkunaram temple, the second-largest site of Buddhist worship in the country, built in 1988 in a remote location 20 miles west of Phoenix.
Although many valuable religious icons had not been removed, there was sufficient evidence of the building having been ransacked for the police to refuse to rule out robbery as a possible motive.
There was also considerable speculation that the killings had been racially motivated as they followed reports of recent attacks against racial minorities in the area.
The temple provided the main centre for the region's 3,000-strong Thai community and for the 1,000 Cambodians and 1,000 Laotians in the area.
The Asian community in the Phoenix area had also been subjected recently to violent robberies by Asian gangs.
In brief On Aug. 7 Judge Mary E. Lupo postponed the opening of the William Kennedy Smith rape trial until Jan. 13, 1992.
The trial had been scheduled to begin in August but was delayed after defence submissions that the massive publicity surrounding the case had prejudiced Smith's chances of receiving a fair hearing.
Attorney General Dick Thornburgh formally left the Cabinet on Aug. 9, after a federal appeals court ruled on Aug. 6 that a special election should be held on Nov. 5 to fill the Senate seat of the late John Heinz — although Thornburgh had made known his intention to contest the vacant seat, his resignation from the government had been deferred pending a judicial examination of the constitutionality of Pennsylvania's special election statute.
A federal judge on Aug. 23 re-sentenced former television evangelist Jim Bakker, reducing his prison sentence for fraud passed in 1989 from 27 years to 18.
AMERICAS
CANADA
PCP convention — Indian issues — Supreme Court decision on rape
The ruling federal Progressive Conservative Party (PCP) held its biennial five-day convention in Toronto in mid-August.
Despite the record unpopularity of Prime Minister Brian Mulroney, the 2,500 delegates gave him a warm reception as he promised a third consecutive PCP victory in the federal elections due in 1993.
The overwhelming theme of the convention was the importance of party unity, and even the crucial debate over the future of Quebec failed to prove divisive, as had been widely anticipated.
On Aug. 9 over 90 per cent of the delegates voted in favour of recognizing the right of Quebec to self-determination.
Although speakers stressed the importance of welcoming Quebec into a reformed federal structure, the party failed to address detailed constitutional change, and one of the party's Quebec MPs denounced the resolution as a cosmetic exercise, announcing her resignation from the PCP.
Overall, however, the impression of unity was preserved as delegates voted on 320 non-binding resolutions, many of which reaffirmed Mulroney's handling of the economy and the issue of national unity.
Recognition of Indian right to self-government — Supreme Court decision on Indian land claim
Ontario became the first province to recognise Indian rights to self-government when, on Aug. 6, New Democratic Party Premier Bob Rae signed a statement of political relationship with Indian chiefs.
The statement promised that all future negotiations between Ontario and the province's 180,000 Indian population would be conducted on a government-to-government basis.
The agreement was designed to mark the beginning of a process of consultation on how the principles of self-government could be implemented, including the possibility of greater Indian autonomy in areas such as policing, judicial affairs, education, health care and the use of natural resources.
The province's Indian population received a setback in its quest for greater autonomy, however, when the Canadian Supreme Court on Aug. 15 upheld a treaty signed in 1850 whereby the Indian inhabitants of the Lake Temagami region had surrendered their rights to white settlers.
In a unanimous decision, the Court upheld lower court rulings in 1984 and 1989 that the Teme-Augama Anishnabai Indians had possessed aboriginal rights to the 3,800 square mile tract of mineral- and timber-rich land some 275 miles north of Toronto, but that these had been surrendered to the British Crown under the terms of the Robinson-Huron treaty.
In response to the Indian claim that the Indian chief who signed the treaty was not a representative of the Temagami, the court judged that the Indians had adhered to the treaty's terms by accepting annual federal payments and a reservation.
The ruling came at a time when Indians throughout Canada were asserting their rights to vast areas of land.
Legal experts predicted that the case could serve as a precedent in land claim cases where tribes alleged that treaties had been signed on their behalf by representatives of other language groups.
Supreme Courtdecision on rape
The Supreme Court on Aug. 22 ruled that the sexual history of an alleged rape victim might be offered as evidence in court at the discretion of a judge.
In striking down part of a 1983 law designed to shield rape victims from intrusive questioning about their past, the court ruled by seven to two that the law had rendered inadmissible evidence which could be essential to the constitutional right to the accused to receive a fair trial.
AMERICAS
MEXICO
Congressional and gubernatorial elections
The ruling Institutional Revolutionary Party (PRI) gained an overwhelming victory in mid-term congressional and gubernatorial elections on Aug. 18, restoring PRI support to levels prior to 1988, when the party had been accused of fraudulently securing a narrow victory in the presidential elections [see pp. 36367-69].
The PRI success, marred by accusations of widespread fraud and intimidation, was nevertheless interpreted as a broad endorsement of the government's current economic policies.
On the eve of polling the government had announced 4.8 per cent economic growth in the six months to June, the best performance in a decade.
Turnout was estimated as some 60 per cent in the elections, the first to be held under a new electoral law [see pp. 37274; 37707]and using a new voter roll which increased the total electorate to some 36,000,000 eligible voters.
The PRI claimed 61.4 per cent of the overall vote.
Results of gubernatorial elections — Withdrawal of disputed PRI victor in Guanajuato
There were six (out of 31) state governorships at stake, with close contests in Guanajuato [see below]and San Luis Potosí (secured by the PRI), and easier PRI victories in Campeche, Querétaro, Sonoro and Colima.
The PRI had also won the July 7 gubernatorial election in Nuevo León, where the opposition parties also complained of blatant electoral malpractice.
The PRI won all 40 seats on the city council of the capital, Mexico City.
President Carlos Salinas de Gortari, responding to increasing domestic and international pressure, was reportedly instrumental in compelling Ramon Aguirre Velázquez, a PRI hardliner who had officially won 55 per cent of the vote in Guanajuato, to make the unprecedented announcement on Aug. 29 that he would not take up office as state governor.
The opposition, alleging fraud, had refused to concede defeat in Guanajuato.
In the face of protest from the local PRI hierarchy and from other opposition parties, Salinas designated Carlos Medina Plascencia of the conservative opposition National Action Party (PAN) to take office on Sept. 26 as interim governor pending fresh elections.
Congressional election results
In the congressional elections the PRI won a total of 326 seats in the 500-member Chamber of Deputies, the lower house of the Congress, taking 290 of the 300 seats directly contested (the 200 remaining seats being assigned under a complex system of proportional representation designed to favour smaller parties.
With half the 64 Senate seats up for election, the PRI won 31, giving it 61 in all.
The other Senate seat up for election went for the first time to the PAN, which won 17.7 per cent of the vote and secured 92 seats in the Chamber of Deputies.
The vote of the left-of-centre Party of the Democratic Revolution (PRD) collapsed dramatically, falling from 31 per cent in elections in 1988 [see pp. 36367-8]to only 8.3 per cent.
The PRD now held only 40 seats in the Chamber of Deputies; of its former four Senate seats, it lost both those which were up for election.
The centrist Authentic Party of the Mexican Revolution (PARM) and the left-wing Party of the Cardenist Front for National Reconstruction (PFCRN) and Popular Socialist Party (PPS) between them commanded 42 seats in the Chamber of Deputies.
In the combined Congress, the PRI thus had the necessary two-thirds majority to amend the Constitution.
Opposition leaders stated their concern that the PRI would push through an amendment to allow Salinas to run for a second term as president in 1994.
(The ban on presidential re-election, which had been a central issue in the Mexican revolution of 1910, was seen by the opposition as a bulwark against the consolidation of authoritarian PRI rule in an effectively single-party state.)
AMERICAS
GUATEMALA
Military involvement in massacre
Attorney General Acisclo Valladares Molina announced on Aug. 17 that seven members of the military, including a naval captain — the commander of the important Military Base of the Pacific — could face the death penalty over the killing of 11 people on Aug. 9 in the southern department of Escuintla.
Valladares claimed that this was "an historic moment" which would mark the true re-establishment of rights based on equality under the law.
In an unprecedented action, the army, on its own initiative, had arrested the seven on Aug. 15 to stand trial before a military court.
The bodies of 10 men and a woman had been found by a roadside with their hands ties behind their backs; they bore signs of torture and had been shot in the head, a hallmark of right-wing paramilitary groups whose members included military personnel.
Discovery of mass grave
A team of Argentinian and Guatemalan pathologists dug up on Aug. 8 the bodies of 11 campesinos (peasants) who had been allegedly murdered by the military during the previous 10 years and buried in a mass grave near the village of Chontala, west of Guatemala City.
The bodies were exhumed on the orders of a judge, who had disregarded the opposition of representatives of known right-wing paramilitary groups while hearing an appeal by human rights groups.
Village residents stated that at least 100 people had been murdered and buried in mass graves in the area.
AMERICAS
CUBA
Easing of travel restrictions
The government announced on Aug. 5 that it was lowering the age limit to 20 for those seeking an exit visa to travel abroad.
The previous age limits had stood at 35 for men and 30 for women.
Despite official denials, the decision was seen as a riposte to the United States government which on July 29 had suspended travel visa applications from Cubans until a backlog of 28,000 applications had been processed.
The US State Department also claimed that a third of the 36,000 Cubans admitted as tourists since Oct. 1 had overstayed their visas and might not be planning to return.
The Cuban decision raised immediate fears in the USA that the 1980 officially sanctioned exodus of 125,000 Cubans [see pp. 30474-75]might be repeated, and there were reports that the US navy was reviewing contingency plans to mount a naval blockade.
Analysts were agreed that the US government, at a time of economic crisis in Cuba, was determined to maintain the pressure on President Fidel Castro Ruz by refusing to allow travel to the USA to be become a safety valve for discontent on the island.
An estimated 1,400 Cubans had already crossed illegally to Florida during 1991 so far, triple the number for 1990.
The financial cost of hosting the 11th PanAmerican games, held in the capital Havana on Aug. 3-18, had reportedly increased social tensions.
The US trade embargo had prevented the US ABC television network paying US$8,700,000 in television rights; the government had chosen to waive this payment, however, in return for technical assistance in its domestic coverage of the games.
Volunteer labour was needed to reduce the cost of the construction of 66 games facilities to $18,000,000, at a time when Cuba's international reserves were estimated to be less than $100,000,000 and the national debt stood at $7,000 million.
AMERICAS
HAITI
Political unrest
The current session of the parliament was suspended on Aug. 13.
Parliamentary criticisms of Prime Minister René Préval and threats to force his resignation had precipitated angry demonstrations by Préval's supporters, over 2,000 of whom had gathered outside the parliament building in the capital, Port-au-Prince.
The crowd reportedly threatened the lives of legislators, accusing them of "sabotaging" the government.
Police used tear gas to disperse the demonstrators, who also burned down a trade union office and fired guns outside the office of the National Front for Change and Democracy (FNCD — a loose coalition group led by President Jean-Bertrand Aristide) because both had allegedly called for Préval's resignation.
The demonstration came as Préval was being rebuked in parliament for the government's poor economic performance and for his administrative reform programme, which, his critics claimed, lacked clear objectives or a coherent policy for the dismissal and appointment of state employees.
Out of 45,000 civil servants, 8,000 had been recently dismissed.
The legislators, along with some government supporters, also complained that Préval's Cabinet was drawn mainly from Lavalas, a group closely associated with Aristide, who did not consult with parliament on the formulation of policies.
Aristide called on the legislators to be "responsible" , and warned that Préval's removal would seriously harm efforts to attract more foreign aid.
Resignation of parliamentary leader — Withdrawal of MOP from FNCD parliamentary bloc
Following the resignation of Ernst Pedro Casseus as president of the Chamber of Deputies (lower house of parliament) after disagreements over his decision to suspend the session, Duly Brutus was unanimously elected as the chamber's new president on Aug. 20.
Disagreements within the FNCD, especially in relation to the Aug. 13 disturbances, led the Movement of the Organization of the Country (MOP) to ask its deputies to withdraw from the FNCD parliamentary bloc.
AMERICAS
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC
Sentencing of former President
Salvador Jorge Blanco, 62, President in 1982-1986, was sentenced to 20 years' imprisonment and fined US$5,760,000 on Aug. 8 for the misappropriation of public funds through the over-invoicing of arms purchases bought from companies headed by his associates.
Also sentenced to 20 years and fined $4,700,000 on the same charge was a former Secretary of State for the Armed Forces, Lt. Gen. Manuel Antonio Cuervo Gómez.
Lawyers for Blanco said they would appeal against both the prison sentence and the fine.
Dismissal of head of electricity board — End of strikes
Ramón "Macoris" Pérez Martínez was dismissed by the government as head of the state electricity board, as reported on Aug. 16.
Pressure for his removal had come from trade unions; Pérez had made 3,000 workers redundant and had failed to improve on the three to four hours of electricity the country received daily.
Some 7,000 doctors ended a 12-week strike in the week ending Aug. 9 and leaders of 32,000 teachers stated that their current 14-week strike would cease by the end of the month following settlements with the government.
The doctors had their salaries increased by 50 per cent, while the teachers were granted a 20 per cent rise.
A general strike had already taken place in July in response to a government announcement that agreement had been reached with the IMF on conditions for a standby loan which sources in the capital, Santo Domingo, described as "one of the most drastic programmes ever contemplated by the IMF" .
Details were expected to be released in September.
AMERICAS
GRENADA
Reprieve of "Grenada 14" 
Prime Minister Nicholas Brathwaite on Aug. 14 commuted to life imprisonment the death sentences passed in December 1986 on the "Grenada 14" for the October 1983 murder of Prime Minister Maurice Bishop and 10 other people.
The 14 included former Deputy Prime Minister Bernard Coard, his wife Phyllis Coard, and former army commander Hudson Austin.
[See pp. 32614-15 for killing of Bishop, takeover of the government by Coard, Austin and their supporters, and US invasion of Grenada six days later; see p. 34941 for 1986 trial, including full list of defendants.]
Brathwaite acknowledged in a radio address that last-minute pressure from international church organizations and human rights organizations had influenced his decision.
The government, he said, was now "committed to reconciliation" and this was "the closing of one chapter and the opening of another" .
A plea for clemency, submitted by the defence lawyers, had been denied by the six-member Grenada Advisory Committee on the Prerogative of Mercy on July 26.
The Court of Appeal had ruled on July 30, however, that the execution of five of the convicted be delayed while a defence motion for a new hearing was heard.
This argued that the original trial of the 14 had been conducted by an unconstitutional court with selected judges and a biased jury and that the evidence presented had been weak and contradictory.
A further defence submission on Aug. 8, requesting a rehearing of the case and a another stay of execution, was turned down by the Court of Appeal, which rejected arguments that the 14 defendants had the right to take their cases to the United Kingdom Privy Council.
Grenada had withdrawn in 1981 from membership of the Eastern Caribbean Supreme Court (ECSC), which automatically granted such a right of appeal, and the government was thought to have deliberately delayed re-entry to ECSC membership, originally scheduled for Aug. 1, to obstruct this process.
However, appeals to ECSC were thought likely once the country had returned to its jurisdiction.
AMERICAS
COLOMBIA
Resignation of Justice Minister
The resignation was accepted on Aug. 5 of Justice Minister Jaime Giraldo Angel, who was replaced by Fernando Carillo Flores.
Giraldo, the architect of a controversial policy offering leniency to leading drug traffickers who surrendered [see pp. 37772; 37851; 37957; 38001], denied that he had been forced to resign.
He stated that he had informed President César Gaviria Trujillo "a long time ago" of his intention to take up a post in the Higher Council for the Administration of Justice.
This did not dispel rumours, however, that the resignation was part of an effort to clean up the image of the justice system.
The previous week 30 of the country's 60 examining magistrates had been dismissed, and the Attorney General of Antioquia province, the principal negotiator of the surrender of the Medellín drug cartel chief Pablo Escobar Gaviria in June [see p. 38283], had resigned after it was revealed that he was related to Gaviria.
(Press reports also alleged that over 300 people, including some with outstanding charges against them, had visited Escobar in his private prison in Envigado, outside Medellín.)
Carillo, 28, was Colombia's second youngest Cabinet minister ever.
As a member of a legislative committee he had helped to draw up justice reforms approved by the Constituent Assembly which completed its work in July [see p. 38332].
New Defence Minister
Rafael Pardo Ruedas, a former government security adviser who played a key role in negotiating the demobilization and political integration of the left-wing April-19 Movement (M-19) guerrillas in March 1990 [see pp. 37244; 37311], was appointed Defence Minister on Aug. 24, replacing Gen. Oscar Botero Restrepo.
Pardo, the first civilian to hold the post for 35 years, stated that his appointment implied "a political handling and responsibility in the Defence Ministry" and was the result of "an important political change that is made evident in the new constitution" .
Amnesty offer to guerrillas
The government on Aug. 13 made "individual" offers of amnesty and pardon to active guerrillas who had committed political crimes prior to the promulgation of the new constitution on July 5, if they surrendered and showed a willingness to return to civilian life.
Peace talks were set to resume in Caracas, Venezuela, on Aug. 26 between the government and the Simon Bolivar National Guerrilla Co-ordinating Group (CNGSB), which had announced on Aug. 1 that it would suspend attacks on the country's economic infrastructure, especially electricity pylons and oil pipelines, because of "the harm being done to the poverty stricken communities of the country" .
Guerrillas from the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) and the National Liberation Army (ELN) on Aug. 11 and Aug. 16 carried out raids in the departments of Huilar and Bolívar which resulted in the deaths of 17 members of the security forces, 20 guerrillas and two doctors.
AMERICAS
VENEZUELA
Privatization of state airline
Stakes in Venezuela's largest airline, the debt-ridden Viasa concern, were acquired on Aug. 9 by the Spanish state airline Iberia (45 per cent) and the Venezuelan Banco Provincial (15 per cent ) for a total of US$145,000,000.
The government also allocated 20 per cent of the shares to Viasa's 3,564 employees; the remaining 20 per cent were to be sold gradually through the stock exchange in the capital, Caracas [see pp. 37608; 37773; 38335 for Iberia's involvement in sale of Argentine state airline].
Transport strike
An indefinite transport strike by an estimated 300,000 transport workers was launched on Aug. 12 in protest at increases in petrol prices decreed by the government.
Public transport in Caracas was not affected after 35,000 subway conductors and public bus drivers voted not to join the strike.
Sharp increases in petrol prices in February 1989 had triggered riots following large increases in bus fares and the price of basic foodstuffs [see pp. 36457-58].
AMERICAS
PERU
Demand for trial of former President
The lower house of the National Congress, the Chamber of Deputies, voted by 88 to 76 on Aug. 16 to withdraw the constitutional immunity from prosecution of former President Alan García Pérez, who held office in 1985-1990 and was a senator for life, so that he could face trial for the "alleged charges of embezzlement, extortion, fraud and the breach of public faith" .
The decision was subject to ratification by the Senate before any legal proceedings could begin.
García had rejected the verdict of a year-long investigation by a special congressional commission which accused him of authorizing the placing of a third of Central Bank reserves (US$270,000,000) into the Panamanian branch of the now discredited Bank of Credit and Commerce International (BCCI — see p. 38355) in return for US$3,000,000 in bribes.
In addition, the commission claimed that García removed US$50,000,000 from the BCCI accounts and dispersed it in several of his own private bank accounts.
García, in turn, accused the five commission members of being "delinquents with political ambitions" intent on preventing his making a political comeback.
The commission also accused three former ministers who had served in García's American Popular Revolutionary Alliance Party (APRA) government and eight senior civil servants of holding illegal and substantial bank accounts in the United States.
The weekly magazine Oiga also accused Remigo Morales Bermudez, a former Agriculture Minister, of having deposited US$20,000,000 in a Miami Bank account in February 1990, five months before APRA lost power with the election of President Alberto Keinya Fujimori.
Arrest warrants were issued for two former Central Bank officials implicated in the scandal after they failed to appear to testify before the Senate.
One, Héctor Neyra, had fled the country claiming he had been threatened by the right-wing death squad Commando Rodrigo Franco; the other, Daniel Figueroa, was working in Chile.
Discovery of children's mass graves
A commission financed by UNICEF arrived in the eastern Amazonian jungle region of Madre de Dios on Aug. 21 to investigate reports that children were either being killed or were dying while working as slaves in gold mines, in saw mills and on ranches, and that their bodies were subsequently being dumped in mass graves.
Police had discovered a mass grave containing the mutilated bodies of 50 children, aged 12-14, near the Madre de Dios river in the second week of August.
Víctor Salorio Neyra, the head of the Labour Ministry's office in the province of Manu, stated that while on a visit on July 17-29 to gold-panning operations at Waypethue and Choque, he had discovered 71 clandestine graves containing dozens of children.
AMERICAS
BOLIVIA
Cabinet changes
The entire Cabinet formally resigned on Aug. 8 to allow President Jaime Paz Zamora to make eight new appointments.
Paz Zamora described the changes as part of a general "relocation" process affecting the role of each citizen in the fulfilment of tasks "beneficial to the nation" .
The reshuffle, which reduced the number of ministers from 18 to 17, had been agreed by the leaders of the left-of-centre Movement of the Revolutionary Left (MIR) and the right-wing National Democratic Action (ADN) parties, the key members of the two-year-old Patriotic Accord (AP) coalition government.
Some sections of the local press, however, stated that a "sudden" reshuffle of this size was Zamora's attempt to deal with a real crisis and the corruption which allegedly existed within ministerial bodies.
The ADN and MIR each now had eight Cabinet posts, three of the MIR posts being occupied by members of the "New Majority" faction (MIR-NM).
The other seat was taken by a member of the Revolutionary Front of the Left (FRI).
The Christian Democrat Party (PDC) of Vice-President Luis Ossio Sanjinés was unsuccessful in demanding its "quota of power" in the reshuffle.
An unexpected retention in the Cabinet was Foreign Minister Carlos Iturralde Ballivián who had been widely criticized for his conduct of diplomacy within the Organization of American States (OAS), for the handling of border disputes with Chile and for his failure to secure Bolivian membership of the Mercosur common market with Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay and Uruguay [see p. 38096].
Carlos Iturralde Ballivián (ADN) Foreign Affairs, Worship Carlos Armando Saavedra (MIR) Interior; Justice: Migration Gustavo Fernández Saavedra (MIR-NM) Minister of Presidency
Bolivian Cabinet
*Rear-Adml.
Alberto Sainz Klinsky (ADN) Defence Mario Paz Zamora (MIR) Social Services, Health
*Fernando Kieffer (ADN) Housing and Urban Affairs
*Jorge Landivar (ADN) Without portfolio
*Edim Céspedes (ADN) Education
*Leopoldo López (MIR) Industry; Commerce, Tourism
*Samuel Doria Medina (MIR) Planning David Blanco Zabala (ADN) Finance Oscar Zamora Medinacelli (FRI) Labour Willy Vargas Vacaflor (ADN) Transport and Communications
*Gonzalo Valda (MIR) Mining and Metallurgy
*Herbert Muller (MIR-NM) Energy and Hydrocarbons Mauro Bertero Gutierrez (ADN) Agriculture, Campesino Affairs, Livestock Mario Rueda Pena (MIR-NM) Information
*New appointment 
New Army Chief
Gen. Víctor Gúzman Bruno was named as the new C.-in-C. of the Armed Forces on Aug. 14.
He replaced Gen. Jorge Moreira Rojas [see p. 37851], who had stated that "professional ethics" did not allow him to take orders from the new Defence Minister, Klinsky, who as a rear-admiral was subordinate to him.
AMERICAS
CHILE
Rejection by Aylwin of extension of mandate
President Patricio Aylwin Azócar, whose period of office was due to end in March 1994, "categorically" rejected a cross-party initiative announced on Aug. 7 to extend his mandate by a further two years.
Sergio Onofre Jarpa, of the National Renewal party (RN), a leading right-wing senator and an Interior Minister under the Pinochet military regime, had joined several government ministers and members of parties in the ruling Coalition for Democracy (CPD) in arguing that the 1994 elections would upset the smooth return to democracy.
Aylwin, however, stated that he did not wish to accept such an offer, nor did he feel that it was justified, given that he had agreed to be elected for a four-year period and that to alter the term of office (by amending the Constitution) "would be to change the rules of play of our democratic co-existence" .
Volcano eruption
The 1,740-metre high Hudson volcano, situated in the central Andean cordillera in the province of Aysen, 1,600 km south of the capital Santiago, erupted on Aug. 8.
Ash and dust was deposited over an area of 170,000 hectares devastating the local environment and crops.
No-one was reported killed, but nearby villages on either side of the Andes, in both Chile and Argentina, were evacuated.
Huge clouds of silicon oxide, as high as 15,000 metres in the atmosphere, spread 1,000 km east to the Falklands Islands, west into the Pacific and 700 km south to the Antarctic.
Previous eruptions of the volcano had occurred in 1971 and 1973 causing the death of five people and affecting 35,000 hectares of land.
AMERICAS
BRAZIL
Proposed constitutional reforms
Widespread criticism from across the political spectrum greeted President Fernando Collor de Mello's announcement on Aug. 22 of proposals for 44 changes to the 1988 constitution, intended to allow for measures to increase federal revenues while simultaneously cutting public spending.
The most controversial of the proposals aimed to (i) reduce spending on education;(ii) grant the government new powers to reduce the salaries of state employees and judges and to abolish security of tenure for civil servants with five years' service;(iii) end banking secrecy to allow the government to tackle tax evasion;(iv) suspend a provision forbidding the government from collecting tax revenue in the year in which the tax was introduced; and (v) reform pension schemes.
Following a meeting with Collor on Aug. 26, the 27 state governors acknowledged the need for amendments but refused to endorse the changes as proposed until they had been subjected to a wider debate.
Congressional opposition — Rising military dissatisfaction
Collor's proposed constitutional reforms were widely interpreted as entailing a diminution of the powers of the Congress, which in late July had inflicted on him his worst legislative defeat, rejecting by 329 votes to 111 his "provisional measure" (medida provisória) granting pay rises to the armed forces and "unconstitutional" selective and differentiated increases for public servants.
In response to this vote, Collor had reportedly endorsed the release of a public statement by the military ministers in the Cabinet, signed by 80 generals, criticizing the Congress decision and emphasising that members of the Congress and judiciary had recently awarded themselves a pay increase of 37 per cent.
Many analysts recalled that the 1964 military coup had been triggered off by, among other things, similar accusations of congressional abuse and corruption.
The statement was also allegedly intended to calm the high level of irritation and dissatisfaction existing in the ranks.
A majority of the Congress, however, interpreted it as further evidence of the military's lack of respect for democratic legality.
Considerable press attention had already been devoted to a recent report prepared by the Escola Superior de Guerra, a senior military academy, which contained references to the systematic killing of street children by "death squads" [see p. 38285]which were known often to be composed of off-duty or on-duty police and armed force members.
It characterized such children as a potential revolutionary army of the future.
Another anonymous military report had recommended the destruction of such "future bandits" .
Resignations
The resignation of Carlos Chiarelli, the Education Minister, was announced on Aug. 21.
He was replaced by Joshua Goldenburg.
Chiarelli was to remain in the government to oversee integration with neighbouring countries in the South American Common Market (Mercosur — see pp. 38096; 38331].
Collor's wife Rosane Malta, was reportedly forced to resign her post as head of the LBA government welfare agency in late August following allegations in the leading Jornal do Brasíl newspaper that she had authorized credit payments of thousands of US dollars to organizations run by members of her large extended family, the Maltas, an influential clan in the state of Alagoas.
The LBA funds were intended to supply relief to drought victims.
AMERICAS
ARGENTINA
Elections in three provinces
Provincial elections on Aug. 8 in three provinces gave unexpected encouragement to the ruling Peronist party (Partido Justicialista — PJ), which retained control of San Luis and captured San Juan province for the first time for 18 years; the opposition Radical Party (UCR) retained control of Río Negro.
The successful Peronist candidate in San Juan was Jorge Escobar, a hardline supporter of the economic austerity policies of President Carlos Saúl Menem, and a member of the menemist faction of the PJ.
He defeated the incumbent governor, a member of the conservative Bloquista Civic Union Party (UCB), despite the rival candidacy of a member of the PJ's orthodox renewal faction.
The successful Peronist in San Luis, incumbent governor Alberto Rodríguez Saa, announced his intention to present himself as a candidate for the 1995 presidential elections.
Menem publicly stated on Aug. 12 that he wanted the Constitution to be amended in order to allow him to run for re-election.
Resignation of Interior Minister
The resignation of Interior Minister Julio Mera Figueroa was accepted on Aug. 9.
He was replaced by José Luis Manzano, 35, a former renewalist who had switched his allegiance to the menemist faction.
It was rumoured that Menem had first offered the post to César Jaroslavsky, the opposition UCR leader in the Congress, but that Jaroslavsky had declined, pending a "global" agreement between the two major parties.
In the week prior to the resignation of Mera Figueroa, a court had ruled that his award of a US$293,000,000 contract to a French company to make identity documents was illegal.
The government's decision to withdraw from the contract was felt to be a major reason behind his departure.
Border agreement with Chile
Menem signed a border agreement on Aug. 2 with Chilean President Aylwin in Buenos Aires.
Based on the 1984 Peace and Friendship Treaty, which created the framework for settling the border disputes which had brought both countries to the brink of war in 1978 [see p. 32781], the agreement covered 22 points of dispute.
It awarded 1,079 sq km of territory in southern Antarctic regions to Chile, and 1,083 sq km to Argentina.
Sovereignty over the 520 sq km Patagonian plateau Laguna del Desierto region, some 3,000 km south of Buenos Aires, was to be subject to a further international arbitration process.
Military sentences
The Armed Forces Supreme Court sentenced 26 non-commissioned army officers to terms of imprisonment of between six and nine months for participating in the abortive military coup of Dec. 3, 1990 [see p. 37913].
They joined 32 others already sentenced [see p. 37959]and whose appeals were currently being heard by the Federal Court of Appeal.
Army sources claimed that a further 12 officers and 289 others were in prison awaiting trial and that four officers and three NCOs were still at large.
AMERICAS
JAMAICA
Howard Cooke, 75, was sworn in on Aug. 14 as Governor-General in succession to Sir Florizel Glasspole.
ASIA — PACIFIC
CAMBODIA
Further progress in search for peace
A comprehensive Cambodian peace agreement appeared closer after a meeting of the all-party Supreme National Council (SNC) in Pattaya, Thailand, on Aug. 26-29 [see p. 38293 for June SNC meeting in Pattaya], with the four warring factions nearing agreement on the draft UN peace plan.
The SNC agreed to meet again in New York on Sept. 21 when an SNC delegation would attend the 46th UN General Assembly.
SNC meeting in Pattaya — Agreement partly to disarm Cambodian military forces — Disagreement over elections
The meeting was attended by six delegates from the State of Cambodia (SOC) led by Hun Sen, the SOC Premier, and five representatives of the three factions of the rebel National Government of Cambodia (NGC), namely the Khmers Rouges, the Khmer People's National Liberation Front (KPNLF) and the Sihanoukists.
Also in attendance were officials from France and Indonesia (co-chairs of the Paris International Conference on Cambodia, PICC) and a representative of UN Secretary-General Javier Pérez de Cuéllar.
The meeting was chaired by Prince Norodom Sihanouk, who had been elected as SNC chair (president) at its "informal" meeting in China in mid-July [see p. 38343].
The most significant agreement reached at Pattaya was a compromise military arrangement under which the four factions would reduce their armed forces and arms, ammunition and equipment by 70 per cent.
The remaining 30 per cent of forces would be regrouped and relocated to specifically designated cantonment areas under the supervision of the UN Transitional Authority in Cambodia (UNTAC).
The Khmers Rouges put aside their demand that SOC police be included in the arrangement.
At the meeting the SOC finally ceased its efforts to amend the UN draft plan so that it made explicit mention of "genocide" , in reference to the appalling human rights record of the Khmer Rouge government of the late 1970s.
The SOC agreed to accept the wording of the draft UN agreement ( "Cambodia's tragic recent history requires special measures to assure protection of human rights" ).
The factions agreed to boost significantly the powers of Prince Sihanouk within the SNC.
They agreed that if there was no consensus on any given matter among the members of the SNC, then the Prince would be entitled to make a final decision.
The SNC called on Pérez de Cuéllar to send 200 UN personnel to Cambodia in September as "observers" to assist in monitoring the ceasefire and the cessation of foreign military assistance.
It also agreed to request international assistance for the rehabilitation and reconstruction of Cambodia.
On the question of the country's future political system, the SNC agreed that a system of multiparty liberal democracy would be adopted.
The principal remaining area of disagreement was the question of elections.
All parties agreed that UNTAC-supervised elections would take place, but there was strong disagreement between the SOC and the Khmers Rouges over the actual electoral system to be adopted.
Clauses in the UN draft plan provided for a system of proportional representation, a method supported by the Khmers Rouges.
The SOC, however, opposed the system and demanded single constituency balloting.
Meeting of permanent UN Security Council members
The five permanent members of the UN Security Council (China, France, the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom and the United States) approved the demobilization plan at a meeting in Pattaya on Aug. 30.
The meeting was also attended by SNC and Indonesian representatives.
However, some commentators suggested that the permanent five, especially the USA, were wary of approving any major revisions to the draft plan.
UN monitoring team — State of ceasefire
A 12-member UN monitoring team led by Maj.-Gen.
Timothy Dibuama of Ghana arrived in Phnom Penh on Aug. 23 to study ways of monitoring the ceasefire.
During his visit, which lasted until early September, Dibuama and his team visited areas controlled by all four factions.
Dibuama had visited Cambodia in May at the head of a UN fact-finding mission [see p. 38195].
A ceasefire had been in force in Cambodia since May 1 [see pp. 38194-95].
However, both sides frequently reported violations.
An SOC Defence Ministry communiqué issued on Aug. 23 claimed that opposition factions had launched 19 attacks against government positions in three provinces on Aug. 11-16.
A Khmer Rouge report on the same day alleged that some 200 Vietnamese troops had established themselves in Kampot province in mid-August.
Report of Pol Pot's presence at June SNC meeting — Statement by Sihanouk on Pol Pot's intentions
The Asian Wall Street Journal of Aug. 5 reported that Pol Pot, the Khmer Rouge leader and former Prime Minister of Democratic Kampuchea (1976-79), had secretly attended the breakthrough SNC meeting in Pattaya in late June [see p. 38293].
Officially Pol Pot had "retired" from the Khmer Rouge leadership in the mid-1980s, although analysts contended that he remained firmly in charge of the organization.
In a statement on Aug. 28 Prince Sihanouk told reporters that Pol Pot and two other Khmer Rouge leaders, Ieng Sary and Chit Choeun (Ta Mok), would not participate in the future UNTAC-controlled elections.
However, Sihanouk said that the three would "encourage" their group and had no intention of withdrawing from Cambodia's political landscape.
Internal developments
Party appointments — National Assembly session
Some personnel changes were approved at the 13th plenum of the fifth central committee of the ruling Kampuchean People's Revolutionary Party held in Phnom Penh on Aug. 8-11.
Men Sam An resigned from the secretariat "for health reasons" and was replaced by Lt.-Gen Ke Kimyan, First Defence Minister.
Men Sam An retained her position as seventh ranking politburo member.
Ho Non was expelled from the central committee for "inappropriateness" and "pilfering for personal benefit" .
The 21st session of the first National Assembly took place in Phnom Penh on Aug. 14-19.
Alleged anti-government demonstrations in Battambang
Khmer Rouge radio (Voice of the National Army of Democratic Kampuchea — Vonadk) reported on July 31 that anti-government demonstrations had erupted in Battambang city on July 20-21.
The report claimed that demonstrators had protested against "worsening living conditions due to the steady devaluation of the riel currency and the exorbitant rice price" .
The allegations were repeated by the Thai newspaper The Nation on Aug. 2.
However, on Aug. 3 SPK, the official SOC news agency, issued a categorical rejection of the allegations which it described as a "treacherous attempt to divert public opinion from reality in Cambodia" .
Flooding
Serious flooding occurred in mid-August in Kompong Speu, Takeo, Kampot and Kandal provinces, causing a number of deaths and serious damage to the rice crop.
On Aug. 22 Foreign Minister Hor Nam Hong issued an appeal for international emergency aid.
ASIA — PACIFIC
VIETNAM
National Assembly session — New Premier and Council of Ministers — Debate on constitutional amendments
The ninth session of the eighth National Assembly was held in Hanoi from July 27 to Aug. 12 [see p. 37916 for eighth Assembly session held in December 1990].
Election of Vo Van Kiet as Premier — Election of new ministers
Do Muoi, Premier (Chair of the Council of Ministers) since 1988, resigned on Aug. 9, and Vo Van Kiet, hitherto First Vice-Premier, was elected as his successor.
Do Muoi had been elected as general secretary of the Communist Party of Vietnam (CPV) at its seventh congress in June [see pp. 38271-72].
A government spokesman said that 426 of 444 Assembly deputies voted for Vo Van Kiet, 69, a southerner with strong reformist credentials.
The third-ranking member of the CPV politburo, he had served as acting Premier for a few months in 1988 following the death of Pham Hung, but had then been dislodged from the post by the more conservative Do Muoi.
The chair of the National Assembly, Le Quang Dao, had also put forward the name of Pham Vam Khai, State Planning Commission Chair and a CPV politburo member since the June 1991 congress, as a candidate for the premiership, but Pham Vam Khai declined the nomination.
The National Assembly elected a number of new ministers on Aug. 10.
Pham Vam Khai, 58, was elected as a Vice-Premier, replacing the veteran communist leader and war hero Gen. Vo Nguyen Giap.
Do Quoc Sam, 62, took over as Chair of State Commission for Planning, having previously served as its deputy chair.
Gen. Doan Khue, 68, the Vietnam People's Army Chief of General Staff and the fifth-ranking politburo member, was promoted from Deputy Minister to Minister of National Defence.
The outgoing Defence Minister, Gen. Le Duc Anh, had been promoted at the seventh CPV congress to second ranking member of the politburo, from where he controlled foreign policy.
Lt.-Gen.
Bui Thien Ngo, 62, replaced Mai Chi Tho as Interior Minister.
Bui Thien Ngo, hitherto Permanent Vice-Minister of the Interior, had also replaced Tho in the politburo at the seventh congress.
Nguyen Manh Cam, 62, became Foreign Minister in place of Nguyen Co Thach, another of the late Le Duc Tho's associates who had been removed from the politburo at the seventh congress.
Nguyen Manh Cam, a former Deputy Foreign Minister and ambassador to the Soviet Union, was not a member of the politburo or secretariat.
According to the Far Eastern Economic Review of Aug. 22, Cam was reluctant to accept the post and only did so after Do Muoi personally pressed him.
The CPV's first candidate, Deputy Foreign Minister Tran Quang Co, rejected the post outright.
Le Van Triet, 61, hitherto Deputy Minister of Trade and a former deputy party chief of Ho Chi Minh City, was elected Minister of Commerce in place of Hoang Minh Thang.
Review of Constitution
The Assembly debated a number of major amendments to the country's 1980 Constitution.
The amendments, drawn up by a Commission for Constitutional Amendment (CCA) headed by Vo Chi Cong, President of the Council of State, would be placed before the Assembly at its next session in December.
The draft produced by the CCA proposed the abolition of the Council of Ministers and the establishment of a government operating in accordance with the "premiership system" , under which the Prime Minister and individual ministers would have greatly enhanced powers.
The draft also proposed the abolition of the Council of State (the collective presidency) and the National Assembly standing committee.
One proposal was for a new head of state to be elected by the National Assembly, but under an alternative plan the National Assembly would elect a Presidium, the chair of which would also assume the post of head of state.
Relations with China and USA
Sino-Vietnamese talks
Nguyen Duy Nien, the Vietnamese Deputy Foreign Minister, held talks with senior Chinese leaders in Beijing on Aug. 8-10.
Nien held talks with his Chinese counterpart, Xu Dunxin, but also met with Foreign Minister Qian Qichen, Premier Li Peng and Chinese Communist Party general secretary Jiang Zemin.
The talks were the most significant in a 15-month series of deputy foreign ministerial level discussions in that they occurred at a time when the two countries appeared to be on the verge of restoring full diplomatic relations.
A joint statement issued after the meeting said that Nien and Xu had discussed "quickly restoring their relations in economy, trade, communications, postal services and other fields" .
Nien's visit had been preceded by a "secret" visit to China in late July by Gen. Le Duc Anh (the second-ranking politburo member).
According to the Far Eastern Economic Review of Aug. 22, Le Duc Anh's visit had been prompted by an unexpected invitation from China for Vietnam to send an envoy to report on the results of the CPV's seventh congress.
Chinese leaders reportedly told Anh that they fully supported the outcome of the congress, which had stressed the maintenance of the party's hold on political power whilst approving further loosening of its control over the economy.
In addition, China had been pleased by leadership changes approved by the congress, in particular the removal of Nguyen Co Thach and Mai Chi Tho from the politburo.
US-Vietnamese talks — MIA issue
Le Mai, a Vietnamese Deputy Foreign Minister, held talks with Richard Solomon, United States Assistant Secretary of State for East Asia and the South Pacific, in Bangkok, Thailand, on July 31.
It was the sixth formal meeting between Vietnam and the USA since August 1990.
The two sides discussed the normalization of relations and other issues, including Cambodia.
US government officials stated on Aug. 5 that they had uncovered evidence which indicated that a series of photographs purportedly showing that US servicemen listed as missing in action (MIA) were recently alive in Indo-China were fakes.
One of the photographs had been published in US newspapers in July and had increased speculation over the fate of MIAs in Indo-China [see p.38344].
US MIA investigators visited Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia during July and August.
In mid-August Senator John Kerry led a US delegation to Vietnam and Cambodia.
Kerry, president of the Committee for the Search of American Servicemen Missing in Action, had long pressed for a lifting of the US trade embargoes against Vietnam and Cambodia.
ASIA — PACIFIC
LAOS
Approval of Constitution — Appointment of Kaysone as President — Other appointments — Relations with Thailand
The Supreme People's Assembly (SPA), which convened on Aug. 13-15, unanimously endorsed the first Lao People's Democratic Republic (LPDR) Constitution [see p. 37533 for publication of draft constitution in June 1990].
The constitution consisted of 80 articles within 10 chapters.
It provided for a strong president, to be elected by a National Assembly for a five-year term.
Previously, the post of president had been largely ceremonial, with power concentrated in the higher echelons of the ruling Lao People's Revolutionary Party (LPRP) and the Council of Ministers.
Appointment of Kaysone as President — Other appointments
The SPA unanimously elected Kaysone Phomvihane, as the country's new President, replacing Phoumi Vongvichit, who had served as President in an acting capacity since 1986 when he effectively took over from the ailing Souphanouvong [see p. 35005].
The SPA officially accepted Souphanouvong's resignation as President for "reasons of age and health" .
Kaysone, also president of the LPRP, was replaced as Premier by Gen. Khamtay Siphandon, hitherto Vice-Premier and Minister of National Defence.
Gen. Khamtay was the third-ranking politburo member, behind Kaysone and octogenarian SPA chair, Nouhak Phoumsavan.
Kaysone had held the post of Premier since the foundation of the LPDR in 1975.
However, with the post of president strengthened under the new constitution, Kaysone was expected to remain the dominant force in Lao politics.
Khamphoui Keoboualapha was appointed as Vice Prime Minister and Minister of Economic Planning and Finance, a post which had been vacant since the death of Sali Vongkhamsao in January 1991 [see p. 37963].
Khamphoui had been elected to the LPRP politburo at the party's fifth congress held in April 1991 [see p. 38150].
Lt.-Gen.
Choummali Saignakong, who had been promoted from alternate to full politburo membership at the fifth congress, replaced Khamtay as Minister of National Defence.
Security and co-operation agreement with Thailand
Laos and Thailand signed a border security and co-operation agreement on Aug. 16.
The agreement was signed by Gen. Phoune Sipaseuth, the Lao Foreign Minister, and Arsa Sarasin, his Thai counterpart, at the close of a two-day meeting of the Lao-Thai Joint Commission in Thailand.
According to Lao reports, the agreement provided the two sides with co-operation mechanisms at both national and provisional levels.
According to a Xinhua (New China News Agency) report of Aug. 17 the two sides agreed to complete the repatriation of 60,000 Lao refugees from Thailand within three years.
ASIA — PACIFIC
THAILAND
Annual military reshuffle
Class 5 members of Chulachomklao Military Academy further strengthened their position of dominance within the armed forces in the annual military reshuffle announced on Aug. 4 [see p. 37570 for 1990 reshuffle].
The reshuffle was effective from Oct. 2 and involved a total of 642 officers.
Class 5 leader Gen. Suchinda Kraprayoon retained his post as Army C.-in-C. and was promoted to take on the additional post of Supreme Commander of the Armed Forces, in place of Gen. Sunthorn Kongsompong.
Although Gen. Sunthorn remained as chair of the ruling military junta, the National Peace Keeping Assembly (NPKA), the reshuffle confirmed Gen. Suchinda's position as the most powerful figure in the armed forces.
Gen. Suchinda's classmate, Gen. Wimon Wongwanich, was promoted from Assistant Army C.-in-C. to Deputy Supreme Commander, replacing Gen. Phichitr Kullavanijaya.
Gen. Wimon was succeeded by First Army Region Commander Lt.-Gen.
Salya Sripen, also a Class 5 member.
With the reshuffle Class 5 members commanded all but one of the country's four army regions.
While Class 5 members held the key military posts, the middle-ranking positions at divisional level were dominated by members of Classes 8 and 11.
The Bangkok Post of Aug. 16 reported that the "key link" between Class 5 and Class 11 officers was Maj.-Gen.
Chainarong Noonpakdi of Class 11, a cousin of Gen. Issarapong Noonpakdi of Class 5, who was the Interior Minister, NPKA secretary-general and Deputy Army C.-in-C.
Analysts claimed that close links between Class 5 and Class 11 would ensure a future non-contested attainment of the post of Army C.-in-C. by Gen. Issarapong.
In a move which surprised many commentators Adml.
Praphat Kritsanachan (one of four NPKA vice-chairs) was replaced as Navy C.-in-C. by Adml.
Vichet Karunyavanij, hitherto Navy Chief of Staff.
ASIA — PACIFIC
MYANMA
Visit to China by Saw Maung
Gen. Saw Maung, chair of the State Law and Order Restoration Council (SLORC), the country's ruling junta, visited China on Aug. 20-25.
The visit was Saw Maung's first foreign trip since the SLORC takeover in September 1988; reports in February 1991 had claimed that Myanma had agreed to purchase a large arms package from China [see p. 38005].
Gen. Saw Maung was accompanied by a number of high-ranking officials, including Brig. -Gen.
Khin Nyunt, an SLORC secretary and head of the Directorate of Defence Services Intelligence, and Brig. -Gen.
David Abel, Minister of Trade and of Planning and Finance.
Gen. Saw Maung held talks with a number of Chinese leaders, including President Yang Shangkun, Premier Li Peng and Chinese Communist Party general secretary Jiang Zemin.
The Financial Times of Aug. 27 reported that China had pledged "modest development aid" to Myanma during Gen. Saw Maung's visit.
Most western donors had suspended aid to Myanma soon after the SLORC had taken control.
ASIA — PACIFIC
INDIA
Internal politics — Foreign Affairs — Defence
Gandhi assassination investigation — Death of chief suspect
All-India radio reported on Aug. 26 that the government had appointed a second commission of inquiry to investigate the May 21 assassination of former Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi [see p. 38175].
The new commission, headed by M. C. Cain, former Chief Justice of the Delhi High Court, would submit its report within six months.
It would investigate circumstances relating to the assassination other than those covered by the terms of reference for the Verma commission, appointed in the immediate aftermath of Gandhi's death.
The term of the Verma commission, which was to have ended on Aug. 25, was extended until Dec. 31.
One of the prime suspect in the Gandhi assassination, reputedly a leading organizer for the "Tamil Tiger" separatist Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) in Sri Lanka, committed suicide on Aug. 20.
Sivarasan (also known as Raja Arumainayagam or "One-Eyed Jack" ) shot himself through the head as police stormed his hideout in a suburb of the southern city of Bangalore.
Six other people taking refuge in the house also committed suicide, each by swallowing cyanide capsules.
Since Gandhi's assassination the police hunt for Sivarasan had produced a number of arrests, and, according to the Guardian of Aug. 21, no less than 24 suicides.
Tamil Tigers had a reputation for committing suicide — especially using cyanide — rather than letting themselves be captured.
Resumption of Bofors investigation
The Indian Supreme Court on Aug. 27 cleared the way for a resumption of investigations into allegations of high-level corruption in connection with the 1986 deal for the purchase of Bofors artillery from Sweden for the Indian army [see p. 37184].
Investigations had been halted since December 1990 when the Delhi High Court found irregularities in the preliminary charge sheet filed by the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI).
The Supreme Court overruled the high court decision and declared the CBI charge sheet legal.
The reversal cleared the way for the Swiss cantonal court of Geneva to co-operate in the investigation by disclosing details of six secret accounts with Swiss banks which were alleged to contain money paid by Bofors in "commissions" .
Introduction of bill on places of worship
On Aug. 23 the Minister of Home Affairs, S. B. Chavan, presented a bill to the Lok Sabha (lower house of parliament) which sought to prohibit the conversion of any place of worship that existed at the time of India's independence from the United Kingdom in 1947.
If passed the bill would effectively bar Hindus from converting mosques into temples.
However, the bill exempted the mosque in Ayodhya, Uttar Pradesh, an issue which had provoked fierce rioting in recent years and had played a major part in the collapse of the government of V. P. Singh in November 1990 [see p. 37854].
The bill was strongly opposed by the opposition Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), whose members walked out of the Lok Sabha when Chavan rose to introduce it.
BJP boycott of Lok Sabha
The BJP effectively boycotted proceedings in the Lok Sabha from Aug. 7-12 in protest at remarks made by Madhav Rao Scindia, Minister of Civil Aviation and Tourism.
In an interview Scindia had described the BJP as a party of "traitors" , prompting the party's leader, L. K. Advani, to threaten to review its relationship with the government.
There was further disruption in the Lok Sabha on Aug. 14 as Congress (I) members protested against events the previous day when BJP workers were alleged to have attacked Scindia's house in New Delhi.
Resignation of V. P. Singh as parliamentary party leader
V. P. Singh resigned as leader of the Janata Dal parliamentary party on Aug. 24.
He announced that he had resigned in accordance with a recent party proposal providing for an income and wealth ceiling for those holding leadership posts.
However, the Hindu of Aug. 31 described the resignation as part of "the factional war of nerves" taking place within the Janata Dal.
Extension of Soviet-Indian friendship pact
On Aug. 9 India and the Soviet Union agreed to extend their 1971 Treaty of Peace, Friendship and Co-operation [see p. 24773]for a further period of 20 years.
A joint declaration issued in New Delhi and Moscow described the treaty as "one of the most important factors of peace and security in Asia and worldwide" .
Successful launch of missile
India successfully launched its Prithivi-3 ground-to-air missile at Sriharikota in Andhra Pradesh on Aug. 7.
Economy
Budget — Partial restoration of fertilizer subsidy
Manmohan Singh, the Indian Finance Minister, partially restored the subsidy on fertilizers withdrawn when he presented his budget on July 24 [see p. 38337].
In a speech to the Lok Sabha Singh announced that small and marginal farmers would be completely exempted from the rise in fertilizer prices and that the average increase for other farmers would be reduced from the 40 per cent announced in his budget to 30 per cent.
Singh had been under intense political pressure to reduce the increase in fertilizer prices.
The new measures would effectively add some 4,050 million rupees to the fiscal deficit.
Commenting on the move the Financial Times of Aug. 7 said that it would "disappoint" the IMF which was currently considering an Indian request for a US$2,000 million standby credit.
In an interview with the Financial Times of Aug. 28 Singh confirmed that India would seek a further three-year loan from the IMF under its extended fund facility (EFF).
The report stated that the EFF loan could provide India with US$5,000-US$7,000 million over three years, but that it would take a year to negotiate.
Further liberalization measures
The government announced further trade liberalization measures on Aug. 13 [see p. 38337 for measures announced in July].
In an attempt to boost exports, the government increased incentives to companies setting up in export processing zones.
It also announced that it was reducing customs duty on sales from such zones to the domestic market.
In addition some 20 items, including platinum, raw jute, and floppy diskettes for computers, were removed from the list of products which could only be imported by a government agency.
The government announced on Aug. 20 that it was planning to open up for exploration by foreign oil companies areas that had hitherto been reserved for Indian state-owned companies.
For the first time, foreign companies, and private Indian companies, would be encouraged to bid for onshore, as well as offshore, blocks.
State developments
Jammu and Kashmir
On Aug. 26 the Lok Sabha and the Rajya Sabha approved the extension of president's rule in Jammu and Kashmir for a further six months from its expiry on Sept. 2.
K. Doraiswamy, executive director of the Indian Oil Corporation, was freed on Aug. 20 after being held for 55 days by the Ikhwan-ul-Muslameen group.
Doraiswamy was released in exchange for six activists.
In late August serious clashes were reported between Indian and Pakistani forces stationed along the Line of Actual Control (LAC).
Associated Press of Pakistan claimed on Aug. 26 that Pakistani troops had repulsed an Indian attack on a post in Mirzapur, and that the Indians had "lost 20 lives including their two officers" while the Pakistanis "suffered two casualties" .
On Sept. 2 All-India Radio reported that Pakistani forces had been shelling the Punch sector in Jammu and Kashmir since Aug. 26 and that a woman and two children had been killed.
The shelling was described as the "first of its kind since the 1971 war" .
The report also stated that the Indian army had repulsed a Pakistani encroachment in the Kirni area of Punch sector.
Punjab
Gen. O. P. Malhotra resigned as Governor of Punjab on Aug. 5 in protest at the government's last minute postponement of elections in the state in mid-June [see p. 38286; see p. 37915 for Malhotra's appointment in December 1990].
Surendra Nath was sworn in as the new governor on Aug. 7.
Nath had worked as police chief in Jammu and Kashmir and as adviser to the Punjab governor during 1983-85.
Rajasthan
The Hindu of Aug. 17 reported that the Governor of Rajasthan, Debi Prasad Chattopadhyay, had resigned [see p. 37350 for his appointment in January 1990].
ASIA — PACIFIC
SRI LANKA
Tamil Tiger defeat in north
The Sri Lankan army claimed on Aug. 12 to have killed 2,552 Tamil separatist fighters in the preceding month.
Some senior commanders were reportedly keen to press home their advantage with a further offensive in the north, using recently arrived Chinese weaponry.
All-India Radio reported on Aug. 24 that the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) were "ready for talks" if the government would send the (ethnic Tamil) Tourism and Rural Industries Minister S. Thondaman to LTTE-controlled Jaffna.
The LTTE had launched a major assault on July 10 on the Sri Lankan government's army base at Elephant Pass.
The battle, the biggest of the war to date, ended in early August, however, with the relief of the base on Aug. 3.
Some 8-10,000 Sri Lankan troops had been landed 9 km further east on July 14 and gradually fought their way to Elephant Pass, supported by naval shelling of LTTE positions.
Army losses were given officially as 178 dead; the LTTE acknowledged that it had lost some 500 fighters, whereas the government claimed over 2,000 Tigers killed in the battle to Aug. 3, and a further 500 in "mopping-up operations" in the succeeding days.
Elephant Pass, with a garrison of some 800-1,000, commanded the causeway providing the only link by road to the Jaffna peninsula to the north and west.
The Tigers controlled the whole peninsula, save for Elephant Pass, a naval base at Karainagar [see p. 38152 for lifting of siege of Karainagar in April], and the Palaly airfield.
The decision to commit 5,000-7,000 guerrilla fighters in a direct assault on the base was described by the LTTE leader Velupillai Prabhakaran as "the mother of battles" , echoing the rhetoric of Iraqi President Saddam Hussein.
Prior to the Elephant Pass battle, there had been sporadic reports of upsurges in fighting in the Tamil-dominated north during May-June.
A five-day curfew declared by the government in the Jaffna area was officially lifted on April 30.
On the same day 45 soldiers were reported killed in an LTTE ambush, and on May 5 an LTTE suicide commando attacked a government naval vessel, killing the five crew members.
In the Vavuniya area the government forces claimed to have killed 250 LTTE fighters for the loss of 35 soldiers in operations on May 2-13, after which the curfew in the area was declared lifted.
The Buddhist Vesak festival on May 27-29 was marked by the official suspension of offensive operations by the army, but the government claimed that nine soldiers were killed by the LTTE during this three-day period.
Bitter fighting was again reported in Vavuniya district on June 14-15, with the government claiming to have killed over 100 LTTE guerrillas for the loss of 20 soldiers.
In late June the army again declared the suspension of offensive operations, until July 6.
The Elephant Pass battle from July 10 brought the renewal of the official curfew in Jaffna, Mullaittivu and Killinochni districts.
Violent incidents in east
Incidents of serious violence continued in ethnically mixed eastern areas.
The Sri Lankan army blamed the Tamil Tigers, notably for attacks on a private bus on June 27 and on two Moslem fishing villages near Batticaloa on July 7.
The bus attacked on June 27 was travelling to Colombo from Pottuvil, some 100 km south of Batticaloa, when it was forced to stop because of land mines.
Gunmen opened fire, killing 14 occupants of the bus, including a Dane, Rasmussen Testerto, described in press reports as the first Western tourist to fall victim to the fighting in Sri Lanka; a Japanese tourist had been shot dead in 1985.
The worst single incident in the east during this period, however, involved the massacre of over 150 Tamil civilians in Batticaloa district on July 12.
The massacre brought an unprecedented official government apology from President Ranasinghe Premadasa, the announcement of an inquiry by a military court into the actions of the troops involved (who were believed to have launched the attack in revenge after the death of six soldiers in a land mine explosion), and the reported suspension and detention of their commanding officer on June 20.
June 21 bombing of Defence Ministry in Colombo
The Defence Ministry operational headquarters in Colombo was the target of a suicide bombing on June 21 in which 11 soldiers and 10 civilians died, and over a hundred were wounded.
Two men had driven up to the gate in a van containing a 70 kg bomb which they then detonated.
The attack, like the March 2 bombing which killed Ranjan Wijeratne [see p. 38103], was attributed to the LTTE although not formally claimed by them.
Later in July seven men were arrested as suspects in planning the attack, while its alleged organiser, N. Varathan (32), was reported in early August to have committed suicide by swallowing a cyanide capsule to evade arrest.
Refusal of asylum in UK for Tamil militant
Sathasivam Krishna Kumar ( "Kittu" ), 31, regarded as the LTTE number two and a member of its central committee, who had first arrived in the United Kingdom in October 1989 and applied unsuccessfully for political asylum there in August 1990 after the breakdown of peace talks with the Sri Lankan government, was told in early August 1991 that he had to leave the UK by Aug. 7 or face deportation, for having abused his refugee status by collecting funds and trying to procure arms.
It emerged in late August that he had privately left the UK for a secret destination in Europe.
Challenge to Premadasa — Ministerial resignations
Premadasa on Aug. 30 countered an attempt in Parliament to impeach him, by announcing that he was suspending Parliament until Sept. 24.
Critics within the ruling United National Party (UNP), who reportedly regarded Premadasa's style as excessively authoritarian and resented the influence of the Mahasangha (Buddhist clergy), had joined opposition MPs in signing a petition for his impeachment, which they submitted to the Speaker of Parliament on Aug. 27.
They claimed that 133 out of the 225 MPs had signed the petition, which cited 24 cases of alleged corruption and nepotism.
The most prominent UNP dissidents were Education Minister Lalith Athulathmudali, who resigned from the Cabinet on Aug. 30, and former minister Gamini Dissanayake [see p. 37316].
Suspension of UK aid
On July 3 it was reported that the UK government had suspended aid, pending the arrival of a new UK high commissioner in Colombo (the last one having been declared persona non grata in May — see p. 38193) and a review of the human rights situation.
There would also be a "more restrictive policy" over arms sales, although the provision of military training was to continue.
The Sri Lankan presidential adviser Bradman Weerakoon said on July 6 that UK aid "in the pipeline" was continuing without interruption.
ASIA — PACIFIC
PAKISTAN
Opposition protest
The opposition People's Democratic Alliance (PDA) of which the Pakistan People's Party (PPP) was the main component, staged a 12-hour hunger strike on Aug. 4 in protest against granting the government special powers to establish "speedy" courts to try "terrorist" cases [see p. 38338].
Describing the government's latest measures as "civil martial law" , the leader of the PPP and former Prime Minister, Benazir Bhutto, said that up to 5,000 PPP activists had been arrested and tortured.
The arrest in Sind of 2,000-3,000 striking PPP activists, including legislators, was reported by the Far Eastern Economic Review of Aug. 15.
Allegations of a government-sponsored campaign against the PPP [see pp. 38152; 38338]grew after a former adviser to Prime Minister Mian Nawaz Sharif claimed that he had been a member of one of two "election cells" created by Sharif's Islamic Democratic Alliance (IDA) which had "rigged the 1990 elections by adding 20,000 bogus votes" in a number of constituencies to ensure the defeat of the PPP [see pp. 37763-64].
Bhutto had repeatedly questioned the outcome of the 1990 elections [see pp. 37763; 38102].
Renewed violence
The government extended its deadline of Aug. 30 for the surrender of illegal arms [see p. 38338]amidst reports of continuing violence.
On Aug. 5 government forces secured the release of an aid worker from New Zealand who had been abducted on Aug. 1 by a gang operating in the west of Peshawar.
Eleven people were killed between Aug. 6-7 after clashes between armed gangs and security forces in a remote tribal area of the North West Frontier Province.
The Guardian of Aug. 23 reported that at least 43 people had died in Sind in the previous 12 days as a result of armed attacks by gunmen.
The Middle East Economic Digest of Aug. 23, quoting the Reuters news agency, said that more than 1,500 people had been shot dead since 1986 in Karachi alone.
Law against blasphemy
The government announced on Aug. 1 that it had decided to bring the penal code in line with Islamic law by making the death penalty mandatory for anyone convicted of defaming the Prophet Mohammed.
A Sharia Bill enforcing Islamic law had been approved in May by the National Assembly [see pp. 38152; 38193-94].
Meanwhile, two men convicted of raping a six year old girl were flogged publicly on Aug. 25 in the southern city of Hyderabad.
New President of Azad Jammu and Kashmir
Sardar Sikander Hayat Khan was elected unopposed as President of Azad Jammu and Kashmir (AJK) by the AJK State Assembly on Aug 11.
A 12-member Cabinet led by Sardar Abdul Qayyum Khan [see p. 38338]had been sworn in on Aug. 9.
Human Rights Commission report on child labour
According to a report by the non-government Human Rights Commission of Pakistan released on Aug. 18, thousands of children were being forced into bonded labour, especially in the country's brick-making and carpet-weaving industries.
The report, which also underlined the complicity of the police in enforcing a system of child slavery, claimed that "in many cases, whole families have been living in serfdom, generation after generation" .
The Independent of Aug. 14 reported allegations by the Bonded Labour Liberation Front, that the government had sanctioned child labour through the operation of more than 100 centres employing and training children.
On Aug. 18 a government spokesman said that the Cabinet had "approved in principle" a law against bonded labour.
Indo-Pakistan relations
A government spokesman confirmed on Aug. 27 that India and Pakistan had decided jointly to "take effective steps to prevent escalation of tension" along the border.
The announcement came after reports of heavy fighting between Pakistani and Indian troops in the disputed territory of Kashmir [see 38392].
The Cabinet formally approved on Aug. 10 two air space agreements with India signed in April [see pp. 38152-53].
Meanwhile, an Indian Defence Ministry report released on Aug. 1 claimed that Pakistan was secretly continuing the development of a weapons-oriented nuclear programme with Chinese assistance.
Talks with Chinese officials
A high-level delegation including the secretary general of the Foreign Office, Akram Zaki, held talks in Beijing with Chinese officials on Aug. 11-15.
ASIA — PACIFIC
AFGHANISTAN
Second round of trilateral talks
A second round of trilateral talks in Tehran on Aug. 28-29, hosted by Iranian Foreign Minister Ali Akbar Vellayati, brought together officials from Pakistan and Iran and representatives of the nine Iran-based mujaheddin groups, four groups from the seven-party Afghan Interim Government (AIG) led by Seghbatullah Mujjaddedi and three other groups based in Pakistan.
The other three AIG component groups — Hezb-e-Islami led by Gulbuddin Hekmatyar, and those led respectively by Abdul Rasul Sayeef and Yunus Khalis — boycotted the meeting.
The negotiations were aimed at reaching consensus on a five-point UN plan unveiled in May [see p. 38194].
After an earlier round of talks in Islamabad in July [see pp. 38338-39], it was reported that some mujaheddin groups had refused to accept the inclusion of representatives of the Najibullah regime in a transitional government [see also p. 38194].
Others had reportedly expressed opposition to greater representation for Iran-based Shia guerrillas in any future negotiations.
The 30-member Pakistani delegation, led by the secretary-general of the Pakistan Foreign Office, Akram Zaki, reportedly included members of the army's Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI), known for its close links to mujaheddin groups, especially the fundamentalist Jamaat-e-Islami [see p. 38153].
The Independent of Aug. 28 said that members of the ISI and of the United States Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) and the head of Saudi Arabia's military intelligence, Prince Turki al-Saud, had met in Islamabad on Aug. 26 to discuss a common strategy in preparation for the talks.
Announcement by Najibullah of new peace proposals
In a radio and television broadcast marking independence day on Aug. 19, President Najibullah proposed talks between government officials and the mujaheddin "in the presence of the representatives of a third neutral side" — in effect "under the auspices of the UN or countries interested in the Afghan problem" .
The latest proposals followed an offer in May of a ceasefire between government forces and the mujaheddin [see p. 38194].
In a significant departure from earlier proposals, Najibullah also proposed the participation of "a number of authoritative clergy" who would act as a "mediatory force" between the government and the mujaheddin.
Soviet delegation in Pakistan — Release of Soviet prisoner of war
A high-ranking Soviet delegation, led by Deputy Foreign Minister Nikolai Kozyrev, visited Pakistan on Aug. 11-13, holding meetings with mujaheddin leaders and Pakistani officials [see p. 38008 for earlier talks].
Pakistan-based mujaheddin released a Soviet prisoner of war in Islamabad on Aug. 12 in exchange for 25 guerrillas imprisoned by the Afghan government [see also p. 37355].
Referring to recent events in the Soviet Union, Vellayati said on Aug. 28 that he hoped this would help speed up an end to the civil war.
Earlier, on Aug. 19, a spokesman for the AIG had appealed to the leaders of the (ultimately unsuccessful) Soviet coup to "open a new chapter in the relations of the two countries by removing the puppet regime in Kabul" .
Abduction and release of aid worker
A Swiss representative of the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), Alexandre Ghelew, 27, was released by guerrillas in Kabul on Aug. 18 after having been abducted on Aug. 6.
Escalation in fighting between government and mujaheddin forces
Reports on Aug. 2 said that hundreds of people were killed after an explosion at an arms depot in Kabul thought to have been triggered by rockets fired by mujaheddin.
More than 30 people were reported killed and hundreds injured in Kabul on Aug. 13 following rocket attacks by mujaheddin forces.
In Maydan Shar on Aug. 17, 100 Kabul militiamen were reportedly killed in heavy fighting with mujaheddin forces.
At least 100 people were reported killed and 300 wounded on Aug. 19 after three days of intensive aerial bombing by government forces against the city of Taloqan located in the northern guerrilla stronghold controlled by Ahmad Shah Massud, the "Lion of Panjsher" [see p. 37775].
ASIA — PACIFIC
BANGLADESH
Approval of parliamentary system
In a move abolishing 16 years of presidential rule, MPs voted unanimously on Aug. 6 to endorse the restoration of parliamentary democracy.
Deputies also voted to ratify the appointment of acting President Shehabuddin Ahmed and all actions executed during his tenure.
The changes were expected to take effect following a referendum scheduled for Sept. 15.
The measures, among those originally proposed by the government in July [see pp. 38289; 38338], were passed after negotiations, mediated by Shehabuddin Ahmed, between the ruling Bangladesh National Party (BNP) and the opposition Awami League led by Sheikh Hasina Wajed.
According to a Radio Bangladesh report on Aug. 3, the Prime Minister and leader of the BNP, Begum Khaleda Zia, had accused the Awami League of obstructing the passage of the bills.
Sheikh Hasina denied this but acknowledged that her party had objected to "some undemocratic provisions" contained in the government's proposals.
All 27 MPs belonging to the Jatiya Party voted in favour of the new reforms despite the party's expressed preference for presidential rule.
Introduction of deregulation policy
The Finance and Planning Minister, Saifur Rahman, said on Aug. 1 that the government intended to strengthen measures aimed at boosting private enterprise [see p. 38289].
On July 29 the government had unveiled its New Industrial Policy (NIP) providing tax exemptions to exporters and allowing foreign investors 100 per cent ownership of any venture except those, including arms and defence equipment, exclusively under government control.
Earlier, the government had announced the lifting of various foreign exchange controls with effect from July 1.
Census results
Preliminary results of the country's third census gave the population as 107,992,140.
They showed a slower rate of annual population growth, down to 2.17 per cent in 1991 from 2.32 per cent in 1981, and population density per sq km rose from 624 in 1981 to 782 in 1991.
Indo-Bangladeshi relations
Bangladeshi and Indian officials meeting in Sylhet on Aug. 27-29 agreed to adopt stringent measures to prevent cross-border crime.
Meanwhile, a delegation led by Foreign Minister A. S. M. Mustafizur Rahman visited India on Aug. 26-28, signing bilateral agreements on the avoidance of double taxation and the extension of credit facilities to Bangladesh.
ASIA — PACIFIC
CHINA
Relations with Japan
Visit by Kaifu
Toshiki Kaifu, the Japanese Prime Minister, visited China on Aug. 10-13.
The visit was the first to China by a leader of a major industrialized country since the June 1989 Tiananmen Square massacre.
In November 1990 Japan had opened the way for China's international rehabilitation by lifting economic sanctions imposed in the aftermath of the crackdown [see p.37859].
During his visit Kaifu held extensive talks with his Chinese counterpart, Li Peng, the talks were dominated by international issues, especially arms control.
(Li had on Aug. 10 stated China's willingness to sign the 1968 Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty — see p. 38381).
A Chinese government spokesman said that the announcement had been made during Kaifu's visit in part because of Japan's experience as the only country to be subjected to nuclear attack.)
Also during their first round of talks Li signalled that he would seriously consider a proposal by Kaifu jointly to submit a plan to the UN for a register to track the international arms trade.
The proposal for such a register had been endorsed at the G-7 summit of leading industrialized countries in London in July [see p. 38321-22].
Human rights and development aid
In an interview on Aug. 12 Kaifu said that he had discussed "candidly" with Li and other Chinese leaders issues including human rights, arms control and regional conflicts.
He said that he had outlined to the Chinese leadership Japan's four-point overseas development aid policy, which linked aid to the recipient's military spending, its arms imports and exports and its human rights situation.
During the visit it was agreed that Japan would provide 129,000 million yen (about US$930 million) of official development assistance loans to China in 1991.
Internal affairs
Hunger strike by leading dissidents
The Agence France-Presse (AFP) news agency reported on Aug. 14 that two of China's most prominent dissidents, Wang Juntao and Chen Zeming, had begun a hunger strike to protest against prison conditions.
AFP reported that it had received the information from the Paris-based dissident group, the Federation for Democracy in China.
Wang and Chen, formerly editor and publisher respectively of the banned journal Economic Studies Weekly, had both been sentenced in February 1991 to 13 years in prison for their role in the June 1989 Tiananmen Square demonstrations [see pp. 38008; 38097].
Both were reportedly being held in solitary confinement in Beijing prison number two, and Wang was reported to be suffering from hepatitis.
The Chinese authorities denied that Wang and Chen were on hunger strike.
Nevertheless in a statement released on Aug. 23 the United States embassy in Beijing said it was "deeply disturbed" by news of the hunger strike, and urged the government to grant an amnesty to all political prisoners.
Anti-drug campaign
The Chinese government's anti-drug campaign launched in June continued in July and August [see p. 38290].
Drug offenders were among 13 criminals executed in Kunming on Aug. 6 after a mass public trial.
Three drug offenders were executed in Gansu on Aug. 22, including Ma Yonghua, described as the "chief offender in the largest transnational drug trafficking case ever cracked by China's public security organs" .
The next day four traffickers were executed in Canton.
ASIA — PACIFIC
HONG KONG
Breakdown of "boat people" talks
Hopes for a resolution of the problem of Hong Kong's 62,500 Vietnamese "boat people" received a set-back on Aug. 14 when the Vietnamese government broke off talks with United Kingdom and UN representatives in Geneva.
The negotiations, which had reached their seventh round and had given rise to considerable optimism, centred on the creation of internationally managed reception centres in Vietnam.
These were to provide points of first arrival outside formal Vietnamese jurisdiction.
According to the plan, the centres were to be administered by a non-governmental international agency, most probably the International Organization for Migration (IOM).
The plan was seen as a means of meeting United States resistance to (and consequent Vietnamese apprehension of) forcible repatriation.
The US response to the idea had been generally supportive, although formal opposition to compulsion was maintained.
The precise cause of the collapse of the talks was unclear.
While British officials suggested that it was a result of confusion and misunderstanding in Hanoi, it was acknowledged that Vietnam had considerable reservations about the implications of the plan for its territorial sovereignty.
Proposed reforms to stock exchange practices
The result was announced on Aug. 20 of a vote by members of the Hong Kong stock exchange, on reforms urged by the colony's Securities and Futures Commission (SFC).
Falling short of the necessary 75 per cent vote to approve the changes, the vote was 54 per cent in favour and 44 per cent against.
Nevertheless, the SFC moved immediately to impose the reforms.
Failure to conform to Commission requirements within 45 days would lead to their compulsory introduction.
Pressure for reform, which was concerned primarily with the ending of special share issues and dividend payments to exchange members, began after investigations following the 1987 crash [see p. 35742].
The changes, which were designed to bring the Hong Kong exchange into line with international practice, were opposed mainly by the smaller Chinese brokers, and supported by the larger international institutions which had moved increasingly into the Hong Kong exchange in the 1980s.
Relations between the SFC and the stock exchange had historically been poor, and the government feared that the timing of the crisis could mean a collision with local financial interests, at a particularly sensitive political juncture with direct elections due in September.
ASIA — PACIFIC
TAIWAN
Relations with China
Two mainland Chinese journalists arrived in Taiwan on Aug. 12, the first such visit since 1949.
The journalists, Fan Liqing and Guo Weifeng, were granted permission by the authorities to cover the trial of a group of Chinese fisherman arrested off Taiwan in July and accused of theft and piracy.
Two senior Chinese Red Cross officials, Qu Zhe and Zhuang Zhongxi, arrived in Taiwan on Aug. 20 to visit the fishermen.
This was the first official visit by mainland Chinese representatives to Taiwan since 1949.
After discussion with officials of the Straits Exchange Foundation (SEF) of Taiwan, the Red Cross officials reached an agreement on Aug. 21 on repatriating 11 of the 18 fishermen.
Qu and Zhuang returned to China on Aug. 23 and the following day the 11 fishermen and their boat returned to Xiamen, Fujian province.
On Aug. 30 five of the remaining seven fishermen were sentenced to prison terms of up to 14 months after being found guilty of "violation of freedom" .
The Mainland Affairs Council on July 29 approved new rules permitting some local banks and post offices to provide foreign-exchange services and send remittances by individuals in Taiwan to China.
Visit by UN official
Benny Widyono, a UN Secretariat official, visited Taiwan on Aug. 16-21.
He was the first high-ranking UN official to visit Taiwan since it withdrew from the UN in 1971.
The Taiwanese Foreign Ministry had issued invitations to UN officials in early 1991 after the Legislative Yuan passed a resolution urging Taiwan to apply to re-join the UN.
ASIA — PACIFIC
MONGOLIA
Communist party plenum
A two-day plenum of the Mongolian People's Revolutionary Party (MPRP) was held in Ulan Bator, the capital, on July 29-30.
The (communist) MPRP had continued in government in Mongolia after the country's first democratic election in 1990 [see p. 37609-10], and was providing the impetus towards political liberalization and the move to a market economy.
At the plenum party chairman Budragchaagyn Dash-Yondon referred to the process of reform as "irreversible" .
A primary role of the party in the new disposition, he said, would be to work against the threat of social polarization inherent in restructuring and the move towards a market economy.
The plenum also committed the party to the maintenance of good relations with both the Soviet Union and China.
Prosecution of former politburo members
The extent of the transformation of the country since 1990 was further underlined in late August when 12 former members of the MPRP politburo were charged with a range of offences concerned with financial corruption and abuse of power during their terms in office.
The 12, who included former President and secretary-general of the MPRP Jambyn Batmönh, and former Premier Dumaagiyn Sodnom, had resigned when the party gave up its monopoly of power in 1990 [see p. 37317].
Visit of Japanese Prime Minister
Mongolia received its first visit from a Japanese Prime Minister when Toshiki Kaifu arrived in Ulan Bator on Aug. 13 at the end of his visit to China.
During his two days in Mongolia Kaifu held talks with Prime Minister Dashiyn Byambasuren and with President Punsalmaagiyn Ochirbat.
At the end of the visit it was announced that Japan was to provide Mongolia with US$15,000,000 in grants and $100 million in export guarantees.
Creation of agricultural commodities exchange
The move towards a market economy gained further impetus on Aug. 1 with the establishment of Mongolia's first agricultural commodities exchange.
From the beginning of 1992 agricultural produce was to be traded at free market prices throughout the country.
ASIA — PACIFIC
KOREA
South Korean application to UN — Relations between North and South — Concerns over North's nuclear programme
South Korea formally submitted its application for UN membership on Aug. 5, North Korea having made a similar application in July [see p. 38341].
Three days later the UN Security Council approved a resolution, without a vote, which recommended membership for both states.
Both were expected to be admitted by the General Assembly at the beginning of its annual session in New York on Sept. 17.
A statement read by Jose Ayala Lasso of Ecuador, the president of the Security Council, explained the Council's decision on the grounds that the "aspirations of the peoples and governments of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea and the Republic of Korea have harmoniously coincided" .
Ayala Lasso also expressed the hope that the admission of the Koreas would reduce regional tension and provide the two states with "an appropriate forum in which to consider the many things they have in common and to overcome the few remaining obstacles to their unification" .
Relations between North and South Korea — Agreement to postpone Premiers' talks
It was agreed at working-level talks in Panmunjom on Aug. 23 that the fourth round of the ongoing Premiers' talks between North and South Korea should be held in Pyongyang on Oct. 22-25.
The talks, originally due to be held in Pyongyang on Aug. 27-30, were postponed after the North expressed health concerns after an outbreak of cholera in the South.
The postponement reflected increased tension between the two states during August.
On Aug. 21 the South Korean authorities claimed that North Korean troops in the eastern sector of the heavily fortified border had fired upon a South Korean position.
The incident, which did not result in casualties, came only hours after the South Korean government had placed its armed force on heightened alert in response to the attempted coup in the Soviet Union.
The North Korean government accused the South of undertaking aggressive manoeuvres including the preparations of offensive positions.
A further irritant had occurred earlier in the month when talks scheduled for Aug. 17 to create a joint Korean Olympic team were called off by the North.
The cancellation followed the defection of a North Korean judo competitor, Lee Chang Soo, who sought asylum in an undisclosed South Korean embassy in Europe.
Concerns over North Korea's military potential
On Aug. 6-7 officials from the United States and South Korea met in Honolulu to discuss the security of the Korean peninsula.
Although the contents of the meeting remained classified, it was thought that much of the discussion focused upon North Korea's highly secretive nuclear programme.
Unconfirmed reports suggested that the USA and South Korea agreed to consider removing US nuclear weapons from South Korea in return for a North Korean renunciation of its nuclear weapons programme.
It was widely believed that North Korea had the capacity — or was on the verge of achieving it — to produce a nuclear weapon.
Of the country's three nuclear reactors in Yongbyon, one 50-100 megawatt plant was not connected to the national grid, thereby indicating that it was intended for weapons production.
North Korea was also believed to be constructing a nuclear reprocessing plant which would enable it to extract unused plutonium and uranium by-products from spent nuclear fuel rods.
Although North Korea was widely thought to have the technical expertise to produce nuclear weapons, many experts concluded that it would not have sufficient stocks of plutonium for a viable weapon until 1992, and would not be in position to test such a device until 1995.
Others, however, suggested that it was already capable of manufacturing a small and relatively crude nuclear weapon.
There were also reports that North Korea was developing a new missile with sufficient range to reach Japan, and currently had the capacity to produce 4,500 tonnes of chemical weapons per year.
At the Honolulu meeting it was also reported that the South Korean and US officials had agreed to make greater efforts to negotiate a peace treaty with the North.
Such a treaty would replace the current armistice agreement and dissolve the UN Command under whose auspices some 42,000 US troops remained stationed in South Korea.
Proposals for a permanent peace treaty were expected to be discussed at the next Korean Premiers' meeting.
ASIA — PACIFIC
JAPAN
Continued financial scandals — Opening of special session of Diet
The securities scandal — involving the secret reimbursement of favoured clients for losses sustained through the vagaries of the market — continued to expand during August.
Thirteen middle-ranking securities firms followed the example of the four largest houses by making available the lists of those clients who had been compensated and, like them, were subsequently fined by the Japan Securities Dealers Association.
Later in the month a further four firms admitted making compensation payments.
In all, the 21 firms acknowledged paying some 173,000 million yen (US$1.00=137.111 yen as at Aug. 23, 1991) to more than 700 favoured clients between October 1987 and March 1990.
Implication of Finance Minister
The securities affair, together with a series of other financial scandals [see below], had the effect of undermining the position of Finance Minister Ryutaro Hashimoto.
Hashimoto's standing as a likely successor to Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu was damaged by having to take responsibility for his ministry's lax supervision of the securities industry.
His position was further undermined when, on Aug. 3, it was revealed that his private secretary had been an intermediatory in a separate scandal involving fraudulent loans of 260,000 million yen by the Fuji Bank.
Despite widespread calls for Hashimoto's resignation, Kaifu insisted that he would retain his portfolio.
Commentators concluded, however, that Hashimoto's chances of successfully contesting the October leadership election of the ruling Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) had been rendered negligible by the scandal.
Opening of special Diet session
A special session of the Diet, which opened on Aug. 5, became immediately distracted by the growing calls for financial reform.
The session had originally been called to debate the reform of the electoral system and to allow the sending of Japanese troops abroad in peacekeeping or disaster-relief roles — two pieces of legislation closely associated with Kaifu's ambitions to secure election as LDP leader for a second term.
In his opening address to the special session Kaifu promised to submit legislation to prevent any recurrence of the securities scandals, which he described as "most deplorable not only because they…have seriously undermined general investor trust worldwide in the integrity of our stock markets, but also because they are at variance with our ideal of a fair society" .
On Aug. 7 Hashimoto unveiled a series of tough measures which included laws to penalize investors as well as brokers for compensation payments.
He also promised significant changes in the regulations currently applied to the securities industry.
Revelation of Tokyo Shinkin bank fraud
A fresh scandal, believed to be the largest loan fraud ever uncovered in Japan, was revealed on Aug. 13.
The scandal involved the Tokyo Shinkin bank, an Osaka-based credit co-operative.
A branch manager of the bank had allegedly issued false deposit certificates with a face value of up to 342,000 million yen to Nui Onoue, an Osaka businesswoman who allegedly had links with leading members of Japan's organized crime syndicates.
Using the documents as collateral, Onoue borrowed at least 200,000 million yen from 12 financial institutions including the Industrial Bank of Japan (IBJ) and Fuji Bank, to finance her heavy investment in the stock market.
After suffering serious losses, Onoue was reported to be on the verge of bankruptcy with debts of 410,000 million yen.
Both the Bank of Japan and the Ministry of Finance announced on Aug. 13 that they would attempt to limit the damage done by the scandal by taking steps to prevent the collapse of the Osaka credit association.
The announcement was made after magistrates in Osaka arrested Onoue and a former branch manager at Tokyo Shinkin, Tomomi Maekawa.
The scandal represented the latest and most serious of a string of similar cases involving false deposit certificates.
In addition to the Tokyo Shinkin case, three large city banks — Fuji, Kyowa-Saitama and Tokai — had all recently admitted similar incidents involving members of their staff [see p. 38342].
Fears that there could be many such cases as yet undetected prompted reports that the Finance Ministry intended to investigate 300 non-banking institutions, such as leasing companies and consumer credit firms, which had issued loans using deposit certificates as collateral.
Summoning of financiers to Diet inquiry
On Aug. 23 a special investigating committee of the Diet summoned five of the country's senior financiers for questioning on Aug. 29-30 in connection with the recent stock market and banking scandals.
It was only the second occasion ever in which bankers had been summoned and reflected both the high degree of public outrage and government embarrassment over the spate of recent financial scandals.
In addition to the former heads of two of the big four securities houses — ex-chairman of Nomura Securities, Setsuya Tabuchi, and former president of Nikko Securities, Takuya Iwasaki — three senior bankers were summoned.
Two of these — Yoh Kurosawa, president of the IBJ, the country's most prestigious bank, and Toru Hashimoto, of the Fuji Bank — represented institutions which had been involved in the Tokyo Shinkin scandal [see above].
The third, Sotoo Tatsumi, was the head of the Sumitomo Bank, a former branch manager of which had illegally procured third-party loans for stock speculators.
During the televised hearings on Aug. 30 the three bankers each admitted that lax credit controls had contributed to their banks' involvement in the recent scandals.
Tatsumi and Hashimoto also said that their banks' excessive emphasis on profit had been an additional factor.
Although the former heads of the two securities houses added little to their previous statements, Tabuchi admitted on Aug. 29 that Nomura's links with Japan's organized crime syndicates, which had been revealed in July [see p. 38342], were currently under investigation and might prove to have been more extensive than had been initially suggested.
Tabuchi's statement came the day after Japan's National Police Agency had urged the country's banks and securities houses to establish mechanisms in order to monitor dealings with customers suspected of involvement with organized crime.
Further indictments in connection with Itoman scandal
On Aug. 13 the Osaka District Prosecutor's office formally filed additional charges against the key participants in the Itoman Corporation scandal, involving large-scale embezzlement and dubious art deals.
Yoshihiko Kawamura, former president of Itoman Corp., was charged with embezzlement and with violating the commercial code by endangering the finances of the firm.
The latter charge was also filed against the company's former vice-president, Sadamu Takagaki.
Suemitsu Ito, a property developer and former Itoman board member, and Ho Yung Chang, an Osaka businessman, were indicted on charges of criminal breach of trust.
ASIA — PACIFIC
SINGAPORE
General election
A general election was held in Singapore on Aug. 31.
Although the current five-year term of the People's Action Party (PAP) administration could have run until 1993 [for 1988 general election see pp. 36352-53], Prime Minister Goh Chok Tong who succeeded the veteran Lee Kuan Yew in November 1990, wished to secure a popular mandate for his leadership and its changes of policy emphasis [see p. 37860].
An advocate of more liberal government, Goh had already relaxed Singapore's strict censorship regulations and promised greater spending on social services.
His doubts about the relentlessness of Singapore's Westernization and his relative sensitivity towards the concerns of the city state's ethnic components had attracted some support.
From the beginning, however, his position as successor to Lee had been an uncomfortable one.
His predecessor remained a formidable presence in government (in the role of "Senior Minister" ), and many believed that Goh's tenure in office would continue only until such time as the former leader's son, Brig. -Gen.
Lee Hsien Loong, was ready to replace him [see p. 37574].
Both of the Lees were returned to parliament in the election unopposed.
In the event the trend of declining support for the PAP proved stronger than popular support for Goh's more open approach.
The PAP share of the vote fell to 61 per cent from Lee's 63 per cent in 1988 (itself down from 65 per cent in 1984).
The significance of this was not great in terms of parliamentary seats, with the PAP winning 77 of the total of 81, compared with 80 in 1988.
The opposition parties had anyway announced their intention to fight only 40 seats, thus guaranteeing the government an absolute majority even before voting took place.
Three of the four opposition seats went to the Singapore Democratic Party (SDP) and one to the Workers' Party.
The SDP leader, Chiam See Tong, announced that he would seek an alliance with the Workers' Party whose general secretary, Joshua Jeyaretnum, declared himself ready to co-operate.
ASIA — PACIFIC
INDONESIA
Launch of new pro-democracy forum
Gen. Hartono Resko Dharsono, Indonesia's most prominent dissident, launched on Aug. 22 a new Forum for the Purification of People's Sovereignty (FPPS) to promote democratic values in Indonesia.
Dharsono, who had been released from prison in September 1990 after serving over four years of a seven-year sentence for subversion [see p. 37715], said that the FPPS had the support of some 70 leading intellectuals and dissidents.
The group received the immediate backing of the "Petition of 50" (or "Group of 50" ) movement, Indonesia's most prominent dissident grouping.
Amnesty report on East Timor
The human rights organization Amnesty International charged the Indonesian government with continued human rights abuses in East Timor in a report issued on Aug. 7 [see p. 38011 for February 1991 report].
The report expressed particular concern about what it called "an accelerating pattern of short-term detention, torture and ill-treatment of alleged political opponents" .
The report also criticized the government for refusing to allow Amnesty observers into the territory.
The Indonesian Foreign Minister Ali Alatas announced on Aug. 24 that Indonesia and Portugal had agreed terms to allow a delegation of Portuguese parliamentarians to visit East Timor.
Alatas said that the delegation would also include representatives from the UN.
Release of Aceh detainees
The government freed as many as 226 detainees held in Aceh Province (northern Sumatra) on Aug. 16.
The detainees were all suspected members of the separatist Free Aceh Movement [see p. 38294 for June 1991 Tapol report on Aceh].
Release of PKI members
Two members of the banned Indonesian Communist Party (PKI) were reportedly released from jail on July 24.
Marto Suwandhi and Rewang had both been imprisoned in the late 1960s.
ASIA — PACIFIC
PHILIPPINES
Signature of US bases agreement — Arrest of leading members of NPA
The agreement on the future of United States bases in the Philippines, concluded in July [see pp. 38344-45], was formally signed in Manila on Aug. 27.
The Treaty of Friendship, Co-operation and Security, which allowed the USA to continue using the Subic Bay naval base for 10 years in return for $203,000,000 in annual aid, was signed by Philippines Foreign Secretary Raul Manglapus and the US ambassador, Frank Wisner.
The signature was accompanied by a seven-page letter to President Corazon Aquino from US President Bush, in which Bush stated his desire to support democracy and economic reform in the Philippines through economic assistance, improved trade, and assistance with debt reduction.
Although Bush did not specify how much such assistance — which would be additional to the $203,000,000 already agreed — would amount to, some US officials suggested that it could measure more than $3,500 million over the next decade.
The offer of further help was widely interpreted as attempt to improve the chances of the treaty being ratified by the requisite two-thirds majority of the 23-member Philippine Senate.
Aquino, who had initially opposed any retention of US bases within her country, characterized the new treaty as "a straightforward, pragmatic investment in our economic future" , and warned senators that one of the consequences of rejecting the treaty would be "the derailment of plans for the modernization of the armed forces" .
Arrest of NPA leaders
Romulo Kintanar, the head of the New People's Army (NPA)— the military arm of the illegal Maoist Communist Party of the Philippines — Marxist Leninist (CPP-ML)— was arrested at the Makati Medical Centre in Manila on Aug. 5.
Together with his wife, Gloria Jopson, secretary of the CPP-ML Finance Commission, Kintanar was apprehended whilst attending the hospital for a health check.
His capture marked the culmination of a series of raids throughout Manila during which the authorities had seized 13 senior NPA figures since July 26.
The arrests were widely believed to have inflicted a serious blow to the organization's command structure and its ability to continue with its 22-year guerrilla war.
Amongst those arrested were Rolando Abiog, chief political officer of the NPA General Command's special operations department; Virigio Maceda, deputy chief of NPA special operations; Antonio Lacaba, head of the NPA intelligence department; Rey Claro Casambre, political director of the general command; and his wife, Corazon Casambre, head of the personnel aspects of the general command.
It was also reported that considerable quantities of files and computer disks had been seized during the raids.
Kintanar, 42, was believed to have been responsible for the NPA's post-Marcos strategy of trying to increase the organization's capacity to extend its guerrilla war from its traditional rural sphere.
This had included the increased use of "Sparrow units" — groups of urban guerrillas who targeted key officials and US military personnel for assassination.
Kintanar had been captured in 1988 but, after eight months in detention, he and his wife had escaped from Camp Crame during a birthday party for one of their gaolers.
Both had undergone extensive cosmetic surgery following their escape and, at the time of their re-arrest, they were attending hospital for follow-up treatment.
The breakthrough against the NPA was believed to have been a result of information seized in August 1990 when NPA operations chief Afredo Simbulan was arrested.
It was also a product of greater co-operation between the Philippine National Police (PNP) and the Armed Forces of the Philippines (AFP), and the more efficient use by the authorities of computerized information.
Issues concerning Marcos family
Executive Secretary Frank Drilon announced on Aug. 14 that the current prohibition on the return of the body of former President Ferdinand Marcos would be lifted before Aquino left office in 1992.
The announcement followed the presentation on Aug. 7 of a non-binding resolution — signed by 144 of the 209-member House of Representatives and 10 senators, many of whom were supporters of Aquino — calling upon the President to lift the prohibition.
Marcos's body had lain in a refrigerated crypt in Hawaii since his death in 1989.
He had fled the Philippines in early 1986 after being overthrown by Aquino's supporters.
On July 31 Aquino had announced that former First Lady Imelda Marcos and her children would be permitted to return to the Philippines in order to stand trial on outstanding corruption charges, but that the corpse of the former President would remain banned.
On Aug. 2 officials from the US Immigration and Naturalization Service lifted an order which prevented Imelda Marcos from leaving Manhattan without the prior permission of the US Justice Department.
However, she rejected the offer to return without her husband's remains, insisting that it was his dying wish to receive "a simple soldier's burial" in his country of origin.
ASIA — PACIFIC
AUSTRALIA
Trial of police chief — Legal decision on status of foetus — Massacre by Sydney gunman
Sir Terence Lewis, 63, the former police commissioner of Queensland, was sentenced to 14 years' imprisonment on Aug. 5, after being convicted on 15 counts of corruption.
The convictions followed a four-month trial at which it was alleged that Sir Terence had taken bribes whilst in office in return for protecting illegal activities such as prostitution and gambling.
The jury deliberated for five days before finding the accused guilty on all counts.
The former police chief was the latest — and, thus far, the most senior — victim of the Fitzgerald inquiry, established in 1987, into corruption in Queensland.
Several members of the Cabinet of former National Party Premier Sir Johannes "Joh" Bjelke-Petersen had already been imprisoned as a result of the inquiry, and Sir Joh himself, who appointed Sir Terence as commissioner in 1976, was due to face trial on corruption and perjury charges later in 1991.
The trial of Sir Terence and the charges against Sir Joh were indicative of the depth of corruption associated with the National Party's 30 years in office in Queensland which had ended with the party's electoral defeat in 1989.
In all, more than 200 people had been charged as a result of the Fitzgerald inquiry, including seven former National Party politicians, 26 police, and several judges and prominent businessmen.
Landmark decision on legal status of foetus
It was reported on Aug. 3 that the Supreme Court of New South Wales had awarded damages of A$2,850,000 (US$2,224,500) to a teenage girl who had sued her mother for negligence committed whilst the girl was still a foetus.
The mother's insurance company announced that it would appeal.
Nicole Lynch, 18, had suffered since her birth from impaired sight, speech and bodily control as a result of cerebral palsy.
The basis of her legal case was that this condition had been caused by a motor accident four months before her birth in which her mother lost control of a pick-up truck during a cattle muster on the family ranch.
The decision was seen as a landmark case in that the defence lawyers argued unsuccessfully that Nicole had no legal existence at the time of the accident and, therefore, could not be identified as a victim of her mother's action.
They claimed that as she and her mother were one entity, there could be no duty of care owed by the mother to herself.
The judge rejected this contention and ruled that "Nicole's personality was identifiable and recognizable" at the time of the accident.
The judgment appeared to redefine the legal relationship between mother and foetus in such a way as to have important future implications both for the behaviour of pregnant women and for the issue of abortion.
Tightening of gun laws after Sydney massacre
The state government of New South Wales on Aug. 19 imposed new curbs on military assault rifles after one such weapon was used in the killing of eight people in a Sydney shopping centre on Aug. 17.
Wade John Frankum, 33, hacked a 15 year-old girl to death with a machete before rampaging through the shopping complex firing randomly at bystanders.
He killed a further five people and wounded at least eight, one of whom later died.
After firing some 80 rounds from his legally owned 7.62mm SKS Chinese semi-automatic rifle, Frankum shot himself dead.
This was the fourth mass killing in Australia in four years.
After two such incidents in Melbourne in 1987 the federal government had banned the importation of semi-automatic weapons, but the states had been unable to agree upon a common strategy for tightening the laws relating to such weapons already in circulation.
Speaking immediately after the Sydney attack, federal Justice Minister Michael Tate accused the government of New South Wales of failing to take a strong enough stance against the powerful gun lobby.
The state's Police Minister, Ted Pickering, a consistent opponent of tighter gun laws, responded by saying that he did "not accept that any firearm is more dangerous than any other" .
ASIA — PACIFIC
VANUATU
Release of Jimmy Stevens
Jimmy Stevens, the leader of a secessionist rebellion in Vanuatu in 1980 [see pp. 30642-44], was released from prison on Aug. 19 after serving 11 years of a 14@1/2-year sentence for treason.
Stevens, who was in his 70s and in poor health, was the longest-serving political prisoner in the Pacific.
Of mixed European and Pacific ancestry, Stevens grew up on the island of Espiritu Santo.
A vigorous campaigner against the joint French-British rule of the New Hebrides (the pre-independence colonial name for Vanuatu), he was elected to territory's national assembly in 1975.
He eventually formed a religious group, the Royal Church of Nagriamel, before declaring a provisional government on Espiritu Santo on May 29, 1980, the eve of Vanuatu's independence.
Troops from Papua New Guinea were used to crush the rebellion and to arrest hundreds of Stevens' supporters.
On his release Stevens was reported to have suggested that he wanted to continue his Nagriamel movement.
ASIA — PACIFIC
MALAYSIA
The opposition Semangat"46 party retained two Kelantan State Assembly seats on Aug. 24 in by-elections called after two of its Assembly members defected to the United Malays National Organization and were then disqualified from the Assembly when it passed retroactive anti-defection legislation.
ASIA — PACIFIC
NEPAL
It was reported on Aug. 5 that three of Nepal's smaller communist parties had merged to form the Nepal Communist Party (United) in order to "strengthen the left movement" .
EUROPE
POLAND
Announcement of Finance Minister's resignation — Bank scandal
Leszek Balcerowicz, the Finance Minister and deputy Prime Minister, announced on Aug. 5 that he would resign after the parliamentary elections planned for October, saying that his decision had been made for family reasons.
Banking scandal
The Warsaw Province Prosecutor's Office announced on Aug. 7 the arrest of five people — including senior officials at state banks — accused of illegal activities causing serious losses to the state treasury and of falsifying documents.
The officials were alleged to have poured what the prosecutor described as "unimaginable" amounts of government money into a private business enterprise called Art-B.
Two more people were arrested later the same week, and a warrant for the arrest of Art-B's chairman, Boguslaw Bagsik, on suspicion of bribery and fraud, was issued on Aug. 12.
Art-B was one of Poland's largest and least well-known enterprises.
It was founded in 1989, and grew rapidly to employ 15,000 people by mid-1991 with a turnover of US$300,000,000.
However, there were reports of difficulties, and Bagsik put the company up for sale on July 30 at US$500,000,000.
Art-B was said to have arranged huge loans from Poland's two biggest financial institutions, the National Bank of Poland (central bank) and the PKO (the state savings bank), and was accused of illegal manipulation of bank deposits and loans, profiting illegally from the country's 60 per cent interest rates.
In a telephone news conference on Aug. 6 from an unknown location, believed to be Israel, Bagsik claimed that the investigations into Art-B were started for political reasons, and that the company had become "pre-election meat" .
The head of the central bank, Grzegorz Wojtowicz, was suspended on Aug. 9, pending a parliamentary vote on his dismissal when the Sejm, the lower house, resumed sitting at the end of the month.
The move followed a motion from President Lech Walesa demanding Wojtowicz's resignation on the grounds of "lack of supervision" .
Andrezej Topinski was nominated to replace Wojtowicz on Aug. 12.
Arrest of former head of FOZZ
It was reported on Aug. 23 that Grzegorz Zemek, the former head of the government agency, the Fund for Servicing the Foreign Debt (FOZZ), had been arrested on charges of gross mismanagement of public funds.
Zemek was alleged to have used funds held by Polish companies abroad to buy back some of Poland's commercial debt on the secondary market where it traded at a fraction of face value.
World Bank loan
The World Bank on Aug. 14 granted Poland a loan of US$200,000,000 to modernize its banking system.
Most of the money was expected to be used to restructure and computerize the nine state banks.
EUROPE
BULGARIA
Postponement of elections
Local and general elections set for Sept. 29 [see p. 38350]were put back to mid-October following heated parliamentary debate during August on an elections bill.
The bill, providing for a system of proportional representation, was finally passed on Aug. 22 after amendments were agreed by the Bulgarian Socialist Party (BSP — the former communist party), which held 210 seats in the 400-seat parliament.
Non-communist deputies had walked out en masse on Aug. 16, protesting that the unamended version favoured the BSP.
Former Prime Minister, Andrej Lukanov, was reported on Aug. 20 to have resigned as BSP deputy chairman.
Lukanov was apparently unhappy at what he considered to be the party's failure to respond appropriately to the coup attempt in the Soviet Union.
Industrial disputes
A strike by a majority of Bulgaria's 21,000 miners, some of them fasting underground, appeared to have been halted when, on Aug. 22, the men's representatives agreed to negotiations after nine days' action.
However, it was reported the following day that talks had broken down and the employers had stopped the strikers' wages.
The dispute centred on proposals involving the closure of lead-zinc mines, posing a threat to jobs.
The country had more than 302,000 registered unemployed at mid-August.
Tension was reported also in the medical and telecommunications sectors, where strike action was being threatened to back demands for better conditions.
World Bank loan
The World Bank on Aug. 5 announced a $250,000,000 17-year loan to help the country import basic goods during a period of transition from communist to capitalist economic policies.
The loan was to be released in two tranches, with the second, totalling $100,000,000, subject to progress with economic reforms.
EUROPE
ALBANIA
New refugee crisis — Economic problems
Italian officials stated in early August that approximately 10,000 Albanian refugees remaining in Italy since March would not after all be repatriated forcibly.
The Italian authorities had previously said that those remaining, out of an estimated 24,000, had until the end of July to find jobs, obtain political asylum, or be deported [see p. 38351]; the Italian attitude changed quickly, however, when on Aug. 7 a new flotilla of refugee boats appeared off Adriatic ports, with an estimated 17,000 people aboard.
Up to 12 Albanians had reportedly been killed when thousands broke through security patrols at the Albanian port of Durres on Aug. 7.
A hijacked 8,000-ton freighter Vlore entered the Italian port of Bari the next day, defying Italian naval patrols, with approximately 10,000 destitute people aboard.
A number of vessels were turned away in the following days.
All Albanian ports were placed under military control from Aug. 9.
Most of those aboard the Vlorewere quickly rounded up after scrambling or swimming ashore.
Some were put aboard Italian vessels and air force transports and taken back, but about 7,000 refugees were held in a disused football stadium without sanitation or cover.
When it became known that they were to be repatriated, fighting broke out, the gates were forced, and Italian police opened fire after being attacked with stones and planks.
Several people were wounded, before the Albanians were forced back and the gates barred.
Fighting also broke out on the Bari dockside, where approximately 3,000 deportees were held under guard in temperatures of 35 degrees Centigrade.
There were repeated clashes in the ensuing days as, more or less forcibly, people were escorted away for repatriation.
On Aug. 14, the remaining refugees, numbering about 2,000, having been given clean clothes and food, and told, in an apparent change of heart by Italy, that they could stay while their cases were examined, were taken in small groups to reception centres in distant parts of the country.
An abrupt end to the affair came three days later when refugees were awakened before dawn and taken to airports to be flown back to Albania.
Amid a torrent of press accusations of Machiavellian deception, the Italian Interior Ministry later said that 2,267 Albanians had been deported, while 788, mainly deserting soldiers, were allowed to stay.
Italian television on Aug. 18 said that only 154 of the refugees remained.
Italian aid
A succession of Italian officials visited Tirana, the Albanian capital, during August, including President Francesco Cossiga, Foreign Affairs Minister Gianni De Michelis and Interior Minister Vincenzo Scotti.
On Aug. 28, it was reported that some 1,000 Italian troops would assist with the distribution of US$85,000,000 worth of Italian food aid, sufficient to meet Albania's requirement for three months.
Italy was also reported to be offering $50,000,000 in assistance to Albanian industry.
Closing down of Foreign exchange after losses
It was reported on Aug. 1 that the Albanian government had closed down the Albanian State Bank's foreign exchange department after losses totalling $170,000,000 were disclosed in the department's foreign exchange trading since 1988.
The official ATA news agency said that there was no evidence of deception or abuse.
Land privatization
Agriculture Minister Nexhmedin Dumani announced on Aug. 5 that officials were to begin measuring out land that week in readiness to return holdings to peasants dispossessed under the former Stalinist regime, following enactment of a land privatisation bill in parliament at the end of July.
Incidents including killings were reported during August as peasants disputed rights to land ownership.
Dumani said that the aim was to complete the privatization by mid-September in time for autumn sowing.
Establishement of diplomatic relations
Diplomatic ties were formally established with Israel and South Korea during August.
A Soviet embassy was opened in Tirana on Aug. 13.
EUROPE
CZECHOSLOVAKIA
Privatization of large Czech enterprises
The privatization of industry in the Czech Lands began on Aug. 8 when 50 of the republic's largest businesses were put up for sale on international markets.
Czech Industry Minister Jan Vrba stated that of 3,246 large enterprises, 1,776, considered the most attractive to foreign investors, would be privatized in the first phase.
From Oct. 1, Czech and Slovak citizens would have the opportunity to purchase coupons enabling them to buy shares.
A second phase involving a further 1,170 concerns would begin in 1992, but more than 400 enterprises in key economic sectors would remain in state hands for at least a further five years.
Hitherto, foreign investment had been encouraged through the establishment of joint ventures, 3,000 of which were now in existence.
However, of these only five had received substantial foreign investment.
Reorganization of federal Interior Ministry
A major reorganization of the federal Interior Ministry was announced on July 30.
The aims of the reorganization, which followed laws on the police adopted in mid-July, were to separate Czechoslovak security structures from those of former Warsaw Treaty countries — including the replacement of Soviet cryptographers, the clarification of the Interior Ministry's organization and the separation of the ministry's administrative from its policing functions.
The Federal Police Corps for Investigation and certain special units remained, however, under Interior Ministry control.
Proposal for Slovak "grand coalition" 
The former Slovak Premier Vladimir Merciar [for whose dismissal in April, following the split in the principal government party Public Against Violence, see p. 38161], proposed on Aug. 14 the formation of a "grand coalition" of Slovak political parties and movements.
Merciar, who now chaired the Movement (formerly Platform) for a Democratic Slovakia (HZDS), argued that the unity of all forces was needed to solve the fundamental problems of Slovakia's relationship to the Czech Lands, and to halt economic decline.
However, Slovak Premier Jan Carnogursky dismissed the idea on Aug. 16, expressing his satisfaction with the existing government coalition, while welcoming any support the HZDS might give to government economic policy.
EUROPE
ROMANIA
Privatization law
A law privatizing all state enterprises except utilities was signed on Aug. 14 by President Ion Iliescu.
In a scheme expected to take between six and 12 months to set up, 30 per cent of the capital would be set aside exclusively for Romanian nationals in five private ownership funds.
A free certificate of ownership would be given to all citizens, who would be free to buy and sell shares in the company or fund of their choice.
The remaining 70 per cent would be held in a state ownership fund for foreign investors.
Despite the attempts to meet criticisms that privatization would mean selling off Romanian industry to foreign concerns, much public opposition to the law remained.
Purge of former Securitate officers
The Romanian Information Services (RIS) reported on July 30 that an "important number" of former Securitate officers had been removed from its ranks.
The RIS action followed increasing concern that a majority of Securitate officers had kept their jobs after the revolution.
Election of SPL president
At the first congress of the Socialist Party of Labour (SPL) on Aug. 11 in Bucharest, a former Prime Minister under Nicolae Ceausescu, Ilie Verdet, was elected president.
Suspension of nationalist newspaper
On Aug. 19, the weekly nationalist newspaper Romania Mare ( "Great Romania" ), suspected of links with the Securitate, voluntarily suspended publication for one month following the appearance of an anti-Semitic article condemned by President Ion Iliescu.
The United States had earlier stated that US aid would depend on the elimination of anti-Semitism from the Romanian media.
Foreign Minister's visit to Japan
Adrian Nastase visited Japan on Aug. 4, the first Romanian Foreign Minister to do so for 16 years.
During his six-day visit, Japan promised US$100,000,000 to Romania for balance-of-payments support and $200,000 in emergency aid, to help restructure Romania's economy.
Flood after dam burst
Severe flooding in the Bacau region, 320 km north of Bucharest, caused by a dam bursting after torrential rain, swept away 17 villages, leaving more than 70 people dead and a further 43 missing.
Following visits to the devastated region by Prime Minister Petre Roman and Minister of Public Works Doru Pana, emergency measures were agreed to re-establish the region's infrastructure.
International bodies, including the European Communities (EC), were being approached for fuel supplies.
EUROPE
HUNGARY
Reintegration of Smallholders parties
It was confirmed on Aug. 14 that the small right-wing National Smallholders' Party led by Imre Boross had reached agreement with the Independent Smallholders' Party — from which it had split in December 1989 [see p. 37739]— and would reunite with it at an unspecified date in the future.
The Smallholders' Party was the largest political party in Hungary at the time of its dissolution in 1948.
Reconstituted in November 1988 [see pp. 36399, 36939, 36960], it campaigned effectively on the single issue of compensation for property expropriated under the communist regime [see p. 38352 for eventual legislation on this in July 1991], with the Independent Smallholders' Party winning 44 seats in the 1990 elections [see pp. 37325; 37380]and becoming a coalition partner in the government of Jozsef Antall.
Its leader (now its president) Jozsef Torgyan had been embroiled in policy disputes within the party in early 1991 [see p. 38161], and in an exchange of bitter personal allegations, notably with Boross.
Fund for unemployed — Phasing out of aluminium production
A "solidarity fund for the unemployed" went into operation on Aug. 1, when a sum equivalent to 2 per cent of all gross wages was levied for the first time.
It was hoped that the fund would raise some 6,000 million forints (about US$80,000,000) in 1991/1992, although it was widely predicted that this would be insufficient to provide for the estimated 300,000 unemployed in Hungary.
It was announced on Aug. 14 that the Hungarian Aluminium Trust, Hungalu, would phase out production from its three aluminium smelters, with a combined capacity of 75,000 tonnes a year, by 1993, in view of the uncompetitive productivity level of Hungarian plants, combined with the rising costs of energy and the current low world prices for aluminium.
The country would continue, however, to mine bauxite for export.
EUROPE
GERMANY
New Bundesbank president
Karl Otto Pöhl, 61, the president for 11 years of the German Bundesbank (central bank), retired on July 31 and was replaced on Aug. 1 by his deputy, Helmut Schlesinger.
In a farewell speech on Aug. 28, Pöhl warned that the German economy faced a period of considerable difficulty, as rising inflation compounded the already serious problems of funding the necessary investment surge in the east of the country after unification, and as the social transfer costs in the east continued to mount.
On Aug. 15 the Bundesbank had raised the discount rate from 6.5 per cent to 7.5 per cent, and its Lombard rate from 9.0 per cent to 9.25 per cent , in an effort to end the already substantial downward pressure on the Deutschmark.
The Bundesbank announced on Aug. 30 that it was to honour some DM250,000,000 of outstanding interest payments which were still due on a debt agreement reached in 1953 with its Western creditors.
The original agreement had rationalized and drastically reduced the total German debt in respect of the Second World War, but interest payments had been frozen, by mutual consent, until the two parts of the then divided country were reunited.
Reburial of Friedrich II
The remains of King Friedrich II of Prussia ( "Frederick the Great" ), and of his father Friedrich Wilhelm I, were reburied on Aug. 18 with state honours at Schloss Sanssouci at Potsdam, in a ceremony attended by Chancellor Helmut Kohl.
The king was generally regarded as the founder of the unified German state, created in the 18th century through the fusion of hundreds of small warring principalities.
The ceremony was widely regarded as an effort to restore Prussia's regional identity after its suppression during the years of communist rule in the former East Germany, and simultaneously to dissociate Frederick the Great from the Nazi Party, which had revered his military power.
The remains of the king and his father had been removed on Aug. 16 from Burg Hohenzollern at Hechingen, near Stuttgart, where they had been placed in 1952 — having been recovered from Nazi hands during the last days of the Second World War.
Despite fears that the Aug. 18 funeral would attract attention from extreme right-wing groups, and counter-demonstrations from the left wing, the only violent disturbances arose in Frankfurt and in Bavaria, with the funeral itself remaining peaceful.
On July 17 the statue of Nike, the Greek goddess of victory, had been restored to the top of the Brandenburg Gate in Berlin, after repairs.
The renovated statue carried the Prussian Iron Cross and the Prussian Eagle, added in 1814 but removed by the former East German authorities in the 1950s.
Reorganization of Saxony Anhalt Cabinet
A reorganization of the Land Cabinet in Saxony-Anhalt took place on Aug. 16, following the resignation of the Free Democrat deputy Minister President Gerd Brunner on Aug. 9 and of the Agriculture Minister four days later, over accusations that they had acted as agents for the former East German Ministry of State Security — the "Stasi" .
EUROPE
NETHERLANDS
Government crisis over state benefits
The ruling parties in the coalition government, the Christian Democratic Appeal (CDA) and the Labour Party (PvdA), reached a compromise agreement on Aug. 26 on a reform of the social security system.
Disagreement between the two parties had threatened to topple the government, which in the early hours of Aug. 29 survived a parliamentary vote of no confidence.
The Cabinet of Prime Minister Ruud Lubbers had proposed the reforms of the state benefit system, including controversial measures to reduce long-term disability payments, as part of an austerity package proposed in March [see p. 38113].
The changes were designed to save a total of 4,400,000 guilders, representing about 1 per cent of gross national product (GNP).
Labour eventually agreed to Christian Democrat demands to end the linkage of state benefits to private-sector wages, in return for a reduction in the proposed cuts in state benefits, a commitment to increase social security payments by 3 per cent in 1992, and provisions for the lowest income sector to receive tax concessions.
Although this agreement averted a government crisis, Marjanne Sint submitted her resignation as PvdA chair over the issue on Aug. 30.
EUROPE
DENMARK
Road and rail link agreement with Sweden
Denmark and Sweden signed on Aug. 27 an agreement on the construction and the funding of a new road and rail bridge system over the Öresund strait which separated Malmö and Copenhagen.
The two countries would share equally the costs of building the 17-km link, which would comprise two bridges and a tunnel, and which was provisionally costed at DKr12,000 million (US$1,000 million).
Contracts had already been awarded, and construction was due to start by the end of 1991.
In a vote on Aug. 15 the project had received the overwhelming support of the Folketing (parliament), which had voted against a similar project in 1973, although Sweden had given its approval at that time.
It was still opposed by Danish environmentalists, who claimed that it would affect the salinity of the Baltic Sea by partially blocking the Öresund, as well as bringing greater pollution to the Copenhagen area through increased traffic flows, but supporters of the project said that it would bring new economic activity to the area.
The bridge across the Öresund was opposed by Finland, which had lodged an objection at the International Court of Justice on the grounds that its 65-metre clearance would be insufficient to allow the passage of oil drilling rigs manufactured by shipyards in the region.
The Court, however, found on July 29 that there was no case for an interim ruling against the bridge, since Denmark had given assurances that there would be no obstruction of the channel before end-1994, by which time the Court would expect to have completed its full consideration of the case.
1992 budget
The Danish government presented on Aug. 27 an austerity budget for 1992, which it said would reduce the state deficit from its expected level of Dkr35,800 million in 1991 to around DKr30,500 million ($2,700 million).
Spending was to be reduced to DKr326,200 million, of which DKr57,900 would go towards interest payments on the country's DKr560,400 million official debts.
The government conceded that the projected 1991 deficit was more than double the DKr16,100 million originally planned; the growth, it said, was due to a rapid rise in unemployment which had swelled the cost of social transfers while reducing tax revenues.
It added that it expected Denmark's gross domestic product to grow by 2.25 per cent in 1992, up from 2 per cent in 1991.
EUROPE
NORTHERN IRELAND
Resumption of sectarian killing
The breakdown in July of all-party talks on the future of the province [see p. 38356]was followed in August by a fresh outbreak of sectarian killings throughout Northern Ireland.
The Provisional Irish Republican Army (IRA) killed a loyalist political worker on Aug. 9 as he arrived at his work in Londonderry.
A civilian died in an IRA explosion near a Belfast police and army base on Aug. 15, while on the same day a former part-time member of the Ulster Defence Regiment (UDR) was shot dead by the IRA in Co.
Tyrone.
On Aug. 17 a British army soldier was killed in a bomb explosion while on foot patrol on Co.
Armagh.
A loyalist paramilitary group, the Ulster Freedom Fighters (UFF), killed two members of Sinn Féin on Aug. 12 and 16 in Co.
Tyrone and Co.
Londonderry respectively, and two IRA members on Aug. 16.
Two civilians found dead, in Co.
Tyrone on Aug. 5 and in Lisburn on Aug. 24, were also believed to be victims of the sectarian violence.
During the weekend of Aug. 17-18, Hugh Annesley, chief constable of the Royal Ulster Constabulary (RUC), said that the internment of suspected terrorists without trial might be introduced if the heightened violence continued, while Peter Brooke, the United Kingdom Northern Ireland Secretary, condemned what he called the "constant litany of violence" .
EUROPE
SPAIN
New upsurge of ETA activity
Bomb threats by the Basque separatist group ETA disrupted Spain's rail system over the Aug. 3-4 holiday weekend for the third year in succession.
The organization had contacted the national railway company, RENFE, on Aug. 2, stating that it intended to attack four major lines during the month.
Bomb explosions on the night of Aug. 2-3 caused minor damage on the Madrid-Seville and Madrid-Palencia lines, and threw the system into chaos for the rest of the weekend.
Some 200,000 people had their journeys cancelled or disrupted.
Pro-ETA demonstrators had greeted King Juan Carlos and Queen Sofia when they made a two-day visit to San Sebastián, in the Basque region, at the end of July.
A small bomb was said to have exploded near the royal party's hotel, causing no injuries.
On Aug. 17 police shot dead three suspected ETA activists, during a four-hour gun battle at a house in San Sebastián in which two Civil Guards were seriously wounded.
Eleven suspects were rounded up for questioning in other Basque towns the same day.
The police action led to riots across the region, with hundreds of demonstrators building barricades and burning vehicles.
In San Sebastián, 17 people were reported to have suffered minor injuries in clashes with police on Aug. 18.
Prison riots
An inmate was beheaded by a fellow prisoner on Aug. 11 during rioting at the high-security Puerto de Santa Maria prison near Cadiz, bringing the death toll among prisoners to four in a summer of riots in Spain's overcrowded prisons.
It was the 11th reported violent clash at the prison so far during the year.
Prison authorities were cited as blaming the disturbances on heat, overcrowding, drugs and AIDS.
According to reports nearly 50 per cent of Spain's 36,736 prisoners were believed to have some form of addiction and just under 25 per cent were said to be HIV positive.
EUROPE
CYPRUS
Announcement of September conference
US President Bush announced in Washington on Aug. 2 that he had received confirmation from Greek Prime Minister Konstantinos Mitsotakis and Turkish President Turgut Özal that Greece and Turkey were prepared to attend a peace conference the following month aimed at ending the partition of Cyprus.
The conference would be held in the USA under the auspices of the UN, which had been mediating in the Cyprus conflict since Turkey invaded and occupied 37 per cent of the island in 1974 [see pp. 26661-66; 26709-10].
Both Cyprus President Georgios Vassiliou and the President of the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus, Rauf Denktash, welcomed the initiative.
However, the Un Secretary-General, Javier Pérez de Cuéllar, made it clear that a conference would take place only if sufficient progress towards an outline agreement had previously been made.
Since both Greek and Turkish Cypriot political leaders accepted that a new Cyprus republic would have a federal and bizonal character, the essence of the pre-conference negotiations concerned the proportion of territory the Turkish authorities in occupied Cyprus were willing to cede to what would effectively become the Greek area in a federal republic (early indications being that they were prepared to concede no more than 9 per cent of the occupied area), and precisely how many refugees could return, out of some 180,000 Greeks Cypriots who fled following the Turkish invasion.
The prospect of a settlement had encouraged two of the four main Greek Cypriot political parties, the centre-right DIKO and the socialist party, EDEK, to form a national front which insisted on the right of all refugees to return to their homes.
Archbishop Chrisostomos of Cyprus had warned the governments of Greece and Cyprus against "betraying" the Greek people of Cyprus, and opposition leaders in Greece had made similar statements.
EUROPE
GREECE
Cabinet reshuffle
In an effort to revitalize his government's image in the area of economic management and modernization, Prime Minister Konstantinos Mitsotakis undertook a Cabinet reshuffle on Aug. 7, the second since the conservative New Democracy party assumed office in April 1990 [see pp. 37388; 37968].
Mitsotakis reduced the number of Cabinet ministers and undersecretaries from 43 to 36.
There were no alterations in key positions, the Foreign Minister, Antonis Samaras, the Defence Minister, Yannis Varvitsiotis, and the Finance Minister, Yannis Paliokrassas, retaining their posts.
Mitsotakis's daughter, Dora Bakoyiannis, was dismissed from her post as Under-Secretary to the Prime Minister.
Mitsotakis's sensitivity on the issue of his family's political involvement was seen to reflect his desire to avoid charges of unethical conduct by his government, the issue which had effectively brought down his (socialist) predecessor Andreas Papandreou.
[For resignation in July of Industry Minister Stavros Dimas, who had reportedly clashed with Mitsotakis's wife, see p. 38357.]
Konstantinos Mitsotakis Prime Minister Tzannis Tzannetakis Deputy Prime Minister Athanassios Kanellopoulos Deputy Prime Minister Miltiades Evert Minister to the Prime Minister's Office Antonis Samaras Foreign Minister Yannis Varvitsiotis National Defence
Greek Cabinet
*Nikolaos Kleitos Interior
*Efthymios Christodoulou National Economy Yannis Paliokrassas Finance
**Sotiris Kouvelas Agriculture Aristides Kalantzakos Labour
**Michalis Papaconstantinou Justice
*Anna Psarouda-Benakif Culture Georgios Sourlas* Health, Welfare and Social Security Georgios Souflias National Education and Religion
*Theodore Anagnostopoulos Public Order
*Andreas Andrianopoulos Industry and Commerce Nikolaos Gelestathis Transport and Communications
*Achilleas Karamanlis Environment, Town Planning and Public Works
*Panagiotis Hadzinikolaou Macedonia and Thrace Georgios Missailidis Aegean Arisotelis Pavlidis Merchant Navy Michalis Theodorakis Without portfolio
*New appointment.
**Altered responsibilities.
EUROPE
TURKEY
Action against Kurds
International protests were lodged in early August over the deployment of Turkish troops on Iraqi soil, as they engaged from Aug. 5-19 in cross-border activities against alleged militia camps belonging to the banned Kurdish Workers' Party (PKK).
Iraq, for its part, was widely believed to have condoned the "hot pursuit" of the Kurdish activists, who had been conducting guerrilla activities against the Turkish authorities for some 20 years, and indeed it had signed agreements to this effect during the 1980s.
[For latest developments concerning Kurds inside Iraq see p. 38407.]
Turkey claimed that its action had been provoked by an escalation of Kurdish attacks on the armed forces in the south-east of the country.
A Turkish army post in Semdinli had been ambushed on Aug. 3, when nine soldiers and a village guard were killed and a further three soldiers kidnapped.
Kurdish guerrillas had seized 10 German tourists in the Bitlis province of Turkey on Aug. 1, but released them unharmed on Aug. 8 as the Turkish army attacks reached their height.
Turkish helicopters and fighter planes were flown up to 5 km inside Iraq, and at least 24 alleged PKK bases were destroyed; the government claimed on Aug. 16 that large quantities of arms, ammunition and documents had been seized during attacks at Kharkuk, in the Durji valley.
On Aug. 9 both the German and the Soviet governments condemned Turkey's "violation of international law" in entering Iraqi territory.
Iran, near whose borders the attack had taken place, also denounced the action.
The Turkish government announced on Aug. 19 that it was to recall the troops operating across the border.
It warned, however, that close surveillance of the border would continue, and it called for the creation of a "security zone" 5 km wide inside Iraq.
Clashes also continued within Turkey itself during this period, and some 40 people were reported to have been killed in separate incidents, the worst of these occurring on Aug. 16 when 14 Kurds and five troops and police died as demonstrations broke out to mark the eighth anniversary of the separatist rebellions of 1983 [see pp. 33037-38].
Five Turkish soldiers were killed on Aug. 20 in an ambush at Silopi, the town which had been designated as the headquarters of a 1,000-strong Turkish battalion intended to prevent incursions from Iraqi soil.
Three village guards were killed on Aug. 21 in a raid on a minibus at Kulp, in Diyarbakir province.
Calling of elections
The Grand National Assembly (parliament) approved a government bill on Aug. 24 to call a general election on Oct. 20, more than a year before the expiry of the Assembly's full five-year term in November 1992.
Prime Minister Mesut Yilmaz told the Assembly that the ruling Motherland Party (ANAP), with 275 of the 450 seats, was seeking an early poll "to refresh the people's confidence" in his government.
Opposition parties had also been pressing for an early poll, especially in view of the poor performance by ANAP in local elections since 1989 [see p. 36528].
The Socialist Party and the (Kurdish-backed) People's Labour Pary were barred from the elections.
New government ministry
The Official Gazette reported on Aug. 22 that Ali Talip Ozdemir, a Minister of State, had been appointed to the newly created post of Environment Minister.
Shooting of British citizen
A British citizen named as Andrew Blake was shot dead in Istanbul on Aug. 19, in an attack for which the Dev Sol ( "Revolutionary Left" ) claimed responsibility.
The organization's statement called him "a representative of imperialism in Turkey" .
EUROPE
EUROPE
Immigration issues
Concern about immigration issues continued to grow in several European countries during the summer of 1991.
The imminent abolition of most border controls as a consequence of the implementation of the Single European Market raised the likelihood that illegal entry would become easier after January 1993.
There was particular concern over the growing phenomenon of "orbiting" , in which asylum seekers applied unsuccessfully to several European Community (EC) member states in turn, thereby achieving a short stay in each.
By mid-August the EC were planning a convention on the crossing of external borders, which by imposing uniform asylum and visa criteria in all member states would mean that a refusal in any one would be enforceable by all.
In Germany the total number of refugees from eastern Europe and from developing countries was expected to reach some 200,000 in 1991.
Interior Minister Wolfgang Schäuble and Foreign Minister Hans-Dietrich Genscher both declared in early August that asylum applications from east Europeans should be disallowed, because they could no longer legitimately claim to be persecuted at home.
In Austria it was announced on Aug. 13 that the visa requirement for Poles would be finally lifted on Sept. 1 — having originally been abolished in 1988, but having been hurriedly re-introduced in on Sept. 6, 1990, in the face of a massive immigration surge.
In France the government had been forced in July to back off from a declaration that deportation measures would be stepped up [see p. 38354].
In Switzerland, which had 36,000 political asylum requests in 1990 (and 17 per cent of whose residents were non-nationals), the government had been tightening the rules since February 1991.
Nevertheless, a series of violent attacks were committed against refugee centres during 1991, including two particularly serious assaults in Basel on Aug. 7.
In Italy on Aug. 18 two Senegalese immigrant workers were killed by gunmen, reportedly rightwingers, on a motorway near Rimini.
EUROPE
CENTRAL EUROPE
Rain and flooding in the Danube basin in Germany and Austria killed at least nine people in early August; flooding and tornadoes reported on Aug. 8 killed a further 27 people near the Soviet Black Sea resort of Sochi.
EUROPE
EUROPE
At the end of a meeting in Weimar, Germany, on Aug. 29 the German, French and Polish Foreign Ministers issued a joint declaration stressing the importance of their co-operation at an historic point in European development and committing themselves to such trilateral meetings at least once year.
EUROPE
SOVIET UNION
Armenian guerrillas seized some 40 Soviet Interior Ministry troops in the disputed region of Nagorno-Karabakh on Aug. 13 to exchange for a militant Armenian leader Zh.
Petrosyan and a number of others arrested by Soviet forces; three of the hostages were freed on Aug. 16 and the release of the others was agreed on Aug. 20.
EUROPE
UNITED KINGDOM
Youths rioted for two nights on the streets of Telford in the Midlands after police marksmen shot dead Ian Gordon early on Aug. 12; the 24-year-old black man, who had a history of psychiatric problems, had pointed a firearm at the policemen; two witnesses were reported to have told police that the gun was unloaded and had no firing mechanism.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
MIDDLE EAST
Peace process
Attempts by the United States to organize a Middle East peace conference remained deadlocked at the end of August.
Although all the major players had agreed to attend a conference, disagreements remained over guarantees and conditions sought by Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO).
A central source of disagreement between the Israelis and the Arabs was the complex issue of Palestinian representation at the proposed conference.
The deadlock also reflected the general feeling of uncertainty on the international stage engendered by events in the Soviet Union during August.
Under the USA peace plan, the Soviet Union and the US would co-chair the conference.
Conditional acceptance of a peace conference by Israel
James Baker, the US Secretary of State and architect of the peace conference plan, arrived in Israel for a fresh round of talks on Aug. 1.
Following his meeting with Baker, Itzhak Shamir, Israel's Prime Minister, announced that he would recommend to his Cabinet that Israel attend a Middle East peace conference in October.
Israel's attendance, however, was "subject to a satisfactory solution to the issue of Palestinian Arab representation in the Jordanian-Palestinian delegation" .
Baker described Shamir's announcement as "extraordinarily positive and significant" .
Shamir had been under pressure to react positively to the US plan following Syria's approval of it in mid-July [see p. 38358].
He was effectively obliged to do so when US President George Bush and Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev issued a statement on July 31 during their summit meeting in Moscow announcing a joint US-Soviet commitment toward convening the conference in October [see p. 38320].
Israeli Cabinet approval of conference — Outline of "understandings" by Levi
On Aug. 4 the Israeli Cabinet approved Shamir's acceptance of conditional attendance at a peace conference.
Only three ministers voted against attendance, namely Ariel Sharon, the hardline Likud Housing and Construction Minister, Yaval Ne'eman, Minister of Science and Energy, and Rehavam Ze'evi, Minister Without Portfolio.
Many commentators had forecast that the Cabinet session might lead to the collapse of the ruling Likud dominated coalition, with Ne'eman and Ze'evi taking their small hardline parties (Tehiyaand Moledet) out of the government in protest.
In the event, the session was relatively amicable, with Sharon alone launching his customary forceful attack on Shamir.
On Aug. 6 David Levi, the Israeli Foreign Minister, gave the Knesset foreign affairs and defence committee the details of a series of "understandings" with the USA which had been the basis of Israel's conditional assent to attend the conference.
According to Levi these "understandings" included the following:(i) Israel would not be obliged to accept the principle of "land for peace" ;(ii) the conference would have no power to make decisions and would not be used as a forum for appeal or discussion;(iii) negotiations would be direct and without preconditions and would be aimed at a peace treaty;(iv) the PLO would not be a partner to the process and the Palestinians would be represented by a joint delegation with Jordan;(v) the UN observer at the conference would be silent and would be a personal representative of the UN Secretary-General Javier Pérez de Cuéllar;(vi) a representative of the European Communities (EC) would attend the opening session of the conference;(vii) the USA would not allow a parallel conference to take place in the UN Security Council; and (viii) the Soviet Union would renew full diplomatic ties with Israel before the start of a conference.
Also on Aug. 6 Israel announced the establishment of another new settlement, Eshkolot, in the West Bank, thereby rejecting US and international appeals for a freeze on settlement activity in the period prior to the conference.
Palestinian reaction to Israel's conditional acceptance
On Aug. 2 Baker met with a Palestinian delegation in East Jerusalem led by Faisal al-Husseini, who was widely regarded as the unofficial PLO representative in Jerusalem.
After the meeting Hanan Ashrawi, another member of the Palestinian delegation, rejected Shamir's conditional acceptance of a conference, stating that "nobody has the right to veto or suggest the names of the Palestinian delegation" .
The PLO was extremely reluctant to accept Israel's conditions which would effectively exclude not only PLO members, but also residents of East Jerusalem from the peace conference.
The PLO's reluctance stemmed partly from the fact that the international community officially shared its view that East Jerusalem was illegally occupied by Israel and partly because such an exclusion would prevent its most able supporters (including Husseini) from attending the conference.
However, there were unconfirmed reports in July and August that the PLO was coming under some pressure from moderate Arab states to accept the exclusion of East Jerusalem residents.
Evidence also emerged during August of deep divisions over the issue within the Palestinian community.
Some groups openly rejected the idea of a conference, whereas a number of leading figures, including Bassam Abu Sharif,(senior adviser to Yassir Arafat.
the PLO chair) and Elias Freij, issued statements which appeared to countenance compliance with the Israeli conditions.
In a statement from Tunis on Aug. 2, the PLO issued a set of guarantees and conditions of its own, including implementation of UN Security Council resolutions 242 (November 1967) and 338 (October 1973), recognition of the legitimate and national rights of the Palestinian people, Palestinian participation at the conference in accordance with the decision of the PLO, the rejection of the exclusion of Jerusalem as an issue during any one of the peace process stages, and an immediate halt to settlement activities.
Republic of Algeria radio reported on Aug. 7 that the Palestine National Council (PNC, the Palestinian "parliament in exile" ) would convene in Algiers in September to "look into ways of dealing with the new peace initiative" .
Palestinian, Israeli and Jordanian officials met with US State Department officials between Aug. 7-13 in an attempt to draw up mutually acceptable memoranda of understanding as a basis for the conference.
Among the issues the Palestinians wanted in their memoranda of understanding was what the Middle East International of Aug. 16 described as "the legal reference point of the conference" in addition to detailed US interpretations of UN Resolutions 242 and 338 and the US position on East Jerusalem.
Baker tour of Jordan and Maghreb — Meeting between Assad and King Hussein
Baker left Israel on Aug. 2 for Jordan where he held talks with King Hussein.
He then visited Morocco, Tunisia and Algeria on Aug. 3-5, his first trip to the Maghreb as Secretary of State.
During his visit to North Africa Baker raised the idea of Maghrebi involvement in the peace conference, either at individual state level, or as the five-country Arab Maghreb Union (AMU).
President Hafez al Assad of Syria and King Hussein held talks in the Syrian port of Latakia on Aug. 19-20.
It was the first time the two leaders had met since Syria's mid-July agreement to participate in the conference.
The Syrian Foreign Minister, Farooq ash-Shar", visited Alexandria on Aug. 22 to brief Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak on the Assad-Hussein talks.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
LEBANON
Release of hostages — Search for comprehensive hostage deal
The release of two Western hostages in Lebanon in early August led to hopes of an imminent comprehensive hostage deal.
Speculation increased later in the month as Javier Pérez de Cuéllar, the UN Secretary-General, launched a major diplomatic campaign to arrange a hostage exchange involving Shia "prisoners" in Israel, and Israeli servicemen and Western hostages in Lebanon.
Release of McCarthy
On Aug. 6 Islamic Jihad issued a statement saying that it would send within the next 48 hours "a special envoy" with an extremely important message to Pérez de Cuéllar.
Islamic Jihad, an underground faction of the pro-Iranian radical Shia Hezbollah organization, was believed to be holding most of the Western hostages.
The Aug. 6 statement was accompanied by a photograph of United States hostage Terry Anderson, kidnapped in March 1985 and now detained for longer than any other of the Westerners captive in Lebanon.
On Aug. 8 the British hostage John McCarthy was released in Beirut; he was swiftly transported to the Syrian capital, Damascus, and thence flown back to the United Kingdom.
A statement released in Beirut on Aug. 8 by Islamic Jihad said: "Our emissary, John McCarthy, was dispatched at 11 a.m. today to convey our message to the UN Secretary-General, and this message will be delivered to him personally" [see below].
McCarthy, the first Western hostage released in Lebanon since the freeing of Brian Keenan in August 1990 [see p. 37668], had been kidnapped in Beirut on April 17, 1986, only a short while after arriving in the city to serve as acting bureau chief for Worldwide Television [see p. 34458].
His kidnapping was carried out at a time of great international tension, occurring only two days after US aircraft had conducted bombing raids on targets in Libya.
Kidnapping and release of Leyraud
Jerome Leyraud, a French worker for the relief agency Médécins du Monde, was kidnapped in West Beirut only hours after McCarthy's release on Aug. 8, apparently by a radical Shia faction opposed to the release of hostages, but he was released unharmed at dawn on Aug. 11.
A previously unknown organization calling itself the Organization for the Defence of the Rights of Prisoners and Detainees had issued a statement claiming responsibility for Leyraud's abduction, describing him as a French intelligence officer and threatening that he would be executed if another hostage was released.
The Middle East International of Aug. 16 said that it was "virtually certain" that Leyraud's abduction had been carried out by dissidents from within radical Shia circles.
However, the kidnappers were quickly revealed to be severely isolated within even their own community.
In his Friday sermon on Aug. 9 Sheikh Allamah Mohammed Husayn Fadlallah, Hezbollah's spiritual adviser, strongly condemned the kidnapping.
Meanwhile, Syrian and Lebanese security forces launched a major operation to secure Leyraud's release.
Release of Tracey
The Revolutionary Justice Organization (RJO) released US hostage Edward Tracey in Beirut on Aug. 11.
He was quickly driven to Damascus where he was handed over to the US chargé d'affaires, John Craig.
Tracey had been kidnapped by the RJO in October 1986 [see p. 35023].
On Aug. 10 the RJO had delivered a statement to a news agency in Beirut stating that a US hostage would be released within 72 hours.
The statement said that the impending release had been facilitated by negotiations with the UN Secretary-General's special envoy, Giandomenico Picco.
In the statement the RJO reiterated that the issue of Sheikh Abdel-Karim Obeid was a "priority" .
Sheikh Obeid, a Shia Moslem cleric and Hezbollah leader from southern Lebanon, had been abducted by Israeli commandos in July 1989 [see pp.36832; 36858].
According to the Agence France-Presse (AFP) news agency the RJO statement was accompanied by a photograph of the US hostage Joseph Cicippio.
Delivery of letter to Pérez de Cuéllar — Negotiations on hostage deal
On Aug. 11 McCarthy delivered to Pérez de Cuéllar the letter given him by Islamic Jihad.
After a meeting with McCarthy at RAF Lyneham in England, Pérez de Cuéllar said that he would do "whatever is necessary" to secure the release of all hostages and end the "humanitarian problem" .
The letter called for the release of all detainees in the prisons of "occupied Palestine" (Israel) and Europe in return for the release of Western hostages in Lebanon.
In the letter Islamic Jihad called on Pérez de Cuéllar "to make a personal endeavour, in the framework of a comprehensive solution, to secure the release of all detainees around the world" .
After taking possession of the letter Pérez de Cuéllar returned to Geneva and opened diplomatic negotiations aimed at bringing the hostage crisis to an end.
Throughout the remainder of August he and Picco held a number of discussions with Uri Lubrani, Israel's "co-ordinator of activities in Lebanon" , Kamal Kharazi, Iran's permanent representative at the UN, Cornelio Sommaruga, President of the International Committee of the Red Cross, and many others.
Israel had never hidden its willingness to enter into a hostage exchange deal.
However, the Israeli government maintained that it would only release Shia "prisoners" held in Israel or in its self-declared "security zone" in southern Lebanon in return for seven Israeli servicemen listed as missing in action (MIA) in Lebanon.
During late August various sources released information on the seven Israeli MIAs.
AFP, quoting official Lebanese sources, reported on Aug. 22 that an Israeli navigator, Ron Arad, was alive, but that the other six servicemen were dead.
Reports published in Beirut newspapers on Aug. 28 and quoting a senior source in the Shia Amal movement claimed that Arad was being held by the Iranian Revolutionary Guard in Iran, having been captured by Amal in Lebanon in 1986 after bailing out of his aircraft, and then sold by Amal to the Revolutionary Guard for $500,000.
The Amal leader Nabi Berri announced on Aug. 27 that his group was in possession of the remains of two Israeli "prisoners" , and would allow the Red Cross to examine the bodies once Israel had freed 28 Lebanese women held in Israeli prisons.
Sheikh Na'im Qasim, a Hezbollah deputy secretary-general, claimed in an interview on Aug. 26 that Hezbollah was holding two Israeli prisoners of war.
Internal affairs
Departure of Gen. Aoun — Passage of amnesty law
Gen. Michel Aoun, the rebel Maronite leader who launched an unsuccessful "war of liberation" against Syrian forces in Lebanon in the late 1980s, arrived in exile in France on Aug. 29.
Aoun had been living in the French embassy in Beirut since Syrian and Lebanese forces toppled his "government" in October 1990 [see p. 37792].
Aoun's departure into exile was made possible on Aug. 26 when the National Assembly approved a law providing a general amnesty for crimes committed during the civil war (1975-90).
Aoun and his two colleagues, Gen. Issam Abu Jamrah and Gen. Adgar Ma'luf, were subsequently given a special pardon by President Elias Hrawi.
The pardon stipulated that Aoun, Jamrah and Ma'luf should live abroad for at least five years and would lose their immunity if they engaged in political activity during that period.
Some US$30,000,000 held by Gen. Aoun in European bank accounts would be frozen pending a negotiated settlement.
A number of crimes were not covered by the amnesty law.
These included two of the incidents which were believed effectively to have triggered the civil war, namely the assassination in February 1975 in Sidon of a prominent left-wing politician, Maarouf Saad, and, two months later, the attack by armed Phalangists on a bus carrying Palestinians through the Beirut suburb of Ain Rumaneh [see p. 27287].
Other crimes not covered by the amnesty included a host of assassinations, including those of Kamal Jumblatt (1977 — see p. 28737), Rashid Karami (1987 — see pp. 35346-47), Mufti Hassan Khaled (1989 — see p. 36671), Rene Mouawad (1989 — see p. 37029) and Dany Chamoun (1990 — see p. 37793).
Clashes in south
Israel Defence Force (IDF) radio reported on Aug. 8 that an officer of the Israeli-backed South Lebanon Army (SLA) militia had been killed that day in the central sector of Israel's self-declared "security zone" .
Hezbollah radio (Voice of the Oppressed) claimed to have ambushed an SLA patrol that day, but made no mention of casualties.
On Aug. 23 Hezbollah forces attacked an SLA patrol near the "security zone" border, and SLA units responded by shelling villages further north.
Israel claimed that two SLA soldiers died and three others were wounded in the Hezbollah attack, whereas Hezbollah claimed that all 10 members of the SLA patrol were either killed or injured.
Radio Lebanon reported on Aug. 24 that a number of civilians were killed or wounded in the subsequent SLA barrage, during which, according to some sources, regular Lebanese soldiers (deployed in the south since July — see p. 38360) clashed with SLA fighters.
Army deployment in the north — Renewal of UNIFIL mandate
In implementation of the government's plan to extend state authority over all Lebanese territory, regular army units replaced Syrian troops in Bsharri and al-Kurah in the north on Aug. 25.
The mandate of the UN Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL), deployed in southern Lebanon since 1978, was extended for a further six-month term on July 31.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
ISRAEL
Foreign relations — Defence
Visit to Bulgaria by Shamir
Israeli Prime Minister Itzhak Shamir visited Bulgaria on Aug. 27-30.
His visit was the first by an Israeli head of government to Bulgaria, and followed the restoration of diplomatic links in May 1990 [see p. 37749].
The talks between Shamir and his Bulgarian counterpart Dimitur Popov centred on future plans for economic co-operation.
They signed an agreement for closer co-operation on economic, technological and research activities, providing for the establishment of joint ventures and the opening of a US$3,000,000 line of credit to Bulgaria.
Israeli-Soviet flight agreement
The Israeli Transport Minister, Moshe Katsav, and the Soviet Civil Aviation Minister, Boris Panyukov, signed an agreement in Moscow on Aug. 14 providing for direct charter flights of immigrants from the Soviet Union to Israel.
The agreement provided for the establishment of a joint venture between the Israeli and Soviet state airlines.
Successful test of Barak-1
Israel successfully tested its home-developed Barak-1 anti-missile missile on Aug. 16.
The ship-launched missile had a range of up to 11 km and could carry a 5kg warhead.
The Independent of Aug. 19 reported that a second country was known to be developing the missile with Israel, but that its identity was being kept secret.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
IRAQ
UN resolution authorizing oil sales and Compensation Fund ceiling
The UN Security Council on Aug. 16 adopted by 13 votes to one (Cuba), with one abstention (Yemen), Resolution 706 authorizing Iraq to sell oil worth US$1,600,000 million to buy food and other humanitarian supplies under strict UN supervision.
Resolution 705, adopted unanimously, directed Iraq to start a war reparations fund paid for by up to 30 per cent of future oil revenues [see pp. 38165; 38211; 38308].
The partial lifting of the oil ban was reportedly prompted by a recent UN report recommending limited sales of Iraqi oil to stave off imminent mass starvation [see p. 38361].
A UN Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) study released on Aug. 2 warned that a "widespread and acute food supply crisis" threatened "massive starvation throughout the country" , and described the effects of the economic blockade, particularly the lack of drugs, as "alarming" .
The Iraqi Health Ministry said on Aug. 26 that 14,333 children had died in the last year owing to the absence of medical supplies.
UN officials emphasised that the resolutions, which gave Iraq no control over its oil revenues, were exceptional and did not signify the lifting of sanctions.
On Aug. 16 Iraq's permanent representative at the UN, Abdul Amir al-Anbari, rejected Resolution 706 as a violation of Iraq's sovereignty and claimed that it reduced Iraq's position to one of "trusteeship" .
He also denounced Resolution 705 on the creation of a war reparations fund, reiterating Iraq's request for a five-year moratorium to help cope with the consequences of bombing and economic devastation [see p. 38211].
On Aug. 19 the Iraqi National Assembly described the resolutions as "unjust" and "an encroachment on the sovereignty…of a UN member nation" .
Responding to the charge that the restrictions attached to oil sales violated Iraqi sovereignty, the United States permanent representative at the UN, Thomas Pickering, said that they had been included to "prevent [food and medicines being diverted]to the Iraqi privileged classes as has happened in the past" .
On Aug. 1 the Iraqi Minister of Trade, Mohammad Mehdi Saleh, had denied reports that food and medical supplies were diverted to the armed forces and members of the Ba'ath Party.
On Aug. 15 the UN World Food Programme (WFP) began distributing 90,000 tonnes of food in Baghdad amidst reports that the governing body of the UN Compensation Fund [see p. 38211]intended to order Iraq to pay compensation to workers forced to leave Kuwait and Iraq as a result of the Gulf crisis.
UN resolution on disclosure of weapons programme
The UN Security Council on Aug. 15 unanimously adopted Resolution 707 condemning Iraq for its failure to disclose full details of its weapons programme and ordering it to provide complete access to UN inspection teams [see pp. 38307-08; 38360-61], including accepting their right to conduct aerial inspections anywhere in the country.
The UN Security Council had received two reports in early August, from the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and the UN Special Commission [see pp. 38165; 38211; 38307; 38361], outlining a comprehensive strategy to monitor Iraq's nuclear capacity, including the right of international inspectors to "full and free" access to "all locations, all persons and all information" and to use independent means of transport and communication.
On Aug. 12, the UN Special Commission confirmed that it had borrowed a high-altitude U-2 US spy plane to conduct aerial inspection of suspected Iraqi weapons sites.
Aerial inspections were condemned by the Iraqi government on Aug. 27 as "spying operations" .
Earlier, the head of the fourth UN-IAEA inspection team assigned to re-assess Iraq's nuclear capability [see p. 38361], David Kay, had indicated that the government had shown greater willingness to co-operate with UN inspectors.
On Aug. 5 the government announced that it had provided UN inspectors details of its "biological research for military purposes" , but stressed that "there is positively no biological activity for ammunition or weapons purposes" .
In April Iraq had denied possessing any biological weapons [see p. 38164].
The statement, which coincided with the inspection of a research centre near Salman Pak, 30 km south-east of Baghdad, by a team of UN biological weapons experts who had arrived in Iraq on Aug. 2, was confirmed by the team's head, David Kelly, who said that Iraq had undertaken research using anthrax and the food poisoning toxin, botulinum, but that his team had found no evidence of the manufacture of biological weapons.
In further disclosures on Aug. 6, the government admitted that its scientists had extracted "tiny amounts" of plutonium.
Reports on Aug. 8 said that UN-IAEA inspectors had discovered sophisticated centrifuge technology used to produce enriched uranium at al-Farat, 30 km south-west of Baghdad [see p. 38211; 38307; 38360].
The Independent of Aug. 22 reported that the UN-IAEA team had found two additional facilities producing enough enriched uranium for two nuclear devices a year.
UN officials supervising the destruction of Iraq's chemical weapons [see pp.38164-65; 38211; 38307-08; 38361], who visited the country on Aug. 15-21, said that the government had co-operated fully and was working out ways to destroy bombs and warheads.
The head of a UN ballistics team, Wolfgang Buttler, said on Aug. 14 that the government had assisted with the inspection of an assembled "super-gun" [see pp. 37332; 37390-91; 37471; 38361].
It had been reported on July 7 that a UN team had overseen the destruction of 61 Iraqi missiles and 10 mobile launchers.
Stalemate over Kurdish autonomy
The latest round of negotiations with the government over Kurdish autonomy [see pp. 38126; 38211; 38308]ended on Aug. 20 with apparent agreement on a draft settlement, believed to include provisions for the resettlement of Kurdish refugees and the creation of a Kurdish executive and legislative council for the autonomous region.
However, reports of differences between Kurdish guerrilla leaders, first suggested in June [see pp. 38308; 38361], resurfaced when they met in Shaqlawa on Aug. 28 to discuss the government's latest proposals.
Masoud Barzani of the Democratic Party of Kurdistan (DPK), who led the Kurdish delegation during the talks in Baghdad, was believed to have pressed for an acceptance of the proposed settlement, despite uncertainty over the status of Kirkuk, claiming that the government was unwilling to make any further concessions.
Jalal Talabani of the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan (PUK), who had recently received fresh assurances of continued Western assistance for Iraqi Kurds [see p. 38361], had reportedly insisted on a more ambitious scheme involving autonomy for an area twice the size held by Kurdish guerrillas, incorporating the city of Kirkuk, and a clearer commitment by the government to hold democratic elections.
On Aug. 14 the Iraqi government demanded the immediate withdrawal of all Turkish forces from northern Iraq.
This ultimatum [see also p. 38403]came in the wake of reports which claimed that Iraqi troops were being massed around Kirkuk.
Opposition meetings
A statement issued by the Joint Action Committee of the Iraqi Opposition (JACIO)[see pp. 37987; 38082; 38211], meeting in Damascus on Aug. 4, said that the Committee had considered "ways to promote [its]actions inside Iraq" .
Members of 18 opposition groups from Europe and the Middle East had met in Washington on Aug. 1-3 and discussed "plans to depose [President]Saddam [Hussein]" .
Establishment of Baghdad stock exchange — Other RCC decrees
A Revolutionary Command Council (RCC) decree of Aug. 12 established the Baghdad stock exchange on a "non-profit" basis to sell and purchase securities "in a way that will…protect the national economy" .
The measure came amidst allegations by the government that neighbouring states hostile to Iraq had flooded the country with forged banknotes to destabilize the economy.
On Aug. 26 the Iraqi News Agency (INA) reported that police had arrested a gang dealing in foreign currency and counterfeit money.
On Aug. 11 the RCC exempted importers of basic foodstuffs from paying income tax.
Increased salaries and benefits for army officers were announced by the RCC on Aug. 15.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
KUWAIT
UNIKOM investigation into Iraqi landing on Bubiyan
Members of the UN Iraq-Kuwait Observer Mission (UNIKOM)[see p. 38165]visited Bubiyan on Aug. 29 to investigate claims that Iraqi troops in gunboats had attempted to "infiltrate" the island the previous day.
In a formal protest to the UN Security Council on Aug. 28, the Kuwaiti government said that between 80 and 90 Iraqi troops had landed on the island in violation of Gulf ceasefire agreements [see pp. 38164-65]before being repulsed by Kuwaiti coastguards.
Subsequent reports, citing Interior Ministry officials, indicated that the Iraqi landing was intended to retrieve weapons and ammunition abandoned after Iraq's defeat in the Gulf War [see pp. 37982-86].
A US Defence Department spokesman referred to the Iraqi action as "a very small violation" , while the Iraqi News Agency (INA) dismissed the Kuwaiti claims as "sheer lies" and emphasised that Iraqi troops were "conducting no military activities in the area" .
Kuwait, backed by UNIKOM, had already accused Iraq on Aug. 15 of violating the ceasefire in the demilitarized zone between the two countries [see p. 38164], and this latest incident was expected to renew pressure on Western governments to respond to Kuwaiti requests for a permanent Western military presence in the emirate.
UN Secretary-General Javier Pérez de Cuéllar, who had described the incursion into Bubiyan island as "a very serious development" , said on Aug. 29 that the incident had been brought under control.
Members of the National Council [see pp. 37549-50; 38309; 38361]who met the Foreign Minister, Shaikh Salem as Sabah as Salim as Sabah, on Aug. 22, confirmed afterwards that they had "called for expanding proposals…to include setting up bases for the United States and Britain" .
In a separate development, the Amir of Kuwait, Shaikh Jabir al Ahmad al Jabir as Sabah disclosed on Aug. 13 that Iraq's President Saddam Hussein had, three months before the invasion, warned the Amir of military action if he failed to cede one-third of Kuwait's territories to Iraq.
Re-opening of oil refinery — Lifting of currency restrictions — Appeal courts
The country's biggest oil refinery, Ahmadi, which resumed operations on Aug. 27, was expected to meet domestic demands by processing up to 130,000 barrels per day (bpd) of crude oil.
Oil exports from Kuwait had resumed in July.
Meanwhile, 293 oil fires were reported on Aug. 14 to have been extinguished [see pp. 38119; 38212; 38309].
Oil Minister Hamud Abdullah al Raqaba said on Aug. 13 that the government expected to bring up to 21 oil fires per week under control following the arrival of new firefighting equipment.
The first 30 of a batch of Chinese firefighters arrived in Kuwait City on Aug. 23.
Lifting of restrictions on currency withdrawals
The Central Bank lifted restrictions on currency withdrawals on Aug. 3 after having imposed a limit in February of KD4,000 (US$13,500) on all withdrawals and foreign currency transfers.
Establishment of appeals courts
In measures announced on Aug. 12 and 14, the government ordered the trial of all detainees within six months and the establishment of appeals courts.
The new laws followed widespread international criticism of the conduct of recent war trials [see pp. 38212; 38308].
Reports on Aug. 7 said that the government had airlifted hundreds of Palestinians, expected to total 3,000 by mid-August, to Jordan [see pp. 38118; 38166; 38309]].
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
GULF CONFLICT
Iraqi "victory" claim — US victory parades
Aug. 2, the anniversary of the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait, was marked by a broadcast by Iraqi President Saddam Hussein in which he described the Iraqis as the true victors in the subsequent war, on the grounds that Iraq had not backed down in the face of the enormous odds against it.
The United States had held victory parades on June 8-10, most notably in Washington (June 8) and in New York (June 10).
The Washington military parade had begun with a wreath-laying ceremony to commemorate 378 US war dead.
In New York, police estimated that 4,700,000 people watched what was believed to be the largest-ever ticker-tape parade.
A more restrained parade on June 21 in London marked the return of British troops, 1,000 of whom marched through the City where the Queen took the salute; UK Gulf war honours were announced on June 29.
UK war dead totalled 42, including nine killed accidentally on Feb. 26 by US "friendly fire" [see p. 38382 for disclosures about total number of deaths resulting from US "friendly fire" ].
The US Defence Department on June 11 announced as its goal the completion by Nov. 1 of the return of all reservists (except volunteers) from the Gulf theatre.
The last US National Guard unit left Saudi Arabia on Sept. 17.
In all 228,000 US reservists had been called into service, of whom 106,000 were deployed in the Gulf (20,000 being still there at the time of the June 11 announcement); the total US armed forces contingent in the Gulf had numbered 541,000.
The United Kingdom, second in military significance on the allied side, had provided 45,000 personnel.
The UK House of Commons defence committee, reporting on Aug. 9 on the preliminary lessons of this so-called "Operation Granby" , noted that it had "stretched" the country's military resources to the extent that its operational capability in Germany had effectively been destroyed.
Contributions to US war costs
The Financial Times of Aug. 2 gave details of foreign contributions to the costs of US military operations in the Gulf war.
US Budget Director Richard Darman told the House of Representatives ways and means committee on July 31 that the additional costs incurred because of the military operation were expected to total US$61,000 million.
A significant proportion of this cost would not actually be incurred in the current financial year, as it related to the need for future replacement of equipment or ammunition.
Foreign contributions already received amounted to over $46,000 million and the total foreign commitment came to $54,000 million, with 96 per cent of the outstanding amount being due from Saudi Arabia and Kuwait, already the largest contributors with payments of $12,700 million and $12,500 million respectively.
[For resolution of the position on the Japanese $9,000 million contribution see p. 38098; for German contribution see p. 38109; the other principal contributor was the UAE.]
Uncertainty over war death toll
The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) was reported in early August to be unable to trace more than a few hundred of the many thousands of Iraqi soldiers who died in the Gulf war fighting, nor had details been given of the location of mass graves.
There was no consensus as to the credibility of the commonly mentioned estimate of 100,000 Iraqi war dead, no official figures having been provided despite the obligation under the Geneva Convention for the military authorities to attempt to account for enemy dead.
The US Defence Department had provided on May 22 the approximate estimate that Iraqi military casualties had been around 100,000 dead, but warned that this estimate could be 50 per cent out either way.
The non-governmental environmentalist organization Greenpeace published in Washington on May 29 the first comprehensive survey of the human and environmental impact of the Gulf war, based on interviews with relief workers, reporters and US officials.
It estimated that 100,000-120,000 Iraqi troops had been killed, as well as 5,000-15,000 civilians, and that 2,000-5,000 Kuwaitis had died during the Iraqi occupation and in the war itself.
Casualties on the allied side were given as 343 troops killed, including 266 US forces, of whom 145 had been killed in action and 121 had died in accidents.
Subsequently, the report estimated, some 20,000 people had died in Iraq during a month of civil war in the south and in fighting in Kurdish areas.
The death toll of 15,000-30,000 Kurdish and other refugees, and 4,000-16,000 Iraqis killed by disease and starvation since the war, was believed to have risen by a further 30,000 between the completion of the report and its publication.
Controversy over US diplomatic signals prior to Iraqi invasion of Kuwait
The former US ambassador to Iraq, April Glaspie, replying belatedly to the allegation that she had allowed Saddam Hussein to conclude that there would be no US opposition if Iraq invaded Kuwait, gave her own version of her fateful July 25, 1990, discussions with the Iraqi President, when she appeared before the Senate foreign relations committee in late March 1991.
Glaspie, who subsequently left her State Department post for a teaching job, claimed that a taped record of these discussions as released by the Iraqis in September 1990 [see p. 37696]was effectively "a fabrication" , having been cut and doctored to discredit her.
Most significantly, the Iraqi tape had represented her as saying simply that the US "has no opinion on the Arab-Arab conflicts like your border disagreement with Kuwait" , whereas, she now stated, she had insisted that the dispute must be settled "in a non-violent manner" .
However, the New York Times of July 12, reporting on hitherto secret State Department cables provided at the request of the Senate foreign relations committee, found that they included no such clear warning on Glaspie's part.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
IRAN
Anti-government disturbances
Public discontent with the government's economic policies [see p. 38363]reportedly provoked an outbreak of arson at Tehran's main bazaar and 15 others across the country in late July and August.
Over 50 people were killed and millions of dollars' worth of carpets and other goods were destroyed.
Slum-dwellers in a Tehran suburb, protesting against the planned demolition of unauthorized shacks, had clashed violently with police on July 29.
Opposition sources claimed that police had wounded and killed numerous protestors during anti-government riots in the northern city of Tabriz on Aug. 15.
On Aug. 17 Tehran Radio reported "violent incidents" at an anti-government demonstration in Zanjan, west of Tehran.
Meanwhile, recent protests against the compulsory use of the hijab or headscarf [see p. 38363]were reported to have prompted north Tehran's police commander, Massoud Kiumarsi on Aug. 5 to issue a warning to female employees of foreign companies to abide by the dress code.
Reports on Aug. 15 said that the Prosecutor General, Abolfazi Moussavi Tabrizi, had threatened to impose the death sentence on anyone violating the dress code.
The report was denied on Aug. 16.
The spate of recent disturbances, aggravated by high prices, housing shortages and the cut in food subsidies imposed during the Gulf war, led the government's opponents to accuse it of ignoring the poor.
On July 31, several Majlis deputies called on the government to stop "putting pressure on low-income people" .
A study by an informal Majlis committee, reported in the Guardian of Aug. 5, found that the gulf between rich and poor was almost as wide as before the 1979 revolution.
Inflation, officially set at 9 per cent, was estimated by the Far Eastern Economic Review of Sept. 5 to have run at 24 per cent in 1990-91.
Meanwhile, house prices and rents were reported to have more than doubled in the last 12 months.
On Aug. 14 the government modified budget allocations to give greater priority to improving living standards in the poorest regions and on Aug. 19 issued guidelines to curb "unnecessary spending" .
On the same day the country's spiritual leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, urged government officials to "refrain from indulgence in extravagant spending" , adding that "we earned our popularity…because of our…disregard for material things" .
UN report on damage from Iran-Iraq war
A report released on Aug. 2 by a UN team assigned to assess damage resulting from the 1980-88 war with Iraq [see p. 38309]found that "the damage inflicted on the country's infrastructure was of a magnitude and nature that will require several years of repair or reconstruction" .
The report described reconstruction efforts as impressive, but estimated the probable total cost of direct and indirect damage at 65,346 million rials (about US$1,000 million).
Some of the worst damage had occurred in the port cities of Abadan and Khorramshahr.
Relying on government figures, the report estimated that 14,000 civilians had died during the war while another 57,000 were wounded, 37,000 of whom were permanently disabled.
Visit by President of Azerbaijan
President Ayaz Mutalibov of the Soviet republic of Azerbaijan, who visited Iran on Aug. 16-18, held talks with President Hashemi Ali Akbar Rafsanjani on Aug. 18 after which they signed a memorandum of understanding to improve bilateral relations.
According to the International Herald Tribune of Aug. 27 Iran had expressed its willingness to host a conference of leaders from the Soviet Moslem republics to forge a "common stance" against Soviet authority.
Oil plant contracts
The Oil Minister, Gholamreza Agazadeh was quoted by Tehran Radio on Aug. 10 as saying that German and Italian banks had agreed to lend Iran US$856 million to help finance petrochemical projects.
Increased oil revenues in 1990 [see p. 38071]accounting for a rise in foreign exchange allotments for several industries, were reported to have made possible a three-fold increase in car production, announced by the Ministry of Heavy Industries on Aug. 6.
Murder of Bakhtiar
Shapour Bakhtiar, 76, who had briefly been Prime Minister in 1979 (Jan. 3-Feb. 5 — see pp. 29740-44) in the last days of the Shah's regime, was murdered at his home in a Paris suburb on Aug. 6; French police only discovered his body on Aug. 8, together with the body of an aide apparently also killed in the attack.
From his exile in France Bakhtiar had been a fierce critic of Ayatollah Khomeini, Iran's spiritual leader following the 1979 revolution.
He founded the National Iranian Resistance Movement, and had narrowly escaped an earlier assassination attempt in July 1980 [see pp. 30631-32].
He was the second prominent Iranian dissident to be killed abroad since April [see p. 38169].
One of three suspects, Ali Vakili Rad, was arrested by Swiss police on Aug. 21 and extradited on Aug. 27 to France, where he was charged the following day with murder.
The fact that the assassination coincided with the release in Lebanon of the British hostage John McCarthy [see p. 38405]fuelled speculation that it had been sanctioned by opponents of the Iranian government critical of its current conciliatory attitude towards the West [see pp.38212; 38309]and of its role in pressing for an early resolution of the hostage crisis.
Other reports implicating the Iranian government itself in the assassination were denied on Aug. 12 by a Foreign Ministry spokesman who said that "Iran has always strongly condemned any terrorist act" .
The French Foreign Minister, Roland Dumas, said on Aug. 22 that there was "as yet" no evidence of official Iranian involvement; there had been fears that the incident, coming on top of the recent difficulties in resolving a financial dispute between France and Iran [see p. 38363], could jeopardize a planned visit to Iran by French President Mitterrand.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
LIBYA
Inauguration of Great Manmade River
The first phase of Libya's Great Manmade River, begun in 1984 [see pp. 33435-36]and the largest irrigation project in the Middle East, was inaugurated on Aug. 28 by Col. Moamer al Kadhafi, who turned a tap to start the flow of water at a ceremony near Benghazi.
The scheme, expected to cost US$25,000 million and to take 25 years to complete, aimed to tap underground water resources 2,000 km away in south-eastern Libya to supply the more populous coastal regions.
The first phase brought drinking water to the Benghazi and Sirte areas, through a network of underground pipes and reservoirs built by South Korean companies.
Later phases would concentrate on irrigation for agriculture.
Most Western leaders declined Kadhafi's invitation to attend the inauguration ceremonies; some observers linked their cool response to Libya's welcoming of the attempted overthrow of Soviet President Gorbachev.
Arab and African leaders attending included the heads of state of Algeria, Burkina, Chad, Djibouti, Egypt, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, Rwanda, Sudan and Tunisia, the Vice-Presidents of Afghanistan, Iraq and Syria, Palestine Liberation Organization chairman Yassir Arafat and Arab League Secretary-General Esmat Abdel Meguid.
In his speech at the inauguration, Kadhafi said that Libya had carried out the project unaided by developed nations or international financial institutions.
This evidence of strength used by a small country for peaceful purposes and to promote its own self-sufficiency would, he warned, undermine the power of "imperialism" and lay Libya open to attack, especially by the United States.
Recent moves towards the economic integration of Egypt and Libya were discussed by Kadhafi and Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak during the ceremonies.
On Aug. 6, the Egyptian government had ordered the opening of the border with Libya, removing all obstacles to trade and travel between the two countries.
Mubarak had returned from a visit to Tripoli the previous day, while Kadhafi had visited Cairo at the beginning of July to conclude the ratification of 10 integration agreements signed by the two countries.
Deportation of illegal immigrants
About 180 Ghanaians arrived in Accra, the Ghanaian capital, on Aug. 13 after being deported by Libya as part of a drive to expel illegal immigrants from African countries.
Nationals of Burkina, Chad, Mali, Niger and Nigeria were also reported to be affected.
A government official told the Libyan news agency that large numbers of illegal immigrants had found their way into Libya by desert routes without passports and some had been found to be suffering from serious diseases.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
ALGERIA
Multiparty conference
The final round of talks between the government and political leaders, aimed at reaching a consensus on electoral reform, ended on Aug. 24 with a joint statement underlining the government's commitment to hold a general election "before the end of the year" and to formulate a draft law on "the division of electoral constituencies…in consultation with all parties" .
The talks were boycotted by the fundamentalist Islamic Salvation Front (FIS) and the Front of Socialist Forces (FFS).
The first session, on July 30-Aug. 2, was attended, according to official sources, by representatives of 51 political parties and 60 associations.
It had rapidly run into controversy, with the representative of the ruling National Liberation Front (FLN) withdrawing in protest over proposals to reform the electoral law and to oblige the party to return state funds.
Although the FIS had refused to participate in the conference without prior acceptance of its demands, which included the release of FIS leaders arrested in June [see p. 38312], it was understood that channels of communication between the government and the FIS had remained open.
On Aug. 22 it emerged that Shaikh Bachir Fekih, a member of the FIS, had attended the final round of negotiations in a personal capacity amidst reports of assurances by the Prime Minister, Sid Ahmed Ghozali, that the state of siege in force in the country since June 5 [see p. 38312]would be lifted by Oct. 5.
Earlier, a draft formula prepared by a 26-party committee and submitted to conference participants on Aug. 2 had envisaged, as minimum conditions for elections,(i) the immediate lifting of the state of siege;(ii) the release of political detainees; and (iii) the creation of a consultative mechanism between the government and political parties.
Release of political detainees
In a move interpreted by observers as an attempt to persuade the FIS to participate in the national conference [see above], the government announced on Aug. 17 the release of 329 political prisoners, allegedly members of the FIS, detained since June.
The FIS claimed that the government's latest figures on the number of arrests made in June represented only a tenth of the actual total.
(On July 31 Ghozali had said that the government's final tally following the June disturbances, showed that 55 people had been killed, 326 wounded and 2,976 arrested.
On Aug. 12, however, the chairman of the League for the Defence of Human Rights said that more than 300 people had died and over 8,000 had been arrested during the recent disturbances.)
Election of FLN politburo
Former Prime Minister Mouloud Hamrouche was elected to a new 15-member politburo announced by the FLN on Aug. 8.
The new committee, reportedly dominated by political figures close to the military establishment, was believed to reflect the army's growing alienation from the policies of the Ghozali government; although Ghozali remained a member of the FLN central committee he was considered as having tried to distance himself from the FLN as much as possible.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
MOROCCO
Release of political prisoners
King Hassan on Aug. 14 granted an amnesty to an unspecified number of "prisoners who have recognized the Moroccan identity of the recovered Sahara" .
[For developments in Western Sahara see this page.]
The amnesty, announced in an official communiqué, gave no details of the identities of those released.
Much speculation surrounded the case of left-wing leader Abraham Serfaty, imprisoned since 1974 [see p. 28260], about whose continued imprisonment a UN panel had sought an official explanation in November 1990 [see p. 37874].
It subsequently became known that Serfaty had been released, and on Sept. 13 he was expelled to France, the Moroccan authorities having denied his claim to Moroccan nationality on the grounds that he held Brazilian citizenship.
In early July the Moroccan authorities had freed a number of prisoners previously deemed to have "disappeared" , who had been secretly detained for up to 15 years.
The Moroccan Organization of Human Rights on Aug. 3 denounced the government's policy of "political detention" and "inhuman prison conditions" , while on Aug. 7 Amnesty International renewed its call for the "immediate release of all army personnel held in secret beyond the expiry of their sentence, for over 17 years" , a reference to some 60 people said to be still detained under conditions of "rigorous imprisonment" at an isolated fortress in Tazmamart.
[For 1973 treason trials, including life sentence passed in absentia on Serfaty, see pp. 26131-32.]
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
WESTERN SAHARA
Renewed fighting
On Aug. 4 and 5, in the week before UN staff were due to arrive in the territory to start preparing the January 1992 UN-supervised referendum [see p. 38169], Moroccan aircraft strafed the oasis of Tfariti in the north-east, near the Mauritanian border, while Polisario Front guerrillas claimed to have shot down a Moroccan aircraft.
The attacks, followed by further clashes later in the month, ended a 21-month lull in fighting between Morocco and the Polisario guerrillas, and appeared to place in jeopardy a formal UN-backed ceasefire due to come into effect on Sept. 6.
A Moroccan government statement on Aug. 7 said that that the armed forces were "conducting clean-up operations in no-man's land" between the Moroccan defensive lines and the Western Sahara's borders, and accused Polisario of infiltrating the territory with the aim of "perturbing and delaying" the referendum.
In a letter to UN Secretary-General Javier Pérez de Cuéllar on Aug. 7, the Polisario secretary-general and President of the Saharan Arab Democratic Republic Mohammed Abdelazziz complained of a policy of "deliberate derailing" by Morocco.
Pérez de Cuéllar on Aug. 9 called for a truce to be maintained until the implementation of the formal ceasefire.
It was reported that on Aug. 10 Moroccan officials had refused to allow the UN official in charge of the ceasefire and referendum arrangements, Johannes Manz, to enter the territory.
Polisario accused the Moroccan government on Aug. 18 of "trying to influence the international community by releasing a few Saharan prisoners" in an amnesty on Aug. 14 [see this page]claiming that 800 Saharans were still missing.
On Aug. 27 Polisario claimed that Morocco had massed 200,000 troops around Tfariti.
Moroccan air force attacks on the oases of Bir Lahlou, Mijic and Aguenit were reported, and Polisario claimed that thousands of nomads had been forced to take refuge in the desert.
Its Madrid representative said on Aug. 27 that dozens of people had died, some in the bombing and others of thirst, and that "hundreds" were missing.
Moroccan call for postponement of referendum
On Aug. 20, King Hassan of Morocco called on the UN to delay the referendum by four months; Morocco was disputing the UN's "consolidated list" of approximately 74,000 Sahrawis deemed entitled to vote, and was objecting to Manz's rejection of a Moroccan list of some 120,000 people it claimed were refugees from the territory entitled to vote.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
GULF CO-OPERATION COUNCIL
Release of Damascus Declaration
On Aug. 6 the Egyptian government released the text of the hitherto secret Damascus Declaration originally drawn up in March [see pp. 38116-17; 38313; 38364]by the six members of the Gulf Co-Operation Council (GCC — Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates), together with Egypt and Syria.
A report in the Middle East International of Aug. 16 suggested that the publication of the Declaration before final agreement on its details had been prompted by Egypt's growing alienation from its Arab partners.
A meeting of GCC, Egyptian and Syrian Foreign Ministers in July [see p. 38364]had failed to reach a consensus on the terms of a regional defence pact, amidst reports of differences on the size and role of the new force, fears of Egyptian and Syrian domination, and continued Kuwaiti demands for additional Western military guarantees.
In May Egypt's President Hosni Mubarak had announced the withdrawal of all Egyptian troops from Kuwait and Saudi Arabia [see p. 38213], although he had subsequently offered to reconsider the decision [see p. 38309].
In the preamble to the final version of the Declaration released by Egyptian officials, contracting parties reaffirmed their "rejection of the aggressive course and alignment that occurred during the Iraqi aggression and occupation of the state of Kuwait" and recognized that it had "destroyed many of the concepts and achievements of joint Arab action" .
While condemning "the Iraqi regime's aggression" , however, the signatories underlined "their support for the Iraqi people" .
The Declaration committed parties to "work towards building a new Arab order to bolster joint Arab action" and viewed "the support by Egyptian and Syrian forces…during the Gulf crisis" as a model example, adding that "any GCC country has the right to employ the services of Egyptian and Syrian forces on its territories if it so wishes" .
Parties to the Declaration also undertook to "turn the Middle East into a region free from all weapons of mass destruction" and to strengthen economic co-operation and development by seeking to "encourage the private sector in the Arab states" .
The Declaration's organizational framework committed parties to "co-ordinate and co-operate…by holding meetings at the foreign ministers' level" .
Meeting of GCC Chiefs of Staff
Chiefs of Staff from the six GCC states held an extraordinary meeting in the Omani capital, Muscat, on Aug. 26-27, to review preliminary plans for the formation of a joint defence force in the Gulf.
Oman's Chief of Staff, Lt.-Gen.
Khamis bin Hamid al-Kalbani, stressed that "the idea of a joint and independent GCC force" showed growing awareness that "Gulf security [was]the responsibility of the people of the Gulf" .
Oman had reportedly favoured the formation of a regional defence force drawn exclusively from the Gulf states [see p. 38364].
GCC Secretary-General Abdullah Yacoub Bishara (Kuwait) said that the meeting of Chiefs of Staff was the first in a line of "other meetings to give substance to the concepts adopted at the meeting on the joint independent GCC force" .
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
EGYPT
The Egypt Human Rights Defence Organization claimed on Aug. 4 that defendants accused of the murder in October 1990 of National Assembly president Rifaat al-Mahgoub had been tortured; the trial of the 25 accused had begun in June.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
SAUDI ARABIA
British businessman Neville Norton, 59, who had been barred from leaving Saudi Arabia since 1975 because of a financial dispute, was released on Aug. 13 and returned to London, reportedly following a personal appeal to King Fahd by the UK Prime Minister, John Major.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
YEMEN
the United States Agency for International Development (USAID) agreed in early August to resume economic aid, suspended in January [see p. 38026], worth US$2,900,000 having recently extended US$5,000,000 in food aid.
INTERNATIONAL
ISLAMIC CONFERENCE ORGANIZATION
Annual meeting of ICO Foreign Ministers
Foreign Ministers from the 44-member Islamic Conference Organization (ICO) held their 20th session in Istanbul on Aug. 4-9, chaired by the Turkish Foreign Minister Safa Giray.
Support for sanctions against Iraq
In a keynote address, President Turgut Özal of Turkey urged members to demonstrate greater unity to prevent a repeat of "Iraq's lawlessness" in invading Kuwait, adding that the invasion had caused widespread suffering for many of the countries represented at the Conference.
In their final communiqué issued on Aug. 9, Foreign Ministers "expressed sorrow over the ordeal to which the Iraqi people are being subjected" but charged the Iraqi regime with "full responsibility for the human and material losses" incurred by its invasion of Kuwait, and stressed that Iraq's "non-commitment to implementation" of all UN resolutions "necessitat[ed] the continuation of sanctions" .
On Aug. 11 Al-Qadisiya, a newspaper published by the Iraqi Ministry of Defence, described this resolution as "a calamitous and scandalous event" .
At the ICO conference the Iraqi Minister of State for Foreign Affairs, Muhammad Said Kazim al-Sahhaf, had urged delegates on Aug. 5 to support an immediate end to the "inhumane economic embargo" against his country which, he said, was "a blatant violation of humanitarian and international laws" .
The Iraqi position was supported by Yemen.
(The Iraqi News Agency was quoted as reporting on Aug. 3 that Arab League Secretary-General Ahmed Esmat Abdel Meguid, at a meeting with the Iraqi and Yemeni delegations in Istanbul on Aug. 3, had expressed support for the ending of the blockade.)
Middle East peace process
Foreign Ministers agreed to endorse a Middle East peace conference [see p. 38210] "under the auspices of the UN" , but urged that the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) be included "on an equal footing" with all other parties.
In an interview with Amman Radio on Aug. 5, the Jordanian Foreign Minister, Abdullah Nusur referred to an "atmosphere of tension, discord and disunity" on this issue.
In his address to ICO ministers on Aug. 5, the Iranian Foreign Minister Ali Akbar Vellayati had questioned "the wisdom of accepting the US-sponsored" Middle East peace conference, saying that "only Israel stands to gain from the negotiations" .
Egyptian Foreign Minister Amr Mohammad Moussa warned, however, that any opposition to a Middle East peace conference based on UN resolutions "would contradict international legitimacy" .
Support for a peace conference came also from Saudi Arabia and Syria, although the Syrians explicitly underlined their opposition to Israel's "right to name members of the Palestinian delegation" .
Other issues
The communiqué called for Israel's "immediate and unconditional withdrawal" from Lebanon.
On Jewish immigration it expressed "concern over the continuation of the plan to repatriate Soviet, Falasha and other Jews to Israel" .
On Afghanistan it welcomed the latest initiative by the UN Secretary General to find a political solution, and supported "the Afghan mujaheddin's efforts to form a broad-based government" .
On Kashmir it called for "a peaceful settlement to the conflict in Jammu and Kashmir" and urged adherence by all sides to UN resolutions and the terms of the Simla Accord of 1972.
Ministers examined the request made by the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus for full membership of the ICO and "decided…to strengthen the participation of the Turkish Cypriot Moslem community in…all ICO organs" while agreeing to keep open the question of full membership.
Sudan was to host the 21st (1992) session.
INTERNATIONAL
DISARMAMENT
Egyptian proposals
The Egyptian Middle East News Agency (MENA) reported on Aug. 5 that Egypt had submitted "specific proposals to the UN on…the elimination of weapons of mass destruction from the Middle East" .
In a letter to UN Secretary-General Javier Pérez de Cuéllar, the Egyptian Foreign Minister, Amr Mohammed Moussa, urged all arms-exporting countries, as well as Israel, Iran and the Arab states, to declare their "unconditional support" for a weapons-free zone in the Middle East and to undertake "not to use any nuclear, chemical or biological weapons" .
The proposals followed a recent agreement by the five permanent members of the UN Security Council to declare the Middle East a weapons-free zone [see pp. 38365-66; see also pp. 38217; 38314].
Chinese stance on NPT
During talks in Beijing on Aug. 10 with visiting Japanese Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu [see p. 38395], Li Peng said that China had agreed "in principle" to sign the 1968 Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT).
[For earlier Chinese indications of this willingness, see p. 38340.]
INTERNATIONAL
GATT
Report on 1990 activities
The Director-General of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), Arthur Dunkel, in a report GATT Activities 1990 released on Aug. 19, urged the world's main trading nations to bring the Uruguay Round of trade liberalization talks, launched in 1986, to a successful conclusion by the end of the year.
In remarks understood to be directed at members of the European Communities (EC) and the United States, whose differences over farm subsidies had contributed to the breakdown of the talks in December 1990 [see pp. 37796; 37930], Dunkel called for "political rhetoric" to "be complemented by political courage" .
The failure to conclude the Uruguay Round had injected uncertainty into the international trade system, causing trade disputes to resurface, and had led to the "impression that there is one law for the most powerful members of GATT and quite another for all the rest" .
On Aug. 1 the Australian Prime Minister, Bob Hawke, had accused the USA of "an unfriendly act" following sales of US subsidized wheat to Yemen, one of Australia's traditional markets.
Australia's Minister for Primary Industries and Energy, Simon Crean, was quoted on Aug. 15 after talks in Washington between US and Australian officials, as saying: "A subsidy war is a war we cannot win.
We cannot match the resources of the USA and the EC."
INTERNATIONAL
POPULATION
Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS) Conference sponsored by the United States Agency for International Development (USAID) in Washington on Aug. 5 was told that fertility in the developing world had declined by about one-third since the late 1960s — from 6.1 to 4.2 births per woman.
Experts stressed, however, that this sharp (and unexpected) decline would fail to head off continued rapid population growth unless the fertility rate was further reduced to two children per woman.
INTERNATIONAL
HUMAN RIGHTS
The UN Sub-Commission on Human Rights, composed of 26 independent experts, held its annual session in Geneva on Aug. 5-30.
INTERNATIONAL
SPACE
The United States space shuttle Atlantis made its first scheduled landing since 1985 at the Kennedy space centre, Florida, on Aug. 11, completing a delayed nine-day mission during which a US$120,000,000 communications satellite for the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) was launched, and medical experiments were conducted on the effects of prolonged periods in space.
INTERNATIONAL
UNPO
A total of 47 delegations from the Unrepresented Nations and Peoples' Organization (UNPO — see p. 38027), meeting in The Hague on Aug. 6, discussed the political crises in Yugoslavia and the Soviet Union, and agreed to establish an Urgent Action Council to respond to requests from groups threatened by state violence.
INTERNATIONAL
VATICAN
Pope John Paul II paid a three-day visit (his fourth) to Poland on Aug. 13-16, celebrating mass in Krakow on Aug 13 and paying tribute the next day in his home town of Wadowice to the town's pre-war Jewish community, many of whom died in the nearby concentration camp at Auschwitz.
He flew from Poland to Hungary on Aug. 16 for a four-day visit, celebrating mass at Esztergom, Pecs, Mariapocs (according to the Greek Catholic rite), Szombathely and finally in Budapest; while in Hungary he met government leaders as well as the chief rabbi.