

AMERICAS
UNITED STATES
Confirmation hearings for Thomas
President George Bush's nomination to the Supreme Court of Clarence Thomas, 43, a black Appeals Court judge with strong conservative views [see p. 38328], occasioned what was probably the most controversial Senate confirmation hearing in US history.
The eventual confirmation of Thomas, who succeeded black justice Thurgood Marshall, meant that the nine-member Supreme Court would be without a single liberal member for the first time in its modern history.
The Senate resolution to confirm Thomas was passed on Oct. 15 by 52 votes to 48, the closest vote in the 20th century for a successful Supreme Court nominee.
He also made history as the first judicial nominee to be confirmed without the recommendation of the Senate judiciary committee, which held confirmation hearings on Sept. 10-27, but deadlocked seven to seven when it finally voted on the motion to recommend the nomination, and then voted 13 to one to pass along the nomination to the entire Senate with no recommendation.
Judiciary committee hearings in September
In preparation for the anticipated tough hearings before the Democrat-controlled judiciary committee, Thomas, whose nomination had aroused opposition from a range of black, feminist, and liberal organizations [see p. 38328], received intensive coaching from members of administration.
His main strategy was to emphasize his personal success in overcoming the disadvantages of race and poverty during his childhood in rural Georgia and rising to the top, first as a corporation lawyer, then as a public official and finally as a judge.
Aware that in 1987 the judiciary committee had rejected Robert M. Bork because of his ideological combativeness during confirmation hearings, Thomas tried to be as emollient as possible.
In particular he employed an "advocate versus jurist" defence to deflect questions about his sceptical attitude towards affirmative action programmes while Equal Employment Opportunities Commission (EEOC) chairman in the 1980s (i.e. suggesting that he would shed policy views advocated as a public official and approach issues with legalistic impartiality as a judge).
Thomas also avoided taking avowedly conservative positions on controversial issues such as criminal justice and abortion.
On some issues he declined to voice an opinion, claiming an obligation to remain impartial.
On others he apparently modified his position; most notably, though refusing to discuss explicitly the constitutionality of abortion, he acknowledged the existence of a fundamental right protecting marital privacy, the doctrine originally used by the Supreme Court to legitimize abortion in the landmark 1973 decision Roe v. Wade.
Thomas's tactics rebounded against him because of his extensive previous public involvement in ideological controversy through his writings and speeches.
A Democrat senator, Patrick V. Leahy (Vermont), accused him of undergoing a temporary "confirmation conversion" , a charge that gained credence when the nominee disavowed natural law theory, despite his previous statements that individuals were subject to laws of a higher order which had precedence over man-made laws.
Democrats also responded with incredulity when Thomas justified his refusal to comment on Roe v. Wade on the grounds that he had never previously discussed this historically significant decision during his entire legal career.
The committee's ultimate 7-7 vote on Sept. 27 was split on straight party lines except for one Democrat, Dennis De Concini (Arizona), who endorsed Thomas.
Republicans had expected, but failed to get, the vote of Howell T. Heflin (Alabama), a conservative Democrat, who voted against the nominee on grounds that his testimony had shown "deceptiveness at worst or muddle-headedness at best" .
Democrats most strongly opposed to the nomination were Howard Metzenbaum (Ohio) and Edward Kennedy (Massachussetts).
Anita Hill's evidence — Senate vote
The conclusive Senate vote was scheduled for Oct. 8, but had to be delayed for seven days following revelation of new evidence from Anita Hill, 35, a black University of Oklahoma teacher of law, who alleged that Thomas had subjected her to sexual harassment with explicit, pornographic suggestions when she worked for him at the Department of Education and the EEOC in the early 1980s.
Contacted initially by Metzenbaum's staff on Sept. 4, Hill at first wanted to provide evidence anonymously, but on Sept. 21 she agreed to the suggestion of judiciary committee chairman Joseph Biden, Democratic senator for Delaware, that she provide a sworn affidavit to the Federal Bureau of Investigation which would examine her case.
The committee chose not to delay its own vote on Thomas, but details of Hill's affidavit were leaked to the media on Oct. 6.
Thomas requested a postponement of the Senate vote so that the charges could be investigated, and it was agreed that the judiciary committee would hold three days of public hearings from Oct. 11 to 13.
Hopes for a dispassionate inquiry were quickly dashed.
Republican committee members attempted in an adversarial and prosecutorial manner to demolish Hill's credibility when she appeared before them.
Arlen Specter (Pennsylvania) accused her without substantiating evidence of "flat-out perjury" , and introduced without prior notice an affidavit from an acquaintance of Hill who accused her of being a sexual fantasist.
Also without evidence, Orrin G. Hatch (Utah) accused her of being part of a plot by civil rights activists to smear Thomas.
Independent legal experts were scathingly critical of Democratic committee members for failing to protect Hill.
Except when Kennedy denounced "attempts of character assassination" against her, they did not act as her advocates and merely sought to get her testimony on record.
Thomas, who testified first, vehemently denied Hill's charges and himself took the offensive against liberal Democrats for allowing his reputation to be destroyed in public hearings, televised to the world.
He described the proceedings as a "high-tech lynching for those uppity blacks who dare to deviate from the old rules." 
Both Thomas and Hill retained their credibility as witnesses, and both received effective support from character and corroborating witnesses.
Therefore the second round of committee hearings ended without either protagonist's case being conclusively proven or disproven.
Thomas emerged from the hearings with considerable public sympathy, polls showing that a clear majority of both men and women backed him, but the long-term damage to his judicial reputation was unclear.
Women's organizations, although disappointed at the outcome, took heart that the episode had placed sexual harassment in the workplace firmly on the political agenda and had increased prospects for legislation to attack this.
Only three of the 13 Democrats originally pledged to vote for Thomas changed sides in the final Senate vote as a result of Hill's charges, but 11 others (eight of them representing Southern states in which they depended heavily on black support) joined with all but two of the Republicans to confirm him by a slim majority.
The two women senators, Democrat Barbara Mikulski (Maryland) and Republican Nancy Kassebaum (Kansas), voted with their parties.
Bush lobbied wavering senators by telephone.
It was widely agreed that the episode had damaged the public image of Congress and had discredited the confirmation process.
Both parties expressed a strong desire to avoid another tussle of this kind, and some politicians advocated that the Senate should be informally consulted before Bush announced future nominations.
Confirmation of Gates as CIA director
Coincident with the Thomas hearings, the Senate intelligence committee held confirmation hearings for Robert M. Gates, 48, President Bush's nominee as Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) director.
The committee voted by 11 to four on Oct. 18 to recommend the nomination.
It was widely agreed that, in contrast to the Thomas affair, the Gates hearings proved a good advertisement for the confirmation process because the intelligence committee kept to relevant matters, avoided leaks and undue partisanship, and shed light on the workings of the CIA.
Controversy initially surrounded Gates because of suspicions of his complicity, while he was CIA deputy director of intelligence (1984-86) and then deputy director (1986-89), in the Iran-Contra arms-for-hostages deal [see p. 38327].
These doubts had previously compelled Gates to withdraw his name after being nominated CIA director by President Ronald Reagan in 1987.
He appeared to allay this concern during the present hearings by admitting to mistakes, specifically not following up on the vague information available to him that there might have been a covert operation and unquestioningly accepting the repeated reassurances of his superior, the then CIA director William J. Casey, that government officials were not involved in illicit activities.
Alan D. Fiers, who had admitted involvement in the scandal [ibid.], testified on Sept. 19 that he had no reason to disbelieve Gates's claim of ignorance.
Several former CIA analysts testified to the committee on Sept. 25 that intelligence reports overseen by Gates in the 1980s were tilted to support the anti-communist views of Casey and the Reagan administration.
Melvin Goodman, who headed the Soviet-Third World intelligence division, accused him of "covering up" his role in suppressing intelligence estimates which downplayed the Soviet threat.
Later, on Oct. 1, he claimed that Gates's role "was to corrupt the process and the ethics of intelligence" , exemplified by his doctoring of assessments of the assassination attempt on the Pope in May 1981 in order to suggest KGB involvement, and his wilfully inflated estimate of Soviet influence in Iran in the mid-1980s in order to justify the sale of arms to so-called moderates in Tehran — the first step toward the Iran-contra scandal.
Harold P. Ford, a long-serving and widely respected former CIA analyst, portrayed Gates as a self-serving careerist who curried favour with his superiors and did not manifest the necessary independence of judgment.
Other CIA witnesses such as Graham Fuller, a Middle East expert, defended Gates, who himself offered a spirited rebuttal of the charges.
Bush also strongly supported him.
Although House of Representatives intelligence committee chairman Dave McCurdy (Oklahoma) called for Gates to withdraw because of the allegations, the Democrats on the Senate committee were divided, with chairman David Boren (Oklahoma) proving a strong supporter in recognition of the co-operation which Gates had given the committee in the past, and the highly respected Sam Nunn (Georgia) also casting his influential vote for Gates.
ASIA — PACIFIC
CAMBODIA
Peace agreement
Representatives at Paris conference
Cambodian Supreme National Council Prince Norodom Sihanouk (SNC President) Hun Sen (Premier of the State of Cambodia) Khieu Samphan (Khmers Rouges) Son Sann (Khmer People's National Liberation Front) Norodom Ranaridh (Sihanoukists)
Five permanent UN Security Council members Qian Qichen (Chinese Foreign Minister) Boris Pankin (Soviet Foreign Minister) Roland Dumas (French Foreign Minister; PICC co-chair) James Baker (US Secretary of State) Earl of Caithness (UK Minister of State at the Foreign and Commonwealth Office)
ASEAN Foreign Ministers Ali Alatas (Indonesia; PICC co-chair) Arsa Sarasin (Thailand) Raul Manglapus (Philippines) Prince Mohamed Bolkiah (Brunei) Wong Kan Seng (Singapore) Abdullah Ahmad Badawi (Malaysia)
Others in attendance Nguyen Manh Cam (Vietnamese Foreign Minister) Gen. Phoune Sipaseuth (Laotian Foreign Minister and Vice-Premier) Taro Nakayama (Japanese Foreign Minister) Barbara McDougall (Canadian Secretary of State for External Affairs) Gareth Evans (Australian Foreign Affairs Minister) Madhavsinh Solanki (Indian Minister of External Affairs) Nathan Shamuyarira (Zimbabwean Minister of Foreign Affairs) Javier Pérez de Cuéllar (UN Secretary-General)
The path to the Cambodian peace agreement
December 1987 Hun Sen and Sihanouk hold face-to-face talks for the first time [see pp. 35967-68].
July 1988 The first talks take place between all the opposing Cambodian factions at the Jakarta Informal Meeting [see pp. 36615-16].
July-August 1989 The Paris International Conference on Cambodia is convened [see pp. 36848-49].
September 1989 Vietnam withdraws the last of its remaining troops from Cambodia [see pp. 36881-82].
November 1989 Australia unveils a peace plan involving UN administration of Cambodia during a period of transition to free elections [see pp. 37186-87].
August 1990 After months of discussion the five permanent members of the UN Security Council transform the Australian plan into a comprehensive "framework document" [see p. 37654].
September 1990 The Cambodian factions form an all-party Supreme National Council [see p. 37712].
May 1991 A ceasefire comes into effect [see pp. 38194-95].
September 1991 The peace process enters its final stage with a range of meetings in New York [see pp. 38440-41].
October 1991 The peace agreement is signed in Paris.
After almost four years of complex negotiations, completed in New York in September [see pp. 38440-41], the warring factions in Cambodia signed a peace agreement in Paris on Oct. 23 under the auspices of the Paris International Conference on Cambodia (PICC).
The agreement formally ended 13 years of civil war, although small-scale fighting reportedly continued, and analysts were generally cautious in their appraisal of the agreement, noting that there still remained many barriers to genuine peace in Cambodia.
The agreement was signed by the four Cambodian factions, represented by the all-party Supreme National Council (SNC).
It comprised four documents, the centrepiece being the "Agreement on a Comprehensive Political Settlement of the Cambodia Conflict" .
The Agreement provided for massive UN involvement, and work had already started on raising finance from donor countries for what promised to be the UN's most substantial peacekeeping operation; some estimates put the cost at up to US$2,000 million.
Japan, which was expected to pay the largest share of the UN's cost in Cambodia, had announced its intention to organize a donors' conference in Tokyo before March 1992.
The UN Security Council and the UN General Assembly were to establish a UN Transitional Authority in Cambodia (UNTAC), with civilian and military components and under the direct responsibility of the UN Secretary-General.
UNTAC would administer the country until the election of a Legislative Assembly and the formation of a government.
It would supervise the demobilization of an agreed 70 per cent of each faction's armed forces, while ensuring that the remaining 30 per cent remained in special cantonments.
UNTAC would also enforce a ceasefire and ensure that no military equipment, or forces, entered the country.
At the time of the signing plans were already well under way for the dispatch of a UN Advance Mission to Cambodia (UNAMIC).
France, Australia and the United Kingdom had already pledged military contingents.
Throughout the transitional period the SNC would represent Cambodia externally and would occupy Cambodia's seat at the UN.
On the question of human rights, the agreement stated that all persons in Cambodia and all Cambodian refugees should enjoy the rights and freedoms embodied in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
All refugees and displaced persons had the right to return to Cambodia.
Extraordinary KPRP congress
An extraordinary congress of the ruling Kampuchean People's Revolutionary Party (KPRP) was held in Phnom Penh, the Cambodian capital, on Oct. 17-18.
The previous congress, the party's fifth, had taken place in October 1985 [see pp. 34423-24].
The congress was attended by some 300 delegates; there were no representatives of foreign communist parties in attendance.
At the congress the party formally abandoned its Marxist-Leninist ideology and endorsed a multiparty democratic system.
The congress also approved major leadership changes.
The Far Eastern Economic Review of Oct. 31 reported that the congress had approved the radical changes in order to "bolster its image prior to UN-supervised elections" .
The party had also recently sought to distance itself from its Vietnamese patrons and had reportedly refused to provide Do Muoi, general secretary of the Communist Party of Vietnam (CPV), with a full, pre-congress briefing.
However, Gen. Le Duc Anh, the second-ranking CPV politburo member, had secretly visited Phnom Penh prior to the congress and had been informed about the changes.
The KPRP, as the pro-Vietnamese wing of the Cambodian communist movement, was placed in power by Vietnam in 1979.
The other wing of the Cambodian communist movement, the Communist Party of Kampuchea (CPK), was the secretive core of the Khmers Rouges, led by Pol Pot, Ieng Sary, Ta Mok and Nuon Chea.
Change of party name — Leadership changes
During the course of the congress it became evident that the KPRP had changed its name to the Cambodian People's Party (CPP).
Details of changes to the party structure and leadership were announced on Oct. 18.
Chea Sim, second ranking member of the KPRP politburo and Chair of the National Assembly, was elected chair of the CPP central committee.
He replaced Heng Samrin, hitherto KPRP general secretary.
Heng Samrin retained his post as President of the State Council and was appointed as the party's "honorary president" .
Hun Sen, hitherto the third ranking KPRP politburo member, was elected as vice-chair of the CPP central committee.
Chea Sim, Hun Sen and Heng Samrin were the only members of the Kampuchean People's Revolutionary Council placed in power by the Vietnamese in 1979 who still held positions of power in Phnom Penh.
All three had been members of the Khmer Rouge administration in the eastern section of Cambodia who had taken up arms against the Pol Pot regime in 1978.
The western media tended to portray Chea Sim as the leader of a "hardline faction" in opposition to Hun Sen and his "liberal grouping" , an analysis denounced by both men during interviews given at the time of the congress.
The KPRP politburo and secretariat were joined in a single CPP standing committee.
No new members were elected to the party central committee.
Endorsement of liberal democracy — Hun Sen's support for Sihanouk's presidency
In a speech delivered to the congress on Oct. 18 Chea Sim provided details of the party's new political platform and statutes.
The CPP endorsed multiparty liberal democracy and would uphold Buddhism as the state religion.
The party supported a free-market economy and was prepared to co-operate with other parties to create a national movement to protect human rights in Cambodia.
Hun Sen proposed in a speech delivered on Oct. 17 that the party support Sihanouk's candidacy for the presidency of Cambodia in the future elections.
He said that this was "the most correct formula to steer Cambodia away from new political crisis" .
EUROPE
YUGOSLAVIA
Continuing conflict — EC peace plan
Fighting in Croatia stopped and started throughout October, as ceasefire agreements were announced but broke down, and ports on the Adriatic coast came under blockade.
The European Communities (EC) did not abandon their peace efforts but could claim no concrete progress by the end of the month.
Croatian Foreign Minister Zvonimir Separovic said in a letter to EC foreign ministers on Oct. 27 that some 5,000 people had been killed in Croatia since the beginning of July.
According to the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), more than 280,000 people had left their homes over the period of the fighting.
JNA actions
On Oct 1 the high command of the (Serbian-dominated) Yugoslav National Army (JNA), accusing Croatia of violating the Sept. 22 ceasefire [see p. 38421], threatened Croatia with reprisals on Croatian civilian targets for attacks carried out against JNA barracks in Croatia.
The same day, attacks began against towns on the Croatian Adriatic coast and on Oct. 3 the Yugoslav navy began a blockade of seven Croatian ports — Dubrovnik, Pula, Rujeka, Sebenik, Split, Zadar and Ploce.
Serbia had carried out a partial mobilization of the JNA reserve in Serbia on Sept. 28.
Federal Prime Minister Ante Markovic (a Croat) on Sept. 30 accused Serbian President Slobodan Milosevic of using the JNA to advance Serbia's aims.
A transcript of a telephone conversation, printed in the independent Belgrade weekly Vreme, showed Milosevic to be working with Serb leaders in Bosnia-Hercegovina and co-ordinating bombardments of Croatia.
Gen. Nikola Uzelac ordered mobilization in the (Serbian-populated) north-west region of Bosnia-Hercegovina, but the Moslem President of Bosnia-Hercegovina, Alija Izetbegovic, countermanded this order.
Croatia, which had passed a law banning its citizens from service in the JNA on Sept. 27, ordered general mobilization on Oct. 6.
On Oct. 16 Croatia promised to guarantee the safety of any JNA soldiers who deserted before Nov. 10.
Despite the ceasefire Croatian forces were still fighting to capture JNA garrisons in Croatia (the important garrison of Bjelovar near Zagreb fell to Croatian forces on Oct. 1 after a 12-hour battle); military hardware was sent from Serbia in response.
On Oct. 7 the JNA bombed the presidential palace in the Croatian capital, Zagreb.
Croatian President Franjo Tudjman, the current (Croatian) President of the Collective State Presidency Stjepan Mesic and federal Prime Minister Markovic, who were all in the building at the time, were unhurt.
An EC convoy attempting to reach Vukovar with aid was attacked on Oct. 12.
In retaliation, Croatia reimposed its blockade on the Borongaj barracks in Zagreb.
It appeared that the attack had been carried out by extremist forces not under the control of JNA commanders.
On Oct. 17, Vukovar came under heavy attack, and on Oct. 20 a relief convoy organized by Médecins sans Frontières evacuated 109 wounded from the city.
Meanwhile Ilok in eastern Croatia was evacuated and ceded to the JNA and a military convoy moved from Serbia towards Croatia.
The Serbian blockade of ports from Oct. 3 reportedly created severe shortages of water and electricity in Dubrovnik, and on Oct. 28 it was reported that a four-day-old ceasefire agreed between the JNA and Dubrovnik city officials had broken down, the JNA having issued an ultimatum for all weapons in the city to be surrendered on Oct. 26.
However, on Oct. 31 a relief flotilla from Split, carrying refugees back to Dubrovnik and with Mesic also on board, was allowed to sail into the city after being searched by JNA forces.
EC intervention
In talks at The Hague on Oct. 4, chaired by Lord Carrington, agreement appeared to have been reached between Croatia and Serbia on lifting the blockade of army barracks and on including the Serbian minority in Croatia in future talks.
However, on Oct. 8 the "Prime Ministers" of Krajina and Slavonia — two self-proclaimed Serbian autonomous regions (SARs) in Croatia, Milan Babic and Goran Hadzic, boycotted the meeting in The Hague to which they had been invited, because they refused to be treated as a "minority" .
EC Foreign Ministers meeting in Utrecht on Oct. 6 threatened to impose trade sanctions against republics impeding the peace process if a ceasefire were not imposed by midnight on Oct. 7.
A ceasefire agreement, signed by Croatia and the JNA on Oct. 8, provided for the lifting of the respective blockades on Adriatic ports and of the Borongaj barracks in Zagreb.
There were fears, however, that this would merely give the JNA time to regroup around the towns of Vukovar and Vinkovci (eastern Croatia).
On Oct. 10, at EC sponsored-talks in The Hague, Tudjman and Milosevic agreed that JNA forces would withdraw from Croatia within one month.
However, the ceasefire of Oct. 8 was already reported to have been breached, and on Oct. 11 the Serbian-dominated rump Collective State Presidency [see below]rejected the EC agreement.
On Oct. 18, at peace conference talks in The Hague [for third session, on Sept. 19, see p. 38421; the second session had taken place on Sept. 12], the EC proposed a plan for the future structure of Yugoslavia, loosely based on its own structure.
While the rump Collective State Presidency had said the previous day that it would not accept any decision reached by the peace conference, of the six republics attending the conference, Serbia was the only one to reject the proposals; even Montenegro accepted, provoking internal political disputes in that republic.
The EC plan envisaged a free association of sovereign states co-operating on trade, fiscal and security matters, with a council of ministers, an executive commission and a court of appeal.
The independence of republics within existing borders would be recognized, if the republics wished it, and minorities would be given a second nationality and their own schools and legislature.
EC foreign ministers set a deadline of Nov. 5, the date of the next full session of the peace talks, for Serbia to accept the EC peace plan.
If it did not do so, they threatened to suspend trade agreements with Yugoslavia, and immediately to restore them with those individual republics which agreed to the plan — in effect to recognize their independence.
The eight members of the Collective State Presidency and Croatian President Tudjman had on Oct. 18 ordered an unconditional ceasefire before the start of the talks.
This ceasefire was reported to be holding on Oct 21, although poor weather was thought to be a major factor.
However, on Oct. 22, Col.-Gen.
Veljko Kadijevic, the National Defence Minister, in a speech to the Collective State Presidency, responding to the EC peace plan, accused Germany of "being about to attack Yugoslavia for the third time this century,…preparing first for an economic and then a military assault" .
He called for mobilization of reservists "to stop the Croatian fascists" .
The three-month mandate for EC monitors [see p. 38374]ran out on Oct. 13, but was renewed indefinitely.
On Sept. 30, 120 more monitors had been sent to cover the situation on the Hungarian border and in Bosnia-Hercegovina, bringing their total to 200.
Other external mediation initiatives
Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev invited Tudjman and Milosevic (presidents of Croatia and Serbia) for talks in Moscow, meeting them both separately and together on Oct. 15.
They also met Russian president Boris Yeltsin on Oct 16.
An agreement calling for an immediate ceasefirewas signed on Oct. 15.
On Oct. 13 Cyrus Vance, a former US Secretary of State, arrived in Yugoslavia in the capacity of a UN special envoy.
Officials of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE) decided on Oct. 22 to form a mission to monitor human rights in Yugoslavia.
Status of independence and sovereignty declarations
Croatia and Slovenia proceeded during October with steps to dissociate themselves from federal Yugoslav arrangements, refusing to extend beyond Oct. 7 the three-month moratoriums on implementing their independence declarations to which both had agreed at the Brioni talks in July [see p. 38374].
Croat and Slovene representatives resigned throughout September and October from federal bodies.
Slovenia introduced its own currency, the tolar, on Oct. 8, to replace the Yugoslav dinar.
On Oct. 17 it was announced that all Yugoslav ambassadors of Slovene origin had resigned.
The JNA agreed to withdraw from Slovenia by Oct. 25, and to hand over military hardware to the Slovenian authorities.
Croatia officially severed relations with Yugoslavia as of Oct. 8, in a move designed to identify the JNA as an invading force and to make Yugoslav law null and void on Croatian territory.
The parliament of Bosnia-Hercegovina declared the republic's sovereignty on Oct. 15.
Ethnic Serbian deputies walked out of the session, and formed on Oct. 24 the "Assembly of the Serbian Nation of Bosnia-Hercegovina" , fixing a plebiscite on remaining in Yugoslavia for Nov. 9 and 19.
Assumption of power by rump presidency
On Oct. 3 four of the eight members of the Collective State Presidency (representing the republics of Serbia and Montenegro, and the autonomous provinces of Vojvodina and Kosovo within Serbia) voted to take on the powers of the Yugoslav Assembly because they were "in conditions of an immediate danger of war" .
The meeting fell short of the five members required for a quorum, with Bosnia-Hercegovina, Croatia, Macedonia and Slovenia not attending.
The Vice-President of the Collective State Presidency, Branco Kostic, had originally called the meeting for Oct. 1.
Mesic (its president) responded by calling it unconstitutional, and said that those attending "will have joined the putsch" — a reference to the Serbian parliament's adoption on Sept. 27 of a document on the future form of Yugoslavia, based on consultations between Serbia, Montenegro and representatives of Serbian areas of Bosnia-Hercegovina, which the parliament declared open to agreement by other republics.
On Oct. 24, the Great National Assembly of the SARs of Slavonia, Baranja and Western Srem in Croatia declared unification with the SAR of Krajina in Croatia and the Community of Municipalities of Bosanka Krajina in Bosnia-Hercegovina.
This formed a united Serbian region which announced its acceptance of the Collective State Presidency's position on a solution to the crisis, and called for general mobilization to "solve the problem of Serbs in Croatia militarily, because all…truces concluded so far have been violated by Croatia" .
Referendums in Kosovo and Sandzak
Despite the insistence of Serbia that its actions were illegal, the Kosovo Assembly (dissolved by the Serbian government in July 1990 — see pp. 37621-22) organized a referendum on Sept. 26-30 on sovereignty for the 92 per cent Albanian-speaking province of Kosovo, and proceeded on Oct. 19 to elect a provisional coalition government, headed by Bujar Bukoshi, which was recognized on Oct. 22 by Albania.
The referendum was reported as recording an 87.01 per cent turnout and 99.87 per cent approval for sovereignty for Kosovo.
The Serbian government also declared illegal a referendum on autonomy arranged on Oct. 25-27 by the Party of Democratic Action (PDA) in Sandzak, a region extending from southern Serbia into northern Montenegro with a population 43 per cent Moslem and 51 per cent Serbian.
The PDA said on Oct. 30 that 98.92 per cent of the 185,437 voters (of 264,154 eligible to vote) had been in favour of Sandzak autonomy.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
MIDDLE EAST PEACE PROCESS
Pre-conference diplomacy
Last-minute efforts to secure the participation of all parties in a Middle East peace conference were conducted principally by United States officials, and in particular the US Secretary of State James Baker.
On Oct. 30 delegations from Israel, Syria, Lebanon and Egypt and a joint Jordanian-Palestinian delegation finally took their seats, amid heavy security, at a negotiating table in Madrid.
The conference, jointly sponsored by the US and the Soviet Union, was to take place within the framework of UN Security Council Resolution 242, adopted in 1967 [see pp. 22473; 25029], calling for the withdrawal of Israeli troops from recently occupied territories and for the recognition of Israel, and Resolution 338 of 1973, which called for negotiations to implement Resolution 242.
The loose agenda of the negotiating process launched at Madrid was to draw more heavily, however, on the idea of "autonomy" for the West Bank and Gaza, contained in the 1978 Camp David peace accord between Israel and Egypt [see pp. 29654-57], which had included articles (never implemented) proposing a five-year transitional period during which a "self-governing authority" would replace the existing Israeli administration in the West Bank and Gaza.
This idea had found echoes in various peace proposals of the 1980s and (as a first step towards a two-state solution) in Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) declarations from 1989 [see pp. 36860; 37749-51; 38117].
The administration of US President George Bush used the phrase "territory for peace" to encapsulate the two UN Resolutions, and had declared that "legitimate Palestinian political rights" must be recognized, as well as Israel's security guaranteed [see p. 38117].
The largely ceremonial meetings which began in Madrid on Oct. 30 were expected to last three days and were intended merely to initiate a wider negotiating process.
The next stage would be bilateral negotiations between Israel on the one hand and Syria, Lebanon, and the Jordanian-Palestinian delegation on the other.
It was then hoped, within two weeks of the opening conference, to reach a third stage, of multilateral negotiations with Egypt and the Gulf Co-operation Council as additional participants, in which "regional issues" including water resources, the environment and arms control would be discussed.
Baker's September and October visits to the Middle East — Acceptances of invitations to conference
Baker visited Jerusalem, Cairo, Damascus and Amman on Sept. 16-20 and Cairo, Amman, Damascus and Jerusalem on Oct. 12-17 (his eighth journey to the region since the Gulf War).
The Soviet Foreign Minister Boris Pankin also visited Jerusalem, on Oct. 17, and met with Israeli Foreign Minister David Levi, while Baker met with Prime Minister Itzhak Shamir.
On both his visits to Jerusalem and on the first visit to Amman Baker also met with Palestinian representatives, and he held talks with the main Palestinian pre-conference negotiators, Hanan Ashrawi, Faisal al-Husseini, Zakaria al-Agha and Sari Nusseibah, in Washington on Oct. 10-11.
On Oct. 12 King Hussein of Jordan announced that Jordan would attend the conference.
The PLO 90-member Central Council, after an Oct. 16-17 meeting in Tunis, approved the formation of a joint Jordanian-Palestinian delegation.
On Oct. 18 the USA and the Soviet Union jointly issued invitations to a conference to open on Oct. 30 and to be held in Madrid (not Lausanne, Switzerland, as had been widely believed until then).
On Oct. 20 the Israeli government decided in favour of sending a delegation to the conference, and the other parties met the Oct. 23 deadline for the formal acceptance of invitations.
Letters of assurances
Each party to the conference, including the Palestinian representation, was understood to have received during the second half of October a separate"letter of assurances' from the US government.
The texts of these documents, the products of negotiations with Baker and US officials over previous weeks, were not published, although their general contents had featured in numerous press reports.
According to the Independent of Oct. 10, the USA had offered to provide written declarations "either in the form of a letter of assurance or memorandum of understanding, depending on each delegation's wishes" .
Role of PLO
Face-saving formulas involving unacknowledged compromises by the Israeli and Palestinian leaderships had served to overcome some of the potential obstacles to the Madrid conference.
On certain points this had meant that the Palestinian delegation complied in form but not in substance with Israeli preconditions.
The PLO failed to secure a UN-supervised peace conference to which it would send a delegation to represent "the Palestinian people" [see pp. 38167].
The PLO central council's decision to form a joint delegation with Jordan was strongly criticized from within the PLO by Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (PFLP) leader Georges Habash on Oct. 18.
On the issue of PLO involvement in the conference, Shamir repeatedly warned, as in his address at the opening of the Knesset's winter session on Oct. 7, that Israeli representatives would refuse to sit with any delegates who might announce "that they were appointed by or represented the PLO terrorist organization" .
The Shamir administration refrained, however, from challenging for the time being the apparent PLO involvement with the Jordanian-Palestinian delegation, nor did it decide to use this as grounds for withdrawing from the conference.
It had nevertheless become increasingly clear that Ashrawi and Husseini, negotiating the final version of the Palestinians' "letter of assurances" , were acting in close liaison with PLO headquarters in Tunis.
The two reportedly denied reports that they had left their London hotel to attend the Palestine National Council (PNC) meeting in Algiers in September [see pp. 38453-54], and the PLO news agency Wafa on Sept. 26 said that they had not attended the PLO meeting in person, but had sent a message which was read out to the political committee.
(Press reports of Sept. 27 cited PLO officials as apparently confirming that on the previous day Ashrawi and Husseini had addressed the PNC, while Le Monde reported the "audition" of Ashrawi and Husseini by the PNC, "although nobody outside the members of the congress' political committee was allowed to see them and therefore provide tangible proof of their presence" .
Shamir, faced with protests from the Israeli far right over this matter, responded by telling a radio interviewer on Sept. 27 that "the Americans can meet who they want, but it is clear that these people will not represent anyone in negotiations" .
PLO chairman Yassir Arafat was quoted in the Financial Times of Oct. 16 as telling US reporters that he was "consulted…day and night by phone" by Ashrawi and Husseini in Jerusalem and that, as they met with Baker in Washington on Oct. 10-11, he was faxing them PLO endorsements of specific negotiating positions.
Question of Israeli veto on Palestinian delegates and discussion of Jerusalem
The Israeli government insisted that while the Palestinian representatives should be drawn from the occupied territories rather than the Palestinian "diaspora" (a term which included those who in 1948 had left what was then Palestine, and their descendants), they should not be residents of Jerusalem (as were both Husseini and Ashrawi).
This was a corollary to the Israeli insistence that the future of Jerusalem was non-negotiable — a principle rejected by the PLO and since March 1990 by the US administration [see p. 37304.]
The PNC meeting in Algiers in September, while welcoming the latest efforts for a peace conference, had reiterated that the PLO had a right to form its own delegation from "inside and outside the homeland, including Jerusalem" [see also p. 38453].
By the third week of October the formation of an "advisory committee" to guide the 14 Palestinian negotiators from one remove was being mooted.
This seven-member committee eventually included Husseini, Ashrawi and members of the Palestinian diaspora.
Arafat said in a Guardian report of Oct. 22 that he had "appointed" Faisal al-Husseini "to head the Palestinian team" and that Haidar Abdel Shafi, a veteran PLO member from Gaza who was to be the main Palestinian speaker at the opening conference, was "only head of the negotiating delegation" .
Abdel Shafi told Israeli army radio on Oct. 21 that all delegates would be representatives of the PLO "in the sense that all Palestinians have allegiance to the PLO" .
In answer to a journalist's question in Madrid on Oct. 30 as to whom the delegation represented, Husseini replied that they represented "all Palestinians everywhere" .
The Palestinians rejected the Israeli demand, repeated by Shamir in his Oct. 7 Knesset address, that the names of the "Palestinian element of the Jordanian-Palestinian delegation" should be "approved" by the Israeli government before the beginning of the negotiations.
On Oct. 18 the list of names in the Palestinian negotiating delegation was released by the PLO to US officials in Jerusalem.
Settlement-building policy of Shamir administration
The PLO had failed to secure a halt to the building of Jewish settlements in the occupied territories as a pre-condition to Palestinian participation in any peace conference — a demand also made by pre-conference negotiators Ashrawi and Husseini and repeatedly rejected by Shamir.
Shamir in his Oct. 7 Knesset speech said that the second stage of bilateral discussions between Israel and neighbouring states would, in the case of the Jordanian-Palestinian delegation, be aimed at "arriving at a transitional five-year accord, which will lead to the implementation of the programme of autonomy [in the occupied territories]as agreed in the Camp David accords" .
Referring to the third stage of negotiations between Israel and its neighbours, he warned that if the Arab negotiators continued to raise the question of the occupied territories "placing them at the centre of discussions…we shall know that their intentions are not directed towards peace" .
Right-wingers in Shamir's Cabinet were understood to regard the pace of settlement building in the occupied territories as crucial in creating facts on the ground which could not easily be eliminated by developments at the diplomatic level [see also p. 38550].
The Israeli Cabinet on Oct. 20 approved participation in the conference by 16 votes to three (Housing Minister Ariel Sharon within the Likud party, Rehavam Ze'evi of Moledet and Yuval Ne'eman of Tehiya), with one abstention.
The central committee of Tehiya voted to leave the coalition government.
Shamir's decision to lead Israeli delegation
On Oct. 23 Shamir announced that he himself, rather than Foreign Minister David Levi, would lead the Israeli delegation at the conference.
No other country was being represented by its head of government.
Shamir's decision was attributed partly to a personal antipathy and partly to the intention of eclipsing the less hardline Foreign Ministry officials from the negotiations.
Levi withdrew entirely from the Israeli delegation.
Damascus meeting of Foreign Ministers
The Foreign Ministers of Egypt, Syria, Libya and Jordan and Farouk Kaddoumi, the head of PLO foreign relations, met in Damascus on Oct. 23-24.
The Foreign Ministers of Saudi Arabia and Morocco also attended as observers, representing respectively the Gulf Co-operation Council (GCC) and the Arab Maghreb Union (AMU).
The meeting resolved to form a "co-ordination committee" which would meet regularly to ensure a united Arab stance in the forthcoming negotiations, and called for an immediate halt on Jewish settlement-building.
It was not clear, however, whether other governments would join Syria (newly in accord with the PLO) in demanding territorial concessions as a precondition to participating in the planned third stage of the negotiations.
Syria
On Sept. 18-19 Baker delivered to the Syrian government a draft version of a "letter of assurances" reportedly confirming that the US regarded the Golan Heights as an occupied territory.
By Sept. 26 the Syrian government had indicated that it would not participate in the planned third stage of the conference — the multilateral discussions on regional issues — unless Israel had first showed that it was willing to withdraw from Arab land occupied in 1967.
Foreign Minister Farooq ash-Shar ", at a press conference concluding Baker's visit on Oct. 16, added that he would not shake his Israeli counterpart's" guilty hands which still occupy our land and ignore Palestinian rights".
Jordan
King Hussein, who had resisted calls from Moslem Brotherhood members of parliament and leftists to boycott the conference, said in an emotional speech on Oct. 12 at a conference of 2,500 elected officials in Amman that he had been assured by the USA that it would "do its utmost" to see that a transitional period of Palestinian "autonomy" in the occupied territories would be negotiated within a year of the conference opening, and announced Jordan's unconditional acceptance of US terms for the proposed Middle East peace conference.
The King said that he had considered abdicating over the question of whether to meet Israel face-to-face, but that he believed that attending the talks would add weight to international calls for Israel's withdrawal from the occupied territories.
A Jordanian official speaking on behalf of the Jordanian delegation, Maruan Muasher, was quoted in El País of Oct. 27 as saying that Jordan would be willing to contemplate a federation with an independent Palestinian state.
Resumption of US aid to Jordan
US President Bush, in a letter to the US Congress which was made public on Oct. 26, stated his intention to provide renewed military aid for Jordan (cut off because of Jordan's stance in the Gulf war — see pp. 38024; 38119, 38311).
Bush declared that freeing the US$21,000,000 in military aid which had been allocated to Jordan in the current fiscal year was "in the national interest of the United States" and "would be beneficial to the peace process in the Middle East" .
Lebanon
President Hrawi met with President Assad of Syria on Oct. 17 to discuss a common stand for the peace conference.
The Lebanese government received a US letter of assurances on Oct. 19, reportedly referring to the implementation of UN Resolution 425, adopted in March 1978 following the Israeli invasion of Lebanon and calling for a complete Israeli withdrawal [see p. 29649].
Tehran conference
On Oct. 19-22 in Tehran, the Iranian capital, 400 delegates from 45 countries attended a conference organized by the Iranian government "for the Support of the Moslem Palestinian People's Revolution" .
The final communiqué condemned the Madrid conference as effecting "the liquidation of the Palestinian people" .
The conference was attended by representatives of the Palestinian Islamic fundamentalist group Hamas and, reportedly, by non-PLO Palestinian groups such as the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine-General Command, the Palestine National Liberation Movement-Fatah led by Abu Musa, and Abu Nidal's Fatah Revolutionary Command.
AFRICA
ZAMBIA
Kaunda's election defeat
In the first multiparty elections since 1968, Frederick Chiluba, leader of the Movement for Multiparty Democracy (MMD), was elected President on Oct. 31, ending the 27-year rule of Kenneth Kaunda, who led Zambia to independence and became its first President in October 1964 [see p. 20373].
Chiluba won the support of 75 per cent of voters, while Kaunda won 24 per cent.
Parliamentary elections, held at the same time as the presidential poll, were contested by 330 candidates from six parties.
The MMD, formed in July 1990 [see p. 37602], won 125 of the National Assembly's 150 seats [not 135 as given on p. 38049]and Kaunda's United National Independence Party (UNIP), the sole legal political party between December 1972 and December 1990, won the remaining 25.
Of the 20 Cabinet ministers and ministers of state in the outgoing government to stand for election only four were returned.
Official figures indicated that more than half the 2,900,000 electorate did not vote.
The election campaign
The main focus of the MMD's election campaign was UNIP's poor record of economic management, highlighting the country's soaring inflation and high unemployment.
Chiluba pledged to reduce spending on the security forces and to privatize loss-making parastatal organizations.
He promised diversification away from copper, stocks of which were fast diminishing, but which provided up to 90 per cent of Zambia's foreign exchange.
The UNIP conducted a determined campaign during which Kaunda warned that he would "deal mercilessly" with MMD if he was returned to power.
The former ruling party argued that it was the only party able to maintain "peace and stability" , while the MMD was untried and tribalistic.
In the week before polling day Kaunda released a report complied five years earlier on drug traffickers in which leading figures in the MMD were implicated.
Fears of violence both before and after the election led to an appeal by Chiluba on Oct. 18 to the Secretary-General of the Organization of African Unity (OAU) to send peacekeeping forces to Zambia.
These fears were dismissed on Oct. 21 by Kaunda, who said that they illustrated the immaturity of the MMD leadership.
He promised to "abide by the people's mandate" and step down if defeated in the elections.
The election campaign was monitored by over 2,000 local and foreign observers who reported that the campaign period was generally free from intimidation and violence.
However, in Chipata, in Eastern Province, there were reports of shopkeepers threatened with having their trading licenses withdrawn and public workers dismissed for supporting the MMD.
In rural areas UNIP was alleged to have exploited traditional structures and beliefs; headmen were said to have threatened to expel villagers who supported the MMD, and ritual leaders apparently told villagers in some areas that they would become sick if they attended MMD rallies.
Swearing-in of new President
On Nov. 1 Kaunda conceded defeat after about a third of the results had been publicly declared.
He congratulated Chiluba and promised to co-operate with him.
The new President was hurriedly sworn into office on Nov. 2.
Frederick Chiluba, 48, became a shop steward in 1967 and made a rapid rise through trade union ranks.
He had been chairman-general of the 300,000-strong Zambian Congress of Trade Unions since 1974.
Following a series of strikes in 1981, he was detained for three months, during which time he became a "born-again" Christian.
He had reportedly turned down an offer from Kaunda of the post of labour minister and a position on the central committee of UNIP — a decision which was said to have had much to do with the MMD's decision in April to choose him as its presidential candidate [see p. 38133].
AFRICA
ZAIRE
Dismissal of Prime Minister
The crisis in Zaïre deepened as President Mobutu Sese Seko on Oct. 21 dismissed Prime Minister Etienne Tshisekedi, whom he had appointed on Sept. 30 [see p. 38423].
Mobutu had come under sustained pressure to reach a power-sharing agreement with Tshisekedi, a leading figure of the opposition Democratic Union for Social Progress (UDPS) and in the opposition Sacred Union alliance, and his dismissal provoked renewed protests.
When the Sacred Union met on Oct. 22 it refused Mobutu's proposal that it should name an alternative Prime Minister, and reaffirmed its support for Tshisekedi.
Mobutu on Oct. 23 named Bernardin Mungul Diaka as Prime Minister; Tshisekedi responded by announcing on Oct. 31 the formation of an alternative cabinet, "in consideration of the total lack of authority of the state" .
Relations between Mobutu and Tshisekedi were strained from the outset, notably over the composition of the Cabinet.
Mobutu insisted that he be allowed to name the Defence Minister.
Although Tshisekedi eventually conceded, Mobutu then demanded that he be allowed to nominate a further 10 ministers, giving him effective control.
A 22-member Cabinet as eventually announced on Oct. 14 included four supporters of Mobutu who held the key portfolios of Defence, Foreign Affairs, Planning, and Land and Mines.
The remaining 18 portfolios were held by members of opposition parties, including Fantin Birhindwa of the UDPS as Minister of Finance and Mathieu Lombeye Bosongo of the Democratic and Social Christian Party (PDSC) as Minister of the Interior.
On Oct. 16 Tshisekedi refused to recognize the authority of President Mobutu and of the Constitution in the swearing-in ceremony, following which he was barred from his office by troops loyal to the President.
After his dismissal on Oct. 21, troops fired tear gas and shots to disperse a crowd of 15,000 demonstrators in Kinshasa, while riots and looting in Lubumbashi continued for a number of days.
The local media reported rioting across the country throughout the remainder of the month.
Diaka, a member of the Sacred Union who had earlier supported Tshisekedi, was severely criticized by Union members when he accepted the position of Prime Minister the following day; his membership of the Sacred Union, and that of his party, the Rally for Republican Democrats, was revoked.
Diaka announced a 34-member Cabinet on Oct. 30, in which he claimed that 40 per cent of ministerial posts were taken by members of the Sacred Union.
This assertion was strongly denied by Tshisekedi, who further maintained that key Cabinet positions were controlled by supporters of Mobutu, including the Defence portfolio which was given to N'gbanda Nzambo Ko Atumba, a nephew of Mobutu.
Foreign reaction
On Oct. 25 France announced the suspension of aid, and the last French troops were withdrawn on Oct. 30 in spite of calls from the opposition for them to remain to prevent more killing.
Belgium advised its nationals to leave the country without delay, but refused Mobutu's demand that it withdraw its troops immediately.
Mobutu resisted pressure from Western governments to enter into a power-sharing arrangement with Tshisekedi and attacked them for their "flagrant interference" ; he understood, he said, "that Western aid is mixed with all sorts of threats and blackmail" .
AFRICA
SOUTH AFRICA
Launch of Patriotic Front
On Oct. 25-27 the African National Congress (ANC) and the Pan-Africanist Congress (PAC — which had split from the ANC in 1959 — see p. 17449), acted together for the first time since 1960 to become part of the Patriotic Front, an initiative launched to create a united front in negotiations with the Pretoria government.
Over 75 organizations were represented at the meeting in Durban, including the Congress of South African Trade Unions (COSATU) and the Labour Party, which held the majority of seats in the House of Representatives (the chamber for Coloured people in the tricameral parliament — see p. 36880 for 1989 election).
Notable non-participants
The launch of the Front was placed in some jeopardy when on Oct. 17 the Azanian People's Organization (AZAPO) denounced 14 of the organizations taking part in the conference for either having participated in apartheid structures or for their racial make-up.
The move caused the withdrawal of the liberal Democratic Party and anger among other organizations.
On Oct. 20 the ANC and PAC excluded AZAPO from the convening committee of the conference, but invited it to participate in the meeting.
AZAPO declined.
The other notable absence was that of the Inkatha Freedom Party, which called the front "regressive and foreign" .
The Front's demands
Delegates demanded the start of all-party talks as soon as possible, followed by the formation of a broadly based interim government.
Elections should then follow for a constituent assembly which would draft a constitution.
President F. W. de Klerk's government was described as "illegal, illegitimate and totally discredited" .
Significantly, however, the PAC, which had consistently called for the immediate transfer of power from the white minority, agreed to negotiations with the de Klerk regime.
Continuing violence
The peace accord between the government, the ANC and Inkatha [see p. 38422]came under serious threat in October, as township violence continued in the Transvaal and Natal.
In one incident on Oct. 7, unknown assailants killed 18 people at the funeral of a murdered ANC member, in an attack similar to that on Inkatha supporters on Sept. 8 [see p. 38422].
The incident led to renewed charges of police complicity in violence, as the injured identified two of their attackers as policemen.
Although the allegations were denied by the police, ANC president Nelson Mandela launched a furious attack on de Klerk, saying that he had "let loose his hounds on the people" .
He added: "If he does not want violence why do the police act with such impunity?" 
A report published on Oct. 24 by the independent Community Agency for Social Enquiry concluded that Inkatha and the police were largely responsible for the violence in the Transvaal between July 1990 and July 1991.
In 257 cases of violence, 370 attackers were identified: in 190 cases they were Inkatha supporters, in 84 they were police and in 13 they were ANC supporters.
The report also revealed a high level of collaboration between Inkatha supporters and the police; in at least 46 of the 257 cases, collusion was established.
ANC's economic plans
Mandela on Oct. 12 said that the ANC was prepared to abandon its long-held policy of nationalization if the business community could provide an alternative which would redress the economic imbalances in the country.
Mandela also said that nationalization did not mean that "the private sector would be excluded from certain areas of the economy" and that the ANC welcomed dialogue with business to ensure growth and equal distribution.
On Oct. 14 the ANC released a report which recognized the important role of foreign investment and reassured foreign corporations that they would be free to take their profits out of the country under an ANC government.
Conviction of trade unionists
Three leading trade unionists were convicted on kidnap and assault charges on Oct. 16 over the holding of a security policemen for five hours in a COSATU office in August 1990 [see p. 37643].
Jay Naidoo, general secretary of COSATU, his deputy Sidney Mufamadi and Moses Mayekiso, general secretary of the metalworkers' union, said that they would appeal against the conviction and sentence — a fine of R2,000 (about US$640) each and suspended prison terms.
Foreign relations
The United States announced on Oct. 11 that it was imposing a two-year embargo on the South African state arms manufacturer, Armscor, in protest at the proliferation of missiles and missile technology by Armscor.
The embargo, which took immediate effect, prohibited all US contracts with the manufacturer as well as the importation of any Armscor products.
Japan lifted economic sanctions on Oct. 22, including the bans on the import of gold coins and of steel and on direct investment loans.
A Japanese Foreign Ministry official said that Japan was also considering establishing full diplomatic relations.
On Oct. 21 a five-year contract was signed by Iscor, the South African steel group, and six leading Japanese steel companies.
Foreign Affairs Minister Roelof "Pik" Botha began an eight-day foreign tour on Oct. 4, visiting Australia, New Zealand, Hong Kong and China.There was no official Chinese acknowledgement of his visit, the first by a South African government minister, although he met his counterpart Qian Qichen to discuss trade relations.
Official diplomatic relations with Turkey were confirmed on Oct 22, when the first consul-general presented his credentials.
Prime Minister Goh Chok Tong of Singapore began a three-day visit on Oct. 23, during which he met with de Klerk, ANC Deputy President Walter Sisulu and Inkatha's Chief Mangosuthu Buthelezi.
Following the decision to lift certain sanctions taken by the Commonwealth heads of state [see p. 38553], countries relaxing restrictions included Canada which on Oct. 22 began to issue visas to South Africans and India which on Oct. 31 lifted "people-to-people" , cultural and academic sanctions.
State of emergency in Ciskei
The military authorities in the nominally independent homeland of Ciskei declared a state of emergency on Oct. 28 "to combat activities of arson and terrorism" by the ANC.
Brig.
Joshua Oupa Gqozo, chairman of the Military Council, said that the ANC was resorting to the "politics of aggression and intimidation" .
The ANC in turn vigorously denied these allegations and condemned the repressive rule of Gqozo, whom it had criticized already for imposing his supporters as headmen against the will of local communities.
AFRICA
SWAZILAND
Cabinet changes
On Oct. 12, Prime Minister Obed Dlamini announced a major Cabinet reshuffle and the creation of five new or reorganized ministries effective from Oct. 14.
The five ministries were: Broadcasting, Information and Tourism; Economic Planning and Development; Transport and Communication; Housing and Township Development; and Works and Construction.
Included in the new Cabinet was Albert Nhlanhla Shabangu, president of the teachers' union and a former critic of the government.
Growing pressure for democratic change
On Oct. 3 the Appeal Court overturned the conviction and sentencing of two prominent political prisoners.
Dominic Mngomezulu and Ray Russon were released after the court found that there was no evidence to support charges that they had attended a public political meeting contrary to the state of emergency.
Although opposition figures regarded the ruling as a major success, the releases were overshadowed by a tour of the country during September and early October by a royal commission which held public meetings on constitutional reforms.
The tour provided the first opportunity for many years for people to call openly for the restoration of human rights, legalization of political parties and the scrapping of the Tinkhundla (chieftancy) system [see p. 38048].
King Mswati III was expected to authorize redrafting of the Constitution on the basis of the commission's report, although it was thought that demands for full democracy might not be met.
AFRICA
NAMIBIA
Relations with South Africa — Walvis Bay issue
President Sam Nujoma announced on Oct. 29 that Namibia would shortly be opening a Namibian interests office in South Africa.
The announcement followed a number of indications of improving relations between the two countries.
On Sept. 20 Namibia and South Africa agreed to the joint administration of the Walvis Bay enclave — with the only deep-water harbour on the Namibian coast — and offshore islands, pending final settlement of the future of the disputed territory.
While Namibia claimed sovereignty, South Africa had retained control when Namibia gained independence in March 1990.
Under the agreement a joint technical committee was established to advise both governments on the appropriate structures for the joint adminstration of the 1,100-sq km territory.
Negotiations continued in Pretoria during October.
The South African authorities also agreed to co-operate during a Namibian nationwide census conducted on Oct. 21-30 which included Walvis Bay.
It was agreed to appoint a similar committee to investigate and report on the demarcation of the Orange River boundary, Namibia's southern border with South Africa.
AFRICA
ANGOLA
Food aid for troops
The United States and the UN began airlifting food and other essential items to Angola in October in an attempt to avert a food crisis among demobilized government soldiers and guerrillas from the rebel National Union for the Total Independence of Angola (UNITA).
The first aircraft arrived on Oct. 10.
An estimated 200,000 troops were confined to special bases under the terms of the May peace agreement between the government and UNITA [see p. 38180].
All 50 assembly points were reportedly experiencing acute food shortages.
Concerned about the possibility of food riots which would disrupt the peace process, the USA sent 450,000 ready-made meals from its Defence Department stocks in Europe and the Gulf; officials said that the USA planned to provide one-third of the nutritional needs of the troops for a year.
The UN World Food Programme undertook to provide food, tents and domestic utensils, worth US$27,300,000, for six months.
Requests for further assistance were made to the Commonwealth and to the European Communities (EC).
Removal of UNITA headquarters to Luanda
Jonas Savimbi, leader of UNITA, announced on Oct. 20 that the movement's general headquarters was being transferred from Jamba to Luanda.
The move was apparently necessitated by the requirement of the peace negotiations for a greater UNITA presence in Luanda.
AFRICA
MOZAMBIQUE
Protocol on peace process
Amidst what Radio Mozambique called "moderate optimism" , the eighth round of peace talks between the government and the rebel Mozambique National Resistance (MNR or Renamo) restarted in Rome on Oct. 7, with the Italian mediators present.
On Oct. 19 Radio Mozambique announced that the government and the MNR had signed "Protocol Number 1 on fundamental principles" the previous day.
Portuguese radio described the protocol as "a framework for mutual guarantees" .
The MNR had now effectively recognized the government's legitimacy and would start operating as a political party in opposition, which meant that in practice a ceasefire was in operation.
The United Kingdom Foreign and Commonwealth Secretary, Douglas Hurd, had flown to Maputo during the Commonwealth summit in Harare on Oct. 16-22 and, according to some sources, put strong pressure on President Joachim Chissano to come to an agreement.
The UK apparently had also been exerting pressure on Commonwealth member countries with MNR sympathies, notably Kenya, to convince the rebels that they should accept a peace package.
The government and the MNR agreed in principle to create a control commission comprising their own officials and representatives of the UN and other parties to be decided, which would supervise a peace agreement, once signed.
The rebels had apparently dropped an earlier insistence that the UN should take over main government ministries until elections.
In exchange, the government was understood to have agreed not to legislate, pending a final agreement, on any of the issues under negotiation in the Rome talks, which resumed on Oct. 30.
AFRICA
CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC
Announcement of conference
On Oct. 30 the government announced that a national conference would begin on Feb. 19, 1992.
Alphonse Blaguet, a mediator appointed by President André Kolingba, was charged with setting up a preparatory committee, consulting with political parties and drawing up the agenda.
The decision, however, was rejected by opposition groups.
Abel Goumba of the Front patriotique oubanguien — Parti du travail said that the "regime appears to be using stalling tactics to push it back as far as possible" and that the opposition would increase its activities to press for the conference to be convened earlier.
AFRICA
CAMEROON
Announcement of elections
President Paul Biya, under continuing pressure from opposition groups for democratic reforms, set Feb. 16, 1992, as the date for legislative elections, in a broadcast on Oct. 11.
Biya did not alter his position on the holding of a national conference, a central demand of the opposition, which he had refused to countenance.
He said that international observers would be invited to supervise the ballot and that a prime minister would be appointed from whichever party won a majority.
In the following days there were clashes in Douala, the business capital, between security forces and opposition supporters demanding a national conference.
Some reports said that up to 50,000 people had taken part in the demonstrations.
There were clashes on Oct. 2 in Bamenda, in anglophone North-West Cameroon, where demonstrators confronted security forces in the streets, defying a ban on public gatherings.
At least two people were killed, according to the government newspaper Cameroon Tribune.
A report on Radio France Internationale said that, in addition, 17 people were wounded when police fired on crowds.
Further violent demonstrations were reported in Douala on Oct. 14, leaving dozens injured and causing major damage to property.
On Oct. 17 the National Co-ordination of Opposition Parties and Associations (NCOPA) called off a planned boycott of the reopening of schools "as a show of its disposition to dialogue" .
The NCOPA said, however, that it would maintain its campaign of civil disobedience — the so-called "dead cities" campaign — until its demands for a national conference were satisfied.
On Oct. 30 the Prime Minister, Sadou Hayatou, met opposition parties to discuss a proposed electoral code, and the opposition's access to the media.
Radio France Internationale reported on Oct. 1 that opposition leaders arrested following demonstrations in Douala in September had claimed that they were tortured in detention.
AFRICA
BURKINA
Withdrawal of presidential candidates
On Oct. 18 five presidential candidates, all leaders of parties within the opposition Co-ordinating Committee of Democratic Forces (CFD), announced the suspension of their candidatures for the election due on Dec. 1, leaving the incumbent President, Blaise Compaoré, as the sole candidate.
On the President's initiative, a tripartite commission comprising members of the government, opposition, and religious and customary authorities, had begun meeting on Oct. 10 in an effort to resolve the country's political crisis.
This initiative ended in failure, however, and the opposition withdrew its participation on Oct. 18.
Hermann Yameogo, leader of the Alliance for Democracy and Federation, said that it would not confirm any presidential candidates until a national conference was held.
AFRICA
LIBERIA
Peace agreement
A fourth summit meeting on Liberia was held by the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) in Yammoussoukro, capital of Côte d'Ivoire, on Oct. 29-31.
It ended with a peace agreement in which the rebel National Patriotic Front of Liberia (NPFL) agreed to surrender the territory controlled by its forces to the regional peacekeeping force ECOMOG (the ECOWAS Monitoring Group).
The summit was attended by the NPFL leader Charles Taylor; the president of the interim government of Liberia, Amos Sawyer; the Secretary-General of the Organization of African Unity (OAU), Salim Ahmed Salim; and the heads of state, or their representatives, of 11 West African countries.
A communiqué stated that all participants had adopted a programme for the implementation within 60 days of major aspects of a ceasefire agreement, including the disarming of the NPFL and the relinquishing of NPFL-held territory to ECOMOG forces.
The communiqué also recognized the need for the immediate withdrawal of all foreign fighting forces from Sierra Leone [see p. 38278]and for the creation of a buffer zone at the Liberian border.
It welcomed the decision of Guinea-Bissau to contribute troops to ECOMOG.
It was also agreed that elections would be held in Liberia within six months.
AFRICA
MAURITANIA
New electoral law
On Oct. 14 the ruling Military Committee for National Salvation (CMSN) amended an electoral law it had promulgated one week earlier.
The amendment came in response to criticisms by six of the seven recently created opposition parties that the first version was weighted in favour of the Social Democratic Republican Party (PRDS), formed under the sponsorship of President Moaouia Ould Sidi Taya).
The law introduced on Oct. 7 had stipulated that any candidate for the presidency had to be supported by 50 mayors and 400 town councillors.
The leader of the Rally for Democracy and National Unity (RDUN), Ahmed Mokhtar Sidi Baba, pointed out in an open letter to the CMSN that 200 of the country's 208 mayors were PRDS supporters.
Qualifying support was therefore altered to 50 town councillors only, of which a maximum of 10 might come from the same region.
The law envisaged presidential elections held over two rounds, between candidates aged at least 40 and of the Moslem religion.
Candidates for the 79 National Assembly seats had to be over 25 and would be elected for five years.
A 56-seat Senate would be elected every six years from candidates aged over 35.
The opposition parties had also criticized other aspects of the electoral law.
The Union of Democratic Forces (UFD — see below) and the Socialist and Democratic Popular Union (UPSD) claimed that constituency boundaries favoured rural areas so that expanding centres of population, such as Nouadhibou, would be under-represented.
There was also criticism of the authorities' reluctance to set a date for the elections (scheduled for early 1992 — see pp. 38135; 38325).
Some parties had called for a national multiparty conference to be held first.
President's comments on parties and killings
In a radio interview of Oct. 5 President Taya had dismissed the idea of a multiparty conference: "It consolidates the success of those who shout with the loudest voices, the most arrogant lobbies, and the tribes with strong dependency on the outside." 
Asked about reports of detainees killed [see p. 38425]he said that they were exaggerated although "there were incidents of neglect that resulted from lack of self-control in some units" and senior officers, including some members of the CMSN had been disciplined.
Recognition of parties
The recently legalized UFD, headed by Mohammed Ould Baba, held its first meeting in a Nouakchott stadium on Oct. 11.
According to French radio it was attended by 15,000 people, who heard speakers demand the formation of a provisional government of national unity and the restoration of rights to expelled Mauritanians.
On Oct. 6 the Progressive People's Party (APP), headed by journalist Taleb Ould Jiddou was the seventh party to be legalized.
AFRICA
TOGO
Failure of coup attempts
Soldiers loyal to President Gnassingbe Eyadema, who was divested by the national conference in August of all but his ceremonial powers [see p. 38379], twice stormed the national radio and television station on Oct. 1, in separate attempts to return him to power.
In the first attempt soldiers entered the radio station and ordered a journalist to read a communiqué demanding the resignation of the Prime Minister, Koukou Koffigoh, who had been elected by the national conference on Aug. 27 [ibid.], and the dissolution of his transitional government, known as the High Council of the Republic [for which see p. 38425].
They also denounced recent army appointments and demanded pay rises, before broadcasting recordings of songs praising Eyadema.
Soon afterwards, the radio broadcast a message from Eyadema himself, calling on the soldiers to return to barracks.
As they left the radio station, the soldiers apparently encountered a large crowd of demonstrators who pelted them with stones.
Shots were fired and, according to witnesses six to eight people were killed and many wounded.
In a confused situation, the demonstrators also apparently set upon army units dispatched to the radio station to arrest the mutineers.
A few hours later, a statement by Koffigoh was broadcast, denouncing "undisciplined" elements.
He said that he had contacted Eyadema, who was away from Lomé, and that the president had assured him that he had known nothing about the attempt.
Thousands of people crowded into the streets during the day, converging on the government offices to demonstrate support for Koffigoh.
Later the same day about 20 soldiers wearing the green berets of Eyadema's presidential guard briefly held the broadcasting station, before leaving at nightfall.
Witnesses identified their leader as Lt. Gnassingbe Toi, chief of the presidential guard and Eyadema's brother.
The leader of the earlier occupation of the broadcasting station was identified as Maj. Narcisse Djoua.
The two, and a third senior officer, were arrested.
In the early hours of Oct. 8 an unidentified group reportedly entered the hotel in central Lomé where the Prime Minister was staying, demanding a meeting.
They left after about an hour, without seeing Koffigoh, who denounced their actions in a broadcast later in the day.
According to some reports, seven people died in street riots the same day, when pro-Koffigoh demonstrators were reported to have attacked property belonging to Eyadema's entourage.
AFRICA
NIGERIA
Religious rioting
A dusk-to-dawn curfew was imposed and all religious gatherings were banned as a major outbreak of religious rioting began in Kano, a principal Moslem centre in northern Nigeria, on Oct. 14.
According to the Agence France-Presse news agency, at least 100 people were killed, most of them Moslems.
President Ibrahim Babangida was forced to return early from the Commonwealth heads of government meeting as a result of the crisis.
This was the third large-scale incident of religious violence in Nigeria in 1991, following riots in Bauchi and Katsina states in April [see pp. 38135-36].
The trouble began when 10,000 Moslems marched in the town centre, protesting that permission had been granted for a five-day Christian revivalist rally to be addressed by a German preacher, Reinhard Bonnke, whereas some weeks previously permission had been refused for a South African imam to visit Kano.
As tension rose, mobs of Islamic fundamentalists and Christian youths engaged in street battles.
The area most affected was Sabon Gari, which had a large Christian population, mainly Ibos from southern Nigeria.
By Oct. 17 the police had managed to restore calm and the curfew was partially lifted.
A 13-member panel to investigate the disturbances was inaugurated on Oct. 23.
Coup trial
On Oct. 25 a further 12 people, including two civilians, were convicted for their part in an attempted coup in April 1990 [see p. 37367].
Death sentences were handed down to eight of the accused.
When the court's judgement was reviewed by the Armed Forces Ruling Council (AFRC), Nigeria's principal decision-making body, on Oct. 31, however, the death sentences were commuted to terms of life imprisonment.
The AFRC also reduced to 10 years' imprisonment the life sentences of three others.
In 1990, 69 people were executed as a result of their participation in the coup [see pp. 37602; 37700].
AFRICA
CHAD
Coup attempt — Arrest of Interior Minister
A coup attempt was launched in the early hours of Oct. 13 when a group of soldiers unsuccessfully attacked an arsenal close to N'Djamena airport.
Three of the rebel soldiers and one government soldier were killed.
Fighting in the city itself later that day left at least 36 dead.
Maldom Bada Abbas, who was both Interior Minister and vice-president of the ruling Patriotic Salvation Movement (MPS), was arrested and accused of attempting a coup.
Maldom Bada was reportedly arrested at 7 a.m., along with about 10 other politicians and members of the military.
Several hundred armed fighters from Maldom Bada's Hadjerai clan were arrested in the vicinity of his residence (the palace of former President Hissène Habré) and a number of them were said to have been executed.
Three commanders who supported Maldom Abbas fled eastwards to the Guera mountains and Hadjera where serious clashes were reported on Oct. 14.
The French government on Oct. 14 affirmed its continued support for the government of President Idress Déby and four days later announced that 300 paratroops would be sent to reinforce the 1,100 French troops already stationed in Chad.
Observers interpreted the coup as a rebellion against the predominance of Déby's Zaghawa clan, although Déby stressed in a radio broadcast of Oct. 22 that "this incident will in no way change our attitude" and that "no group or leader of the MPS or person will be marginalized" .
He traced Maldom Bada's dissent back to March 1991 when he declined to give up the post of MPS vice-president on being appointed Minister of the Interior.
Déby had also reportedly been critical of Maldom Bada's negotiation of an accord between Chad and Libya signed in Tripoli on Sept. 5.
According to the Libyan media the accord would regulate travel between the two countries and also provide for "the exchange of information and co-operation in security spheres" .
The Chadian Foreign Minister Ahmad Soungui said on Oct. 18 that he had had to explain to Libya that the accord was invalid, since the two countries were still in dispute over the Aouzou strip [see p. 36841].
Official statements on Tibesti disturbances
On Oct. 1 it was reported that the Chadian authorities suspected Chadian refugees in Niger of having triggered the recent disturbances in the northern Tibesti region [see p. 38427].
Official sources detailed an attack on a garrison at Bardai, followed by an attack on officials conveying military funds on Sept. 18 and an attack on the Zoumri garrison on Sept. 20.
By late September the government was attempting to negotiate with the rebels through local community leaders, and about 90 people taken hostage in the north were subsequently returned to N'Djamena.
Political parties charter
On Oct. 4 the Council of Ministers published an order on the "Formation, Functioning and Dissolution of Political Parties" , which decreed that any parties approved must "shun intolerance, tribalism, regionalism, religious discrimination…and recourse to violence" .
Parties refused authorization had a right of appeal before an administrative judge, and the MPS, "which already leads a public life by virtue of being the source and guarantor of the institutions provided for in the National Charter" , was exempted from certain registration formalities.
This aspect of the decree was criticized by two opposition groups — the National Movement of the Chadian Renovators and the Rally for Democracy and Progress — which were demanding the convening of a multiparty national conference before the scheduled date of May 1992.
AFRICA
SUDAN
Postponement of talks
On Oct. 23 the Nigerian news media reported that peace talks between the Sudanese government and the southern rebel Sudanese People's Liberation Army (SPLA) had been postponed due to a recent split within the SPLA leadership.
It had been planned to hold the talks in Abuja, Nigeria on Oct. 28 and Nov. 7 under the auspices of the Organization of African Unity [see p. 38323].
The Nigerian government was now reportedly attempting to mediate between the two SPLA groups.
Courts-martial followingcoup attempt
In early October a closed military court in Khartoum was hearing the cases of nine army officers, four retired soldiers and two civilians who were accused of involvement in the August coup attempt [see p. 38380].
They were said to face summary execution if found guilty of complicity in what had been the fifth rumoured coup attempt since the military took power in June 1989.
On Sept. 16 the general army command had announced that the leaders of the August coup attempt had confessed in the presence of judges.
Two groups implicated were said to be the National Democratic Alliance (NDA — an alliance formed in 1989 which grouped the opposition parties, including the Umma party, with the SPLA) and a hitherto unknown group, Ana al-Sudan ( "I am Sudan" ).
The authorities also claimed that an (unnamed) foreign state had helped opposition members in exile to communicate with the conspirators, who had planned to seize Khartoum state and the principal towns of Eastern state.
A statement issued in Cairo on Sept. 30 by the NDA's military wing, the "legitimate command of the Sudanese army" , named the two civilian accused as Umma party politicians Abdel Rahman Nugud Allah and Abdellatif al-Jamiabi.
On Oct. 2 the NDA claimed that over 70 people had been arrested in connection with the events of August.
Former Prime Minister Sadiq al-Mahdi had been detained and interrogated for three days.
Bashir's visit to Ethiopia
The Revolutionary Command Council (RCC) Chairman, Lt.-Gen.
Omar Hassan Ahmed al-Bashir, led an official delegation on a visit to the Ethiopian capital, Addis Ababa, on Oct. 22-24.
Addressing the Ethiopian transitional Council of Representatives on Oct. 24 he said that the overthrow of the previous Ethiopian regime would allow the two countries to work to solve their problems jointly.
He reportedly noted that Sudan had "applied the federal system of rule for realizing the principle of power sharing, the fair distribution of wealth and unity in diversity" .
Other issues discussed during the visit included the movement of peoples between the two countries and the convening of a conference on relief and development in the Horn of Africa.
Removal of subsidies
On Oct. 7 the removal of subsidies from a number of basic commodities, including sugar and petroleum, led to immediate consumer price rises of 66-75 per cent.
To counterbalance these increases, government employees were awarded a wage rise of £S300 a month, while around 500,000 low-paid public-sector workers would be eligible for monthly grants of the same amount.
On Oct. 14 the Sudanese pound was devalued by 70 per cent(US$1=£S15.0305 as at Oct. 14), in a move calculated to improve relations with the International Monetary Fund (IMF).
In September 1990 the IMF had declared Sudan ineligible for refusing to discharge its obligations to the Fund over arrears accumulated since 1984.
An IMF official quoted in the Middle East Economic Digest of Oct. 18 welcomed "the government's intention to address the outstanding economic and financial issues" and looked forward to future co-operation between Sudan and the IMF.
AFRICA
SOMALIA
New Cabinet
A 72-member new Cabinet was appointed by Prime Minister Umar Arteh Ghalib on Oct. 1.
The length of the Cabinet list — which included 14 ministers of state and 23 deputy ministers from a variety of clans — was explained by Arteh Ghalib at the Oct. 3 swearing-in ceremony as being a response to the special circumstances prevailing in Somalia.
Since President Ali Mahdi Mohammed was from the United Somali Congress (USC), the two posts of Vice-president (which had been created following the July talks between Somali groups in Djibouti — see pp. 38322-23) were now filled by Abdel Qadir Mohammed Rebeh and Umar Ma'alim Mohammed, representing the Somali Patriotic Movement (SPM) and the Somali Democratic Movement (SDM).
One week later, Gen. Mohammed Farah Aydid, who was chairman of the USC but whose supporters had clashed in September with a rival faction loyal to President Mahdi Mohammed [see pp. 38426-27], denounced the new appointees and the Djibouti accords.
On Oct. 14 Gen. Ahmed Sahal Ali was appointed as the new commander of the armed forces and instructed to speed up the formation of a single national army.
Relief operations
Relief agencies estimated that around 400 people had been killed in the September fighting in Mogadishu, and up to 1,500 had been injured.
A team of German engineers assigned to a European Community (EC) project to repair the town's water system (damaged some months earlier) had left the country on account of the fighting.
The EC representative Robert Walker, who had arrived in Mogadishu in August to oversee the distribution by relief agencies of European emergency aid worth US$23,000,000, was in late October liaising with President Mahdi Mohammed over the government's own plans for emergency aid.
Farah Aydid had claimed that relief aid arriving in Mogadishu was not reaching targeted populations.
Meanwhile, in the self-declared Republic of Somaliland in the north [see pp. 38182-83], relief organizations had begun implementing EC-sponsored programmes in co-operation with the government created there by the Somali National Movement (SNM).
The land and sea borders with Djibouti were declared open as a "humanitarian step" by Djibouti President Gouled Aptidon on Oct. 8.
Although the borders had officially been closed on May 2, 1989, they had since been crossed by large numbers of Somali refugees, some of whom were now returning home.
AFRICA
MAURITIUS
Date for republic status
Prime Minister Anerood Jugnauth, whose coalition government had won a majority in legislative elections on Sept. 15 [see p. 38427], announced on Oct. 22 that Mauritius would become a republic on March 12, 1992.
The necessary constitutional changes would require approval by a three-quarters majority in the 70-seat Assembly.
On Oct. 29 Sir Gaëtan Duval, leader of the opposition Parti Mauricien Social-Démocrate (PMSD), said that the country was on the "brink of dictatorship" and reiterated his claims that the elections had been rigged.
AFRICA
THE GAMBIA
The Gambia announced on Oct. 23 that 980 illegal immigrants, the majority from Guinea and Sierra Leone, had been deported; the expulsions were apparently prompted by concern over a rise in violent crime.
AFRICA
GHANA
Ghana signed a communiqué with the transitional government of TOGO on Oct. 4 under which the two countries agreed to "promote close and mutually beneficial co-operation" ; land, sea and air borders were opened on Oct. 5 for the free movement of goods and persons.
AFRICA
GUINEA
On Oct. 3 President Lansana Conte announced that a full multiparty system would come into operation from April 1992; opposition RPG leader Alpha Conde accused the government of procrastination in order to appoint "a so-called government of transition" .
AFRICA
NIGER
On Oct. 26 the national conference elected Amadou Cheffou as Prime Minister for a 15-month transitional period (Nov. 1, 1991-Jan. 31, 1993); on Oct. 11 the conference had confirmed that President Ali Saibou would remain head of state during the transition.
AFRICA
RWANDA
Sylvestre Nsanzimana, the Justice Minister, was appointed on Oct. 12 as Prime Minister, a post created under the Constitution introduced in June.
AMERICAS
UNITED STATES
Entries for Democratic nomination contest — Beginning of Bush campaign
Governor Bill Clinton of Arkansas and Edmund G. (Jerry) Brown Jr formally entered the 1992 presidential race on Oct. 3 and Oct. 21 respectively, as foreshadowed in September [see pp. 38427-28].
Brown underlined a populist stance by refusing individual campaign contributions of over $100, and promised a crusade against what he called "the unholy alliance of private greed and corrupt politics" in Washington.
His targets went beyond the Republicans to include "entrenched Democratic politicians" , whom he accused of turning "our party from a voice of opposition into a party of complicity" .
Clinton had risen from impoverished childhood in Hope, Arkansas, to work his way through Georgetown University and hold a Rhodes scholarship; he became the nation's youngest sitting governor at 32 in 1979.
Like Brown, he struck a populist tone by attacking the "status-quo paralysis" in Washington, but combined this with a partisan attack on the Bush administration for its neglect of home affairs in general and of the interests of America's middle class in particular.
Claiming that his domestic agenda went beyond the liberal-conservative divide of US politics, he denounced President Bush's opposition to recent civil rights bills, and promised to back a national health plan, to penalize parents whose children missed school, and to send fathers who missed child support payment to prison.
With Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa established as the standard-bearer of the Democratic Party's liberal wing in the nomination race, Clinton's strategy, like that of Bob Kerrey, was to present himself as a "new" alternative offering change from the party's past (see p. 38427).
Governor Mario Cuomo of New York, widely regarded as the strongest candidate the Democrats could field against Bush, announced on Oct. 11 that he was thinking about running for the presidential nomination.
Opinion polls had begun to indicate that the deep recession affecting the economy made Bush's re-election less certain than had hitherto been thought.
In particular, the New York Times/CBS poll of Oct. 22 found that 79 per cent believed foreign policy less important than home issues, that only 37 per cent approved Bush's handling of the economy, and that 56 per cent believed that the recession was getting worse.
Bush, not yet a formally declared candidate, authorized on Oct. 11 the formation of a campaign re-election committee with a Texan oil magnate, Bobby Hold, as finance chairman.
This body quickly laid plans to raise a primary-season budget of US$26,000,000, the maximum amount allowable in order to qualify for federal matching funds.
The first major fund raising events were held in Texas in late October.
In a public statement on Oct. 12 Bush also effectively confirmed that Vice-President Dan Quayle would be retained as his running-mate.
The Bush administration also moved on proposals for tax cuts, designed to appeal to middle-class voters hurt by the recession, and to counter a plan put forward by Senate finance committee chairman Lloyd Bentsen (Democrat, Texas) for tax cuts of $72,000 million over five years financed by a 5 per cent cut in defence spending.
Despite the growing magnitude of the budget deficit, the Bush administration (which had hitherto opposed tax cuts except on capital gains tax) declared on Oct. 23 that stimulative middle-income tax-cuts were "under consideration" .
It also took measures to ease the so-called "credit crunch" , mainly by relaxing regulatory pressures in order to encourage bank lending.
Iran Contra scandal
Guilt plea by Abrams
Eliott Abrams, 43, assistant secretary of state from 1985 to early 1989, pleaded guilty in a federal court on Oct. 7 to two charges of illegally withholding information from Congress about covert US support for contra rebels in Nicaragua.
Among the details he had held back during appearances before both the Senate foreign relations committee and the House of Representatives intelligence committee in October 1986 were the fact that he had solicited a $10,000 million contribution from the Sultan of Brunei.
Abrams, Oliver L. North and Alan D. Fiers, head of the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) Central American Task Force in 1984-88, composed the inner circle of a "Restricted Interagency Group" which co-ordinated US activities in central America in 1985-86, a period when Congress had banned military aid to the rebels.
The only State Department official, past or present, to face charges thus far, Abrams avoided the threat of felony charges by pleading guilty and promising to co-operate with independent prosecutor Lawrence E. Walsh.
Having concentrated so far on administration and CIA involvement, Walsh declared that the final stages of his investigation would focus on other agencies which either collaborated in, or had detailed knowledge of, the Reagan administration's secret arms sales to Iran or its covert resupply network for the contras.
North's assertion of Reagan's knowledge
In his book Under Fire: An American Story, published on Oct. 22, North avowed that former President Ronald Reagan not only "knew everything" about the Iran-contra project but also "enthusiastically" backed it, and that he had been made a scapegoat by senior Reagan administration officials seeking to protect the President and themselves.
North also told journalists on Oct. 22 that Bush, then Vice President, probably knew in outline of his activities in Central America but had no specific knowledge of the diversion of arms sales profits to the contras.
Nomination of new Attorney General
On Oct. 16 President Bush nominated William P. Barr, 41, as Attorney General.
Acting Attorney General since Dick Thornburgh resigned the post to run for the Senate [for his announcement in June p. 38279], Barr was a strong supporter of tougher law-and-order measures.
Previously head of the Justice Department's legal counsel office, he wrote the legal opinion which justified the arrest in 1989 of Manuel Noriega, the deposed Panamanian ruler.
He also wrote the still-secret legal opinion which authorized Federal Bureau of Investigation agents to kidnap fugitives overseas without getting permission from foreign governments.
Barr was at the CIA from 1973 to 1977 when Bush himself was director, and served on the White House domestic policy staff when Bush was Vice-President.
Bush veto of unemployment benefit legislation
On Oct. 11 Bush vetoed legislation which would have extended unemployment payments to more than 2,000,000 people whose benefits had run out (see.
p. 38428).
His veto message declared that the bill, which would cost US$6,400 million to implement, would drive up the budget deficit and stifle economic recovery, thereby increasing unemployment.
Rebutting charges that they were insensitive to the plight of the unemployed, Bush and Republican congressional leaders urged support for Senator Robert Dole's more modest benefit extension bill whose costs would be funded by the sell-off of radio airwaves.
Democrats accused Bush of timing the veto to capitalize on the fact that public attention was currently focused on the Clarence Thomas confirmation hearings [see p. 38510].
By deepening the partisan rift, the Thomas affair also cast its shadow over the Senate's attempt to override the President, which failed to achieve the necessary two-thirds majority by two votes on Oct. 16.
Eight Republicans, who had originally voted for the bill because of unemployment problems in their home states, joined all 57 Democrats to oppose the veto, but there were no additional crossovers in spite of the widespread recession.
Bush had vetoed a total of 23 bills, and all 11 attempts by Congress to override him had proved unsuccessful.
Upholding of legal test of term-limit law
On Oct. 10 the California Supreme Court upheld by a six-to-one majority a term-limit initiative, Proposition 140, which voters had narrowly approved in November 1990.
The ballot initiative, which limited State Assembly members to three two-year terms and state senators and most statewide elected officials to two four-year terms from 1991 onwards, was ruled a valid protection "against an entrenched dynastic legislative bureaucracy" ; the court rejected arguments from attorneys representing the legislature's Democratic leadership that a legislator's right to run for office and a voter's right to choose a candidate would be unconstitutionally restricted.
The initiative had been launched by citizen groups anxious to break up the relationship which had developed between pressure groups and entrenched state politicians, and to make the California legislature more responsive to the ordinary voters.
In general Republicans supported the measure because its likely effect would be to undermine the long-lasting Democratic domination of the state legislature.
The judgment encouraged citizen groups supporting term-limit initiatives in other states.
The most radical of these, Initiative 533 in Washington, extended to legislators at both federal and state level, but the legality of states limiting the terms of their federal representatives had been widely questioned.
Election of first black mayor of Memphis
On Oct. 4 Memphis, Tennessee, elected its first black mayor, Willie Herenton, who defeated by 172 votes the two-term incumbent Richard Hackett.
With 49.45 per cent of the vote, Herenton fell just short of an actual plurality, but did not have to undergo a runoff election as required in the past.
A federal judge had recently prohibited runoffs in citywide elections after a lawsuit claiming that they were used to discriminate against black candidates.
Brought up in a broken home and educated in segregated schools, Herenton overcame his early disadvantages, worked unloading boxcars to pay for college education and served as Memphis school superintendent before becoming mayor.
Mass murder — Rejection of gun ban by Congress
On Oct. 16 in Killeen, Texas, 35-year-old George Hennard killed 22 people and wounded 15, in an attack which began when he drove a truck through the window of a cafeteria.
For 20-30 minutes he fired at lunchtime diners with two large-capacity ammunition clip semi-automatic pistols, before finally killing himself.
Local police speculated that hatred of women was his motive.
The day after this attack, reported as the worst mass murder in US history, the House of Representatives voted by 247 to 177 to remove from a Democratic anti-crime bill clauses outlawing 13 types of semi-automatic assault weapons and magazines containing more than seven rounds of ammunition.
The number of guns of various kinds owned by US citizens had doubled since 1970 to 201,837,000.
Mounting a strong lobby, the National Rifle Association argued that gun control was irrelevant to isolated incidents like that in Killeen and restricted the opportunity for self-defence against armed assailants.
The Bush administration deemed the bill "totally unacceptable" , and called for sterner punishment as the best antidote for gun crimes, notably an expansion of the death penalty to cover some 50 murder categories including drug-related killings and "drive-by" shootings.
Extradition of Beckwith
After a 10-month battle, self-proclaimed white supremacist Byron de la Beckwith, 70, was extradited from Tennessee on Oct. 4 to face a third trial in Mississippi for the killing in 1963 of Medgar Evers, at the time the state's leading black activist [see p. 19771].
All-white juries failed to reach a verdict in his two trials in 1964 [see p. 20209], but new witnesses came forward with evidence of his whereabouts on the night of the killing in Jackson, contradicting his claims to have been 95 miles away in Greenwood.
AMERICAS
CANADA
NDP election victories in British Columbia and Saskatchewan
The New Democratic Party (NDP) swept to landslide victories in provincial elections in British Columbia on Oct. 17 and Saskatchewan on Oct. 21.
The NDP, although standing a distant third in the federal House of Commmons behind the ruling Progressive Conservative Party (PCP) and the Liberals, was now the ruling party in three provinces containing more than 50 per cent of Canada's 26,000,000 population.
[For September 1990 NDP victory in legislative elections in Ontario, Canada's most populous province, see p. 37705.]
The federal government had proposed that enactment of its September 1991 constitutional reform proposals [see p. 38429]should depend on approval by seven provinces representing at least 50 per cent of Canada's population, and the NDP could thus have an unexpected degree of influence over their fate.
There was speculation that this might provide the party with an opportunity to press for its social democratic goals, including stronger welfare provisions and labour and trade union rights.
In British Columbia the NDP, led by Mike Harcourt, won 51 of the 75 seats (expanded from 69), ousting the Social Credit Party (Socred) government, in power since December 1975.
The NDP failed to improve on its popular vote, winning just over 40 per cent, but benefited from the division of the rest of the electorate between Socred and the Liberals.
Socred, hit by scandal allegations, won only seven seats, compared with 43 at dissolution (having won 47 in the 1986 elections [see p. 38940], and Rita Johnston, the Premier since April 1991 [see p. 38140], lost her seat.
The Liberals won 17 seats.
In Saskatchewan the NDP, led by John Roy Romanow, won 55 of the 66 seats (expanded from 64) and toppled the PCP government of Grant Devine.
The NDP had won 25 seats in 1986.
The PCP fell from 34 at dissolution (38 in the 1986 elections) to 10 seats, and the Liberals retained their one seat.
The two provincial elections took place against a background of public opinion polls showing PCP federal Prime Minister Brian Mulroney's standing with the electorate dropping to the lowest for any prime minister in the history of Canadian opinion polling.
AMERICAS
HAITI
Aftermath of military coup
Strict economic sanctions were imposed by the United States government on Oct. 29 in protest at the Sept. 30 military coup which deposed President Jean-Bertrand Aristide [see p. 38430].
The US decision was the decisive factor in persuading the military-backed interim government and local business groups to agree on the same day to renewed negotiations with the Organization of American States (OAS).
A special OAS mission, led by the former Colombian Foreign Minster Augusto Ramírez Ocampo, aimed at negotiating Aristide's return to power, was reported to have arrived in the capital, Port-au-Prince, on Oct. 31.
The effect of sanctions on the island's weak economy, highly dependent on trade with the USA, was expected to be instantaneous and food and oil supplies were already reported to be nearly exhausted.
Aristide, in turn, had assured the OAS that he was willing to find a "national solution" to the crisis, one which would safeguard the rights of all sections of society, if respect were shown for the Constitution and if his presidency were recognised.
He also claimed that he was prepared to dismiss his controversial Prime Minister René Préval, but insisted on the arrest and trial of the coup leader, Armed Forces C.-in- C. Brig. -Gen.
Raoul Cedras.
Arisitide's European tour
Aristide had embarked on a European tour on Oct. 24, returning to the Venezuelan capital, Caracas, on Oct. 31.
During his tour the French government, on Oct. 30, officially reiterated its recognition of him as Haiti's President and offered him political asylum.
The Swiss, Spanish and Belgium governments also promised him support.
France, along with the USA, Canada and the European Communities, had also frozen all foreign aid [see also p. 38430].
Initial OAS and UN response to coup
Aristide addressed a specially convened emergency session of foreign ministers of the OAS member countries on Oct. 2 and an extraordinary session of the UN Security Council on Oct. 3.
Both organizations demanded his return to power, while not endorsing military action.
US President Bush, during a meeting with Aristide in Washington on Oct. 4, endorsed the OAS diplomatic effort but effectively ruled out US military involvement, unless the lives of US citizens were at risk.
US Marines had been deployed to the nearby US navy base at Guantanamo on Cuba, to evacuate US citizens from Haiti if necessary.
US officials were reported to have criticized Aristide for the tone of his speeches which, they claimed, had fomented class hatred [see below].
A high-level OAS delegation, led by OAS Secretary-General Joao Clemente Baena Soares, travelled to Haiti on Oct. 4 and Oct. 6 from Kingston, Jamaica, and held discussions with Cedras and other coup leaders.
The talks were held in the terminal of Port-au-Prince's international airport to ensure the safety of the OAS delegates.
The final meeting was broken up, however, and the OAS delegation forced to leave the country immediately, by soldiers who reportedly suspected that Cedras had agreed to Aristide's conditional return (the soldiers' action being taken by US local officials as proof that rank-and-file soldiers, and not necessarily the army's commanders, were preventing a political settlement — see below).
On Oct. 8 the OAS voted unanimously for a trade embargo, the freezing of Haitian government assets, the banning of arms sales and the diplomatic isolation of the military junta, although agreeing to the provision of basic humanitarian aid.
The OAS rejected calls from Argentina, Venezuela and Costa Rica for firmer action, including the threat of direct intervention by a multi-national peacekeeping force.
Local opposition to coup
The mayor of Port-au Prince, Evans Paul, one of the few public officials openly to oppose the coup was badly beaten and arrested by soldiers on Oct. 6 as he was arranging a flight to Caracas in order to liaise with Aristide.
He was released on Oct. 8.
Préval, the deposed Prime Minister (who like the rest of the former Cabinet was in hiding — most of them in the French embassy) issued leaflets calling for non-violent civil disobedience campaigns, as did Aristide in radio broadcasts beamed from neighbouring Dominican Republic.
A general strike on Oct. 15 closed shops, offices and schools but no confrontations with the army were reported.
Approval of coup by Senate — Interim President and Prime Minster
Over 100 soldiers, supported by tanks, invaded the National Assembly on Oct. 7 and forced the 29 delegates present (out of a total of 110) to elect the little-known Joseph Nerette, 67, a Supreme Court judge, as interim President.
Nerette was inaugurated on Oct. 8.
A compliant "interparliamentary crisis commission" had been formed earlier by upwards of two dozen politicians hostile to Aristide, to confer a spurious constitutional legitimacy to the coup.
They had declared the presidency and all ministerial posts vacant.
An interim Prime Minster, Jean Jacques Honorat, who had been a government minister under former dictator Jean-Claude Duvalier and was one of Aristide's bitterest critics, was installed on Oct. 10; a new Cabinet was announced on Oct. 16.
The date of fresh elections was not fixed, even though the Constitution stated that an interim government had to convene elections within 45 days.
Effects of coup
In the space of two days — Sept. 30 to Oct. 1 — at least 600 people were reliably estimated to have been killed by the army and police and in succeeding days more killings and arrests were reported as troops raided premises, principally in Port-au Prince, in search of troops loyal to Aristide.
Radio Lumière was forcibly closed down after it had reported the massacre of 40 peasants by the army in the village of Carrefour, south west of Port-au-Prince.
Most other independent radio stations had either had their equipment destroyed or had broadcast music programmes and other safe material.
Killing of Lafontant
Among those killed during the coup was Roger Lafontant, the former leader of the Tontons Macoutes, the private army used by the Duvalier regimes to terrorize the population, and sentenced to life imprisonment in July for his part in the January 1991 abortive coup [see pp. 37955; 38332].
The military claimed that his killing, in the national penitentiary, was the work of Aristide supporters, but this version was disputed by analysts who thought it marked the settling of old scores between Lafontant and his opponents within the army.
Disputed origins of coup
Cedras, confirmed as Armed Forces C.-in- C. by the National Assembly on Oct. 14, characterized the coup as a "correction of the democratic process" , claiming that Aristide had adopted an autocratic style of government, had flouted the Constitution and was inciting mob violence.
Local US embassy officials described the coup as the work of disaffected rank-and-file soldiers, who had compelled reluctant senior commanders to participate.
Maj. Joseph Michel François, acknowledged by diplomats to have been a ringleader, insisted to foreign journalists that the main impetus had come from the ranks of the 8,000-strong army who feared the growing influence of Aristide's new foreign-trained 50-member presidential guard.
Other Western diplomats, local journalists and most political analysts claimed, however, that the coup had been rumoured for weeks and had a level of sophistication far greater than that expected from mostly illiterate soldiers in the ranks.
Reports of the importation of 2,000 Israeli Uzi submachine guns and Galil assault rifles three weeks before the coup, and which were widely used by rebel soldiers, lent credence to this view.
The army, where profiteering and corruption was endemic, had profitable interests to protect, especially its involvement in drug trafficking.
Financial and logistical support (vehicles, petrol and food) had been provided for the coup by Haiti's rich minority, who saw Aristide as bent on fomenting class war.
In a speech on Sept. 27, he had appeared to encourage his supporters in the teeming shanty town areas of Port-au-Prince to rectify gross social inequalities by rising up and killing their opponents with "necklaces" of flaming tyres, known locally as "Pères Lebruns" after the country's main tyre importing firm.
Joseph Nerette President Jean Jacques Honorat Prime Minister Gracia Jean Interior and National Defence Charles Beaulieu Finance and Economy Claude Pierre-Louis Agriculture Joseph Desir National Education Joachin Pierre Social Affairs and Labour Francois Bouzi Commerce and Industry Marc-Henri Rousseau Francois Public Works Greger Jean Louis Health Henri Piquion Information Antoine Leconte Justice
Haiti provisional government
AMERICAS
CUBA
Fourth PCC congress
Against a backdrop of domestic economic crisis and growing international isolation following the collapse of communism in the Soviet Union and in eastern Europe, the fourth congress of the ruling Cuban Communist Party (PCC) was held in the eastern city of Santiago de Cuba on Oct. 10-14.
[For third congress in February 1986 see p. 34230; the second congress had been in 1980 — see p. 30817 — and the first in 1975 — see p. 27595.
The party had adopted its current name only in 1965, having been in power since 1959 following the 1958 revolution.]
The congress was held behind closed doors, and the exclusion of foreign journalists and overseas political delegations encouraged speculation that political divisions existed between the party leadership and membership, represented by 1,800 delegates.
The congress reportedly passed without noticeable discord, however, and supported President Fidel Castro Ruz in his rejection of a mixed economy, especially in agriculture, and of Western style multiparty political systems which he described as "garbage" .
Castro claimed that the country would survive even if "surrounded by an ocean of capitalism" .
At a concluding public rally, attended by over 250,000 people, he declared that the people were prepared to die for the revolution if the United States invaded the country.
Twelve members of dissident groups, six of whom were from the Association for the Defence of Political Rights (Adepo) and four from the Free Art Association (Apal), campaigning for a multiparty system and free elections, were arrested before or during the Congress.
Implications of changes in Soviet Union
During a five-hour address on the opening day, which for the first time was not broadcast live, Castro painted a bleak picture of an economy critically dependent on trade with the Soviet Union.
He announced that by September only 38 per cent of the US$3,360 million in promised Soviet imports had been delivered, a figure already reduced from $5,130 million in 1990.
In addition, promised Soviet oil supplies of 10,000,000 tonnes were 5 per cent down and the prospects of future consignments hinged, like all other trade, on whether individual soviet republics, especially the Russian Federation, would be willing, or able, to negotiate further imports.
In preparation for more difficult times ahead, delegates ratified the drastic "Special Period in Time of Peace" austerity programme, adopted in September 1990, which aimed to stem corruption and achieve food self-sufficiency [see also p. 38229].
They also backed moves to boost foreign exchange, especially for tourism, and to increase private foreign investment, particulary from Latin America [see p. 38528 for Castro's appearance at October Group-of-3 meeting].
Party leaders stressed that this did not signify an abdication of socialist principles and that the population would endure sacrifices to preserve the basic social achievements of the revolution, above all in education, health and social security.
Decision on direct elections
Although the proceedings reinforced Castro's dominance of the PCC, some decisions ratified by the congress, in particular accepting direct election of all delegates to the National Assembly of People's Powers, were interpreted as signs that he had either made tactical concessions or had recognized the need for gradual change.
The direct election of Assembly delegates (for which a constitutional amendment would be required) would replace the system of elections by local assemblies.
The widening of the franchise, albeit within the confines of the PCC, whose membership was estimated to be 600,000, was seen as an important step and offered some hope to opposition groups campaigning for a future independent parliament.
Reduction in party bureaucracy
The PCC central committee secretariat — which previously controlled ministries and other party committees — were abolished to avoid bureaucratic duplication of work.
It was now thought that the roles of party and state would be more distinct.
Enlarged central committee
The membership of the PPC central committee was increased from 146 (plus 79 alternates) to 225.
The average age of central committee members fell from 52 to 47; an increased proportion of members had been in the party for less than 15 years.
The central committee was granted extraordinary powers to take policy decisions during the current crisis period.
New political bureau
Of the key figures of the 1959 revolution, only Castro, re-elected as the PCC's first secretary, his brother Gen. Raúl Castro Ruz, re-elected as party president and second secretary, and Carlos Rafael Rodríguez, re-elected as vice-president, remained in the PCC politburo, which was reduced from 26 to 25 members.
Those dropped from the politburo included Vilma Espín Guillois de Castro, the wife of Raúl Castro and president of the Association of Cuban Women; Armando Hart Dávalos, the Minister of Culture; Julio Camacho Aguilera, a former ambassador to the Soviet Union; Pedro Miret Prieto, a Vice-President of the Council of State and of the Council of Ministers; and Jorge Risquet Valdés-Saldaña [see p. 37770].
Among the "rising stars" were Carlos Aldana and Carlos Lage Dávila, both involved in the running of the Union of Young Communists, and Roberto Robaina González representing the Revolution's third generation.
Entry of Christians
In an effort to broaden the base and appeal of the PCC, those holding Christian beliefs were allowed to join the party for the first time.
This decision was a formal one, since many Christians, including the well-known historian and director of the Museum of Havana, Eusebio Leal Spengler, were already party members.
Small-scale enterprises
Where heavy demand or deficiencies existed, small-scale traders such as mechanics, carpenters and plumbers would be allowed to work for their own profit.
This in effect recognized and gave official sanction to the thriving black market.
Moves towards free markets for farm produce and other commodities were firmly rejected.
PCC political bureau
First secretary: Fidel Castro Ruz.
Second secretary: Raúl Castro Ruz.Full members (+ — former alternate member;— new member; women are indicated by (f)): Carlos Rafael Rodríguez Rodríguez; Juan Almeida Bosque; José Ramón Machado; Gen. Abelardo Colomé Ibarra; +Carlos Lage Dávila; +Roberto Robaina Gonzalez; Esteban Lazo Hernández; *Carlos Aldana; *Jorge Lezcano; *Alfredo Hondal; *Alfredo Jordan;
*Nelson Torres; Osmany Cienfuegos Gorriarán +Julián Rizo Alvarez; +Pedro Ross Leal; +Ulises Rosales de Toro; *Concépcion Campa (f); *Yadira García (f); *Maria de los Angeles García (f);
*Candido Palmero;; *Abel Prieto; *Julio Casas; *Leopoldo Cintra Frias.
AMERICAS
JAMAICA
Social unrest
The introduction on Oct. 22 of a 10 per cent general consumption tax (GCT) provoked widespread criticism from the political opposition and scepticism from the business community.
The opposition Jamaica Labour Party (JLP) had staged a protest march through the capital, Kingston, on Oct. 17 against the government's alleged mismanagement of the economy.
The People's National Party (PNP) government on Sept. 25 had reimposed value added tax (VAT) on fuel which had been suspended earlier in the year.
The VAT increase, combined with the lifting of the remaining controls on foreign exchange, caused a rise in the US dollar exchange rate, and fuel prices rose by 15 per cent.
Public transport rates increased by 30 per cent in early October.
There were angry demonstrations in late September and early October.
Investment plan
In an attempt to counter public criticism, Prime Minister Michael Manley, addressing parliament in early October, stated that the government would support a "micro-investment" programme, to be launched by the Micro-Investment Development Agency (Mida) on Oct. 8.
He also announced spending of the equivalent of US$1,200,000 to upgrade urban slums; this amount was part of a US$6,300,000 increase in the government's social programme to support the country's poorest groups.
The Mida plan was specifically designed to benefit the poor, and particularly the young.
Manley claimed that it would provide training, marketing and financial advice to help "ambitious and disciplined young people" , but the benefits were expected to reach only a minority of the young unemployed.
The programme was also dependent on foreign aid; the Netherlands government had reportedly agreed to provide assistance, and the United States Agency for International Development (USAID) had been approached for funding.
PNP conference
Manley was re-elected president of the PNP for the 22nd consecutive time at the party's annual conference in late September, his re-election dispelling rumours that he was about to retire from politics and resign as Prime Minister.
Peter Phillips was elected as general secretary.
Cabinet changes
In early October Desmond Leaky, hitherto Minister of State for Agriculture, was appointed to succeed Phillips as Minister without Portfolio in the Prime Minister's office.
Paul Robertson was appointed Public Service Minister, replacing Kenneth McNeil; Robertson retained his post as Minister of Information.
AMERICAS
MONTSERRAT
General election
The National Progressive Party (NPP) led by former civil servant Reuben Meade, formed only the previous month, achieved a comprehensive victory in the general election held on Oct. 8.
The NPP won four of the seven seats in the Legislative Council.
One seat each went to the hitherto ruling People's Liberation Movement (PLM), the National Development Party (NDP) led by Bertrand Osborne, and an independent, Ruby Wade-Bramble.
PLM leader John Osborne, who was seeking a fourth consecutive term as Chief Minister, lost his seat and stated that he was retiring from politics.
Former Deputy Chief Minister Benjamin Chalmers, whose resignation from the government and the PLM had forced Osborne to call the election a year ahead of schedule, also lost his seat.
Meade, who had accused the Osborne administration of corruption and mismanagement and promised to restore honesty and integrity in government, was sworn in as Chief Minister on Oct. 10.
He headed a four-member Cabinet comprising in addition the former Labour Commissioner Lazalle Homes (Education), a lawyer and former NDP member of the Legislative Council since 1983 David Brandt (Communications and Works), and Charles Kirnon, vice-president of the Montserrat Allied Workers' Union (Agriculture, Trade, Lands and Housing).
AMERICAS
MEXICO
Resignation of second governor
Fausto Zapata, of the ruling Institutional Revolutionary Party (PRI), whose election as governor of the state of San Luis Potosí in August had sparked off great controversy, resigned following a meeting on Oct. 9 with President Carlos Salinas de Gortari.
He was replaced by another PRI member, Gonzalo Martinez Corbala, until new elections could be held.
Zapata strenuously denied opposition claims that his election had been fraudulent and stated that he was standing down to avoid "endangering the possibilities of peaceful coexistence" with rival political forces in the state.
Salvador Nava, 77, an independent who had been the opposition coalition candidate in the gubernatorial election, was in the 12th day of a protest march from San Luis Potosí to Mexico City to expose what he said had been extensive electoral fraud.
Protests and public rallies had continued in San Luis Potosí and a group calling itself "Women for Democracy" had laid siege to the governor's palace, blocking the entrance.
Salinas had forced the resignation of the PRI's governor-elect for the state of Guanajuato on Aug. 29 following similar protests [see p. 38385]; both cases were seen as important victories for the country's fledgling civil rights movement.
Bank sale
The government announced on Oct. 28 that it had sold its 51 per cent stake in Bancomer, the country's second largest bank, for US$2,540 million.
This was one of the largest sales to date in the government's sweeping privatization programme, and Bancomer was the eighth bank to be auctioned in 1991; all had sold for two or three times their book value.
In August the government had sold a 31 per cent stake in the country's largest bank, the Banco Nacional de Mexico, for $3,190 million [for details of May 1991 bank privatization programme see p. 37449].
AMERICAS
PANAMA
Alleged coup attempt
The Attorney General Rogelio Cruz announced on Oct. 7 that a military coup against President Guillermo Endara Galimany had been thwarted and that four former officers, who had belonged to the now defunct Panamanian Defence Forces (FDP) which had been led by the deposed ruler Manuel Antonio Noriega, had been arrested.
The pro-government newspaper Critica Libre additionally identified a former major, Carlos Saldaña, and a former lieutenant, Alcebiades Rodríguez, as fugitive plotters for whom arrest warrants had been issued.
There were suspicions, however, that the government had used the scare of a military coup to deflect attention from the political crisis created by its neo-liberal economic policies first introduced in August 1990 [see p. 37706].
These had resulted in very large cuts in health, education and social security spending, and large-scale redundancies in the wake of the privatization of government agencies.
The response had been massive strikes in the public sector.
A three-week strike by 11 teacher unions had ended on Sept. 20 when the government reached a settlement with nine of the unions whereby it would pay immediately the equivalent of US$1,600,000 in back salaries from 1987 and the remaining US$4,400,000 in the next fiscal year.
New police chief
Oswaldo Fernandez, was sworn in as the new Director of the National Police Force on Oct. 30, replacing Gonzalo Menendez Franco who had resigned on Oct. 25 following accusations that he had meddled in politics.
AMERICAS
FRENCH GUIANA
General strike
A general strike was called on Oct. 8 in protest at a decision of the French government's Bureau of Ecological Studies (BRGM) to grant mining rights to the South African mining company Gencor.
This covered the extraction of gold-bearing deposits beneath territory belonging to the commune of Régina.
Guiana's two deputies to the French National Assembly, Elie Castor and León Betrand, describing the decision as a prime example of France's colonial posture towards the country, demanded its cancellation.
Castor, a prominent Socialist deputy, threatened to resign from the party.
AMERICAS
COLOMBIA
Congressional and gubernatorial elections
Only a third of the 15,000,000 people eligible to vote actually did so in the congressional and gubernatorial elections on Oct. 27, the first to be held under the new Constitution approved in July [see p. 38332].
The indifference of the electorate was blamed partly on the apathy produced by this being the fourth election in 18 months, by the confusing number of different party slates and by the lack of concrete proposal and programmes from the candidates.
As no party emblems were allowed, mostly illiterate rural campesinos (peasants) and urban slum dwellers in particular were unable to distinguish between the parties and most failed to vote.
Over 90,000 troops were mobilized to protect polling stations.
Four people were reported killed and seven injured in isolated skirmishes between the police and guerrillas of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) and the National Liberation Army (ELN).
Liberal victory
The ruling Liberal Party (PL) won a clear majority of 58 seats in the 102-seat Senate and 86 seats in the 161-seat lower House of Representatives.
The PL discredited itself, however, by fielding 392 candidates, divided into different factions, with 89 separate candidate lists being presented for the lower house alone.
Hardliners were in the main returned, to outnumber easily members of the PL's reformist wing.
The poor performance of the main opposition Social Conservative Party (PSC), which similarly fielded several slates of congressional candidates and gained only 10 seats in the Senate and 15 in the lower house, confirmed recent indications that the 70-year duopoly of power by the PL and the PSC had been broken.
The M19-Democratic Alliance (ADM-19) of former left-wing guerrillas, which ran a single slate of candidates, consolidated its position as the third political force in the country, winning nine Senate seats and 15 in the lower house, although its support dropped dramatically from 27 to 10 per cent of the vote.
The ADM-19 was to be led in the Congress by a former guerrilla commander, Vera Grabe.
The right-wing New Democratic Force (NFD) won nine seats in the Senate and the right-wing National Salvation Movement (MSN) won five and 12 seats respectively in the Senate and lower house.
The left-wing Patriotic Union (UP), split into orthodox and reformist factions, won one seat in the Senate and two seats in the lower house.
Indigenous groups gained three seats in the Senate — two specially allotted to them under the new constitution and one elected.
State governorships
There were simultaneous elections for 27 departmental governors, who under the old constitution had been directly appointed, of which the PL won 18.
Development plan
The government launched its US$6,000 million 1991-1994 Economic and Social Development Plan on Oct. 16.
The plan, it claimed, would produce a "peaceful revolution" aimed at achieving radical improvements in health, education and the national infrastructure.
Governorships PL 18 MC 1 Antioquian United Movement (MAU) 1 PSC 3 Popular Movement of the Caribbean (MPC) 1 MSN 1 Coalition 2 Total 27 Senate PL 58 ADM-19 9 NFD 9 Christian National Party (PNC) 1 MSN 5 UP 1 PSC 10 National Conservative Movement (MNC) 1 National Progressive Movement (MND) 1 United Movement for Colombia (MUPC) 1 Unitary Metapolitico (UM) 1 Independent 1 Indigenous elected 1 Indigenous appointed 2 Total 102
Colombian election results
AMERICAS
PERU
Fujimori's European tour
President Alberto Keinya Fujimori undertook a European tour on Oct. 21-26, visiting Luxembourg, Belgium, Spain (the first official visit by a Peruvian President to the former colonial power), France, Italy and Switzerland.
He also had an audience with Pope John Paul II in the Vatican.
The visit was designed to bolster the country's image — marred by a poor human rights record and political instability — among potential aid donors and private investors.
During the visit the European Communities (EC) granted US$160,000,000 in development loans, as did the Spanish government.
Spain also promised to act as an intermediary to gain more support from the United States government and the EC for the government's crop substitution schemes, designed to reduce the number of coca plants being grown by thousands of peasant farmers.
In Italy six agreements were signed for future economic, commercial and industrial co-operation, including the prospect of investment and co-operation from the Italian private sector.
Lifting of legal immunity on former President
The Senate voted on Oct. 19 by 38 votes to 17 to lift constitutional immunity from prosecution of former President Alan García Pérez, who held office from 1985-1990.
The decision, which upheld that of the Chamber of Deputies in August [see p. 38387], was subject to ratification by the Attorney General's Office, and meant that García could now be tried as an ordinary civilian on charges of "illicit personal enrichment" over 14 years in public office.
Border dispute with Ecuador
The threat of a serious military confrontation with Ecuador over long-disputed territory in the Condor Range Amazonian border region, was reported to have faded by Oct. 29.
Ecuadorian and Peruvian troops, who at one time were reported to be only yards apart, were reported on Oct. 15 to have withdrawn simultaneously from their common border in order to avoid a confrontation.
A Peruvian helicopter gunship had overflown Ecuadorian territory on Oct. 6.
Both governments had asked for the help of the governments of Argentina, Chile and the Andean Pact countries (Bolivia, Ecuador and Peru) to resolve the matter.
Peru had rejected an Ecuadorian proposal that Pope John Paul II be asked to mediate and Ecuador in turn had rejected a Peruvian proposal that the United States, Argentina and Chile, signatories to the 1942 Rio de Janeiro protocol on Peruvian and Ecuador border disputes, be allowed to adjudicate.
Council for Peace
A Council for Peace, composed of representatives from the political parties, high-ranking army officers, retired police officers, the business sector, the Roman Catholic, Protestant and Evangelical churches, human rights groups, trade unions, co-operative groups and campesino (peasant) organizations, held its first meeting on Oct. 14.
Established by Congress on Aug. 2, it was given responsibility for drawing up a plan within 150 days for the "pacification" of the country.
The Council began its work at time of escalating violence.
At least 50 guerrillas of the Tupac Amaru Revolutionary Movement (MRTA) and two soldiers were reported killed, and 30 more wounded, in a clash on Oct. 24.
On Oct. 21 it was reported that in recent days at least 50 civilians had been killed during a "war" between Shining Path (Sendero Luminoso) guerrillas and MRTA forces in remote towns in the central Andean Huallaga region.
Sendero Luminoso was reported to have killed 22 members of a peasant militia on Oct. 5 in the southern Ayacucho region.
The army later claimed that 15 guerrillas had been killed.
A Sendero Luminoso attack on a military base in the province of Satipo, 370 km east of the capital Lima, on Oct. 2 was reported to have led to the deaths of 21 people, including an estimated 16 guerrillas, four civilians and one soldier.
AMERICAS
CHILE
Aylwin's report on political prisoners — Reaction to Kohl speech
In an address to students at the University of Santiago on Oct. 15, President Patricio Aylwin Azócar stated that when he assumed the presidency in March 1990 there had been a total of 380 political prisoners still detained from the 1973-1990 military regime; all but 83 had already been released, he said, and the rest would be freed by the end of the year.
Reaction to Kohl speech
Right-wing opposition members walked out of the Congress on Oct. 22 during a speech by German Chancellor Helmut Kohl, who paid an official visit to Chile on Oct. 19-22.
Aylwin stated that he "deplored the incident" and expressed his "solidarity" with Kohl.
Kohl described the military regime of former president Gen. Augusto Pinochet Ugarte as a "dictatorship" and compared it to the former East German regime headed by Erich Honecker (whose request for political asylum in Chile had recently been rejected).
Kohl also called for the "tearing down" of the walls of Dignity Colony (Colonia Dignidad), a secretive community run by German nationals 400 km south of Santiago, the capital, to see what they had to hide.
The Colony, which had its legal status removed in February [see p. 38002], was still operating and former inmates had reported that it had been a centre for child sexual abuse and slave labour, and a torture centre for Pinochet's DINA secret police following the 1973 military coup.
Relations with Bolivia
A bilateral commission to resolve long-standing disputes with Bolivia was announced on Oct. 13.
Foreign Minister Enrique Silva Cimma stated, however, that proposals calling for a sea outlet for Bolivia, which became land-locked following defeat by Chile in the War of the Pacific (1879-83), were not supported by the Chilean government or by most of the population.
The issue was expected to be the major obstacle to any agreement being reached.
Changes in military high command
It was reported on Oct. 17 that Brig. -Gen.
Ramón Castro Ivanovich had been promoted to major-general, despite Aylwin's objection to such a promotion the previous year.
Brig. -Gen.
Manuel Concha Martínez, an Economy Minister under the Pinochet military regime, had retired, as had Gen. Carlos Parera Silva.
Three Air Force generals were also reported to have retired.
Brig. -Gen.
Hernán Ramírez Rurange, the Director of the Army Intelligence Directorate (Dine), was transferred to the second Army division, based in Santiago.
AMERICAS
BRAZIL
Political and economic crisis
President Fernando Collor de Mello faced a serious crisis over the combination of political deadlock with the Congress, a severe loss of public confidence and the effects of inflation and economic recession — an unprecedented surge in bankruptcies and mass unemployment.
In office since March 1990 [see p. 37312], Collor lacked a strong base in the Congress [see pp. 37773-74; 37852 for October 1990 congressional elections].
Political leaders in the Congress accused him of adopting an autocratic style, and critics also alleged that the government was both inefficient and corrupt.
In early September Collor had summoned for the first time the Council of the Republic, whose remit was to advise the President on action to be taken in a time of deep crisis or emergency, including the declaration of a state of siege if necessary.
The summoning of the Council followed the rejection by the state governors of Collor's offer to roll over the equivalent of US$57,000 million owed by the states to the federal government, in exchange for their help in persuading congressional members of their respective political parties to approve the government's August 1991 constitutional reform package on the economy [see below; p. 38388].
The gravity of the situation was compounded by mounting military unrest over pay, and the threat that a breakdown in military discipline could lead to a coup.
The Congress, which in July had rejected Collor's proposed pay increases for the military [ibid.], subsequently approved an interim pay rise of 45 per cent for the 350,000 members of the armed forces.
Revision of proposals for reforms to liberalize economy
In the face of sustained congressional hostility to his August 1991 proposals, which had envisaged a total of 44 constitutional reforms to liberalize and open up the economy and reform fiscal policy [see p. 38388], Collor offered on Oct. 4 a revised set of proposals, involving only 13 amendments to eight articles.
Gone were such controversial elements as the plans to abolish security of tenure for civil servants, to enable public-sector wages and state pensions to be reduced, and to give the federal government a decisive say in the finances of state and municipal governments.
The revised constitutional package focused on (i) fiscal adjustment measures including, critically, a new simplified tax system to broaden the tax base in order to raise an extra US$10,000 million per annum;(ii) the lifting of banking secrecy in cases of proven tax evasion;(iii) new mechanisms for dealing with state debts to the central government;(iii) the ending of government monopolies in such areas as oil and telecommunications, opening them up to private domestic and (more controversially) foreign capital investment.
The proposed tax reform was judged to be crucial for IMF approval of a US$2,000 million standby loan, and for agreements with commercial creditor banks on the restructuring of the US$52,000 million commercial debt.
Instead of furthering a process of "national understanding" as Collor had hoped, the presentation of the new package served to deepen the rift between himself and the majority of the Congress who interpreted it as a sign of the government's weakness.
Leaders of several political parties were reported to have convened meetings with interest groups outside the Congress in an attempt to avert political chaos and to draft an alternative "consensus" proposal to be presented to Collor "within the next few weeks" .
ebiscite on parliamentary system
The Senate on Oct. 23 voted (subject to approval by the Chamber of Deputies) to bring forward from September 1993 to April 1992 a plebiscite on the country's future system of government.
Under the current system the President was both head of state and head of government.
A National Parliamentary Movement (MNP) of 19 parties had been formed to campaign for the early adoption of a parliamentary system, which could mean severely curtailing Collor's powers.
Bills to tackle corruption
In an effort to restore his political standing, Collor submitted to congress two bills to fight official corruption and took visible steps to disband his unofficial inner cabinet of friends and advisers — popularly known as the "Republic of Alagoas" after his home state — who were accused of influence peddling [see p. 38388 for resignation of Collor's wife as head of welfare agency].
Foreign exchange crisis
The Central Bank of Brazil on Oct. 29 suspended its operations on the domestic gold market, to prevent foreign exchange reserves from falling to critical levels.
The move severely affected business confidence and fuelled fears of hyperinflation, prompting an increase of more than 20 per cent in the domestic price of gold and the black-market value of the US dollar.
Economic uncertainty and a return to a monthly inflation rate of over 24 per cent had prompted an increasing trend for people to convert their assets into gold and dollars.
For more than two weeks prior to Oct. 29, the Central Bank had been selling an estimated US$50,000,000 in gold each day, in efforts to keep down the gold price (and thereby to hold down the black-market dollar rate, whose divergence from the official rate provided a barometer of business confidence).
During October the value of the cruzeiro fell from 520 to 850 to the US dollar on the black market; at the official rate it fell from US$1.00=460.502 cruzeiros as at Sept. 30 to US$1.00=621.714 cruzeiros as at Oct. 28.
Reimposition of price controls
Price controls were reimposed on 53 basic food and drug products on Oct. 28.
The price freezes imposed in February had only just been lifted, and producers had raised prices by as much as 60 per cent in two weeks.
Privatization
The government's troubled privatization programme, aimed at raising US$18,000 million over two years to reduce the foreign debt, began on Oct. 24 with the sale of Usiminas, the country's largest steel mill.
The federal government's 75 per cent share in Usiminas was sold for US$1,170 million, mostly to Brazilian investors; the share of foreign capital accounted for a disappointing 5.9 per cent of the total.
The sale had been postponed in September amid court cases challenging its constitutionality and violent demonstrations by union members facing redundancy.
Trade unionists threw rocks at police who used tear gas to disperse a large demonstration outside the Stock Exchange in Rio de Janeiro on the day of the sale; over 90 people (48 of them police) were reportedly injured.
Papal visit
Pope John Paul II paid his second visit to Brazil on Oct 12-21, visiting 10 cities, and appealing for social justice for native peoples, landless peasants and street children, while maintaining his strictures against birth control and divorce.
Attendances at open air masses were reportedly hundreds of thousands below the Vatican's expectations, and analysts attributed this in part to the increasing appeal of Protestant evangelism and Afro-Brazilian sects.
AMERICAS
ARGENTINA
Mid-term elections
A third round of gubernatorial and congressional elections was held on Oct. 27.
An estimated 4,500,000 voters went to the polls in eight provinces to elect six governors and remaining congressional deputies [see pp. 38388; 38434 for results of first and second rounds].
The ruling Justicialist Party (PJ — the Peronists) retained the governorships of the provinces of La Rioja, Jujuy and Santiago del Estero, but lost to small local conservative parties in (i) Chaco — won by José Ruiz Palacios, a former colonel who served as an Under-Secretary in the Ministry of the Interior under the previous military dictatorship;(ii) Salta — won by former navy captain Roberto Ulloa, who had been the provincial governor under the military regime; and (iii) Corrientes.
The Peronists now controlled 14 of the country's 23 provinces, with independent parties holding four and the main opposition Radical Party (UCR) holding three.
Elections for the governorships of Catamarca province and the territory of Tierra del Fuego were to be held on Dec. 1.
It was estimated, following preliminary results of the congressional elections, that the Peronists now controlled at least 120 of the 254 seats in the Chamber of Deputies, a position strengthened further by their alliance with centre-right parties.
Economic liberalization measures
Menem signed a 122-point decree on Oct. 31 which swept away 40 years of Peronist-originated protectionist practices restricting trade and economic activity.
The measures, which Menem chose not to present to the Congress, were designed to encourage foreign investment, further reduce inflation and boost productivity.
They abolished 50 existing laws and 36 agencies involved in regulating foreign trade, to (i) lift all quotas on imports and exports;(ii) end trade controls except those protecting health care, urban planning, competition policy and environmental protection;(iii) phase out regulation on domestic production and prices;(iv) allow employers to negotiate wages at company level rather than with national unions;(v) abolish regulations covering labour contracts and business hours;(vi) prevent professional bodies fixing fees nationally; and (vii) phase out the controls of State Boards to regulate production and sale of such key products as beef, wine, sugar, cotton and tobacco.
Employers' organizations generally welcomed the package, whereas farmers were among the fiercest supporters of protectionism.
The direct attack on national wage bargaining and national wage rates was taken by analysts as evidence of Menem's confidence that the once powerful Peronist labour unions, whose leaders were opposed to the right-wing menemista faction of the party, were no longer capable of mounting sustained opposition to the government.
The laying-off of 3,000 out of 8,900 steel workers at the state SOMISA iron and steel works, 190 km north of the capital Buenos Aires, provoked a strike as part of a strong union response.
A judge ordered the government to suspend the dismissals, but on Oct. 17 an elite military unit entered the plant on Oct. 17 in an attempt to evict strikers who had attempted to restart a closed blast furnace.
Resignation of UCR leader
Raúl Alfonsín Foulkes, who was President from 1983-1989, announced on Oct. 12 that he would step down as leader of the UCR in mid-November.
He said that he intended to lead an internal political current within the UCR called the "Movement for the Defence of the Principles of Social Democracy" .
Alfonsín had been severely criticized from within the UCR for the party's poor showing in the mid-term elections.
Retirement of army chief
Gen. Martin Bonnet, the Army Chief of Staff, was reported on Oct. 31 to have filed a petition to the government for his retirement and to have requested that his Deputy Chief of Staff Gen. Martin Balza replace him until a successor was appointed.
Bonnet was known to be opposed to the government's plans to restructure the army.
AMERICAS
CENTRAL AMERICA
Establishment of Parlacén
Roberto Carpio Nicolle, a former Vice-President of Guatemala, was elected "by acclamation" in Guatemala City on Oct. 27 as the President of the Central American Parliament (Parlacén).
The parliament, designed to promote political and economic integration in the region, was formally established on Oct. 28 by Honduras, Guatemala, and El Salvador, but its credibility was immediately in question as neither Costa Rica nor Nicaragua had joined, for domestic constitutional reasons, and would remain as observers.
The membership of Panama and Belize had been postponed to a future, unspecified, date.
Former Guatemalan President Vinicio Cerezo Arévalo, who had proposed the creation of Parlacén in 1986, had been accused by critics inside Guatemala of seeking the presidency of the new body in order to claim immunity from prosecution for crimes he had allegedly committed during his time as President.
AMERICAS
LATIN AMERICA
Group of Three meeting
The presidents of Colombia, Venezuela and Mexico, the Group of Three (G-3), held a one-day meeting on Oct. 23 on the Mexican Island of Cozumel, off the country's south-east coast.
They were joined by Cuban President Fidel Castro Ruz, an unexpected guest, as was Gabriel García Márquez, the Nobel Laureate for Literature and a personal friend of Castro.
Discussion focused on Cuba's current political isolation and economic crisis.
The G-3 Presidents, in their final communiqué, emphasized that Cuba had to be completely re-integrated into Latin America.
They promised to help normalize relations between Cuba and the United States, and to assist Cuban economic development, and broadly approved the modest political reforms agreed at the Cuban Communist Party's fourth congress [see p. 38523].
However, it was made clear that Cuba would not be admitted into the San José Pact, whereby Mexico and Venezuela sold oil on favourable rates to central American and some Caribbean states.
Castro later stated that he favoured political and economic integration with Latin America but had not come begging for aid and had not asked for oil supplies to replace the potential loss of shipments from the Soviet Union.
He also stated that Cuba was willing to contribute to the Central American peace process and would support the full implementation of the 1967 Tlatelolco treaty on non-proliferation of nuclear weapons in Latin America.
The G-3 also (i) supported the resolutions of the Organization of American States (OAS) on Haiti and its condemnation of the September military coup [see pp. 38430; 38522];(ii) urged a ceasefire in the civil war in El Salvador and agreed to encourage peace talks in Guatemala;(iii) supported the early negotiation of a G-3 free trade agreement; and (iv) resolved to improve transport and communications between G-3 countries and to co-operate in the development of satellite communication with the help of Andean Pact member countries.
Columbus anniversary protests
The 499th anniversary of Columbus's arrival in the Americas on Oct. 12 was marked by marches by indigenous people in Guatemala, Mexico, Bolivia and Chile protesting over the massacre and exploitation of indians which followed the Spanish conquest of Latin America, and the violence and injustice still being suffered by their descendants.
Mapuche Indians in Chile occupied ancestral lands, now white-owned farms in the southern Arauca region, 900 km south of the capital, Santiago.
The action coincided with a debate in the Chilean Congress on the government's proposed legislation offering positive discrimination in favour of the country's indigenous people.
An alternative programme to the 1992 500th anniversary celebrations was discussed in Quetzaltenango in Guatemala in the week ending Oct. 12 by 224 representatives of indigenous peoples from 27 countries in the Americas, at the Second Continental Encounter of Indigenous, Black and People's Resistance.
The First Continental Encounter had been in the Colombian capital, Bogota, in 1989 and the Third Encounter was scheduled for Oct. 7-12, 1992, in Nicaragua, to coincide with a continent-wide strike.
Those addressing the Quetzaltenango conference included Danielle Mitterrand, wife of the French President, and Rigoberta Menchu, a Guatemalan Indian activist and a leader of the Campesino Unity Committee (CUC) forced into political exile in Mexico in 1981.
Delegates decided to make 1992 a "Year of Indigenous, Black and People's Resistance" and called on European countries and the Vatican not to celebrate the Columbus anniversary.
Cultural differences and disagreements in strategy emerged, however, some delegates favouring the linking of indigenous issues with wider political causes and others favouring protests by indigenous people alone.
The ambiguous status of blacks, as neither invaders nor indigenous Americans, caused some controversy but it was agreed to keep them within the overall campaign.
AMERICAS
BARBADOS
There were large demonstrations in Bridgetown on Oct. 26 against the government's latest austerity package, involving lower pensions, increased bus fares and taxes, a two-year wage freeze and an 8 per cent pay cut for civil servants; supporters of the ruling Democratic Labour Party (DLP) joined with those of the opposition Barbados Labour Party (BLP) in opposing the measures, based on a September mini-budget and linked with an attempt to obtain an IMF loan.
AMERICAS
ECUADOR
The former guerrilla group Alfaro Vive, Carajo! announced on Oct. 21 that it had disbanded and that its members had joined the ruling Democratic Left party (ID).
AMERICAS
GUATEMALA
Gonzalo Menendez Park was sworn in as Foreign Minister on Oct. 22, replacing Alvaro Arzú Irigoyen who had resigned in September [see p. 38432].
AMERICAS
NICARAGUA
Former contra rebels numbering 5,000 established the Nicaraguan Resistance Party (PRN) on Oct. 6, with Juan Angel López as president, to oppose "peacefully" the Sandinista National Liberation Front (FSLN).
The IMF on Sept. 18 approved a standby loan of 40,860,000 special drawing rights (US$55,700,000).
AMERICAS
SURINAM
President Ronald Venetiaan stated on Oct. 17 that the country did not need an army to defend its sovereignty and that the budget of the Defence Ministry would be cut by half and the army reduced by two-thirds, to approximately 1,500.
AMERICAS
URUGUAY
A State Reform Law, allowing for the privatization of public companies, was signed on Oct. 1.
ASIA — PACIFIC
JAPAN
Replacement of Kaifu — Failure of constitutional reform plans — Foreign relations
The government of Toshiki Kaifu was undermined from the beginning of September by the announcement on Sept. 6 that Kiichi Miyazawa, a former Finance Minister, was to challenge for the leadership of the ruling Liberal Democratic Party (LDP), and thus for the premiership, in party elections due on Oct. 27.
[The successful leadership bid by Miyazawa, and the factional manoeuvres within the LDP which surrounded it, resulting ultimately in the formation of a new government by Miyazawaon in early November, will be covered in the November news digest.]
Kaifu's government had been forced on Sept. 30 to abandon plans for a major constitutional reform which might have helped to end the LDP's factional in-fighting.
Kaifu had proposed to the Diet on Sept. 11 that controls on political donations should be tightened; that political parties should receive public subsidies; and, most importantly, that Japan's electoral system of multi-member constituencies should be replaced by a hybrid system in which 300 Diet members would be appointed from single-seat constituencies and another 171 by a process of proportional representation from party lists.
The latter proposal had aroused deep resentment among many influential LDP members, and particularly faction leaders whose power relied on the interdependence of party members in the multi-member constituencies.
It had also been opposed, however, by the government's political opponents, who felt that a first-past-the-post system would give an unfair advantage to the LDP.
It was noted in this context that, despite Kaifu's political problems, the LDP itself was growing in strength.
Opinion polls in August had shown 55 per cent support for the party, the highest level since its foundation in 1947, and its membership stood at a record 5,400,000 members, or some 7 per cent of the adult population.
Emperor's visit to Thailand, Malaysia and Indonesia — Apology to Netherlands
Emperor Akihito and his wife undertook an 11-day tour of Thailand, Malaysia and Indonesia from Sept. 26, the first time that a Japanese emperor had visited Japan's immediate neighbours in modern times.
The royal couple used the opportunity to seek an improvement in relations and particularly to address the problem of Japanese atrocities during the occupation of the region in the 1930s and 1940s.
At the start of his first visit — to Thailand on Sept. 26-30 — the Emperor told King Bhumibol Adulyadej that Japan had "resolved that it would live as a nation of peace, so that it should never repeat the horrors of that most unfortunate war" , and that Japan had made "unremitting efforts" to build "new friendships" in the region.
In Malaysia, where anti-Japanese sentiment was known to be stronger, the Emperor had a short meeting on Sept. 30 with Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamed, and another with Sultan Azlan Muhibbuddin Shah, the reigning monarch, who asked Japan to take the lead in forming a new economic community of East Asian countries.
The royal couple moved on on Oct. 3 to Indonesia, before returning to Japan on Oct. 6.
Queen Beatrix of the Netherlands, who visited Japan on Oct. 20-26, received a formal apology on Oct. 23 from Kaifu for the "unbearable suffering" inflicted by Japanese soldiers on Dutch internees during the occupation of Indonesia in the Second World War.
The Queen had said at a banquet given by Emperor Akihito that the atrocities had caused a "deep gulf" between the two countries; Netherlands figures indicated that some 21,320 of the 138,500 internees had died during their internment.
Postponement of defence measures
The government announced on Oct. 2 that it was to postpone until the end of 1991 the enactment of a controversial bill which would have allowed Japan to send up to 2,000 troops abroad as part of its contribution to UN peacekeeping forces in Cambodia and elsewhere.
Japan's Constitution, drawn up under United States auspices after the Second World War, had limited the country's military activities to self-defence, in recognition of the Japanese aggression in the region during the 1930s and 1940s, and the possibility of changing this had caused considerable consternation among various South and East Asian countries.
Kaifu told the Diet on Sept. 24, however, that his proposals were compatible with the Constitution and that they would help to bolster stability in the region.
Resignation of Finance Minister — Financial scandals
Ryutaro Hashimoto, the Finance Minister, on Oct. 3 announced his resignation, effective Oct. 18, as accusations mounted that he had failed to stem the tide of financial scandals which had been sweeping the country since the start of the year.
Nikko, Daiwa, Nomura and Yamaichi Securities
Nikko Securities, Daiwa Securities, Nomura Securities and Yamaichi Securities admitted on Sept. 23 that they had engaged in further illegal share compensation deals, in addition to those which had caused a political storm earlier in the year [see p. 38342].
In particular they agreed that they had entered into private compensation deals with their larger investors, in contravention of a voluntary self-regulation agreement imposed by the government in December 1989 after the Recruit scandal [for which see pp. 36463-64; 36589], paying a total of 43,500 million yen (about US$315,000,000) to 78 clients between March 1990 and March 1991, to make up for trading losses resulting from their investment advice.
These sums were separate from the 128,300 million yen which they had already confessed to paying between 1987 and 1990, and which had been revealed in July 1991 [see p. 38342].
The Finance Ministry announced on Oct. 8 that it was to punish all four by banning them from trading in equities for a period of one month.
A further two-week suspension was imposed on Nomura, because of its role in the illegal manipulation of shares in the Tokyu railway and property company, so as to benefit the Inagawakai gangster organization which held an interest in the company.
Nomura's president, Setsuya Tabuchi, had already resigned in June 1991 in connection with allegations of dealings with gangsters, but this was the first time that actual criminal activities had been alleged against the company.
Nomura was further ordered on Oct. 8 to close more than 79 of its 153 domestic branches for a month, and to close for six weeks the six branches most heavily involved in the Tokyu incident.
On Oct. 18 the Fair Trade Commission launched an investigation into allegations that the four had also violated anti-monopoly laws by offering unduly large profits to some clients.
Nomura was also censured for breaking a rule which barred securities firms from holding more than 5 per cent of any company's stock for their own investment purposes (i.e. as distinct from holding them for clients).
The company had been ordered on Oct. 8 to suspend temporarily all such "own account" stock trading.
It had already been confirmed on Sept. 24 that the government had banned Nomura, Daiwa, Nikko and Yamaichi from bidding for government bond issues for a period of one month, as a penalty for their actions.
The initial punishment for the four securities houses had been only an instruction to refrain from certain securities transactions for four days.
Nomura and Nikko had been removed by the World Bank on Sept. 12 from a list of dealers eligible to bid for its bond underwriting business, and Nomura was under further examination by the Fair Trade Commission for possible breaches of anti-monopoly legislation relating to property transactions.
The four companies revealed substantial losses in the half year to September, as the public reaction to the corruption allegations grew, and as the mood in the Tokyo exchange remained subdued by the property price collapse afflicting the country.
The Tokyo exchange reported on Oct. 29 that its 124 brokers had made an overall net loss of 69,490,000 million yen during the six months, compared with a 199,160 million yen profit a year earlier.
During the year the Nikkei Average index had failed to rise above the 26,000 mark, compared with some 39,000 at the end of 1989, and operating revenues had been down by 23 per cent during the six months to September.
Nevertheless, the stock market picked up on Oct. 15 as the suspension of the four went into effect.
The Diet gave its final approval on Oct. 3 to a bill imposing up to a year's imprisonment on brokers who violated a new law making all shareholder compensation schemes by brokers illegal, and up to six months for clients who requested paybacks.
Bank forgery and other cases
It was announced on Oct. 3 that Taizo Hashida, the chairman of Fuji Bank — the world's third-largest bank — had resigned in order to accept the responsibility for an incident in which former employees of the bank had been accused of forging deposit certificates worth some 257,000 million yen ($1,920 million).
The chairman and former president of the Industrial Bank of Japan, Kaneo Nakamura, announced his resignation on Oct. 22 together with two other directors, after the bank was accused of serious irregularities in relation to an Osaka entrepreneur who had forged securities against up to 240,000 million yen of IBJ loans.
Investigations into other cases of financial corruption resulted in a series of arrests among senior industry figures.
Kazuo Toyama, a former excutive of Kyowa Saitama Bank, was arrested on Sept. 5 by police investigating the forgery of certificates of deposit worth some 3,940 million yen, and it was confirmed on Oct. 3 that two directors of the bank were to resign.
A vice-chairman of Tokai Bank, named as Eikichi Arai, announced his resignation on Oct. 3 after confessing to similar forgeries.
Hiroshi Minamino, the head of a small Osaka bank, was arrested on Sept. 17 by police investigating the near-collapse in 1990 of the Itoman investment group [see p. 38342].
The former head of the Toko commodity trading company was arrested on Sept. 18 on charges relating to some £32,200,000 of fraudulent dealings involving fictitious futures contracts.
ASIA — PACIFIC
KOREA
Premiers' talks
The fourth round of Premiers' talks between North and South Korea was held in Pyongyang on Oct. 22-25, after being postponed twice by the North, in February and August [see p. 38010; 38341; 38396].
This was the first meeting since both Koreas had entered the UN [see p. 38437].
The South Korean Prime Minister, Chung Won Shik, and his North Korean counterpart, Yon Hyong Muk, delivered keynote speeches.
They agreed in principle to draw up an "Agreement on Reconciliation, Non-Aggression and Co-operation and Exchange Between the North and the South" , incorporating proposals from both sides on signing a non-aggression declaration, measures for reconciliation and the promotion of exchanges and economic co-operation.
A fifth round of talks was to be held in Seoul on Dec. 10-13 "to finalize the text" of the agreement, according to a joint communiqué on Oct. 24.
In previous talks South Korea had demanded agreement on improving relations before signing a non-aggression declaration, while the North had made a military agreement a priority.
Speaking on his return to Seoul on Oct. 25, Chung Won Shik spoke of a "small breakthrough" and "a sort of success" , but officials stressed that there would be "acute" problems in achieving a final agreement.
The two sides remained divided on the issue of nuclear weapons.
South Korea called on the North to accept inspection of its nuclear facilities, which were said to be well advanced in developing a nuclear device [see p. 38396].
Calling this demand "brazen and provocative" , the North Koreans responded with a nine-point set of new preconditions for inspection, including the South's renunciation of United States nuclear protection, an end to nuclear military exercises and a ban on US aircraft and ships carrying nuclear weapons from entering Korean ports or territory.
(This challenged the US policy of neither confirming or denying the presence of nuclear weapons.)
The new, tougher conditions followed the disclosure in September that the USA was to remove all nuclear weapons from the Korean peninsula, thus meeting the North's earlier demand.
ASIA — PACIFIC
NORTH KOREA
President's visit to China
President Kim Il Sung paid a visit to China on Oct. 4-15 aimed at "deepening traditional Korea-China friendship" .
He held "cordial" talks in "complete agreement" with the Chinese Communist Party general secretary Jiang Zemin, with President Yang Shangkun and with Premier Li Peng.
Analysts said that Kim was likely to have asked China to delay official ties with South Korea until Japan recognized North Korea.
China, it was believed, might have urged North Korea to sign the International Atomic Energy Agency's nuclear safeguards accord and allow international inspection of its nuclear facilities.
Kim's appeal for economic assistance was said to have been met with advice from Li Peng on running a market-orientated economy.
During the visit, which was highly publicized in contrast to previous visits [for November 1989 visit see p. 37041], Kim also toured cities and factories in Shandong and Jiangsu provinces.
The South Korean news agency Yonhap on Oct. 19 reported Kim as saying during the visit that he would remain in power for four to five more years.
ASIA — PACIFIC
CHINA
Relations with USA — Trade dispute
Following repeated demands that China open its markets or face sanctions, the office of the United States Representative for Trade Negotiations Carla Hills on Oct. 10 opened investigations under Section 301 of the 1988 Trade Act into China's trade barriers [see also p. 38340].
If China failed to co-operate with the year-long investigation, Hills said, the USA could impose punitive tariffs of up to 100 per cent on Chinese exports.
The investigation covered import quotas and bans on some products, restrictive import licensing requirements, special technical standards and China's refusal to publish regulations governing imports, and also sought to reduce Chinese tariffs of up to 170 per cent and other "unreasonable" fees.
The Ministry of Foreign Economic Relations and Trade (MOFERT) on Oct. 11 expressed "strong dissatisfaction" with the US decision, and accused the USA of disregarding its "tremendous efforts" to seek a solution.
On Sept. 30, China had announced proposed measures to open its markets over a period of six months in response to US demands in August, but these had been rejected by Hills as "unsatisfactory" .
US discontent with the growing trade imbalance, expected to reach US$12,000 million by the end of the year, was coupled with action against unfair trade practices.
Criminal investigations had begun into 23 US-based Chinese companies on charges of dumping and of evading customs tariffs estimated at US$300 million-500 million, following raids on Sept. 5-6.
Meanwhile, the US customs impounded shipments of tools allegedly made by prison labour in Shanghai, to which MOFERT responded on Oct. 10 by reiterating China's ban on the export of prison-made goods, adding that any such exports were in violation of regulations.
Joseph Massey, US Assistant Trade Representative, held talks with MOFERT in Beijing on Oct. 21-25 on market access and on protection of intellectual property rights.
The USA had set Nov. 26 as the deadline for agreement.
China had formed a Leading Group on Intellectual Property, headed by State Councillor Song Jian, and on Oct. 20, the China Daily reported that China would join the Berne Convention and the Universal Copyright Convention before the end of 1992 [see also pp. 38339-40].
Postponement of accession to NPT
The 22nd meeting of the seventh standing committee of the National People's Congress (legislature) on Oct. 25 was expected to approve a proposal that China accede to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT), following Premier Li Peng's announcement in August of China's acceptance of the treaty; however Japan's Kyodo News Service reported on Oct. 31 that it was agreed only to hold further discussions [see also p. 38340].
Foreign share-buying
The Shanghai stock exchange was reported by the Financial Times of Oct. 23 to have gained approval to offer for the first time to foreign investors shares worth $35,000,000-50,000,000 in the state-owned Shanghai Vacuum, the biggest quoted company on the exchange.
It was reported on Oct. 31 that the Shenzhen stock exchange also planned to make two share offers available to foreigners [see p. 38340].
Refusal to allow visit by Dalai Lama to Tibet — Suppression of protests
A Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman on Oct. 10 rejected a proposal made by the Dalai Lama in a speech in the USA on Oct. 9 to return to Tibet for the first time since 1959, and demanded that he abandon his support for Tibetan independence.
Earlier, China had protested at the Dalai Lama's visit to Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia.
The Independent of Oct. 15 cited eyewitness reports of four anti-Chinese protests in Lhasa despite tight security following the alleged killing of a Buddhist monk by police during a protest in September.
Escape of dissidents
It was reported on Oct. 17 that Song Xiaoyong, a naval officer, and Xin Li, a student leader in Shanghai, imprisoned for involvement in the 1989 pro-democracy movement, had escaped from China by means of an underground network.
Vice-Premier's visits to Japan and UK
Zou Jiahua, a Vice-Premier and Minister in charge of the State Planning Commission, visited Japan on Oct. 14-17 for talks with Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu on enhancing scientific and technological co-operation [see pp. 38394-95 for Kaifu's August visit to Beijing].
On Oct. 22-28 Zou Jiahua visited London, meeting Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd and (on Oct. 25) Prime Minister John Major [for whose visit to Beijing in September see p. 38435]and agreeing to continue senior-level consultations on economic and technological co-operation.
Execution of drug offenders
In continuing national crackdown on drug-related crime, 35 drug dealers were publicly tried and executed in Kunming, Yunnan Province, on Oct. 26.
ASIA — PACIFIC
TAIWAN
Pro-independence stand by opposition party
In preparation for the first National Assembly elections, scheduled for Dec. 21 [see p. 38291], the main opposition Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) at its fifth national congress on Oct. 13 announced a draft manifesto containing a new clause pledging to "build a Taiwanese republic with independent sovereignty" and to redefine the territory of Taiwan, subject to a national plebiscite.
The party also resolved to refer to the Beijing regime by its own chosen name, the People's Republic of China, instead of as "Communist China" .
Hsu Hsin-liang was elected DPP chairman, replacing Huang Hsin-chieh.
A former member of the ruling Kuomintang (KMT) and head of the DPP's moderate Formosa faction, Hsu was imprisoned for sedition on his return from exile in 1989, but was released in a presidential amnesty in 1990.
The stance on independence represented a victory for the party's radical New Tide faction.
It followed several months of public debate led by the DPP over calls for Taiwan independence, theoretically punishable under sedition laws as advocating secession [see also p. 38291].
The opening of the Legislative Yuan session on Sept. 24 had been seriously disrupted by DPP legislators, forcing Premier Hau Pei-tsun to deliver his address from behind riot shields, and the DPP had pledged to filibuster all sessions until the Criminal Code article covering sedition, used to suppress independence activists, was abolished [see also p. 38190].
The Taiwan High Court on Oct. 14 began an investigation into the DPP for alleged violation of the Civic Organizations Law which prohibited advocacy of secession.
According to the Far Eastern Economic Review of Oct. 24, the adoption of the independence clause was an attempt by the DPP to turn the National Assembly elections into a tacit referendum on independence.
In a written statement issued on Oct. 15 after consultation with Hau Pei-Tsun, President Lee Teng-hui described it as a "rash and irresponsible act in total disregard of national security, social stability and the welfare of the people" , and called for penalties in accordance with the law.
However, some KMT legislators backed the DPP's call for a plebiscite on independence.
Chinese expression of concern
China expressed "grave concern" over the DPP's commitment to independence for Taiwan.
On Oct. 9 Chinese President Yang Shangkun accused leading KMT figures of supporting the independence movement.
Hinting at the possible use of force, he warned: "Those who play with fire will be burnt to ashes." 
Tang Shubei, spokesman for the State Council's Taiwan Affairs Office, warned on Oct. 14 that if Taiwan independence activists "continue the move to split the nation and sell out the territory of the country, the Chinese government will not sit idly by" .
He also called on the KMT to take "really effective" measures to suppress the independence movement.
Pro-independence demonstrations — Arrest of independence activists
On Oct. 25 some 20,000 people joined a DPP pro-independence demonstration in Kaohsiung, Taiwan's second city.
Earlier, clashes with riot police had been reported when 10,000-15,000 demonstrators marched on the presidential office in Taipei on Sept. 9 to demand a plebiscite on Taiwan rejoining the UN as an independent country, on the release of dissidents and on the repeal of sedition laws.
Eleven activists from the banned United States-based World United Formosans for Independence (WUFI), including its secretary-general, Wang Kang-lu, were arrested under sedition laws on Oct. 20.
Kuo Cheng-kuang, a WUFI central standing committee member, was arrested and expelled on Oct. 21.
Members of the group, which had been barred from entering Taiwan, were in Taipei to inaugurate WUFI's Taiwan chapter.
Approval for KMT political faction
The Interior Ministry on Sept. 30 approved the formation of a political organization within the KMT in the Legislative Yuan, the first of its kind.
Approval of investment project in China — Resumption of contributions to ADB
It was reported on Oct. 16 that the government had approved an application by Cheng Shin Rubber Industrial to invest US$20,000,000 in a tyre plant in Xiamen, the biggest Taiwan investment project in China.
The resumption of Taiwanese contributions to the Asian Development Bank (ADB), suspended following China's admission to the bank in 1986, was announced on Oct. 24.
Protest at nuclear plant site
A policeman was killed during a protest in Taipei county on Oct. 3 against the construction of a fourth nuclear power plant.
ASIA — PACIFIC
HONG KONG
Boat people agreement
On Oct. 21 The United Kingdom and Vietnam announced an agreement to repatriate forcibly some 250 Vietnamese "boat people" from Hong Kong.
The Hong Kong administration said that forced repatriation, which was halted in December 1989 after an international outcry led by the United States [see pp. 37121-22; 37185], was unlikely to start before November.
The accord, which was greeted by sizable refugee protest, covered so-called "double backers" who voluntarily returned to Vietnam from Hong Kong and then left for the colony again.
On Oct. 29, following intensive talks in Hanoi, the Vietnamese capital, between Hong Kong, the UK, Vietnam and the Office of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees, agreement was reached that all boat people not qualified as refugees would face compulsory repatriation.
Of the 64,000 people in the Hong Kong camps, only 5,000 had so far been accepted as genuine refugees.
Hong Kong officials described the accord as a "major breakthrough" and predicted that it would take between two and three years to clear the camps.
The Vietnamese government's increased willingness to accept forced repatriations in the face of known US disapproval was believed to stem from its desire to improve ties with its ASEAN neighbours following the signing of the Cambodian peace accord in Paris on Oct. 23 [see p. 38511].
While the US Congress remained hostile, the US administration had not voiced its opposition to the proposed agreement in spite of its previous strong objections to any forced repatriation, preferring instead to maintain a "neutral reaction" to deportations.
Boat people in Hong Kong made an emotional appeal to the US government to block moves to return them to Vietnam, repeating earlier threats of mass suicide.
Relations with USA
A bill was introduced on Sept. 20 in the US Senate which sought to lay down guidelines for US policy on Hong Kong up to and after 1997.
The proposed US-Hong Kong Policy Bill of 1991 stipulated that the USA should develop a coherent policy towards Hong Kong while recognising that it would become part of China.
Much of the bill was restricted to backing the principles of the 1984 joint declaration between China and the UK [see pp. 33655-60]but it also laid down that, after 1997, the US would continue to treat Hong Kong as a separate territory in matters such as immigration quotas and most-favoured-nation trading status.
On Oct. 7 the USA decided to exempt Hong Kong from most restrictions imposed on non-Western importers of high-technology equipment, extending to the colony the licensing benefits applicable to members of the 18-country Coordinating Committee on Multilateral Export Controls (COCOM).
Exclusion of elected leaders from Exco
On Oct. 24 the Governor of Hong Kong, Sir David Wilson, excluded the colony's popularly elected leaders from seats on the Executive Council (Exco), the administration's most powerful policy-making body, selecting instead 10 conservatives and moderates.
Martin Lee, chairman of the UDHK, said that the decision demonstrated "deep disrespect towards the people of Hong Kong and a profound hostility towards the democratic process here" .
Composition of future court of final appeal
Following a three-day meeting in London on Sept. 24-26, the Sino-British Liaison Group (JLG) announced that Hong Kong's Court of Final Appeal, which in 1993 would replace the Privy Council in London, would be composed of the Chief Justice, three Hong Kong-based judges and a fifth member to be invited alternately from two panels — Panel A, containing retired and serving Court of Appeal judges in Hong Kong, and Panel B, made up of retired judges from other common law jurisdictions.
The agreement provoked an outcry in Hong Kong where both the Law Society and the local bar association condemned it as a threat to the independence of the judiciary and contrary to the 1984 Joint Declaration.
Critics said that the formula, which limited the number of overseas judges to a maximum of one from either Panel A or B, would compromise the colony's absolute freedom to chose judges.
The UK, which had wanted two overseas judges, was said to have backed down to get the court functioning quickly.
The extent of opposition to the proposal raised the prospect of its being vetoed by the Legislative Council (Legco).
Pro-democracy demonstrations
Ten newly elected legislative councillors of the liberal United Democrats of Hong Kong (UDHK) led a procession of 1,300 people on Sept. 29 calling for the release of political prisoners in China and commemorating the 1989 crackdown in Beijing on pro-democracy demonstrators.
Seven of the councillors attended a nighttime vigil on Oct. 1, opposite the New China News Agency (NCNA) building, China's de facto embassy in Hong Kong.
ASIA — PACIFIC
MONGOLIA
Discovery of mass grave — Land privatization — President's visit to South Korea
The British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) reported on Oct. 22 the discovery of a mass grave near the Soviet border, containing the remains of about 5,000 monks who had all been shot in the head, apparently on Stalin's orders under the Choybalsan regime (1936-52).
The Small Hural (standing parliament) approved a law for the private ownership of land, it was reported on Oct. 10.
The new law would allow enterprises and individuals to own land "under state co-ordination and supervision" .
Foreigners would also be allowed to rent land.
The report stated that pasture lands would remain state-owned, since livestock rearing in Mongolia was still largely nomadic.
President Punsalmaagiyn Ochirbat made the first Mongolian presidential visit to South Korea on Oct. 22-25, accompanied by Foreign Minister Tserenpilyn Gombosuren.
Ochirbat pointed to South Korea's economic development as a model for Mongolia.
Aviation accords and financial assistance programmes were signed between the two states.
ASIA — PACIFIC
LAOS
Relations with Vietnam and China
President Kaysone Phomvihane visited Vietnam on Oct. 12-22, and the Prime Minister, Gen. Khamtay Siphandon made an official visit to China on Oct. 23-26.
During what the official Lao news agency described as "a goodwill visit and period of rest" , Kaysone had talks with his counterpart, President Vo Chi Cong, and with the Vietnamese Communist Party secretary-general Do Muoi.
Particular consideration was given to developments in Cambodia.
Khamtay signed a new border treaty with China on Oct. 24, and held talks with the Chinese Premier Li Peng.
Ban on commercial logging
It was reported at the beginning of October that the Lao government had issued a decree suspending the commercial exploitation of timber resources.
A ban on logging in Thailand, after a series of devastating floods, had led Thai logging companies to turn their attention across the irregularly policed border with Laos.
The new Lao decree, signed by Khamtay, referred to widespread criminality in the logging business involving the blatant "theft" of timber, the bribing of officials and the forging of documents.
Careful husbanding of timber resources was of particular importance for Laos as this represented the country's most important single export, worth US$45,000,000 in 1988 or almost half of Laos's export earnings.
ASIA — PACIFIC
VIETNAM
Proposed normalization of relations with USA
United States Secretary of State James Baker indicated on Oct. 23 that the USA was prepared to begin bilateral discussions with Vietnam as a preliminary to the normalization of relations.
Speaking prior to meeting with Vietnamese Foreign Minister Nguyen Manh Cam in Paris (at the signing of the Cambodian peace agreement — see p. 38511), Baker expressed US willingness "to turn a page on the Vietnam War" .
Vietnam's co-operation in the Cambodian peace process had removed one of the major obstacles to normalization, but there remained the issue of approximately 2,300 US service personnel reported missing in action (MIAs) in the war and still unaccounted for.
Vietnam, while expressing its willingness to help in the matter, insisted that it was an essentially humanitarian issue and should not be coupled with the larger political relationship.
US officials calculated that the normalization process might take two or more years.
It would follow four phases: preliminary talks; a partial lifting of the US trade embargo; the exchange of diplomatic missions and finally the ending of the embargo entirely.
Following the Paris meeting Baker announced the removal of obstacles to visits to Vietnam by US citizens and the removal of the travel restrictions on Vietnamese diplomats at the UN in New York.
Aid to Vietnam
The US had maintained as recently as Oct. 15 its opposition to IMF assistance to Vietnam, blocking a French plan at a regional IMF meeting in Bangkok to help Vietnam pay off arrears of US$140 million to the Fund.
The clearing of arrears would have allowed Vietnam renewed access to the loans necessary to revive its economy.
By Vietnam's own calculation some US$600 million would be necessary for economic restructuring up to the end of 1993.
The impetus towards rapprochement had been accelerated by a visit to Vietnam on Oct. 1-2 by President Bush's personal envoy, Gen. John Vessey, for a general exchange of views on the question of the US MIAs.
Vessey's visit followed the announcement of a US$1,300,000 grant of official US aid to voluntary agencies working in Vietnam in various fields of post-war reconstruction.
The Australian government also relaxed its ban on aid to Vietnam, as announced on Oct. 9 in a joint statement by Foreign Minister Gareth Evans and Trade Negotiations Minister Neal Blewett, in view of progress on the Cambodian settlement.
An Australian mission would travel to Vietnam in November to assess needs.
Vietnamese Prime Minister Vo Van Kiet invited his Australian counterpart Bob Hawke to visit Vietnam in 1992.
Prime Minister's tour of south-east Asia
At the end of October Vo Van Kiet visited a number of member countries of the Association of South East Asian Nations (ASEAN), the first such tour since 1978.
His tour began on Oct. 24 in Indonesia; he visited Thailand on Oct. 28-29 and finished the tour in Singapore on Oct. 30.
A number of functional agreements were concluded covering civil aviation, shipping and technical assistance, but the main achievement of the tour lay in the consolidation of the generally improving relationship between Vietnam and its capitalist neighbours.
Death penalty for corruption
In mid-August the National Assembly amended the penal code to permit the death penalty for bribe-taking and "defrauding socialist property" .
ASIA — PACIFIC
INDIA
Internal political developments
Sonia Gandhi's decision not to stand in by-election
Sonia Gandhi, the widow of the assassinated former Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi, confirmed on Oct. 12 that she would not stand as a candidate in a by-election scheduled for Nov. 16 in her late husband's Amethi constituency in the state of Uttar Pradesh.
In May she had resisted pressure to become president of the Congress (I)[see p. 38175].
Ruling on Ayodhya temple site
A court in Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, on Oct. 25 granted permission to the state government to acquire land around the disputed shrine at Ayodhya in Uttar Pradesh, but ruled that no "permanent structures" could be erected on the site [see pp. 37854; 37964; 38391].
The decision followed the recent approval of a Places of Worship (Special Provisions) Bill [see pp. 38391; 38438].
The state government, dominated by the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), had on Oct. 11 acquired 1.12 hectares of land around the shrine, saying that it wished to provide services for tourists and pilgrims.
On Oct. 4 the Vishva Hindu Parishad (VHP) had announced plans to begin work on a Hindu temple at Ayodhya "any time after Oct. 18" .
Ruling on Bhopal disaster
The Supreme Court on Oct. 3 lifted the immunity from criminal prosecution of the United States company Union Carbide Corp.
(UCC) over the 1984 Bhopal gas disaster [see pp. 33467-68], but ruled that the company's US$470,000,000 compensation offer to victims was adequate.
The ruling overturned a February 1989 civil settlement, whereby criminal charges against UCC were to be withdrawn in return for compensation [see p. 36466].
The government had decided in January 1990 to oppose this settlement [see pp. 37184; 37316].
Abduction of Romanian diplomat
The Romanian chargé d'affaires, Liviu Radu, was kidnapped in Delhi on Oct. 9 by Sikh separatists belonging to the Khalistan Liberation Force (KLF).
The abduction was reportedly in retaliation for the killing of Sikh militants who, on Aug. 20, had attacked India's ambassador to Romania, Julius Ribeiro, in Bucharest.
Raising of interest rates
In a move designed to control inflation [see p. 38439], the Reserve Bank of India (the central bank) on Oct. 8 raised commercial borrowing rates by 1.5 percentage points to 20 per cent; short term deposit rates were raised by 1 percentage point to 12 per cent .
State developments
President's rule was imposed in Meghalaya on Oct. 11, ending a two-month crisis which erupted after some deputies switched loyalties and precipitated a power struggle between the ruling Meghalaya United Parliamentary Party (MUPP) and the Congress (I) -backed United Meghalaya Parliamentary Forum (UMPF).
More than 90 people were reported killed between Oct. 2 and 17 in Punjab and Uttar Pradesh following a wave of violence reportedly instigated by Sikh militants.
Police on Oct. 18 secured the release of Khemlata Wakhloo, former Jammu and Kashmir Tourism Minister, and her husband, who were abducted by the pro-Pakistani organization Hizbullah [see p. 38439].
Earthquake
More than 1,000 people were killed when an earthquake measuring 6.1 on the Richter scale struck northern Uttar Pradesh on Oct. 20.
Some of the worst-hit areas included the districts of Chamoli, Tehri and Uttarkashi.
ASIA — PACIFIC
PAKISTAN
Privatization programme
Major new initiatives, some subsequently reversed, were announced during October by the government as part of its privatization programme [for which see pp. 38007; 38289].
Attempts in January 1991 to rush through the privatization of the banking sector had met with legal objections [see pp. 38007], but two public-sector banks had been privatized, in January and August.
On Oct. 22 the Privatization Commission invited bids for a further five public-sector banks and finance institutions.
However, the government on Oct. 28 withdrew the National Bank of Pakistan from public sale, on the grounds that it acted as the treasury arm of the State Bank of Pakistan in places where the State Bank had no office.
In an interview with the Financial Times of Oct. 29, the Prime Minister, Mian Nawaz Sharif, denied that this apparent reversal would confuse investors, and confirmed also that foreign groups would be allowed to bid for all banks and institutions.
On Oct. 17 the government had approved the sale of 101 state companies, and on Oct. 21 it endorsed the privatization of a further 24 state-owned industrial enterprises.
Fears that privatization would trigger job losses led to an agreement on Oct. 15 between the government and labour leaders representing the All Pakistan State Enterprises Workers' Action Committee (APSEWAC).
Reports said that the government had given assurances that there would be no retrenchment in the first year of privatization and that workers would be entitled to buy up to 10 per cent of the shareholding in their factories.
The Punjab government on Oct. 21 ordered the freezing of the assets of 113 directors and sponsors implicated in a recent financial co-operatives scandal [see p. 38438].
Formation of new political alliance
According to the Middle East Economic Digest of Oct. 18, seven political parties outside the main opposition People's Democratic Alliance (PDA) had united to oppose the government's domestic and foreign policies.
Acquittal of US Moslems
Two Moslems, brothers from the United States, sentenced by an Islamic court to undergo amputation had their convictions overturned by the Supreme Court on Oct. 14.
New navy C.-in-C.
Vice Adml.
Sayeed Mohammad Khan was appointed C.-in-C. of the Navy on Oct. 17.
Foreign relations
Iran on Oct. 7 protested to the government of Pakistan after a crowd attacked the Iranian consulate in Peshawar.
There had been allegations of Iranian involvement in the murder in Peshawar on Oct. 3 of Lt.-Gen.
Fazle Haq, who had been accused of complicity in the murder in 1988 of a Shia leader while he was caretaker Chief Minister of the North-West Frontier Province (NWFP)[see p. 37151].
A bilateral economic agreement with China was concluded on Oct. 27 during a visit by the Chinese President, Yang Shangkun on Oct. 26-30 [see p. 38438].
Indo-Pakistan talks
The fifth round of Indo-Pakistan talks at foreign secretary level took place in Murree near Islamabad on Oct. 30-31.
Both sides agreed to exchange information about their nuclear installations before Jan. 1 [for April fourth round see pp. 38152-53].
Senior officials from India and Pakistan held talks in Islamabad on Oct. 27-28 on the demarcation of the Sir Creek area in the Great Rann of Cutch [see p. 38153].
Prime Minister Sharif, who met the Indian Prime Minister P. V. Narasimha Rao during the Commonwealth summit in Harare, Zimbabwe, on Oct. 17, said on Oct. 24 that the two sides had agreed to establish closer communication to avoid future crises.
ASIA — PACIFIC
AFGHANISTAN
Talks on transitional government
Direct talks between mujaheddin leaders and Soviet and UN officials in New York on Oct. 2 produced signs of Soviet flexibility over whether Afghan President Najibullah should remain in office until a new government could be elected.
Soviet Foreign Minister Boris Pankin offered to accept a mujaheddin leader as president in a future transitional government (envisaged by the UN peace plan as a crucial step towards the holding of elections — see p. 38194) provided that Fazal Haq Khaleqiar remained Prime Minister.
The Soviet offer was initially greeted by Seghbatullah Mujjaddedi, the moderate mujaheddin president of the Afghan Interim Government (AIG) based in Pakistan, as the key to the settlement of the Afghan issue.
Subsequently, however, under pressure from more radical mujaheddin groups, Mujjaddedi withdrew his support for Soviet-mujaheddin talks, and on Oct. 28 the Bakhtar Information Agency in Kabul announced that Borhanuddin Rabani, rather than Mujadedi, was to head a delegation of Afghan opposition groups to Moscow at the end of October or beginning of November.
Gardez fighting
Mujaheddin forces intensified their campaign to capture Gardez (capital of the south-eastern Paktia province) with infantry attacks in late September assisted by captured Iraqi tanks sent by Saudi Arabia.
Mujaheddin guerrillas had advanced to within 1 km of the town before government forces retaliated from the night of Oct. 3 with round-the-clock air strikes; hundreds of guerrillas and civilians died as the fighting degenerated into a stalemate.
The mujaheddin attack was further weakened by internal rivalries.
Najibullah, who belonged to the local Ahmedzai tribe, flew to Gardez on Oct. 7 to bolster morale.
ASIA — PACIFIC
BANGLADESH
Election of new President
Abdur Rahman Biswas, its Speaker, was elected President by the Jatiya Sangsad (parliament) on Oct. 8.
Biswas, who obtained 172 out of 264 votes cast, succeeded Chief Justice Shehabuddin Ahmed, Acting President since December 1990 [see p. 37907].
Increased IMF lending
The International Monetary Fund (IMF) announced on Oct. 1 that it had increased its lending to Bangladesh — under an existing three-year enhanced structural adjustment facility (ESAF)— to help the country to cope with the impact of the Gulf war and the effects of the April cyclone [see pp. 38152; 38176-77].
The facility, originally worth SDR 258,750,000 as announced in August 1990, was increased to SDR 345,000,000;(i.e. disbursements for 1991 would increase by SDR86,000,000 (US$117,000,000) to SDR144 million.
In May the World Bank-sponsored Aid to Bangladesh Consortium had increased longer-term assistance to Bangladesh for the 12 months running to June 1982 [see p. 38177].
On Oct. 19 the government denied reports that up to 300 people had died from starvation following floods in northern Bangladesh.
According to Le Monde of Oct. 22 widespread famine had triggered violent protests in a number of northern districts where, the report claimed, up to 5,000 people had died from water-borne diseases in the last two months.
Charges against Ershad
A special tribunal on Oct. 15 ordered the former President, Lt.-Gen. (retd) Hussain Mohammad Ershad, to stand trial on charges of gold smuggling [for other changes see pp. 37965; 38288].
On Oct. 10 between 30 and 100 people were reported hurt during a pro-Ershad rally in the capital, Dhaka.
Student clashes
Seven people were reported killed and 12 others injured on Oct. 27 during clashes at Dhaka University between rival student groups.
Water transit agreement with India
An agreement renewing a two-year inland water transit and trade protocol with India was signed in Dhaka on Oct. 3.
Amnesty
The government on Oct. 22 announced an amnesty, the fifth of its kind, for members of the separatist Shanti Bahini (Peace Force) based in the Chittagong Hill Tracts [see also pp. 37205; 38289].
ASIA — PACIFIC
BHUTAN
King's abdication threat
King Jigme Singye Wangchuk, under pressure in the National Assembly (Tsogdu) to intensify a crackdown on dissenting ethnic Nepalese activists, threatened on Oct. 24 to abdicate if no permanent solution were found.
In early September he had won a promise from India that anti-Bhutan activity would not be allowed by ethnic Nepalese who had fled Bhutan to West Bengal and Assam.
Communist ministers in the West Bengal state government had protested over Bhutanese army cross-border raids aimed at capturing members of the Bhutan People's Party and other pro-democracy and human rights groups.
The 1988 census had recorded Bhutan's population as 1,370,000, of whom 45 per cent were ethnic Nepalese, but in the following year King Jigme claimed that all but 28,000 Nepalese were illegal immigrants.
Mass protests (and a refugee exodus to India and thence to Nepal) began in August-September 1990 [see p. 37711]when, in tandem with strict enforcement of the Bhutanese language, dress and Buddhist cultural code, thousands of ethnic Nepalese were made stateless by enforcement of the 1985 citizenship act, requiring them to show evidence of pre-1958 domicile in Bhutan.
On Oct. 7 in Nepal five ethnic Nepalese members of the Tsogdu who had fled in May formally sought political asylum and threatened a hunger strike in front of the Kathmandu offices of the South Asian Association for Regional Co-operation (SAARC).
ASIA — PACIFIC
SRI LANKA
Defeat of no confidence motion
A motion of no confidence in the Speaker of Parliament, Haniffa Mohamed, was defeated by 123 votes to 85 on Oct. 11.
Opposition parties led by the Sri Lanka Freedom Party (SLFP) had turned their criticism against the Speaker after he rejected an impeachment motion against President Ranasinghe Premadasa [see p. 38440].
His unexpected decision made SLFP leader Sirimavo Bandaranaike conclude, when the House met on Oct. 9, that there was no point in pursuing the motion of no confidence which she had tabled against Premadasa himself.
The Independent of Oct. 15 reported that "all but eight of the 47 rebel government MPs who signed the impeachment motion scurried back to the fold" .
Leading dissidents in the ruling United National Party, however, organized public rallies to attack the executive presidency for running a "police state" , marginalizing the parliament and even the Cabinet, and ruling through presidential advisers with no public accountability.
Army successes against LTTE
Government forces claimed effective control over all land routes into the Jaffna peninsula as of late October, and had also driven guerrillas of the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) from several offshore island bases, in a follow-up operation launched on Oct. 18 to consolidate their August and September military successes.
Colombo radio reported on Oct. 17 that the LTTE had recently been admitting, at public meetings in its remaining Jaffna stronghold, that the organization was disintegrating, foreign funds were drying up after the recent military reverses, and Tamil youths were refusing to join its guerrillas.
ASIA — PACIFIC
INDONESIA
Forest fires
Foreign Minister Ali Alatas on Oct. 11 echoed criticisms levelled at Western countries by Malaysian Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamed at an ASEAN meeting on Oct. 7, over their failure to provide assistance in coping with large-scale fires under way in Indonesia for several months.
Both contrasted this apparent indifference with the West's readiness to criticize the damaging of rainforest by logging.
However, it was in logged-out areas rather than primary rainforest that the fires were able to spread rapidly in Indonesia's protracted four-month drought, which had also undermined the country's self-sufficiency in rice, its staple food.
Grass fires had damaged wide areas of the island of Sumatra, while on Sulawesi and in western Java stubble was burning out of control in rice paddies.
The palls of smoke were causing serious pollution and disruption to air travel, with effects spreading to neighbouring Singapore and Malaysia.
In Kalimantan (Borneo), fires believed to have been smouldering in underground coal seams since 1986 or even 1982-83 had now taken hold across many thousands of acres of secondary forest growth (i.e. the re-growth after clearance), often fuelled by the debris from logging operations, and were approaching the primary rainforest of Kutai national park.
Military aircraft crash
A military transport aircraft, with 12 crew and 120 soldiers on board returning to Bandung after a parade, caught fire and crashed minutes after take-off in a Jakarta suburb, killing all those on board and a guard at a government training centre.
ASIA — PACIFIC
PHILIPPINES
Agreement on US troop withdrawal
President Corazon Aquino announced on Oct. 2 a compromise formula for the closure of the United States naval base at Subic Bay.
The plan was devised following the vote of the Philippine Senate in September to reject a renewal of the US lease, and Aquino's threat, soon retracted, to hold a referendum on the issue [see pp. 38441-38442].
The compromise plan involved a phased US withdrawal over a three-year period, the modalities of which were to be worked out by a special panel which would be chaired by the chief presidential aide, Franklin Drilon.
Although Aquino insisted that the plan had the support of at least 15 members of the 23-strong Senate, the Senate President and key opponent of a continued US presence, Jovito Salonga, remained suspicious of the plan, characterizing it as vague and ill-defined and insisting that all combat troops had to be withdrawn within one year.
Speculation emerged in both Manila and Washington that the plan was designed to play for sufficient time to allow for a reversal of the Senate's decision after the election of its new President in May 1992.
Such suspicions were reinforced by the relative equanimity with which the US government appeared to have accepted the decision.
ASIA — PACIFIC
PAPUA NEW GUINEA
Diro affair — Resignation of Eri
Sir Vincent Serei Eri, Governor-General since February 1990, resigned on Oct. 1 after Prime Minister Rabbie Namaliu moved to ask Queen Elizabeth II to dismiss him.
Namaliu had been backed by the current opposition leader Paias Wingti in a confrontation stemming from Eri's refusal to dismiss Deputy Prime Minister Ted Diro.
Security forces were placed on alert, but no unrest was reported.
Diro, suspended from government duties since April, had been found guilty on Sept. 27 by a specially appointed tribunal, after hearings lasting nearly four years [see p. 36936 for August 1988 Supreme Court ruling against the bringing of earlier perjury charges], on 81 charges of corruption.
The tribunal concluded that he should be dismissed and banned for three years from public office, forfeiting his seat in parliament.
The Constitution allowed the Governor-General no discretion over this, but Eri announced that he was reinstating Diro in his ministerial and parliamentary posts, claiming that to dismiss him would provoke immense social and political upheaval.
Diro was the predominant Papuan leader; Eri, also a Papuan, was a past president of Diro's People's Action Party (PAP).
Namaliu and all of Papua New Guinea's previous Prime Ministers (Michael Somare, Sir Julius Chan, and Wingti) came from the New Guinea mainland or islands.
Eri was replaced temporarily by the Speaker of Parliament, Dennis Young (PAP), until Parliament elected a successor.
(On Nov. 11 Wiwa Korowi was elected as Governor-General, defeating the government's nominee, Labour Minister Tony Ila.)
Diro's replacement
Diro's resignation was announced shortly after that of Eri on Oct. 1.
Akoka Doi, the Minister of Fisheries and Marine Resources, was elected as PAP leader on Oct. 5, and became Deputy Prime Minister on Oct. 7 as part of a minor Cabinet reshuffle.
The reshuffle also involved the departure of Culture and Tourism Minister Aruru Matiabe who Namaliu said was being dismissed for leaving the PAP after losing the party leadership contest.
ASIA — PACIFIC
AUSTRALIA
Deadlocked jury in Bjelke-Petersen perjury trial
Former Queensland Premier and National Party leader Sir Joh Bjelke-Petersen walked free from the Brisbane District Court on Oct. 19 after a jury failed to agree on a verdict in his trial for perjury.
The charges arose from the 1988 Fitzgerald Commission established to investigate accusations of corruption in the Queensland state government during Sir Joh's period of office, which had eventually forced him to resign [see pp. 35975; 36817].
Specifically Sir Joh was accused of lying to the Commission when he denied any knowledge of the business plans of a Singaporean entrepreneur Robert Sng, from whom he had received a "contribution to party funds" of A$100,000.
Judge John Helman dismissed the jury after the foreman reported that, after eight hours of deliberation, there was no prospect of an agreed verdict.
Judge Helman had earlier rejected a prosecution request for a retrial after a possible conflict of interest had been discovered among the jurymen.
After the trial it emerged that the foreman of the jury was not only a member of Sir Joh's National Party but had in fact raised funds for his legal expenses.
The Australian Labor Party Premier of Queensland, Wayne Goss, vowed to change court rules to oblige jury members to declare possible conflicts of interest prior to the beginning of trials.
The decision whether or not to order a retrial lay with the special prosecutor, Des Drummond, appointed to pursue cases arising out of the Fitzgerald Commission.
A further hearing was thought unlikely, however, in view of Sir Joh's advanced age (he was 80).
A number of "smaller fish" had already been prosecuted and were serving prison terms; Sir Joh, however, challenging the prosecution to mount a retrial, insisted that no Queensland jury would ever convict him.
ASIA — PACIFIC
ASEAN
Meeting of economic ministers — EAEC and AFTA proposals
Economic Ministers of the six-member Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN) met in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, on Oct. 7-8 and agreed on proposals for economic co-operation arrangements, to be submitted to the ASEAN summit meeting scheduled for late January 1992 in Singapore.
The framework for an Asian Free Trade Area (AFTA), and formation of a "non-institutional" discussion forum to be called the East Asian Economic Caucus (EAEC), were widely seen as diluting the proposals put forward by Malaysia at the beginning of the year [see p. 38101]for an East Asian Economic Grouping (EAEG).
AFTA, based on proposals advanced by Thailand in September, would provide for moves over 15 years towards free trade in manufactures among ASEAN members.
The original Thai timetable of 10 years had been extended to 15 in response to the cautious reaction of Indonesia and the Philippines.
EAEC, whose participants were not yet clearly specified, would exist within the broader Asia-Pacific Economic Co-operation Council (APEC, inaugurated in November 1989 — see p. 37044).
The United States in particular had feared that Malaysia's EAEG proposal — a more exclusive and ambitious trade bloc initiative — would have divided rather than drawn together the trading interests of the wider Pacific area.
ASIA — PACIFIC
BRUNEI
Joint communiqués were signed on the establishment of diplomatic relations (i) with China on Sept. 30 following a visit to Beijing by a Brunei delegation on Sept. 8-11; and (ii) with the Soviet Union on Oct. 1 in New York.
ASIA — PACIFIC
EAST TIMOR
A visit by Portuguese parliamentarians and journalists to the former Portuguese territory, which Indonesia had de facto incorporated into its territory in 1976 [see pp. 27906-07], was scheduled after repeated postponements for Nov. 4, but was postponed indefinitely in late October, when the Indonesian side objected to the inclusion of a freelance reporter for the Melbourne Age, Jill Joliffe, accusing her of being a "crusader" and propagandist for East Timor's Fretilin guerrilla movement.
The delegation's visit had been arranged under UN auspices, as part of a process which Indonesia hoped would lead to international acceptance of its annexation, and Indonesian forces had reportedly intensified their anti-guerrilla activities in October in anticipation of its arrival.
ASIA — PACIFIC
UNDP
The UN Development Programme on Oct. 23 announced that agreement had been reached at a meeting in Pyongyang, North Korea, on an action plan costing US$30,000 million over 20 years to develop transport and other infrastructure in the Tumen river basin, a densely populated area rich in raw materials, stretching from the port of Shonjin in North Korea to Yanji in China and north-east to Vladivostok.
EUROPE
POLAND
Elections
The domination of Poland's legislature, the National Assembly, by former communists ended when free multiparty elections were held on Oct. 27 for the 460-member Sejm (lower house), as well as for the 100-member Senate.
In a turnout of only 43.2 per cent, no party gained more than 13 per cent of the vote, producing a severely fragmented legislature.
Poland's June 1989 elections, based on the April 1989 round table agreement [see pp. 36577-79; 36722-24], had been the first in eastern Europe to break the Communist monopoly on power, but only 35 per cent of seats in the Sejm and all seats in the Senate had been freely contested (all, bar one in the Senate, being won by Solidarity candidates).
The voting system, based on modified proportional representation, was complex, having been established only in June [see p. 38305]after prolonged disagreements between President Lech Walesa and the outgoing parliament.
For the 100 Senate seats, there were 47 two-member counties and three members each for Warsaw and Katowice counties.
In the 460-member Sejm, 391 seats were decided on a proportional representation system in 37 electoral districts; parties won seats according to the aggregate vote for their candidates in a given district, and then allocated them to the candidates with the highest individual totals.
The remaining 69 seats were allocated according to votes cast for the national lists of the 27 parties who had collected enough signatures to be eligible.
Although the Roman Catholic Church was debarred from using church property for political purposes, the Polish Episcopate urged believers in pastoral letters read out in churches on Sept. 29 and Oct. 20 to take part in the elections and, while not mentioning parties by name, to support candidates who espoused "Christian values" .
Party X affair
Party X, founded by emigré businessman Stanislaw Tyminiski after his defeat in the Polish presidential elections in November 1990 [see pp. 37840-41; 38108], was barred on Sept. 17 from fielding candidates in all constituencies except four, after it was discovered that many of the signatures on the party's list of supporters were forgeries.
Tyminski announced on Oct. 4 that he would be returning to Canada, because "I do not want my presence here to create the appearance of honesty in these elections" .
Results
Commentators noted that the country's disillusion with politics was shown by the low turnout and the considerable support for extremist or joke parties, such as the Confederation for an Independent Poland (which was strongly nationalistic), and the Beer Lovers' Party (which was led by a comedian but included businessmen).
The Democratic Left Alliance, a party of former Communists, came a close second to the post-Solidarity party of former Prime Minister Tadeusz Mazowiecki, the Democratic Union.
Rural districts showed more support for the Polish Peasant Party, which was the successor to a party formerly allied with the Communists, than for the post-Solidarity party, Peasant Accord.
Prior to the elections, parties formed of former Communists blamed the current poor economic situation on the Solidarity government, accusations described as "slanderous" by government spokesman Andrzej Zarebski.
However, electtoral support for the ex-communists was perceived as a reaction to falling living standards over the period of the Solidarity-led government.
Initial attempts to form government
After the elections, Mazowiecki was authorized by the Democratic Union to start talks on forming a majority coalition, but his past disagreements with Walesa made it uncertain that he would be able to do so (the President having the power to nominate the Prime Minister).
The government of Prime Minister Jan Krzysztof Bielecki, of the Liberal-Democratic Congress, was asked to continue until the appointment of a new Prime Minister.
On Oct. 29 Walesa proposed that he should himself serve as both President and Prime Minister for a guaranteed two years.
Making comparisons with the inter-war period of Polish history under Pilsudski, he asserted that "there is no set-up which would provide stability without the President as Prime Minister" .
Walesa made three suggestions:(i) a coalition of post-Solidarity parties;(ii) a coalition of the seven leading parties (including ex-Communists), with portfolios distributed according to election results; or (iii) a government whose members would renounce party political allegiance.
He also suggested that a government might be formed from a coalition of post-Solidarity parties which would choose their own leadership.
Soviet troop withdrawal — Abolition of state farms
On Oct. 8 it was announced that agreement had been reached on the withdrawal of Soviet troops from Poland, thus paving the way for a treaty between the two countries.
A treaty providing for the withdrawal of all Soviet combat troops stationed in Poland by Nov. 15, 1992, and the remainder by the end of 1993, was initialled in Moscow by Polish and Soviet Deputy Foreign Ministers, Jerzy Makarczyk and Yury Deryabin.
It was reported on Oct. 9 that since April 1, 4,387 of the 50,000 Soviet troops in Poland had left.
Abolition of state farms
On Oct. 4 the Sejm (lower house of the National Assembly) voted 198 to 13 with 30 abstentions to abolish the state farms.
The 500,000 state farm workers would now be able to organize themselves as trading companies and rent the land as individuals.
In a related development, agriculture minister Adam Tanski called on banks to suspend for at least a month legal proceedings against private farmers who were unable to pay back credit.
Farmers nevertheless continued their protest outside the government building.
Rejection of constitution bill
On Oct. 10 the Sejm rejected the government-proposed bill on a new constitution by 133 votes to 100 with 16 abstentions.
The government's bill proposed that the President should mediate in disputes between the government and the Sejm; such disputes were a feature of the outgoing parliament.
A draft constitution bill prepared by the Sejm constitutional committee was rejected on Oct. 18, as deputies felt that they should not restrict the work of the new parliament.
Treaty with Italy
Poland and Italy signed a 20-year co-operation treaty on Oct. 11 in Warsaw.
The treaty supported Polish efforts for association with the European Communities (EC) and offered economic co-operation in a variety of spheres.
On Oct. 11 the Italian vehicle manufacturing group FIAT agreed to buy a 51 per cent stake in its Polish associate, the car manufacturer Fabryka Samochodow Malolitrazowych (FSM).
This was the largest privatization so far in Poland.
Ratification of border and friendship treaties with Germany
On Oct. 17 and 18 respectively the German and Polish lower houses of parliament (the Bundestag and the Sejm) ratified the border treaty signed on Nov. 14, 1990 [see p. 37867], and the friendship treaty signed on June 17, 1991 [see p. 38306].
During the Bundestag debate, German Chancellor Helmut Kohl said that the friendship treaty represented a formal recognition of the German minority in Poland.
Polish Foreign Minister Krzystof Skubiszewski told the Sejm that the implications of the friendship treaty went beyond Polish-German relations; without agreement between the two countries, he said, there could be no unified Europe.
Polish radio reported on Oct. 16 that a bilateral agreement had been signed to provide compensation for victims of Nazi crimes.
Under the agreement Germany would provide DM500 million (about US$295 million) to a Polish-German Reconciliation Foundation which the Polish government would set up.
However, compensation would only go to "those who suffered unusually under Nazi terror, for example, those who were used for medical experiments" .
Seats Percentage of votes Democratic Union 62 12.31 Democratic Left Alliance 60 11.98 Catholic Electoral Action 49 8.73 Polish Peasant Party — Programmatic Alliance 48 8.67 Confederation for an Independent Poland 46 7.5 Centre Citizens' Alliance 44 8.71 Liberal Democratic Congress 37 7.48 Peasant Accord 28 5.46 Solidarity 27 5.05 Beer Lovers' Party 16 3.27 German Minority 7 1.27 Christian Democracy 5 n/a Party of Christian Democrats 4 1.11 Polish Western Union (labour minority) 4 n/a Janusz Korwin-Mikke (Union of Realpolitik) Solidarity 4 n/a Party X 3 0.47 Union of Real Politics 3 n/a Silesian Autonomy Movement 2 n/a The following parties gained one seat each: Democratic Party, Orthodox Believers' Election Committee, Union of Wielkopolska and Lubuski Region Inhabitants, Peasant Electoral Alliance Piast, Union of Podhale Region Inhabitants, Bydgoszcz List of Peasant Unity, Party for Wielkopolska and Poland, Cracow Coalition "In solidarity with the President" , Women's Alliance Against Adversity, Democratic Social Movement, Solidarity 80.
Distribution of seats Democratic Union 21 Solidarity 11 Catholic Electoral Action 9 Centre Citizens' Alliance 9 Polish Peasant Party — Programmatic Action 7 Liberal Democratic Congress 6 Peasant Accord 5 Democratic Left Alliance 4 Confederation for an Independent Poland 4 Party of Christian Democrats 3 National Electoral Committee 1 German Minority 1 Christian Democracy 1 18 seats were won by representatives of local electoral committees.
Polish election results: Sejm
Polish election results: Senate
EUROPE
SOVIET UNION
Military arrangements — Economy — The republics
Developments in the republics in October, in the accelerated process of the dissolution of central Soviet power, included assertions of increasing autonomy not only over economic but also over military arrangements [see under individual headings below, but also p. 38553 for Gorbachev's statement when proposing arms reductions that central control over Soviet nuclear weapons would remain].
Military
There were announcements on Oct. 1 and 2 of impending deep cuts in the size of the Soviet armed forces, currently numbering about 3,500,000.
Statements made by Deputy Defence Minister Gen. Pavel Grachev, announcing cuts of at least 1,200,000, were described by the Defence Ministry, however, as his "personal opinion" .
Grachev's remarks also included proposals to increase the professionalism of the army by reducing the length of service and increasing the proportion of volunteers to conscripts.
The ruling collegium of the Defence Ministry, comprising deputy defence ministers and commanders of forces, had replaced over half its membership after the coup, as reported on Sept. 16; Marshal Dmitri Yazov and Gen. Valentin Varennikov, former Defence Minister and Deputy Interior Minister, had both been dismissed following their arrests in August [see p. 38371].
Abolition of KGB
At a meeting of the State Council on Oct. 11, it was decided to abolish the USSR KGB (Committee for State Security), and to form, on its basis, units concerned with border defence, intelligence and counterintelligence.
Debt
On Oct. 29, Prime Ministers of the 12 Soviet republics signed a memorandum on their "joint and several responsibility" for the foreign debt of the Soviet Union "and its successors" .
The agreement was prompted by the visit of a G-7 delegation to Moscow on Oct. 26-28, which had threatened that republics' attempts to divide up the Soviet Union's estimated $60,000 million debt between them would threaten further Western financial aid.
The joint memorandum made Vneshekonombank (the Soviet bank for foreign economic affairs) the co-ordinating body for repaying the debt.
The Soviet Union's gold reserves were named as support.
The Baltic states did not sign the document, but the 12 republics said that they would negotiate the Baltics' part in payment "on a solidarity basis" .
G-7 was thus in a position to agree a "safety net" for Vneshekonombank's Western subsidiaries against possible default on debt repayments.
Treaty on economic community
The leaders of eight republics signed a treaty on economic "community" on Oct. 18 (the word "union" was considered too reminiscent of the former Soviet set-up).
The treaty had been initialled in Alma Ata on Oct. 2 by all 12 Soviet republics, but Ukraine, Moldava, Azerbaijan and Georgia abstained from signing.
It remained to settle detailed agreements, but the Financial Times of Oct. 19 described the treaty as giving "a necessary minimum of coherence" for the visit of the G-7 delegation [see above].
It provided for (i) free movement of goods, services and labour;(ii) a common monetary system and central banking system;(iii) no federal taxation but a unified tax rate for taxes common to all republics;(iv) agreed limits to republics' budget deficits and a community budget which would not be allowed to have a deficit; and (v) price reform, with controlled prices for key goods and services.
The Russian Council of Ministers had rejected the agreement on Oct. 3, despite its having been signed by Economics Minister Yevgeny Saburov.
President Yeltsin overruled their objections on his return from holiday, and refused to accept Saburov's resignation in protest.
The presidium of the Ukrainian Supreme Soviet had decided not to sign the treaty, it was announced on Oct. 17, fearing it would "infringe the republic's sovereignty" .
USSR Supreme Soviet
The first session of the new USSR Supreme Soviet convened on Oct. 21 [for its formation see p. 38414].
However, only seven republics — the Russian Federation, Kazakhstan, Byelorus, Uzbekistan, Kirghizia, Tajikistan and Turkmenia — sent delegations to participate in the session; Azerbaijan and Ukraine sent observers, but Moldava and Georgia were absent.
President Mikhail Gorbachev announced that a draft union treaty would be forwarded to republican governments.
On Oct. 22, Gorbachev and the leaders of the seven republics and Azerbaijan appealed to Ukraine to participate in working on the draft union treaty.
On Oct. 25, the USSR Supreme Soviet appealed to republics who were holding back from signing the economic community treaty, saying that "the chaotic disintegration of the republics of the former union may further destabilize the situation and exacerbate interrepublican relations" .
On Oct. 28, the seven participating republics elected Konstantin Lubchenko to chair the Soviet of the Union.
The following day, Anuarbek Alimzhanov (a Kazakh) was elected chair of the Soviet of Republics.
Russian Federation
The fifth (extraordinary) session of the Congress of People's Deputies opened in Moscow on Oct. 28.
In his opening speech, Russian President Boris Yeltsin put forward a radical plan of economic reform, involving financial discipline and privatization, and elaborating the relationship with other republics.
In what was seen as a policy of high personal risk, he proposed himself for the post of Prime Minister (Ivan Silayev having resigned in September — see p. 38416).
Yeltsin's economic programme was approved by the Congress on Nov. 1 by 876 votes to 16.
The economic reforms included "a tough monetary and financial policy" and freeing prices.
Observers compared the plan to Poland's "shock therapy" reforms and noted that the Russian government had been slow to build on the progress made by democratic forces in the failed coup.
In elections for the chair of the Supreme Soviet (standing parliament elected from the Congress), Ruslan Khasbulatov, the acting chair, was elected from among five candidates on Oct. 28 by 559 votes to 381, the election having been postponed from July [see p. 38349].
Deputy chairs Boris Isayev and Svetlana Goryacheva, who had been among those seeking Yeltsin's resignation in April 1991 [see p. 38130], had resigned their posts on Oct. 24.
A Constitutional Court was elected on Oct. 29 and 30.
The functions of this new body would be to supervise the constitutionality of Russian laws and treaties with foreign states concluded by Russia, and also to examine territorial disputes between members of the Russian Federation.
On Oct. 30 Yeltsin made an appeal for stronger executive powers to implement his economic reforms.
The aim was to create "a rigid vertical administrative structure which establishes minimum necessary rules for economic and social behaviour" .
Two proposals were presented to the Congress on Nov. 1, and the more radical was supported by 618 deputies.
This subordinated the lower levels of government directly to Yeltsin, and banned local elections until Dec. 1, 1992.
Yeltsin was given the authority to appoint people to local government, and to suspend the actions of the presidents of autonomous republics within the Russian Federation, who were made heads of executive power within those republics.
On Nov. 1 Yeltsin withdrew his draft proposal of the previous day to turn the USSR State Bank into a Russian state bank, taking over its gold and hard currency reserves.
According to the news agency Tass, this was after discussions with Silayev.
He had mentioned the possibility of Russia introducing its own currency, if the republics did not to agree on establishing an inter-republican bank.
Kazakhstan
Kazakh president Nursultan Nazarbayev, visiting the United Kingdom on Oct. 28-31, confirmed that nuclear weapons stationed in Kazakhstan would remain there, under the joint control of Kazakhstan and the other republics party to the economic treaty.
Kazakhstan had recently appointed its own Defence Minister, Gen. Sagadat Nurabagambetov.
Nazarbayev also confirmed that Kazakhstan would be building up its own gold reserves.
Azerbaijan
A closed session of the Azerbaijani Supreme Soviet on Oct. 10 voted to establish a republican defence force.
Opposition demands to dissolve the parliament for fresh elections were not accepted.
On Oct. 18, the Supreme Soviet adopted unanimously a law on state independence, confirming the independence declaration of Aug. 30 [see p. 38373].
The law on republican defence forces, published on Oct. 31, envisaged the creation of ground, air and naval units subordinate to the president, to defend "the interests, sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence" of the republic.
National service would be introduced, with an alternative for conscientious objectors.
Azerbaijani Prime Minister Gasan Gasanov was in Italy on Oct. 27-29 for talks with industrialists and Italian ministers including Prime Minister, Giulio Andreotti.
On Oct. 31 at the opening of a border crossing between Azerbaijan and Turkey on a bridge over the Arax river, 10,000 people seeking asylum crossed into Turkey and two were killed, according to the newspaper, Nezavisimaya gazeta.
The leader of the Nakhichevan Autonomous Republic, Geydar Aliyev, who opened the crossing, accused the Azeri leadership of exacerbating Nakhichevan's search for independence by blocking aid from Turkey.
Kirghizia
In the first popular Kirghiz presidential elections on Oct. 12, the sole candidate and incumbent, Askar Akayev, was elected with 95.3 per cent of the vote.
Turnout was estimated as 90 per cent.
The President was elected for a five-year term, limited to two consecutive terms.
Akayev was widely seen as a democrat and as eager to develop contacts with capitalist countries.
He had strongly opposed the attempted coup in August [see p. 38370].
Armenia
Popular presidential elections on Oct. 16 returned the incumbent, Levon Ter Petrosyan, to office with 83 per cent of the votes.
There were five other candidates.
The news agency Interfax on Oct. 16 put the turnout as between 70 to 90 per cent.
Turkmenia
In a referendum on Oct. 26, 94.1 per cent of the population voted for the independence of Turkmenia and 93.5 per cent said that they supported the policies of the President and Supreme Soviet.
Consequently, on Oct. 27, a special session of the Supreme Soviet passed a law on independence, giving republican laws precedence over all-union ones, and planning the creation of Turkmen currency, gold reserves and armed forces.
Tajikistan
The ban on activities of the republican Communist Party (CP), which had been lifted on Sept. 23, was reimposed on Oct. 2 at the second vote in the Supreme Soviet.
The Cabinet of Ministers would control CP property until the latter's role in the August coup attempt could be determined.
Demonstrations, including a hunger strike by 180 people, continued, however, until the chair of the Supreme Soviet, Rakhom Nabiyev was persuaded to resign on Oct. 6.
Anatoly Sobchak, mayor of Leningrad, had arrived in Dushanbe on Oct. 4 at the request of President Gorbachev to attempt to resolve the situation.
Deputy chair of the Supreme Soviet, A. Iskandrov, would act as chair until the presidential elections, rescheduled to Nov. 24, in which Nabiyev was planning to stand.
The opposition parties — the Democratic Party and Islamic Rebirth — were once more allowed to function.
Georgia
The confrontation between President Zviad Gamsakhurdia and opposition forces, including those who had once been part of his regime as fellow nationalists, continued throughout October.
On Oct. 3, the rebel forces of the National Guard left the television tower in Tbilisi which had served as their headquarters, and there were reports of a battle around the Tbilisi Sea (a lake 10 km from the capital) between rebel and loyal forces, with five injured and possibly three dead.
There were reports of opposition supporters having been fired on in Tbilisi the following day.
Opposition forces had ignored Gamsakhurdia's Oct. 1 ultimatum to hand in their weapons within two days.
The Georgian Supreme Soviet ended its debate in closed session on Oct. 7, by introducing a state of emergency in Tbilisi.
The internal security role of the USSR Interior Ministry was transferred to the Georgian Defence Ministry.
On Oct. 9 the Supreme Soviet adopted a declaration describing the events of September and October as "an attempted coup" and on Oct. 22 nine members of the opposition National Democratic Party of Georgia were arrested.
The Autonomous Region of South Ossetia continued to come under heavy attack from Georgian forces sited outside its capital, Tskhinvali, which was cut off from aid; there were reports of hostage-taking.
On Oct. 16 Tass described the situation in South Ossetia as "critical" .
According to a USSR Interior Ministry Commission, over 250 South Ossetians had been killed during the conflict with Georgia, which began in December 1990 [see p. 37920].
Leaders of the region repeatedly appealed to Russian leaders to consider South Ossetia's inclusion in the Russian Federation.
Ukraine
The Ukrainian Supreme Soviet passed laws on Oct. 23 creating the legal basis for Ukraine to have its own army, air force and navy — totalling 450,000 men — and a National Guard of 30,000.
Their formation would take place over two years and Soviet troops already stationed in Ukraine would form their basis.
Of the republican budget 2.8 per cent was voted for military expenditure.
The Supreme Soviet issued a statement on Oct. 24, which confirmed the republic's intention to become nuclear-free, and insisting on the joint control of nuclear weapons currently deployed on its territory.
About 1,500,000 Soviet servicemen were known to be stationed on Ukrainian territory, and 42 per cent of officers in the Soviet Army were of Ukrainian origin.
President Gorbachev had released Ukrainian Defence Minister, Gen. Konstantin Morozov, from his duties in the Soviet Army on Oct. 1.
There were reports of some units already having transferred allegiance to Ukraine, including the 48th division, withdrawn from Czechoslovakia in 1990, which had disobeyed orders of Sept. 10 to move to the Caucasus.
The Ukrainian Supreme Soviet discussed Prime Minister Vitold Fokin's programme for economic reform on Oct. 24, and on Oct. 25 approved it by 284 to 39 votes after a heated debate, during which there were calls for Fokin's resignation.
The Supreme Soviet also resolved on Oct. 25 to send a delegation of observers to the USSR Supreme Soviet's Soviet of the Republics [see below], noting that it was inexpedient for Ukraine to take part in inter-republican structures which could entail its forming part of another state.
A fire at Block 2 of the Chernobyl nuclear power station on Oct. 11 was brought under control within four hours and no radiation occurred, but the block was shut down, and on Oct. 30 the Ukrainian Supreme Soviet took the decision to shut down Blocks 1 and 3 by 1993 — two years ahead of schedule.
Authority over the Chernobyl power station was to be transferred to the Ukrainian government, and deputies accordingly voted to create a Ukrainian government department for nuclear safety and research.
A ceremony on Oct. 5 commemorating the 50th anniversary of the massacre of Jews by the Nazis at Babi Yar near Kiev was attended by Jewish, German and US delegations.
Ukrainian President Leonid Kravchuk, making a public apology for Ukraine's part in the massacre, acknowledged for the first time that Babi Yar had been primarily a massacre of Jews, and commentators noted that the ceremony was also a way of emphasising the government's insistence on minority rights in Ukraine (where 500,000 Jews still lived).
EC, Japanese and US aid
On Oct. 7, the European Communities (EC) announced an aid plan for the Soviet Union totalling ECU6,000 million.
ECU2,000 million would come from the EC, and the remainder, it was expected, from the non-European members of the G-7 (Canada, Japan and the United States).
Chancellor Helmut Kohl of Germany had called on other Western countries to give more to the Soviet Union in a visit to Washington on Sept. 16, quoting EC figures showing that Germany had provided 56 per cent of financial aid to the Soviet Union over two years.
The European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) announced on Sept. 3 that it had set up a short-term technical advice scheme for the Soviet Union.
ECU1,250 million were in the form of a new grant, but the package included ECU250 million of food aid and a ECU500 million ecu credit guarantee already earmarked for the Soviet Union.
Half the money would buy food from the EC and half from the Baltic states and eastern Europe.
The deputy chair of the Interim Economic Council, Yuri Luzhkov, had requested $14,700 million in aid — $6,500 million from the EC — from EC officials on Sept. 19.
However, President Gorbachev had requested $10,200 million when he met the EC Commissioner for Economic Affairs, Henning Christophersen, on Oct. 1.
The amount appeared to be the Soviet estimate of its need for food purchases abroad in 1991-92.
Little detail was available on the needs of individual republics, and there appeared to be little co-ordination in the demands.
The St Petersburg mayor, Anatoly Sobchak, made an individual request for food aid from the EC on Sept. 16, and Ivan Silayev, chair of the Interim Economic Council, had asked for between ECU5,000 million and 6,000 million in aid from the EC on Sept. 9, although it was unclear whether this was on behalf of all the republics or only the Russian Federation.
On Oct. 8, Japan, in a reversal of policy, offered a $2,500 million package to the Soviet Union.
Only $500 million consisted of humanitarian aid, however, with the remainder made up of trade guarantees for Japanese companies.
The package was also tied to the repayment of a $70,000 million loan from Japan.
Japanese Foreign Minister, Taro Nakayama, visited Moscow on Oct. 12.
The US Department of Agriculture offered credits of $400 million to enable the Soviet Union to buy animal feed and cereals, it was reported on Oct. 5.
The credits supplemented a loan package of $1,500 million made in June 1991 and intended to last until February 1992.
Western delegations had visited the Soviet Union during September to research the economic situation.
They included the US Treasury Secretary, Nicholas Brady, on Sept. 17-20; a five-day EC visit by the Commissioner for External Affairs, Frans Andriessen, from Sept. 11; a 10-day visit by a group of British experts in the food distribution industry from Sept. 22.
A report from the UN Food and Agriculture Organization on Sept. 12 said poor areas could face "hardship and even malnutrition" in the winter, because of market disruption.
Other foreign relations
After taking part in the opening of the Madrid Middle East peace conference [see p. 38513], Gorbachev had a two-day summit meeting with French President Mitterrand.
Issues of aid and security were discussed.
Mitterrand emphasised the importance of the centre in relations with the Soviet Union.
On Oct. 18 the German Foreign Minister, Hans-Dietrich Genscher, visiting Kiev as part of a German cultural event met the Ukrainian President, Leonid Kravchuk and Foreign Minister, Anatoly Zlenko, who handed over documents on establishing consular relations between Germany and Ukraine.
On Sept. 30, Ukraine and Austria had signed an agreement to establish consular relations.
On Oct. 25 Genscher met the Russian Foreign Minister, Andrei Kozyrev, and on Oct. 26 President Gorbachev and the Soviet Foreign Minister, Boris Pankin.
EUROPE
ALBANIA
Wave of strikes and protests
The end of October was marked by a series of protest rallies in Tirana and attempts to leave the country from the ports of Vlorë and Durrës, as well as countrywide strikes.
Portraits of former communist dictator Enver Hoxha and of the current President, Ramiz Alia, were burned at rallies in Tirana on Oct. 6, and there were calls for the arrest of Hoxha's widow, Nexhmije Hoxha.
Protest strikes against living conditions included those by teachers, miners and Tirana's transport workers, as well as a general strike in the copper mining district of Puke in support of its demand to become a free economic zone.
Former political prisoners had gone on hunger strike on Sept. 20 in Tirana, demanding recognition of their innocence and economic compensation.
Their protest ended when on Sept. 30 the People's Assembly passed an amnesty law providing for rehabilitation of former political prisoners and setting out their economic rights.
Democratic Party congress — Authorization of new parties
The first national assembly of the Democratic Party, the main opposition party in Albania, founded in December 1990 [see p. 37924]was held on Sept. 27-29 in Tirana.
Sali Berisha was elected chairman by 449 votes to 98, despite an attempt by his opponents to persuade him to step down as leader.
A 105-member national council was also elected.
Further to the law on political parties of July 25, the Ministry of Justice authorized the creation of 10 new political parties during September and October.
Devaluation of lek
The Albanian State Bank devalued the lek with effect from Oct. 14 to US$1.00=30 leks.
Albanian citizens were given the freedom to open foreign currency accounts in Albania.
Visit of French Foreign Minister
French Foreign Minister Roland Dumas made a one-day official visit to Albania on Oct. 10, holding talks with Prime Minister Ylli Bufi on Albania's reform programme and the situation in Yugoslavia.
New political parties
National Progress Party of Albania; Albanian Liberal Party; Albanian Green Party; Democratic Unity of Albania; Albanian Popular Unity Party; Motherland Political Association; Bratska Political Association of Macedonians in Albania; Albanian People's League; Albanian Independent — Centre Party; Albanian Party of Democratic Prosperity.
EUROPE
BULGARIA
Narrow UDF election victory
Bulgaria's second general election since the fall of the communist administration in 1989 was held on Oct. 13.
The results were a victory for the coalition, the Union of Democratic Forces (UDF), which defeated the (former communist) Bulgarian Socialist Party (BSP) by a margin of just over 1 per cent of the vote.
The balance of power in the National Assembly would therefore be held by the Movement for Rights and Freedoms (MRF), which represented Bulgaria's 1,500,000 Turkish-speaking minority.
The new parliament would have 240 seats instead of the 400 in the outgoing Grand National Assembly, to which Bulgaria's first free elections had been held in June 1990 [see pp. 37543-44], and in which the BSP had held 211 seats to the UDF's 144; BSP and UDF deputies had formed a coalition government in December 1990 [see p. 37923].
Parties contesting election
A total of 41 parties and coalitions had been registered with the Central Electoral Commission (CEC) by Sept. 13.
An attempt by 54 National Assembly deputies to prevent the registration of the MRF, on the grounds that it was a political party founded on ethnic allegiance, failed on Oct. 1 when the Supreme Court upheld the CEC's decision to register the MRF.
Two splinter groups from the UDF — the UDF-Centre (dominated by the Bulgarian Social Democratic Party) and the UDF-Liberals (Green Party and Federation of Democracy Clubs) signed on Oct. 8 an agreement on post-election co-operation.
The Nikola Petkov Bulgarian Agrarian Party (BZNS) campaigned separately from the UDF, of which it had been a partner in the 1990 elections.
The United Bulgarian Agrarian Party (BZNS-E), a former ally of the ruling communists, had united with part of the Nikola Petkov BZNS.
The BSP formed an electoral alliance with several minor parties, including the nationalist Fatherland Party of Labour.
Monarchist groups included the Kingdom of Bulgaria Confederation and Svoboda (Freedom).
The elections were held using a proportional representation system with a threshold of 4 per cent of the vote needed to gain a seat in the National Assembly.
Turnout was put at 83.87 per cent of the electorate by the CEC; 38 parties, coalitions and independent candidates contested the election.
It was announced on Oct. 25 that the National Assembly would convene on Nov. 4.
Presidential elections would be held within three months of the general election.
Relations with Russian Federation, Germany, Greece
President Zhelyu Zhelyev visited the Russian Federation on Oct. 21-23 at the invitation of Russian President Boris Yeltsin.
The signature of a declaration on relations between the two countries was seen as the first step towards a future inter-state treaty.
On Oct. 7 in Sofia, the Greek and Bulgarian Prime Ministers, Konstantinos Mitsotakis and Dimitur Popov, signed a 20-year friendship treaty providing for enhanced co-operation between the two countries on defence, business and combating crime.
Greece confirmed its support for Bulgaria's application for association with the EC.
On the issue of Yugoslavia, however, Bulgaria did not endorse Greek support for Yugoslavian unity.
German Foreign Minister Hans-Dietrich Genscher made a one-day official visit to Bulgaria on Oct. 9, signing a 10-year treaty on co-operation and partnership in Europe with his Bulgarian counterpart, Viktor Vulkov.
Percentage of vote Seats UDF 34.36 110 BSP 33.14 106 MRF 7.55 24 BZNS-E 3.86 0 Other* 21.09 0
Bulgarian election results
*Independents, smaller parties.
EUROPE
HUNGARY
Commemoration of 1956 — Entry restrictions for foreigners
Memorial rallies were held all over Hungary on Oct. 23 to commemorate the 1956 revolution and the proclamation of the Hungarian Republic in 1989 [see pp. 36961; 37739].
Hungarian radio said on Oct. 22 that Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev's spokesman had reported him as having condemned the 1956 Warsaw Treaty intervention in Hungary as a violation of international law.
Hungary tightened its border controls on Oct. 4, enforcing a 1983 decree which restricted entry into the country to those with valid documents and sufficient means for subsistence.
On Oct. 7 it was reported that 46,000 foreigners, the majority of them Romanian nationals, had in the previous three days been refused entry from 27 countries for not fulfilling these conditions.
Foreign Minister Geza Jeszenszky said on Oct. 11 that around 50,000 foreigners were illegally resident in Hungary or were engaged in black market activities.
A government decree linked the employment of foreigners to their possession of a work permit, it was reported on Oct. 11.
Hungarian Radio reported that ethnic Hungarians in neighbouring states would be given priority in receiving permits.
Employers wishing to hire foreigners would have to have permission from the local labour exchange, if they wished to avoid paying twice the value of the wage into the employment fund.
An employment visa (munkavallaloi vizum), which could only be obtained if the foreigner had a work permit, was also introduced.
According to a Hungarian Radio broadcast of Sept. 27, there were 16,000 foreigners officially employed in Hungary, most of them Romanian nationals.
World Expo — Military co-operation with Austria — Hungarian president in Canada
On Oct. 10, Budapest city council rejected a proposal to host the World Exposition in 1996 because of inadequate funding.
The government had offered to contribute 30,000 million forints, which it was subsequently proposed should be used instead for development in rural areas.
On Oct. 25 the Hungarian Defence Minister Lajos Für and his Austrian counterpart Werner Fasslabend signed a 15-point agreement on bilateral military co-operation, the details of which were to be worked out by chiefs of staff.
President Arpad Göncz visited Canada on Oct. 13-21.
He opened the Hungarian Weeks series in Toronto on Oct. 17, and held talks with Canadian Prime Minister Brian Mulroney in Ottawa on Oct. 21, requesting his help in establishing guarantees for minority rights.
EUROPE
ROMANIA
New government
On Oct. 16 the Romanian National Assembly approved by 324 votes to seven the new Council of Ministers proposed by Prime Minister-designate Theodor Stolojan, who undertook to accelerate reforms and promised that he would continue his political neutrality and would not stand in the forthcoming (1992) elections.
President Ion Iliescu had held talks on Oct. 9 with leaders of minority parties on the formation of a new government, following the collapse of Petre Roman's National Salvation Front government after demonstrations by miners in Bucharest in September [see p. 38450].
The new Council of Ministers included not only NSF members but also representatives from the National Liberal Party (NLP), the Romanian Ecological Movement (REM) and the Agrarian Democratic Party (ADP); other parties were represented at lower government level.
The Hungarian Democratic Union of Romania (HDUR) held no post, as it had stipulated as a condition the creation of a Ministry for National Minorities.
The nominations of Spiess and Babuic were endorsed by the Senate on Oct. 17, having previously been refused.
Intelligence services
On Oct. 7 the Senate passed by 68 votes to 11 with nine abstentions a bill on the organization of the Romanian Intelligence Service (RIS), after heated debates on RIS rights to "use" the archives of the former security services (Securitate).
Report on Romanian-speaking population in Harghita and Covasna
On Oct. 17, the Romanian parliament heard a report on the situation of the Romanian-speaking population in the ethnically Hungarian- and Szekler-dominated areas of Harghita and Covasna counties after the revolution of December 1989.
The two HDUR deputies refused to endorse the report which claimed that 4,000 Romanians had been driven to leave the area in that time.
A grouping of Szekler people had intended to use the occasion of the commemoration of the 1848 Szekler People's Assembly to hold a referendum on Oct. 19 in Harghita and Covasna on their autonomy.
The rumour generated a wave of protest, which caused the HDUR to dissociate itself from the initiative.
Romanian Council of Ministers
*Theodor Stolojan Prime Minister Adrian Nastase Foreign Affairs Gen. Nicolae Spiroiu National Defence
*Mircea Ionescu-Quintus (NLP) Justice
**Victor Babuic Minister of Interior
*George Danielescu (NLP) Economy and Finance
**Dan Mircea Popescu Labour and Social Protection Constantin Fota Trade and Tourism
*Dan Constantinescu Industry Petru Marculescu (ADP) Agriculture and Food Traian Vasescu Transport Andrei Chirica Communications
*Dan Nicolae (NSF) Public Works
*Marcian Bleahu (REM) Environment
*Mihai Golu (NSF) Education and Science
*Ludovic Spiess Culture
*Mircea Mairoescu Health
*Ioan Moldovan Youth and Sport
**Ion Aurel Stoic (NSF) Relations with Parliament
*Emil Tokacs (NLP) Sec. of State at Ministry of Education Florian Bercea Budget
*New appointment.
**Altered responsibilities.
EUROPE
CZECHOSLOVAKIA
Treaties with France, Soviet Union and Germany
On a visit to Paris on Oct. 1, President Vaclav Havel and French President François Mitterrand signed a 10-year friendship treaty.
The treaty, similar to those already signed by France with Poland [see p. 38162]and Hungary [see p. 38449], pledged French support for Czechoslovakia's efforts to gain association with the European Communities (EC).
[For September negotiations on east European association with EC see pp. 38443-44.]
A friendship treaty between the Soviet Union and Czechoslovakia was initialled on Oct. 3 by the Soviet Foreign Minister, Boris Pankin, and his Czechoslovak counterpart, Jiri Dienstbier.
The Soviet side had, since the failed August coup, dropped its previous insistence on a clause to prevent either side from joining alliances potentially hostile to the other.
It was made clear that the treaty did not infringe the rights and sovereignty of individual Soviet republics.
The document confirmed Soviet condemnation, first voiced in February 1990 [see p. 37256], of the 1968 Warsaw Treaty invasion of Czechoslovakia.
Pankin's successor as Soviet ambassador to Czechoslovakia, Aleksandr Lebedev, presented his credentials on Sept. 30.
On Oct. 7, a friendship and co-operation treaty was initialled by Dienstbier and German Foreign Minister Hans-Dietrich Genscher, in the presence of Havel and the German President, Richard von Weizsäcker, who was on a five-day state visit to Czechoslovakia.
The treaty contained a clause recognizing the legal continuity since 1918 of the Czechoslovak state.
The Slovak Republic Prime Minister, Jan Carnogursky, had objected to this on the grounds that it ignored the separate existence of Slovakia (as a Nazi protectorate) from 1938 to 1945.
It was, however, thought unlikely that the Slovak government would refuse to ratify the treaty.
Another controversy centred on the issue of compensation for some 2,000,000 Sudeten Germans expelled from Czechoslovakia at the end of the Second World War and for Czech victims of fascism.
These sensitive issues were dealt with in an exchange of letters accompanying the treaty, stating that with German support for Czechoslovakia's integration into the EC, it would become easier for Germans to return to their homeland in Czechoslovakia.
The issue of property rights was not addressed.
Appointment of two federal Deputy Prime Ministers
Havel appointed Deputy Prime Ministers on Oct. 3 — Vaclav Klaus (chair of the Civic Democratic Party), who also retained the Finance portfolio, and Pavel Hoffmann, whose former portfolio of Strategic Planning was abolished.
[For Sept. 17 resignation of Vaclav Vales see p. 38449.]
Screening law — Formation of Civic Democratic Union
The law to screen or "vet" the holders of state posts for involvement in the former communist administration [see p. 38449]was passed by the Federal Assembly on Oct. 4 by 148 votes to 21 with 22 abstentions.
Havel signed the law on Oct. 17, but said that he would be seeking amendments to it.
The final version was more stringent than the original proposals, broadening the criteria for screening to ban those who had simply collaborated with the StB (Security Service).
At its assembly on Oct. 19-21, the Public Against Violence (PAV) movement, the Slovak equivalent of the Czech Civic Forum, turned itself into a political party named Civic Democratic Union — Public Against Violence.
Martin Porubjak was elected chairman of the new party.
Outgoing PAV chairman Josef Kucerak said that it would be "a clearly non-socialist party…aimed at liberal-conservative minded people" .
In February 1991 Civic Forum had formed two parties, Civic Democratic Party and Civic Movement [see p. 38017-18].
EUROPE
CENTRAL EUROPE
Krakow meeting
At a summit meeting in Krakow on Oct. 5-6 between the Presidents, Prime Ministers and Foreign Ministers of the "Visegrad Three" (Czechoslovakia, Hungary and Poland), a co-operation treaty was signed by Presidents Vaclav Havel, Jozsef Antall and Lech Walesa.
They adopted a Krakow Declaration, stating that the three countries would act for union with a united Europe and that their security would best be served by integration with the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), and recognizing the dangers posed by the breaking up of Yugoslavia and the Soviet Union.
Bilateral treaties were signed between Hungary and Poland and between Czechoslovakia and Poland.
The delegations supported sending an international peacekeeping force to Yugoslavia and said that military action in solving internal political disputes was inadmissible.
Labour and Social Affairs Ministers of the three countries, also meeting in Krakow, appealed to the European Communities (EC) for co-operation on social policy and the movement of labour.
They signed a co-operation agreement on employment policy, training, and wages policy.
The Czechoslovak, Hungarian and Polish Economy Ministers had met with their German, Austrian and Swiss counterparts in Salzburg, Austria, on Sept. 14, the first meeting of its kind, and had been promised that the west European participants were ready to increase efforts to help eastern and central European states to improve their economies.
EUROPE
BALTIC STATES
Relations with Soviet Union
On Oct. 10, Estonia and Lithuania formally established diplomatic relations with the Soviet Union; Latvia did not do so until Oct. 15, having first established diplomatic ties with the Russian Federation (on Oct. 4).
On Sept. 25 three prominent members of the new Soviet Political Consultative Council [see p. 38415], Eduard Shevardnadze, Aleksandr Yakovlev and Anatoly Sobchak, had been appointed to head delegations to Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia respectively, to negotiate with the Baltic states matters arising from their new independent status.
Ccall for withdrawal of troops
On Oct. 5 the Baltic Council met in Vilnius, when it called for all Soviet troops stationed in Tallinn, Riga and Vilnius to leave by Dec. 1, 1991.
It also declared that, subsequent to their 1934 Co-operation Treaty, Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania would co-ordinate foreign and security policy.
The Soviet military responded to the demand by noting that troops could not leave before the completion of Soviet forces' withdrawal from Eastern Europe, partly because of the difficulties involved in rehousing troops.
On Sept. 19 Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev had signed a decree providing for all conscripts in the Soviet armed forces from the Baltic states to be released by the end of October.
EUROPE
EFTA
Agreement with EC on EEA
A protracted final "make or break" negotiating session began in Luxembourg on Oct. 22 and ended in the early morning of Oct. 23 with the conclusion of an agreement between the seven-member European Free Trade Association (EFTA) and the 12-member European Communities (EC) on the creation from January 1993 of a common European Economic Area (EEA), the world's largest common market embracing 380 million people.
From the EC perspective, Commission President Jacques Delors said that the EEA would offer the benefits of useful experience for those ultimately seeking EC membership (for which Austria and Sweden had already applied), while the Commission vice-president responsible for the negotiations, Frans Andriessen, spoke of a breathing space for the EC prior to enlargement.
The current EFTA Council chairman Pertti Salolainen spoke of the EEA as "a building block in the new European architecture" and suggested that "while the EC will of course remain the centre of attraction in Europe, the EEA may very well become an attractive concept for central and eastern European countries seeking to become part of the greater European family" .
EFTA as a whole was the largest EC trading partner; EC exports to EFTA in 1990 were worth ECU111,370 million and imports from EFTA were worth ECU108,600 million.
The agreement
The EEA treaty required completion of some 40 minor details prior to initialling and signature.
Ratification would involve approval by the EC member countries, the European parliament (EP) and the parliaments of each EFTA country; Swiss participation would be subject to referendum.
The EEA would follow the principles of free movement of goods, services, people and capital.
The EFTA countries would adopt the acquis communautaire in respect of the passage into national law of some 1,500 acts.
For goods, there had been tariff-free trade in manufactures since 1972, but non-tariff barriers would now be removed.
Common rules would be needed to define whether goods qualified as originating in a member country.
The EFTA countries would not apply the EC's common agricultural or fisheries policies or the coal and steel policy, and would retain sovereign control over their energy resources and production; stricter environmental controls on the use of chemicals would be retained by certain EFTA countries, while Norway and Sweden would retain their state alcohol monopolies.
On services EFTA countries would adopt existing EC rules on areas such as consumer protection, education, social policy, company law, anti-trust and competition legislation including on state aid and mergers.
On movement of people there would be mutual recognition of professional qualifications; Switzerland would have until 1996 to adjust from its particularly strict regime on immigration.
Capital investment would remain subject to certain restrictions in particularly sensitive areas, such as purchase of real estate by non-nationals in some EFTA countries.
Institutions of the EEA would be an EEA Council (one minister from each of the 19 countries and a representative of the EC Commission, chaired for six months alternately by an EC or an EFTA member), EEA courts to deal with disputes and to hear appeals on competition rulings, an EEA consultative committee, and an EEA joint parliamentary committee.
EFTA member countries would have no right to vote on new EC legislation.
The EEA Council would decide by consensus whether such legislation would apply throughout the EEA.
There would be reviews of the agreement every two years, the first at the end of 1993.
Outstanding issues resolved in October
Fish: Norway conceded some improved EC access to its fishing grounds, on a formula predicted to amount to 6,000 tonnes of cod for 1993 rising to 11,000 by 1997, but failed to get a relaxation of EC restrictions on market access for Norwegian products including salmon and lobster.
Iceland would retain control over its fisheries but allow an EC catch of 3,000 tonnes redfish equivalent, in exchange for some access to EC waters and customs-free market access for 97 per cent of its fisheries products by 1997.
Cohesion fund: EFTA countries would contribute ECU2,000 million in low-interest loans and ECU425 million in grants to promote development in disadvantaged regions of the EC.
Transport: Separate negotiations between the EC and the Austrian and Swiss governments had covered, but not settled, the matter of Alpine lorry transit.
This was eventually resolved at the Luxembourg meeting, with Switzerland accepting unrestricted passage for up to 28 tonnes axle weight and 50 licences per day for 28-38 tonne trucks, and Austria agreeing to increase licences for EC lorries to 1,300,000 for 1992, but insisting that annual ceilings thereafter should embody a progressive reduction in pollutant output.
Greece sought until the last moment to hold out for a higher ceiling than the 60,500 transit licences offered to Greek lorries.
EFTA-Turkey agreement
Free trade in industrial goods with Turkey was to develop by end-1995 under an agreement initialled in Geneva in mid-October and expected to enter into force in April 1992 following the completion of signature and ratification procedures.
EUROPE
SWEDEN
Formation of "bourgeois" coalition government
On Oct. 3 the Riksdag (unicameral parliament) elected Carl Bildt, 42, leader of the conservative Moderate Party, as Prime Minister.
The following day Bildt presented his new four-party Cabinet and his government programme, declaring that "the age of collectivism is at an end" , and announcing "a clear and unequivocal change of course" .
As a result of the Sept. 15 general election the Riksdag was dominated by the centre-right [see p. 38444].
The election of Bildt was approved by 163 votes to 147 (Social Democratic Party — SAP — and Left Party — Vp) with 23 abstentions (New Democracy — ND).
The new government's four priorities were (i) negotiating European Community (EC) membership (the outgoing government having submitted an application on July 1, 1991 — see p. 38353) with a view to holding a referendum on the issue by September 1994;(ii) breaking the pattern of economic stagnation and re-establishing the country's reputation for growth and enterprise;(iii) deregulating areas such as health and child care; and (iv) establishing a long-term, sustainable policy on the environment.
Spending cuts were planned to reduce 1992 budget expenditure by 10,000-15,000 million kronor (US$1,700 million-2,500 million).
Tax cuts would include a reduction from 25 to 18 per cent from Jan. 1, 1992, in the rate of value added tax (VAT) charged on food, hotel and restaurant bills, tourism and internal transportation.
The controversial employee investment funds, administered with the involvement of trade unions and financed by a 20 per cent tax on business profits, would be phased out.
The 0.5 per cent tax on stock market turnover would be abolished, as would the restrictions on foreign investment and ownership of Swedish companies.
Carl Bildt (M) Prime Minister Gun Hellsvik (M)(f) Justice Margaretha af Ugglas (M)(f) Foreign Affairs Anders Björck (M) Defence Bengt Westerberg (Fp) Health and Social Affairs; Deputy Prime Minister Mats Odell (KdS) Transport and Communications Anne Wibble (Fp)(f) Finance Per Unckel (M) Education Karl Erik Olsson (C) Agriculture Börje Hörnlund (C) Labour Birgit Friggebo (Fp)(f) Immigration and Cultural Affairs Per Westerberg (M) Industry and Commerce Inger Davidsson (KdS)(f) Public Administration Olof Johansson (C) Environment and Natural Resources
Swedish Cabinet
Subordinate ministers Reidunn Laurén (f) Ministry of Justice Alf Svensson (C) Development Co-operation and human rights issues, Foreign Affairs Ulf Dinkelspiel European Community Affairs, Foreign Trade Bo Könberg (Fp) Ministry of Health and Social Affairs Bo Lundgren (M) Ministry of Finance Beatrice Ask (M)(f) Ministry of Education Görel Thurdin Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources
(M)— Moderate Party;(Fp)— Liberal Party;(C)— Centre Party;(KdS)— Christian Democratic Community Party.
(f) denotes female.
EUROPE
NORWAY
1992 budget — Bank rescue
On Oct. 4 the minority Labour government announced an expansionary draft budget for 1992 designed to create 20,000 new jobs.
Child support would be increased, rail transport expenditure would go up by 50 per cent and that on the environment by 20 per cent.
The increase in overall expenditure of NKr450,900 million (about US$68,600 million — US$1=NK6.573 as at Oct. 7, 1991) would be financed primarily from oil revenues.
The budget deficit, excluding oil revenues, was projected to rise from NKr56,700 million to NKr65,000 million in 1992; the deficit including oil revenues would be NKr24,200 million.
[For revised 1991 budget see p. 38202.]
On Oct. 14 Norway's second largest bank, Christiana Bank og Kreditkasse (already receiving substantial state assistance — see p. 38486), announced that it was technically bankrupt, with losses of NKr7,200 million in the first three quarters of 1991.
Finance Minister Sigbjoern Johnsen announced on Oct. 17 an NKr11,500 million rescue package for the country's banking system.
NKr6,000 million would go to the "bank insurance fund" set up in January 1991 [ibid.],
NKr1,000 million to the "savings bank insurance fund" , and NKr4,500 million to a new "bank investment fund" to support banks not facing an acute crisis but needing more capital.
Espionage issues
On Oct. 11 Svein Urdal resigned as chief of intelligence after it was revealed that 10 out of some 100 Palestinian asylum seekers who arrived in Norway in late 1990 and early 1991 had been interviewed by the Israeli security service Mossad at the request of Norwegian police.
Eight Soviet diplomats were expelled from Norway for espionage according to an announcement of Oct. 21 [for last such expulsions, in mid-1987, see p. 36242].
EUROPE
SWITZERLAND
Parliamentary elections
Elections to the Nationalrat (lower house of the federal parliament) on Oct. 20 left the four largest parties, which together made up the governing coalition, controlling 147 of the 200 seats (previously 159); the Radical Democratic Party (FDP/PRD) lost seven seats and the Christian Democratic People's Party (CVP/PDC) lost five.
The representation of the other two coalition parties (Social Democratic Party of Switzerland — SP/PS and Swiss People's Party — SVP/UDC) remained unchanged [for 1987 elections see pp. 35666-67].
The small right-wing Car Party (APS/PSA), originally a party defending motorists' rights, increased its representation after a campaign aimed at curbing immigration.
The Swiss Democrats (SD/DS), formerly the National Action against Foreign Infiltration of the People and Homeland Party, also won more seats and the populist Ticino League (Lega dei Ticinesi) entered the Nationalrat with two members.
The Greens (GPS/PES) increased their representation.
For the first time 18- and 19-year-olds were permitted to vote in national parliamentary elections [see p. 38110].
The turnout was 46.2 per cent(46.5 per cent in 1987).
At the same time elections were held for 37 of the 46 seats in the Ständerat (upper house) in 20 of the 26 cantons and half-cantons.
The provisional distribution of seats pending a second round of elections in seven areas was FDP 15 (previously 14), CVP 14 (19), SPS none (five), SVP four (four), LPS three (three), others one (one).
Seats Percentage of votes 1991 1987 1991 1987 FDP/PRD 44 51 20.9 22.9 CVP/PDC 37 42 17.8 20.0 SP/PS 41 41 19.0 18.4 SVP/UDC 25 25 11.8 11.0 GPS/PES 14 9 6.4 5.0 LPS/PLS 10 9 3.0 2.7 APS/PSA 8 2 5.1 2.6 LdU/AdI 6 *9 2.7 4.2 SD/DS 5 3 2.8 3.2 EVP/PEV 3 3 1.9 1.9 PdA/PST+Alt. 3 **5 Ticino League 2 Others 2 ***1 (LdU/AdI — Alliance of Independents; LPS/PLS — Liberal Party; EVP/PEV — Evangelical People's Party; PdAS/PST+Alt. — Party of Labour and Left Alternative including Women in Politics)
Swiss Nationalrat election
*Figure includes independent member for Appenzell-Ausserrhoden, classified under Others in 1987 table.
**Includes Progressive Organization of Switzerland (POCH).
***Autonomous Socialist Party for Ticino.
EUROPE
AUSTRIA
Right-wing gains in provincial election — Cabinet changes
In elections to the Landtag (provincial parliament) in Upper Austria on Oct. 6 the extreme right Freedom Party of Austria (FPÖ) more than tripled its share of the vote, winning 17.7 per cent(5 per cent in the last Upper Austria provincial elections in 1985 — see p. 34110) and 11 seats (three hitherto).
As in the September elections in Styria [see p. 38448], the centre-right Austrian People's Party (ÖVP) lost its absolute majority, winning 45.2 per cent of the vote (52 per cent in 1985) and 26 seats (30 hitherto).
Social Democratic Party of Austria (SPÖ) won 31.4 per cent(38 per cent in 1985) and 19 seats (23 hitherto).
Cabinet changes
There were changes in mid-October among ÖVP members in the federal coalition SPÖ-ÖVP Cabinet.
Josef Riegler, who had already been replaced as Federal Vice-Chancellor by ÖVP president Erhard Busek on July 2, resigned as Minister for Federalism and for Administrative Reform in the Federal Chancellery, and was replaced by Jurgen Weiss, while Johannes Ditz succeeded Günter Stummvoll as Minister of State to the Finance Minister.
Agreement on budget
The SPÖ and ÖVP reached agreement on Oct. 22 after lengthy negotiations on a Sch636,000 million (about US$53,600 million) budget in which the deficit would be reduced to Sch62,000 million (3.5 per cent of gross national product, with a further reduction to 3 per cent in 1992).
Expenditure would go up by 6 per cent.
Desecration of Jewish graves
Increasing anti-Semitism in Austria was reflected in eight attacks on Jewish graves in Vienna on Oct. 9-10, making a total of at least 25 desecrations in 1991.
The latest attacks coincided with a visit by the mayor of Jerusalem, Teddy Kollek, to Vienna, where he was born.
EUROPE
EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
Security and defence proposals
Several member countries of the European Communities (EC), in the context of the EC debate on European political union (EPU), made proposals during October which addressed the issues of common European security and defence policy, and in particular the role of the Western European Union (WEU), which currently comprised nine of the 12 members of the European Communities (EC) but not Denmark, Greece or neutral Ireland.
Joint UK-Italian proposals on Oct. 4 envisaged that the WEU would develop aims "not contradictory but compatible" with its becoming "the defence component of the [European]union" .
This was seen as "a means to strengthen the European pillar of the [NATO]alliance" .
A WEU rapid reaction force could, however, operate outside the NATO arena.
On Oct. 16 the French and German Foreign Ministers published proposals in draft treaty form on foreign and defence policy, which were welcomed by Belgium, Greece, Luxembourg and Spain.
The member countries would establish those aspects of foreign policy which were ripe for "common action" , and policy decisions on these aspects could thereafter be made by qualified majority voting.
The EC would take on a direct role in defence affairs in the medium term by gradually absorbing the WEU.
Greece and Denmark would be invited to join WEU, and Ireland would be offered observer status; the WEU secretariat would move to Brussels, where meetings would be co-ordinated with those of the EC.
A permanent WEU group would set up military units answerable to the WEU, plan possible deployments, and set up a European armaments agency.
The joint Franco-German brigade (which started operations in October 1990 — see p. 38507) would be the core of a future European defence force, reportedly numbering up to 100,000, which could operate within the NATO arena.
Douglas Hurd, the UK Foreign and Commonwealth Secretary, however, declared that he did not "believe there is any point, and some danger indeed, in duplicating what NATO does and what the members of NATO decided should be renewed and continued" .
[For May 1991 decision on a NATO rapid reaction force see p. 38216; for October NATO meeting and further reactions to Franco-German proposals see p. 38554.]
Speaking to the European Parliament on Oct. 23 Jacques Delors, President of the European Commission, maintained: "The crux of the reforms must be the concept of a common action, resting on the need for a common will to defend the central interests which the member states share…
If there is no majority voting then the Community will be left with the same level of impotence it has now."
At an extraordinary meeting of WEU Foreign and Defence Ministers on Oct. 29 the WEU Secretary-General, Willem van Eekelen, suggested a gradual approach whereby EC leaders would approve a common European defence policy at the Maastricht European Council meeting in December but leave the details of its implementation for review for at least five years thereafter.
Differences between the UK-Italian and Franco-German positions were not resolved.
Revised draft treaty on EMU
On Oct. 28 the Netherlands as current holders of the EC presidency tabled a revised draft treaty on economic and monetary union (EMU).
Under this draft, the European Parliament would have increased powers to approve the legislative measures necessary to establish the final stage of EMU, but the Commission would retain exclusive rights to initiate this legislation.
The European Monetary Institute, which would be formed in January 1994 at the start of "stage two" of the Delors EMU plan [see p. 36598]as a precursor to the fully-fledged European Central Bank, would have a fully supranational character and an independent president.
(EC central bank governors met in Basle on Oct. 20 but were unable to agree on a statute for the proposed Institute.)
Protocols specified the level of "economic convergence" required for states to embark on the third and final stage of EMU.
Any state whose parliament "does not feel able to approve the irrevocable fixing of its currency" could opt out by seeking "exemption" from this stage of economic union; member states would nevertheless be asked to make a solemn (non-binding) declaration proclaiming their support for a "swift transition" to EMU and "their strongest intention to participate in EMU without exemption" .
(The "opt-out" clause was welcomed the following day by the UK government, but the idea of this non-binding declaration was dismissed as "pretty irrelevant" by a UK government official.)
Increased German representation in EP
The European Parliament (EP) on Oct. 9 voted by 239 votes to 47 with 47 abstentions to recommend that the number of German members elected to the EP be increased by 18 to 99.
This would require approval by national parliaments since it involved an amendment to the 1957 Treaty of Rome [see pp. 15951-59].
Since German unification in October 1990, 18 east German delegates had sat in the EP [see p. 37718].
Energy tax
At an informal meeting in Amsterdam on Oct. 12, Environment Ministers approved in principle Commission proposals for a tax on energy consumption, phased in from 1993 onwards, to help reduce emissions of greenhouse gases [for EC commitment to stabilise carbon dioxide emission levels at 1990 levels by 2000 see pp. 37444; 37784].
EC Finance Ministers had given their provisional approval on Oct. 7.
The new tax would be offset by tax cuts in other areas.
EC blocking of UK transport projects on environmental grounds
UK Prime Minister John Major wrote on Oct. 21 to Delors to express "severe irritation" over an Oct. 17 communication from Carlo Ripa di Meana, the Commissioner responsible for the environment, calling on the UK government to halt work on seven transport construction projects because environmental considerations had not been taken into account.
Fisheries conservation
EC fisheries ministers agreed on Oct. 28 to increase the mesh size of nets for catching cod and haddock in the North and Irish Seas.
Drift nets over 2.5 km in length would be banned in EC waters from June 1, 1992 [see pp. 37925; 38506 for earlier measures].
Blocking of de Havilland takeover
On Oct. 2, over a year after the Commisison had acquired increased powers over mergers and competition policy [see p. 37719], it blocked the acquisition of the Canadian aircraft manufacturer de Havilland by Aérospatiale of France and Alenia of Italy.
Sir Leon Brittan, the EC Commissioner responsible for competition, said that the companies would have acquired a 50 per cent share of the world market for commuter aircraft of 20-70 seats and 67 per cent of the EC market.
EUROPE
FRANCE
Pay concessions prior to general strike
Public-sector workers on Oct. 24 took part in a 24-hour general strike organized by the trade union organization Force ouvrière (FO) in protest at high unemployment caused by government policies.
A separate day of action was staged by the communist-led General Confederation of Labour (CGT) and others.
The effect of the strike was defused by a 6.5 per cent government pay offer made to teachers and civil servants on Oct. 22, the promise of concessions to striking nurses (who had been camping in front of the Health Ministry for three weeks), and a series of measures to end protests by farmers.
President François Mitterrand also announced on Oct. 22, in return for an undertaking by farmers to end violent protests, that the government would introduce border controls on imported meat, reduce land and inheritance taxes, encourage the growing of crops for the production of environmentally friendly fuel, and introduce a new pension scheme to allow farmers to retire at 55.
The farmers' protests, over falling prices and the prospect of even lower prices under the common agricultural policy of the European Communities (EC)[see p. 38352-53], had initially been peaceful but in some cases deteriorated into violence [see p. 38446].
Police cars and government buildings in the provinces were attacked, cargoes of foreign produce hijacked and destroyed, roads blocked and trains halted, despite the announcement on Oct. 9 of a F1,300 million (about US$230 million) emergency package of tax cuts and fodder subsidies for those worst affected.
Incidents directed against members of the government also occurred, and Prime Minister Edith Cresson on Oct. 21 ordered ministers to seek clearance with her before travelling to the provinces.
Also on Oct. 21 Mitterrand called on Raymond Lacombe, the chairman of the farmers' union FNSEA (Fédération nationale des syndicats d'exploitants agricoles), to control his supporters, describing the attacks by "gangs" who were not representative of the main body of farmers as "unacceptable" and ordering the police to intervene to restore law and order.
Adoption of 1992 budget
The main body of the 1992 budget, approved by the Council of Ministers on Sept. 18 [see p. 38445], and presented to the National Assembly on Oct. 15, was adopted on Oct. 20 by invoking Article 49.3 of the Constitution ( "engagement of the government's responsibility" ), whereby legislation could be adopted on first reading unless the opposition tabled a vote of censure.
The government later survived such a vote on Oct. 24 with 264 votes in its favour.
Infected blood scandal
Three senior doctors, Jacques Roux (the former director general for health) Michel Garretta and Robert Netter, were charged on Oct. 21 with knowingly supplying blood infected with the HIV virus in 1984-85.
Just before the men were charged, Le Monde published a confidential document prepared for the government in 1989 showing that some 360,000 people had been infected with blood contaminated by hepatitis because of inadequate testing of blood donors between 1980 and 1988, when compulsory tests were introduced.
Garretta, who prepared this document, had resigned in June 1991 as director general of the national blood transfusion centre after complaints from haemophiliacs.
The government announced on Oct. 30 that compensation would be paid to people who contracted the HIV virus from blood transfusions during 1980-85, or to their families.
Legislation on illegal immigration
The National Assembly on Oct. 15 approved legislation to restrict illegal immigration by heavily penalizing employers who employed illegal immigrants, and guides who brought them over French borders.
Reduction of military service
The National Assembly on Oct. 3 approved by 316 votes to two, with 255 abstentions, a law reducing military service from 12 to 10 months.
EUROPE
GERMANY
Measures over asylum-seekers — Racist violence
In talks on Oct. 10 between the governing coalition parties and the opposition Chancellor Helmut Kohl's proposals to amend Article 16 of the Constitution in order to reduce the numbers of asylum-seekers (which were opposed by the opposition Social Democratic Party — SPD — as well as by the coalition Free Democratic Party — FDP) were rejected.
However, a consensus was reached on proposed legislation whereby asylum-seekers should be housed in camps by Jan. 1, 1992, and their applications processed within six weeks.
According to government figures in the first nine months of 1991 the number of immigrants of German origin (Aussiedler) fell to 166,786 from 337,394 for the same period of 1990, but the number of asylum-seekers rose from 143,826 to 169,785.
Racist violence
Celebrations on Oct. 3 to mark the first anniversary of unification were marred by about 50 attacks on immigrants throughout the country, in which at least 25 people were injured.
In addition intelligence figures showed that four people had been killed and 169 injured in attacks on foreigners by neo-Nazis and other right-wing elements in the first eight months of 1991.
At the official unification festivities in Hamburg Rita Süssmuth, the President of the Bundestag (lower house of parliament), defended the right to asylum which she said Germans should appreciate as fundamentally important because of their experience under the Nazis.
Chancellor Kohl said that Germany would remain a "nation of friendship for foreigners" but stressed that the right of asylum should not be abused, a point which he again emphasized on Oct. 13 when he described those who attacked foreigners as "fools and criminals" bringing shame on Germany.
Incidents and attacks escalated throughout October, and rallies in protest at the violence against foreigners were staged in several towns on Oct. 13.
Three skinheads were arrested after burning down a hostel in Immenstadt (Bavaria) on Oct. 13, as a result of which two men were injured, and 19 people were charged in Dresden on Oct. 25 in connection with the attacks in Hoyerswerda on Sept. 17-23 [see p. 38447].
At Bad Honeff the tomb of Konrad Adenauer, West Germany's first post-war Chancellor, was daubed with swastikas on Oct. 5.
Local elections in Lower Saxony
In local elections held in Lower Saxony on Oct. 6 the Christian Democratic Union (CDU) share of the vote dropped from 46 per cent to 43.1 per cent while the SPD, which continued to control the Land government in conjunction with the Greens [see pp. 37676], won 40.2 per cent of the vote (down from 40.5 per cent in 1986).
The Greens won 6.3 per cent(5.4 per cent ) and the FDP 5.9 per cent (4.9 per cent ).
The right-wing Republican Party won less than 1 per cent in the state overall but won two seats in Hannover, where the SPD suffered a serious setback, and two others in Delmenhorst.
Bundesbank reform
The Cabinet on Oct. 2 approved plans for a reform of the Bundesbank, reducing the influence of the Länder (which strongly opposed the reform) and strengthening the role of the president.
In order to streamline the decision-making council, the number of regional central banks would be reduced from the current figure of 11 to nine, with only Saxony among the five east German states having its own bank and some smaller west German Länder merging their regional banks with those of other states.
The bank's permanent directorate, hitherto comprising five members (with 10 the maximum), would be expanded to a maximum of eight to include east German representation.
RAF sentence
Silke Maier-Witt, a former member of the Red Army Faction (RAF) arrested in east Germany in 1990 [see p. 37828], was sentenced by a Stuttgart court to 10 years' imprisonment on Oct. 8 for her part in the 1977 murder of Hanns-Martin Schleyer [see pp. 28743; 28920]and in the 1979 attempted assassination of Gen. Alexander Haig [see p. 29913].
Sentences in Rabta affair
Three managers of the German firm Imhausen-Chemie were sentenced by a Mannheim court on Oct. 9 to suspended prison terms ranging from 10 to 16 months for contravention of foreign trade laws in exporting materials to Libya between 1984 and 1988 for use in a chemical weapons factory at Rabta, south of Tripoli.
[For 1990 sentencing of the chair of Imhausen-Chemie, Jürgen Happenstiel-Imhausen, see p. 37677.]
EUROPE
UNITED KINGDOM
Failure of BCCI rescue
On Oct. 3 a statement issued in Abu Dhabi, one of the United Arab Emirates (UAE), by the majority shareholders of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International (BCCI), which had been closed down on July 5, 1991, amid allegations of massive corruption and fraud [see p. 38355], announced that they had withdrawn their support for an attempted rescue of the bank.
Some 1,100 of BCCI's 1,260 staff in the UK were given redundancy notices; 80 per cent of the bank's 480 employees in the UAE had been made redundant on Oct. 2.
BCCI's shares were 77.4 per cent owned by Abu Dhabi's Ruler and President of the UAE, Shaikh Zayed bin Sultan al-Nahayan, Abu Dhabi's Crown Prince, the Abu Dhabi government finance department and the Abu Dhabi Investment Authority.
Details of the secret Price Waterhouse/Bank of England report on BCCI [see p. 38355]had been revealed on Aug. 2.
BCCI's "major customers and shareholders" were aware as early as April 1990, it said, of widespread fraud and manipulation of banking records within BCCI; "the precise amount of such losses and fictitious profits [over the period from 1977 to 1985]can not now be established" , but could have approached US$1,000 million.
Repercussions for UK councils — US investigations — Criminal charges
Local councils in the United Kingdom had lost some £80,000,000 as a result of the BCCI closure.
The Rev. Donald Macaulay, chair of the Western Isles council which had lost £23,000,000, resigned in early September and two other senior officials of the council were suspended on Sept. 11.
A United States Senate subcommittee investigating the BCCI scandal, chaired by John F. Kerry, heard testimony on Aug. 1 that several US government agencies knew of illegal activities as early as 1986.
A Central Investigation Agency (CIA) memorandum dated Sept. 30, 1986, Kerry disclosed, indicated the CIA's knowledge of criminal activities and of BCCI's secret and illegal acquisition of First American Bankshares Inc…
The chairman and the president of First American, respectively former US Defence Secretary Clark M. Clifford and Robert A. Altman, resigned in August 1991.
They had allegedly made millions of dollars in the 1980s by borrowing from BCCI to buy and sell shares in the holding company which owned First American, but on Sept. 11 both men, appearing before the House Banking Committee, denied any knowledge of secret control by BCCI.
On Sept. 25 the US Federal Reserve imposed a fine of $20,000,000 on Kemal Shoaib, former chair of the Independence Bank of the USA, for secretly assisting BCCI to acquire the Independence Bank.
Charges of laundering drug money through BCCI were brought on Sept. 5 in the USA against six BCCI officials, the former head of Capcom Financial Services Ltd of London, Syed Ali Akbar, and Colombian cocaine cartel leaders.
On Sept. 8 in Abu Dhabi 26 BCCI executives were arrested including former chief operating officer Swaleh Naqvi, already indicted in New York on July 29 [see p. 38355].
Television franchises
The Independent Television Commission (ITC) on Oct. 16 awarded new 10-year licences (1993-2002) for the 16 franchises of the main commercial television network, ITV.
For the first time bids were by competitive tender, a highly controversial system introduced by the government in an attempt to increase competition.
Four existing companies lost their licences — TV-am; Thames Television, broadcasting on weekdays in the London area; TVS, in the south; and TSW, in the south-west.
These franchises were awarded to Sunrise Television, Carlton Communications, Meridian Broadcasting and Westcountry Television respectively.
The ITC criteria included a "quality threshold" for proposed programming and economic feasibility; not all franchises were awarded to the highest bidder.
Several unsuccessful companies announced that they were considering challenging the commission's decisions in court.
Resignation of senior law official
The Director of Public Prosecutions, Sir Allan Green, resigned on Oct. 3 after he had been stopped by police while talking to a prostitute in a London "red-light" district.
Prostitution was not illegal under English law, but "kerb crawling" was made an offence in 1985.
He was succeeded in a caretaker capacity by his deputy, David Gandy.
EUROPE
PORTUGAL
PSD general election victory
In legislative elections on Oct. 6 the incumbent Social Democratic Party (PSD) led by Prime Minister Aníbal Cavaco Silva was returned to power with a slightly decreased majority of 135 seats, representing 50.4 per cent of votes cast, in the 230-seat [not 250 as given on p. 38488]Assembly of the Republic.
The Socialist Party (PS) led by Jorge Sampaio won 30 per cent and 72 seats.
The turnout was recorded at 68.2 per cent compared with 78 per cent in 1987 [see pp. 35388-90], when the PSD had won 148 seats, with 50.2 per cent of the vote, and the PS 29.3 per cent.
Cavaco Silva, 52, had conducted a confident electoral campaign described by Le Monde as carefully programmed "in the American style" and, in its emphasis on Cavaco Silva's personality, a "flirtation with populism" .
Avoiding inter-party debate of concrete issues, Cavaco Silva had stressed the government's economic record and the importance of "stability with continuity" if the successes of recent years were to continue.
He had indicated that if the PSD failed to secure a majority at least as big as that obtained in 1987, he would refuse to form a new government or a coalition.
With Portugal due to assume the EC presidency for the first time in January 1992 a change of leadership would be badly received abroad, he claimed.
Sampaio, the PS secretary-general since 1989, had presented the PS under his leadership as representing an alternative to the centre-right policies of the PSD in spite of the easy cohabitation of President Mário Soares, a former PS leader, with the PSD government.
Advocating increased spending on housing, health and education, Sampaio had, however, found little fault with the general direction of the government's liberalizing economic policy.
The Communist Party (PCP), which had in August declared its approval of the attempted coup in the Soviet Union, lost nearly half its seats, obtaining only 8.8 per cent of the vote and 17 seats on a joint platform (the United Democratic Coalition — CDU) with smaller leftist parties.
The party of the Christian democrats, the Social Democratic Centre (CDS), won 4.4 per cent and 5 seats.
CDS leader Diogo Freitas do Amaral resigned after early results came in.
The National Solidarity Party, formed in early 1991 to prioritize the needs of pensioners, won one seat.
The Democratic Renewal Party, founded in 1985 in support of the then President Ramalho Eanes, failed to secure enough votes to return a representative to parliament.
Eanes had himself urged voters to vote for the PSD.
New Cabinet
In the new Cabinet appointed on Oct. 28, the most notable change was the appointment of an academic economist, Jorge Braga de Macedo, 44, who replaced Miguel Beleza as Finance Minister.
Aníbal Cavaco Silva Prime Minister Joaquim Fernando Nogueira Presidency and Defence António Couto dos Santos Deputy Minister for Parliamentary Affairs Manuel Dias Loureiro Home Affairs Jorge Braga de Macedo Finance Luis Valente de Oliveira Planning and Territorial Administration Alvaro Laborinho Lúcio Justice Joao de Deus Pinheiro Foreign Affairs Arlindo Cunha Agriculture Luis Mira Amaral Industry and Energy Diamantino Gomes Durao Education Joaquim Ferreira do Amaral Public Works, Transport and Communications Arlindo de Carvalho Health José da Silva Peneda Labour and Social Security Fernando Faria de Oliveira Commerce and Tourism Carlos Borrego Environment and Natural Resources Eduardo de Azevedo Soares Sea
Portuguese Cabinet
EUROPE
SPAIN
Asturias strike
There was a general strike in the northern region of Asturias on Oct. 23.
The General Workers' Union (UGT) and the Workers' Commissions (CCOO) were seeking to put pressure on the government to negotiate a plan for regional reindustrialization in order to compensate for 40,000 projected job losses.
The strike had the support of the United Left (IU) and other smaller parties, while the PSOE, the PP and the Asturian regional government opposed it as being "not the best way to secure investment in Asturias" , according to a PSOE offical Txiki Benegas, speaking on Oct. 23.
Road and train transport was paralysed, and shopkeepers, students and agricultural workers were reported to have joined the region's mineworkers in the strike [see also p. 38446].
New Basque government
On Sept. 27 a new coalition administration was formed for the Basque region, under the leadership of José Antonio Ardanza of the Basque National Party (PNV) as President (lehendakari).
The three components of the coalition were the PNV with nine Cabinet seats, the Basque Socialist party (Partido Socialista de Euskadi allied with the PSOE and known as PSE-PSOE) with five seats, and the Basque Left (Euskadiko Ezkerra-EE) with one seat.
The PSE-PSOE had been persuaded to join the coalition after the Basque Solidarity party (Eusko Alkartasuna-EA) withdrew.
The EA had clashed with its two more moderate coalition partners over its policy of placing before all town councils a motion advocating immediate independence for the region.
[For January 1991 formation of government following October 1990 elections see p. 37968.]
Disbanding of PTE
On Oct. 27 the founder and leader of the Spanish Labour Party (PTE) Santiago Carrillo, 75, declared his party dissolved as it integrated with the Socialist Party (PSOE).
Carrillo was a former Spanish Communist Party (PCE) secretary general who had left to found the 4,000-member PTE in 1985.
He said that the integration with the PSOE was a response to events in eastern Europe and predicted that "before long, other communists will follow the same path" .
The future of the PCE, which was the main component of the United Left (IU) coalition, was similarly subject to debate as some trade unionists and party activists suggested it should be dissolved into the IU at the PCE congress in December, in order to improve the IU's electoral prospects.
Election of new CDS leadership
During an extraordinary congress of the Democratic and Social Centre (CDS) on Sept. 28-29 in Madrid Rafael Calvo Ortega and Antonio Fernández Teixidó were elected as president and secretary-general respectively after fierce debate had exposed divisions within the party.
The party's poor showing in the May local elections [see p. 38201]had prompted the resignation of CDS president and founder Adolfo Suárez.
The new leadership represented a further defeat for his faction within the party.
EUROPE
ITALY
General strike
A four-hour general strike was called by the three main labour federations on Oct. 22 in protest against proposed public spending cuts contained in the budget for 1992 (presented on Sept. 30 — see below).
All public services were suspended for four hours at the beginning of each shift.
The strike was called by the Italian General Confederation of Labour (CGIL)(with members drawn largely from the former Communist Party, the Democratic Party of the Left (PDS)), the Christian Democrat-led CISL and the Socialist/Social Democrat-led UIL.
Participation of over 80 per cent of the workforce was reported in some areas, in the first general strike in Italy since May 1989.
The 1992 budget planned to limit the public-sector deficit to 9 per cent of gross domestic product (GDP), and to save L60,000 million (about US$48,250,000) through a combination of spending cuts, fiscal measures and privatization.
The unions were opposed to proposals for increases in health service charges and restrictions on wage rises for public servants.
CGIL congress
At the annual congress of the CGIL in Rimini on Oct. 22-26 the federation's reformist secretary-general Bruno Trentin, fighting off challenges both from a current linked to the Socialist Party (PSI) and from the old-style communists, claimed that rather than "making demands for the working class" the CGIL would now be "the union of solidarity and of the rights of pensioners, the disabled, immigrants, women and the marginalized" .
There was also recognition of the need for various levels of wage-bargaining — rather than across-the-board deals — following work stoppages earlier in October by independently organized groups of train drivers (Oct. 15) and by air traffic controllers and national airline cabin staff (Oct. 18).
EUROPE
GREECE
Cabinet changes — Retreat on island sale
Miltiadis Evert, hitherto seen as a possible successor to Prime Minister Konstaninos Mitsotakis, was dismissed on Oct. 26 as Minister to the Prime Minister, a key post involving responsibility for intelligence and relations with the international media.
Evert, one of those within the ruling New Democracy party who had strongly criticized the proposed sale of islands [see below], was replaced on Oct. 31 by Sotiris Kouvelas, whose Agriculture portfolio went to Sotiris Hadjigakis.
Tourism Minister Yannis Kefaloyannis had resigned on Sept. 2 in protest against a proposal to remove restrictions on building hotels close to the shoreline.
Economy Minister Epthymios Christodoulou assumed the Tourism portfolio on a provisional basis.
Government retreat on sale of islands
A political storm which had developed in September around the proposed sale of 35 small islands in the Bay of Argolis and the Saronic Gulf abated after a government official, Byron Polydoras, on Oct. 14 assured journalists that the proposals had been that "certain rocky islets" should be leased — not sold — "on a long-term basis for tourist development" .
Polydoras had on Sept. 23 referred to government plans for "the sale of islands, on the open market or through land bonds" .
This gave rise to strong criticism not just from the opposition but also from within the ND party.
The islands, which were largely uninhabited and ranged in size from 20 to 80 hectares, were among the smallest of Greece's approximately 3,700 islands.
Killing of Turkish diplomat
A press attaché at the Turkish embassy in Athens, Cetin Gorgu, was shot dead by two men as he began his drive to work on Oct. 7 — the day before Mitsotakis was scheduled to visit Istanbul for the funeral of the Archbishop Dimitrios I [see this page].
The leftist 17 November group was reported to have claimed responsibility, and to have referred to Turkish policy towards Cyprus.
Riots at Athens Polytechnic
Riot police using tear gas and water cannons dislodged several dozen self-proclaimed "anarchists" who had set fire to administrative offices at Athens Polytechnic University on the night of Oct. 24-25.
There were 49 arrests and more than 20 people were injured.
Clashes between riot police and demonstrators had broken out during a student demonstration outside the Education Ministry on Oct. 24.
Some 1,500 high-school students had been protesting against the reintroduction of mid-term examinations and had also called for increased government spending on education.
According to some reports, the march was infiltrated by masked youths who stoned ground-floor windows of the Education Ministry and then moved through the city centre towards the Polytechnic, smashing shop windows and setting fire to two cars and a bus.
On Oct. 30 five high-school students arrested during the disturbances were sentenced to between five and eight years in prison.
EUROPE
TURKEY
Inconclusive general election
Following a general election held on Oct. 20 which provided no party with a clear majority, Suleyman Demirel, 67, leader of the True Path Party (DYP), began to negotiate the formation of a coalition government.
Prime Minister Mesut Yilmaz of the hitherto ruling Motherland Party (ANAP) resigned on Oct. 21, but continued as head of a caretaker administration.
Demirel was permitted 45 days in which to form a new administration, failing which President Turgut Özal would have the option of calling a fresh election.
In a turnout of over 80 per cent of the 29,900,000 registered voters, the DYP won 27 per cent and secured 178 seats in the 450-seat Grand National Assembly, while the ANAP won 24 per cent but saw its share of seats fall from 275 to 115.
The Social Democratic Populists (SHP — formerly referred to as the SDPP) under Erdal Inonu won 20 per cent and 88 seats, in alliance with the Kurdish nationalist People's Labour Party (HEP-Halkin Emek Partisi), whose members took 22 of these 88 seats.
The Islamic fundamentalist Welfare Party (RP-Refah Partisi — led by Necmettin Erbakan) entered parliament for the first time, with 62 seats, on an agenda which included withdrawal from the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and renunciation of efforts towards EC membership.
The Democratic Left Party (DSP) of former Prime Minister Bulent Ecevit won seven seats.
The main issues of the campaign had been the continuing high level of inflation (at 67 per cent in the 12 months to October), the autocratic style of President Özal and the situation in Kurdish-populated south-east Turkey.
Observers noted, however, few major policy differences between the ANAP and the DYP, which were both centre-right parties in favour of further economic liberalization.
Demirel had previously pledged to remove President Özal from power, but on Oct. 24, possibly influenced by the narrowness of his party's victory over the ANAP, he declared that Özal might continue as President — an office to which he had been elected for a seven-year term in October 1989.
Demirel had been Prime Minister six times in the period until 1980, and several of his administrations had been coalitions.
There was reported to be strong personal rivalry between Demirel and Özal, who had been Demirel's economic adviser in 1979-80 before acting as an adviser to the military regime of 1980-82 and founding the ANAP in 1983.
Operations against Turkish Kurdish bases in Iraq
On Oct. 11-13 and again on Oct. 25-27 Turkish forces mounted air and land attacks across the border into northern Iraq.
Their targets were ostensibly bases of the Kurdish Workers' Party (PKK) guerrilla movement which had been used for cross-border attacks.
When Iraqi Kurdish civilians were among those killed during the operations there were protests from the Iraqi government, the two Iraqi Kurdish organizations and also the German government.
PKK guerrillas based in Iraq were believed responsible for an Oct. 7 attack in which automatic weapons were used to kill 11 Turkish soldiers in the Cukurca district of Hakkari province.
On Oct. 11 eight retaliatory bombing raids were made against targets up to 11 km inside Iraq, and on Oct. 12 up to 3,000 Turkish troops crossed the border.
Three civilians of Iraqi nationality were reported killed and at least 35 wounded.
The ground troops of the multinational rapid reaction force created for the protection of the Kurds of northern Iraq [pp. 38450; 38357]had completed their withdrawal on Oct. 10.
The second three-day operation into Iraqi territory was in retaliation for an Oct. 24 attack, involving (according to the Turkish authorities) some 400-500 PKK guerrillas, in which 17 Turkish soldiers were killed.
On Oct. 25-27 Turkish air sorties against eight villages up to 30 km inside Iraq were reported to have killed 12 people.
On Oct. 12-15 the Iraqi government protested to the Turkish government about the incursions into Iraqi territory, and issued three protests to the UN between Oct. 13 and 29.
The Turkish army was said by the Iraqi government and by some media reports to have used napalm.
The German government on Oct. 14 condemned the operation as a violation of human rights, but did not endorse suggestions made by Gottfried Hennig, parliamentary state secretary for defence, that German military aid for Turkey might be embargoed.
The attacks also strained the emerging co-operation between the Turkish government and the two Iraqi Kurdish groups, especially the PUK led by Jalal Talabani.
Talabani, in Ankara on Oct. 26-28 for talks with Demirel and with European and United States representatives protested that both operations had been against civilian areas.
On Oct. 31 he said that he had asked PKK leader Abdullah Ocalan to call off the armed campaign, and offered himself as a mediator between the PKK and the Turkish government.
Attacks on army general and foreign nationals
A retired army general, Adnan Ersoz, was shot dead by three assailants in his Istanbul home on Oct. 13.
The left-wing Dev Sol group later announced that he had been "punished" for his participation in the 1980 military coup.
In Ankara on Oct. 28 two car bombs killed a US national employed at the Tuslog military base and seriously injured the Egyptian embassy's press attaché.
The Islamic Jihad group was said to have claimed responsibility.
New patriarch
On Oct. 22, following the death on Oct. 2 of the 77-year-old Archbishop of Constantinople Dimitrios I, a new archbishop, Archbishop Bartholomew, 51, Metropolitan of Chalcedon, was elected by the 15 members of the Holy Synod.
The Archbishop of Constantinople was traditionally "first among equals" of the five leaders of Orthodox Christianity in Europe and Asia, as well as leader of the approximately 3,000 Greek Orthodox Christians remaining in Turkey.
EUROPE
CYPRUS
The Turkish-Cypriot administration in the northern part of the island rejected as unacceptable a UN Security Council resolution of Oct. 11 which called for both sides to observe the existing framework for a settlement [as agreed in April 1989 — see p. 36711]which envisaged the establishment of a bizonal federal republic.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
IRAQ
UN resolution approving stricter arms inspection
The UN Security Council on Oct. 11 unanimously adopted Resolution 715 approving plans submitted by the UN Secretary-General, Javier Pérez de Cuéllar, and the Director-General of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), Hans Blix, aimed at eliminating Iraq's nuclear, chemical and biological weapons arsenal.
The resolution, of indefinite duration, authorized UN inspectors to move freely in Iraq, to install any surveillance equipment and to verify all imports and exports — one of the most intrusive inspection systems in UN history.
The UN sanctions committee was also directed to develop a rigorous mechanism to monitor foreign arms sales to Iraq.
On Oct. 11 Iraq's permanent representative at the UN, Abdul Amir al-Anbari described Resolution 715 as an affront to Iraqi sovereignty and hinted that its implementation by Iraq was unlikely.
Reports regarding Iraqi nuclear capabilities
Rolf Ekeus, the head of the joint UN and IAEA special commission on Iraq [see pp. 38165; 38211; 38451], maintained, following a visit to the country on Oct. 4-6, that Iraq "has had…and may continue to have a nuclear weapons development programme" .
Press accounts of the IAEA's report based on the preliminary findings of its sixth inspection team [see p. 38451]indicated that there was conclusive proof of an extensive Iraqi nuclear weapons programme, the hub of which was located at an installation in Al Atheer, about 60 km south of Baghdad.
IAEA inspectors were also reported to have discovered evidence of tests for a surface-to-surface missile capable of carrying nuclear warheads.
The report established that foreign companies had knowingly supplied Iraq with key equipment for its nuclear weapons programme, estimated to have cost US$10,000 million, and named an Iraqi official, Jaffar Dhia Jaffar, as the "mastermind" with "lead technical and administrative responsibility for [Iraq's]nuclear weapons programme" .
Claims that Iraq was engaged in the production of a hydrogen bomb, made by IAEA spokesmen at a press conference in New York on Oct. 8, were denied by the Iraqi Atomic Energy Agency on Oct. 10.
A suggestion by the IAEA that China had provided Iraq with equipment for uranium enrichment had been denied by the government on Oct. 8.
[See p. 38549 for allegations of Chinese nuclear technology links with Iran.]
The latest round of claims and counter-claims came amid conflicting reports about the precise extent and durability of Iraq's nuclear weapons programme.
On Oct. 1, the head of the sixth IAEA inspection team, David Kay, said in Bahrain that Iraq would have developed a nuclear weapon within 18 months had the Gulf war not intervened, and that it still possessed the technology to manufacture a nuclear weapon within five years.
UN officials quoted by the Independent of Oct. 5, however, cast doubt over Kay's assessment, saying he had received no formal training as a nuclear physicist.
Other reports quoted Kay as acknowledging in Vienna on Oct. 4 that questions remained about "the presence [in Iraq]of [sufficient]fissile material to initiate a nuclear explosion" .
Meanwhile Kay's decision, for which he was officially reprimanded by the UN [see p. 38451], to send material from Baghdad to the United States State Department rather than to UN officials, was defended by Blix in Vienna on Oct. 4 on the grounds that "improvisation is necessary in some situations" .
The seventh IAEA inspection team arrived in Baghdad on Oct. 11, led by Demetrios Perricos, who was quoted in Baghdad on Oct. 22 as saying that the government had, for the first time, admitted research into nuclear weapons.
Resumption of other inspections
The second biological weapons inspection team [see pp. 38164; 38361; 38407; 38451]which completed its mission on Oct. 3, found no evidence of an Iraqi germ warfare programme.
A fifth chemical weapons inspection team [see pp. 38164; 38308; 38361; 38451]arrived on Oct. 6 amid reports that the UN was considering the government's offer made in June [see p. 38307]to destroy its own chemical weapons stocks.
A team of ballistic missiles experts headed by Douglas Englund, who had earlier been forced to abandon their mission [see p. 38451], arrived on Oct. 1 following the government's approval of helicopter flights, and on Oct. 8 Englund announced that UN inspectors had completed the destruction of Iraq's first "super-gun" [see pp. 37332; 37390-91; 37471; 38361]as part of a programme to supervise the demolition of 28 declared Iraqi missile launch sites.
An Iraqi protest addressed to the UN alleging that Israeli warplanes had overflown Iraq on Oct. 4 using UN helicopters as cover, was categorically rejected by Pérez de Cuéllar on Oct. 16.
Reports on Oct. 9 indicated, however, that the US had warned Israel not to jeopardize the work of UN inspectors.
Approval of oil sales mechanism
A framework allowing Iraq to pump and sell oil under strict controls [see p. 38406]was approved by the UN sanctions committee on Oct. 15, but rejected on Oct. 24 by the Iraqi Oil Minister Usamah Abd al-Razzaq Hummadi al-Hithi, who said that it was a scheme aimed at unseating the government and that "it's not going to happen" .
In August the UN Security Council had authorized the sale of Iraqi oil worth US$1,600 million over six months to pay for urgently needed food and medicines [see p. 38452].
The latest plan provided for three oil experts, based at UN headquarters in New York 24 hours a day, to scrutinise oil contracts.
It also authorized UN agents to monitor the main pipeline designated to transport oil from northern Iraq to Turkey.
There was growing concern that Iraq's continued refusal to accept UN resolutions governing oil sales would aggravate conditions ensuing from chronic food and medical shortages.
In its monthly report released on Oct. 16, the UN Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) had also warned that Iraq faced "imminent famine" [see pp. 38308; 38361; 38406].
An international team of academics which had recently returned from Iraq reported on Oct. 22 that the death rate of Iraqi children under five had almost quadrupled since the imposition of sanctions [see also p. 38452].
Measures aimed at assisting Iraq to obtain medical supplies were agreed by Arab Health Ministers meeting in Tunis on Oct. 6.
A spokesman for the UN Compensation Fund [see pp. 38211; 38406]said on Oct. 29 that the Fund's governing body at a recent meeting in Geneva had decided to ask Iraq to pay compensation to an estimated 2,000,000 people who had incurred losses as result of the Gulf war.
Intensification of fighting in Kurdistan
Fighting between government troops and Kurdish pesh mergas (guerrillas) intensified in northern Iraq.
Kurdish guerrillas reportedly shot dead 60 unarmed Iraqi soldiers on Oct. 7 following clashes around Sulaimaniya.
Retaliatory attacks by government troops prompted the head of the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan (PUK), Jalal Talabani, to appeal to the West for assistance to counter Iraqi "repression" .
A ceasefire agreement between Kurdish and Iraqi military leaders was announced on Oct. 8, but on Oct. 9 government forces shelled Sulaimaniya and the Kurdish towns of Kifri, Kalar and Maydan, reportedly killing hundreds of civilians.
On Oct. 30 Talabani warned that the government planned an economic blockade against parts of Kurdistan, and claimed that civil services were being withdrawn in a move tantamount to "a declaration of economic war" .
Reports continued of disagreements between Kurdish leaders [see pp. 38308; 38361; 38407]after the leader of the Kurdish Democratic Party (KDP), Masoud Barzani, challenged his political rivals on Oct. 29 to an electoral test to decide whether to accept the government's autonomy plan or resort to armed struggle.
Simultaneous reports indicated that the PUK was in favour of a military option to secure a more ambitious autonomy settlement.
Appointment of RCC members — Iranian allegation of coup attempt
Prime Minister Muhammad Hamzah al-Zubaydi, Interior Minister Ali Hasan al-Majid and the head of the Ba'ath Party secretariat, Mizban Khader Hadi, were appointed members of the Revolutionary Command Council (RCC) on Oct. 5 following Ba'ath Party elections in September [see also p. 38452].
The Iranian news agency IRNA reported on Oct. 3 that former Prime Minister Sa'adoun Hammadi [for whose dismissal in September see p. 38452]had been involved in an attempted coup in September against President Saddam Hussein after which 76 army officers had been executed.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
KUWAIT
Amir's visits to Washington, London and Paris
Visiting Washington on Oct. 1 the Amir of Kuwait Shaikh Jabir Ahmed al-Jabir al Sabah expressed his gratitude to United States President George Bush and to the US people for withstanding "evil tendencies — motivated by false ambitions, mad greed and deep hatred —[which]exploded at one inauspicious moment" .
In London and Paris on Oct. 2-4, he discussed defence pacts which would mirror the agreement signed by Kuwait and the USA in September [see p. 38455].
The two pacts under discussion with the United Kingdom and France concerned training, joint military exercises and military supplies; unlike the agreement with the USA they would not allow for the stockpiling of military equipment in Kuwait.
In meetings with UK Prime Minister John Major and French President Mitterrand Sheikh al Sabah also discussed financial matters and raised the question of the 2,242 Kuwaiti citizens said to be still held by Iraq.
Repatriations
It was reported by the Iraqi media that 447 Iraqi, Palestinian and Jordanian deportees had arrived in Basra on Oct. 8-9 "after being released from Kuwaiti prisons" .
On Oct. 11 the Kuwait government began to allow "scores" of the approximately 12,000 refugees at Abdali camp in the demilitarized zone on the Kuwaiti-Iraqi border to enter Kuwait, having verified that they were previous residents and had family in Kuwait.
On Oct. 14, according to Radio Kuwait, 118 people returned to Kuwait from Iraq, including 103 members of Kuwaiti families who were in Iraq "before Kuwait's liberation" and who "have been released as part of the family reunion programme" .
Announcement of syndicated loan
On Oct. 24 a list was published of 24 banks which had agreed to participate in the first level of syndication of a US$5,000 million loan to the Kuwaiti government.
This was the first major loan contracted by Kuwait and followed a decision taken in July to fund post-war reconstruction through international borrowing rather than through the sale of Kuwaiti assets abroad.
The funds thus obtained, which would be repayable over a five-year period, represented only about 15 per cent of the estimated cost of making good damage to infrastructure [see p. 38362]; most reconstruction funding was expected to come from oil revenues.
Participating banks were from Canada, France, Germany, Japan, Switzerland, the USA and other Arab countries.
The anxieties of some UK companies over the reluctance of UK banks to participate at this stage were assuaged with the early November announcement of a meduium-term facility worth about £700 million ($190 million) to be extended to Kuwait by the UK government.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
IRAN
Reports of clashes in Tehran
In the first week of October opposition groups reported widespread anti-government protests in Tehran following strikes which shut petrol stations.
Similar demonstrations in east Tehran, Estahbanat (Fars province) and elsewhere on Oct. 27-28 were reported by the monarchist radio station Kaviyani Banner of Iran; in Tehran confrontations between the Revolutionary Guards and demonstrators protesting against rising utilities costs and fuel shortages were said to have become violent.
According to a report in the Guardian of Oct. 12 up to 70 theological students and professors had recently been arrested in the city of Qom (120 km south of Tehran and a centre of Shia studies).
They had been demonstrating against calls by other students for Iran's spiritual leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei to be promoted to the rank of Grand Ayatollah.
Observers suggested that the schism was "another front in the power struggle between the moderate pro-President Rafsanjani pragmatists and the hardliners supporting Khamenei" .
Executions
There were two sets of executions of those convicted of drug trafficking and armed banditry in the north-east city of Mashad in early October and on Oct. 14, and in Zahedan on Oct. 1.
A total of 65 Iranians and Afghans, including four women, were hanged.
Nuclear co-operation with China
As the Chinese President Yang Shangkun visited Tehran and Esfahan in central Iran on Oct. 30-Nov. 2, unnamed officials in the US administration were quoted in the Washington Post of Oct. 31 as claiming that Iran was developing a nuclear weapon using calutron equipment — capable of producing highly enriched uranium — purchased from China.
China had undertaken in June 1990 to supply Iran with a "micronuclear reactor" to be installed at Esfahan, according to the Washington Post.
United States officials claimed that most of the nuclear-related technology that Iran was seeking to obtain from China, Brazil and elsewhere could be used equally for nuclear weapons or civilian uses.
The report also drew attention to a recent interview given by a Vice-President, Seyed Ataollah Mohajerani, to the Iranian news agency IRNA in which he had said "because the enemy has nuclear facilities, the Moslem states too should be equipped with the same capacity" .
Both the Iranian and the Chinese governments denied that their co-operation over nuclear technology was for the development of a nuclear weapon.
On Oct. 31 a Chinese Foreign Ministry representative said that all nuclear co-operation between China and other countries was for peaceful purposes and was open to international inspection.
President Ali Akbar Rafsanjani on the same day dismissed the reports as "mendacious propaganda and blackmail" , saying: "We must make America understand that today one cannot use the deceitful weapon of disarmament to threaten other countries and to interfere in their affairs." 
Release of US prisoner
On Oct. 7 the Iranian government released Jon Pattis, 54, an engineer who had been sentenced to 10 years on spying charges in 1987.
Pattis, an employee of a US engineering company, had worked at Iran's main satellite ground station at Assadabad.
It was claimed that he had confessed to spying for the US Central Intelligence Agency, but the US authorities had always denied that he had any official connections.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
ISRAEL
Relations with USA — Internal developments
Events in October raised tension in Israel and the occupied territories and complicated Israel's relations with the United States in the run-up to the Middle East peace conference in Madrid [see pp. 38513-14].
Settlement policy
Prime Minister Itzhak Shamir on Oct. 7 bitterly condemned the decision by the US Congress to delay US$10,000 million in loan guarantees for 120 days [see p. 38452]saying the action struck at "the deepest foundations of Jewish and Zionist existence" .
He was also said to have been angered by a report by the US Export/Import Bank which criticized the structure of the Israeli economy and raised doubts about its ability to repay the debts it intended to take on to help Soviet immigrants.
US President Bush, in addition to urging Congress to delay the loan guarantees, had also asked Israel to suspend the building of settlements in the occupied territories for the duration of the peace process, but Israel had refused to give such a commitment.
On Oct. 4 settlers on the Golan Heights announced that they intended to convert an army post into a settlement for Soviet Jewish immigrants within two weeks.
In East Jerusalem on Oct. 9 settlers, accompanied by three MPs from the right-wing Tehiya Party and one from the ruling Likud party, seized eight houses in the Arab neighbourhood of Silwan, claiming that they had been legally purchased by a state-owned company controlled by the Housing Minister, Ariel Sharon.
Sharon said: "This is not a settlement or an invasion, it is the right of Jews to live in Jewish homes legally rented to them in Jerusalem, the capital of Israel." 
Following negotiations with the police most of the settlers left Silwan, abandoning all but one of the houses which they said belonged to a Jewish family evicted during riots in 1930.
A second house was sealed against its current Arab occupiers, pending a decision on the entire settlers case by the Attorney General.
A US State Department spokeswoman said that "extremists" were trying to frustrate the efforts of the USA to convene a peace conference.
On Oct. 16 it was announced that work had begun to erect 40 mobile homes at Givat Hamatos in southern Jerusalem.
Reconnaissance flight over Iraq
On Oct. 4 four Israeli F-15 fighters carried out a reconnaissance flight over a section of western Iraq where additional SCUD missiles and launchers had been discovered after the Gulf war.
The planes also flew over Syria, Saudi Arabia, Lebanon and Jordan.
Iraq officially protested to the UN, and the USA sent a private "strongly worded" protest to Israel, warning that a military confrontation with Iraq could interfere with UN attempts to disarm the country, as well as wreck the chances of convening a peace conference.
The Defence Minister, Moshe Arens, said: "Israel will continue to do what it has done in the past.
It will take the measures necessary to exercise its legitimate right of self-defence."
Security incidents
In Tel Aviv on Oct. 11 a Palestinian drove a stolen van into a group of soldiers waiting at a road junction, killing two and wounding 11 others.
He claimed that he was avenging the killing of 17 Arabs in October 1990 on the Temple Mount in Jerusalem [see pp. 37759-60].
Two Israeli settlers from the West Bank were killed and five wounded on Oct. 28 during an attack near Ariel on a bus carrying them to a demonstration against trading land for peace at the Middle East peace conference.
Responsibility for the attack was claimed both by "Hezbollah-Palestine" , an offshoot of Hamas, a fundamentalist Palestinian group, and by the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine.
Imprisonment of peace activist — Sentencing of Hamas founder
Abie Nathan, peace campaigner and owner of the Voice of Peace radio station, was imprisoned for 18 months on Oct. 6 for meeting with PLO chairman Yassir Arafat in July in defiance of a law forbidding contacts with the PLO.
Nathan had spent 122 days in prison in 1990 for meeting PLO officials, and had subsequently staged a 40-day hunger strike in protest against the law.
An Israeli military court in Gaza on Oct. 16 sentenced Sheikh Ahmed Yassin, the founder of Hamas, to life imprisonment plus 15 years for ordering the killing of Palestinians suspected of co-operating with the Israeli authorities.
Yassin, arrested in May 1989, had confessed to founding and directing a hostile organization, as well as to homicide, incitement and the possession of firearms.
New Arab Party
Members of the Committee of Arab Local Councils announced on Oct. 2 that they would form a political party to contest the next parliamentary elections.
Many of the founders were formerly associated with the Hadash (Democratic Front for Peace and Equality) Party.
Controls on export of missile technology — nuclear allegations
The Defence Ministry announced on Oct. 3 that Israel had decided to "adopt the rules" of the Missile Technology Control Regime (MTCR), an international convention introduced in 1987 to control the spread of Western missile technology and hardware to the Third World.
The Ha'aretz newspaper reported that Israel had accepted the MTCR under pressure from the USA, which had threatened to close US suppliers to Israel's military industry.
Israeli officials denied any knowledge of such pressure.
The USA had been concerned over Israeli arms dealing with South Africa, China and a number of Latin American countries.
The Washington Post of Oct. 28 reported that US intelligence agencies had recently discovered that Israel had exported key ballistic missile components to South Africa, but that President Bush had secretly decided to waive the sanctions against Israel required under the 1990 Appropriations Bill.
Officials said that the decision was in part motivated by concern that punishing Israel would undermine Israel's position at the forthcoming Middle East peace conference, and aggravate further US-Israeli relations.
Israel's decision to sign the MTCR together with an undertaking to implement a 1987 decision not to renew military contacts with South Africa was also thought to have affected Bush's decision.
Controversy over Israel's defence capabilities continued with the publication on Oct. 20 of The Samson Option by a US investigative journalist, Seymour Hersh.
He alleged that Israel possessed more than 300 nuclear weapons, some of them targeted not only at Arab oil fields and cities but also against southern cities of the Soviet Union.
Israel had never acknowledged that it possessed nuclear weapons.
Hersh's book attracted libel suits in the UK over its claims that the UK newspaper proprietor Robert Maxwell had close links with the Israeli intelligence agency Mossad and that he, together with a member of his Daily Mirror newspaper staff, had helped Mossad to track down Mordechai Vanunu, a nuclear technician who leaked details of Israel's nuclear programme and had been imprisoned in Israel since 1986 [see p. 35922].
Foreign relations
Israel and the Soviet Union restored diplomatic relations on Oct. 18, broken since the 1967 Middle East war.
Israel had insisted that the Soviet Union would have to restore ties as a condition for Israel's participation in the US-Soviet sponsored Middle East peace conference.
A joint economic commission was established to build on the growing links between the two countries.
President Chaim Herzog became the first Israeli head of state to visit Czechoslovakia on Oct. 13-20.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
LEBANON
Negotiations on and release of hostages
The pro-Iranian Islamic Jihad for the Liberation of Palestine released United States hostage Jesse Turner to Syrian security officers in Beirut on Oct. 21, after the freeing of one Arab prisoner from Israel and of 14 held by the Israeli-backed South Lebanese Army (SLA) from the al-Khiam prison in the southern Lebanon "security zone" .
The Oct. 21 releases formed part of a comprehensive process of exchange of Western hostages, Arabs held by Israel and its SLA allies, and Israelis missing in Lebanon, which was being negotiated by the UN.
The UN office in Beirut had made an unprecedented announcement on Oct. 20 that a US hostage was to be released within 24 hours, following talks between the UN Secretary-General's special envoy, Giandomenico Picco, and a representative of the hostage takers.
Israeli negotiators had gained proof on Oct. 19 of the death of a soldier, Yossi Fink, missing in Lebanon since 1986.
[For release of British hostage Jackie Mann in September see p. 38454; for kidnapping of Turner, a lecturer at Beirut University, on Jan. 24, 1987, see p. 35024.]
Violence in Southern Lebanon
Israel was reported to have stepped up military activity in the "security zone" in early October, including the shelling of villages and the overflight of Lebanese territory by the Israeli airforce.
The Lebanese army clashed with the SLA at the villages of Mlikh, Louwaizeh and Jarjoun just outside the "security zone" on Oct. 16.
There were no reported casualties.
On Oct. 21 Israeli F-16 jets attacked a Hezbollah base in Jibchit and artillery opened fire on villages just north of the "security zone" .
The Israeli action was in retaliation for a bomb attack, claimed by Hezbollah, which killed three soldiers on patrol in the Nabatiyeh area on Oct. 20.
Three Israeli soldiers were killed and six were wounded in a further bomb attack and gun battle near Aramta on Oct. 29.
Hezbollah claimed responsibility for the attack, which took place on the eve of the opening of the Middle East peace conference in Madrid [see p. 38513].
Two Israeli helicopters later attacked refugee camps near Rashideiyeh, killing one person and wounding three, according to local police.
In a separate incident Israeli troops patrolling their side of the border near Zarit were attacked by missiles from inside Lebanon.
Fire was returned and two Arabs were killed.
The Israeli army denied claims by Islamic Jihad that three of their members flying hang gliders to attack Israel were shot down on Oct. 29 in southern Lebanon.
The US embassy in Beirut was damaged by a rocket-propelled grenade on Oct. 29.
There were no casualties.
On Oct. 31 Israeli troops and the SLA shelled a number of villages east of Sidon, in the area of Nabatiyeh and along the Iqlim el Toufah ridge, which they claimed were Hezbollah bases.
The Israeli airforce also staged mock raids on two Palestinian refugee camps east of Sidon and Iqlim el Toufah.
Lebanese-Syrian Supreme Council — Hrawi's visit to France
President Elias Hrawi, Prime Minister Umar Karami and the president of the National Assembly, Hussain al-Hussaini, visited Damascus on Oct. 17 to attend the first session of the Lebanese-Syrian Supreme Council.
The council, co-chaired by Hrawi and Syrian President Hafez al-Assad, was set up under the "treaty of brotherhood, co-operation and co-ordination" in May [see p. 38214].
This first session dealt mainly with co-operation between the two countries at the forthcoming Middle East peace conference.
Hrawi visited France on Oct. 21-22 and held talks with President Mitterrand on French military and financial aid for the reconstruction of the Lebanon.
The visit brought to an end a period of tension in Franco-Lebanese relations, and Mitterrand accepted an invitation to visit Beirut.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
ALGERIA
New electoral laws
On Oct. 13 the National Assembly approved new electoral laws based on draft legislation presented by the non-party government of Prime Minister Sid-Ahmed Ghozali.
Deputies of the ruling National Liberation Front (FLN), who occupied all of the 423 seats in the Assembly, had subjected the government's draft legislation to delays and major amendments.
On Sept. 3 written responses to the government's proposed changes to the electoral law had been invited from eight political parties, including the fundamentalist Islamic Salvation Front (FIS).
FLN deputies in the National Assembly, after various administrative delays, approved an amended version of the legislation by 152 votes to 71, with 30 abstentions.
On the morning of the vote members of the Socialist Forces Front (FFS) held a sit-in outside the Assembly, claiming that it was an unrepresentative body.
The legislation as amended set the number of (single-member) parliamentary constituencies at 430, rather than 377 as the government had proposed.
There were currently 295 constituencies, as demarcated in 1987, returning 423 deputies; legislation passed in April to convert these to 542 single-member constituencies [see p. 38169]had never been implemented.
On Oct. 18 Ghozali emphasized that at least it was now accepted that there should be some "simple and public criteria…the rules of the game" in the demarcation of constituencies.
Henceforward, population would be the determining factor (although the number of voters in a constituency still varied according to population density, from 80,000 people per constituency in the larger towns to 25,000 in the extreme south).
The FLN deputies did cede some ground to government recommendations on independent candidates, who henceforward would need to secure 300 instead of 500 signatures in support of their candidacy.
There was also to be stricter supervision of polling stations, with opposition party representatives present at all stages of voting and ballot-counting.
The minimum age for parliamentary candidates was lowered from 35 to 28 (instead of 25, as advocated by the government).
With regard to husbands voting as proxy for their wives, the government had wanted at least the wife's written authorization to be necessary, but the deputies voted to retain the existing stipulation that the proxy voter must present the family registration book.
Ghozali's immediate reaction to the amendments had been to threaten to ask for a second reading of the bill.
By Oct. 14 he had resigned himself to submitting merely the question of proxy voting by husbands to the seven-member Constitutional Council set up in 1989.
On Oct. 28 the Council declared this clause unconstitutional and therefore null and void.
Election date
On Oct. 15 President Chadli Benjedid announced that the general election postponed since June [see p. 38312]would be held on Dec. 26, with a second round of voting on Jan. 16, 1992, to decide constituencies in which there was no outright winner.
In his speech Benjedid spoke of the role of woman as "mother, wife, daughter and comrade in arms" and said that Islam "was, and still is, the strongest factor of unification and cohesion" and should not become a source of contention.
In numerous communiqués issued on Oct. 16, many of Algeria's over 40 opposition parties expressed dissatisfaction with the electoral laws as passed, but indicated that they would participate in the December election.
By early November it was still unclear whether the FIS would participate.
A demonstration in Algiers on Oct. 24 organized by the Rally for Culture and Democracy (RCD — led by Said Saadi) was attended by tens of thousands of people.
Saadi spoke of the FLN as a "factory of misery" , blaming it for the "alarming social problems" which, he said, had contributed to the rise of the fundamentalist movement.
Cabinet changes
Eight Cabinet changes were made on Oct. 16.
Among the changes Ghozali, in addition to his duties as Prime Minister, was given the Economy portfolio, taking over from Hocine Benissad, an economist who was an associate of FFS secretary-general Hocine Ait Ahmed.
Maj.-Gen.
Larbi Belkheir, 54, a close associate of President Chadli and formerly secretary-general of the President's office, became Minister of the Interior, replacing Abdellatif Rahal.
Nafissa Lalliam was replaced as Health Minister by Mohammed Salah Mentouri, who also took over the Social Affairs portfolio but another woman, Anissa Benameur entered the Cabinet as Minister for Vocational Training and Employment, replacing Mohammed Bonmahrat.
FIS conference
At a national conference on Oct. 3, FIS representatives reiterated their commitment to the establishment of an Islamic state and their support for imprisoned leaders Abassi Madani and Ali Belhadj [For July meeting of FIS consultative council see p. 38364].
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
TUNISIA
Cabinet reshuffle
In a Cabinet reshuffle on Oct. 10 the Interior Minister, Abdullah Kallal, became in addition Minister of State, making him second in rank only to Prime Minister Hamed Karoui.
A former general and Interior Minister since February [see p. 38026]Kallal was responsible for implementing official policy towards the fundamentalist movement.
Habib Boulares was replaced as Minister of Defence by Abdelaziz Ben Dhia, a lawyer and long-serving deputy of the ruling Constitutional Democratic Rally (RCD).
Boulares was elected National Assembly Speaker on Oct. 22.
Two other changes were made to the 24-member Cabinet: Mongi Bousnina replaced Moncer Rouissi at the Ministry of Culture, and Salah Jebali was appointed to head a newly-created Ministry of Infrastructure and Land Management.
Boycott of by-elections
The six legal opposition parties declined a government invitation to contest nine parliamentary seats unopposed by the ruling RCD.
RCD candidates therefore stood and were returned for all nine constituencies in the Oct. 13 by-elections, despite the fact that these seats had been vacated specifically to induce the opposition to end the ruling party's monopoly of all 141 National Assembly seats.
Percentages of the electorate voting were reported to range from 69 per cent in the two Tunis constituencies involved to 92 per cent in the coastal town of Nabeul.
The largest opposition party, the Movement of Democratic Socialists (MDS) led by Mohammed Moada, had been the first to opt for a boycott, on the grounds that the elections represented only a limited pluralist opening as long as parliament and the media continued under RCD control.
In recent months the government had offered subsidies and television air-time to the legalized opposition parties [for boycott of June 1990 local elections see p. 37550].
Executions of Nahda members
The execution on Oct. 9 of three members of the Islamic fundamentalist Nahda movement, along with two child murderers, represented a significant hardening of official policy towards the movement.
The three had been sentenced in June for an attack in February on RCD offices in which an elderly security guard was killed [see pp. 38026; 38122].
It had been widely expected that President Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali, whose distaste for capital punishment for politically motivated crimes had been well publicized, would commute the death sentences.
Those against five other people were commuted on Oct. 9 to life imprisonment.
All other death sentences (with the exception of one other convicted murderer) had been commuted since Ben Ali had taken office in 1987.
Tunisian radio reported on Oct. 3 that Prime Minister Hamed Karoui had told a "large popular meeting" in Tunis that the Nahda movement "[did]not differ from the rest of the terrorist gangs in European democratic countries" ; it had since 1986 opposed the democratic process and now sought "to exploit the effects of the Gulf crisis on the tourism sector and disrupt development work" .
Accusations of assassination plot
Kallal had on Sept. 28 revealed further details of what was claimed to be a longstanding fundamentalist conspiracy to seize power [see pp. 38215; 38456].
He said that Nahda activists had planned to assassinate Ben Ali and a number of key ministers.
In a Sept. 30 statement from exile, Nahda leader Rachid Ghannouchi strongly denied the allegations.
According to Kallal, Nahda had an intelligence section designed to infiltrate the organs of the state, and an armed and trained strike force.
He later also revealed that it had been planned to install a new government including prominent political exiles Mohammed Mzali and Ahmed Ben Salah.
Protests to other governments
The activities of the Nahda movement had in September severely strained relations with Algeria, as the government claimed that Tunisian fundamentalists were allowed to operate from bases in Algeria.
On Oct. 9 the Algerian Prime Minister Sid-Ahmed Ghozali visited Tunisia in what was understood to be an attempt to improve relations.
On Oct. 15 the Tunisian ambassador to Sudan was recalled and the Sudanese government publicly accused by the RCD's political bureau of breaking numerous undertakings to withdraw assistance from Tunisian fundamentalists.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
AMU
On Oct. 22 a Tunisian, Mohammed Amamou, 58, was confirmed as Secretary-General of the Arab Maghreb Union, and as such attended the Middle East peace conference.
On Oct. 26-27 the AMU foreign ministers met in Algiers with their counterparts from the western Mediterranean countries of Europe (Portugal, Spain, France and Italy), with Malta as an observer.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
JORDAN
On Oct. 17 sources in Saudi Arabia said that it had been decided to renew economic relations with Jordan which had been suspended since the Gulf War.
The closure of a pipeline supplying Jordan with 15 per cent of its crude oil needs had been one of the most important economic sanctions imposed against Jordan.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
YEMEN
Up to nine people were killed in violent disturbances in the capital, San'aa, on Oct. 19; the next day there were a number of arrests at a demonstration to protest about the authorities' failure to find the killers of opposition figure and rural development official Hassan Huraibi, who had been murdered on Sept. 10.
INTERNATIONAL
COMMONWEALTH
Heads of government meeting
The 28th biennial Commonwealth heads of government meeting (CHOGM) took place in Harare, Zimbabwe, on Oct. 16-22, attended by representatives of 47 of the Commonwealth's 50 member states.
There was none of the rancour which had marked the 1989 conference [see pp. 36963-64], and many commentators praised the organization's success in redefining its role, as a champion of good government and human rights.
The United Kingdom, which at the 1989 conference in Malaysia had been isolated because of its opposition to a declaration calling for an intensification of sanctions against South Africa, took a lead in Harare on several issues.
The Prime Minister, John Major, was reported to have made it clear that the Commonwealth was still a pillar of British foreign policy, together with the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and the European Communities, whereas his predecessor, Margaret Thatcher, had repeatedly clashed with other Commonwealth leaders.
Harare Commonwealth Declaration
The Harare Commonwealth Declaration was adopted on Oct. 20 after the weekend retreat midway through the conference (a now traditional feature of the CHOGM), which the leaders spent at the Victoria Falls.
It represented the views of the heads of government with regard to the discussions of a 10-country "High Level Appraisal Group" , appointed to make recommendations on the organization's future role and chaired by the Malaysian Prime Minister.
The group had met on Oct. 15 and had drawn up a Report on the Commonwealth in the 1990s — a synthesis of an initial Malaysian document and of a more forceful British-drafted version proposing new Commonwealth policies favouring the promotion of democracy and human rights, and stressing the need for an independent judiciary.
In the Declaration all, including the poorer Commonwealth countries whose economic and social problems might inhibit their ability to meet fully the criteria for democracy which the Declaration laid down, had committed themselves to promote democracy, as well as "the rule of law and the independence of the judiciary and a just and honest government" .
The heads of government also promised to foster equality for women, and universal access to education.
At the UK's insistence, the Declaration emphasized the need for "sound economic management" and recognition of "the central role of the market economy" .
The Commonwealth as a whole committed itself to the promotion of sustainable development and alleviation of poverty, with the more prosperous Commonwealth members promising "an adequate flow of resources" to alleviate the debt burdens of the most needy.
The Declaration also talked of the need for sound economic management, the free flow of trade and the active participation of "a thriving private sector" .
It called for "effective population policies and programmes" and spoke of the need to "entrench the practices of democracy to support good governance" .
It did not include a threat to cut off aid to governments guilty of human rights violations, although the UK reportedly had made such a threat outside the conference.
UK and other debt cancellations
Major announced on Oct. 17 that the UK was to write off unilaterally some US$850,000,000 in debts owed by the poorest countries — two-thirds of the debt owed by some 20 countries.
He called on other wealthy countries to follow suit; Canada announced shortly afterwards that it would follow the British lead, and it was understood that Australia was considering similar action.
The UK, Major said, had decided to take a lead in the light of resistance from the "Paris Club" of industrialized creditor countries, mainly the United States, to joint action on the cancellation of debts totalling some $1,300 million.
The UK measures applied to countries implementing International Monetary Fund (IMF) economic reform programmes.
[For "Trinidad Terms" on debt relief — the product of a meeting of Commonwealth finance ministers in September 1990 — see p. 37892 and below.]
Some Commonwealth leaders were reported to be resentful of suggestions that aid be tied to democratic practices.
Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamed of Malaysia denounced such linkage as "blackmail" and the leaders of India, Kenya and Ghana were also reported to oppose it.
President Robert Mugabe of Zimbabwe said that it would be "unfortunate" if donors tied aid to human rights, and that the policies of developing countries could not be bought.
Echoing a view widespread among the developing country members, Mugabe said that while democracy must be their "pervading principle" , it should not become a "sacrosanct" condition of aid.
Communiqué's recommendations on ending sanctions against South Africa
The Commonwealth leaders had, with difficulty, produced a common position on the lifting of sanctions against South Africa by the time the final communiqué came to be agreed on Oct. 21.
Welcoming "the important changes" in South Africa in the previous 20 months, they agreed unanimously to lift some sanctions immediately.
These included consular and visa restrictions, cultural, academic and scientific boycotts, and bans on tourist promotion and direct air links.
It was agreed that the UN arms embargo should stay in force until a democratic post-apartheid government was established.
The UK, however, continued to distance itself from its Commonwealth partners on financial and trading and investment sanctions, stressing that it was dissatisfied with the pace at which its partners intended to lift them.
On lifting financial sanctions, including allowing access to IMF and World Bank assistance, the communiqué said that such sanctions should remain until either a new democratic constitution had been agreed or until there was agreement to lift them "at South Africa's all-party conference or by an interim government" .
Trade sanctions should be lifted once transitional arrangements had been agreed enabling all parties in South Africa to participate in negotiations.
Nelson Mandela, president of the African National Congress, was in Harare as an observer at Mugabe's invitation, and was said at his meetings with Commonwealth leaders outside the main conference, to have advocated a speedier progress towards the lifting of sanctions than previously.
Sam Nujoma, President of Namibia, which became a Commonwealth member at independence in March 1990, said that he hoped that Mandela would attend the next CHOGM, in 1993, "as head of state of a non-racial, democratic South Africa" .
Secretary-General's mission to Pretoria
The conference authorized the Commonwealth Secretary-General, Chief Emeka Anyaoku, to visit South Africa immediately after the summit; he arrived in South Africa on Oct. 30 on a five-day visit, the first by a Commonwealth Secretary-General for almost three decades.
His task was to be to assess whether the Commonwealth could assist with constitutional negotiations.
He was also authorized to urge the South African government to end violence "with the utmost urgency" .
Finance Ministers' meeting
Meeting in Kuala Lumpur on Oct. 9-10, Commonwealth Finance Ministers issued a strong call for rapid action by the richer countries on relief to poor debtor countries, urging early agreement on the "Trinidad Terms" advocated by Major in 1990 when he was Chancellor of the Exchequer.
Mahathir, opening the meeting, denounced the imposition of democratic or human rights conditions, saying that this could have the effect of hurting people whom aid was intended to help.
Many ministers were said to support the view that exceptional aid to Poland and Egypt, effectively writing off half their debt, should be extended to other countries.
It appeared that the UK and other industrialized Commonwealth countries had prevented the inclusion of wording in the Kuala Lumpur statement which would have called for yet more radical measures on debt relief.
INTERNATIONAL
DISARMAMENT
Soviet response to US offer
In a move calculated to match United States arms-control initiatives announced by President Bush in September [see pp. 38457-58]and to promote "a nuclear-free world" , Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev unveiled plans in a nationally televised broadcast on Oct. 5 for bilateral elimination or withdrawal of all land- and sea-based short-range tactical nuclear weapons.
He also promised unilaterally to reduce Soviet strategic nuclear warheads to 5,000, rather than to 6,000 as required under the Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty (START)[see pp. 38320-21]; challenged the USA to open negotiations to effect deeper cuts, i.e. a further 50 per cent reduction, in the strategic nuclear arsenal of both countries; and called on the USA to join the Soviet Union in imposing a ban on nuclear testing for at least a year and to renounce the "no first use" nuclear strategy.
In a gesture reportedly designed to allay US fears about the fate of nuclear warheads stationed in the Soviet republics, Gorbachev announced that all Soviet nuclear forces would be brought under a single command.
Gorbachev's offer on tactical weapons would involve scrapping nuclear land-mines and artillery shells, as well as tactical missile warheads, and removing all tactical nuclear weapons from surface ships, submarines and naval aircraft.
He also offered to destroy, or to have placed in storage, nuclear rockets assigned to anti-aircraft troops.
Urging the US to employ bolder initiatives, Gorbachev proposed the destruction, instead of the withdrawal or storage, of all US sea-based tactical nuclear weapons, and recommended the removal of all US front-line aviation-based nuclear tactical weapons — a category not included in Bush's plans.
Indicating continued reluctance to abandon Soviet superiority in land-based strategic missiles [see pp. 37223; 38255; 38457], Gorbachev offered to halt, rather than ban, the development of a small-dimension mobile inter-continental ballistic missile (ICBM) and to freeze the number of launching sites for rail-based multiple-warhead ICBMs.
Endorsing US proposals for a combined super-power shield, reportedly against attacks from "renegade" Third-World nuclear states, Gorbachev called for negotiations on "the possibility of creating joint systems to avert nuclear missile attacks with ground- and space-based elements" .
US and international reaction
On Oct. 5 Bush hailed Gorbachev's offer as "good news" , adding that the USA was "prepared to discuss all issues" .
The German Chancellor, Helmut Kohl said on Oct. 6 that Gorbachev's offer was of "special importance" for Europe, while on Oct. 7 China welcomed the Soviet initiative.
Gorbachev's plans for more radical nuclear weapons cuts were generally received with caution, however, by Western leaders, some of whom reportedly questioned the feasibility of the proposals in the face of the rapid disintegration of the Soviet Union.
US resistance to a freeze on nuclear testing was thought likely to remain an obstacle in the way of a super-power agreement.
Reports also suggested that the Bush administration was divided over the question of negotiations on the "no first use" nuclear strategy, over which the US Defence Secretary, Dick Cheney, held strong reservations.
The UK Prime Minister, John Major, who welcomed Gorbachev's proposals on Oct. 6, said they were unlikely to halt the deployment of the submarine-launched Trident missile.
Although France issued no official comment, it was understood to be reluctant to institute any immediate cuts in its nuclear arsenal.
US-Soviet talks on joint defence system
The 16th round of US-Soviet Nuclear and Space Talks (NST)[see pp. 37223; 38255]were held in Geneva on Sept. 30-Oct. 24.
[For 14th and 15th rounds, held in January and April 1991, see pp. 37979; 38171.]
The talks, described by US negotiators as "most constructive" , reportedly centred on a US proposal, recently cleared by the Soviet Union [see above], for the limited joint deployment of a missile defence system also known as "global protection against limited strikes" (GPALS).
On Oct. 5-8 in Moscow, and again in Washington in late October, US and Soviet arms control negotiators apparently discussed a defence system which would protect the Soviet Union from ballistic missile attacks.
There was speculation that Soviet concern could extend to the possibility of missile attacks launched from any of the republics they were known to be located.
US-Soviet inspections under CFE
A Soviet team acting under the Conventional Forces in Europe (CFE) Treaty [see p. 37838]inspected military installations in the UK on Oct. 29-Nov.1 [see p. 38458], while US inspectors reviewed Soviet military activities in Lvov on Oct. 28-30 under the terms of the CFE Treaty.
Arms trade
Senior officials representing the five permanent members of the UN Security Council agreed in London on Oct. 17-18 to avoid selling weapons likely to worsen international conflict and to exchange information on conventional weapons sales to the Middle East [see also pp. 38365-66].
INTERNATIONAL
NATO
Defence Ministers' meeting
Defence Ministers representing the Nuclear Planning Group (NPG) of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) met in Taormina, Sicily, on Oct. 17-18.
Decision to cut nuclear stockpile
Ministers agreed to reduce NATO's ground-launched and air-delivered nuclear arsenal in Europe by 80 per cent; this followed a United States decision in September to scrap battlefield nuclear weapons [see p. 38457-58], and was expected to involve the destruction of all 2,100 of NATO's nuclear artillery shells and missiles, as well as of an estimated 700 out of 1,400 airborne nuclear bombs.
In their final declaration ministers said that the radical nature of the cuts had been prompted by the "decisive steps towards democracy and freedom in the Soviet Union" and the "constructive Soviet response" to recent US arms control initiatives [see pp. 38457; 38553].
According to the Financial Times of Oct. 18, the formal approval by ministers of the US decision to scrap battlefield nuclear weapons had helped postpone the airing of differences over the deployment of tactical air-to-surface missiles (TASM) which a number of NATO's European partners, especially Germany, were reluctant to accept [see also pp. 36476-77; 37931; 38457-58].
Differences on European defence
Differences on European defence policy [see pp. 37931; 38022; 38155; 38216; 38295; 38313]emerged over Franco-German plans for a European force based in Strasbourg [see p. 38554], although responses were sufficiently guarded as to suggest a reluctance to revive transatlantic splits in NATO.
Reports on Oct. 18 said that the German Defence Minister, Gerhard Stoltenberg had assured ministers that the new corps did not signify a "questioning of NATO's central role" , but that both UK and Netherlands officials had expressed concern.
On Oct. 21 the US Defence Secretary Dick Cheney was quoted as saying that "whatever develops within the area of European security identity should not detract from…the basic cohesion of NATO itself" , but adding that decisions about European security were the prerogative of Europeans.
In Madrid the NATO Secretary-General, Manfred Wörner told legislators attending a five-day annual NATO assembly on Oct. 21 that, while "an additional independent European force" would "not make practical sense" , a European force co-ordinated by the Western European Union (WEU) could prove valuable in areas outside NATO's traditional field.
On Oct. 3 Wörner described the future of NATO as an expanded defence community employing peacekeeping forces in areas of ethnic or border unrest.
Co-operation with former Warsaw Pact countries
In an offer originally formalized in June [see p. 38313], ministers urged "increased co-operation and contacts between the Alliance and countries of central and eastern Europe" .
Reports of plans inviting former Warsaw Pact countries to establish closer relations with NATO had been confirmed on Oct. 3 following a joint US-German declaration recommending the creation of a pan-European "North Atlantic Cooperation Council" .
The declaration envisaged regular ministerial meetings and the conversion of former communist defence industries to civilian production, but stopped short of advocating full membership of NATO for the Soviet Union and the former communist regimes of eastern Europe.
Reports said that France had opposed the US-German declaration, claiming that it would duplicate the pan-European network of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE).
According to the Economist of Oct. 12, the French government also feared that institutionalizing a pan-European security dialogue within NATO (rather than within the CSCE where the USA had only one of 38 separate votes) would perpetuate US dominance in Europe.
On Oct. 31, NATO officials in Brussels disclosed that France had dropped its objections to a pan-European security "forum" .
They indicated further that NATO was "not prepared to entertain the notion of membership" for the former Warsaw Pact countries.
(On Oct. 6 Czechoslovakia, Hungary and Poland had urged full membership in NATO for all European countries — see p. 38541).
INTERNATIONAL
CSCE
Human rights breakthrough at Moscow conference
The 38 countries taking part in the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE) decided on Oct. 3 that fact-finding teams could be sent to investigate alleged human rights abuses in any member country, whether or not the country's government agreed to the investigation.
The decision, by representatives of 36 European states, the United States and Canada, reversed long-standing resistance by most governments to outside interference in their internal affairs.
It was reached at the CSCE's third Conference on the Human Dimension, held in Moscow on Sept. 10-Oct. 4 [see p. 38458 for opening].
In another reversal of attitude, the Soviet delegation was among the strongest advocates of even tougher international action to protect human rights against government abuse.
The Soviet and east European delegations supported a German proposal to introduce sanctions against violators.
That proposal was opposed, however, by the USA, the United Kingdom, France and other Western delegations and failed to win the consensus required for CSCE decisions.
The Conference's final document set out mechanisms by which member countries could authorize mandatory fact-finding missions into alleged human rights violations even if the host government refused to consent.
It was not clear what would happen if investigators were refused entry.
The Soviet turn-around was underlined a by Deputy Foreign Minister Sergei Kovalev, co-chairman of the Soviet delegation and himself a former political prisoner, who spoke of violations in his country and current efforts to rectify them.
The other Soviet co-chairman, Deputy Foreign Minister Yuri Deryabin, called the agreement "a major breakthrough" in protecting the individual against the state.
Max Kampelman, head of the US delegation, said that it was a historic step.
The CSCE document also called for protection of correspondents and the lifting of restrictions on the movements of foreigners, including journalists.
It called attention to a need for safeguards of the rights of prisoners, disabled people, women and immigrant workers.
The accord tried to establish standards to protect basic rights even when a government declared a state of emergency.
Signature by Baltic Presidents of CSCE Final Act
The Presidents of the three newly independent Baltic states,(admitted to the CSCE on Sept. 10 — see p. 38458) Arnold Rüütel of Estonia, Anatolijs Gorbunovs of Latvia and Vytautas Landsbergis of Lithuania, signed the Final Act of the CSCE in Helsinki, site of the original 1975 signing, on Oct. 15.
INTERNATIONAL
IMF-WORLD BANK
Annual meetings
The 46th annual meetings of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and World Bank were held in Bangkok (Thailand) on Oct. 15-17, preceded by the traditional series of committee or ministerial meetings on Oct. 11-14.
[For appointment of new President of World Bank and reappointment of Michel Camdessus as IMF Managing Director see p. 38459.]
IMF annual report
In its annual report published on Oct. 2 the Fund confirmed that in the 12 months ended April 30, 1991, it had for the first time since 1984-85 made more disbursements (6,823 million special drawing rights: SDR1=US$1.365 as at Oct. 2) than it had received through repurchases or repayments (SDR5,608 million).
Total outstanding credit provided by the Fund had also risen (from SDR24,388 million to SDR25,603 million, but compared with a peak of SDR37,622 million at the end of April 1985).
1990-91commitments in support of macroeconomic and structural policies totalled only SDR5,600 million, two-thirds of which had been committed in the last four months to five countries — Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Poland and Romania.
Association agreement with Soviet Union
Prior to the meetings an agreement had been signed in Moscow on Oct. 5 by Camdessus and Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev establishing a special association between the Fund and the Soviet Union.
[For Soviet announcement in July of its intention to apply for membership in the IMF and World Bank, see p. 38348.]
The Fund would review the Soviet economy in the same way as it did the economies of members, would provide the Soviet Union with technical assistance on agreed projects, would invite a Soviet representative to appropriate IMF executive board and other meetings and would "give favourable consideration" to requests from union republics for the extension to them of similar undertakings.
The Soviet Union would provide the IMF with such information as was required from Fund members and would allow the Fund to establish and maintain a resident office in the Soviet Union.
During talks in Bangkok on Oct. 12-13 between Soviet representatives and ministers and central bank governors of the Group of Seven (G-7) industrialized countries (delayed pending the eventual arrival of the Soviet team), a "strong endorsement" was given to the intention of the Soviet Union and the republics to "resolve certain fundamental issues essential for the maintenance of international creditworthiness and for ensuring their access to new credits" .
G-7 deputies (officials) were to visit Moscow shortly to discuss specific approaches for dealing with the issues, including the restructuring of financial relations between the centre and the republics.
Admission of Albania
Albania, which had applied for membership in the IMF and the Bank in January 1991, was admitted as the 156th member of each organization on the opening day of the plenary meetings on Oct. 15.
Ministerial and other committee meetings
Group of Seven (Oct. 11-12).
Finance Ministers and central bank governors (i) commented that the United Kingdom was moving towards economic recovery, that recovery was under way in the United States, that growth was projected to pick up in Italy and France, and that in Japan and Germany growth had slowed from the rapid pace in 1990 to a more sustainable rate;(ii) noted the importance of strengthening global savings;(iii) reaffirmed the need for effective measures to avoid the recurrence of "recent irregularities that were revealed in some financial markets" (a reference in particular to scandals in Japan — see pp. 38529 — and to the collapse of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International — see pp. 38396-37; 38355; 38545);(iv) called on the Paris Club to continue discussions on how best to implement promptly additional debt relief measures, on a case-by-case basis, which went well beyond the relief already granted under the "Toronto terms" [see pp. 36123-24]; and (v) noted that it was essential for developing countries to encourage private capital flows.
Group of 10 (Oct. 13).
Finance Ministers and central bank governors noted especially the central and important role played by the IMF and the World Bank group institutions in the move towards economic stabilization and reform in central and eastern Europe and in the implementation of the strengthened debt strategy.
Interim Committee (Oct. 13-14 with the attendance for part of its proceedings of a Soviet delegation).
This in particular(i) warned that it was essential that the additional demands on resources associated with reconstruction in the Middle East, unification in Germany, the economic transformation of eastern Europe and prospects for reform in the Soviet Union should be met by reductions in the absorption of saving by governments and an increase in private saving, and that an important contribution could be made by "reassessing spending on defence and subsidies" ;(ii) expressed concern over delays in the Uruguay Round of GATT negotiations [see this page];(iii) welcomed the continuing commitment of eastern European countries to stabilizing and reforming their economies along market-oriented lines in spite of the added difficulties caused by the collapse of trade in the former COMECON area; and (iv) also welcomed the intention of the authorities in the Soviet Union to "intensify reliance on market mechanisms and to integrate the economy into the multilateral trade and payments system" .
Development Committee (Oct. 14).
This committee addressed in particular the issues of development priorities for the 1990s and implications for the World Bank Group, and human resource development.
INTERNATIONAL
GATT
Prospects for Uruguay Round — Membership
The General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) council of representatives met in Geneva on Oct. 8 amid continuing concern over apparent deadlock in the Uruguay Round of multilateral trade talks.
A new German willingness to compromise on farm subsidies, however, emerged on Oct. 9, and by Oct. 14 the GATT Director-General Arthur Dunkel was able to tell the IMF/World Bank meeting in Bangkok that there were real prospects of concluding the Uruguay Round by end-year, a deadline he had presented as crucial if the whole process were not to end in failure.
The German Cabinet, by accepting that reduced price subsidies for farmers could be acceptable in exchange for guarantees of direct income compensation, apparently left France and Ireland isolated within the European Communities on this highly contentious aspect of the agricultural trade protectionism issue.
European Community (EC) Trade Ministers, meeting in Amsterdam on Oct. 12, effectively accepted the timetable spelt out by Dunkel for completing the Uruguay Round.
This envisaged the completion of drafting work by all seven GATT negotiating groups by Nov. 1.
Guatemala's GATT membership, as the 103rd contracting party, took effect on Oct. 10.
Guatemala had signed the accession protocol in April [see p. 38259]; formal membership came 30 days after the notification that ratification procedures had been completed.
Mongolia and Panama applied on Oct. 8 to join GATT, and membership was also under consideration for Algeria, Bulgaria, China, Honduras, Nepal and Paraguay.
INTERNATIONAL
UNITED NATIONS
Elections to Security Council
The five non-permanent members of the Security Council for the two years from Jan. 1, 1992, were elected by the General Assembly on Oct. 16.
The new members were to be Cape Verde, Hungary, Japan, Morocco and Venezuela.
They would replace Côte d'Ivoire, Cuba, Romania, Yemen and Zaïre.
The other five non-permanent members, serving until January 1993, were Austria, Belgium, Ecuador, India and Zimbabwe [see p. 37931].
INTERNATIONAL
NOBEL PRIZES
1991 awards
The Nobel Peace Prize for 1991 was awarded to Aung San Suu Kyi, 46, the daughter of Burmese independence hero Aung San.
She had gone back home in April 1988, played a leading role in the National League for Democracy (NLD), and, although under house arrest since July 1989, had become the leading symbol of opposition to the military government of Myanma (Burma).
The announcement was made on Oct. 14 by the Nobel Committee of the Norwegian parliament in Oslo, citing "her non-violent struggle for democracy and human rights" .
Myanma's military-dominated regime, however, which had refused to implement the results of the May 1990 general election won by the NLD, made it clear that Suu Kyi was regarded as a troublemaker and that she would remain under house arrest; she had refused to renounce political involvement and go into exile.
(In 1972 she had married a British academic, Michael Aris, and their two children were at school in England, where she had lived herself until April 1988.)
Norway's ambassador to Myanma (based in Singapore) was refused a visa to visit the country to try to persuade the government to allow her to receive the prize in Oslo in December.
The other Nobel prizes for 1991 were announced by the relevant Swedish academies between Oct. 3 and Oct. 16:(i) Literature — Nadine Gordimer, the South African novelist whose "magnificent epic writing" had as its central theme the consequences of apartheid;(ii) Medicine — Erwin Neher and Bert Sakmann, German scientists working on the function of single ion channels in cell physiology;(iii) Economics — Ronald Coase, the veteran UK-born member of the Chicago school and theorist of transaction costs and property rights, relevant to how buyers and sellers are brought together in the free market;(iv) Physics — Pierre-Gilles de Gennes, the French scientist, for his work on applying the study of order and behavioural similarities in molecules to a range of complex materials; and (v) Chemistry — Richard R. Ernst, the Swiss researcher, for contributions to high-resolution nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy.
INTERNATIONAL
ANTARCTICA
Mining ban agreement
An agreement banning mining and mineral extraction in the Antarctic for at least 50 years was signed in Madrid on Oct. 4.
The agreement, in the form of a protocol to the 1959 Antarctic Treaty, confirmed a draft agreed in April [see p. 38171].
It was seen as a victory for a long-running campaign by environmental groups to protect the Antarctic, and also covered issues such as wildlife protection, waste disposal and marine pollution.
Greenpeace subsequently announced that it would withdraw its team from a research base on Ross Island.
INTERNATIONAL
SPACE RESEARCH
Soyuz flight
The Soviet Soyuz TM-13 mission, launched on Oct. 2 from the Baikanur cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, carried an Austrian, Franz Viehboeck, and two Soviet cosmonauts, Alexander Volkov and Tokar Aubakirov (the latter being officially described as representing the Republic of Kazakhstan).
Volkov was transferred from Soyuz TM-13 to the Mir space station, and Anatoly Artsebarsky, who had spent 144 days in space [see p. 38219], returned to earth on Soyuz.