

ASIA — PACIFIC
JAPAN
Appointment of Miyazawa as Prime Minister
The Japanese Diet voted on Nov. 5 to approve the appointment of Kiichi Miyazawa as Prime Minister, following his election on Oct. 27 as chairman of the ruling Liberal Democratic Party.
Toshiki Kaifu had held both posts since August 1989 [see pp. 36849-50].
The Kaifu government had recently suffered a series of political humiliations, culminating in a major financial scandal and the forced retraction of numerous political reform proposals [see pp. 38528-29].
Immediately on his election, Miyazawa announced a new LDP Cabinet which contained only one member of the outgoing Kaifu administration; critics noted, however, that three of its senior members had been implicated in financial scandals in the recent past.
The LDP leadership election of Oct. 27 came at the end of an unusually bitter political campaign, and many observers were surprised that Miyazawa did not obtain more than 285 of the 496 votes cast by the 395 LDP deputies and the 101 representatives from local party organisations.
Michio Watanabe, who also was a former Finance Minister, did unexpectedly well, obtaining 120 votes, while Hiroshi Mitsuzuka, a former Minister for International Trade and Industry, came third with 87 votes.
There were four invalid votes.
Miyazawa's eventual success in the leadership poll was attributed to the support of the largest faction in the LDP, led jointly by Shin Kanemaru and by former Prime Minister Noboru Takeshita, who remained a powerful force in LDP politics despite having been accused of involvement in the Recruit Cosmos financial scandal of 1987-89.
The Kanemaru/Takeshita faction was now being effectively managed by Ichiro Ozawa, who had been secretary-general of the LDP until April 1991 [see pp. 38148-49], and who had helped to instigate the party's shift away from support for Kaifu during the summer and early autumn of 1991 [see pp. 38528-29].
A fluent English and French speaker with extensive business experience, Miyazawa, 72, had held a succession of senior Cabinet posts between 1962 and 1987, including Minister of International Trade and Industry, Foreign Minister, Chief Cabinet Secretary and Chief of the Economic Planning Agency.
In 1987 he became Finance Minister in Takeshita's first government, but his political career was curtailed in December 1988 when he was forced to resign after accusations of misleading the Diet over his involvement in the Recruit Cosmos scandal [see p. 36379].
He had based his electoral platform on the need for better relations with the United States.
Political observers felt, however, that difficulties could still arise with the USA, because of his publicly expressed view that Japan's trade surplus was a "fundamentally insoluble problem" caused by unstoppable world demand for superior Japanese products, and would remain impervious to import tariffs or even major currency shifts.
Miyazawa's recent calls for a period of renewed economic growth in Japan and for a cut in Japanese interest rates (implying a weakening of the yen and a growth in the trade surplus) were also received with concern in the USA.
Miyazawa had also called during his election campaign for the political rehabilitation and "purification" of Japanese politicians who had been implicated, like himself, in the financial scandals of recent years.
Indeed, all three contenders for the leadership had been accused of such involvement at one point or another: Watanabe's staff had been deeply implicated in the Recruit affair, and Mitsuzuka had been linked with other scandals involving illegal fund-raising activities for the LDP.
Principal new appointments
Announcing his new Cabinet on Nov. 5, Miyazawa made Watanabe his Foreign Minister, and gave posts to members of the Mitsuzuka faction, although not to Mitsuzuka himself.
He instructed his new ministers, however, to resign their faction memberships, and he ordered them to refrain from all stock market dealings, while also returning one-10th of their salaries to the Treasury, in an effort to regain the political prestige of the Cabinet.
Watanabe's appointment as Foreign Minister was received with some surprise in the USA, which had protested in 1988 over his allegedly racist remarks about the country's black population.
Watanabe had also made derogatory comments about China and Brazil which he had since been forced to retract.
Watanabe was known to take a more hawkish line than his predecessors on defence issues.
Tsutomu Hata, a former Agriculture Minister, had supported moves to dismantle Japan's ban on foreign rice imports, which were causing dissent at the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade [see also p. 38148], and he was known to favour a reduction in interest rates.
Not only Michio Watanabe but also Koichi Kato and Hideo Watanabe had been accused of involvement in the Recruit scandal.
Miyazawa's appointments to the LDP leadership included others accused of similar offences; Yoshiro Mori, who became chairman of the LDP's policy affairs research council on Nov. 1, had been implicated in the Recruit affair, while Koko Sato, who became chairman of the LDP executive council, had received a three-year suspended prison sentence for taking bribes during the Lockheed scandal of the mid-1970s.
Former premiers Takeshita and Yasuhiro Nakasone, both of whom had resigned over the Recruit issue, became senior advisers to the party.
Miyazawa told the Diet on Nov. 8 that Japan would seek to expand its global role with vigorous foreign policy initiatives, especially in the Asia-Pacific region.
He also said that he would press ahead with the controversial plans announced by his predecessor to revise the Constitution in such a way as to permit the despatch of Japanese troops to other countries [see p. 38529].
(In early December the Diet accordingly gave its consent, after long discussion, to a much-amended version of the bill.)
He called on the Soviet Union to show "good faith" in resolving its long-standing disagreements with Japan over the disputed Kurile islands to the north of the country [see p. 38148], and finally he affirmed his faith that the USA would remain the "cornerstone" of Japan's foreign policy.
Kiichi Miyazawa (Miyazawa) Prime Minister Michio Watanabe (Watanabe) Deputy Premier and Foreign Ministry Takashi Tawara (Takeshita) Justice Tsutomu Hata (Takeshita) Finance Kunio Hatoyama (Takeshita) Finance Tokuo Yamashita (Komoto) Health and Welfare Masami Tanabu (Unaffiliated) Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries
Japanese Cabinet
(Factional allegiances are listed in parentheses)
*Kozo Watanabe (Takeshita) International Trade and Industry Keiwa Okuda (Takeshita) Transport Hideo Watanabe (Watanabe) Posts and Telecommunications Tetsuo Kondo (Komoto) Labour Taku Yamasaki (Watanabe) Construction Masajuro Shiokawa (Mitsuzuka) Home Affairs, and Chairman of the National Public Safety Commission Koichi Kato (Miyazawa) Chief Cabinet Secretary Junzo Iwasaki (Komoto) Director General of the Management and Co-ordination Agency Tomoo Ie (Takeshita) Director-General of the Hokkaido and Okinawa Development Agencies Sohei Miyashita (Mitsuzuka) Director-General of the Defence Agency Takeshi Noda (Watanabe) Director-General of the Economic Planning Agency Kanzo Tanigawa (Mitsuzuka) Director-General of the Science and Technology Agency, and Chairman of the Atomic Energy Commission Shozaburo Nakamura (Mitsuzuka) Director-General of the Environment Agency Yoshiyuki Toya (Miyazawa) Director-General of the National Land Agency Atsuo Kudo (Unaffiliated) Director of the Cabinet Legislation Bureau
* Member of outgoing Cabinet
EUROPE
YUGOSLAVIA
Continuing civil war
Fighting continued in Yugoslavia during November, principally in Croatia (the town of Vukovar falling to Serbian-dominated federal army forces after a three-month siege) but also including, for the first time, attacks on Serbian territory.
The human rights organization Amnesty International, in a report issued on Nov. 25, accused all sides in the war of torture and murder of civilians.
As regards external mediation efforts, the European Community (EC) moved to the imposition of sanctions on Yugoslavia, while at the UN there was increasingly urgent consideration of a mission by peacekeeping forces.
The prospect grew of international recognition of the republics of Slovenia and Croatia.
EC peace conference
On Nov. 5, Yugoslav leaders met EC Foreign Ministers at The Hague for the eighth session of the Peace Conference on Yugoslavia, chaired by Lord Carrington.
Before the start of talks, Federal Defence Minister Gen. Veljko Kadijevic agreed to implement the Oct. 18 ceasefire [see p. 38513], which included Croatian agreement to lift the blockade of federal barracks inside Croatia by Nov. 8.
Serbia's President, Slobodan Milosevic, agreed to continue the negotiations, despite having refused the terms of the EC peace plan as proposed in October [see pp. 38512-13].
The peace plan, which would allow for republics to declare independence, had been amended to allow for republics to form a common state, the economy of which could be organized on non-market lines; the article granting autonomy to the (currently Serbian-controlled) provinces of Kosovo and Vojvodina was deleted.
Serbia and Montenegro proposed an amendment to permit not only republics but also "nations" to remain within Yugoslavia, a formula under which Serbs in Croatia could elect to join this entity.
Diplomatic sources revealed that Croatia had rejected the amended version.
EC Foreign Ministers meeting in Noordwijk on Nov.12 requested Lord Carrington to travel to Yugoslavia for further negotiations with Serbian and Croatian leaders, in the light of their requests for EC or UN peacekeeping forces [see below].
Lord Carrington met Croatian President Franjo Tudjman at Graz, and Milosevic and Kadijevic in Belgrade, and reached agreement with Kadijevic on an immediate ceasefire on Nov. 14.
Lord Carrington travelled again to Belgrade on Nov. 22, and met the UN special envoy to Yugoslavia, former US Secretary of State Cyrus Vance.
Sanctions
Before the Nov. 5 peace conference, EC Foreign Ministers in Brussels agreed on a package of economic sanctions to be imposed should the proposal be rejected.
On Nov. 8, the EC Council of Ministers, at a fringe meeting of the NATO summit in Rome [see pp. 38600-01], imposed trade sanctions on Yugoslavia, and proposed a UN Security Council oil embargo.
The EC sanctions included suspension of the 1980 trade agreement and import limits on textiles.
Greece, which sent 20 per cent of exports through Yugoslavia, would be compensated, while other EC countries were not expected to be heavily affected.
The Council of Europe called for sanctions against Serbia on Nov. 5, and on Nov. 25 suspended Yugoslavia's special status at the European parliament.
On Nov. 10, US President Bush said that the USA would also impose trade sanctions, and on Nov. 11 the G-24 donor countries suspended aid to Yugoslavia.
UN involvement in ceasefire and peacekeeping proposals
The first ceasefire to be brokered by the UN rather than the EC was negotiated in Geneva and came into force on Nov. 23, after Vance had spent a week monitoring the situation in Yugoslavia.
On Nov. 27 the UN Security Council unanimously adopted Resolution 721, requesting a report on the feasibility of sending peacekeeping forces to Yugoslavia, conditional on the observance of the Nov. 23 ceasefire agreement.
There were, however, differences between Serbian and Croatian requests for the deployment of forces.
The (rump) Yugoslav Collective State Presidency on Nov. 10 requested that UN peacekeeping forces should be deployed around the Serb-populated regions in Croatia.
The Croatian leadership, however, denounced this as an attempt to create a Greater Serbia, and insisted that peacekeeping forces should be on the legal republican borders.
Yugoslav National Army (JNA) forces began withdrawing from barracks in Zagreb, the Croatian capital, on Nov. 28, following talks between JNA and Croatian representatives.
Nevertheless, ceasefire violations on Nov. 27 and 28 were reported by Croatian radio.
Croatia agreed on Nov. 28 to allow UN peacekeeping forces to be deployed in areas of fighting (i.e. not only on existing legal republican borders).
Other attempts at international mediation
A meeting of officials from the conflicting sides, convened in Geneva by the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), which had appealed to them to "observe the elementary principles of humanity" , ended on Nov. 27 with an agreement to implement the 1949 Geneva Convention.
It was reported on Nov. 19 that Foreign Ministers of the Western European Union (WEU) meeting in Bonn had agreed to allow naval ships to create "humanitarian corridors" for relief to Yugoslavia.
On Nov. 29, the Conference for Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE) opened its fifth emergency meeting on Yugoslavia in Prague.
It adopted resolutions supporting the UN efforts and setting up a mission to monitor human rights in Yugoslavia.
A special Hexagonale session in Venice on Nov. 30, without the participation of Yugoslavia (which was a member), decided that the presidency of the organization would go to Austria as of January 1992, rather than Yugoslavia, and that in future, the Hexagonale would attempt co-operation with the "Yugoslav nations" .
Germany and Austria led calls for the west to recognise the independence of Slovenia and Croatia.
On Nov. 27 German Federal Chancellor Helmut Kohl promised that Germany would recognize the two republics "before Christmas" .
Federal government resignations
The Chamber of Republics and Provinces of the Yugoslav Federal Assembly passed a vote of no confidence in Federal Prime Minister Ante Markovic and Foreign Minister Budimir Loncar, on Nov. 15.
However, the session was boycotted by Croatian, Slovenian and Macedonian deputies.
Loncar said on Nov. 20 that his departure was final.
On Nov. 27, a further vote of no confidence in Markovic and his Cabinet was postponed.
The resignations of members of the Federal Executive Council (government)— Zivko Pregl (Vice-President), Joze Slokar (Transport and communications) and Franc Horvat (Foreign Economic Relations)— were formally accepted on Nov. 21, together with those of ministers whose resignations were reported in September [see p. 38420].
Constitutional developments
On Nov. 20, the Federal Constitutional Court suspended Croatia's decision of Oct. 8 severing links with Yugoslavia [see p. 38513].
The Macedonian Assembly adopted a new constitution on Nov. 17, by 96 votes to 24, after heated debate.
Bosnia Hercegovina requested the deployment of UN troops, it was announced on Nov. 20.
The results of a plebescite in Bosnia-Hercegovina [see p. 38513]were announced on Nov. 12.
It was claimed that in the Krajna (Serb populated areas) over 90 per cent had voted to remain in Yugoslavia.
On Nov. 18, the Croatian population of the republic had voted to set up two Croatian communities [for establishment of Serbian Autonomous Regions see p. 38513].
Croat attacks into Serbia
Fighting spread for the first time to Serbian territory on Nov. 5 and 6, when Croatian forces were reported to have attacked Serbian villages.
These attacks were believed to be the work of the military wing (HOS) of the right-wing Croatian Party of Justice (HSP), operating outside the control of the Croatian authorities.
From Nov. 21 Croatia restricted the movement of men liable to call-up.
HSP leader Dobroslav Paraga was arrested at the end of November.
Formation of Serbian "special force" 
On Nov. 7, the Serbian military announced that "a special force of 20,000 well-trained soldiers" would be formed.
It was unclear whether this was an independent Serbian initiative, or had resulted from an agreement with the JNA.
From Nov. 8, the Serbian authorities closed the republic's borders to men liable to military service.
Evacuation of refugees from Dubrovnik
A ceasefire in Dubrovnik was negotiated for Nov. 13, and 3,000 refugees were evacuated by sea, together with the EC monitors in the city.
The following day French and Italian relief ships arrived in the port.
EC monitors remained in Croatia.
Fall of Vukovar
Continued heavy fighting on Nov. 10-11 was particularly intense around Vukovar; it was reported by Zagreb radio that at least 80 people had been killed on Nov. 11.
On Nov. 17 it was admitted that Vukovar had fallen to JNA forces, after an 86-day seige.
Convoys of the remaining residents were evacuated to Croatia.
Fighting was reported to have moved to Osijek, the capital of Eastern Slavonia (Serb region of Croatia), and its surrounding area.
The Croatian leadership accused Serbia of planning to settle Serbs in the areas which were falling under JNA control and being vacated by the Croatian population.
AFRICA
SOUTH AFRICA
Date for constitutional talks
Delegates from 20 groups agreed after preparatory talks in Johannesburg on Nov. 29-30 on a date for the start of substantive negotiations on South Africa's future constitution; a "Convention for a Democratic South Africa" (CODESA) would hold its opening session in Johannesburg on Dec. 20-21.
The government, the ruling National Party (NP)(which sent a separate delegation), the African National Congress (ANC) and the Inkatha Freedom Party were joined at the preparatory meeting by the Pan-Africanist Congress (PAC), the Democratic Party (DP), the South African Communist Party, various other political parties, delegations from the 10 "homelands" or bantustans, and representatives of the Indian and Coloured communities.
Delegates agreed that all parties represented at the meeting, as well as the Azanian People's Organization (AZAPO), the official white opposition Conservative Party (CP), the Reformed National Party (HNP) and the neo-fascist Afrikaner Resistance Movement (AWB)— all of which refused to attend the preparatory meeting — would be invited to CODESA.
Delegates agreed that points to be discussed at the December meeting would include (i) the creation of a climate for free political participation;(ii) constitutional principles;(iii) the nature of the constitution-making body and arrangements for a transitional government; and (iv) the future of the bantustans.
A steering group to expedite the CODESA discussions, comprising a representative of each of the 20 parties and chaired by Zach de Beer of the DP, was established.
On Nov. 30 the PAC withdrew from the preparatory meeting after accusing the ANC and the government of secret collaboration.
The PAC also expressed its discontent at the name of CODESA — it had proposed "conference for a constituent assembly" — and the venue — it had urged that it be held at a "neutral" venue, outside South Africa.
General strike
A two-day nationwide strike on Nov. 5-6 against the imposition of value added tax (VAT — introduced in September) on basic foodstuffs, health care and essential services [see p. 38422]was supported by at least 80 per cent of the workforce in manufacturing and industry.
The figure, which represented over 3,700,000 workers, was confirmed by employers.
The strike call was made by the Congress of South African Trade Unions (COSATU) and was regarded as a test of the strength of the newly formed Patriotic Front [see p. 38516].
A joint statement by COSATU and the ANC issued on Nov. 5 said: "A referendum was held in the streets of our country today.
The result was a devastating vote of no confidence in this government."
The government said that the strike was "unjustified" and would cost an estimated R25,000 million (about US$8,500 million) and lead to the loss of 70,000 jobs.
It also claimed that there was overwhelming evidence of intimidation and coercion.
Although the strike itself went off peacefully, according to the police it was the cause of violence which began on Nov. 3 at a mine in Welkom in the Orange Free State and which had led to the killing of at least 84 miners by Nov. 11.
However, local trade unionists believed that a "third force" of agents provocateurs were responsible.
These suspicions were fuelled when it was discovered that one of those killed was not employed at the mine.
Anglo-American Corporation announced on Nov. 11 that it was temporarily laying off between 4,000 and 5,000 workers without pay as part of its efforts to defuse tensions at the mine.
A two-day strike of between 35,000 and 40,000 workers at four platinum mines in the Bophuthatswana bantustan ended on Nov. 14.
The strike was related to the refusal of the bantustan authorities to recognize the National Union of Mineworkers which it regarded as foreign since it was not registered in the bantustan, but in South Africa itself.
The mines had suffered disruption since July and 220 workers had been dismissed earlier for taking industrial action, and according to the managing director at least two weeks' production had been lost.
Virginia by-election
Claiming that his party would win a general election, CP leader Andries Treurnicht was jubilant at a CP by-election victory in Virginia, in the Orange Free State, on Nov. 28.
The CP won the seat from the NP with a majority of just over 3,000 votes and now held half the parliamentary seats of the Free State — an NP stronghold until 1989.
NP officials, however, claimed that the election was "definitely not" a response to the government's reform programme but a response to local issues.
Formation of new police unit
The Minister of Law and Order Hernus Kriel announced on Nov. 8 the formation of a new police unit which would have the specific task of stabilizing and controlling political unrest.
The unit of 17,500 men, forming a fifth division of the South African Police (SAP) and called Internal Stability, would be specially equipped and stationed in areas of frequent unrest.
Kriel described the force as being committed to impartiality but warned that it would "never be crippled to the point where the SAP is scared to act against unrest" .
Foreign relations
Foreign Minister Roelof "Pik" Botha began a visit to the Soviet Union on Nov. 6 and announced the re-establishment of consular relations which were broken off in 1956.
Although termed an unofficial private visit, Botha met with his then counterpart Boris Pankin as well as with Eduard Shevardnadze (reappointed on Nov. 19 in place of Pankin as Soviet Foreign Minister).
Botha also announced the opening of a trade mission in St Petersburg.
Botha had earlier visited the Baltic States where Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania established full diplomatic relations with South Africa immediately.
On Nov. 1 South Africa and the Soviet Union signed airways and harbour agreements.
The close ties between South Africa and Israel were reaffirmed at the highest level on Nov. 10 when President F. W. de Klerk and Botha arrived in Jerusalem.
The two countries had built up a clandestine network of military links, with Israel frequently accused of breaking the UN Security Council arms embargo.
Botha and Israeli Foreign Minister, David Levi, who noted that the two countries "have similar goals in many areas" , signed a broad agreement for improved economic and scientific ties.
Sporting links
Sam Ramsamy, the chairman of the National Olympic Committee of South Africa (NOCSA) announced on Nov. 6 that South Africa had accepted an invitation to participate in the Olympic Games in Barcelona in June 1992 [see p. 38318 readmission to International Olympic Committee].
He also announced that the South African team would not be using the country's current national anthem but the Olympic hymn, Beethoven's "Ode to Joy" , and unveiled the flag under which the team would compete.
Both would be used until such a time as South Africa negotiated a non-racial democracy and adopted a new flag and anthem.
These decisions angered many sections of the white community, including de Klerk who said that national symbols had nothing to do with apartheid.
South Africa ended 21 years of isolation from international cricket on Nov. 8 when a national team received a rapturous welcome on its arrival in India for a series of three one-day matches [see p. 38318 for readmission to International Cricket Conference].
Bantustan developments
The state of emergency imposed in Ciskei on Oct. 28 [see p. 38516]was lifted on Nov. 17 after the ANC and Ciskei's military ruler Brig.
Joshua Oupa Gqoza committed themselves to peace in the region.
The ANC specifically undertook to inform all its members to "conduct themselves in a peaceful manner" .
Over 300 people, mainly ANC members, were arrested within the first week of the emergency.
The government began the transfer on Nov. 2 of 32,000 hectares of land, including parcels in the Cape Province and the Transvaal, to the Bophuthatswana bantustan.
The transfer came despite the government's commitment to talks with the ANC on the reincorporation of all four "independent" bantustans (Bophuthatswana, Ciskei, Transkei and Venda).
AFRICA
ANGOLA
Provisional election timetable
In an address to the country on Nov. 10, President José Eduardo Dos Santos announced that a general election would take place on a date provisionally set for the second half of September 1992 and that consultations would continue with political parties and organizations on a firm date.
He said that the provisional date was also conditional on the extension of state administration by mid-November 1991 into areas still under the control of the rebel National Union for the Total Independence of Angola (UNITA), and on the confinement of all government and UNITA troops to assembly points by mid-December 1991.
He rejected a proposal to hold a national conference, emphasizing that "the sovereign conference will be the parliament to be elected by the Angolan people" .
Violence in Cabinda province
A curfew was imposed in Cabinda on Nov. 12 after at least nine deaths in clashes between government forces and supporters of the Front for the Liberation of the Cabinda Enclave (FLEC), which was calling for the independence of the region.
Angolans born outside Cabinda, described as "colonialists" by the separatists, began to flee the province.
Condemning the FLEC, the government on Nov. 16 sent troops to the province, a move denounced by both the FLEC and UNITA.
Economic reforms
On Nov. 16 sweeping reforms were announced in a step towards a free-market economy.
Taking effect from Nov. 18, the reforms included (i) a 331/3 per cent devaluation of the currency, with an initial base exchange rate of 90 new kwanzas to the United States dollar;(ii) a reduction in personal income tax, taking the top rate from 40 per cent of earned income to 15 per cent;(iii) reduced consumer taxes;(iv) the lifting of price ceilings on all commodities except soap, cooking oil, rice, sugar and baby milk;(v) a new salary scale for public-sector workers, to compensate for the withdrawal of ration cards which had allowed them to buy goods at low prices; and (vi) a minimum national salary of 12,000 kwanzas.
Formation of armed forces Supreme Command
Gen. Joao de Matos, hitherto chief of the government's ground forces, and Gen. Ahilo Camalata Numa, commander of UNITA's northern front, were sworn in on Nov. 14 as the Supreme Command of Angola's armed forces.
During the ceremony Gen. Matos underlined the role of armed forces in upholding territorial integrity and national sovereignty, whilst Gen. Numa spoke of the armed forces as the foundation of an Angola based on "democracy, peace and social justice" .
AFRICA
ZAMBIA
New government
Following accession to office on Nov. 2 after his October election victory [see p. 38515]President Frederick Chiluba of the Movement for Multiparty Democracy (MMD) announced that the "era of dictators, of hypocrisy and lies" was over.
On Nov. 7 he named his government and pledged to rebuild the country's economy.
Levy Mwanawasa, a constitutional lawyer, was named as Vice-President and Leader of the National Assembly, and was expected to act as a prime minister, running day-to-day affairs.
The key post of Minister of Finance was given to businessman Emmanuel Kasonde, a permanent secretary at the Ministry during the 1970s.
The Foreign Affairs portfolio went to Vernon Johnson Mwaanga, previously a diplomat and then Foreign Minister in 1973-75, but reportedly detained under presidential order in 1985 [see p. 33902].
Other appointments included a trade unionist, Newstead L. Zimba, to the Ministry of Home Affairs and a white farmer, Guy Scott, to the Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries.
Acknowledging that the new government faced enormous problems in reconstructing the debt-ridden economy, Chiluba warned that subsidies on cornmeal would be removed, although he stressed that measures would be taken to ensure that people could afford this staple food.
On Nov. 5 Chiluba launched a major reorganization of both the civil service and parastatal organizations.
Several senior executives were dismissed and others were questioned by the police about corruption; in addition staff were prevented from removing documents.
Francis Kaunda, chair and chief executive of Zambia Consolidated Copper Mines (ZCCM) and son of former President Kenneth Kaunda, was dismissed immediately, as was the managing director of ZCCM, which provided Zambia with 93 per cent of its foreign exchange earnings.
On Nov. 18 the new administration removed the director-general of the national broadcasting corporation and the managing editor of the Times of Zambia.
On Nov. 27 new defence and security force chiefs were appointed.
Expiry of state of emergency
The state of emergency, in force for 27 years, was allowed to expire at midnight on Nov. 8, in accordance with the Constitution adopted on Aug. 2 [see p. 38378]which stipulated that any such martial law in force should cease seven days after the inauguration of a new presidency.
Police were instructed to cease searching vehicles and homes without warrant and to remove all roadblocks immediately.
The Legal Affairs Minister, Roger Chonwe, declared that to detain people without charge would be illegal and an abuse of human rights.
Frederick Chiluba President Levy Mwanawasa Vice-President; Leader of the National Assembly Benjamin Yoram Mwila Defence Vernon Johnston Mwaanga Foreign Affairs Emmanuel G. Kasonde Finance Newstead L. Zimba Home Affairs Michael Chilufya Sata Local Government Boniface Kawimbe Health Arthur N. L. Wina Education Ronald Penza Commerce Trade and Industry Gabriel Maka Community Development and Social Welfare Ludwig Sondashi Labour and Social Security Andrew Kashita Communications, Transport and Public Works Alfeyo Hambayi Energy and Water Development Guy Scott Agriculture and Fisheries Dawson Lupunga Lands Roger Chongwe Legal Affairs Keli Walubita Environment and Natural Resources Stan Kristafor Information and Continuing Education Humphrey Mulemba Mines and Mineral Development Akashambatwa Mbikusita-Lewanika Technical Education and Training Baldwin Munakumabu Nkumbula Youth, Sport and Child Development Christon Tembo Tourism Emphraim Chibwe Works and Supply Godfrey Miyanda Minister without portfolio
Zambian Cabinet
AFRICA
ZAIRE
Rival governments — Formation of new Cabinet
The parallel government set up by the Zaïrean opposition held its first Cabinet meeting on Nov. 1, under the leadership of Etienne Tshisekedi, dismissed as Prime Minister by President Mobutu Sese Seko the previous month.
On the same day, Bernardin Mungul Diaka, the Prime Minister appointed by Mobutu on Oct. 22 [see pp. 38515-16], was sworn in.
The opposition Sacred Union called on the armed forces to abandon Mobutu and asked foreign governments not to co-operate with Diaka; it also called for France and Belgium to return their troops to the country.
The last group of 850 Belgian paratroopers flown in during September to help evacuate foreigners from the country was withdrawn on Nov. 4.
On Nov. 5, a third government was reported to have been formed by Zaïrean exiles in Brussels, headed by Antoine Bubulu Koi Bulonda, chairman of the National Unity Party.
This group appeared to be opposed to both Mobutu and the leadership of the Sacred Union, calling for a new generation to take control of Zaïrean politics.
After a Cabinet meeting on Nov. 8, the Diaka government announced that the national conference, suspended since September, would resume its discussions on Nov. 15.
The opposition responded with calls for the conference to be chaired by the Most Rev. Monsengwo Pasinya, president of the Roman Catholic Bishops' Conference and archbishop of Kisangani, in place of Isaac Kalonji Mutambaye, regarded as discredited by his loyalty to Mobutu.
Monsengwo's house was reported to have been attacked by armed men on Nov. 12.
A bomb explosion in Kinshasa the previous day, which killed 17 people, was blamed by the opposition on supporters of Mobutu.
The explosion destroyed a bar in an area known for its strong support for the Sacred Union.
The United States administration meanwhile came under increasing congressional criticism for its failure to take a position on the situation in Zaïre.
Concern was expressed that the country, once a key strategic ally of the USA, would descend further into anarchy; Zaïrean exiles also expressed fears that Mobutu would be tempted to use force against the opposition now that foreign troops had been withdrawn.
The administration's strongest criticism to date of Mobutu came in testimony to the Senate foreign relations committee on Nov. 7 by Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs Herman Cohen, who accused Mobutu of "an apparent unwillingness to distinguish between state finances and his own, a failing that lies at the heart of Zaïre's dismal economic record" .
Participants in the national conference had been bought off by Mobutu, he said, adding that the best hope for Zaïre lay in "genuine power-sharing between Mobutu and the opposition" .
Apparent Senegalese-backed agreement
Attempts by the Senegalese Minister of State Abdoulayé Wade to mediate a settlement in mid-November led to the announcement of an agreement between government and opposition on Nov. 18, said to lay the foundations for the establishment of a transitional government.
The national conference, having met on Nov. 15 and immediately adjourned following the resignation of Mutambaye as chairman, met again on Nov. 20, only to be adjourned again by the acting chairman, Prime Minister Diaka.
Senegalese President Abdou Diouf visited Kinshasa on Nov. 22 to attend the signing of the agreement brokered by Wade, which included calls by both sides for their supporters to eschew violence and to clear the way for the functioning of the national conference.
The two sides also agreed that the Prime Minister should be chosen from the opposition.
Split within opposition — New Prime Minister
The opposition's agreement that Tshisekedi should remain its sole candidate for the post of Prime Minister was breached by an offer from Jean Nguza Karl I Bond, leader of the Union of Federalists and Independent Republicans (UFERI), to act as interim prime minister under Mobutu.
Mobutu announced on Nov. 25 that he had appointed Nguza as Prime Minister, demoting Diaka to the rank of Minister of State.
The Sacred Union expelled UFERI, and condemned Nguza's appointment as breaking the promises of consultation made in the recently signed agreement.
On Nov. 28, Nguza announced a Cabinet containing members of several opposition parties, but with key portfolios such as Foreign Affairs, Defence and Security and Budget held by Mobutu supporters.
Last article pp. 38515-16; reference article pp. 38048-49.
AFRICA
NIGER
Beginning of transitional period
The national conference which had begun on July 29 [see p. 38325]ended on Nov. 3.
On Nov. 2 delegates nominated 15 officials to form the High Council of the Republic (HCR).
High Council of the Republic: André Salifou — Chairman; Omar Idi Ango — First Vice-Chairman; Adamou Kombo — Second Vice-Chairman; Saidou Sabo — Secretary-General; Ali Morou — Deputy Secretary-General; Irne Diawara (f); Aichatou Foumakoye (f); Bibata Adamou (f); Abdou Idrissa; Mohamed Moudour; André Wright; Jackou Senoussi; Ali Madougou; Alazi Soumaila; Habib Moctar.
The HCR — the legislative assembly during the transition period — was to ensure the implementation of the decisions of the conference; it would have control over the executive, and would supervise the drafting of constitutional texts.
On Nov. 4, Amadou Cheiffou, who was appointed Prime Minister on Oct. 26 [see p. 38520], named his transitional government.
Amadou Cheiffou Prime Minister, Minister of National Defence Albert Wright National Education and Research Mohammed Mousa Interior Hassane Hamidou Foreign Affairs and Co-operation Souna Issake Justice, Keeper of the Seals Laoual Chaffani Economy and Finance Boukar Abba Malam Agriculture and Animal Breeding Hassane Abdou Water Rescources and Environment Mahamadou Ouhoumoudou Mines, Energy, Industry and Cottage Industry Souleymane Saidou Public Health Aissata Bagna (f) Social Development, Population and Women's Promotion Adam El Back Communications, Culture, Youth and Sports; Government Spokesman Laouali Baraou Equipment, Transport and Territorial Development Mariama Banakoye (f) Civil Service and Labour
Niger Cabinet
AFRICA
TOGO
Coup attempt
On Nov. 28 troops surrounded the government's headquarters, and occupied the state radio station.
This was the third military attempt to oust Prime Minister Joseph Koukou Koffigoh since his election in August by the national conference which had stripped President Gnassingbe Eyadema of all executive power [see pp. 38379; 38518].
The action by troops loyal to Eyadema followed the decision on Nov. 26 by the High Council of the Republic (the transitional government, led by Koffigoh — see p. 38425) to dissolve Eyadema's former ruling party, the Togolese People's Rally (RPT), in accordance with a decision taken in August by the conference.
The troops demanded that the High Council of the Republic be dissolved; that all decisions of the conference be declared null and void; and that an "all-party" government be formed, with a new Prime Minister appointed by the President, "unless the President deems it useful" to retain Koffigoh.
Koffigoh refused to submit to the demand that he leave the government headquarters where he had taken refuge, and on Nov. 28 asked President Mitterrand of France to despatch troops to Togo urgently.
On Nov. 29, 300 French troops arrived in neighbouring Benin, the French Foreign Ministry insisting, however, that the action was taken to protect the 3,000 French nationals in Togo.
AFRICA
LIBERIA
ULIMO rejection of Yamoussoukro agreement
The United Liberation Movement of Liberia for Democracy (ULIMO) rejected the peace agreement reached in the Côte d'Ivoire capital, Yamoussoukro, in October [see p. 38518].
The ULIMO leader, Raleigh Seekie declared on Nov. 4 that his forces would continue to fight.
According to ULIMO — a coalition of supporters of former President Samuel Doe reportedly based in Sierra Leone — the agreement was not in the interests of the Liberian people but of those of rebel leader Charles Taylor and his National Patriotic Front of Liberia (NPFL).
Seekie claimed that ULIMO forces controlled Grand Cape Mount County in the west and were about 50 km from Monrovia.
He gave assurances, however, that ULIMO forces would not attack the regional peacekeeping force, ECOMOG (Economic Community of West African States Monitoring Group).
Other parties involved in the Liberian conflict gave their continued commitment to the peace process.
Taylor promised to abide by the Yamoussoukro settlement, although on Nov. 6 he stressed that he would defend the country against outside threats.
On Nov. 8 the Independent National Patriotic Front of Liberia (INPFL) led by Prince Yormie Johnson announced that it was rejoining the interim government [see p. 38379 for its withdrawal in August].
The local press later reported that Johnson was seeking the defence portfolio as well as several other ministerial posts for INPFL members.
AFRICA
NIGERIA
Cancellation of party primaries
The National Electoral Commission (NEC) on Nov. 25 cancelled the results of gubernatorial primary elections held on Oct. 19 and the subsequent November run-offs in nine states, disqualified 12 candidates and ordered new elections in the affected states to be held on Dec. 3.
The chair of the NEC said that it was forced to take action after it uncovered widespread irregularities and blatant corruption on the part of both recognized political parties — the National Republican Convention (NRC) and the Social Democratic Party (SDP).
National census
A nationwide census was carried out on Nov. 27-29 during which time almost the entire population was subject to a dawn-to-dusk curfew and all cross-border activity was prohibited.
In an attempt to depoliticize the exercise, questions on the religious and ethnic background of respondents were omitted (the population being roughly evenly divided between Moslems, dominant in the north, and Christians, in the south).
The federal government used population figures in its calculations when allocating regional budgets.
Figures given in the two previous counts, in 1963 and 1973, were rejected after several regions were found to have hugely inflated figures.
The results of the 1991 census were expected in February-March 1992.
Award to Abubakar of Sardauna of Sokoto
Abubakar Alhaji, the Finance and Economic Planning Minister, was awarded the prestigious traditional post of Sardauna of Sokoto on Nov. 15.
The position, vacant for 25 years, made him captain of the guard of the Sultan of Sokoto, the spiritual leader of Nigeria's 60,000,000 Moslems.
Diplomatic sources considered that Abubakar's prospects in presidential elections next year would thus be enhanced, as he acquired political authority recognized by all the traditional hierarchy of northern Nigeria.
Debt rescheduling agreement with Japan
An agreement for the rescheduling of Nigeria's debt with Japan was signed on Oct. 28.
Under the agreement, government and parastatal loans were to be repaid over a 20-year period with a three-year grace period, while commercial debts would become payable over 15 years with an eight-year grace period.
The agreement completed the rescheduling of over 80 per cent of Nigeria's external debt to 16 participating countries of the "Paris Club" — a total of US$2,142,000 million.
AFRICA
MALI
Tuareg conference delay — Extension of transition period
A special conference to be held in Tombouctu with the aim of ending the rebellion of Tuaregs in the north of the country [see p. 38325]was postponed from Nov. 15 to Dec. 27.
Announcing the delay on Nov. 9, Head of State Amadou Toumani Touré said that preparations for the conference were behind schedule but added that the delay would give the rebel movements time to ensure they had proper representation to make credible commitments at the conference.
The postponement of the conference was cited as a reason for the extension of the transition period.
According to the timetable announced in September [see p. 38425]the election process should have begun on Dec. 1, with the final round of presidential elections on Jan. 22.
However, the Transition Committee for the Salvation of the People (CTSP) decided that the transition period should continue until March 26, 1992 — the first anniversary of the overthrow of former President Moussa Traoré.
CTSP officials said that until the Tuareg issue was resolved it was unrealistic to conduct electoral operations in the north of the country, which was subject to rebel raids and from which thousands of people had fled.
Officials also indicated that the organization of the elections had been hindered by lack of material aid.
AFRICA
KENYA
Dismissal of minister
On Nov. 19 President Daniel arap Moi was forced to dismiss his closest political ally, Kiprono Nicholas K. Biwott, following revelations in the inquiry into the murder of Foreign Minister Robert Ouko in February 1990 [see p. 37239].
Biwott, who had been moved from the Ministry of Energy to that of Industry during a cabinet reshuffle on Oct. 27, was named as a "prime suspect" by John Troon, a British detective investigating the murder.
Giving evidence at a judicial tribunal into Ouko's killing, Troon said that Ouko's attempt to expose governmental corruption and a dispute with Biwott had been the reasons for his murder.
Troon, who had first presented the government with the findings of his investigation in September 1990, also stated that he believed that there had been an attempt by Biwott and top-level security officials to hamper his investigations.
Ouko had apparently complied a file based on allegations that certain government members, including Biwott and Vice-President George Saitoti, had been demanding 10 per cent commissions in return for awarding contracts.
Ouko had been about to deliver the report to President Moi on the weekend he died.
On Nov. 10 similar allegations against Biwott were made in a letter published in Nairobi from Roland "Tiny" Rowland, chief executive of Lonrho, the United Kingdom-based multinational corporation.
On Nov. 26 Moi ordered the arrest of Biwott and Hezekiah Oyugi, named by Troon as another chief suspect.
Oyugi had been removed on Oct. 27 as Permanent Secretary in the Office of the President where he was chief of state security.
Moi also ordered a halt to an inquiry which began in October 1990 and instructed the three judges to submit a report to him before the end of January 1992.
Arrest of opposition leaders
The government continued its offensive against the opposition Forum for the Restoration of Democracy (FORD).
On Nov. 14 at least seven FORD leaders were arrested prior to a pro-democracy rally planned for Nov. 16.
In spite of the arrests, the rally took place and protestors broke through security cordons; riot police used tear gas and batons to disperse a crowd of several thousand.
A group of United States and German diplomats attempted to observe the rally, but were turned away and several foreign and local journalists were briefly detained.
Although charges against most of the FORD leaders were dropped by the end of the month, Ahmed Salim Bamahriz, who had escaped arrest earlier in the month, was detained in Mombasa on Nov. 25.
Strained foreign relations
Relations between Kenya and the USA and other Western states deteriorated sharply as a result of the government's response to FORD's demands and activities.
On Nov. 13 Moi had warned foreign diplomats to stay away from the rally, and a Foreign Ministry official said that diplomats who attended the rally "would be violating international conventions on diplomacy" .
On Nov. 17 Wilson Ndolo Ayah, the Foreign Minister, summoned representatives from six foreign missions to register concern about the behaviour of diplomats in Kenya.
At a press conference Ayah singled out the US ambassador, Smith Hempstone, as having an attitude "of a slave-owner" and as having been "personally involved with organizing dissidents" .
A special meeting of the ruling Kenya African National Union (KANU) on the same day called for the expulsion of 10 foreign diplomats, mostly from the USA, for "aiding dissidents" .
The allegations were denied by their governments and US President Bush gave his full support to Hempstone.
On Nov. 18 the German government said that it was recalling its ambassador as a protest at the "increasing brutality" aimed at the opposition movement.
On Nov. 27 a meeting of Western donor countries held in Paris under World Bank auspices deferred for six months a decision on 1992 aid, stating that they expected Moi's government to open up the political system and to end human rights abuses and high-level corruption.
AFRICA
ETHIOPIA
Proposed new regional boundaries
Details and a map of a proposed division of Ethiopia into 12 autonomous regions became available to foreign journalists in early November.
The proposals were reported to have been agreed upon by the Ethiopian People's Revolutionary Democratic Front (EPRDF) and the Oromo Liberation Front (OLF) on Oct. 19 and were presented to the Council of Representatives on Nov. 18.
The proposed regions, which would each have an elected regional council, were based on the pre-1987 provinces and on a 1984 language survey.
The five largest regions would confer formal autonomy on the Tigrayan, Afar, Amhara, Oromo and Somali ethnic groups.
The proposals conformed with the EPRDF's commitment, as published in February 1991, to "reorganize the administrative structure of the country on a new and democratic basis" in order "to give the nations…wide autonomy to administer their internal affairs on the basis of federation, confederation etc." .
Observers noted a number of potential hazards for the EPRDF-dominated transitional government in these "prematurely leaked" proposals.
According to Africa Confidential the OLF, by accepting the new proposals, had "implicitly abandoned its claim for a separate Oromo state" — a move which was likely to antagonize the allied Oromo People's Democratic Organization (OPDO).
Eritrea was not included in the proposals.
Meanwhile in the area around the port of Assab in Eritrea, a newly formed Afar Revolutionary Democratic Union (ARDU) had in October issued a document affirming the Afar community's right to "self-determination, even secession" .
The parliament of the autonomous region of Assab, established under the previous regime, was no longer functioning, the document said, and the transitional government in Addis Ababa should give a commitment to preserve the integrity of the Afar-inhabited areas.
Alliance of Oromo organizations
On Nov. 6 it was announced that four Oromo organizations, the OPDO, the Islamic Front for the Liberation of Oromia (IFLO), the United Oromo People's Liberation Front (UOPLF) and the Oromo Abo Liberation Front (OALF), had agreed to work together towards the creation of a "broad-based national entity" .
The joint statement referred to the July agreement between five Oromo organizations (including the OLF — see p. 38322), which had failed, it said, because of divisions created by "subversive forces" and the fabrication of rumours by some groups about others.
The OLF secretary-general Gelasa Gilbo on Nov. 10 met with Herman Cohen, the United States Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs, in Washington, where he also opened OLF offices.
Suspension of rail communications with Djibouti
The rail link between Djibouti and Addis Ababa via Dire Dawa was suspended from Oct. 4 as clashes continued between EPRDF forces and Issa groups which since the late 19th century had had responsibility for security along the line.
The Gurgureh tribe was also involved in confrontations with EPRDF forces.
Fifty people were killed in fighting which broke out in Dire Dawa on Nov. 9 between Oromos and Amhara settlers.
On Nov. 28 a team from the Ogaden National Liberation Front (ONLF) visiting the Dire Dawa area appealed to the transitional government to improve the delivery and distribution of food relief to the "Somali" people of the drought-striken Ogaden autonomous region (which would fall within the proposed Somali region).
Aptidon's visit
President Aptidon of Djibouti concluded a visit to Addis Ababa on Nov. 4-6 by issuing a joint communiqué together with President Meles Zenawi.
The two countries resolved to work together to solve the problem of the many refugees displaced by the "recurrent wars and drought in the region" .
It was also agreed "to ensure the administrative autonomy" of the railway between Djibouti and Ethiopia.
Carter's visit
Former US President Jimmy Carter visited Addis Ababa on Nov. 3 at the end of a tour of Africa.
Ethiopian radio reported that during a ceremony in the office of President Meles, Carter had said that he was ready to make his own contribution to convince the World Bank, the IMF and other international organizations "to take part in the country's economic reconstruction" .
Ha also mentioned with approval recent releases of political detainees and the government's "efforts to help the families of ex-soldiers" .
AFRICA
SOMALIA
Fierce fighting in Mogadishu — Retreat of Mahdi Mohammed
Fighting between opposing factions of the United Somali Congress (USC) in Mogadishu flared on Nov. 16-25.
As in early September, the clashes were between forces loyal to interim President Ali Mahdi Mohammed and supporters of USC chairman Gen. Mohammed Farah Aydid.
On Nov. 18 Farah Aydid claimed that Mahdi Mohammed had been deposed as President.
Foreign aid workers and diplomats confirmed that Farah Aydid's forces appeared to be in control of most of Mogadishu, including Villa Somalia, the presidential residence.
Mahdi Mohammed loyalists were holding out in the northern fringes of the capital.
By Nov. 20 Mahdi Mohammed was reported to be massing reinforcements in Warsheik, about 60 km north of Mogadishu, and had placed a satellite telephone call to the British Broadcasting Corporation denying that he had been ousted.
Both factions were firing anti-aircraft guns and large-calibre machine guns indiscriminately at civilian housing.
By the end of November an estimated 1,000 civilians had been killed in the latest fighting and up to 6,000 injured.
Hospitals on both sides of the town were unable to cope.
Médecins Sans Frontières and the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) were among the few relief organizations continuing to operate in the town.
The Italian embassy was sacked and by Nov. 20 its remaining staff had been evacuated from the country.
Telephone and telex communications between Mogadishu and the outside world were severed from Nov. 16.
Mediation efforts
Africa Confidential of Oct. 25 had noted a mediation effort by the Ethiopian government and the Eritrean People's Liberation Front (EPLF).
Both were concerned about the repercussions of instability on the Ethiopian border, and sought to "focus on a new reconciliation conference, giving more space to military chiefs" .
On Oct. 29 the Italian Deputy Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs Andrea Borruso was unable to land at Mogadishu due to fighting around the airport.
The USC executive committee, which apparently supported Farah Aydid, had meanwhile accused Italy of interfering in Somalia's domestic affairs and had demanded that Rome recall its ambassador, Mario Sica.
In late October Prime Minister Umar Arteh Ghalib flew to Saudi Arabia for medical treatment.
From there he was said by officials in Mogadishu on Nov. 8 to have sent letters to a number of countries and relief organizations explaining Somalia's needs for emergency aid and calling upon "the international community and the Moslem world to extend humanitarian aid" .
AFRICA
DJIBOUTI
Revolt in the north — French mediation
Faced with revolt in the north by anti-government guerrillas of the Front for the Restoration of Unity and Democracy (FRUD), the Djibouti government was reported to have appealed to France for military support, on the basis of the 1977 defence treaty between the two countries, and for the intervention of French forces stationed in Djibouti.
Anti-government guerrilla activity from early November centred on the hinterland of Tadjoura and Obock — both coastal towns of about 10,000 inhabitants north of the capital.
FRUD guerrillas intensified their attacks on Nov. 11-12, and the government on Nov. 13 ordered the "general mobilization of all citizens" in order to defend national institutions and territory.
On the night of Nov. 15-16 FRUD forces began their first offensive against the town of Obock.
French nationals were evacuated by French army helicopter from both towns, which were now virtually cut off from contact with the outside world.
The authorities reported that 232 "foreign guerrillas" had been arrested and brought to the capital.
French mediation
On Nov. 19-20 Paul Dijoud, director for African and Malagasy affairs at the French Foreign Ministry, met with President Hassan Gouled Aptidon and later with FRUD leaders in the capital.
On Nov. 25 Dijoud arrived from Paris for a second visit, this time with a letter from President François Mitterrand for Gouled Aptidon.
The terms of the 1977 defence treaty between Djibouti and France allowed for France to respond to a request for military intervention if Djibouti's frontiers were threatened by "foreign armed forces" , but not, according to Le Monde of Nov. 19, if the request concerned the "maintenance or restoration of public order inside the territory" .
Gouled Aptidon announced on Nov. 27 that he was prepared hold a referendum in order to "consult" the population on "changes to be made in the political domain" .
Also on Nov. 27 the FRUD declared a seven-day ceasefire as a sign of good faith.
On Nov. 29 it was announced that France was to send an official military "observation unit" to the north of the country, where it would patrol and prevent infiltration across the international border.
FRUD representative Abbate Ebo Adou responded to the announcement by accusing France of financing the integration into the Djibouti armed forces of "foreigners" from the south, according to Radio France Internationale on Nov. 29.
Conflicting versions of rebellion
The government insisted that the northern guerrillas were Ethiopian Afar militias, created by the former regime of President Mengistu of Ethiopia, and seeking to "realize their dream of a greater Afaria" embracing the Afars of Ethiopia, Djibouti and Somalia.
Eritrean radio from Asmara broadly concurred with this version of events, and accused France of self-interested intrigue, while Ethiopian radio said that many Ethiopian Afar fighters who had refused to disarm had crossed into Djibouti "to join the rebellion" .
The government had similarly blamed "armed foreign forces" for clashes in the south-west of Djibouti on Oct. 20-23, in which, according to the Defence Ministry, the army had killed 12 of a group of 400-500 men wearing Ethiopian uniforms who had made an incursion into the Dikhil region, bordering Ethiopia.
The opposition Union of Democratic Movements (UMD — see p. 38052) had said that the rebels had come "from inside the country" .
A FRUD commander interviewed by Le Monde of Nov. 26 in the vicinity of Obock confirmed that he had formerly trained in Ethiopia, as a member of the Democratic Front for the Liberation of Djibouti (FDLJ — reportedly supported by Mengistu in 1978-81).
In the same issue the former FDLJ leader, Mohammed Adoyta Yussuf, now president of the FRUD, was quoted as saying that the FRUD "wishes to replace the tribalist regime of President Gouled with a government of national unity which represents equally the Issas, the Afars and other communities" .
He appealed to the French government to play an active role as mediator.
Amnesty report
A report published by the human rights organization Amnesty International on Nov. 6 called on the Djibouti government to end the arbitrary detention of members of the opposition.
It claimed that some 300 people had been detained and tortured in 1990-91 and many had been tortured.
The report mentioned the case of Ali Aref Bourhan, Chief Minister of the territory before independence from France in 1977, who on Oct. 29 had begun a hunger-strike in protest against his detention (since January — see p. 37946).
The government denied the allegations contained in the report.
AFRICA
MADAGASCAR
New government
A new unity government was named on Nov. 13, following an agreement signed on Oct. 29 by President Didier Ratsiraka and Prime Minister Guy Razanamasy, and representatives of the opposition forces including the Comité de forces vives, religious groups and the armed forces.
Under the terms of the agreement a state of transition was established prior to the creation of the third republic within 18 months.
Under the agreement the Supreme Revolutionary Council, defined in the Constitution as "the guardian of the Malagasy Socialist Revolution" , and the National Assembly were dissolved.
Their responsibilities were assumed by a High Authority for the Transition to the Third Republic and a National Committee for Economic and Social Recovery; both these bodies would include members of the opposition.
Power to appoint or dismiss ministers and senior civil servants, hitherto the prerogative of the President, was transferred to the Prime Minister.
A new constitution, embracing the details of the agreement, was expected to be submitted for popular approval in a referendum before the end of the year.
However, the news agency Agence France-Presse reported on Nov. 14 that the referendum had been postponed.
The agreement initially had the support of the leader of the Comité de forces vives, Albert Zafy, who was named president of the High Authority.
However, Zafy rejected the settlement on Nov. 7, calling for it to be renegotiated in order to re-balance the powers of the various transitional authorities.
He expressed particular concern that the President would remain Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces, albeit nominally.
Despite the refusal of supporters of Zafy to participate in the new unity government, Razamasy said that it included members of the Movement for Proletarian Power (MFM) and the Front for the Defence of Malagasy Socialism (MMSM).
Among those named in his Cabinet were: Françisque Ravony, Deputy Prime Minister; Ceasire Rabenoro, Minister of Foreign Affairs (no change); Armand Rajaonarivelo, Minister of Justice and Keeper of the Seals (no change); Col. Sylvain Rakotoarison, Minister of the Interior; and Gerard Rabevohitra, in charge of the Ministry of Finance.
AFRICA
ANGOLA-NAMIBIA
The final meeting took place on Nov. 21 in Havana, Cuba, of the Joint Monitoring Commission (JMC) on south western Africa, comprising representatives from Angola, Cuba, Namibia, and South Africa and set up under the Brazzaville Protocol of Dec. 13, 1988 [see p. 36380]to oversee the implementation of UN Security Council Resolution 435/78, on Namibian independence and the withdrawal of Cuban troops from Angola.
AFRICA
BENIN
Foreign Minister Theodore Holo disclosed on Nov. 5 that the government was seeking renewed ties with Israel but did not give a timetable for normalizing relations.
AFRICA
BOTSWANA
The Directorate of Public Service Management dismissed an estimated 12,000 strikers on Nov. 6, after some 60,000 to 70,000 government and public-sector workers had taken industrial action in support of a 154 per cent wage rise, originally agreed between the National Amalgamated Union and the government, but which government officials now said could not be met in view of the budget deficit.
AFRICA
CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC
Christian Lingama-Toleque, former ambassador to Germany, was appointed Foreign Minister on Nov. 5 in place of Laurent Gomina-Pampali.
AFRICA
COMOROS
In a statement on Nov. 19 the Comoran Union for Progress (Udzima) announced that it was withdrawing support from its leader, President Said Mohammed Djohar, and going into opposition; the statement accused Djohar of carrying out a political witch-hunt following an attempted coup and subsequent Cabinet reshuffle in August [see p. 38378].
AFRICA
CONGO
Prime Minister André Milongo announced on Nov. 26 that the referendum on the draft constitution scheduled for Nov. 30 would be postponed until December.
AFRICA
EQUATORIAL GUINEA
A new Constitution, designed to usher in multiparty politics, was adopted after a "yes" vote recorded as 98.36 per cent in a referendum on Nov. 16; the new Constitution stipulated that the head of state "shall not be impeached, or called as a witness before, during and after his term of office" .
AFRICA
MAURITANIA
Seven opposition parties on Nov. 12 rejected the election dates announced by the government two days earlier (two rounds of voting on Jan. 24 and Feb. 27, 1992) as allowing insufficient time for election campaigns.
AFRICA
MOZAMBIQUE
The government and the rebel Mozambique National Resistance (MNR or Renamo) signed a protocol on party law on Nov. 13 under which it was agreed that the MNR would start functioning as a political party immediately after the signing of a general peace accord.
AFRICA
NAMIBIA
The Namibian authorities opened a border post in the Caprivi Strip at Mpelela Island in the Zambezi River on Nov. 1, describing this as an effort to meet the needs of Zambians travelling to Namibia by river and to stop smugglers of drugs, corn meal and other goods, and presenting the move as being in accordance with a 1990 agreement with Zambia; the latter, however, claimed that the Namibians had acted unilaterally and that, without a post on its side of the border, Zambia would lose customs revenue from undeclared goods.
AMERICAS
UNITED STATES
Elections
Congressional, state, and local elections held on Nov. 5 did not provide clear encouragement for either the Republican or Democratic parties.
As in 1990, an anti-incumbent trend was evident.
Democratic mayors did badly in Houston and San Francisco, Mississippi replaced Democratic governor Ray Mabus with its first Republican governor since the 1870s, and Virginia and New Jersey elected Republican legislatures in votes widely interpreted as expressing dissatisfaction with their Democratic governors.
Nevertheless, efforts to limit incumbency suffered a setback when Washington state voters unexpectedly rejected the term-limit proposal, Initiative 553 [see p. 38521], after a broad coalition representing labour, women's groups, teachers and lawyers organized against it.
Initiative 119 to legalize doctor-assisted suicide in Washington was also unexpectedly defeated, a result attributed to a well-financed campaign by Christian fundamentalists.
Victory for Wofford over Thornburgh in Pennsylvania
The only US Senate seat at issue, in Pennsylvania, was won by the Democrat Harris Wofford, who overcame an early 44-point opinion poll deficit to take 55 per cent of the vote against Dick Thornburgh, a former two-term governor who had in June announced his resignation as Attorney General in order to enter the contest [see p. 38279].
This outcome was widely interpreted as an expression of current dissatisfaction with the Bush administration.
Wofford, 65, once an aide to President Kennedy, had been appointed temporary senator in May 1991 by Democratic governor Robert Casey after the death in April of incumbent Republican John Heinz in a plane crash [see p. 38138].
In the special election to complete Heinz's term, his platform had emphasized the need to switch from social programmes aimed at the poor to programmes offering something to average non-affluent US citizens, especially on health care; to cut middle class taxes; to boost unemployment benefits; and to protect jobs from low-wage Mexico's competition (a reference to the North American Free Trade Agreement currently in the final stages of negotiation).
Wofford's message, "It is time to help our own" , found a ready audience in a recession-hit state.
Advised by campaign strategist James Darville, often referred to as the Democrats' Lee Atwater (Bush's 1988 strategist), Wofford avoided overly close identification with black interests and denounced racial-preference job tests.
His economic populism had a powerful appeal to white working-class and middle-class voters, who had often viewed the Democrats as too ready to promote race-based liberalism at their expense in recent years.
Race factor in south
Race was a prominent factor in two Southern gubernatorial elections.
In Mississippi on Nov. 5 a conservative Republican outsider Kirk Fordice, a Vicksburg businessman, narrowly won the governorship.
Fordice highlighted his opposition to affirmative action and welfare with racially-loaded television adverts, but Bush still felt able to label him "our man" .
Bush had, however, disowned Louisiana's Republican gubernatorial candidate, David Duke, the former Ku Klux Klan leader and American Nazi activist.
Duke, 41, became a Republican in 1989 after claiming to have undergone a Christian conversion and rejected his racist views.
Despite being repudiated by his new party, he was elected state representative in 1989 and was nominated for US senator in 1990, taking 44 per cent of the vote in losing to the incumbent Democrat.
On Oct. 19, 1991, he defeated incumbent Republican governor Buddy Roemer in the all-party primary.
For the Nov. 16 poll against Democrat Edwin Edwards, Duke's campaign emphasized the themes that had promoted his rapid political rise: opposition to affirmative action, to high taxes, to crime, and to a welfare system which, he said, encouraged mothers to have more babies just to increase their benefits.
This message had clearly coded racial overtones and appealed to many working-class whites, particularly in rural areas of the recession-hit state.
Nevertheless Edwards, who had failed to win re-election in 1987 because of an unsavoury reputation for alleged corruption as a three-term governor, won the election with 61 per cent of the vote.
The business community rallied to him for fear that Duke's election would scare off tourism and outside investors.
Many middle-class Republicans voted Democrat, and Edwards benefited from a black turn-out of nearly 80 per cent, an unprecedented level in a state election.
Prospects for 1992 presidential elections
Despite his defeat, Duke hinted that he would enter the 1992 Republican presidential primaries.
On Nov. 14 it was announced that Patrick Buchanan, a syndicated columnist and former speechwriter for President Nixon, would probably enter the New Hampshire primary on an "America First" platform calling for an isolationist foreign policy and anti-government, anti-tax domestic policies.
Growing domestic problems prompted the announcement on the evening of Nov. 5 that Bush had postponed his tour of east Asia and Australia, scheduled to start on Nov. 27.
The recession, which had proved deeper and longer than predicted, made Bush's own re-election less certain than it seemed at mid-year.
Forecasts now differed as to whether economic recovery had temporarily halted or whether a double-dip recession had occurred.
On Nov. 25 the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) supported the former view, but cut its forecasts for economic growth in 1992 from September's projection of 3 per cent to between 2 and 2.5 per cent and predicted that unemployment would rise slightly to over 7 per cent.
The Bush administration sent contradictory signals about its intentions to continue its economic strategy of keeping down the federal deficit while awaiting recovery in 1992.
Its actions belied Bush's declaration on Nov. 15 that he preferred to hold this course than to do something that did not work.
Although the Federal Reserve cut interest rates on Nov. 6 in response to presidential urging, other hasty actions proved mistaken.
On Nov. 15 Wall Street suffered its fifth biggest one-day share crash in history, largely in reaction to a carelessly worded presidential statement two days earlier urging banks to lower interest rates on credit card balances — currently about the only area where they were making profits — and the Senate's rapid adoption of legislation to that effect on Nov. 14.
On Nov. 26, under pressure from Republicans to boost recovery by cutting capital gains tax, Bush called for a special congressional session in December to enact a $23,000,000 tax package proposed by Republican Newt Gingrich (Georgia).
This had little chance of support from Democratic leaders, who seized the opportunity to publicize administration support for tax concessions for the rich.
On Nov. 26 a New York Times/CBS poll revealed that approval of Bush overall had sunk to its lowest level at 51 per cent, a 16 per cent fall since mid-October.
Only one in four respondents approved his handling of the economy, a level of discontent unmatched since the 1979 double-digit inflation rate under Jimmy Carter.
This had ominous implications for a party whose political strength in the 1980s had rested to a large extent on its competence in managing economic prosperity.
Economic problems also damaged the administration's standing with conservative Republicans.
They particularly resented Bush's breaking his no-new-taxes pledge of the previous year, which alienated many blue-collar voters who had been disengaged from the Democratic party by President Ronald Reagan"s tax cuts.
Political analysts noted that Bush's problems were compounded by the absence of non-economic issues to be set against the recession.
In particular, abortion had ceased to be a clear-cut electoral asset because younger and more affluent voters had become concerned that the Supreme Court would criminalize it, and the ending of the Cold War had undermined the traditional Republican issue of a strong defence policy.
In a Times Mirror survey, conducted on Oct. 31-Nov. 10, respondents divided evenly when asked whether they would prefer Bush or an unnamed Democrat to win the 1992 elections.
Although vowing to pursue the presidency in the future, the Rev. Jesse Jackson announced on Nov. 2 that he would not run in 1992.
Democratic National Committee chairman Ronald H. Brown immediately commented that his decision would make it easier to get "a consensus nominee early in the process" .
New York state governor Mario Cuomo, who had been expected to announce whether he would run [see p. 38521], continued to be occupied with the problems of the recession-hit state economy and with the need to negotiate a budget with his Republican-controlled legislature.
Criticism of Sununu
White House Chief of Staff John Sununu, to whom the President delegated much domestic policy responsibility while he concentrated on foreign affairs, came under strong conservative criticism.
On Nov. 24 an open letter signed by 82 Republican congressmen urged Bush to appoint Jack Kemp, the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development who, as domestic policy "tsar" , had called for growth-boosting pro-business economic policies.
Sununu's ambition of managing Bush's re-election campaign also provoked attack from another direction.
Alienated by his brusque personality, many administration members and close Bush associates had made clear their reluctance to serve under him.
Passage of civil rights bill
The passage by the House of representatives of a civil rights bill by 381 votes to 38 on Nov. 7, following Senate approval by 93 votes to 5 on Oct. 30, brought to an end a two-year battle for enactment which had included Bush's 1990 veto of a previous bill and months of inconclusive efforts in mid-1991 by Democratic and moderate Republican senators to work out a compromise with the administration [see p. 38381].
The important breakthrough came late on Oct. 24 following a day of intensive negotiations.
Opposing forces in the dispute over the bill claimed victory, accused each other of capitulation and disagreed over what the compromise meant.
In essential outlines the compromise bill was similar to an earlier proposal devised in July by Republican senator John Danforth (Missouri).
The bill attacked discrimination in the workplace by:
(1) Reversing seven Supreme court decisions of 1989-91 that reduced minority rights to press job discrimination suits.
The most significant of these was Wards Cove Packing Co. v. Atonio, which made it the responsibility of an employee to show that an employer used practices adversely affecting women and minorities without any "business necessity" .
The bill returned the burden of proof to employers, forcing them to justify practices adversely affecting women and minorities as being "job-related…and consistent with business necessity" .
It codified these standards for the first time, the technical details of which were the main subject of the Oct. 24 compromise.
(2) Requiring plaintiffs to specify the hiring or promotional method they considered to have a "disparate impact" on the work force.
(3) Prohibiting adjustment, also called "norming" , of test results earned by racial or other groups.
(4) Enabling women, religious minorities and the disabled to sue and win compensatory and punitive damages for intentional discrimination.
(5) Setting limits on future punitive and compensatory damages on a sliding scale according to the size of the company, and empowering juries to decide the appropriate damages within these limits (which were also a subject of compromise between the White House and Danforth bill supporters).
On Oct. 25 Bush, who had threatened to veto earlier drafts on grounds that employers would be forced to resort to hiring and promotion quotas for minorities and women, claimed that the compromise met his objections on this score.
Democrats had always denied that the civil rights bills of 1990 and 1991 ever invited establishment of quotas.
The compromise enabled both sides to avoid a battle over discrimination and sexual harrassment, highlighted by the October confirmation hearings for Supreme Court Justice Clarence Thomas [see p. 38510].
It enabled Bush, who had been criticized for excessive prioritization of foreign policy, to demonstrate concern for and involvement in domestic affairs, and to demonstrate a commitment to civil rights at a time when Duke's gubernatorial candidacy in Louisiana [see above]had embarrassed the Republican party.
It also enabled moderate Republicans to avoid an open break with Bush on the issue, and saved the Democrats from a potentially damaging veto battle which they seemed one vote short of winning and which would again have highlighted for white voters the identification of Democrats with minority issues.
Finally, it provided Senator Edward Kennedy (Massachusetts), the Democrats' chief negotiator, with a legislative achievement at a time of crisis in his personal and political life.
The main dissent came from conservative Republicans who saw the compromise as merely disguising an administration capitulation on affirmative action and quotas.
Women's groups also resented the imposition of limits for gender discrimination while damages for racial bias were unlimited.
Senate majority leader George Mitchell (Maine) vowed on Oct. 25 to pursue legislation in 1992 to repeal these limits.
Bush's signature of the civil rights bill on Nov. 21 was overshadowed by the withdrawal of a proposed presidential order which would have ended government affirmative action and hiring guidelines benefiting blacks and women.
The order, written under the direction of White House counsel Boyden Gray, was to have been part of a "signing statement" attached to the bill.
It had been sent late in the afternoon of Nov. 20 to all federal agencies and departments, and encountered immediate opposition from many department heads, moderate Republican congressmen, Democrats and civil rights groups.
Widely seen as a sop to Bush's conservative Republican critics, the directive was publicly disavowed on Nov. 21 by presidential press secretary Marlin Fitzwater who avowed that Bush had not seen it before it was sent out.
Nevertheless the rapidly amended "signing statement" generated renewed controversy over its declaration that analysis of the legislation, written by the administration and submitted into the legislative record by Senator Robert Dole (Kansas), "will be treated as the authoritative interpretative guidance" by all officials in enforcing the law.
That interpretation was widely viewed as favoring business over minority and female employees attempting to charge job discrimination.
Iran-contra scandal
On Nov. 15 former Assistant Secretary of State Elliott Abrams was put on probation for two years, ordered to devote up to 100 hours to community service and fined a token $50 for unlawfully witholding information from Congress in the Iran-contra scandal [see p. 38521].
He had pleaded guilty to two misdemeanor charges which each carried maximum sentences of one year in prison and $100,000 in fines, but he had been treated leniently because he had co-operated with independent prosecutor Lawrence E. Walsh, whose Iran-contra investigation was in its final stages.
A spokesman for Walsh expressed satisfaction with Abrams's conduct and his sentence.
On the same day a US Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia circuit overturned the five-count criminal conviction handed down in June 1990 on John Poindexter, President Reagan's national security adviser in 1985-6, for his role in the scandal [see p. 37525].
He had not started serving his six-month prison sentence while the appeal was pending.
Poindexter's conviction was quashed in a split two-to-one judgement on the grounds that the recollection of trial witnesses had been tainted by testimony which he had given before Congress under immunity in 1987.
The sentence of Poindexter's former subordinate, Oliver North, had been overturned for similar reasons in July 1990 [see p. 37605], but the appellate panel now went further by refusing to allow Walsh to return to the trial judge and attempt to show that the trial testimony was not tainted, as had been permitted in North's case.
The two judges who voted to overturn, Douglas Ginsburg and David Sentelle, were both Reagan appointees, while the dissenter, Chief Judge Abner Mikva, had been appointed by President Carter.
On Nov. 26 Duane Clarridge, former CIA chief of European operations, was indicted for lying to congressional investigators about the Iran-contra scandal.
It was alleged that he was enlisted by North in November 1985 to help send Hawk missiles through Israel to Iran.
Passage of defence spending bills
The House of Representatives approved a defence authorization bill for fiscal 1992 (beginning Oct. 1, 1991) of $291,000 million by 329 votes to 82 on Nov. 15.
The measure was sent for Bush's signature after the Senate followed suit by 79 votes to 15 on Nov. 22.
The legislation was worked out by conferees from the armed services committee of both houses, who described the spending plans as a road-map for guiding the US military into the post-Cold War era.
Some administration proposals took deep cuts, most notably Bush's request for four additional B-2 bombers.
Only $1,800 million was authorized to keep the Northrop Corporation's production lines open and to allow possible purchase of one more B-2 following completion of the 15 aircraft already funded (only three of these having already been delivered).
The Strategic Defence Initiative received $4,150 million, $1,000 million less than requested by Bush; much of the money would finance deployment by 1996 of an initial, ground-based system of 100 interceptors capable of shooting down incoming missiles, rather than the space-based system conceived by Reagan.
Further economies included a reduction of US armed forces active duty personnel by 106,400 by the end of fiscal 1992.
Congress responded to grass-roots pressure by only permitting a maximum cut of 37,600 in reserve and national guard forces, whereas the Pentagon wanted a reduction of 105,000.
Dropped from the bill was the proposal presented on Oct. 31 by Democrats Les Aspin (Wisconsin) and Sam Nunn (Georgia), respective chairmen of the House and Senate armed services committees, to divert $1,000 million from the Defence Department budget to help the Soviet Union combat hunger and demilitarize its economy.
Too many congressmen in both parties were reluctant to aid Soviet retraining at a time when growing numbers of US citizens were unemployed.
Also removed, to avoid presidential veto, was the clause revoking a ban on abortion in US military hospitals for military personnel or their dependents.
Nevertheless the bill repealed the ban on women flying combat aircraft for the navy and air force, and created a commission to recommend whether other combat roles, including those of the army, should be opened to women.
An appropriations bill, approving expenditure of $270,000 million in fiscal 1992 to carry out defence programmes planned by the authorization bill, received final congressional approval on Nov. 23.
This had provoked Democratic infighting in the Senate.
Robert Byrd (West Virginia), the appropriations committee chairman, came under attack from Nunn because it allowed unauthorized "pork-barrel" programmes to be funded and because no money was given to restart production of the F-117 A fighter, a stealth aircraft Nunn called the "star" of the Gulf war.
Compromise unemployment benefit legislation
On Nov. 15 the Senate approved by 91 votes to two, and Bush signed into law, a compromise agreement to provide extended benefits to an estimated 3,000,000 unemployed workers.
The president had twice vetoed different versions of the plan [see pp. 38428; 38521].
His acceptance of this compromise was attributed to the damaging impact of the recession on his opinion poll ratings, and pressure from Republican congressmen to show concern for the jobless.
The compromise was largely negotiated by House minority leader Robert H. Michel (Illinois), Dan Rostenkowski (Illinois), the Democratic chairman of the Ways and Means Committee, Senate minority leader Robert Dole (Kansas), Office of Management and Budget Director Richard G. Darman, and Treasury Secretary Nicholas F. Brady.
The House of Representatives had approved the measure on Nov. 14, the day after it was reported out of committee.
The package cost $5,100 million, to be financed by compensatory revenues of $2,600 million gained from closing a loophole for wealthy taxpayers who make quarterly income tax payments, $880 million from maintaining the unemployment tax at 0.08 per cent(instead of allowing the scheduled drop to 0.06 percent), and $1,700 million from allowing the Internal Revenue Service to continue to withold tax refunds from people who had defaulted on student loans.
The aid formula of the House bill provided the unemployed with six, 13 or 20 additional weeks' benefit depending on their state of residence.
Senate amendments replaced this with a two-tiered formula guaranteeing a minimum of 13 weeks and allowed unemployed workers in every state to qualify for extended benefits retroactive to March 1 (18 states were excluded from this provision in the House bill).
Estimated costs of the additions ranged from $300 million to $800 million.
Abortion counselling bill — Presidential veto
On Nov. 6 and 7 respectively the House and Senate approved the conference-reconciled version of the human services appropriations bills which they had enacted in September [see p. 38428].
One of its provisions nullified the ban on abortion counselling at federally funded clinics, imposed by the Reagan administration in 1988.
The Bush administration had been enjoined from enforcing this regulation pending resolution of a court challenge, but the Supreme Court's Rust v. Sullivan decision of May 23, 1991, had pronounced it constitutional.
Embarrassed by the consequent outburst of criticism from doctors, lawyers and many Republicans that the abortion gag rule violated women's right to privacy, Bush had directed Roger Porter, his chief domestic policy adviser, to work with Republican senator John Chafee (Rhode Island) in devising a legislative compromise that would avoid a veto battle.
However, negotiations were broken off owing to the vehement opposition of anti-abortion Republicans, supported by Sununu.
The circulation on Nov. 5 of a presidential memorandum promising that the ban would not deny women their constitutional right to full information about family planning alternatives, failed to persuade Congress to retain it.
The House voted by 272 (including 51 Republicans) to 156 and the senate by 73 to 24 in favour of repeal.
On Nov. 19 Bush carried out his threat to veto the bill.
Speaker Thomas S. Foley expressed confidence that this would be overridden, but the House — also on Nov. 19 — fell 12 votes short of the necessary two-thirds majority in its 276-156 vote, also on Nov. 19, when 43 Democrats joined with 113 Republicans in backing Bush.
Guam and various state developments on abortion issues
Judicial dispute continued over the 1973 Roe v. Wade decision that defined the constitutionality of abortion.
On Nov. 4 hearings began in a federal appeals court in Honolulu on the constitutionality of a Guam territorial law of 1990, permitting abortion only when a pregnancy threatened to kill the woman or "gravely impair" her health.
In August 1991 a US district judge had ruled that the statute violated the right to abortion guaranteed by Roe v. Wade.
Similar cases concerning abortion law changes recenly enacted by several states, notably Pennsylvania, Louisiana, and Utah, were also working their way through the courts, but supporters and opponents of abortion deemed this case to be the most significant because the Guam law was the most explicit defiance of the Roe decision.
Several legal experts doubted its viability as a test case, however, because of uncertainties about the application of constitutional rights in the territories.
ACLU call for clear Supreme Court decision
On Nov. 7 the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) challenged the conservative-dominated Supreme Court to decide "once and for all" whether abortion was a constitutionally protected right.
Instead of going through the state appellate process, the ACLU filed a test case appealing against a Philadelphia court's decision to uphold a Pennsylvania anti-abortion law.
Under normal procedures the Supreme Court would rule on the motion before the 1992 presidential elections took place.
Many commentators predicted that a majority of women voters, regardless of party loyalty, would be alienated by a decision to overturn Roe v. Wade, and that this could damage Bush, who believed that abortion should be available only to rape victims or if the woman's life was in danger, and whose judicial appointments, the latest of whom was Clarence Thomas, might have created an anti-abortion majority on the Supreme Court.
Reprimand for Cranston in "Keating five" case
The Senate ethics committee voted on Nov. 20 to rebuke Alan Cranston (California) for improper conduct.
As a senior member of the banking committee in the late 1980s, he had intervened with federal regulators on behalf of Charles H. Keating, while soliciting about $1,000,000 in political contributions from Keating's Lincoln Savings and Loan Association [see pp. 37848; 37998; 38223].
Having become deadlocked along party lines over whether to call for censure, the committee decided instead to present the case against Cranston on the Senate floor on Nov. 21, a rare step for discipline short of formal censure.
This was the final stage of a two-year investigation into the actions of five senators, all but one of them Democrats, who had intervened with regulators on Keating's behalf at a time when he contributed some $1,300,000 to their campaigns and political causes.
In Feb. 1991 the others — Dennis DeConcini (Arizona), Donald W. Riegle Jr (Michigan), John Glenn (Ohio) and the sole Republican, John S. McCain 3d (Arizona)— had been found to have used poor judgement.
The 77-year-old Cranston, who had resigned as majority whip in 1990 and had dropped plans to seek re-election in 1992 on grounds of ill-health, was treated more severely because he had received by far the largest contributions and, unlike the others, had actively solicited funds.
He was rebuked for "improper and repugnant conduct" in which "fund-raising and official activities were substantially linked" .
Senate confirmation of Gates
The Senate confirmed Robert M. Gates as the 15th director of the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) by 64 votes to 31 on Nov. 5.
Bush had supported the nominee despite the criticism, during confirmation hearings, of his role in the Iran-contra scandal, and the allegations that he had manipulated intelligence reports to support hard-line anticommunist policies in the 1980s [see pp. 38510-11].
Supported unanimously by Republicans, Gates was also backed by 22 Democrats, including intelligence committee chairman David Boren (Oklahoma), armed services committee chairman Sam Nunn (Georgia) and foreign affairs committee chairman Claiborne Pell (Rhode Island).
This bipartisan support reflected appreciation of his long experience in the CIA and his past co-operation with congressional oversight of the CIA.
Nevertheless, 31 Democrats voted against and some, notably Daniel P. Moynihan (New York) and Bill Bradley (New Jersey), voiced scathing criticism.
This was by far the stiffest opposition ever recorded in the confirmation of a CIA director.
The controversial nature of Gates's nomination was highlighted when many of his supporters, most notably Boren, warned him that they would be watching closely to ensure that he did not take retaliatory action against his critics within the CIA.
BCCI indictments
On Nov. 15 the Department of Justice announced indictment on fraud and racketeering charges of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International (BCCI), Agha Hasan Abedi and Swaleh Naqvi, BCCI's former chairman and chief executive, and Gaith Pharaon, a major BCCI shareholder.
The accused allegedly deceived federal regulators by fraudulently taking over Independence Bank of Encino, California, using Pharaon as a front.
The other charge involved a $150,000,000 issue of subordinated debentures by CenTrust Savings Bank in Miami.
Pharaon, holder of 25 percent of CenTrust's shares, allegedly arranged for $25,000,000 of the issue to be placed temporarily with BCCI to mislead regulators into believing the entire issue had been sold.
All three individuals resided abroad and their precise whereabouts were unknown to US officials.
Confirmation of Barr as Attorney General
On Nov. 15 the Senate judiciary committee voted to confirm William Barr as Attorney General [see p. 38521]following hearings during which Democrats had characterized the Bush administration's approach to BCCI as lethargic and piecemeal.
AMERICAS
HAITI
OAS mission — Direct talks with Aristide
The special mission of the Organization of American States (OAS), led by Augusto Ramírez Ocampo and with the aim of negotiating President Jean-Bertrand Aristide"s return to power [see p. 38522], returned to Port-au-Prince on Nov. 9 for further talks with army leaders, politicians and other interest groups.
Despite an initially hostile atmosphere, with demonstrations organized by the regime, the talks concluded on Nov. 13 with an agreement that representatives of the National Assembly should meet for direct talks with Aristide.
A delegation of eight parliamentarians led by the president of the Senate, Dejean Belizaire, subsequently met Aristide in the Colombian city of Cartagena on Nov. 21-24, but no agreement was reached.
The Haitian delegation demanded the lifting of the economic embargo, but was unwilling to consider the immediate return of Aristide as president.
No date for further talks was announced.
On Nov. 28 the interim Prime Minister, Jean-Jacques Honorat, announced that fresh elections would be held on Jan. 5, 1992, in defiance of an OAS resolution.
Haitian refugees
The deteriorating situation in Haiti prompted many poor people to attempt to flee the country by sea in small boats.
By the end of November over 5,000 people were estimated to have left Haiti, of whom some 3,500 were being held aboard United States vessels or at US bases, and over 1,000 were being cared for by the Cuban authorities.
Many of the boats carrying Haitians were intercepted by US Coast Guard vessels operating in the area and their occupants held either on board or at the US Navy base at Guantanamo Bay on Cuba where an emergency refugee camp was set up.
US fears of a potential flood of refugees to southern Florida prompted the government to appeal to other Caribbean nations to accept the "boat people" .
Belize, Venezuela, Honduras, Jamaica and Trinidad agreed to take small numbers of refugees.
The US adminstration on Nov. 18 declared that all the Haitians, apart from those accepted for political asylum, would be repatriated.
The proposal was widely criticized and on Nov. 19 a Miami District Court judge granted a temporary injunction forbidding further repatriations after an appeal from the Haitian Refugee Center in Miami.
AMERICAS
MEXICO
Proposed constitutional reforms
In his annual report to the nation on Nov. 1 setting out goals for the second three years of his six-year presidential term, President Carlos Salinas de Gortari proposed radical reforms of agriculture, the education system and the status of the church based on changes to the 1917 Constitution.
It was envisaged that the changes would weaken the traditional power bases of the ruling Institutional Revolutionary Party (PRI).
The agricultural reform, on which a constitutional amendment was tabled on Nov. 7, put an end to the land distribution programme begun after the 1910-20 revolution, allowed private companies to buy agricultural land and form associations with co-operative farmers (ejidatarios), and permitted the farmers, who currently had only the use of their plots, to own and dispose of them as they wished and, with the approval of their co-operative, to form joint ventures with private investors.
The measures were designed to promote greater efficiency, reverse agricultural stagnation and help Mexico compete in readiness for the free trade agreement which was under negotiation with the United States and Canada.
Currently some 28,000 co-operative farms and 2,600,000 ejidatarios accounted for half of all arable land but contributed only a small percentage of gross national income, and much of the country's food was imported.
The educational measures provided for the devolution of responsibility from the federal government to the state and local authorities.
Without specifying whether the state would grant the Roman Catholic Church legal recognition, Salinas undertook to promote it to a "new legal position" .
Anti-clerical restraints enshrined in the Constitution officially prohibited the clergy from voting, owning property and running schools and from outward displays of religious activity.
Relations with the Vatican had been broken off in 1861 but Pope John Paul II visited Mexico in 1990 [see p. 37475]while Salinas went to the Vatican in July 1991.
Extension of economic pact
The Pact for Economic Stability and Growth between the government, business and trade unions, initiated in 1988 [see pp. 37078; 37274; 37849], was in November again extended, to the end of January 1993.
Under the extended agreement the government raised the daily minimum wage by 12 per cent, reduced value added tax from 15 to 10 per cent and abolished exchange controls.
The nominal daily devaluation of the peso was halved from 40 to 20 pesos.
At the same time the price of leaded petrol was increased by 55 per cent, compared with a 25 per cent rise for unleaded, and electricity prices went up by 15 per cent .
Steel privatization
As one of the final stages in the government's privatization programme, three major state-owned steel companies were sold off on Nov. 20 for a total price of $885,000,000.
The government retained a minority share in the Sicartsa rolled steel mills which sold for $170,000,000 to the Villacero Group, while Grupo Acerero del Norte bought Altos Hornos de Mexico for $350,000,000 and took over $350,000,000 of its debt.
Train crash
Between 30 and 50 people were killed or injured on Nov. 19 when a freight train was derailed outside Tehuacán, 200 km south-east of Mexico City, and crashed on to a roadway, crushing vehicles and houses.
AMERICAS
EL SALVADOR
Unilateral FMLN ceasefire
Following the conclusion of a peace agreement with the government on Sept. 25 [see p. 38414], the Farabundo Martí National Liberation Front (FMLN) on Nov. 14 declared the indefinite unilateral suspension of all offensive operations including economic sabotage from Nov. 16.
President Alfredo Cristiani, who had threatened on Nov. 11 to break off UN-sponsored peace talks in Mexico because of the FMLN's continuing sabotage of electricity installations, said that the government would take action to consolidate the ceasefire, and on Nov. 21 he announced that troops would suspend aerial bombardment and artillery shelling of guerrilla positions.
Amid hopes that a peace treaty might be ready for signature by the end of 1991, a new round of talks opened in San Miguel de Allende, Mexico, on Nov. 25.
However, Joaquín Villalobos, an FMLN commander, said that thousands of troops had been deployed to FMLN-controlled areas on Nov. 15-16, while the Modesto Ramírez Central Front of the FMLN reported heavy troop movements into the Guazapa area, just north of San Salvador.
Skirmishes and incidents were reported in that area and in Chalatenango, San Vicente, Usulután, San Miguel, Morazán and Cuscatlán.
Moakley inquiry into Jesuit killings
A United States congressional panel of Democratic members of the House of Representatives chaired by John.
J. Moakley, which was investigating the 1989 murders of six Jesuit priests, their housekeeper and her daughter in El Salvador [see pp. 37037-38; 37181; 37957], concluded in an internal memorandum on Nov. 18 that senior members of the military high command had "very possibly" ordered the murders.
The panel noted "direct and circumstantial evidence" that Gen. Juan Rafael Bustillo, then Commander of the Air Force (now military attaché in Israel), Gen. René Emilio Ponce, then the Army Chief of Staff (currently Defence and Public Security Minister), and Gen. Juan Orlando Zepeda, currently the Deputy Defence Minister, had been among those who had planned an attack the day before at the Salvadorean military academy.
Two lower-ranking officers were convicted of the murders on Sept. 28, 1991, while seven were acquitted [see p. 38414].
AMERICAS
NICARAGUA
Sandinista unrest
The tomb of Carlos Fonseca, the founder of the Sandinista National Liberation Front (FSLN), was bombed on Nov. 9.
Sandinista supporters rioted in Managua, the capital, on Nov. 9, the unrest spreading to other towns such as León and Matagalpa.
Among buildings damaged were the house belonging to the mayor of Managua, Arnoldo Alemán, and the headquarters of the Social Democratic Party (PSD — one of the members of the ruling UNO coalition).
The Interior Minister, Carlos Hurtado Cabrera, appealed for calm and called on the Sandinista People's Army to help restore order.
Former President Daniel Ortega Saavedra said that supporters of the former right-wing dictator Gen. Anastasio Somoza were returning to the country and attacking the FSLN.
Ortega blamed Alemán, Alfredo César — the leader of the PSD — and Vice-President Virgilio Godoy for "sowing discord, hatred, violence and destabilization" , but urged Sandinistas to work to overcome the present crisis.
A parliamentary commission was set up on Nov. 13 to establish whether the police had played a role in the recent violence, which continued into the following week in the departments of Jinotega and Estelí where 15 people were killed.
The re-armed right-wing contra rebels or re-contras were reported on Nov. 20 to have signed an agreement with the Sandinistas to maintain peace, uphold national and international law and resolve disputes by means of dialogue.
AMERICAS
COSTA RICA
Cabinet changes
Finance Minister Thelmo Vargas, who was responsible for the economic austerity policies introduced in June 1990 [see p. 37527], resigned on Nov. 3.
He was replaced by Rodolfo Méndez Mata, whose post as Minister of the Presidency was taken over by Rolando Lacle.
In response to public unrest and dissension within the Cabinet over Vargas's policies, which were supported by the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank, President Rafael Angel Calderón Fournier had reversed in October some of the most controversial measures, including cuts in university budgets, which had caused student strikes, and had halted a programme of public-sector redundancies.
The Minister of Information and Communications, Guillermo Fernández Rojas, announced his resignation on Nov. 19.
AMERICAS
COLOMBIA
Cabinet reshuffle
President César Gaviria Trujillo on Nov. 9 announced a new "national unity" government.
Of a total of 14 portfolios, nine went to the ruling Liberal Party (PL), two to the Conservative Party (PSC), one each to the National Salvation Movement (MSN) and to the New Democratic Forces (NFD), and one as before to Camilo González Pozo, a member of the left-wing April-19 Movement Democratic Alliance (ADM-19), who remained Health Minister.
In the main changes, Nohemí Sanín Posada de Rubio (PSC), formerly ambassador to Venezuela, became the first woman to be appointed Minister of Foreign Affairs (replacing Luís Fernando Jaramillo Correa, who became permanent representative at the UN); Jorge Ospina Sardi (NFD), the former National Planning Director, became Minister of Economic Development, replacing Ernesto Samper Pizano (PL), who was switched to the newly created Ministry of Foreign Trade; Alfonso López Caballero (PL), formerly ambassador to France, was given Agriculture; Carlos Holmes Trujillo García (PL), mayor of Calí, became Minister of Education; Mauricio Vargas Linares (PL), the president's media adviser, took over at the Ministry of Communications; and Juan Camilo Restrepo was given Mines and Energy.
Adjournment of peace talks
A further round of peace talks between the Simón Bolívar National Guerrilla Co-ordinating Board (CNGSB) and the Colombian government [for previous rounds see pp. 38283; 38387; 38433]ended in the Venezuelan capital Caracas on Nov. 10 with a joint 13-point statement indicating the willingness of the two sides to continue their dialogue by Feb. 1, 1992.
The talks, which had resumed on Oct. 31 shortly after the congressional and gubernatorial elections [see p. 38525], focused on the possibility of a ceasefire, with agreement reached on 10 topics for a preliminary agenda.
They included: the need for international and regional supervision of a ceasefire; proper political guarantees for the guerrillas; an end to guerrilla attacks on the civilian population and on the economic infrastructure; the need for the business community to commit itself to the peace process; presentation by the government of the Second Geneva Protocol to Congress; and the continued existence of the Advisory Commission on Public Order.
On Nov. 27 Colombian radio, quoting Jaramillo as UN permanent representative, stated that the government had discounted the possibility of UN mediation because of the "excellent" chances for peace through direct talks with the CNGSB.
At the same time, however, the government condemned a wave of guerrilla attacks in the departments of Cundinamarca and Antioquia and the intendency of Putumayo in which eight members of the judiciary, a businessman and 10 policemen died.
Describing the attacks as contrary to the spirit of the talks and aimed at bolstering the guerrillas' bargaining position, ministers also criticized the holding of discussions on the Colombian peace process in the Costa Rican capital San José on Nov. 17-18, chaired by former Costa Rican President, Oscar Arias.
They took issue with the decision of the Venezuelan government to grant CNGSB negotiators refugee status so as to facilitate their departure from Caracas to attend the San José talks.
CNGSB negotiators were also reported to have visited Nicaragua and Cuba.
On Nov. 23 the government appointed Brig. -Gen.
Nazim Yanine Díaz to head a newly created directorate within the National Police which would be in charge of specialized forces protecting transport installations and senior government officials.
AMERICAS
VENEZUELA
Protests over economic policies — Coup rumours
The Federation of Venezuelan Workers (CTV) and other trade union organizations on Nov. 7 staged a 12-hour general strike in support of demands for 30 per cent pay increases to keep pace with the cost of living, a reduction in the price of petrol, and changes in economic policy.
Police clashed with steel workers in Guayana City, where two people were wounded, and with students in San Félix, where seven people were wounded, 50 were arrested and buses were set on fire.
President Carlos Andrés Pérez declared that the strike was not justified because the government was dealing successfully with the country's "serious problems" .
Clashes between security forces and students had occurred almost daily since October in protest at petrol price and bus fare increases and police repression.
Three people were shot dead and 10 wounded in Caracas on Nov. 20, prompting the suspension of school and university classes.
Similar clashes occurred in Valencia, Mérida, Maracay and in Barquisimeto, where 15 were injured.
The Defence Minister, Gen. Fernando Ochoa Antich, on Nov. 19 rejected warnings from "a group of intellectuals" led by Arturo Uslar Pietri, a conservative politician, that a military coup might be staged in reaction to anti-government protests unless emergency measures were taken.
AMERICAS
GUYANA
Postponement of elections
On Nov. 22 elections, which on Nov. 10 had been called by President Hugh Desmond Hoyte for Dec. 16, and which were constitutionally required to be held by Dec. 28 at the latest, were indefinitely postponed after the chairman of the Elections Commission, Rudolph Collins, warned that a proper electoral register could not be prepared in time.
A state of emergency was declared on Nov. 28 in order to recall parliament and legalize the postponement.
Hoyte himself had come to office in the last elections in December 1985 [see p. 34162], while his People's National Congress (PNC) had been in power since independence in 1966.
Hoyte had twice extended the parliamentary session in 1991, ostensibly in order to allow new electoral rolls to be drawn up.
Parliament had finally been disssolved on Sept. 28 with a view to holding elections by the end of the year.
An earlier poll planned for October 1990 had also been postponed.
The United States Carter Centre, incorporating the Council for Freely Elected Heads of Government, which was supervising electoral preparations, had found in October that some 130,000 eligible voters had been omitted from the electoral register of a potential 350,000 names and that others were registered in the wrong areas.
The Catholic and Anglican archbishops of Georgetown had stated that the existing lists did not form a "credible basis for free and fair elections" , and both the Carter Centre and the opposition Patriotic Coalition for Democracy (PCD) had called for the elections to be delayed until 1992.
After Hoyte's Nov. 10 announcement of elections the PCD had been divided over whether to take part, and three of its components — the Democratic Labour Movement, the National Democratic Front and the United Republican Party — had decided to boycott the poll.
AMERICAS
PERU
Security and economic decrees
In mid-November President Alberto Keinya Fujimori issued 126 economic and security decrees under a 150-day emergency legislative period granted by Congress on June 18 [see p. 38284].
The decrees were subject to congressional ratification within 30 days.
According to Enrique Bernales, chair of the Senate commission on violence and pacification, the new decrees on the security situation amounted to "a military occupation of the state" .
They gave the armed forces broad powers to take the initiative from the local civilian authorities to expropriate property and financial assets, to mobilize the population and institutions in emergency zones, and to enter the universities and prisons, regarded as centres of recruitment and indoctrination for the Maoist Shining Path (Sendero Luminoso) guerrilla group.
Anyone publishing confidential information relating to "national defence issues" would be liable to five to 10 years' imprisonment.
The economic decrees covered the privatization of schools, the elimination of the state monopoly on telecommunications, postal services and railways, the sale of concessions in private electricity and water companies, and a reform of the social security system.
Earlier measures providing for the elimination of the state docks monopoly and the deregulation of maritime transport, air routes and public transport had not yet been implemented.
Amnesty report — Security incidents
In a report published on Nov. 21 the international human rights organization Amnesty International accused President Fujimori of failing to keep electoral promises to respect and promote human rights.
The report stated that 250 people had disappeared or had been put to death in the "emergency zones" since he took office in August 1990.
In response Fujimori criticised Amnesty International and the United States human rights body Americas Watch for failing to denounce the activities of Sendero Luminoso or human rights violations in the eight years before he came to power.
According to the Senate commission on violence and pacification, Sendero Luminoso was responsible for killing 147 members of civil defence groups in the first 10 months of 1991.
On Nov. 3 Sendero guerrillas murdered 37 people who had formed a civil defence group in the Andean village of Santo Tomás de Pata.
A paramilitary group, the Anti-terrorist Commando of Peru (Comando Antiterorrista del Perú), claimed responsibility for the mass murder of 16 street traders from Ayacucho department in Lima on Nov. 3.
The (Castroist) Tupac Amarú Revolutionary Movement (MRTA) bombed a dozen Lima banks on Nov. 4 and carried out a grenade attack on the presidential palace on Nov. 5 which wounded three people.
Bombs damaged the Spanish embassy and other buildings in the capital on Nov. 28.
Cabinet reorganization
The Council of Ministers was reorganized on Nov. 7.
Prime Minister and Foreign Minister Carlos Torres y Torres Lara had resigned on Oct. 31 after criticism over his handling of the border dispute with Ecuador [see p. 38526].
Alfonso de los Heros Perez Albela, the Labour Minister and a labour lawyer, was appointed as the new head of government.
Presidential tour of south-east Asia
Following his trip to Europe in October [see pp. 38526-27]Fujimori visited Malaysia, Thailand and Singapore in November.
AMERICAS
BOLIVIA
IMF loan
It was reported on Nov. 12 that the International Monetary Fund (IMF) had approved a credit worth US$60,000,000 in support of Bolivia's 1991 economic reform programme, aimed at reducing inflation, increasing foreign reserves and achieving a 4 per cent economic growth rate while improving social conditions.
Under the terms of the IMF loan, the fiscal deficit would be kept to 3.2 per cent of gross domestic product, but public investment would be allowed to rise, with priority given to education, health, water and sanitation, as well as infrastructure and research and development.
New armed forces commanders
President Jaime Paz Zamora swore in new commanders of the armed forces on Nov. 19.
While Gen. Alejandro Camponovo became C.-in-C. of the Air Force (with Gen. Oscar Vargas Lorenzetti as joint C.-in-C.),
Brigade Gen. Dardo Gómez García became C.-in-C. of the army and Adm.
Rolando Herrera was ratified as C.-in-C. of the navy [for 1990 appointments see p. 37772].
AMERICAS
CHILE
Constitutional reform of local government
A joint session of the Congress approved a constitutional reform of Chile's system of regional and local government on Nov. 9, with only a tiny minority of the right-wing opposition failing to support it.
The vote ended the practice by the military regime of 1973-1990 of appointing local officials centrally and opened the way to the holding of direct elections for municipal councils and mayors by the end of June 1992.
Free municipal elections were last held in 1971.
Under the reform, elections would be held under a system of proportional representation, with officials re-electable for four-year periods but unable to occupy several positions at the various levels of local and regional government at the same time.
The reform also enshrined a new system of regional government, transferring greater resources, decision-making power and financial autonomy to local areas, in line with the government's policy of decentralization.
Regional administrations would be set up, their members appointed indirectly by the local officials and councillors elected by universal suffrage.
This was the second time that the centre-left coalition government of President Patricio Aylwin Azócar had successfully introduced changes to the authoritarian 1980 Constitution inherited from the Pinochet dictatorship [for January amendment see p. 37958].
The initiative was part of a wider programme of constitutional reform, and the government subsequently confirmed that other changes — to restore the power of the president to remove commanders-in-chief of the armed forces, and to eliminate the in-built bias of the current political system to the right wing — would be presented in March 1992.
On Nov. 18 a ruling by the Supreme Court confirmed that Gen. (retd.)
Manuel Contreras and Col. Pedro Espinoza of Pinochet's former DINA secret police would stand trial for their role in the Letelier assassination case [see p. 38434].
Political prisoner protests
In the culmination of a week of street unrest, the Moneda presidential palace was the scene of violent clashes on Nov. 12 when the security forces moved to disperse protesters demonstrating their support for four political prisoners critically ill in hospital after a six-week hunger strike.
The courts had ordered that the prisoners be force-fed.
The strikers, supported by left-wing parties outside the government coalition, were demanding the release of all political prisoners still imprisoned from the Pinochet regime, despite an earlier expression of hope by President Aylwin that all such detainees would be released before the end of the year.
The government parties, while stating that the reasons for the protests were "understandable" , condemned the fact that they had been carried out, accusing the organizers of belonging to the extreme left and of using the political prisoner issue to further their own aims.
The four hunger strikers decided to end their protest on Nov. 13 after the government announced that a bill would be presented to Congress to speed up the judicial processing of their cases.
New party leaders
Senator Eduardo Frei Ruíz Tagle was elected president of the Christian Democrat Party (PDC), the dominant party in the government coalition, on Nov. 23.
The son of former President Eduardo Frei Montalva (1964-70), Frei was regarded as on the right of the PDC.
Aged 49, he was much younger than several who now held government posts in the Aylwin government — his father's contemporaries.
Frei, replacing Andrés Zaldívar, became the first party leader in the PDC's 34-year history to be directly elected to the post in a vote involving all party members.
He took over 69 per cent of the vote, as opposed to just under 30 per cent for his rival, former senator Narciso Irureta, seen as belonging to the left wing of the party.
Also elected on the Frei slate were Gutenberg Martínez (vice-president) and Genaro Arriagada (general secretary).
Also in November Senator Ricardo Nuñez took over from Jorge Arrate as president of the Socialist Party (part of the government coalition), in accordance with a 1990 agreement between the two men.
Arrate remained in the leadership as vice-president.
AMERICAS
ARGENTINA
Menem's visit to USA
In a further break with the traditional anti-Americanism of the ruling Justicialist Party (Peronists), President Carlos Menem made an official visit to the United States between Nov. 13 and Nov. 19, continuing his efforts to present Argentina as the USA's firmest ally in Latin America.
[For Menem's US visit in October 1990 see 37773; for President Bush"s December 1990 visit to Buenos Aires, see pp. 37914-15; for Argentina's September exit from Non-aligned Movement see pp. 38458-59.]
On Nov. 14 at the White House the two Presidents signed a bilateral investment protection treaty, aimed at safeguarding and encouraging US investment in Argentina.
Later, during an address to a specially convened joint session of Congress, he appealed for US support for his radical free-market economic strategy.
In a meeting in Washington with International Monetary Fund (IMF) Managing Director Michel Camdessus, Menem asked for Argentina to be given more time to make debt repayments to the Fund.
Camdessus made a brief visit to Buenos Aires on Nov. 27 to discuss the possibility of the IMF making a loan of US$3,000 million as a preliminary step to Argentina being able to participate in the US-sponsored Brady Plan for Third-World debt reduction (introduced in March 1989 — see pp. 36541-42).
During his US stay, Menem, accompanied by Economy Minister Domingo Cavallo, also visited Houston, New York and Miami (where he met Cuban exile leaders).
New privatization drive
On Nov. 13 Menem signed a decree for a sweeping new privatization programme, aimed at winding up the remainder of the public sector by the end of 1992.
Half of each company's shares would be sold off immediately and the rest at a later date.
The state expected to raise US$3,500 million from the divestment of its controlling shares to private operators.
Among the companies for sale were the oil company YPF; the railway and underground systems operated by Ferrocarriles Argentinos; the natural gas monopoly Gas del Estado; three federally owned electricity companies (including the Buenos Aires company SEGBA); SOMISA, the Argentinian Iron and Steel Company; the Obras Sanitarias waterworks serving Buenos Aires; the State Shipyards and Naval Factories company, AFNE; and the National Post Office and Telegraph Enterprise, ENCOTEL.
Several hydroelectric plants and petrochemical firms were also affected.
Reduction in number of senior armed forces officers
Defence Minister Antonio Ermán González announced on Nov. 2 that the reduction in number of senior officers, due to begin "this year" , would be between 25 and 30 per cent, with a more gradual three- or five-year plan for officers below the rank of general, admiral or brigadier.
In changes in the Army General Staff announced by the minister of defence on Nov. 5, Division Gen. Martín Antonio Balza was promoted to Chief of Staff from Deputy Chief of Staff.
Balza, who put down the December 1990 rebellion by the right-wing carapintadas faction of the army [see p. 37913], declined to comment on former Col. Mohamed Ali Seineldin whose release from prison the attempted coup had been intended to force.
New UCR leader
Mario Losada, a senator from Misiones Province, was elected president of the Radical Civic Union (UCR) party on Nov. 15, replacing former President Raúl Alfonsín Foulkes.
AMERICAS
FALKLAND/MALVINAS ISLANDS
Rival claims to offshore oil
A United Kingdom Foreign Office Minister of state, Tristan Garel-Jones, announced in parliament on Nov. 22 that the British government had authorized the search for oil off the coast of the Falkland/Malvinas Islands, and issued a proclamation asserting British jurisdiction over the islands' seabed and continental shelf.
A day earlier the Falklands Islands Legislative Council had passed a long-awaited bill allowing licensed surveys of the area, prompting Argentina's President Carlos Menem to approve a bill in Congress rejecting British sovereignty and setting out Argentina's right to all mineral deposits within 200 nautical miles of the islands.
Simultaneous statements issued by the UK Foreign Office and the Argentinian Foreign Ministry, while asserting their respective claims to oil and mineral rights, displayed a reluctance to jeopardize the improved climate and practical co-operation between the two countries [for restoration of diplomatic relations in February 1990 see p. 37245].
It was announced that officials were due to discuss the dispute in London in December.
The Argentinian Foreign Minister, Guido di Tella, said on Nov. 28 that Argentina and the UK were discussing the possibility of joint ventures.
AMERICAS
LATIN AMERICA
Mercosur justice agreement
Meeting in the Argentinian capital, Buenos Aires, justice ministers from the four South American countries aiming to create the Mercosur regional common market by 1995 — Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay and Uruguay — signed an agreement for joint legal cooperation on Nov. 7 [for March 1991 launch of Mercosur see p. 38096].
Referring to the need to develop a common framework for legal cooperation "in the civil, commercial, labour administrative areas, with special attention to extradition" and other elements of "international criminal laws" , the agreement established a technical commission made up of representatives of the four justice ministries.
The ministers also agreed to carry out a joint study of the rights of Mercosur countries, under national and international law, vis-à-vis those of foreign companies and investors, with a view to harmonising legislation in the run-up to the creation of the planned trading bloc.
Amazon Co-operation Agreement meeting
The fourth meeting of foreign ministers from the eight signatory countries of the Amazon Co-operation Treaty (TCA)— Bolivia, Brazil, Colombia, Ecuador, Guyana, Peru, Surinam and Venezuela — took place in the Bolivian city Santa Cruz on Nov. 7-8.
Stressing the need for an international framework which would promote the sustainable development of the Amazon and respect the sovereign right of each country to make use of its resources, the meeting ended with a commitment by the eight ministers to promote sub-regional integration through the strengthening of TCA institutions, particularly those aimed at reaching agreement on regulations for the commercial navigation of Amazon rivers.
In their statement the ministers also pointed to the importance of a forthcoming meeting of TCA presidents in the run up to the June 1992 UN Conference on the Environment and Development in Brazil.
Congress of families of "disappeared" 
The 11th congress of the Latin American Federation of Associations of Relatives of Disappeared Prisoners (Fedefam) took place in the Chilean capital, Santiago, in early November, attended by delegates from 14 countries.
Held in Villa Grimaldi building, once a torture centre where many Chilean disappeared prisoners were detained under Gen. Augusto Pinochet "s 1973-90 military regime, the meeting ended on Nov. 11 with the decision to create a" network for life"throughout Latin America, aimed at the rapid denunciation of cases of disappearance whenever they occurred, and at the achievement of international legislation declaring the repressive practice a crime against humanity.
Calling for "truth and justice" in the 90,000 unresolved cases throughout Latin America, Fedefam alleged that the practice of disappearance continued in Colombia, El Salvador, Guatemala and Peru and that the experience could easily recur in countries which had failed to apprehend the culprits and bring them to trial.
AMERICAS
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC
On Nov. 24 President Joaquín Belaguer announced the appointment of Maj.-Gen.
José Emilio Guzman Fernandez as Chief of General Staff in place of Maj.-Gen.
Sancito Caro Brito [named as Coco Brito on p. 37708]; Jacqueline Mercedes Malagón was later appointed Education Minister in place of Pedro Gil Iturbes, who had been appointed earlier in the year but had resigned after Belaguer publicly accused him of jeopardizing an agreement between the government and the teachers' association.
AMERICAS
PARAGUAY
Brig. -Gen.
José Cespedes Zarza was sworn in as Commander of the Air Force on Nov. 20 in succession to Gen. Dionisio Cabello, who was reported to be under arrest for refusing to hand over his post.
ASIA — PACIFIC
CAMBODIA
Sihanouk's reinstatement as Head of State
Following the signing of the Paris peace agreement in October [see p. 38511]Prince Norodom Sihanouk arrived in Phnom Penh on Nov. 23 to assume the presidency of the multi-faction Supreme National Council (SNC).
In an elaborately organized reception at the airport, Sihanouk was greeted by his erstwhile bitter enemy Hun Sen.
Their personal reconciliation marked the beginning of a remarkable rapprochement between the monarchy and the administration headed by Hun Sen, which had been installed in Phnom Penh by the Vietnamese when they expelled the Khmers Rouges in 1979.
Sihanouk's return ended almost 13 years in exile, where he had formed part of the tripartite "Coalition Government of Democratic Kampuchea" with the Khmers Rouges and the Khmer People's National Liberation Front (KPNLF) led by Son Sann.
Sihanouk had fled to Beijing just before the 1979 Vietnamese invasion, having been in Phnom Penh since 1975 but without real power as an effective prisoner in the hands of the Khmers Rouges.
Distancing of Sihanouk from Khmers Rouges
On Nov. 16 Sihanouk effectively repudiated his tacit understanding with the Khmers Rouges by associating himself with international calls for the prosecution of Pol Pot and others among the leadership for crimes against humanity.
There was speculation that in distancing himself from the Khmers Rouges, Sihanouk was acting with the approval of the Chinese government.
Announcement of coalition between Sihanouk and Hun Sen
Following the signing of a "treaty of co-operation" on Nov. 19, Sihanouk announced the formation of a coalition between his grouping and Hun Sen's regime.
Sihanouk was recognized on Nov. 20 as "legitimate head of state" until presidential elections scheduled for 1993.
The statement went on to urge popular support for Sihanouk's candidacy in these elections.
It was assumed that a number of serving ministers from Hun Sen's Cambodian People's Party (CPP, the new name chosen in October by what had been the Khmer People's Revolutionary Party or KPRP) would resign to make way for representatives of the monarchist Funcinpec Party led by Sihanouk's son Norodom Ranaridh.
There was widespread international satisfaction at this evident improvement in the prospects for peaceful transition in Cambodia promised by the unexpected warmth of the new relationship.
Return of Khmer Rouge Leaders — Violence
Concern over the possible reaction of the Khmers Rouges to the threat of marginalization was heightened following a debacle when its nominal leader Khieu Samphan returned to Phnom Penh on Nov. 27.
Khmer Rouge "defence minister" Son Sen had arrived from Bangkok to a low-key reception on Nov. 17, but shortly after Khieu Samphan's arrival at the government accommodation assigned to his delegation to the SNC, a hostile demonstration turned to violence.
Khieu Samphan was injured and he and Son Sen, the two Khmer Rouge SNC delegates, were rescued only with difficulty by police and security forces after Hun Sen himself had gone to the scene to appeal for calm.
They were eventually escorted to the airport from where they returned to Bangkok.
The incident inevitably raised questions about the feasibility of the SNC convening in Phnom Penh.
The initial Khmer Rouge reaction to the affair was restrained, however, with no specific blame being apportioned to the Phnom Penh regime.
Political prisoners
On Nov. 13 the Interior Minister, Gen. Sin Song, revealed that about 1,000 political prisoners were still being held by the Phnom Penh regime.
Arrangements for their release were in hand but would depend on individual cases and the implications for public order.
The release of all civilian detainees and prisoners of war was agreed at the Paris talks but a number of practical difficulties impeded the process.
The International Committee of the Red Cross, which was to supervise the releases, was unable to gain full access to prisoners.
Visit by French Foreign Minister — Arrival of Western diplomats and UNAMIC personnel
French Foreign Minister Roland Dumas arrived for an official visit on Nov. 22.
In the meantime diplomatic representatives from a number of countries returned to Cambodia for the first time since the mid-1970s.
United States and British envoys arrived on Nov. 11, and representatives from Australia, France, Japan, North Korea and Thailand also presented their credentials to Prince Sihanouk as president of the SNC.
On Nov. 10-13 the first elements of the UN Advance Mission in Cambodia (UNAMIC) arrived in the country.
They consisted of a total of about 150 military personnel from Australia and France.
The force would eventually form part of the overall UN Transitional Authority in Cambodia (UNTAC), whose numbers were expected to reach some 10,000 by mid-1992.
Accord with Thailand on refugees
On Nov. 21, representatives of the governments of Cambodia and Thailand signed an agreement with the office of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) on the repatriation of the 350,000 Cambodian refugees in camps on the Thai border.
The process, which was expected to take about six months beginning in April 1992, would be voluntary until the situation in Cambodia was clearly non-threatening.
The UNHCR would control reception points jointly with Cambodian officials.
The UN would also provide aid to Thailand in the rehabilitation of camp areas after the departure of the refugees.
Return to Mekong Committee
It was announced on Nov. 4 that Cambodia was to return to the UN-sponsored Mekong Committee after an absence of 15 years.
The Committee was originally composed of representatives of Thailand, Laos, Vietnam and Cambodia and was concerned with the development of the lower Mekong river area.
ASIA — PACIFIC
VIETNAM
Normalization of relations with China
High-level talks in Beijing on Nov. 5-10 between China and Vietnam ended with the normalization of relations after a 20-year rift.
Vo Van Kiet, Vietnam's Prime Minister, and Do Muoi, general secretary of the Communist Party of Vietnam, met their Chinese counterparts Li Peng and Jiang Zemin.
Announcing the normalization of relations, Jiang Zemin said that the meeting "concludes the past and opens up the future" and that normalization would have "a profound impact" on the development of bilateral relations.
Earlier, Do Muoi had spoken of the "great historic significance" of the visit.
Both countries had been speaking for some time of their desire to improve relations, without making much progress.
Jiang Zemin stressed that it was "unrealistic" for relations to return to "the status in the 1950s and 1960s" , when China and Vietnam were close allies.
The Soviet situation was seen as a major factor in impelling the two countries to seek their current reconciliation.
The Vietnamese leaders' visit ended with the signing of a trade agreement and a "provisional agreement" on the handling of border affairs.
A joint communiqué said that the two sides had agreed to promote economic, trade, scientific and technological, and cultural co-operation.
Relations with USA
Vietnam and the United States held talks in Paris on Nov. 21-23.
Richard Solomon, Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs, represented the USA, and vice Foreign Minister Le Mai led the Vietnamese side.
The two sides discussed the issue of US servicemen missing in action (MIAs) in Vietnam, and the Cambodian peace plan [see p. 38511].
They agreed to set up a working group on normalizing relations, to meet in New York, headed by Kenneth Quinn, a US deputy assistant secretary of state, and Trinh Xuan Lang, Vietnam's ambassador to the UN.
Vietnam handed over the remains of another six MIAs on Nov. 4, bringing the total number of servicemen's remains handed over to date to more than 450.
The US Defence Department had listed 2,273 US servicemen as missing.
Defence Secretary Dick Cheney testified before a Senate committee on Nov. 5 that photographs and other clues to the fate of MIAs had failed to reveal that any were still being held prisoner in Vietnam.
Cheney warned that "individuals who repeatedly provide false information, well-intentioned or not, should be called to account for their actions" .
A former North Vietnamese army officer told the Senate select committee on MIA-POW Affairs that some US prisoners had been buried by Cuban and Soviet personnel in 1972, but that there were none now alive in Vietnam.
Release of dissident writer
The Ministry of the Interior announced on Nov. 20 that it had exempted the dissident writer Duong Thu Huong from criminal responsibility.
She had been arrested on April 14, accused of "anti-socialist propaganda and illegal transfer of documents abroad" .
Observers in Hanoi said that her release, which came three days before a visit to Vietnam by French Foreign Minister Roland Dumas, was a goodwill gesture towards France.
ASIA — PACIFIC
CHINA
Relations with USA
Visit of US Secretary of State — Agreements on arms control and trade
In the highest-level United States visit since the crackdown on pro-democracy demonstrators in Tiananmen Square in June 1989, Secretary of State James Baker held talks in Beijing on Nov. 15-17 with Chinese leaders on what he called the "real problems" of trade, weapons proliferation, regional security and human rights.
The US Congress had called for concessions in these areas as a condition for renewing China's most-favoured-nation (MFN) trading status in 1992 [see p. 38339].
Baker's 18 hours of talks with Chinese Foreign Minister Qian Qichen, general secretary of the Chinese Communist Party Jiang Zemin, Prime Minister Li Peng, President Yang Shangkun and Justice Minister Cai Cheng, were described by Xinhua news agency as "frank and sincere" but "also difficult" .
Baker presented detailed proposals on ending China's suspected transfer of nuclear weapons technology and arms sales to the Middle East, and its accession to international agreements on arms control.
He also sought China's co-operation in putting pressure on North Korea to halt its suspected nuclear weapons development programme.
China was believed to be providing technological support for building nuclear weapons to India, Iran, North Korea, Pakistan and possibly Algeria, and had also recently sold M-9 medium-range missiles to Syria and M-11 short-range missiles to Pakistan.
Baker also called for the release of some dissidents, and relayed complaints about Chinese violation of intellectual property rights [see also below], the export of prison-made goods and trade barriers to US goods.
Chinese leaders called on the USA to end sanctions and to withdraw the threat of punitive tariffs under Section 301 of the 1974 Trade Act, invoked over restrictions on US imports [see p. 38530].
Baker was told that human rights were an internal matter; Yang Shangkun, warning that pressure on this issue would only lead to increased tension, suggested "seeking common ground while reserving differences" to improve relations.
Announcing the results of the extended talks, Baker said that "clear gains" had been achieved in arms control and trade issues, but achievements on human rights were "not as much as we would have hoped for" .
On arms control, China agreed conditionally to accede to the 18-country Missile Technology Control Regime, which would limit its arms sales to Pakistan and Syria, in return for the lifting of US sanctions, imposed in June, on exports from two Chinese arms companies, high-technology computer sales and joint satellite launches.
In addition China undertook to speed up the passage of legislation to enable accession to the 1968 Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty by March 1992 (China had agreed in August to sign the treaty — see p. 38395).
On trade, a memorandum of understanding to prevent the export of prisoner-made goods [see also p. 38530]was agreed in principle.
On intellectual property a Chinese team was to visit the USA on Nov. 20-21 to try and resolve issues of copyright violation and computer software and patent protection.
On human rights, China provided information on 800 political prisoners whose names had been presented by the US side in June, but announced no releases.
It also agreed to provide exit visas to intellectuals and the families of prominent Chinese living abroad, provided that there were no outstanding criminal charges against them.
Failure of talks on intellectual property rights
Six days of Sino-US talks in Washington on the protection of intellectual property rights ended in failure on Nov. 26, the deadline for compliance with US demands [see p. 38530].
The US Representative for Trade Negotiations, Carla Hills, said that Chinese proposals on ending violations of copyright, computer software and patents had been "ultimately insufficient" and subsequently announced a list of Chinese goods worth $1,500 million which would be affected by proposed sanctions, including 100 per cent tariffs, provided for under Section 301 of the 1988 Omnibus Trade Act.
A 30-day period was set for comment on the sanctions or the resumption of negotiations.
A statement by the Chinese Ministry of Foreign Economic Relations and Trade on Nov. 27 regretted the USA's decision to take "unfair" reprisals despite "major" and "substantive" concessions by China, but expressed willingness to continue negotiations.
Detention of dissidents during Baker visit
Two dissidents were detained during Baker's visit on Nov. 15-17.
Dai Qing, a journalist on the intellectual newspaper Guangming Ribao who had been imprisoned for 10 months after the 1989 crackdown, and Hou Xiaotian, wife of the imprisoned dissident Wang Juntao, were detained by police for four and two days respectively after being contacted by US embassy officials to arrange a meeting during the visit.
Reports of a hunger strike during Baker's visit by dissidents held in a Liaoning prison in protest over beatings and prison conditions was denied by the Chinese Foreign Ministry.
The trial of Zhai Weimin, a student leader of the 1989 pro-democracy movement, began on Nov. 28, according to unofficial Chinese sources.
Release of dissidents
Two men involved in the 1989 pro-democracy movement were released on Nov. 29.
Wang Youca, a student leader serving a four-year prison sentence, was released on parole for showing signs of repentance, according to the official Xinhua news agency.
Han Dongfang, leader of the workers' organization during the Tiananmen Square protests, who was held without trial for two years until released on bail for medical treatment in April, was exempted from prosecution on the grounds that he had given himself up, the agency said.
White Paper on human rights
The State Council had released an 87-page White Paper on human rights on Oct. 31 which said that the right to subsistence was the "foremost human right" .
The paper denied the existence of political prisoners in China, and said that human rights were a country's internal affair.
It detailed the political, economic, cultural and social rights of the Chinese people, including the right to work and freedom of religious belief.
Other foreign relations
The German Economy Minister, Jürgen Möllemann, visited Beijing on Nov. 5-7 for the seventh Sino-German economic commission meeting.
China agreed to use its trade surplus with Germany of DM6,000 million (about US$3,700 million) to expand imports.
Möllemann, the first German minister to visit since June 1989, requested information on 903 political prisoners when he met the Chinese Prime Minister, Li Peng, and said that trade and economic relations would be dependent on improvements in human rights.
An Israeli trade delegation visited Beijing on Nov. 18-22 for the first official talks on establishing trade ties following a secret visit by Israeli Defence Minister Moshe Arens on Nov. 4-8 to discuss military co-operation and China's arms sales to the Middle East.
Diplomatic relations were expected to be established in the near future.
The fifth round of Sino-Soviet talks on troop reductions in border areas and trust-building measures began in Moscow on Nov. 12.
ASIA — PACIFIC
TAIWAN
Agreement to ease parliamentary confrontation
Meeting for the first time in private on Nov. 4 the Premier, Gen. Hau Pei-tsun, and legislators from the opposition Democratic Progressive Party (DPP), agreed to ease political confrontation in the Legislative Yuan or parliament, the scene of considerable violence in recent months [or DPP filibustering attempts in legislature see p. 38531].
It was reported on Nov. 13 that Hsu Hsin-liang had been sworn in as DPP chairman [for his election see p. 38531].
Taiwan-China talks — Initial agreement on joint action against piracy and smuggling
A delegation of the non-governmental Straits Exchange Foundation (SEF) held a second round of talks in Beijing on Nov. 4-7 with officials from the Taiwan Affairs Office (TAO) under the People's Republic of China (PRC) State Council, and reached an initial agreement on fighting piracy and smuggling in the Taiwan Strait.
[For first round of talks see pp. 38146; 38190.]
Chen Chang-wen, secretary-general of the SEF, and Tang Shubei, deputy director of the TAO, agreed that formal talks on the principle of "one China" would be held early in 1992, as soon as China had set up a non-governmental counterpart to the SEF.
Talks were also held on co-operation over judicial disputes and verification of documents.
The Chinese Vice-Premier, Wu Xueqian, told Chen Chang-wen on Nov. 7 that the SEF delegation's visit was "a good beginning" for achieving reunification.
Expressing concern about calls for Taiwan independence, he said that China had noted the Taiwan authorities' "strong stand" against independence activists.
Taiwanese participation in Chinese ethnic games
A Taiwan delegation took part in the fourth national games for ethnic minorities held in Nanning, Guangxi, on Nov. 10-17, the first to attend a Chinese national sporting event since 1949.
Visit of South African President
F.W. de Klerk, the South African President, arrived in Taipei on a three-day state visit on Nov. 14.
He told a press conference on Nov. 15 that South Africa would maintain its full diplomatic relations with Taiwan while developing trade with mainland China.
Direct trade with North Korea
The Economics Ministry on Nov. 22 announced the lifting of a 40-year ban on free direct trade with North Korea.
New draft law on territorial waters
A draft law claiming a 12 nautical mile jurisdiction over territorial waters, airspace, the seabed and mineral deposits was to be submitted to the Executive Yuan, it was reported on Nov. 19.
The law also provided for a 24 nautical mile "adjacent area" in which the Taiwan government could take precautions against any intrusion.
The territorial waters claim also applied to the disputed Tungsha (Pratas) and Nansha (Spratly) Islands in the South China Sea and the Tiaoyutai Islands north-east of Taiwan.
ASIA — PACIFIC
HONG KONG
Return of boat people to Vietnam
Under the forcible repatriation agreement signed on Oct. 29 by the United Kingdom and Vietnam [see p. 38531], 59 Vietnamese "boat people" were flown back to Vietnam on Nov. 9.
Many of the returnees resisted, and had to be carried on to the aircraft by police amidst scuffles, but officials said that "minimum compulsion" had been used, in contrast to the violence which had marked the only previous forced repatriation attempt in December 1989 [see p. 37121-22].
All 59 had been classified as economic migrants rather than genuine political refugees, and the majority were "double backers" who had previously voluntarily returned with financial assistance from the UN, but had fled Vietnam a second time.
One of the returnees, Nguyen Van Khang, was detained on arrival in Hanoi for allegedly stealing state property.
More than 13,000 boat people in three Hong Kong detention camps demonstrated against forced repatriation on Nov. 11-12.
Resignation of Legco senior member
Allen Lee resigned as senior member of the Legislative Council (Legco) or parliament following criticism that he was no longer impartial.
He remained an ordinary member of Legco.
Lee had recently been elected chairman of the Co-opted Resource Centre, a group set up by 21 conservative councillors within Legco following the election of liberal councillors from the United Democrats of Hong Kong in September [see p. 38436].
Lee's new political role was said to compromise his position as senior member in liaising between Legco and the government.
ASIA — PACIFIC
NORTH-SOUTH KOREA
South's renunciation of nuclear weapons
In a nationally televised address on Nov. 8, the South Korean President, Roh Tae Woo, announced that South Korea "will not manufacture, possess, store deploy or use nuclear weapons" , neither would it develop nuclear reprocessing or enrichment facilities.
Calling on North Korea to make a similar pledge, Roh said that nuclear energy would only be used for peaceful purposes.
He also renounced chemical and biological weapons.
The move, linked to the United States announcement in October that it would withdraw all tactical nuclear weapons from the Korean peninsula, followed fruitless efforts to persuade North Korea as a signatory to comply with the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty under the International Atomic Energy Agency and accept international inspection of its nuclear facilities, and to halt its suspected nuclear weapons development programme including the construction of a nuclear fuel reprocessing plant [see p. 38396].
The North had insisted on the withdrawal of nuclear weapons from the entire Korean peninsula as a precondition for inspection.
The North rejected Roh's announcement as "insignificant" as it left unchanged the South's protection under the US nuclear umbrella [see p. 38530].
US Secretary of State James Baker arrived in Seoul on Nov. 12 to attend the Asia-Pacific Economic Co-operation (APEC) conference [see p. 38580]and to seek support for a multilateral approach to what he called "the greatest threat to regional security" in east Asia.
The USA, Baker said, would "do its utmost" to persuade North Korea to give up its weapons programme.
An article by Baker in the winter 1991 issue of the quarterly journal Foreign Affairs had proposed a "two-plus-four" formula for talks between North and South Korea, and the USA, the Soviet Union, China and Japan to discuss the situation on the Korean peninsula and possibly to guarantee a negotiated solution.
In a meeting with Baker on Nov. 14, however, Roh said that a "two-plus-four" solution could not be applied to Korea.
Analysts said that South Korea feared that intervention by the big powers might overshadow direct North-South dialogue.
At a news conference following the APEC meeting, the Japanese Vice Foreign Minister, Koji Kakizawa, said that normalization of Japanese-North Korean relations would be conditional on the North accepting nuclear inspection [see also this page].
However, saying that dialogue was more effective than pressure, the Chinese Foreign Minister, Qian Qichen, warned against pressuring North Korea "into a corner" .
North Korean proposals on nuclear inspection
A four-point statement issued on Nov. 25 by the North Korean Foreign Ministry on denuclearizing the Korean Peninsula proposed:(i) signing the nuclear safeguards accord (NSA) permitting international inspection of North Korea's nuclear facilities if the USA began withdrawing its nuclear weapons from the South;(ii) simultaneous inspection of nuclear facilities in North and South Korea;(iii) North Korean-US negotiations on simultaneous nuclear inspection and the withdrawal of weapons, and (iv) North-South Korean talks on turning the Korean Peninsula into a nuclear-free zone.
According to the South Korean Foreign Ministry, an inter-ministerial meeting on the proposal, while noting the shift in the North's attitude, found "nothing new" .
It was not clear whether the statement had dropped the condition on inspection that the USA withdraw its nuclear umbrella protection from the South.
The USA was reported to have begun withdrawing its nuclear weapons from South Korea, according to South Korean government sources on Nov. 28.
Cheney visit — Halt to US troop cuts
The US Defence Secretary, Dick Cheney, and the US Joint Chief of Staff, Gen. Colin Powell, met their South Korean counterparts for the 23rd annual joint security consultative meeting on Nov. 18-20 at which the nuclear threat from the North was "top of the agenda" , according to Cheney.
Interviewed on television on Nov. 21, the South Korean Defence Minister, Lee Jong-koo, said that the two sides had agreed on "considerably intensified measures" to halt the North's nuclear programme but denied any plan to use military force.
At the conclusion of the talks, Cheney announced that the second phase of the US troop withdrawal plan to 1995, involving 6,000 troops, would not go ahead in view of "the most serious threat" posed by North Korea.
A previously agreed reduction in troops from 43,000 to 36,000 by the end of 1992 would go ahead as planned.
It was also agreed that the USA would supply South Korea with Patriot missiles, and that enhanced joint military exercises would be staged in 1992.
Responding to this "treacherous" security agreement on Nov. 22, North Korea said that talk of "sanctions" and "military attack" had greatly increased the danger of war.
ASIA — PACIFIC
NORTH KOREA
Normalization talks with Japan
The fifth round of talks between North Korea and Japan on normalizing relations ended in Beijing, China, on Nov. 20, with both sides saying that progress had been made.
North Korea had proposed signing a "peace and good neighbourliness treaty" with Japan, with which it was technically still at war, to include an apology from Japan for its colonial rule.
It was agreed to hold the sixth round of talks in January 1992.
During three days of talks the Japanese chief negotiator, Noboru Nakahira, reiterated Japan's position that there could be no normalization of ties until North Korea signed the nuclear safeguards accord (NSA) with the International Atomic Energy Agency and accepted inspection of its nuclear facilities.
He also expressed "grave concern" over North Korea's alleged construction of a nuclear fuel reprocessing plant.
Earlier, the Japanese Prime Minister, Kiichi Miyazawa, on Nov. 13 had linked normalization to dismantling the plant.
This followed United States calls for a multilateral effort to persuade North Korea to abandon its nuclear weapons development programme [see also this page].
The North Korean chief negotiator, Chon In-chol, said that Japan had "raised an unnecessary problem in an unnecessary manner" .
North Korea would not sign the NSA until international pressure was lifted, he said; then signing would be conditional on the withdrawal of US nuclear weapons from South Korea, the total removal of the US nuclear threat, and simultaneous inspection of nuclear facilities in the South.
The two sides also discussed North Korea's claim for compensation for Japan's 1910-1945 colonial rule; Japanese wives in Korea; and high-level North-South Korean dialogue.
The North Korean side presented information on 12 Japanese wives, but said that home visits could only be considered before full normalization of relations if the talks progressed smoothly.
Explosion in border town
A TNT explosion on Oct. 30 at two ammunition depots near the Pyonggang railway station, 7 km north of the border with South Korea, killed an estimated 120 people, most of whom were reportedly soldiers, the South Korean paper Hangook Ilbo reported on Nov. 6.
ASIA — PACIFIC
MONGOLIA
Change in official name
At the session of the People's Great Hural which opened in Ulan Bator on Nov. 11, deputies debated a new constitution for the country.
On Nov. 21, according to the Chinese Xinhua news agency, 67 per cent of the deputies voted to change the country's name from the People's Republic of Mongolia to the Republic of Mongolia.
The new name would come into use after the adoption of the new constitution [for its publication in June 1991 see p. 38290].
President Punsalmaagiyn Ochirbat, presenting the new draft constitution to the deputies, said that the current constitution was hindering the implementation of major changes.
On Nov. 15, Jambaldorj Urtnasan was elected chair of the Great Hural.
IMF credit
It was announced on Nov. 4 that the IMF had approved a US$30,800,000 standby credit for Mongolia in support of the government's economic reform programme, as it attempted to arrest economic decline and restore financial discipline as a prerequisite for economic growth.
[For Mongolia's February 1991 membership of IMF see p. 38009]
ASIA — PACIFIC
AFGHANISTAN
Talks on peace initiative
Talks between mujaheddin leaders and the Soviet Union on ending the 13-year-old civil war began in Moscow on Nov. 11.
The Afghan rebel groups demanded the immediate resignation of the Soviet-backed government of President Mohammed Najibullah and the creation of an Islamic state.
The mujaheddin delegation was led by Burhanuddin Rabbani, leader of the Islamic Society of Afghanistan, and represented all nine of the Iran-based Shia groups and four of the seven Pakistan-based Sunni groups reported to be willing to negotiate with the Kabul government.
The three remaining Sunni factions were said to be refusing to talk to Kabul.
On Nov. 15 the talks produced agreement on an end to Soviet support for the Najibullah government and a handover of power to an Islamic interim government.
The interim government would rule for two years before holding elections under the auspices of the UN and the Islamic Conference Organization.
Supplies of Soviet arms were to cease from Jan. 1, 1992, and the Soviet side agreed to withdraw all of its military advisers.
Soviet prisoners of war would begin to be released before the end of the year.
(An association representing the mothers of Soviet prisoners claimed that some 300 were being held, but mujaheddin sources put the number at only 75 to 80.)
A communiqué signed by the then Soviet Foreign Minister Boris Pankin included a denunciation of the Soviet Army's invasion of Afghanistan in 1979 and a commitment by the Soviet Union to assist the postwar restoration of Afghanistan.
On Nov. 16 the Afghanistan government welcomed the Moscow talks as part of the continuing efforts by the UN, the Soviet Union and the United States to resolve the Afghan issue.
Dialogue between Afghans, it said, was the only way to achieve peace.
On Nov. 20 the Afghanistan Sena (Senate) said that the Moscow talks were "the beginning of dialogue between the Afghans, which is the main and realistic means for the salvation of the Afghans from this dreadful tragedy" .
The government of Pakistan welcomed the Moscow talks as brightening the prospects for a peace settlement which would allow the mujaheddin to return to their homeland in safety and honour.
Stabbing of exiled former king
The former king of Afghanistan, Mohammed Zahir Shah, 77, was stabbed in the face and throat on Nov. 4 by a man posing as a journalist at the king's villa on the outskirts of Rome.
Paulo Jose Santos de Almeida, aged 26, an Angolan-born Portuguese citizen, was arrested.
He was said to have shouted: "I must kill you" , before attacking.
Zahir Shah, who escaped with minor wounds.
Zahir Shah said that he was ready to assume his "moral duty" to return to Afghanistan; he had been deposed in 1973 by a cousin.
ASIA — PACIFIC
PAKISTAN
US-Pakistan talks
On Nov. 19-20 the United States Under-Secretary of State for International Security Affairs, Reginald Bartholomew, held wide-ranging talks on international, regional and bilateral issues with President Ghulam Ishaq Khan, the Prime Minister Mian Mohammad Nawaz Sharif, the Foreign Secretary, Sheharyar M. Khan, and the army chief, Gen. Asif Nawaz Janjua.
Bartholomew was the most senior US official to visit Pakistan since October 1990 when the US Congress suspended economic and military assistance to Pakistan after it could not certify that Pakistan had no nuclear weapons programme.
The issue of Pakistan's nuclear policy figured prominently in the talks, and a Foreign Ministry spokesman said that Pakistan, while expressing its desire to maintain its long-standing relationship with the USA, was nevertheless not prepared to sacrifice its principles and national interests.
Other issues which were discussed included nuclear and chemical proliferation in South Asia, and regional issues in Kashmir and Afghanistan.
At the same time, the Commander-in-Chief of the US Central Command, Gen. Joseph P. Hoar, held a series of separate meetings with Gen. Janjua, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Committee, Gen. Shamim Alam Khan, and the Chief of Air Staff, Air Chief Marshal Faruq Feroze Khan.
The talks centred on continued US-Pakistan military relations and reviewed areas of future co-operation.
Nuclear reactor
On Nov. 4 Radio Pakistan reported that the modified and improved Pakistan Atomic Research Reactor became operational on Oct. 31.
The reactor has been redesigned to run on low enriched uranium and its capacity upgraded from 5 to 10 megawatts.
Resignation of Senator
On Nov. 13 the religious leader and senator, Sami-ul-Haq resigned as vice-president of the ruling Islamic Democratic Alliance (IDA) coalition, and instructed members of his party, the Jamiat-Ulama-i-Islam, to resign likewise from IDA posts.
The resignation came after his implication in a sex scandal.
An Islamabad brothel madam had claimed after her arrest that senior politicians in the IDA, bureaucrats and religious leaders were among her regular clients.
The senator, although not publicly named, issued a strong denial, claiming that he was under attack because of his opposition to Prime Minister Sharif.
He declared that "the government knows who is behind this campaign" and that he was the "victim of a political assassination" .
Economy
Measures aimed at opening up the economy to foreign investment and the privatization of state companies continued apace throughout November.
The Privatization Committee processed offers from the private sector for over 100 currently state-owned industrial companies.
Letters of acceptance were issued to approximately 30 bidders.
The companies involved included two car plants, six cement companies, a chemical plant, an engineering firm, a fertilizer plant, eight ghee factories and 11 roti plants.
Record gains on stock exchange — Investment conference
The Karachi stock exchange made record gains on Nov. 19 with the 50-share index surging 198 points to 2822.
After a further 20-point rise, the index fell back 73 points on Nov. 21.
The gains had been welcomed by the government as confirmation that its economic policies had received a good response from investors.
A three-day Investment Promotion Conference was held in Islamabad on Nov. 18-20, attended by almost 700 participants including 300 from abroad.
At the inauguration of the conference Prime Minister Sharif promised that constitutional measures would be adopted to support the existing legal protection afforded to privatised companies, to prevent any future government from reversing his economic reform programme.
New petroleum policy
On Nov. 20 Nisar Ali Khan, the Federal Petroleum and Natural Resources Minister, announced a new petroleum policy, offering fresh incentives for oil exploration and production in the country.
Bureaucratic procedures were to be streamlined, so that applications from companies seeking licences for exploration would be decided within a three-month period.
New investors would be allowed to set up oil refineries without government permission.
The government also committed itself to meeting all the foreign exchange requirements of exploration companies, which were paid for their share of oil and gas in local currency.
Addressing concerns expressed about the problem of lawlessness in some parts of the country which was deterring some businessmen from expanding their operations, Khan reassured them that a special force would be set up by the government specifically to protect oil installations.
He also declared that the prices of petroleum and its products would be frozen until June 1992.
Huang Tao, described by Radio Pakistan as the Chinese Petroleum Minister, visiting Islamabad to participate in the International Petroleum Seminar on Nov. 22-24, stated that China was prepared to give substantial aid for the development of Pakistan's petroleum industry.
ASIA — PACIFIC
INDIA
Foreign relations — By-elections — Security
Foreign Minister's visit to Moscow
External Affairs Minister Madhavsinh Solanki visited Moscow on Nov. 14-18, where he had talks with Soviet President Gorbachev and the then Soviet Foreign Minister Boris Pankin.
At a time of radical and rapid change in the Soviet Union the visit represented an opportunity to develop ties with Russia, and Solanki also held talks with Russian President Boris Yeltsin and Foreign Minister Andrey Kozyrev.
Trade relations were also discussed with Ivan Silayev, chair of the Interstate Economic Committee and both sides agreed to work on a long-term trade co-operation treaty.
On defence and nuclear issues, Solanki expressed his "unhappiness and disappointment" that the Soviet Union had on Nov. 11 voted in a UN General Assembly committee in favour of a proposal sponsored by Pakistan and seconded by Bangladesh for a nuclear-free zone in south Asia.
German Economics Minister Jürgen Möllemann visited India on Nov. 19, while on Nov. 8 German Economic Co-operation Minister Carl-Dieter Spranger announced that development assistance to India would be cut by 25 per cent in 1992 from its current level of DM395,000,000 (US$245,000,000) because of India's "excessive armament" .
(A similar cut would be imposed on aid to Pakistan.)
Later in November Prime Minister P. V. Narasimha Rao visited Paris on Nov. 26 and held talks with President Mitterrand.
By-elections for Lok Sabha and state assemblies
Congress (I) won seven seats in the Lok Sabha (lower house of the union parliament) in by-elections on Nov. 16.
At least 19 people were killed in election-related violence in Bihar.
The Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) won two Lok Sabha seats; one went to the Bahujan Samaj Party (BSP) and one to the Forward Bloc; one result was countermanded.
Repolling was ordered in three constituencies in Bihar, all won by the Janata Dal as announced on Nov. 24 by the Press Trust of India…
Prime Minister Narasimha Rao, who was required by the Constitution to enter parliament within six months, won Nandyal in the southern state of Andhra Pradesh by a record margin of 580,297 votes; Defence Minister Sharad Pawar was elected in a Maharashtra seat.
Narasimha Rao took over from Arjun Singh in early December as leader of the house in the Lok Sabha.
Notwithstanding its measure of success nationally, the Congress (I) did badly in the Hindi heartland state of Uttar Pradesh, winning only Rajiv Gandhi's former seat at Amethi, and none of the 17 state assembly seats being contested at the same time in that state.
There were 58 state assembly by-elections in all, spread across different states.
As declared on Nov. 21, with two polls countermanded, Congress (I) won 19 seats, the BJP 15 (10 of these in Uttar Pradesh), the Janata Dal nine (including only two in Uttar Pradesh, and four out of eight in Bihar), the Samajwadi Janata Party five, and others eight (including five independents).
Kashmir
A three-day general strike was launched on Nov. 7 to demonstrate the extent of the hostility to Indian rule in the Kashmir valley.
A delegation from the European Parliament was denied permission to proceed with a planned visit to the area.
Punjab — Release of Romanian diplomat
It was announced on Nov. 26 that Romanian diplomat Liviu Radu, kidnapped on Oct. 9, had been released unconditionally.
The Khalistan Liberation Front (KLF) had been demanding the release of three militants held in India, and of two held in Romania, since the assassination attempt on Aug. 20 against the Indian ambassador in Bucharest, a former chief of police in Punjab, Julius Ribeiro.
The army began deployment of an additional 50,000 troops and police in Punjab in mid-November, ahead of elections scheduled for Feb. 15, and placed the whole state under "disturbed area" status.
The BJP deputy president Baldev Prakash was injured on Nov. 15 in a bomb attack in Amritsar which killed three of his bodyguards, and 17 people were massacred on Nov. 21 at a wedding party for the brother of a leading Sikh militant.
A KLF leader, Gurjant Singh, had been reported killed in a clash with police on Oct. 28.
ASIA — PACIFIC
BANGLADESH
Economic co-operation talks with Pakistan — Agreement with Myanma
After three days of talks in Islamabad on Nov. 4-6, Bangladesh and Pakistan decided to set up committees in each other 's capitals to review the implementation of economic and trade relations as outlined by the Joint Economic Commission.
The minutes of the agreement were signed by the Bangladeshi Commerce Minister, M. K. Anwar, and the Pakistani Minister for Finance and Economic Affairs, Sartaj Aziz.
Settlement with Myanma over Moslems
Following a visit to Rangoon, the capital of Myanma, by the Bangladeshi Foreign Minister, Mustafizur Rahman, in late November, Myanma agreed in principle to take back all refugees who had crossed into Bangladesh in recent months to escape persecution.
An estimated 20,000 to 30,000 people of the Roshingya Moslem minority of Arakan province in Myanma were believed to have entered Bangladesh.
A refugee group said that no refugees should be returned to Myanma, which did not recognize the Roshingyas as its citizens, until Bangladesh had been assured that the persecution would end.
Abolition of local government structure
The government on Nov. 23 repealed the 1982 local government regulations affecting representation and administration at upazilla (sub-district) level, introducing a new ordinance under which all functions would be administered through executive orders until further orders were issued; a 13-member commission was set up to review local government institutions.
ASIA — PACIFIC
THAILAND
Second reading of draft constitution
The Constitution Scrutiny Committee on Nov. 13 made substantial changes to the draft constitution, which had already been passed in the first of three readings by the National Legislative Assembly (NLA).
The new draft allowed permanent government officials to hold Cabinet posts concurrently; gave the NLA, which was set up by the military, the power to nominate senators; and gave senators, along with MPs, the right to screen candidates for the premiership, and to launch no confidence motions against the government.
All major political parties criticized the draft as undemocratic, and a protest rally attracted 50,000 people.
An NLA session on Nov. 25 gave the proposals a second reading after agreeing to drop most of the controversial provisions, including the right of the Senate to participate in the selection of the Prime Minister and other important issues, but senators would still be able to vote on no confidence motions.
New leader of Chart Thai party
Air Chief Marshal (retd) Sombun Rahong, governor of the Thai Airport Authority, was elected leader of the Chart Thai party, it was announced on Nov. 12.
The party, hitherto Maj.-Gen.
Chatichai Choonhaven, the Prime Minister deposed by the military in the February 1991 coup [see p. 38003], was now allied with the Samakkhi Tham party, which was supported by the National Peace-Keeping Council set up by the military after the coup.
ASIA — PACIFIC
LAOS
Foreign relations
In a speech on Nov. 12 the United States President Bush announced that US diplomatic representation in Laos would be upgraded to ambassadorial level for the first time since the communist regime came to power in 1975.
Aside from the general moves towards economic and political reform in Laos, US reasons for the improvement included the Lao government's help in the investigation of US servicemen "missing in action" since the Vietnam war and cooperation in anti-narcotics measures.
Laos and Norway had already agreed to ambassadorial-level relations to come in to effect on November 12.
The first visit by a French foreign minister since independence in 1954 took place with the arrival of Roland Dumas on Nov. 26.
During his visit Dumas called for an acceleration in the reform programme already under way in Laos.
The annual bilateral aid negotiations with Australia took place on Nov. 25 between Lao officials and representatives of the Australian International Development Assistance Bureau (Aidab).
Talks covered the Australian-funded "Friendship Bridge" across the Mekong River and longer-term plans for projects in education, agriculture and health.
A "friendship agreement" was signed between Laos and North Korea during a visit by a North Korean Party delegation to Vientiane on Nov. 7.
ASIA — PACIFIC
PHILIPPINES
Return of Imelda Marcos — Flood disaster
Imelda Marcos, widow of the deposed President Ferdinand Marcos, returned to the Philippines on Nov. 4 after almost six years in exile in Hawaii.
She had long been campaigning to get her late husband's body buried in the Philippines.
Shortly after she arrived, it was reported that she had accepted President Corazon Aquino"s condition that Marcos be buried in his home province of Ilocos Norte, rather than in the capital, Manila.
There were conflicting accounts of Marcos's reception.
Estimates of the numbers of people who turned out to greet her ranged from 1,500 to 30,000, but even this higher figure was regarded as a small crowd by Manila standards.
The unexpected arrival four days beforehand of her son Ferdinand "Bongbong" Marcos was seen by some as upstaging his mother's highly publicized return.
The day after her arrival, Imelda Marcos posted bail of 175,000 pesos (about US$6,700) against seven charges of tax evasion.
The hearing was due to begin at Quezon City regional court on Dec. 9.
The seven tax fraud charges were only the first of many corruption charges expected to be filed against Marcos and her children.
The Swiss government was to end the freeze on the Marcos family's Swiss bank accounts on Dec. 20 unless the Philippines government had begun recovery proceedings there by that date.
The Philippines government had agreed to drop all pending or future suits filed against the Marcoses in the USA in return for Marcos property there worth some $8,000,000.
Floods
Tropical storm "Thelma" struck the central Philippines on Nov. 5, causing floods and mudslides.
It was the fourth disaster to hit the Philippines in 17 months and the most serious since 1976.
[For June-July eruption of Mount Pinatubo see pp. 38294; 38345; for 1976 earthquake see p. 28106.]
Worst affected were the islands of Leyte, Samar and Negros.
More than 5,000 people were believed to have been killed, most of them in the town of Ormoc, and 120,000 were left homeless, with thousands more still missing and presumed dead.
Aquino on Nov. 7 declared a state of calamity in Leyte Province.
Air force planes transported food to the survivors, but delivery of food and other relief operations was hampered by a manpower shortage, due to the heavy casualties.
Although the direct cause was the tropical storm, the disaster was also described as man-made, in that years of illegal logging had left the area's mountains bare and prone to mudslides.
The governor of Leyte island blamed the government for failing to impose a total logging ban.
Aquino promised that all those involved in illegal logging would be prosecuted.
ASIA — PACIFIC
MALAYSIA
1992 budget
Finance Minister Datuk Seri Anwar Ibrahim presented his first budget on Nov. 1.
It was characterized by a commitment to the policies of his predecessor, Tun Daim Zainuddin, who for seven years had kept the country on a course of fast economic growth (with an average annual rate over the previous five years of 8.3 per cent), despite the threat of inflation, estimated to be over 5 per cent , and a worsening current-account balance.
The total budget was set at 45,400 million ringgits (about US$16,600 million); over 18 per cent was allocated to debt-service charges, 28.7 per cent to emoluments, 19.5 per cent to social and economic services, and 4.4 per cent to security.
The expenditure would be financed 22 per cent from borrowing and use of government assets.
There would be increased taxes on imported cigarettes and alcohol; tax incentives to encourage savings; reduction of duties on imported textiles and garments and some foodstuffs, and abolition of some stamp duties; and a levy of 360-2,400 ringgits on foreign workers and expatriates.
ASIA — PACIFIC
INDONESIA
Massacre in East Timor
Indonesian troops opened fire on Nov. 12 on pro-independence demonstrators at a cemetery in Dili, capital of the de facto Indonesian territory of East Timor, killing between 60 and 180 people.
An estimated 3,500 demonstrators had marched peacefully through the town to the cemetery to commemorate a student killed in clashes with police on Oct. 28.
Eyewitness accounts from Western journalists said that 200 troops fired on the unarmed crowd for several minutes before moving in to beat and arrest the survivors.
The East Timor army commander, Brig. -Gen.
Rudolf Warouw, later said that the troops had fired after misunderstanding an order, and blamed provocation by armed demonstrators who had allegedly stabbed an army officer, an account rejected by eyewitnesses.
Warouw blamed the left-wing nationalist guerrilla movement Fretilín for the incident, and promised an investigation.
Official figures put the death toll at 19, with 91 wounded, including some soldiers.
The army C.-in-C., Gen. Try Sutrisno, expressed regret for the killings, but said that the troops had had "no choice" but to fire.
Observers said that the demonstration had been planned to coincide with the visit to Dili of a Portuguese parliamentary delegation (subsequently cancelled by Indonesia — see p. 38535), and of the UN special rapporteur on torture, Peter Kooymans, to raise international awareness of the East Timor independence movement.
A former Portuguese colony, the predominantly Catholic East Timor was forcibly incorporated into Indonesia in 1976 [see pp. 27906-07], and closed to the outside world for 13 years, during which time some 200,000 Timorese were killed or died of starvation, according to human rights groups.
In recent years, independence activities had been increasing, especially in Dili, despite a harsh response from the Indonesian authorities.
In October, the army was said to have embarked on a campaign of intimidation, and tension was reportedly high.
Claims of subsequent killing of detainees
The massacre was reportedly followed by the arrest of 300-400 people, some of whom were allegedly tortured, and 60-80 of whom were executed on Nov. 15, according to Indonesian and Timorese human rights groups.
Another 17 were reportedly executed in the following days.
Opposition sources claimed that seven people including two children were shot on Nov. 20.
The human rights organization Amnesty International termed these reports "credible" .
By Nov. 24 the death toll was said to be 214, with 300 seriously wounded.
Red Cross workers were banned from the military hospital where the wounded were being treated until interrogations were completed; on Nov. 24 they were permitted to speak to the 89 wounded, but a request for private interviews with 47 other detainees was refused.
Indonesian investigation commission
President Suharto on Nov. 19 set up a seven-person commission to investigate the Dili incident, headed by Chief Justice Jaelani, a retired army general, and comprising officials from the Home Affairs, Foreign and Justice Ministries, and representatives from the Supreme Court, armed forces and parliament.
The commission attracted criticism for excluding non-government organizations.
Fretilín announced that it would boycott the investigation, dismissing military guarantees of safety for those giving evidence to the commission.
The governor of East Timor, Mario Carrascalao, threatened to resign if the investigation was not objective.
International response — UN investigation mission
The killings in Dili drew international condemnation.
Portugal called for an end to Indonesia's "illegal occupation" of its former colony.
The European Parliament called for an independent inquiry and proposed an arms embargo on Indonesia.
The Australian Prime Minister, Bob Hawke, said that policies towards Indonesia would be reviewed if the inquiry into the Dili massacre was a "whitewash" .
while the European Communities (EC) warned that aid could be withheld.
Meanwhile, the Netherlands suspended new aid to Indonesia.
On Nov. 28, the UN Secretary-General announced the dispatch of a mission to Dili, to which Indonesia responded that it would not accept foreign commissions of inquiry in East Timor.
ASIA — PACIFIC
NEW ZEALAND
Government compromise on pension cuts — Resignation of Muldoon
New Zealand's National Party government eased proposed cuts in pensions on Nov. 7 after a storm of protest including marches by retired people, and criticism from its own back benches and political opponents.
A stringent new means-tested pension system was part of a radical budget package announced in July, sharply reducing health, education, housing and retirement benefits [see p. 38345].
Even after the latest concession, pension payments would be lower than before.
The concession was expected to cost some NZ$440 million (about US$240 million) more than the government had planned for pensions.
Finance Minister Ruth Richardson said that this would have to be made up from other cuts in public spending.
Resignation of Muldoon
Sir Robert Muldoon, the former National Party leader and Prime Minister in 1975-84, condemned the government's welfare cuts and said on his weekly radio programme on Nov. 17 that he would leave Parliament (where he had represented an Auckland constituency for over 30 years) early in 1992.
The government of Prime Minister Jim Bolger, he said, had been captured by the extreme right and its budget measures were "a tragedy for many good New Zealanders" ; he accused the government of failing to keep a pre-election promise not to hurt pensioners, who were previously protected by a guaranteed retirement income scheme.
Request for extradition of French agent
New Zealand police said on Nov. 26 that they were seeking extradition of an alleged French secret agent, Gerald Andries, who had been arrested in Basel, Switzerland, on a warrant issued in New Zealand on charges of murder and conspiracy.
He was wanted in connection with the July 1985 bombing of the Greenpeace ship Rainbow Warrior in Auckland harbour [see pp. 33852-54].
France said on Nov. 28 that it was recalling its ambassador for consultations.
A spokesman said that the French government regarded the whole issue as closed.
[For November 1985 conviction of two French agents for bombing and other developments see pp. 34565-68; for repatriations of Mafart and Prieur in December 1987 and May 1988 see p. 36295; for April 1991 visit to new Zealand by Roland Dumas see p. 38153; for July honouring of Mafart and further French nuclear test in Pacific see p. 38345.]<N
ASIA — PACIFIC
APEC
Ministerial meeting in Seoul
Ministers from 15 member countries attending the third Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) conference in Seoul on Nov. 12-14 issued a declaration at the close of the talks which set out the direction and role for APEC as "an exemplary model of open regional co-operation" , and agreed to co-operate to reduce trade barriers both within the region and worldwide, and to identify and promote the region's interests.
China, Hong Kong and Taiwan (under the name Chinese Taipei) participated in the conference for the first time; the Chinese delegate, Foreign Minister Qian Qichen, was the most senior Chinese official to visit South Korea.
Other APEC participants were Australia, Brunei, Canada, Indonesia, Japan, South Korea, Malaysia, New Zealand, the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and the United States.
After some disagreement, participants issued a separate declaration on the current Uruguay Round of talks under the auspices of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), which backed "substantial" liberalization of trade, and agreed to show "the necessary flexibility" in the GATT negotiations.
The South Korean Foreign Affairs Minister, Lee Sang Ock, denied that the disagreement stemmed from friction between countries demanding full market opening and those calling for exceptions.
Both Japan and Korea had refused to open their domestic rice markets.
In a banquet speech on Nov. 13, South Korean President Roh Tae Woo said that APEC should not become an exclusive regional economic bloc, and warned against the development of competition between east Asia and north America.
At the conference, the US Secretary of State James Baker promised that the USA's engagement in Asia would increase rather than decrease following the end of US-Soviet confrontation.
Baker also sought support for the USA's opposition to a Malaysian proposal for an East Asian trade grouping which excluded the USA [see p. 38535].
The new Japanese Foreign Minister, Michio Watanabe, had already stated that Japan would not participate in this grouping, and Lee Sang Ock also reportedly pledged South Korea's opposition to the plan.
The Malaysian Prime Minister, Mohamed Mahathir, responded by warning that the USA was becoming "a threat to the future of small countries" and by replacing his trade minister with a lower ranking official at the APEC talks.
ASIA — PACIFIC
MYANMA
In a statement on Nov. 22 the Karen National Union (KNU) estimated that over 800 civilians, 375 government troops and 27 Karen guerrillas had been killed as a result of fighting during the last six weeks in the lower central Irrawaddy Delta, south-east of Rangoon.
ASIA — PACIFIC
NEPAL
On Nov. 24 the Indian government accepted the appointment of Chakra Bastola as Nepali ambassador to India after the Bihar state government dropped charges against him for receipt of Rs3,000,000 claimed to have been on board a Royal Nepal Airlines flight which was hijacked to Forbesganj in June 1971.
ASIA — PACIFIC
SAARC
The sixth annual summit of the South Asian Association for Regional Co-operation (SAARC), due to have been opened in Colombo, Sri Lanka, on Nov. 7, was postponed indefinitely after King Jigme Singye Wangchuk of Bhutan, who faced unrest among ethnic Nepalis in southern Bhutan [see p. 38534], said on Nov. 1 that he would be unable to attend; the Indian government insisted that SAARC's constitution stipulated that summits required the attendance of heads of state or government from each member country.
EUROPE
SOVIET UNION
Abolition of union ministries — Union treaty
At the meeting of the State Council on Nov. 4, attended by the leaders of all 12 republics, except Moldava and Armenia, agreement was reached on the abolition of all Union Ministries, except for railways, atomic power, and electricity.
The question of the Ministries of Defence and Foreign Affairs was discussed in closed session, and their survival was subsequently decided.
Ukraine agreed on Nov. 6 to sign the Treaty on Economic Community [see p. 38537], after heated debate in the republic's Supreme Soviet, as did Moldava, leaving only Azerbaijan and Georgia as non-signatories.
The formation of the Interstate Economic Committee (IEC), was endorsed at a further meeting on Nov. 14 which was not attended by Ukraine, Armenia, Georgia, and Uzbekistan.
Ivan Silayev was confirmed as its chair.
The IEC would replace the interim economic committee, which had been attempting to manage the economy since the coup [see pp. 38414-15].
The IEC would co-ordinate transport, communications, energy (including nuclear energy), statistics and aviation.
Many of the ministries based in Moscow and responsible for specific branches of industry would be reconstituted as semi-independent corporations, according to the Financial Times of Nov. 6.
However, a presidential spokesman said that between 30,000 and 50,000 people would lose their jobs as a result of the abolition of ministries.
The number of personnel at the ministries of Defence, Interior, Foreign Affairs and the Prosecutor's office would be severely cut.
Reorganization of Foreign Ministry — Reinstatement of Shevardnadze
On Nov. 19 Eduard Shevardnadze was reappointed as Soviet Minister of Foreign Affairs.
On Nov. 15, the fundamental reorganization of the Soviet Foreign Ministry had been announced, following the Nov. 4 meeting of the State Council.
The reorganization comprised cutting the number of staff based in Moscow from 5,000 to 2,700; renaming the Ministry as the Ministry of External Relations, and transferring to it some of the functions of the Ministry of Foreign Economic Relations, which was to be abolished [see above].
Shevardnadze had resigned from the post of Foreign Minister on Dec. 20, 1990, warning of the danger of impending dictatorship [see p. 37903].
Since then he had run a foreign policy unit in Moscow, and had helped found the Democratic Reform Movement, which had attempted to unite democratic groups in opposition to the Communist Party [see p. 38347].
After the attempted coup in August, Foreign Ministry staff had requested Shevardnadze's reinstatement [see p. 38372].
Shevardnadze said of President Mikhail Gorbachev on Nov. 20, that after the coup in August"his change toward democracy is, in my mind, final.
Under these circumstances, I thought it possible to work with him".
Observers noted that Shevardnadze's appointment was an attempt to reassure the West over the splintering of foreign policy into republican units, with the attendant worries over nuclear weapons and the co-ordination of foreign aid.
Boris Pankin, appointed Foreign Minister on Aug. 28, 1991, after the dismissal of Aleksandr Bessmertnykh [see p. 38372], was now named as ambassador to the United Kingdom.
The ambassadors to the European Communities (EC), and to France and five other countries were also replaced; nine embassies and 11 consulates general were to be abolished, and the staff of about 20 others to be severely cut.
Agreement on "union of sovereign states" 
Together with the negotiations about the future of the ministries and the economy, the State Council was negotiating the future structure of the Union.
After the meeting of Nov. 14, it was announced that agreement had been reached on forming a Union of Sovereign States, which Gorbachev described as a union of "Confederal Democratic States" .
The Treaty appeared to remove the need for the Supreme Soviet to draft a constitution [see p. 38414].
However, the seven republican delegations which attended a further meeting on Nov. 25 refused to initial the Treaty, and sent it back for further discussion in the republican Supreme Soviets.
Ukraine's absence from the negotiations because of the forthcoming referendum on independence, had made the signing of a Union Treaty unlikely and of little worth if it were signed.
The lack of progress in signing a Union Treaty was a severe blow to Gorbachev, who was increasingly isolated as the republics took over more powers.
At the Nov. 4 meeting he had warned: "We have somehow frivolously disposed of the capital which we acquired after the coup." 
After the failure to initial the Treaty, he admitted that "pressure is being put on my colleagues which raise doubts about the usefulness of preserving the state" .
Budget crisis — Russian control of Soviet banks
A compromise agreement on Nov. 30 between Boris Yeltsin, President of the Russian Federation, and Gorbachev gave the Russian Federation joint control with the centre over Union budget policy, and allowed credits to the budget from the Soviet State Bank (Gosbank), underwritten by Russia, provided that budget cuts were made.
Gosbank had warned on Nov.29 that it would cease payments to central government, after the Supreme Soviet refused to endorse a request for 90,500 million roubles credit to finance the last quarter budget deficit and pay state employees [for budget deficit see p. 38301].
Russian deputies to the Soviet of the Union had boycotted the debate on Nov. 28, leaving the house inquorate.
Russia had already announced, on Nov. 22, that Vneshekonombank (Soviet bank for foreign economic affairs), named as the body responsible for co-ordinating debt repayment in October [see p. 38537], would become a commercial bank under Russian control from Dec. 15 and Gosbank would lie under the control of the Russian Central Bank, until the creation of a banking union between the republics.
The Russian Supreme Soviet voted out Yeltsin's original proposal to bring Gosbank under Russian government control.
Observers noted that the move would speed Ukraine's introduction of its own currency.
From Jan. 1, the Russian Central Bank would have control of monetary, credit and currency policy, and would issue money until the creation of a banking union.
Byelorus transferred its hard currency accounts from Vneshekonombank to a republican bank on Nov. 22.
Other economic measures
The Russian government announced on Nov. 15 that it was taking control of Soviet oil-export licences from Dec. 1.
It was unclear what effect this would have on oil prices abroad.
The move seemed intended to protect domestic supply — there had been a 25 per cent fall in production in the first half of 1991 [see p. 38492].
Russia also took control of gold and diamonds on its territory [for Kazakhstan's control of gold reserves see p. 38538].
A further series of measures, announced on Nov. 17, lifted import and export controls and introduced a floating rouble exchange rate as of Jan. 1, 1992.
It allowed Russian citizens to hold hard-currency accounts, and permitted all Russian firms to engage in foreign trade.
Salaries were also raised, by as much as 90 per cent in some cases, presumably in preparation for price liberalization in 1992 [see p. 38357].
The minimum monthly wage was raised to 200 roubles (average wage 350 roubles); on Nov. 22 the Russian Supreme Soviet raised this to 324 roubles.
G-7 meeting on debt
Talks between the Group of Seven (G-7) industrialized countries deputy finance ministers and Soviet republics were held in Moscow on Nov. 18-21 on the Soviet debt issue.
Ministers from the three Baltic states attended as observers.
The meeting was intended to specify the mechanism by which foreign debt would be repaid by the republics, following the memorandum signed in October [see p. 38537].
On Nov. 21, after an extra day of negotiations, eight out of the 12 republics reached agreement (Ukraine, Azerbaijan, Georgia and Uzbekistan saying that they would sign at some future point), allowing the deferment of principal repayments on debt due at the end of 1992, with an option to extend the deferral after March 1992.
The republics agreed also to implement International Monetary Fund (IMF) recommendations on economic reform, and to honour the US$84,000 million foreign debt.
Warnings earlier in November of possible default on the debt because of lack of hard-currency reserves had prompted a meeting of G-7 officials in Paris on Nov. 6.
The Nov. 21 agreement confirmed the Oct. 28 memorandum, committing the republics to agree on allocating responsibility for the debt.
The G-7 countries committed themselves to gaining agreement from other creditors (commercial banks) and to maintaining short-term credits.
A proposal for a $1,000 million bridging loan, with 104 tonnes of gold as collateral, was not taken up because, Soviet sources said, it raised "social and political problems" .
The amount of Soviet gold remaining was quoted as 240 tonnes by economist Grigory Yavlinsky in October.
There were 150 tonnes in Western banks as loan collateral.
Before the G-7 meeting opened, Russia, Ukraine, Byelorus and Kazakhstan issued a statement on Nov. 18 repudiating agreements signed by the union government with international financial bodies.
The four republics assumed their responsibility for the Union's debts, but would not accept contracts signed "after the Soviet Union ceased to exist as a single state" [for IMF agreement with Soviet Union see p. 38553].
Azerbaijan and Turkmenia had rejected their share of the Soviet Union's foreign debt.
Aid agreements
The World Bank signed a $30,000,000 technical aid deal with Gorbachev on Nov. 5.
On Nov. 20, the USA approved $1,250 million in loan guarantees to buy food and animal feed.
The aid would be offered to all 12 republics, but administered through Moscow.
An accord on food provision in 1992 had been signed on Nov. 5 between the 12 republics, banning restrictions on food exports from the republics, and delegating the conclusion of agreements on purchasing food from foreign states to the IEC.
The European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) announced its first loans to the Soviet Union, totalling $19,000,000, on Nov. 26.
Silayev on a visit to Brussels on Nov. 26-27 signed agreements with Jacques Delors, the President of the European Commission on credits agreed in October [see p. 38538], and held talks on extending these credits.
US co-operation in modernizing the agricultural sector was discussed in a meeting between Gorbachev and US officials in Moscow on Nov. 13.
Abolition of fixed exchange rate
From Dec. 2, the rouble exchange rate for tourists was to be allowed to float, in what the Financial Times called "another small step towards a partially convertible currency" .
The tourist rate had been devalued on Nov. 4 by 31.9 per cent, to reach $1.00=47 roubles.
However, the official and commercial exchange rates remained unchanged at six roubles and seven roubles to the dollar respectively.
During November there had been difficulties in paying money held in hard currency accounts to foreigners, a sign of the shortage of hard currency in the union account.
The republics
Azerbaijan
At a Cabinet meeting on Nov. 9, Turkey agreed to recognise Azerbaijan's independence.
Azerbaijan had made a formal request for recognition on Nov. 5, following an unofficial visit to Turkey by Prime Minister Gasan Gasanov on Nov. 3-4, when he held talks with Turkish leaders.
Azerbaijan's August declaration of independence had been confirmed by the republican Supreme Soviet in October [see p. 38538].
A spokesman for the Turkish government said that Turkey's relations with Moscow would not be affected.
Gasanov said on Nov. 20 that Azerbaijan was hoping for increased commercial links, and, as a Turkic speaking nation, would adopt the Latin alphabet in order to increase cultural co-operation with Turkey.
Armenia — President's visit to north America
President Levon Ter-Petrosyan visited the USA and Canada on Nov. 14-15.
His request that US President Bush recognize Armenia's independence was refused, although the US was planning to open a consulate in Armenia in 1992.
In Canada he visited the large Armenian community and held talks with Prime Minister Brian Mulroney.
Escalation of Nagorny Karabakh dispute
On Nov. 26, the Azerbaijani parliament adopted a resolution annulling the autonomous status of the mainly Armenian-populated region of Nagorny Karabakh, which had been under dispute since 1988.
Henceforth it would be governed by an Azerbaijani National Unity Council.
A meeting of the Soviet State Council on Nov. 27, to which the Presidents of both Armenia and Azerbaijan were invited, adopted a resolution calling on them to "abrogate all acts that change Nagorny Karabakh's legal status" .
Although aimed at Azerbaijan, technically it also concerned Armenia's claim on the region.
Both sides accepted the resolution, but Gorbachev's proposition for a 10 km buffer zone was rejected.
Azerbaijan's declaration followed a worsening in relations after a helicopter carrying high-ranking republican and military officials among its passengers crashed on Nov. 20, killing 21 people.
Azerbaijan accused Armenian forces of shooting down the helicopter, while Armenia claimed that the cause had been poor weather.
Azerbaijan had cut off gas supplies to Armenia on Nov. 5.
Both Turkey and the USA warned the republics that escalation of the conflict could affect relations.
Kirghizia
On Nov. 1, Kirghiz President Askar Akayev reported his satisfaction with his recent visit to the USA, when he had met Bush, spoken at the UN and held talks with businessmen.
The Prime Minister of Kirghizia, Nasirdin Isanov, died in a car accident on Nov. 29.
Tajikistan: Presidential elections
On Nov. 24, Tajikistan held presidential elections, following the protests of September and October over the republican communist party and its role during the August coup [see pp. 38418; 38538].
Rakhman Nabiyev, who had seized power in September, and resigned as chair of the Supreme Soviet during the electoral campaign, was elected president with 58 per cent of the vote and a turnout of 84.6 per cent, according to preliminary results.
Nabiyev had led the republic's Communist Party under Brezhnev, and was generally seen as a hard-line conservative.
His nearest rival in the elections, for which there had been seven candidates in all, was a film producer, Davlar Koudonazarov, who gained only a quarter of the vote, despite being backed by both opposition parties, the Democrats and Islamic Rebirth (whose own candidate had withdrawn).
Koudonazarov's claim that the voting had been manipulated was supported by the observer from the USSR Supreme Soviet.
Ukraine
Ukraine set up a 6,000-strong Border Guard on Nov. 4, drawing troops from Interior Ministry divisions.
Since they would be stationed on inter-republican boundaries, the Supreme Soviet voted at the same time to work towards a definition of legal state borders with its neighbours by Feb. 1, 1992.
The remainder of the 33,000 troops belonging to the Interior Ministry would be included in the Border Guard by April 1992.
Chechen Ingushetia crisis
During November the mainly Moslem autonomous republic of Chechen-Ingushetia within the Russian Federation demanded its independence after a leadership change in August.
Yeltsin had to back down from imposing a state of emergency.
The incident raised fears of the break-up of the Russian Federation, and doubts about Yeltsin's leadership.
The communist leadership of Chechen-Ingushetia, which had supported the August coup, was brought down by demonstrations in August in the capital, Grozny.
President Doku Zavgayev had resigned on Sept. 7 and the Supreme Soviet had been replaced by a provisional 13-member Supreme Council.
However, this was dismissed in October by the Chechen National Congress (CNC), an opposition body led by Gen. Dzhakhar Dudayev.
It had an armed branch, the National Guard, which took over KGB headquarters and surrounded the radio and television studios.
Ingush members of the Provisional Council had resigned, making it clear that they wanted to remain in the Russian Federation.
The Russian Federation Supreme Soviet sent a delegation to the region, but it was said that Russian Vice-President Aleksandr Rutskoi had exacerbated the situation by giving an ultimatum to the National Guard to disband on Oct. 10, in return for the holding of presidential elections on Oct. 27.
On Oct. 24 the RSFSR Supreme Soviet said that the elections called by the CNC were illegal and that only elections organized by the provisional Supreme Council would be recognized.
Despite this, the elections were held and Dudayev was the victor, defeating nine other candidates, although there were allegations of malpractice.
Yeltsin's Nov. 8 declaration of a state of emergency in Chechen Ingushetia was backed by the despatch on Nov.10 of about 650 Interior Ministry troops, who were forced to withdraw, however, when surrounded by armed Chechens.
The Russian Supreme Soviet overturned the declaration of the state of emergency the following day, ordering instead a weapons blockade (although the republic was already well-armed).
Meanwhile, Dudayev had ordered a general mobilization, and claimed a share of Soviet military hardware.
His supporters hijacked an internal Soviet flight on Nov. 8 and forced it to fly to Ankara, in an attempt to publicize their cause.
Dudayev claimed that he had received expressions of support from the leaders of Georgia and Azerbaijan, and also from the largely Moslem autonomous republics of Tartaria and Dagestan.
The post of Prime Minister was assumed by Dudayev on Nov. 18, after the current incumbent resigned, since the Council of Ministers had been disbanded.
Yeltsin's representative in Chechen Ingushetia was dismissed on Nov. 14, for providing "misleading information" .
Rutskoi, who had forcefully supported the imposition of a state of emergency, defended his decision in the face of increasing criticism.
Georgia
President Zviad Gamsakhurdia announced on Nov. 7 and 12 that Georgia had taken over all equipment and facilities belonging to Soviet Interior Ministry troops and the Soviet army stationed on the republic's territory.
On Nov. 25, the Georgian Supreme Council voted to lift the state of emergency in areas of South Ossetia, in an effort "to reduce tension in the region" [for developments in October see p. 38358].
to USA — Banning of Communist Party
Russian Federation — Yeltsin's visit to Germany — Naming of Russian government — Citizenship law — Kozyrev's visit
President Yeltsin began a three-day visit to Germany on Nov. 21, his first visit abroad since the attempted coup.
He met Chancellor Helmut Kohl, leaders of political parties, and President Richard von Weizsäcker.
A joint declaration, signed on Nov. 21, noted Russia's commitment to paying its foreign debt, and to re-establishing a German Volga republic; the German side offered support in Russia's transformation to a "market economy-oriented future" .
In a meeting with German businessmen on Nov. 22 Yeltsin described future measures, such as low tax regimes for foreign investors, as an incentive to start up joint ventures.
Yeltsin named his government for implementing the economic reforms announced on Oct. 28 [see p. 38537].
On Nov. 6, he took on the post of Prime Minister, thus becoming responsible for the Interior, Defence, and Russian KGB.
Vice President Rutskoi was named head of an operational control centre.
Gennady Burbulis was named first Deputy Prime Minister.
Two deputy Prime Ministers were named: Yegor Gaidar, heading economic policy, and Aleksandr Shokhin, in charge of social policy.
On Nov. 28, the Supreme Soviet passed a law giving citizenship to Russians living outside the borders of the Russian Federation.
This would affect the estimated 26,000,000 Russians in other Soviet and former Soviet republics by extending rights to those who had not taken local citizenship.
The measure also restored citizenship to 175 cultural figures stripped of their citizenship on emigration, and to those who had joined the Russian emigration to Israel.
Andrei Kozyrev, Russian Foreign Minister, visited the USA on Nov. 25-27, meeting Secretary of State James Baker and delivering a message from Yeltsin to President Bush.
On Nov. 19 it was announced that Yeltsin had appointed Russia's Deputy Foreign Minister, Andrei Kozlovsky, as special representative to the USA.
He would work within the Soviet embassy.
Yeltsin issued a decree on Nov. 6 banning the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (CPSU) and the Russian CP and nationalizing their property.
The decree stated that the events of the coup proved that the CPSU was never a political party, but "a special mechanism for exercising political power by merging with state structures or subordinating them to the CPSU" .
By law, political parties could be banned only by a court decision, which had not been received.
The original decree of Aug. 23 had suspended CPSU activity "pending juridical inquiry" [see p. 38372].
EUROPE
ALBANIA
Economy — Continuing strikes
From Nov. 1, controls were removed on the prices of products and services in heavy industry and transport.
Retail prices of staple foods and consumer goods remained unchanged.
The government expressed concern over the breakdown in public order in the Tropojë and Shkodër districts, due to shortages of food and energy.
On Oct. 31, the People's Assembly had approved a bill to give financial assistance to "persons who remain jobless due to the implementation of economic reform" .
An announcement by President Ramiz Alia on Nov. 3 warned that police would intervene to stop strikes, which continued during November.
There was a further emigration attempt from the port of Durrës on Nov. 5.
Post Office and health workers staged warning strikes, and in the Fier district, oil industry workers went on strike from Nov. 13, despite an earlier strike having been deemed illegal on Nov. 4 at a meeting of the Council of Ministers.
University students went on strike, including a hunger strike at Shkodër University.
About one-third of the staff of Albanian Radio and Television (RTV) went on strike from Nov. 1 in support of demands by the Independent Radio-Television Trade Union for the resignation of RTV's directors, a demand supported by the Democratic Party, whose deputies boycotted the debate on the status of RTV in the People's Assembly.
A law passed on Nov. 24 declared RTV to be a state-owned body, under the control of the People's Assembly.
The Democratic Party on Nov. 21 denounced the shortage of newsprint — which had prevented the publication of any newspapers for most of November — as a government attempt to control the media.
Political parties
On Nov. 1, the government issued a decree nationalizing most of the property of the former ruling Albanian Workers' Party.
On Nov. 9, the Justice Ministry approved the creation of the Albanian Communist Party.
The Bratska Political Association of Macedonians, legalized on Sept. 3, was banned on Nov. 9; the Justice Ministry claimed that there were false documents in its application for registration.
Investment agreement with Germany
On a visit to Germany on Oct. 31-Nov.1, Foreign Affairs Minister Muhamet Kapllani signed an investment promotion agreement with his German counterpart, Hans-Dietrich Genscher.
EUROPE
BULGARIA
Bulgarian Cabinet
New government
The first wholly non-communist Bulgarian government since the Second World War, formed following the Union of Democratic Forces (UDF) victory in the October general election [see p. 38539], took office on Nov. 8, when the National Assembly approved the Cabinet by 128 votes to 90.
On Nov. 13, the National Assembly set the date for presidential elections for Jan. 12, 1992.
President Zhelyu Zhelev had asked UDF leader Filip Dimitrov to form a new government, following the Nov. 5 resignation of the outgoing government led by Dimitur Popov.
Dimitrov's new Cabinet, of whom nine were also members of the National Assembly, contained some structural changes.
The Ministries of Education and Science were merged, the Ministry of Foreign Economic Relations was abolished, and a Ministry of Regional Development, Housing Policy and Construction replaced the Ministry of Construction and Architecture.
For the first time since 1944, the Defence Minister was a civilian.
On Nov. 4, the National Assembly elected Stefan Savov as its Speaker.
It was also proposed that three deputy speakers be elected, one from each parliamentary group, but the USD deputies objected to this, arguing that the Movement for Rights and Freedoms (MRF) was based on (Turkish) ethnicity and thus constitutionally unlawful.
The USD deputies boycotted the vote, in which Snezhana Botusharova of the UDF and Kadir Dzhalil Kadir of the MRF were elected deputy speakers.
Party developments
On Nov. 1 the parliamentary faction of the Bulgarian Socialist Party (BSP — the successor to the Bulgarian Communist Party) became the Parliamentary Union for Social Democracy (USD), and on Nov. 13 it named a shadow cabinet.
The Federation of Democracy Clubs held a conference on Nov. 2-3 to establish a Liberal Party.
The chair of the Federation, Petko Simeonov, was elected chair of the new party.
On Nov. 14, the BSP organized a rally in protest at the reading of a bill to confiscate its property.
International aid — Foreign relations
The Secretary-General of the Western European Union (WEU), Willem van Eekelen, made an official visit to Bulgaria on Oct. 31-Nov. 3 and held talks with Zhelev.
The then Prime Minister Popov expressed concern in his talks with van Eekelen about a military build-up in Turkey.
The United States granted most favoured nation (MFN) status to Bulgaria on Nov. 13, thus easing tariffs on Bulgarian imports to the USA.
The US Agency for International Development (USAID) granted an additional US$10,000,000 to Bulgaria on Nov. 15, as well as announcing a $50,000,000 fund for the development of private businesses.
According to USAID, the US administration had increased aid to Bulgaria from $2,200,000 in 1990 to $88,000,000 in 1991.
Dimitrov and representatives of the Bulgarian government met a delegation from the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) on Nov. 12.
The European Communities (EC) approved emergency payments to Bulgaria on Nov. 11 [see p. 38587], and on Nov. 13 President Zhelev led a Bulgarian delegation to Brussels, where EC Commission President Jacques Delors told him that talks on an association agreement between Bulgaria and the EC would begin by Dec. 15.
On Nov. 14, in a speech to the North Atlantic Council (the highest authority of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization — NATO), Zhelev suggested holding regular political consultations between Bulgaria, Greece and Turkey.
Zhelev also called for NATO aid to Bulgaria for economic development, in view of the NATO aid given to Greece and Turkey and the "fragile balance of forces in that region" .
On Oct. 30, the then Defence Minister, Col.-Gen.
Yordan Mutafchiev, had made the first visit to China by a Bulgarian Defence Minister in 30 years.
Energy crisis
Periodic power cuts were imposed from Oct. 29 after electricity supplies from the Soviet Union were suddenly suspended.
It was suggested this was due to the unilateral Ukrainian decision to cut energy supplies.
On Oct. 30, the nuclear reactor at Kozloduy was reported to be working at half-capacity and there were reports on Nov. 12 of a further technical failure at the plant, which had been partially closed in September for safety reasons [see pp. 38448-49].
EUROPE
CZECHOSLOVAKIA
Discussion of Federal Constitution
During November discussion of the future constitutional structure of Czechoslovakia intensified; after the failure of negotiations between federal and republican leaders, President Vaclav Havel proposed changes to prevent paralysis of the state.
The move to hold a referendum (as proposed by Havel in September — see p. 38449) on the possibility of a split into separate Czech and Slovak republics also reached deadlock.
A demonstration was held in the Slovak capital, Bratislava, on Oct. 28, on the occasion of the 73rd anniversary of the Czechoslovak Republic, in support of a continuing federation.
The meeting, which was attended by Havel and leaders of the federal and republican governments, was disrupted by Slovak nationalists, and Havel left without making a speech.
On Nov 1, 13 Moravian and Silesian parties signed a charter demanding equal and independent status within Czechoslovakia.
The idea of a referendum had been supported by a petition with 516,000 signatures; any such referendum would have to be held five months before the elections, planned for June 1992.
Havel's proposals for common state
On Nov. 3, Havel invited federal and republican leaders to talks on the future constitution, and made proposals for implementing a five-part agreement between the Czech and Slovak parliaments on a common state.
The timetable for negotiations would include approval of the agreement first by the republican parliaments and then by the Federal Assembly by the beginning of December.
The Czech and Slovak parliaments would then approve republican constitutions in accordance with the agreement.
The new Federal Constitution would be passed by the spring of 1992 and the three constitutions — federal, Czech and Slovak — would take effect simultaneously by May 1, 1992 at the latest.
Independently of this process, the Federal Assembly would discuss calling a referendum in December.
On Nov. 11-12 the presidiums of the Czech and Slovak parliaments met near Bratislava in joint session to discuss Havel's proposals.
In a communiqué they said that difficulties still remained, over differing perceptions of the future state structure, but they undertook to adopt a treaty on its principles by the end of November.
The Slovak side was insisting that the treaty should have legal force, while the Czech side opposed this, fearing that it might supersede the Constitution.
The Slovak parliament on Nov. 15 passed a resolution approving its presidium's position, but on Nov. 19 the Slovak government nevertheless voted by 12 to eight to accept the view that the treaty was a basis for discussion, rather than a legal document; it also agreed to concede further powers to the common state.
Meanwhile, on Nov. 13 the Slovak parliament had defeated a proposal to declare the sovereignty of Slovakia, on a vote postponed from Nov. 8 to allow the completion of the negotiations between the Czech and Slovak parliaments' presidiums [for September motion on Slovak sovereignty in September see p. 38449].
Federal Assembly deadlock on referendum — Havel's proposals
The Federal Assembly proposed minimum conditions for the continuation of a joint state on Nov. 5, and on the following day it passed a bill detailing procedures for holding a referendum.
(A Referendum Law had been passed on July 18 — see p. 38351 — but on Oct. 8 the Assembly had delayed its discussion of the issue.)
However, on Nov. 13 the Assembly failed to approve any of the six versions of a question to be put in a referendum.
The bill had established that the question had to require "a clear yes or no" .
In the face of continuing failure to reach any agreement on the future of Czechoslovakia, the federal government unanimously adopted a resolution pledging itself to submit draft proposals for the legislative and executive authority to the republican and federal parliaments.
On Nov. 17, Havel broadcast his proposed amendments to the referendum law and the existing Constitution.
The President, he said, should be able to call a referendum independently, and should be obliged to declare a referendum if 20 per cent of voters in one republic called for one.
Havel also proposed that a new constitution should first be initialled by the republican parliaments, and called on the federal government quickly to draft its proposals on executive authority [see above].
Havel's most controversial proposals concerned legislative procedures for the Federal Assembly, since, he said, "the present Federal Assembly can easily find itself in a situation when it will be totally incapable of passing any fundamental laws vital for the functioning of the state" .
He proposed to allow the dissolution of the Federal Assembly and the institution of presidential rule until new elections.
The federal representative body should be altered to constitute a Federal Assembly and an independent Federal Council, formed of representatives from the republican parliaments with direct participation in proposing legislation.
He also proposed an electoral law, details of which remained unspecified.
Demonstrations were held in favour of Havel's appeal, including a meeting of 50,000 people in Prague on Nov. 21.
Delay in privatization plans
The implementation of privatization legislation was delayed due to a decision on Nov. 6 by the Czech Minister for Privatization, Tomas Jezek, who said that too little time had been allowed for compiling the list of companies suitable for privatization.
Federal Finance Minister Vaclav Klaus described the decision as "disloyal" , and the Slovak privatization ministry also opposed the delay.
Vouchers for kcs1,000 (about US$34), enabling the citizen to choose companies in which to purchase shares, had been on sale since Oct. 1, and the list of enterprises to be privatized was available on Nov. 20.
The Czech government decided to delay the placing of orders for shares until after March 15, 1992.
The Federal government had decided on Sept. 26 to investigate the source of money being used in small-scale privatization.
Klaus had objected to the move, saying that he "did not know any method of distinguishing in practice dirty money from clean money" .
Civil code
On Nov. 5 the Federal Assembly approved amendments to the Civil Code, bringing court procedures into line with the Bill of Rights approved in January [see p. 37974].
It also approved a government draft for a commercial code to take effect from Jan. 1, 1992.
Death of Husak
Gustav Husak, first secretary of the Czechoslovak Communist Party from 1968 to 1987, and President until the revolution of 1989, died on Nov. 18 in Bratislava, aged 78.
EUROPE
HUNGARY
Currency devaluation — Banking law
The forint was devalued by 5.8 per cent from Nov. 8, in an effort to improve the competitiveness of Hungarian products abroad.
On Nov. 14, the Financial Times reported the passing of a banking act, intended to speed the privatization of Hungary's banks, describing it as "the most significant reform of the financial sector since…1987" .
The law limited any shareholder, including the state, to a 25 per cent share, and established capital requirements consistent with Bank for International Settlement norms.
Independent Smallholders controversy
The national board of the Independent Smallholders Party (FKgP), a member of the governing coalition, withdrew the party mandate from two government ministers, Gyula Kiss, Labour Minister, who was accused of concealing former membership of the Hungarian Socialist Workers' Party (HSWP), and Ferenc Jozsef Nagy, Minister without Portfolio, and two state secretaries as of Nov. 1.
The deputy leader of the parliamentary FKgP faction, Sandor Olah, was expelled from the party on Nov. 1 for opposing the move to expel the ministers, and two other deputies were expelled.
The party announced the creation of a "documentation office" , to uncover "crimes against Magyardom" .
On Nov. 4, however, FKgP parliamentary deputies passed a vote of confidence in the expelled ministers and state secretaries and suspended the faction membership of Jozsef Torgyan, FKgP chair and leader of the parliamentary group.
Torgyan claimed that there was division between "the unified membership and leadership" and individual officials, and that the parliamentary faction risked splitting in two over the issue.
At a party congress on Nov. 16 Torgyan warned that Antall would be going against parliamentary democracy if he were to keep "politicians who no longer have the FKgP's backing" in the coalition.
Bill allowing prosecution of former communists
On Nov. 4 the Országgyülés (parliament) passed a bill to allow prosecution for the crimes of murder and treason committed between Dec. 21, 1944, and May 2, 1990 — the period between the first meeting of the independent Hungarian parliament after the Soviet occupation and the convening of the present parliament.
The bill was passed by 197 votes to 50 with 74 abstentions.
President Göncz, himself imprisoned under Communist rule, asked the Constitutional Court for a ruling on the new law, which he considered to be ill-defined.
The new law followed a bill approved by parliament on Oct. 31 granting compensation to people deported or imprisoned under the Communist regime between 1939 and 1989, and the families of those unlawfully executed.
This was expected to affect around 250,000 people and to cost the state between 6,000 million and 6,500 million forints (about US$80-86,000,000) in 1992.
Relations with NATO and UK
Gen. John Galvin, Supreme Allied Commander Europe, visited Hungary on Oct. 30-Nov. 2 and had talks with Prime Minister Jozsef Antall, and Defence Minister Lajos Für, following Antall's visit to NATO headquarters on Oct. 28.
President Arpad Göncz began a five-day state visit to the United Kingdom on Nov. 18.
EUROPE
ESTONIA
Citizenship law
The Estonian parliament voted 64 to 14, with two abstentions, on Nov. 6 to reinstate the 1938 Law on Citizenship.
The law granted Estonian citizenship automatically to all Estonians; immigrants applying for citizenship would be required to have lived for two years in the country.
Marriage to an Estonian gave automatic eligibility for citizenship.
[For Latvian and Lithuanian citizenship laws see this page; p. 38585.]
Re-enactment of the law had been demanded by the Congress of Estonia [see p. 38420], to emphasise the legal continuity of the republic.
While the passing of the law ended weeks of debate, some aspects were left unclear and its implementation remained to be decided by the government.
The Supreme Council voted on Nov. 18 to introduce visa controls on the Estonian borders from Jan. 10, 1992, to "step up the campaign against crime and stop illegal migration into the republic" .
The Constitutional Assembly, set up on Sept. 7 to draft a new constitution [see p. 38420], continued its debates, having run over the Nov. 15 deadline.
Talks with Soviet negotiators — Other foreign relations
On Nov. 10-11, the first session of negotiations between Estonia and the Soviet Union as independent states was held.
According to a communiqué issued after the talks, the areas for negotiation had been set.
These were state borders, citizenship, withdrawal of army units from Estonia, and legal issues.
The leader of the Soviet delegation, Anatoly Sobchak, a member of the Political Consultative Council, said that the issue of the possible return of territory to Estonia had to be dealt with in separate negotiations with the Russian Federation.
Estonia established diplomatic relations with Cuba on Nov. 12, and with Mongolia on Nov. 20.
The Danish Prime Minister, Poul Schlüter, visited Estonia on Nov. 5-6, and signed a treaty of mutual investment and insurance opportunities with his Estonian counterpart, Edgar Savisaar.
Schlüter said that similar treaties with Latvia and Lithuania would be concluded in future.
Conscription
Conscription into an Estonian army began on Nov. 11.
Service, for 18 months, was compulsory for men over 19 who had not served in the Soviet army.
EUROPE
LATVIA
Citizenship law
Controversy over the citizenship issue continued in November, the Latvian Supreme Council having passed proposals on Oct. 17 which proposals included stringent residency, linguistic and oath of allegiance requirements for ethnic non-Latvians (48.2 per cent of the population of the republic according to 1989 census figures).
Under the basic criteria for the restoration of Latvian citizenship and naturalization, approved by the Supreme Council by 93 votes to 30 with seven abstentions, citizenship would be granted automatically to anyone who had held Latvian citizenship before 1940 (the start of Soviet occupation), and to their descendants, even if they were not currently resident in Latvia.
However, dual citizenship would not be allowed.
Anyone else wishing to receive Latvian citizenship had (i) to have lived in Latvia for at least 16 years;(ii) to be conversationally fluent in Latvian and conversant with the Latvian constitution;(iii) to renounce Soviet (or any other) citizenship; and (iv) to swear allegiance to the Latvian republic.
Opposition deputies said that the bill would establish "an apartheid regime" , as citizenship had implications for obtaining work and property ownership.
[For Estonian citizenship law see this page.]
Nationalization of military property
On Nov. 5, the Supreme Council adopted a decision nationalizing all fixed Soviet military property on Latvian territory, and declaring void any transactions in army property made since Aug. 24.
A Soviet presidential spokesman said on Nov. 6 that the decision could have no legal force as it was a unilateral measure.
Government reorganization
On Nov. 12 Prime Minister Ivars Godmanis proposed a reorganization of the government in order to move toward the formation of a Cabinet of ministers.
The proposals, adopted by the Supreme Council, would establish 16 ministries in the Latvian government, in place of the former 23.
There would be 17 ministers, who would each "be obliged to stimulate the privatization of his sector" .
The Justice Ministry would be given higher profile, and a Defence Ministry would be created.
EUROPE
LITHUANIA
Citizenship — Currency law
A two-year term within which any permanent resident of the republic could request Lithuanian citizenship, declared in 1989 [see p. 37045], expired on Nov. 4.
On Nov. 6 preliminary results showed that 87 per cent of those eligible had acquired citizenship, but 370,000 people who had not taken Lithuanian citizenship effectively became stateless or foreign citizens; dual citizenship had not been permitted.
There were calls to revoke the mandate of deputies who had failed to register as Lithuanian citizens.
[For Estonian and Latvian citizenship laws see p. 38585.]
The Lithuanian parliament adopted on Nov. 5, by 76 votes to none, a law on issuing currency, and set up a committee to determine the implementation of the new currency, the litas.
In a speech to parliament, Prime Minister Gediminas Vagnorius warned of the difficulties which would be incurred in trade with Soviet republics, were the litas to be introduced immediately.
Price liberalization — Confiscation of communist party property
On Nov. 11 retail prices of consumer goods were liberalized and food prices went up.
According to the Soviet news agency Tass, prices of dairy products would rise by about 25 per cent and bread by as much as 100 per cent.
To compensate for this, state grants to students, pensioners and the low-paid would rise by 30 to 40 per cent.
On Nov. 19 industrial prices were also freed.
On Nov. 7 the parliament voted to appropriate the property of both the Soviet and the Lithuanian Communist Party (CP) without compensation (the CP had been banned in Lithuania from Aug. 23 — see p. 38373).
Foreign relations
NATO established diplomatic links with Lithuania on Nov. 22.
Diplomatic relations between Lithuania and Armenia were established on Nov. 21.
On Nov. 7 it was announced that Lithuania and Bulgaria had signed a trade and most-favoured nation treaty in Sofia.
Lithuania thus became the third Soviet republic to conclude an economic agreement with Bulgaria, following Russia and Byelarus [see p. 38350].
A delegation from the European Parliament visiting Lithuania held talks with chair of the Supreme Council (de facto President) Vytautas Landsbergis on Nov. 5.
Landsbergis made a visit to Italy on Nov. 16-19, during which he met Italian political leaders and was received by the Pope.
EUROPE
POLAND
Deadlock over formation of new government
Complex political negotiations continued throughout November over the formation of a coalition government, following the October elections [see pp. 38535-36].
After an attempt by former Solidarity parties to form a government had ended in failure, the centre-right agreed to form a coalition led by Jan Olszewski of the Centre Alliance, a development resisted by President Lech Walesa.
Walesa had asked his former Solidarity colleagues in the Democratic Union — the largest party in the Sejm (lower house of parliament)— to put forward a candidate for Prime Minister, and on Nov. 8 he asked Broneslaw Geremek, a Democratic Union leader, to form a government.
On Nov. 13, however, Geremek resigned, saying that he had failed to win support for a left of centre coalition.
A centre-right coalition of the Confederation for Independent Poland, Liberal Democratic Congress, Centre Alliance, Peasant Alliance and the Christian National Union, proposed Olszewski as Prime Minister on Nov. 14.
Walesa, however, was concerned that Olszewski could not ensure the continuation of the economic reform programme or a stable parliamentary majority, and instead apparently snubbed the centre-right by appointing his former driver Mieczyslaw Wachowski to negotiate on Nov. 19.
Walesa was reported to prefer the reappointment of outgoing Prime Minister Jan Krzysztof Bielecki of the Liberal Democratic Congress.
Bielicki formally submitted his resignation at the inaugural session of the new Sejm on Nov. 25, despite a plea from Walesa to remain.
On Nov. 26 the Sejm postponed the acceptance of Bielecki's resignation until Dec. 6.
On Nov. 28 the would-be centre-right coalition offered to form a "government of experts" to bring stability.
At the inaugural session the Sejm elected as its Speaker Wieslaw Chrzanowski, of the Christian National Union.
Links between CPSU and former Polish communists
The former communist party, now the Socialist Democracy of the Republic of Poland (SDRP) confirmed on Nov. 7 that it had received an interest-free loan worth more than US$1,200,000 in January 1990 from the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (CPSU).
Former first secretary Mieczyslaw Rakowski said that he had paid the money back.
Disclosures made in the Soviet press forced the former communists to admit other contacts with the CPSU after the collapse of communism in Poland, including a meeting in March 1991, at which plans were discussed to finance East European post-communist parties with cash from private companies.
The Prosecutor's Office in Warsaw opened an investigation into breaches of currency regulations on Nov. 28.
Changes in Presidential Chancellery
Jaroslaw Kaczynski, head of the Presidential Chancellery and Minister of State, and Lech Kaczynski, also a Minister of State, resigned on Oct. 31.
Janusz Ziolkowski was appointed head of the Presidential Chancellery, and Jerzy Milewski was appointed Minister of State and also as Secretary of the Committee for National Defence, replacing Maciej Zalewski.
Protests over pensions change
Walesa signed a bill to revalue pensions on Nov. 8, but announced that the law was to be amended immediately to reduce the number of people whose pensions would be cut as a result.
The pensioners' organization threatened to defend the former pensions law through the courts.
On Nov. 19 the Ombudsman, Ewa Letowska, called on the Constitutional Tribunal to declare the revaluation unconstitutional.
New agreements with Germany
On Nov. 8 Poland and Germany agreed to de-restrict the use of territorial waters bordering the two countries and to ease restrictions on cross-border road traffic.
EUROPE
ROMANIA
New constitution
On Nov. 21, the Parliament, meeting as the Constituent Assembly, endorsed a new constitution guaranteeing pluralism, human rights, and a free market.
The voting reached the necessary two-thirds majority, with 414 in favour and 95 against.
The constitution would be confirmed by a referendum within 30 days.
According to the Financial Times of Nov. 22, the constitution owed much to the French system, allowing substantial presidential powers.
The final text defined as unconstitutional attempts to achieve territorial separation; some deputies had wanted the qualification of "territorial" to be omitted, but President Ion Iliescu had spoken against this proposal, associated with an anti-Hungarian faction.
Convertibility of leu
Prime Minister Theodor Stoloyan announced on Nov. 6 that the Romanian currency would be made internally convertible, thus ending the two-tier system of exchange rates.
The new rate would be fixed at around 180 lei to the United States dollar, or midway between the official rate and the currency market floating rate.
Stoloyan promised continued state control of prices for basic goods until May 1992.
However, a Hungarian radio report of Nov. 13 spoke of panic buying.
Foreign aid — Agriculture crisis
The European Communities (EC) granted additional loans to Romania at a meeting of Finance Ministers in Brussels on Nov. 11 [see also G-24 summit this page; for aid to Bulgaria see p. 38584.
This followed a visit beginning on Oct. 13 by an EC delegation to assess Romania's requirements.
Italy granted aid worth $50,000,000 and credits of nearly $100 million to Romania during the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) session in Rome, it was announced on Nov. 19.
Relations with Moldava
The Moldavan Prime Minister, Valery Muravsky, made a one-day visit to Romania on Nov. 2.
In a press statement, he noted that governmental exchanges would "speed up the process of the Republic of Moldava's integration with Romania" .
A commodity exchange agreement was reported on Nov. 13, by which Moldava would supply farm produce in exchange for Romanian consumer goods.
A delegation from the Western European Union (WEU), led by its Secretary-General, Willem van Eekelen, visited Romania on Nov. 4.
During the NATO summit in Rome [see pp. 38600-01]Romania had made known its willingness to co-operate with NATO, and on Oct. 30 had announced the renegotiation of its friendship treaty with the Soviet Union.
The existing treaty, signed in April but not yet ratified, included a clause preventing either side from joining an alliance against the interests of the other.
Political parties
On Nov. 4 a political grouping, the Union of the Democratic Left, was created, open to all centre-left parties.
A merger of the Republican Party and the Social-Liberal Party-20th May, to form a new grouping retaining the name Republican Party, was announced on Nov. 16.
The Liberal Party (formerly the National Liberal Party — Young Wing) withdrew from the Charter for Reform and Democracy (a grouping formed in July 1991 including the ruling National Salvation Front) on the grounds that it was too closely linked with the structures of the former government.
Trade union umbrella body
Three trade union confederations, Fratia, Alfa, and the National Council of Free Trade Unions of Romania, formed a National Advisory Council of Romanian Unions, claiming at a press conference on Nov. 9 to represent 4,000,000 of the country's 4,500,000 trade union members.
The National Advisory Council was formed, it claimed, not in opposition to Stoloyan, but because of the involvement of unrepresentative union leaders in negotiations with the government.
On Nov. 16, it signed a protocol with the government on co-operation in negotiating work contracts and pensions.
EUROPE
BALTIC STATES
Baltic leaders in USA
On Oct. 28, the Prime Ministers of Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania, Edgar Savisaar, Ivars Godmanis and Gediminas Vagnorius, signed agreements with United States Vice-President Dan Quayle, integrating the Baltic states into the US Overseas Private Investment Corporation (OPIC).
The Corporation promoted private business and joint ventures, which it was hoped, would aid their economies.
Quayle said that Congress was being asked for US$15,000,000 in economic aid to the Baltic states, as against $14,000,000 in the previous fiscal year.
The Baltic delegations were in Indianapolis to attend a meeting of the International Baltic Economic Commission (IBEC) at the Hudson Institute on Oct. 28-30.
The IBEC, established in 1990, brought together Western advisers and officials from the Baltic states to advise them on the transformation to a market economy.
It was also announced that volunteers from the US Peace Corps would be going to the Baltic states.
Baltic Assembly
Parliamentary delegations from the Baltic states met in Tallinn, the Estonian capital, on Nov. 8-9 for discussions on forming a co-ordinating body.
There was opposition to the idea of a joint parliament, but, as a compromise, a consultative interparliamentary body was set up.
The presidium and committees were to be formed by December, and it was hoped to hold the first session of the Baltic Assembly by January 1992.
EUROPE
EASTERN EUROPE
G-24 summit
The Foreign Ministers of the G-24, a grouping formed by the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) countries and international financial organizations and whose assistance to central and eastern Europe was being co-ordinated through the European Communities (EC), met in Brussels on Nov. 11.
For the first time Albania attended the meeting, at which EC Commission Vice-President Frans Andriessen reported that US$32,000 million had been given in aid since early 1990.
The United States and Japan were criticized for leaving the bulk of contributions to the European members of G-24.
However, an EC threat to contribute only half of the amount deemed necessary for Bulgaria and Romania (respectively $800 million and $1,000 million) did not materialize, as EC Finance Ministers, meeting separately, had already decided on aid to these countries without the precondition of equal contributions from their G-24 partners.
Participants in the G-24 meeting recognized the need for urgent food aid to Romania and Albania, as well as Bulgaria's problem of electricity shortages after the partial closure of the Kozloduy nuclear power station [see pp. 38350; 38448].
EUROPE
FINLAND
Devaluation — Wages pact — Treaty with Soviet Union
On Nov. 15, acknowledging the seriousness of the economic crisis in Finland, the centre-right government of Esko Aho devalued the markka by 12.3 per cent.
The markka, which had been pegged to the European currency unit (ECU) in June [see p. 38297], had been allowed to float temporarily by the Bank of Finland the previous day, after speculative pressure had caused short-term interest rates to rise to 30 per cent and resulted in a heavy capital outflow.
It was now pegged again within the range of between 5.39166 and 5.72516 to the ECU.
On Nov. 28 employers and unions concluded a two-year pay deal, under which wages would be frozen in 1992 but would rise the following year if inflation exceeded 5.4 per cent.
New treaty with Soviet Union
The preliminary text of a new good neighbourliness and mutual co-operation treaty with the Soviet Union was agreed at talks on Nov. 5-6.
It had been agreed in September that a new accord should be negotiated to replace the 1948 Treaty of Friendship, Co-operation and Mutual Assistance [see pp. 38444-45]and a first round of talks took place in October.
Under the agreement both parties would not use force against each other or threaten to do so.
(The 1948 treaty had gone further, committing each party to defend the other against an aggressor.)
In accordance with the Final Act of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE), the inviolability and territorial integrity of the two countries (which shared a 1,260 km border) would be respected.
EUROPE
NORWAY
Cabinet reshuffle
On Nov. 15 two ministers, Eldrid Nordboe and Matz Sandman, resigned for family reasons.
The Trade and Shipping portfolio was taken over from Nordboe by Björn Tore Godal, leader of the Storting's standing committee on foreign affairs, while Sandman's portfolio, Children's and Family Affairs, went to Grete Berget, a close personal adviser to Prime Minister Gro Harlem Brundtland.
EUROPE
SWEDEN
Economic measures
The new centre-right coalition government led by Carl Bildt [see p. 38542]announced a series of specific measures in early November aimed at "revitalizing the country's economy and industry" and "introducing a new era of enterprise, growth and development" .
Proposals for spending cuts totalling 9,000 million kronor (US$1,660 million) were put forward on Nov. 5; a reduction of value added tax (VAT) from 25 per cent to 18 per cent on a range of basic goods and services on Nov. 6; reductions in the tax on capital income from 30 per cent to 25 per cent and a similar reduction in the tax on share profits on Nov. 8; and the privatization of 35 major state-owned companies in stages from early 1992 onwards and the lifting of restrictions on foreign investors buying into or taking over Swedish companies on Nov. 11.
EUROPE
UNITED KINGDOM
By-elections — Appeal Court rulings
Conservative by-election losses
In three parliamentary by-elections on Nov. 7, the ruling Conservative party lost two seats (and had now suffered seven consecutive by-election defeats in previously Conservative-held seats), while the main opposition Labour party held Hemsworth.
[For last by-elections see pp. 38355; 38200].
The government had let it be known on Sept. 30 that it would not now call a general election in 1991.
The Liberal Democrats won Kincardine and Deeside with an 11.4 per cent swing from the Conservatives; this gave the Liberal Democrats their 10th seat in Scotland, overtaking the Conservatives (nine).
The Scottish National Party candidate came third and Labour fourth.
A particular issue was the application by a local hospital for NHS trust status [for which see p. 38500], which was opposed even by the Conservative candidate.
Labour won Langbaurgh with a 3.6 per cent swing from the Conservatives, in a campaign marred by alleged racial insinuations against the successful Labour candidate, Ashok Kumar.
Labour held Hemsworth, where the Conservatives were beaten into third place by the Liberal Democrats.
The successful candidate had been imposed by the Labour Party nationally after it had refused to place on the selection short-list the locally preferred nominee, Ken Capstick, who was a close associate of Arthur Scargill, president of the National Union of Mineworkers.
Court of Appeal rulings on "Tottenham Three" 
The Court of Appeal on Nov. 25 overturned the conviction of Winston Silcott, sentenced to life imprisonment in 1987 for the murder of Police Constable Keith Blakelock in October 1985 during a violent disturbance at Broadwater Farm estate in Tottenham, north London [see p. 34256].
(Silcott remained in prison, to complete a separate life sentence imposed in 1986 for an unrelated murder committed in 1984.)
Mark Braithwaite and Engin Raghip, also sentenced to life imprisonment for the murder of PC Blakelock, were released on bail on Nov. 27 pending the court's final ruling on their cases.
Their convictions were formally quashed on Dec. 5.
The main issues before the Appeal Court were the authenticity of confessions said to have been made by the defendants while under detention, and the conduct of the police.
Detective Chief Superintendent Graham Melvin was now under suspension from the Metropolitan Police.
[For March 1991 overturn of "Birmingham Six" convictions see p. 38111; for June overturn of "Maguire Seven" convictions see p. 38301.]
Death of Robert Maxwell
Robert Maxwell, controlling shareholder in Mirror Group Newspapers (MGN) and in Maxwell Communication Corporation (MCC), died on Nov. 5 after falling from his yacht off the Canary Islands.
Massive speculation immediately arose over his death, particularly in the light of recent allegations that Maxwell and a senior Daily Mirror journalist, Nick Davies, had both had involvement with the Israeli secret intelligence service Mossad; Davies had been dismissed on Oct. 29 on the grounds that he had lied in relation to a meeting which he was said to have had in 1985 with a United States arms dealer.
Further speculation centred on the financial state of the main Maxwell companies.
EUROPE
NORTHERN IRELAND
Increasing violence — Deployment of extra troops
Reacting to an upsurge of violence in Northern Ireland, the UK government announced (i) on Nov. 13 that the Royal Ulster Constabulary (RUC) was to be strengthened by 441 officers; and (ii) on Nov. 27 that a further army battalion would be sent to Northern Ireland, increasing the number of British regular soldiers there from 10,500 to 11,000.
A Irish Republican Army (IRA) bomb attack on the top-security Musgrove Park hospital in Belfast on Nov. 2 killed two British soldiers and injured seven other people, including a five-year-old girl.
A hospital porter, Liam Dougan, was charged on Nov. 6 with the murder of the two soldiers.
A soldier of the Ulster Defence Regiment (UDR) was killed and another seriously injured in a missile attack in the village of Bellaghy, County Londonderry, on Nov. 6.
Three attacks in Belfast on the night of Nov. 12-13, which left four people dead and seriously injured two others including a baby, were claimed by the IRA.
A Roman Catholic taxi driver was shot and badly injured on Nov. 13 by loyalist paramilitaries apparently in retaliation for the IRA murders.
Two Roman Catholics and a Protestant were shot dead on Nov. 15-16 as they left the factory where they worked in Craigavon, south west of Belfast.
On the UK mainland, two IRA bombers were blown up as they planted a bomb in St Albans, Hertfordshire, on Nov. 15.
They were later identified by the IRA as Frankie Ryan, 25, and Patricia Black Donnelly, 18.
The bomb exploded, apparently prematurely, in an empty bank building near a concert hall where the band of the Blues and Royals was at the time giving a charity performance in front of some 350 people.
Overturning of extradition order by Irish Supreme Court
The Supreme Court in Dublin on Nov. 15 overturned an order for Anthony Sloan to be extradited to the UK.
Sloan, a convicted member of the IRA, faced a 20-year prison sentence in Northern Ireland for possessing a machine gun.
He escaped from Crumlin Road prison in Belfast in 1981, but subsequently spent more than seven years in prison in the Republic for the breakout.
The Court ruled that under existing law, possession of a firearm as a political offence was not subject to the extradition laws.
On the same day, the Irish government promised a detailed study of the loophole in the extradition law, which prevented extradition for possession of, but would have allowed it for use of, a firearm.
Human rights report
The US-based human rights group Helsinki Watch published on Oct. 2 a report on Northern Ireland, detailing "extensive human rights violations" .
It was especially critical of killings, punishment shootings and "kneecappings" and hostage-taking by paramilitary groups, but also recommended stricter controls on police and army use of lethal force, an end to destructive house searches, better investigation of extra-legal actions by the security forces, and the restoration of the rights of detainees to be brought promptly before a court.
EUROPE
IRELAND
Haughey's survival of party no confidence vote
At a specially convened meeting of the parliamentary group of the ruling Fianna Fáil party on Nov. 9-10, Prime Minister Charles Haughey survived a vote of no confidence in his leadership.
During the meeting, which lasted more than 14 hours, party members voted in an open vote by 55 to 22 in favour of Haughey remaining leader.
A motion calling on the party to end his leadership had been tabled on Nov. 6 by backbenchers led by Sean Power, who were critical of Haughey's handling of recent financial scandals in two state companies and his close personal association with several of the figures named in the controversies.
Haughey's government survived a vote of no confidence in the Dáil (parliament) on Oct. 18 by 84 voted to 81.
Just before that vote Fianna Fáil and the Progressive Democrats, the junior coalition partner, had reached agreement on tax reforms which had been the subject of three months of negotiation and which had threatened to bring down the government.
A radical overhaul of the tax system would seek to reduce income tax but curtail "the vast range of exemptions, shelters, allowances and concessionary tax rates" .
Haughey's own position had been called into question over the involvement of close associates in a series of financial scandals, in particular at the state telecommunications monopoly Telecom Éireann, whose chairman Michael Smurfit resigned over a property deal on Sept. 24 at Haughey's instigation, and at the recently privatized sugar group Greencore (formerly Irish Sugar PLC), whose chief executive Chris Comerford had also resigned in September amid allegations of illegal share dealings by senior executives.
Inquiries were set up in both cases, while Haughey announced on Sept. 22 that a serious fraud agency was to be established.
Haughey dismissed two ministers before the no confidence vote.
Albert Reynolds, the Finance Minister, was dismissed on Nov. 7 after he attacked Haughey, saying that he was not satisfied that the strong and decisive government necessary for the well-being of Ireland still existed.
A second minister, Padraig Flynn, responsible for the environment, who had also made clear he would vote against Haughey, was dismissed on Nov. 8.
Reynolds said that he would support a formal attempt to oust the Prime Minister and on Nov. 8 said that he would seek the Fianna Fáil leadership if Haughey was defeated.
A day later he claimed that he had been the victim of a dirty tricks campaign, saying that his house had been under surveillance and that a carefully organized smear campaign had been waged against him, apparently concerning loans alleged to have been made to his petfood company several years previously.
Cabinet reshuffle
A Cabinet reshuffle was announced on Nov. 13.
The new Cabinet was approved by the Dáil on the same day.
Vincent Brady, the Fianna Fáil chief whip, was named Defence Minister.
Brendan Daly moved from Defence to Social Welfare, Michael Woods from Social Welfare to Agriculture and Food, Michael O'Kennedy from Agriculture and Food to Labour, and Bertie Ahern from Labour to Finance in place of Reynolds.
Noel Davern was appointed Education Minister, Mary O'Rourke switched from Education to Health, and Rory O'Hanlon from Health to Environment in place of Flynn.
Haughey's original choice for the Defence post, James McDaid, withdrew hours after his nomination when opposition leaders accused him of being a Sinn Féin "fellow-traveller" in that he had opposed the extradition to the United Kingdom of an IRA escapee, James Pius Clarke.
McDaid denied any links with the IRA and withdrew after it became clear that the junior partner in the government, the Progressive Democrats (PDs), would not vote for a reshuffle including him.
He later admitted he had provided an affidavit for Clarke, who escaped from the Maze prison where he was serving 18 years for the attempted murder of a member of the Ulster Defence Regiment.
In the affidavit, McDaid said he had seen Clarke at a party in County Donegal on the night in 1977 of the alleged murder attempt in Northern Ireland.
EUROPE
BELGIUM
Extremist gains in elections
In an early general election on Nov. 24 the traditional parties lost votes to the extremist anti-immigrant Vlaams Blok in Flanders and, to a lesser extent, to the environmentalist Ecolo party in Wallonia.
The following day Wilfried Martens, who had served as Prime Minister of different coalitions since December 1981, resigned.
It was expected to be months before a government could be formed.
Collapse of outgoing coalition
The general election, due by Jan. 19, 1992, had been called on Oct. 7, after Flemish and Walloon differences had undermined the coalition on two occasions.
The Flemish nationalist Volksunie pulled out of the coalition on Sept. 29 over the renewal of export licences for two Walloon arms exporting companies with contracts for Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates.
The Flemish Socialists and Volksunie (which had pacifist tendencies) objected to the renewal, while the Walloon parties were concerned to preserve jobs.
In the event ad hoc committees for Wallonia, Flanders and bilingual Brussels were set up to decide on arms exports, the renewal was approved, and replacements were appointed for the two Volksunie ministers.
However, the coalition was then split again, over telecommunications contracts signed unilaterally by the (Flemish) Posts and Telecommunications Minister Marcel Colla (which would have benefited Flemish companies), and over the allocation of television licence fees to the regions (which Wallonia needed to help pay teachers' wages — see also p. 38465).
Election results
Of the 7,144,884 registered voters 6,592,441 went to the polls, representing a turnout of 92 per cent— voting was theoretically compulsory.
Of the votes cast 7 per cent were null or void.
The two Christian Social parties were the CVP (Christelijke Volkspartij) from Flanders and the PSC (Parti social chrétien) from Wallonia.
The two socialist parties were the PS (Parti socialiste) from Wallonia and the SP (Socialistische Partij) from Flanders.
The two liberal parties were the PVV (Partij voor Vrijheid en Vooruitgang) from Flanders and the PRL (Parti réformateur libéral) from Wallonia.
The FDF (Front démocratique des francophones bruxellois) came from Brussels.
In addition to electing the 212 members of the Chamber of Representatives (lower house of parliament), voters also elected the 106 directly elected members of the 184-member Senate (upper house).
The distribution of these 106 seats was CVP 20 seats (22 previously), PS 18 (20), SP 14 (17), PVV 13 (11), PRL 9 (12), PSC 9 (9), Vlaams Blok 5 (1), Volksunie 5 (8), Ecolo 6 (2), Agalev 5 (3), Rossem 1 (-), FDF 1 (1).
Factors in protest vote
The strength of the protest vote against the mainstream parties was seen as reflecting popular disillusionment with their unsuccessful attempts to resolve the country's long-running linguistic problems and to complete constitutional reforms [see p. 38465].
Many European newspaper reports also put the surge in support for Vlaams Blok in the context of rising anti-immigrant feeling across Europe [see p. 38593].
Anti-immigrant feeling had not in the past been strong in Belgium, although in May young north African immigrants had rioted in Brussels, prompting the government to reinforce its policy of integrating immigrants [ibid.].
According to Le Monde of Nov. 22 the number of asylum seekers (who came especially from eastern Europe) had risen to 1,700 per month, and a new law to speed the processing of asylum applications stipulated that these should be processed within two months, after which an applicant recognized as a refugee could take up provisional residence while waiting for a definitive decision.
There were 900,000 foreigners in Belgium (of whom one-third came from Africa) out of a total population of 9,800,000.
*Member of outgoing Martens coalition.
**List headed by Jean-Pierre Van Rossem, 46, an anarchist and former multi-millionaire, who was arrested for fraud immediately before the election.
***Seat won by Front national, with 1.1 per cent of vote.
Half a dozen other parties also contested the elections without securing representation.
EUROPE
NETHERLANDS
Euthanasia bill
A bill effectively legalizing euthanasia was submitted to parliament on Nov. 8.
It was intended to give legal sanction to regulations introduced in November 1990, under which a doctor intending to perform euthanasia was obliged to consult a second doctor and to inform the coroner after the patient's death.
The procedure covered all cases of euthanasia expressly requested by the patient, of assisted suicide, and of switching off life-support systems for patients in a coma or severely handicapped new-born children.
Under the existing law, helping someone to die was a criminal offence punishable by up to 12 years' imprisonment, but this had rarely been invoked in recent years amid great public debate and controversy on the ethics and possible modalities of euthanasia.
The bill represented a compromise aimed at accommodating the strong reservations of many Christian Democrats, the senior government coalition partner.
According to a report commissioned by the government, cases of euthanasia in the strict sense accounted for 2,300 deaths annually (out of a total of around 130,000), assisted suicides for 400, and switching off life-support systems for 1,000.
Attacks on government offices
Members of Radical Anti-Racist Action (RaRa) claimed responsibility for two bomb attacks on the main building of the Ministry of the Interior and the home of a junior minister at the Ministry of Justice on Nov. 13.
The group declared in a statement that the attacks were a protest against the government's asylum policy, which it claimed "writes off, excludes and dehumanizes people" .
EUROPE
GERMANY
Cabinet and party changes
On Nov. 25 Wolfgang Schäuble left the Cabinet to become parliamentary leader of the Christian Democratic Union (CDU), i.e. effectively number two in the party after Federal Chancellor Helmut Kohl; he succeeded Alfred Dregger, 71.
His Interior portfolio was taken over by Rudolf Seiters, whose post as Head of the Chancellery went to Friedrich Böhl.
The CDU's choice of Schäuble, 49, who had been confined to a wheelchair since an attempt on his life in October 1990 [see p. 37763], was the last of a series of leadership elections by all four main parties in November.
Within the ruling coalition, the Liberal Democrats (FDP) and the Christian Social Union (CSU) both re-elected their chairs (respectively Otto Graf Lambsdorff, 64, and federal Finance Minister Theo Waigel, 52).
The opposition Social Democrats (SPD) meanwhile chose as their new parliamentary leader on Nov. 12 Hans-Ulrich Klose, 54, currently party treasurer and a former mayor of Hamburg (1974-81).
Hans-Jochen Vogel had announced his intention to step down as leader of the SPD parliamentary group on Oct. 28, having already relinquished the chair of the party to Björn Engholm in May [see p. 38199].
Other senior appointments
On Oct. 18 the Bundesrat (upper house) unanimously elected Alfred Gomolka, Minister President of Mecklenburg-West Pomerania, as its president for the coming year, the first holder of this office from what had been East Germany.
On Oct. 1 Gen. Klaus Naumann took over as Inspector-General of the Armed Forces (Bundeswehr) in succession to Adml.
Dieter Wellershoff.
Law on access to Stasi files
On Nov. 14 the Bundestag approved legislation on public access to the files which the former East German state security police (or "Stasi" ) had kept on 6,000,000 East Germans (one in three of the population).
Under the legislation individual victims of Stasi defamation would be able to see and use their records to restore their reputation.
However, publication of records by the press would be only be permitted if authorized by the commission which had been set up to administer the files.
(This body was headed by Joachim Gauck, an east German Lutheran pastor who had been a co-founder of Neues Forum.)
The German journalists' trade union (DJV) criticized the new law, which, it said, represented "the most serious effort at limiting freedom of the press" since the time of Nazi Germany.
Agreement on withholding tax
On Nov. 12 the Cabinet announced plans to introduce a 25 per cent withholding tax on investment income from January 1993.
A similar 10 per cent tax had been announced in 1987 [see p. 35723]with effect from January 1989 but was dropped in April 1989 after it had provoked a flight of capital abroad [see pp. 36597-98].
This time the impact of the tax was softened by large tax-free allowances for personal savers and exemptions for foreigners.
Coal industry
On Nov. 11 Economics Minister Jürgen Möllemann reached an agreement with mine owners, electricity companies and trade unions which would reduce annual coal output from 70,000,000 to 55,000,000 tonnes by the end of the decade.
Government subsidies would be reduced and the workforce cut from 130,000 to 100,000.
Visit by Yeltsin
Russian President Boris Yeltsin visited Germany on Nov. 21-23 (his first foreign visit since the August coup attempt in the Soviet Union).
He and Kohl signed a joint declaration which, while stopping short of formal recognition of Russia, committed both parties to the closest future co-operation in international relations and economic affairs.
Yeltsin gave a firm commitment to establishing an autonomous republic for ethnic Germans near the city of Volgograd.
This was seen as important in persuading the approximately 2,000,000 ethnic Germans in the Soviet Union not to migrate westwards.
The Soviet Defence Minister, Gen. Yevgeny Shaposhnikov, had visited Germany on Nov. 11-13 for discussions on bilateral issues, including in particular the withdrawal of Soviet troops from German soil, and on the rapidly changing security situation in the Soviet Union.
EUROPE
AUSTRIA
FPÖ gains in Vienna elections
The right-wing Liberal Party (FPÖ), campaigning on an anti-immigrant platform and led by the populist Jörg Haider, more than doubled its vote in Vienna in municipal elections on Nov. 10, to become the second largest party in the city parliament.
The Social Democratic Party (SPÖ) led by mayor Helmut Zilk lost the absolute majority of votes which it had held in Vienna since the end of the Second World War, although, because of the complex proportional system of apportioning seats, it retained an absolute majority of seats.
The SPÖ won 47.7 per cent of the vote and 52 seats (54.9 per cent and 62 seats at the last elections in November 1987 — see p. 35792); the FPÖ won 22.6 per cent and 23 seats (9.7 per cent and eight seats in 1987); the Austrian People's Party (ÖVP) won 18.1 per cent and 18 seats (28.4 per cent and 30 seats in 1987); and the Green Alternatives won over 9 per cent and thus entered the parliament for the first time with seven seats (having won just under 5 per cent in 1987).
The FPÖ gains in Vienna, which had separate provincial status, followed similarly strong performances in provincial elections in September and October [see pp. 38448; 38543].
Haider had been dismissed as governor of Carinthia in June 1991 for praising the Nazis' employment policies [see p. 38298].
The party's slogans included "Vienna for the Viennese" and the FPÖ claimed that there were a further 100,000 illegal residents in Vienna, in addition to the 240,866 foreigners with legal residence permits (out of a total city population of 1,500,000).
Presidential candidates
During November the three largest parties announced their candidates for the presidential elections scheduled for April 26, 1992, to elect a successor to Kurt Waldheim, who had in June 1991 declined to stand for a second term [see p. 38298].
Rudolf Streicher, 52, Minister of Transport and Public Economy since 1987 [whose name was inadvertently excluded from the list on p. 37926], was announced as the SPÖ candidate on Nov. 14.
Thomas Klestil, 59, a former United States ambassador and UN permanent representative, was put forward by the ÖVP the following day.
Heide Schmidt, 43, who was deputy to Haider in the FPÖ but on the party's liberal wing and was described as a skilled politician respected outside the FPÖ, was nominated by the FPÖ on Nov. 21.
EUROPE
FRANCE
Proposed constitutional reforms — Adoption of budget
In a television interview on Nov. 10 President François Mitterrand foreshadowed a package of constitutional reforms.
Full details, he said, would be presented in 1992 after the March regional elections.
The reforms, which would be subject to a referendum, would include a reduction of the current seven-year presidential term, probably to five years, and the reinforcement of the role of the National Assembly and the Constitutional Council.
In addition an element of proportional representation would be introduced in time for the 1993 elections, as already proposed at a Socialist Party convention on Oct. 12-13 with the formation of electoral alliances with minority parties in mind.
The use of Article 49.3 of the Constitution (enabling adoption of legislation without a vote unless the opposition tabled and won a vote of no confidence) to push the final draft of the 1992 budget [see p. 38544]through the National Assembly early on Nov. 16 renewed controversy over certain aspects of the Constitution, critics pointing out that almost all sections of the budget had been adopted without a vote.
The motion of censure tabled by the opposition under the procedure was defeated on Nov. 18 by 289 votes to 264.
FN immigration proposals
Bruno Mégret, deputy leader of the extreme right-wing National Front (FN), revealed on Nov. 16 a list of 50 working proposals to halt immigration and control immigrants.
The controls, he said, would not affect European Community (EC) citizens or those from countries which shared a "common destiny, culture, religion and civilization" with France.
The proposals, based on the premise that "cosmopolitan" laws put French people at a disadvantage, effectively placed immigrants in a separate category of those who could not be joined by their families and should not be eligible for certain benefits, while French people would take priority for jobs and housing.
Naturalization would be established as the only means of gaining nationality, all naturalizations since 1974 would be reviewed, and the automatically renewable 10-year residency permit would be replaced by a two-year permit.
Illegal immigrants would be expelled using chartered transport after being housed in camps set up at ports and airports.
To stop "false tourism" , visitors from certain countries would have to pay a deposit on entering France and to undergo an AIDS test.
Quotas for the children of migrants would be introduced in school classes, ghettos would be dismantled, and mosques and Islamic schools restricted.
Adherence to international agreements such as the Schengen agreement on free movement among EC member states [see p. 37535]would be cancelled.
Discovery of Jewish files
An anti-Nazi lawyer, Serge Klarsfeld, discovered in mid-November that a Second World War filedrawn up by French police in October 1940 on the instructions of the Gestapo and containing information on all Jewish people in Paris was still in existence at the Ministry of War Veterans, where it was apparently used to check pension claims.
Its existence, had been officially denied in 1980.
Other internal developments
Industrial unrest
A three-week strike over pay at the motor company Renault's main engine and gearbox plant at Cléon ended on Nov. 8 after police had stormed the plant on Nov. 5 and removed barricades to allow a degree of production to recommence.
Talks ensued with management, after which the General Confederation of Labour (CGT) instructed employees to return to work.
The dispute, which also affected the firm's other factories, cost Renault an estimated F1,400 million (about US$251 million) and caused production losses of 70,000 cars.
On Nov. 16 police marched through Paris in support of better pay and an improved career structure, despite an Interior Ministry ban on the march.
Thousands of doctors, nurses and other health workers also marched on Nov. 17 in protest at government restrictions on health service expenditure and over pay.
Nurses ended a six-week dispute on Nov. 8 when the government offered a deal on pay and shorter hours.
Illegal funding of political campaigns
The trial opened in Paris on Nov. 25 of 63 people from property development and other companies accused of fraudulent billing to cover up illegal contributions of about F500,000,000 to right-wing parties' election campaigns.
Two days later Gérard Monate, head of the now-dissolved consultancy Urba-Gracco, and eight others went on trial for channelling electoral funds worth F3,000,000 to the Socialist Party's 1988 campaign using similar means.
However, 27 politicians who had been named before the trial were protected by a retrospective amnesty approved by the National Assembly in 1990 which covered illegal funding.
The two cases had prompted the establishment of an all-party commission to investigate the financing of political parties.
Its report, published on Nov. 21, concluded that despite recent legislation covering the public financing of parties represented in parliament, illegal practices continued.
The commission proposed further legislation, state contributions in proportion to a party's share of votes, tax relief on membership fees and the publication of party accounts.
A former senior Finance Ministry official, Alain Boublil, was charged on Nov. 7 with insider trading in connection with the takeover by the state aluminium corporation Pechiney of American National Can (ANC), a subsidiary of Triangle Industries, in 1988.
Information published in Le Figaro in September 1991 following Swiss investigations appeared to confirm that, as speculated in the press at the time, Roger-Patrice Pelat, a friend of Mitterrand who died in March 1989 [see p. 36706], had bought a large number of Triangle shares via a Swiss company, Experta Treuhand, only days before the Pechiney-ANC deal.
Transfer of ENA to Strasbourg
In continuation of the policy of decentralization in progress over the past few years, Prime Minister Edith Cresson announced on Nov. 7 that the École Nationale d'Administration (ENA), the elite civil service school, was to be transferred from Paris to Strasbourg by 2000 to strengthen links with Europe.
Other state institutions were also to leave Paris.
EUROPE
SPAIN
Neo-fascist demonstration
Some 10,000 neo-Fascists from Spain and elsewhere assembled in Madrid's Plaza Oriente on Nov. 17 to commemorate the 16th anniversary (on Nov. 20) of the death of Generalissimo Francisco Franco.
The annual gathering was on this occasion attended by supporters of far-right groups in Austria, Belgium, Germany and Italy.
Paramilitary dress was worn and Nazi banners waved.
More than 100 police earlier in the day prevented demonstrators from laying wreaths on the graves of German pilots of the Condor region who died fighting for Franco during the Spanish Civil war.
EUROPE
ITALY
Lombardy League victory
Local elections in the city of Brescia, Lombardy, on Nov. 25 produced an unexpected win for the separatist Lombardy League.
With 24.4 per cent of the vote, the League scored its most important electoral success since its first appearance, under the name of the Lombardy Regional Party, in 1987.
Although the Christian Democrats (CD), who had controlled the city council since the end of the Second World War, won only 94 fewer votes than the League — translating as 24.3 per cent of the vote and 7.6 per cent down on the last elections — the Brescia poll was widely interpreted as signalling a disillusionment among voters with existing electoral options.
The Lombardy League had polled 19 per cent of the vote in local elections throughout Lombardy in May 1990, becoming the second most important party in the region [see pp. 37468-69].
In the latest poll, support in Brescia for the Socialist Unity Party (PUS-formerly the PSI) fell from 15.5 per cent to 10.3 per cent.
The Lombardy League advocated effective autonomy for the region, and an end to what it regarded as the squandering of locally created wealth by central government.
It also argued for immigration controls and the repatriation of those immigrants without jobs or qualifications.
The League's leader, Umberto Bossi, announced on Nov. 27 that with his party now occupying 14 seats on the 50-seat city council — one more than any other party — he intended to appoint a mayor and put together a coalition adminstration.
Bill on minority languages
On Nov. 21 the central Chamber of Deputies approved a bill endorsing a number of dialects and locally used languages for optional use in primary schools, government offices, and broadcasting.
The legislation was largely inspired by the priority which the regional parties gave to preserving local cultural identities.
One the most widely used dialects included in the bill was Sardinian; others were Ladino, Catalan, and the Occitan dialect existing mainly in southern France.
French, German, Albanian, Greek, Slovene and Croatian were similarly recognized in specified parts of Italy.
Local authorities were to decide how the legislation might be applied in communities where at least 15 per cent of the inhabitants spoke one of the "minority languages" .
The right-wing Italian Social Movement (MSI) and the Republican Party (RP) unsuccessfully opposed the legislation, which was subject to Senate approval.
EUROPE
GREECE
General strike — EC criticism
A 24-hour general strike in protest against the government's economic policy was called on Nov. 7 by two principal unions and had the support of the opposition Panhellenic Socialist Movement (Pasok).
The strike was called by the General Confederation of Greek Workers (GSEE) and the civil service union Adedy, both of whose leaders were members of the Pasok central committee.
A procession of 30,000 demonstrators marched to the Parliament building, where they presented a petition calling for action against unemployment and the increasing cost of living, and a halt to the privatization programme.
Although the budget for 1992 was still in preparation, the Economy Ministry had already announced public-sector salary increases for 1992 of 6 per cent(with inflation anticipated to fall to 10-12 per cent ).
A government representative denounced the strike as politically motivated.
The socialists organized a further show of strength on Nov. 15 when Pasok leader Andreas Papandreou addressed a mass demonstration, the largest since the April 1990 elections, outside the GSEE headquarters.
Papandreou called for an early general election (elections were not due until 1994), describing the conservative New Democracy (ND) administration as "an operetta government" ; it was ready to sell everything, he said, "even the Acropolis" , and had brought the country to the edge of bankruptcy, put democracy at risk, and made poverty and unemployment "a daily reality" .
A report by the Commission of the European Communities (EC), details of which were published by the Economy Ministry on Nov. 4, called for at least another year of economic stringency, noting that by the end of 1991 (the first year of the three-year stabilization plan which the EC had required when making its February 1991 loan — see pp. 37968; 38478) the government would have failed to meet its targets for the reduction of inflation and of the public-sector deficit.
The second EC loan tranche, worth ECU600,000,000 (about uS$750 million), was due early in 1992.
Tax revenues had increased, but not as much as planned, the report said, criticizing the government's failure to bring under control the increasing problem of tax evasion.
EUROPE
TURKEY
Turkish Cabinet
Formation of coalition government
A protocol for a coalition between the True Path Party (DYP) and the Social Democratic Populist Party (SHP) was signed on Nov. 19.
The DYP deputy chairman Suleyman Demirel, 67, was to be Prime Minister.
The Cabinet announced the following day comprised Erdal Inonu, the SHP leader, as Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of State, 17 Ministers heading specific ministries and 14 other Ministers of State.
The DYP contributed 20 ministers and the SHP 12.
On Nov. 30 the new Cabinet was approved by a National Assembly in which the coalition government had a combined total of 266 of the 450 seats.
The new Foreign Minister, Hikmet Cetin, was an SHP member of Kurdish origin, and the Justice Minister Seyfi Oktay was also from the SHP.
DYP members controlled all other key ministries, with Nevzat Ayaz as Defence Minister and Ismet Sezgin as Interior Minister.
The overall management of the economy became the responsiblity of a DYP Minister of State, Tansu Ciller.
Another Minister of State, Mehmet Kahraman had a brief to follow up measures to improve human rights.
Özal's continuation as President
Following the Oct. 20 general election Demirel had reaffirmed his campaign pledge to remove President Turgut Özal from office, on the grounds of his alleged constitutional abuses and corruption.
By late November, however, Demirel was understood to have secured from Özal an undertaking that in future he would not stray beyond his constitutional role as President.
In return he would be allowed to continue in office, with his term not due to expire until 1996.
On Nov. 2 three possible drafts for constitutional changes to the procedure for electing a president had been announced by Demirel.
All would have had the effect of removing Özal.
The DYP needed, however, a three-fifths parliamentary majority in order for such changes to be made.
By Nov. 4 Demirel was reportedly contemplating a temporary alliance to this end, to include not just the SHP but also the Islamic fundamentalist Welfare Party (RP).
Such an alliance was unacceptable to a number of DYP deputies and to the SHP; the RP had said that it would co-operate only if an Islamic leader was first agreed on to replace Özal.
Demirel had also, according to The Month in Turkey newsletter of Nov. 10, rejected an offer by the outgoing Motherland Party (ANAP) Prime Minister, Mesut Yilmaz, for the ANAP to provide a DYP government with "tacit support" for the first 500 days, although the ANAP was regarded as closer in its ideology to the DYP than was the SHP.
Coalition policy document — Kurdish policy
On Nov. 25 a programme agreed on by the coalition partners was announced in the National Assembly.
It planned for a more open democracy to include a revision of "anti-terrorism" legislation and improvements in the field of human rights, media censorship and academic freedom.
The document stated that Kurdish cultural rights were to be recognized and that Kurdish regions would enjoy increased autonomy in local government.
Investment would be encouraged in the underdeveloped south-east region, and allegations of human rights abuses there would be scrupulously investigated.
Strong measures would continue to be taken against the Kurdish guerrillas in the region, with the proviso that they should not enfringe human rights.
During his election campaign Demirel had spoken of the need for a strong hand in dealing with Kurdish guerrillas.
His new position reflected the fact that the SHP, now his coalition partner, included 22 deputies representing a Kurdish party, the People's Labour Party (HEP), which had had its official recognition withdrawn.
At the opening of parliament on Nov. 6, two of these deputies caused an outcry when they protested against the reference in the oath of allegiance to the unity and indivisibility of the "great Turkish nation" .
Interviewed on the radio on Nov. 2, Demirel criticized support given by Democratic Left Party (DSP) leader Bulent Ecevit to proposals for the creation of a Turkish-controlled buffer zone in northern Iraq in order to allow the activities of Kurdish Workers' Party (PKK) guerrillas to be supressed.
Demirel maintained that "when putting this fire out the important thing is to approach the regional people with sympathy and affection" .
He was similarly conciliatory on policy towards Cyprus and Greece, observing that "if the leaders of the two countries use Turkish-Greek relations as tools in internal politics, a solution will be harder to reach" .
The new government's policy document promised a new constitution to replace the one formulated under military rule in 1982.
It also outlined an economic programme including tax reform, the restructuring of state enterprises, and a reduction in inflation without the introduction of harsh austerity measures.
Dissolution of right-wing alliance
On Nov. 15 the RP dissolved its electoral alliance with the neo-fascist Nationalist Work Party (MCP-Milliyetci Calisma Partisi — leader Alpaslan Turkes).
The two parties had together secured 62 seats — 19 of them occupied by MCP members, who now announced that they would serve as independent deputies.
Extension of state of emergency
On Oct. 31 the state of emergency which had applied in the south-eastern provinces since 1987 was renewed following a meeting on Oct. 31 of the National Security Council.
It was also planned to intensify the military campaign against the Kurdish Workers' Party (PKK), with conscripts to be replaced by mobile commando teams in early 1992.
Sentencing of activists — Prison closure
A mass trial by the Second Martial Law Court of Istanbul of 1,243 alleged militants of the Dev Sol ( "Revolutionary Left" ) group concluded on Nov. 1, almost nine years and eight months after it had begun.
One person was sentenced to death, 41 sentenced to life imprisonment and 555 to terms of imprisonment of up to 36 years.
On Nov. 25 the new coalition government announced that it was to close the prison in the north-western town of Eskisehir where human rights groups had alleged that torture of political prisoners took place.
All political prisoners (totalling some 200) were shortly to be transferred elsewhere.
Earlier in the month prisoners in seven prisons had begun hunger strikes in reponse to the evidence of torture in the maximum-security prison, which had been opened in October.
EUROPE
EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
Agreements with Hungary, Czechoslovakia, and Poland
On Nov. 22, after a week's delay, association agreements between the European Communities (EC) and Czechoslovakia, Hungary and Poland were initialled in Brussels.
The agreements, under discussion since February [see pp. 38115; 38443-43], provided for free trade within 10 years and the possibility of eventual EC membership for the three east European countries.
The agreements were due to be signed on Dec. 16, after which they required ratification by the European and national parliaments.
Safeguards for the Spanish steel industry were incorporated in an additional protocol, the talks having been held up over Spain's concern that cheap steel exports from the three countries would disrupt its domestic industry.
Other protocols covered measures protecting EC textile manufacturers and farmers [ibid.].
[For EC aid to the Soviet Union see pp. 38538-39.]
EUROPE
COUNCIL OF EUROPE
Accession of Poland
On Nov. 26 Poland became the third eastern European country after Hungary and Czechoslovakia [see p. 38503], to join the Council of Europe.
Poland's accession followed the holding of free multiparty elections on Oct. 27 [see pp. 38535-36]and brought the number of member countries to 26.
Court of Human Rights ruling on Spycatcher
On Nov. 26 the European Court of Human Rights ruled that the United Kingdom government had been in breach of the Convention on Human Rights in attempting to prevent three newspapers from publishing extracts from Spycatcher, the memoirs of the former MI5 officer Peter Wright [see pp. 35537-39; 36155-56; 36502-03; 37158; 37784].
The unanimous decision found the UK in breach of Article 10 guaranteeing freedom of expression when it had banned the Observer, Guardian, and Sunday Times newspapers from printing extracts from the book after it was published in the United States in July 1987.
However, the Court also ruled by 14 votes to 10 that the UK government had been justified, in the interests of national security, in preventing the newspapers from publishing material from the book before then.
The government was ordered to pay costs of £100,000 to each newspaper.
The long-running legal battle was estimated to have cost newspapers and the UK government £3,500,000 in total.
The ruling brought to 28 the number of violations of the Convention by the UK government.
EUROPE
EUROPE
Immigration issues
Support for anti-immigrant politics in many west European countries grew in late 1991, fuelled by the belief that a "flood of immigrants" posed an economic and cultural challenge.
Governments and organizations such as the European Communities (EC) and the Council of Europe sought steps to contain both the influx of migrants, many of whom came from the Soviet Union and eastern Europe, and the rise of racist sentiment.
An EC Commission report delivered to EC governments on Oct. 9 recommended that they should take measures to restrict illegal immigration and to harmonize procedures on asylum and that the situation of legal immigrants and genuine refugees within the EC should be improved.
Asylum applications within the EC had risen from 169,000 in 1988 to 327,000 in 1990.
Immigration and asylum issues had thus far been subject only to intergovernmental co-operation within the EC (notably through the so-called Trevi group), but some member states were seeking to bring this within the orbit of EC competence in negotiations on European political union due to be concluded at the Maastricht summit on Dec. 9-10.
Anti-immigrant feeling in individual countries
Recent elections had shown significant gains by right-wing groups campaigning on anti-immigrant platforms, notably in Austria [see pp. 38448; 38543; 38590], in Belgium [see p. 38589], in Bremen in Germany [see p. 38447]and in Sweden [see p. 38444].
Racist attacks in Germany, particularly those by neo-Nazis against Gastarbeiter ( "guestworker" ) hostels in the east [see p. 38447], attracted most attention because of the country's Nazi past.
There was no agreement among the parliamentary parties on modifying Germany's traditionally liberal constitutional provisions on asylum [see p. 38544], although agreement was reached to house asylum seekers in camps by January 1992.
By contrast, on Nov. 9 over 100,000 demonstrators in 100 German cities protested against racism on the anniversary of "Kristallnacht" in 1938, when the wholesale destruction by the Nazis of synagogues and Jewish property took place [see pp. 3323-24].
[For November anti-racist attack on Netherlands Interior Ministry see p. 38590.]
There were attacks on asylum centres in Switzerland [see p. 38497 for increase in number of asylum seekers in Switzerland].
In Italy, where tougher immigration legislation laws had been approved in 1990 [see p. 37507-08], the government sought to repatriate thousands of Albanian refugees during 1991 as well as to provide economic assistance to Albania to reduce the influx [see p. 38105-06; 38400].
In the United Kingdom legislation was introduced in early November to close "loopholes" in immigration law and to streamline the processing of immigrants' claims in order to reduce a backlog of over 60,000 cases.
Over 60 per cent of these cases were from Africa, 21 per cent were from south Asia and 3 per cent were from eastern Europe.
The number of asylum seekers had grown from 5,000 in 1988 to an expected 46,000 in 1991.
In France, the National Front (FN) leader Jean-Marie Le Pen made openly racist proposals on immigration [see p. 38591]which in some cases had been echoed by politicians of other political parties [see pp. 38445-46], manoeuvring in advance of regional elections in March 1992.
The socialist government announced tougher measures against illegal immigrants in July [see p. 38354]and in October the National Assembly approved legislation restricting illegal immigration [see p. 38544].
In Spain, where visa requirements had been introduced for north Africans in May 1991 [see p. 38201; right-wing commemoration of 16th anniversary of Franco's death see p. 38591].
OECD and AI reports
A report by the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) in late July 1991 maintained that fears voiced at a Council of Europe conference on east-west migration in January 1991 of a massive influx of immigrants from eastern Europe [see p. 37969]were proving not to be well-founded.
Nevertheless, it noted, in Germany 44 per cent of asylum applications came from eastern Europe in 1989, while in Austria visa requirements had been imposed for Bulgarians, Poles and Romanians during 1990 [see pp. 37969; 38464].
A report by the human rights organization Amnesty International (AI) on Nov. 26 criticized the "unfair barriers" erected against asylum seekers in Europe.
Governments were criticized for not putting enough pressure to end human rights violations in countries where the asylum seekers originated.
Berlin conference
Interior or Justice Ministers from the 12 EC countries, Switzerland, Austria, and 13 east European countries (including the three Baltic republics and Ukraine) met in Berlin on Oct. 30-31 at a conference on illegal migration from eastern and central Europe.
A communiqué said that government measures would (i) crack down on groups smuggling refugees across borders:(ii) standardize border controls;(iii) deploy forces in remoter border areas; and (iv) apply heavy fines for airlines failing to check travellers' papers adequately at their point of departure.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
MIDDLE EAST
The Madrid Conference
Delegations from Israel, Syria and Lebanon, and a joint Jordanian-Palestinian delegation, met around a single conference table in the Royal Palace, Madrid, on Oct. 30, 31 and Nov. 1, and held bilateral talks in the Palacio de Parcente on Nov. 3.
The conference opened with an address by Spanish Prime Minister Felipe González, followed by speeches by leaders of the conference's sponsoring governments — US President George Bush and Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev.
Some 4,000 media workers covering the conference were based in an exhibition hall 2 km away, where the proceedings were relayed on to a giant screen.
The security operation for the protection of delegates involved about 12,000 police.
Delegations at Madrid
Israel.
Prime Minister Itzhak Shamir, 76 — leader; Benjamin Netanyahu, the Deputy Foreign Minister — chief spokesperson.
Palestinians: Haider Abdel-Shafi, 72, a medical doctor from Gaza, led the Palestinian component of the joint Jordanian-Palestinian delegation.
Faisal al-Husseini, 51, was overall head of the Palestinian representation [see p. 38514]and the chief Palestinian spokesperson was Hanan Ashrawi.
Jordan: led by Kamel Abu Jaber, who had been Foreign Minister since October.
Syria: led by Foreign Minister Farouq al-Shara.
Lebanon: Faris Buwayz, 36, Foreign Minister since December 1991.
The UN and the European Communities (EC) had observer status at the conference, and the Arab League, the Gulf Co-operation Council, the Arab Maghreb Union, and the Saudi Arabian and Egyptian governments were also officially represented.
The Egyptian Foreign Minister, Amr Moussa, and the current President of the EC Council, Hans Van den Broeck, made speeches on Oct. 30.
Nabil Al-Shaaf, described as a leading advisor to Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) chairman Yassir Arafat, was present in Madrid on behalf of the PLO, which was not officially represented.
Delegates' speeches — Responses on Nov. 1
On Oct. 31 the delegation leaders were each accorded 45 minutes to speak.
Shamir said that the goal of the forthcoming bilateral talks would be "to sign peace treaties between Israel and its neighbours and to reach an agreement on interim self-government arrangements with the Palestinian Arabs" .
His speech emphasized the importance of the third stage of multilateral talks on regional issues.
He appealed to Arab leaders to "show us and the world that you accept Israel's existence" , to end the "poisonous preachings against Israel" which were evident in their countries, and to "renounce your jihad [holy war]against Israel" .
He asked the "Palestinian Arabs" to "renounce violence and terrorism…stop exposing your children to danger by sending them to throw bombs and stones at soldiers and civilians" .
In passages referring to the history of the dispute, Shamir noted: "We are the only people who have lived in the land of Israel without interruption for nearly 4,000 years…
We are the only people for whom Jerusalem has been a capital.
We are the only people whose sacred places are only in the land of Israel."
Territorial demands might be made by Arab delegates, but"as an examination of the dispute's history makes clear, its nature is not territorial.
It raged well before Israel acquired Judaea, Samaria, Gaza and the Golan in a defensive war."
Whereas "wars have not solved anything in our region" , Shamir suggested that peace could "turn the Middle East into a paradise, a centre of cultural, scientific, medical and technological creativity" .
The Palestinian speech was delivered by Abdel-Shafi.
It referred to the Palestinians' struggle for "sovereignty" and envisaged a future "confederation between the two states of Palestine and Jordan, which can be a cornerstone for our security and prosperity" .
It called for an immediate halt to land confiscations and settlement building in the Occupied Territories, in order to allow for "bilateral negotiations on the withdrawal of Israeli forces, the dissolution of Israeli administration and the transfer of authority to the Palestinian people" .
It would be necessary to provide "international protection for our people" during this phase, which could find acceptance as a "transitional stage, provided interim arrangements are not transformed into permanent status" .
Abdel-Shafi mentioned by name the Palestine National Council and the PLO and stressed Palestinian commitment to the "special status and non-exclusive character" of Jerusalem.
His speech endorsed the intifada and referred to thousands of detainees held in Israel and to doubts about the peace process among the Palestinian population.
"We have evolved a respect for pluralism and diversity and we shall guard the opposition's right to differ…
"
Referring to the "past tragedy of another people" as it affected the "present existence" of the Palestinians, and addressing "the Israeli people, with whom we have had a prolonged exchange of pain" , the speech noted that "the occupier can hide no secrets from the occupied and we are witness to the toll that occupation has exacted from you and yours" .
Speaking for Jordan, Abu Jaber emphasized "our traditional Jordanian moderation" and warned against the "extremists and the rejectionists who speak in absolute terms and are still lurking in the wings" .
King Hussein would have preferred a separate Palestinian delegation, he said, but "we have no objection to providing an umbrella for our Palestinian brethren" .
Jordan demanded "the total withdrawal of Israeli forces from occupied Jordanian, Palestinian, Syrian and Lebanese lands" .
Abu Jaber said that "the Palestinian people must be allowed to exercise their right of self-determination in their ancestral homeland" and added: "Let me speak plainly that Jordan has never been Palestine and will not be so." 
Jordan hoped that the conference would work towards a solution "leading not only to the withdrawal of Israeli forces from the Arab occupied lands, including Arab Jerusalem, but also to the delineation of Israel's permanent borders, and finally peace" .
Jordan, he added, "deserves support as it continues the…transition to political pluralism." 
The Syrian speech, delivered by Al-Shara, was generally perceived to be more militant in tone than the Palestinian.
The Syrian delegation was"determined to reject any exploitation of the current peace process to legalize what is not legitimate and what is unacceptable in the eyes of the UN…
"
Syria demanded "Israel's withdrawal from every inch of the occupied Syrian Golan, the West Bank, Jerusalem, the Gaza Strip and southern Lebanon" and the securing of the Palestinian people's legitimate rights.
Al-Shara asserted that "the world public opinion now realizes more than ever before, especially in the aftermath of the Gulf crisis, that double standards are no longer acceptable in this age; that the principles of international law, not the law of the jungle, must be repected" .
Syria sought a "just and comprehensive peace" , and "our acceptance of holding bilateral talks is also a clear indication of our serious contribution towards the establishment of a real, comprehensive peace in the region" .
The head of the Lebanese delegation, Faris Buwayz, said that "Lebanon is concerned above all with the total liberation of all its territory" .
The example of the recent ending of the Lebanese civil war showed, he said, that "miracles are easy when destiny is at stake" .
In the Nov. 1 session time was allocated to each delegation for replies to the previous day's speeches.
Shamir attacked Syria for attempting to present itself as "a model of liberty and the protection of human rights including those of Jews" while in fact harbouring many terrorist organizations.
Al-Shara in his speech brandished a wanted poster showing Shamir when younger and said that "he himself recognizes that he was a terrorist and that he participated in the assassination of Count Bernadotte [the UN mediator]in 1948" .
Bilateral talks — Joint statement
The conference adjourned on Nov. 2 for the Spanish All Souls public holiday, and resumed the next day for bilateral talks.
Five hours of talks between an Israeli negotiating team and members of the Jordanian-Palestinian delegation produced a joint statement which said that further negotiations would be divided into "two tracks" , to discuss Israeli-Palestinian and Israeli-Jordanian issues.
These negotiations would work towards the conclusion of a two-phase agreement in which Palestinians would first have an interim period of self-rule before negotiating a final settlement with Israel.
Separate Israeli-Lebanese and Israeli-Syrian meetings finally began late in the evening of Nov. 3, after US and Arab diplomats had helped resolve disagreements over procedure between Israeli and Syrian representatives.
Reports referred especially to the involvement of Prince Bandar Bin Sultan, Saudi Arabia's ambassador to the USA, in this mediation.
Developments in Occupied Territories
The participation of Palestinian representatives, with the support of most of the organizations within the PLO, at the peace conference in the Madrid produced tension and clashes in the West Bank and Gaza.
Opposition to the conference appeared to be mobilized by the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (PFLP), the Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine (DFLP) and the Islamic organizations Hamas and Islamic Jihad.
Widespread arrests of alleged PFLP activists by the Israeli police and security services "in recent months" had been reported by the Israeli military authorities on Sept. 26.
On Oct. 2 the Hamas representative in Jordan, Ibrahim Ghawsheh, had called for an escalation of the intifada in protest against the forthcoming conference.
On Oct. 23 a general strike was declared in the Occupied Territories in rejection of the Madrid conference.
Hamas supporters and others were on Oct. 26 reported to be enforcing the strike in East Jerusalem.
However, over 1,000 demonstrators, predominantly boys and young men with some brandishing olive branches, marched through Gaza City on Oct. 29 and 30 chanting "Yes to the peace conference" .
Clashes were also reported between those opposed to the conference and supporters of the PLO-mainstream Fatah organization.
Ashrawi, one of the negotiators leaving the West Bank for Madrid in the last week of October, told a television team that the intifada would continue.
Throughout the conference young people carrying olive branches continued to demonstrate in support of Palestinian participation.
Delegates returning to the West Bank from Madrid on Nov. 10 were greeted in Jericho by thousands of people expressing euphoric support.
It was announced on the same day that "political committees" had been formed in the Occupied Territories.
Press reports varied as to whether the new committees were Fatah-inspired or organized by the PFLP and DFLP, but it appeared that they would be a forum for the local response to the ongoing peace process.
On Nov. 11 Ashrawi told a news conference in Jerusalem that the Palestinian leadership was not "working on a detailed blueprint for autonomy" but was "working on projects, several issues that have to deal with interim transitional arrangements" .
Gaza Chamber of Commerce elections
In elections for the Gaza Chamber of Commerce on Nov. 4 nationalists who backed the Madrid conference won 13 of the 16 seats, unexpectedly leaving only three to Islamic groups who had rejected the conference.
Some 1,500 traders, industrialists and self-employed artisans, out of 1,700 eligible, had turned out to vote.
A report in the Israeli media on Nov. 8 said that following these elections a communiqué issued by the Hamas leadership in the diaspora referred to the importance of a "quiet dialogue" between Hamas and the PLO in order to avoid the violent public clashes between their members.
New Israeli settlement in Golan — Knesset vote
On Nov. 4 the Israeli Housing Minister Ariel Sharon formally opened a new civilian settlement, named Kela, on the Golan Heights.
On Nov. 12 the Israeli Knesset passed a resolution by 26 votes to 12 stating that the Golan Heights were non-negotiable territory, reaffirming an annexation decision of 1981.
The vote was criticized by a number of Arab states; an official Syrian statement on Nov. 13 said that it was an "open defiance of the principles and objectives" of the Madrid conference.
Deportation threat against Ashrawi
After reports on Nov. 15 that the Israeli police had recommended that Ashrawi be prosecuted for contravening laws forbidding contact with the PLO, there were immediate expressions of concern from Bush and the Jordanian Foreign Minister Kamil Abu Jabir.
Ashrawi had said on Jordan on Nov. 9 that she and her fellow delegates had been given diplomatic protection by the USA and the Soviet Union.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
PALESTINIAN AFFAIRS
Reopening of Damascus office
After a meeting in Damascus on Nov. 9 between Farouq al-Shar'a, the Syrian Foreign Minister, and Farouk Qaddumi, his equivalent in the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), Syria and the PLO took a further step towards the normalization of their relations.
Qaddumi announced that it had been agreed in principle that Al-Fatah, the largest constituent group within the PLO, would re-open its offices in the Syrian capital after a break of eight years.
In 1983 the offices of Al-Fatah had been closed and its leader, PLO Chairman Yassir Arafat, was expelled from Damascus, following Syria's backing of a mutiny against Arafat within the ranks of his own faction [see p. 32458].
Al-Fatah was also seeking a rapprochement with Damascus-based radical Palestinian groups in the Palestine National Salvation Front (PNSF), an anti-Arafat coalition.
On Nov. 12 a PNSF delegation held two hours of talks with a Syrian Vice-President, Abdel Kalim Khaddam.
Suspension of PFLP
At a news conference in Damascus on Nov. 6 it was announced by Georges Habash, the secretary-general of the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (PFLP), that his organization was suspending the membership of its representative on the PLO Executive Committee.
Habash stated that the PFLP's decision was a result of what he described as the "erroneous political line" being pursued by the PLO leadership in accepting conditions set by the United States for the formation of a Palestinian delegation to the Madrid conference.
The PFLP rejected the US proposals as a solution "liquidating the question of Palestine" and "asserting Israel's right to our land through a Palestinian and Arab recognition and an international testimony" .
Habash invited those parties serious about reaching a "just and comprehensive solution" to hold an international conference attended by the permanent members of the UN Security Council and other parties concerned "including the PLO" .
Habash added that despite the suspension, the PFLP "will continue to work alongside other national institutions." 
It was confirmed by Palestinian officials that the PFLP did not attend the PLO Executive Committee meetings held on Nov. 14-18 in Tunis.
Execution of alleged assassin of Abu Iyad
On Nov. 22 the London-based daily newspaper Al-Hayah reported the execution of Hamzah Abu Zayd, the alleged assassin of the senior PLO members Salah Khalaf (Abu Iyad) and Hayil Abd al-Hamid (Abu al-Hol) and their aide Muhammad al-Umari who were killed in Tunis on Jan. 14, 1991 [see pp. 37975-76].
Quoting a responsible Palestinian source, the newspaper reported that Abu Zayd had been executed "a few days ago in international waters" .
He had been sentenced to death in March by a Palestinian military tribunal sitting in Sana'a, Yemen.
Arafat's visit to Syria and Jordan
On Nov. 6 Arafat, accompanied by PLO Executive Committee members Yassir Amr, Abdullah Hourani and Yasser Abd ar-Rabbuh, arrived in Damascus after visiting Amman.
In a statement quoted by Syrian Arab Republic Radio Arafat praised the pan-Arab position which Syria had expressed at the Madrid conference.
On Nov. 7 the delegation was received by Vice-President Khaddam and later met with President Hafez al-Assad and Foreign Minister Shar'a to co-ordinate plans for the next stage of the talks.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
ISRAEL
Labour Party convention
Almost 3,000 delegates attending the opposition Labour Party convention in Jerusalem on Nov. 18-21 voted on a number of policy issues which were expected to figure in the general election due by November 1992.
The wording of resolutions relating to security and foreign affairs adopted by the convention represented in some respects a victory for a group of younger "doves" .
This group also argued for measures of economic liberalization and for a clearer separation of the Labour Party from the Histadrut trade union organization.
A resolution referring to Palestinian "national rights" was adopted in the formula originally proposed by the party's preparatory committee.
The "doves" had agreed to withdraw their own amendment, which mentioned the Palestinians' "right to self-determination" .
On this as on all the other resolutions relating to "security issues" , amendments proposed by the right of the party were defeated.
A call for a year's freeze on settlements in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip (with the exception of Jerusalem and the Jordan valley) was adopted as part of the party's platform, as was a commitment to a repeal of laws outlawing "contacts with terrorist organizations [which included the Palestine Liberation Organization-PLO]" .
The convention's preparatory committee had discussed whether to advocate a declaration of support for direct negotiations with PLO members "having no prior record of terrorist activity" , but in the event this was left unresolved.
Delegates voted in favour of the "strengthening" of "existing settlements" on the Golan Heights, although it was also resolved that the future of the Golan was negotiable.
The former Labour Party leader, Prime Minister and Defence Minister Itzhak Rabin, who was generally regarded as a hardliner, surprised delegates with his affirmation that Israel would have to give up "some kilometres of land in exchange for peace" .
A resolution unexpectedly approved on Nov. 21 advocated "the independence of religion from state" , in view of a "politicization of religion" in which "religious institutions are abusing the values of democracy" .
The resolution attracted strong criticism from party chairman Shimon Peres and from Rabin; the small religious parties had in the past been crucial components of Labour-controlled coalition administrations.
In the leadership elections scheduled for mid-February 1992 it was expected that Peres would be challenged by Rabin.
On Nov. 28 the secretary-general of the Histadrut, Yisrael Qeysar, announced that he also would stand.
Rejection of Vananu petition — Denial of refugee status for Menashe
On Nov. 5 it was reported that Israel's Supreme Court had rejected a petition by Mordechai Vananu to be allowed to clarify events surrounding his detention.
Vananu's brother Meir Vananu told the Davar newspaper that the court had "rejected my brother's request to allow the public to know how he was brought to Israel" .
No official information was available on the hearing.
Vananu, who had been held in solitary confinement since 1986, was in March 1988 given an 18-year prison sentence for passing information likely to harm state security, after he had offered a United Kingdom newspaper information about Israel's nuclear programme [see p. 35922].
On Nov. 18 the Australian authorities announced that Australia had refused refugee status to Ari Ben-Menashe, a self-described former Israeli agent whose accounts of Israeli government arms dealings had been cited in a recent book by Seymour Hersh [see p. 38550].
Killing of infiltrators from Egypt
By Nov. 8 a total of 12 Iranians had been detained while crossing the Israeli-Egyptian border in the western Negev desert.
One Iranian was killed by Israeli soldiers in the first days of November, and four more, who had been carrying rifles and ammunition, were killed on Nov. 11.
Those arrested claimed to be part of a group of former dissident Iranian Mujahedin who had been based in Iraq.
On Nov. 13 the Egyptian Interior Ministry said that it had no evidence to suggest that the guerrillas had entered Israel through Egyptian territory.
Visit by De Klerk — Arens' visit to Beijing
The President of South Africa, F. W. de Klerk, visited Israel on Nov. 10-13.
It was the first official visit by a South African President since 1975.
In meetings with the Israeli Prime Minister Itzhak Shamir and the Foreign Minister David Levi ways of promoting trade between the two countries were discussed and a memorandum on co-operation was signed.
In July 1991 Israel had lifted the sanctions it had adopted against South Africa in 1987, but had made it clear that new military contracts would remain formally embargoed.
Defence Minister Moshe Arens visited China in early November.
Details of the visit remained subject to Israeli military censorship, but military exports to China were understood to have been discussed.
Direct flight bringing Soviet immigrants — Appointment of ambassador
The first direct flight bringing Soviet Jewish immigrants to Israel arrived in Tel Aviv on Nov. 5, following an agreement signed in October by the Jewish Agency and by the Soviet and Israeli airlines, respectively Aeroflot and El Al.
On Nov. 14 Soviet President Gorbachev appointed Aleksandr Bovin as ambassador to Israel [see also p. 38406].
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
JORDAN
New Jordanian Cabinet
Field Marshal Sharif Zaid Ibn Shaker Prime Minister; Defence Dhuqan al-Hindawi Deputy Prime Minister; Education
*Ali al-Suhaymat Deputy Prime Minister; Transport
* **Kamil Abu Jabir Foreign Affairs Abdullah al-Nusur Industry and Commerce Awad Khulayfat Higher Education Yanal Hikmat Tourism and Antiquities
*Basil Jardana Finance
*Ziyad Fariz Planning Yusuf al-Mubayyidin Justice
*Abd al-Karim Kabarti Labour Jamal al-Sarayirah Communications
*Saad Hayil al-Surur Public Works and Housing
*Samir Qawar Water and Irrigation
*Jawdat al-Subul Interior
*Ali Abu al-Raguib Energy and Mineral Resources
*Salih Irshidat Youth
* **Shaykh Izz al-Din al-Khatib al-Tamimi Waaqfs (Religious Endowments) and Islamic Affairs
* **Abd al-Razzaq Tubayshat Municipalities and Rural Affairs and Environment
* **Mahmud al-Sharif Information Mahmud al-Samrah Culture Muhammad al-Saqqaf Supply Arif al-Batayinah Health Fayiz al-Khasawinah Agriculture Amin Awwad Mashaqibah Social Development
*Ibrahim Izz al-Din Minister of State for Prime Ministry Affairs Atif al-Butush Minister of State for Parliamentary Affairs Sultan al-Adwan Minister of State
*Jamal Hadithah al-Khurayshah Minister of State Adnan Abu Odeh Royal Court Chief
*Member of outgoing Cabinet.
**First Appointed to post on Oct. 3, 1991.
Resignation of Prime Minister
On Nov. 16 Taher al-Masri resigned as Prime Minister after only five months in the post [see p. 38311].
Three of his ministers had resigned on Oct. 3 in protest at the terms of Jordan's participation in the Middle East peace conference and at his lack of success in tackling economic problems.
Despite replacing five members of his Cabinet, on Oct. 3 he lost the support of the 80-member House of Representatives (lower house of parliament).
Masri's resignation was precipitated by a petition signed on Oct. 6 by an alliance of 49 deputies from the Moslem Brotherhood (with 22 seats), the Constitutional bloc (17 seats), the Democratic Alliance and some independent Islamic deputies.
This stated that the government had lost the confidence of the majority in parliament and urged it to resign.
Most of the signatories opposed the principle of peace negotiations with Israel, while others were angered at their exclusion from the government.
(In the face of growing opposition to the peace process during October the government seized the latest editions both of the weekly newspaper of the People's Democratic Party, Al-Ahali, for criticizing the royal decree of Sept. 25 prolonging parliament's recess until Dec. 1 and also of the Moslem Brotherhood weekly, Al-Ribat, for questioning Jordan's participation in the conference.
A rally called for Oct. 11 by the Moslem Brotherhood and Hamas to mark the first anniversary of the killing of at least 17 Arabs at the Temple Mount in Jerusalem [see p. 37873]was also banned.)
Following Masri's resignation, King Hussein called on his cousin Field Marshal Sharif Zaid Ibn Shaker, 57, who had led a transitional government in 1989 [see p. 36602], to form a government.
The new broader-based government appointed on Nov. 21 included Dhuqan al-Hindawi, the leader of one of the parliamentary factions which brought the motion of no confidence.
The Moslem Brotherhood, which opposed the peace talks on principle, remained excluded from government.
Foreign Minister Jabir, first appointed on Oct. 3, was a United States-educated professor of political science, who had been advising King Hussein on the peace process and led the Jordanian delegation to the Madrid conference [see p. 38594].
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
LEBANON
Hostage releases
Two Western hostages, Terry (Terence Hardy) Waite and Thomas Sutherland, were released on Nov. 18 by the pro-Iranian Islamic Jihad for the Liberation of Palestine, as part of a UN-mediated three-way exchange of Western hostages, Arabs held by Israel and Israelis missing in Lebanon [see p. 38550].
The UN Secretary-General Javier Pérez de Cuéllar confirmed on Nov. 18 that he expected the release of the five remaining Western hostages by Christmas.
The Qatar News Agency quoted an unidentified Islamic Jihad spokesman as saying that his group expected Israel "to reciprocate by releasing another group of Arab prisoners" .
However, the secretary-general of Hezbollah, Sheikh Abbas Musawi, said on Nov. 20 that the fate of the Western hostages was no longer linked to that of Arabs held by Israel, a declaration which appeared to remove the last political obstacle to the resolution of the hostage issue.
Waite, a British citizen and special envoy of the Archbishop of Canterbury, had been seized on Jan. 20, 1987, while on a mission to secure the release other hostages [see p. 35024].
Sutherland, a United States national and dean of Agriculture at the American University in Beirut (AUB), had been kidnapped on June 9, 1985 [see p. 34133].
Waite's release revived questions about his possible involvement with the US administration official at the centre of the Iran-contra scandal, Lt.-Col. Oliver North.
A British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) television programme, Panorama, broadcast on Nov. 18, suggested that Waite had been set up as a front man in the arms for hostages deal and helped gather intelligence on the whereabouts of the captors.
It alleged that he had been fitted out with a secret transmitter on one of his missions to Lebanon, to pinpoint the exact location of the hostages and kidnappers.
It also claimed that he had nearly 20 meetings with North between 1985 and 1987.
Press reports cited evidence of his involvement with the USA, including his use of a US military helicopter to travel from Beirut to Cyprus in 1986 and his involvement in the release of three US hostages, the Rev. Benjamin Weir, freed on Sept. 14, 1985, and Lawrence Jenco and David Jacobsen, released on July 26 and Nov. 2, 1986, respectively, all of whom turned out to have been traded for arms.
Seyed Shamseddin Khareghani, Iran's chargé d'affaires in London, said in an interview on Nov. 21, that the kidnappers and Iran thought "Waite was a US spy, with links with the CIA" [Central Intelligence Agency], when he was abducted.
North denied all the allegations.
Security situation
Israel and its "proxy" militia the South Lebanese Army (SLA) continued military operations in southern Lebanon throughout November, despite growing pressure from the Lebanese government and the international community to halt the attacks.
Lebanese Prime Minister Umar Karami announced on Nov. 2 that the USA had asked Israel to "cease all military activity in southern Lebanon at once because the Middle East peace process cannot afford such aggressive acts" .
The Foreign Minister, Faris Buwayz, who was leading the Lebanese delegation at the Madrid peace talks [see p. 38513; 38594], had appealed to the USA to intervene, and a protest had been submitted to the UN Security Council.
Israel had been shelling targets in the area following the killing of three Israeli soldiers near Aramta on Oct. 29 [see p. 38550].
On Nov. 1, Israeli jets, in three raids, destroyed two bridges linking Nabatiyeh with the Iqlim Al Toufah region and attacked a number of Hezbollah bases in the area.
On Nov. 2 villagers at Kufr Rumman near Nabatiyeh were ordered to leave their homes after evacuation orders were allegedly issued from an Israeli position.
Hundreds of villagers fled from the area.
Israel sources said the SLA was responsible.
The Israeli bombardment resumed on Nov. 5 against a background of clashes involving the Israeli army, the SLA and guerillas.
Targets included the area around Nabatiyeh, villages in the Bekaa valley and Kabrikha and Braachit in the area controlled by the UN Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL).
The Israeli air force attacked "terrorist targets" in the Rashidiyah refugee camp, south of Tyre and in the Ain al-Hulwah camp on Nov. 7.
In the early morning of Nov. 8 an explosion on the campus of the AUB destroyed the main administration building and damaged a number of others.
One person was killed and six people injured.
A Syrian soldier was also killed by the bombers as they escaped.
The Interior Minister, Maj.-Gen.
Sami al-Khatib, said that the government believed that the bomb was intended as "an obstacle for the peace conference and for reconciliation in Lebanon" .
No one claimed responsibility.
The As Safir newspaper of Nov. 20 reported details of an investigation headed by Khatib, which concluded that the bomb attack was organised by an SLA officer.
Israel continued its bombardment of villages in the south on Nov. 12 and Israeli aircraft staged mock attacks over the area.
On Nov. 14 a camp used by the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine in Rashidiyeh was bombed, two Hezbollah bases in the Jabal Safi area and in Mlita were attacked and a bridge, previously bombed on Nov. 1 and under repair, was destroyed.
UN sources reported that an Israeli patrol on Nov. 13 opened fire on a compound manned by UNIFIL, but that no one was injured.
Israel said that the incident was an accident.
Two days later an Irish member of UNIFIL was killed and another injured when their patrol was attacked by the SLA.
Three Lebanese soldiers were killed on Nov. 25 when their patrol was hit by a rocket fired from an area occupied by the SLA.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
IRAQ
Release of UK-held Iraqi assets
The Iraqi authorities on Nov. 24 released the South African-born British businessman, Ian Richter, imprisoned in Iraq since July 1986 and convicted in February 1987 of bribery and forgery charges.
The United Kingdom announced at the same time that it was freeing Iraqi assets worth £70,000,000 (about US$126,000,000), but a UK Foreign Office spokesman denied allegations that Richer's release had been secured by an unpublicised arrangement between Iraq and the UK, said to involve the unfreezing of part of £621,400,000 (US$1,100 million) held by banks in the UK.
On Nov. 18 and 20 the Iraqi government had announced that orders for supplies to meet humanitarian needs costing US$3,240 million worth would not be met, because Western governments had not agreed to free Iraqi assets [see p. 38211], estimated at around US$4,000 million [see p. 38361].
Food crisis
The Iraqi Agriculture and Irrigation Minister, Abdul Wahab Mahmoud al-Sabbagh, said in Rome on Nov. 13 that thousands of Iraqis faced starvation following a 75 per cent drop in food production.
He said that permitted grain imports since March had totalled only 100,000 tonnes, half the normal monthly grain requirements, and "only 15 per cent of our people can afford to buy food on the free market" .
A report by the UK charity Oxfam on Nov. 20 underlined the critical nature of Iraq's food and medical situation.
On Nov. 3 the Observer had reported food riots in a number of Baghdad suburbs on Oct. 16, 18 and 20.
The UN Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) on Nov. 7 extended by two months its programme of emergency relief [see pp. 38165; see also p. 38548].
Meanwhile, in a move reportedly designed to check the further collapse of the dinar, the Finance Minister Majid Abd Ja'far confirmed on Nov. 7 that the central Rafidain Bank had been authorized to accept currency known to be counterfeit [see also p. 38407].
Concern over rejection of oil sales resolution
Efforts to persuade Iraq to pump oil to pay for essential imports, under the terms of UN Resolution 706 [see pp. 38406; 38451], ended in failure on Nov. 24 after six days of talks in Baghdad between government ministers and the head of the UN's Inter-Agency Humanitarian Programme for Iraq and Kuwait, Prince Sadruddin Aga Khan, who told a press conference that "the government of Iraq may be held responsible for failing to take advantage of the window of opportunity…afforded by the arrangement for oil exports and imports of essential needs" , but added that Western governments could alleviate Iraq's humanitarian problem by releasing all Iraqi assets.
On Nov. 15 the Trade Minister, Mohammad Mehdi Saleh, had reiterated Iraq's rejection of UN Resolution 706 as a violation of Iraqi sovereignty.
 "Iraqis," he said, "will not sell their freedom for food." 
The International Herald Tribune of Nov. 25 reported that Iraq had secretly exported small quantities of refined oil products to Lebanon and Turkey to help pay for food.
Extension of UN relief operations to mid-1992
The government agreed, at the end of talks with Prince Sadruddin, to extend by six months a "memorandum of understanding" , due to expire in December, permitting UN relief agencies to continue operations in the north and south of the country.
In early November international relief agencies had accused Iraq of preventing the direct distribution of food to all except Kurdish-held territories in the north.
The completion of the first stage of the government's reconstruction programme was marked by the re-opening on Nov. 4 of the Jumhuriya bridge in central Baghdad and the partial restoration on Nov. 16 of a concrete factory, also in Baghdad.
Destruction of uranium enrichment equipment
The head of the seventh UN nuclear inspection team which visited Iraq on Oct. 11-22 [see p. 38548], Demetrios Perricos, announced in Manama, Bahrain, on Nov. 18 that UN inspectors had destroyed most of the equipment known to have been used to enrich uranium for Iraq's nuclear weapons programme.
The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) confirmed on Nov. 15 that the first consignment of confiscated enriched uranium had been airlifted to the Soviet Union.
Reports on Nov. 7, based on documents seized by UN inspectors [see p. 38451], said that Iraq had successfully detonated a "partial nuclear bomb" at al-Atheer, 100 km south of Baghdad.
Chemical and biological weapons inspections
Officials from the fifth chemical weapons inspection team [see p. 38548], which completed its mission on Nov. 5, were reported on Nov. 12 as saying that they had found Scud missiles fitted with crudely made chemical warheads.
The UK government was reported on Nov. 22 as having admitted that the UK had exported to Iraq the chemical, sodium sulphide, used in the manufacture of chemical weapons.
A third biological weapons inspection team arrived in Iraq on Nov. 19 [for arrival in October of second team see p. 38548].
Cabinet changes
President Saddam Hussein on Nov. 6 appointed Interior Minister Ali Hasan al-Majid as Defence Minister to replace Gen. Hussein Kamil [for whose April appointment see p. 38165].
Watan Ibrahim al-Hasan, Saddam Hussein's half-brother, was named Interior Minister on Nov. 13.
The latest round of Cabinet changes [for other 1991 changes see pp. 38081; 38165; 38308; 38452]was regarded by analysts as strengthening the influence of hard-liners such as Majid and further enhancing the role of members of Saddam Hussein's family in matters affecting security.
On Nov. 6 former Prime Minister Saadoun Hammadi [see p. 38452 for his dismissal in September]was named adviser to the President with the rank of Cabinet minister.
Blockade in Kurdistan
Kurdish leaders announced on Nov. 12, following meetings with government ministers in Baghdad, that they were withdrawing all guerrilla forces south of Arbil, in northern Iraq, in exchange for an end to the three-week long economic blockade [see also p. 38548].
The latest truce came amidst reports that the partial blockade of food and fuel had seriously tested the capacity of Kurdish fighters to administer the region and had caused widespread civilian suffering.
In mid-November, however, Kurdish leaders were reported to be preparing for a fresh economic blockade and an imminent government attack on Kurdish strongholds.
On Nov. 17 thousands of Kurds had fled Arbil fearing that orders to evacuate villages south of the city were a prelude to a government offensive.
Reports that the government had re-imposed a food embargo were denied by Trade Minister Saleh on Nov. 17.
Expulsion of Iraqi diplomat from Sweden
A senior Iraqi diplomat charged with spying on Iraqi refugees, including Kurds, was expelled from Sweden on Nov. 12.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
IRAN
Agreement with India — Transfer of nuclear technology
An Iran-India joint commission held its fifth session in Tehran on Nov. 5-11, when President Ali Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani told the Indian Minister of External Affairs, Madhavsinh Solanki, that Iran was ready to help in solving the differences between India and Pakistan.
The two countries signed a new three-year programme for cultural and scientific exchanges.
On Nov. 17 Rafsanjani condemned the United States for attempting to dissuade China and India from transferring to Iran nuclear technology to be used for non-military purposes.
The Washington Post of Nov. 21 gave prominence to Rafsanjani's declarations and reported that "India announced this week that it will not sell a nuclear reactor to Iran, largely because of mounting international pressure" .
The newspaper also said that "diplomats" believed that China had likewise decided against selling a nuclear reactor to Iran [see p. 38549] "leaving the country with little hope of an early revival of its [nuclear]programme" .
The Indian authorities on Nov. 22 and 28 denied that US pressure had been brought to bear, maintaining that negotiations for the sale of a reactor were at a preliminary stage and would not contravene international law.
The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) representative in New Delhi said on Nov. 23 that the IAEA would not be concerned by any sale of a reactor to Iran, which was a signatory of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT).
Rallies for anniversary of US embassy occupation
The official council for the co-ordination of Islamic publicity organized a demonstration on Nov. 4 to mark the 12th anniversary of the occupation of the United States embassy in Tehran.
 "Various sectors of the city's population, including students" were reported by official radio to have marched towards the "building of the former US dens of espionage" chanting anti-US and anti-Israel slogans.
The day was proclaimed a National Day of Struggle against World Arrogance, and at the Jamaran mosque, Tehran, theology students from Baneh "together with various strata of the people" were addressed by Ahmad Khomeini (son of the late Ayatollah Khomeini).
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
ALGERIA
Question of FIS participation in elections
Uncertainty continued over whether the fundamentalist Islamic Salvation Front (FIS) would participate in the general election to be held on Dec. 26.
On Nov. 27 a military court in Blida, the town where FIS leaders were being held, released one FIS leader, Mohammed Said, but confirmed detention orders against seven others, including Abassi Madani and Ali Belhadj.
All eight had been detained since June [see also p. 38312]and their release had been repeatedly demanded by the FIS as a precondition to FIS participation in the election.
Up to 300,000 FIS supporters marched without incident through Algiers after Friday prayers on Nov. 1, calling for the establishment of an Islamic state and for the release of the imprisoned leaders.
It was the first FIS demonstration since the lifting of the state of siege in September.
Abdelkader Hachani, one of the FIS leaders imprisoned on Sept. 27 [see p. 38456], had been released on Oct. 29.
On Nov. 6 he was allowed to make a television broadcast in which he argued that the programme of the FIS was a non-violent one.
A ban on the publication of two FIS newspapers was lifted in mid-November.
Hachani asserted in a radio interview on Nov. 20 that "if the situation remains as it is" the FIS would "exert every available means, within the framework of the law, so that there will be no elections and so the whole Algerian people boycott these elections" .
He cited 2,700 FIS supporters dismissed from their jobs since June and said that FIS political prisoners were still being held in a number of towns.
The FIS and other groups were convinced, he said, that "the sole solution to all the problems and crises suffered by the country is to adopt Islam as a way of living" .
The military authorities at Blida refused to allow Madani and Belhadj to sign documents authorizing their lawyers to register them as parliamentary candidates before the Nov. 11 deadline for registration.
On Nov. 28 the FIS's consultative council announced that it had postponed a decision on participation in the election "in order to give the regime another opportunity to spell out its intention to clear the political atmosphere" .
Registration of parliamentary candidates
The FIS and over 40 other parties registered a total 5,794 parliamentary candidates for the 430 National Assembly seats.
This represented a 55 per cent increase compared with numbers registered in June.
A number of the 1,089 candidates who were running as independents were members of the ruling National Liberation Front (FLN)— a fact noted with disapproval by FLN secretary-general Abdelhamid Mehri at an emergency session of the FLN central committee on Nov. 21.
The FIS had put up a candidate in each constituency (and claimed to be the only party to do so).
Nahdah, the Islamic party led by Sheikh Djaballah, announced that it was putting forward 206 candidates.
Djaballah said on Nov. 27 that "the Islamic state would be established by all the potential existing in Algeria, and not through the potential of one single party" .
Law on foreign investment in oil and gas
On Nov. 30 the National Assembly approved legislation allowing foreign companies increased involvement in the exploration and exploitation of oil and gas reserves and mining operations.
International companies would be allowed to work in existing oil fields as well as opening up new ones, and gas finds could now be included along with oil in production-sharing agreements.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
LIBYA
US and UK indictments of Libyans for Lockerbie bombing
The United States and United Kingdom authorities on Nov. 13 announced that they had filed charges against two Libyan nationals who were believed responsible for the bomb which exploded on an aircraft over Lockerbie, Scotland, in 1988.
Abdelbaset Ali Mohammed al-Megrahi, 39, and Al-Amin Khalifa Fhimah, 35, who were both presumed to be in Libya, were reportedly members of the Libyan intelligence services and former employees of Libyan Arab Airlines.
The bomb on board the Boeing 747 Pan American World Airways (Pan Am) passenger aircraft flight PA 103 on Dec. 21, 1988, which had killed all 259 people on board and 11 people in the village of Lockerbie [see pp. 36409-10]was believed to have been placed in luggage which joined the flight at Frankfurt.
Investigators had concluded that this suitcase had reached Frankfurt on an Air Malta flight which left Malta earlier that day.
Around the time of the bombing, Megrahi had been security chief for Libyan Arab Airlines and Fhimah had been the airline's station officer in Malta.
On Nov. 13 the UK Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd told the House of Commons that warrants for the arrest of the two Libyans had been issued by Lord Fraser, Scotland's Lord Advocate.
They faced charges of conspiracy, murder, and contravention of the Aviation Security Act of 1982.
Simultaneously with the UK announcement, the acting US Attorney General William Barr (later confirmed in his post — see p. 38568) announced that indictments and arrest warrants would be issued against Megrahi and Fhimah, accused of participating in a "scheme to destroy an American aircraft" , killing the passengers on board.
The formal US indictments were issued the next day.
It was suggested in the US and European press that Syrian, Iranian or Palestinian groups might also have participated in planning the bombing.
Investigators had until late 1990 suspected involvement by a Syrian-based group, the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine-General Command (PFLP-GC).
The authorities now maintained that the bombing was an act of revenge for the April 1986 raid on Tripoli by US aircraft [see pp. 34454-59]and that available evidence indicated sole Libyan responsibility.
French charges over 1989 DC-10 bomb
The French government had on Oct. 30 issued warrants for the arrest of four Libyan officials in connection with the destruction near the Chad-Niger border in 1989 of a DC-10 belonging to a private French airline [see p. 36910].
Abdullah Senoussi, a brother-in-law of the Libyan leader Col. Moamar al Kadhafi and deputy chief of the Libyan intelligence services, was among those named.
The Libyan embassy in Paris rejected the allegations.
Discussion of sanctions — International reaction
The US and UK press gave prominence to reports that officials in both countries might ask Group of Seven (G-7) and European Community (EC) countries to impose commercial sanctions against Libya (additional to the existing US and EC sanctions) if they did not succeed in having Megrahi and Fhimah extradited.
By Nov. 16 US President Bush was said not to have ruled out a military strike against Libya.
EC Foreign Ministers had on Nov. 4 told their five Arab Maghreb Union (AMU) counterparts, with whom they were meeting in Brussels, that they were unable for the time being to lift the sanctions that restricted arms sales to and diplomatic relations with Libya.
Iranian radio on Nov. 16 claimed that the charges constituted "the start of a new psychological and propaganda war by Washington against Libya" .
The Egyptian newspaper Al-Jumhuriyah of Nov. 16 warned Bush against a military strike which would not "punish Kadhafi, but rather the Arab friends of the USA" .
A Soviet Foreign Ministry statement of Nov. 30 said that such an action would set a "dangerous international precedent" .
Libyan reaction
A statement by the Libyan Foreign Ministry on Nov. 15 had denied "any Libyan connection" with the Lockerbie "incident" , and reiterated a "condemnation of terrorism in all its forms" .
It called for an investigation of the charges by a "neutral international investigation committee" or the International Court of Justice.
On Nov. 18 a UK request for the extradition of the two men was presented by the Italian ambassador in Tripoli (as UK-Libyan diplomatic relations had been suspended since 1984).
The request was subsequently refused.
On Nov. 18 Libya announced that it had set up a judicial inquiry to investigate the allegations.
The Justice Ministry said that Judge Ahmed Taher al-Zawi would be seeking access to evidence held by the British and US legal authorities.
In a joint statement issued on Nov. 27 the US and UK governments asserted that "appropriate compensations" would have to be paid by Libya for the victims of the bomb.
In a separate section of the statement, France joined in calling on the Libyan government to "prove by concrete actions its renunciation of terrorism" .
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
MOROCCO
Campus disturbances — Sentencing of students
From mid-October and into early November there were disturbances on the university campus in Oujda, and less seriously in Fez, Meknes and Kenitra, as Islamic fundamentalist students clashed with secularist opponents, in some cases supporters of the National Union of Moroccan students (UNEM).
At the Mohammed I University in Oujda, 20 km from the border with Algeria, the confrontations began on the night of Oct. 7, when a number of non-fundamentalist students were abducted from university residences.
The discovery on Nov. 1 of the body of a 20 year-old who had been abducted from his science class prompted the police to raid clandestine prisons which the fundamentalists had established in the vicinity of the campus.
On Nov. 4 an opposition newspaper reported that three students had been killed in Oujda and that the police had arrested a number of Algerian nationals in connection with the killings.
Some sources said that the clashes had been between members of the fundamentalist Adl wal Ihsan ( "justice and charity" ) group and members of the leftist Kaiyidine group.
By Nov. 15, 25 students in Oujda had been sentenced for up to nine years in prison for involvement in the disturbances.
In Fez, where 15 people had been hospitalized after similar clashes in October, a court on Nov. 8 pronounced sentences of up to four years on 30 students (16 Islamic fundamentalists and 14 described as Marxist-Leninists).
Release of military detainees
Between Sept. 23 and Oct. 29, 26 members of the military were released after spending over 18 years as prisoners in the remote fortified prison of Tazmamart in the Atlas Mountains, which was demolished in September.
According to the Morrocan Association of Human Rights (AMDH) and the humanitarian organization Amnesty International (AI), they were survivors from an original group of 61 prisoners.
Some of the group whom were alleged to have participated in the August 1972 attempt to kill King Hassan (for release of family of Gen. Oufkir see p. 38121).
Others had been imprisoned following an attack on the royal palace at Skhirat, near Rabat, in 1971.
Realignments among parliamentary opposition
On Nov. 19 the Istiqlal ( "independence" ) party and the Socialist Union of Popular Forces (USFP) announced that they had decided to act together for "the establishment of true democracy" .
A conference held by the two parties discussed the general election which was due in mid-1992 and called for an "independent, national body" to oversee it.
Delegates also called for the voting age to be lowered from 20 to 18 years and for voter lists and electoral boundaries to be revised.
Earlier, as the Chamber of Representatives on Oct. 17 held its first session for the parliamentary year 1991-92, it was announced that a new opposition grouping, the National Movement (MN), had been formed under the leadership of the veteran Berber politician Mahjoubi Aherdane, who in 1957 had founded his Popular Movement party (MP).
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
BAHRAIN
On Oct. 27 Bahrain and the United States signed a defence co-operation accord.
Similarly to the one signed by Kuwait, it allowed for common military exercises and the storage of equipment and use of port facilities by US forces.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
DAMASCUS DECLARATION
Foreign Ministers of the signatories to the Damascus Declaration (the six Gulf Co-operation Council (GCC) states plus Syria and Egypt) met in Cairo on Nov. 10.
A joint communiqué made no reference to the formation of an Arab force for deployment in the Gulf and it was resolved to reconvene in April 1992.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
SYRIA
The People's Assembly on Nov. 13 approved a budget for 1991 which provided for expenditure of £S84,690 million (US$7,548 million), representing an increase of 37 per cent over the 1990 budget [see p. 38069].
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
TUNISIA
President Ben Ali marked the fourth anniversary of his accession to power (Nov. 7, 1987) by pardoning 1,070 people sentenced by civil and military courts; 141 would be released and the others would have their sentences reduced.
NATO
Rome summit — Invitation to east European countries — New strategic formula
Leaders of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) ended a summit meeting in Rome on Nov. 8 with an invitation to eastern European countries for closer co-operation, starting with a foreign ministers' meeting in December.
The two-day meeting of heads of state and government spelled out new strategies in the aftermath of the Cold War, aimed at coping with the dangers of instability in eastern Europe and elsewhere.
A communiqué on NATO's "new strategic concept" replaced the old reliance on "forward defence" with new emphasis on crisis management and preventive diplomacy.
The communiqué reaffirmed the trend to arms reductions and smaller, more mobile forces.
The strategy communiqué and the summit's other major statement, a "declaration on peace and co-operation" , re-affirmed the importance of the US alliance with European countries but also stressed the strengthening of NATO's "European pillar" .
The statements said that NATO remained essential but welcomed the growth of a "European identity" in defence matters, expressed in the European Communities (EC) and in the Western European Union (WEU).
This two-track approach was seen by the press in member countries as reflecting continued manoeuvring over the role of the United States in the alliance, against a background of US troop reductions in Europe and Franco-German proposals for a European military force.
US officials had shown concern about the increased emphasis on a "European identity," pressed by France in particular.
A Washington Post report on Nov. 9 described the outcome in Rome as "fuzzy" and the declaration as "filled with compromise language" .
Call for meetings with east European representatives
The 16 NATO leaders invited Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania and the Soviet Union to send foreign ministers to a meeting at NATO headquarters in Brussels, expected to be held on Dec. 20, with the purpose of issuing a joint declaration launching a "new era of partnership" .
The summit declaration applauded those countries' commitment to political and economic reform, and called attention to a continuing programme of visits and contacts.
It proposed that the December meeting should be followed by regular meetings at various levels, including ministerial meetings in what it said "might be called a North Atlantic Co-operation Council" .
Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev praised the Rome initiatives on Nov. 11.
The NATO leaders stressed their support for the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE)— which grouped east and west European countries, the USA and Canada — and urged that the CSCE's role be enhanced and expanded.
The "new strategic concept" 
The new strategy, as agreed at the summit, aimed to define a role for NATO now that "the threat of a simultaneous, full-scale attack on all of NATO's European fronts has effectively been removed…" .
More unpredictable risks, the strategy communiqué said, arose from new instabilities.
These could result from the economic, social and political problems, "including ethnic rivalries and territorial disputes, which are faced by many countries in central and eastern Europe" .
Even in a co-operative relationship, Soviet military capacity was still "the most significant factor" of which NATO had to take account in maintaining the European military balance.
While maintaining its defence, however, NATO saw greater opportunities than ever before for achieving its aims through political means, including dialogue, co-operation, crisis management and other efforts to prevent conflict.
NATO military forces would be smaller but more mobile and flexible, and with the capability to be built up when necessary.
Strategic nuclear forces, "particularly those of the United States" , were still an essential deterrent, but nuclear artillery and ground-launched short-range nuclear missiles were no longer needed in Europe and would be eliminated.
Appeal to Soviet republics
In a separate statement on Nov. 8, the summit urged Soviet republics to respect international arms control treaties, to keep nuclear weapons under a single authority, and to limit the size of their armies.
The statement reflected worries among the NATO leaders about the risks as Soviet central control disintegrated and republican governments took power.
It welcomed the Soviet leadership's intention to keep nuclear weapons under "the safe, responsible and reliable control" of a single authority.
Urging restraint in the development of conventional forces, the statement said that otherwise these could exacerbate political tensions.
French President François Mitterrand dissociated himself from the statement because of a passage which, praising Soviet moves to democracy and "economic liberty" , said that market economies should be created in the Soviet republics.
Mitterrand told a press conference that NATO should not "preach" to others on how to organize their internal affairs.
Call for ceasefire in Yugoslavia
The NATO leaders deplored the fighting in Yugoslavia and called on all parties to co-operate with international efforts to bring about a ceasefire.
In a formal statement on Nov. 8, they condemned attacks by the Yugoslav National Army on Dubrovnik and other Croatian cities, but they added that recognition for seceding republics "can only be envisaged in the framework of an overall settlement" and that such a settlement had to guarantee the rights of "national or ethnic groups within the individual republics." 
Extension of Wörner's term as Secretary-General
NATO headquarters announced on Nov. 7 that Manfred Wörner"s term as NATO Secretary-General was to be extended until June 30, 1993.
INTERNATIONAL
DISARMAMENT
Soviet acceptance of "Open Skies" policy — Progress of CFE talks in Vienna
The Soviet Union announced on Nov. 5 that it would henceforth drop all its objections to "familiarization" overflights of its territory by Western surveillance aircraft conducting inspections in accordance with international disarmament agreements.
The announcement was made in Vienna at the recently reconvened talks on the so-called "Open Skies" policy, which allowed both sides to conduct aerial supervision for defence purposes.
The "Open Skies" policy had been proposed by the United States in December 1989 [see pp. 37112], and test flights had been made in eastern Europe [see p. 37201], but talks on its implementation had effectively been suspended in May 1990 after Soviet expressions of reservations over militarily sensitive areas [see pp. 37267; 38255]and they had been reconvened only on Sept. 9, 1991 [see p. 38458].
Meanwhile, talks were also continuing in Vienna on the implementation of the Treaty on Conventional Forces in Europe (CFE), which had been signed in November 1990 by 22 states from eastern Europe and the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO)[see pp. 37838; 38255; 38458], and which provided for a multilateral reduction of troop deployment levels in Europe as well as a general reduction of conventional weapons stockpiles.
The US Senate voted on Nov. 25 to ratify the CFE treaty, and it also approved, by 86 votes to eight, the allocation of $500,000,000 from the US defence budget to help finance the destruction of tactical nuclear weapons in the Soviet Union, as proposed on Oct. 5 by President Mikhail Gorbachev [see p. 38553].
These moves took place, however, against a growing background of uncertainty as to whether the increasing political instability might make it difficult to implement all of the agreements undertaken by the Soviet leadership on behalf of the Soviet Union.
Special concern surrounded the plans announced by the Ukrainian Republic to run its own 420,000-strong army independently of the Soviet Union — a move which would result in a serious excess over the troop levels agreed in the CFE treaty.
A draft text of the proposed CFE treaty on troop strength reductions was presented on Nov. 21 by 11 participating states (Bulgaria, Canada, Czechoslovakia, France, Germany, Hungary, Italy, Luxembourg, Norway, the United Kingdom and the United States).
It covered all land and air forces, but not paramilitary forces, on which the treaty framework provided only for an exchange of views to take place.
INTERNATIONAL
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY SITUATION
Financial instability after fears of slowing economic growth
International financial markets experienced a period of considerable turbulence in the autumn of 1991, as uncertainties grew about the sustainability of the recovery in the United States economy, and as fears were expressed that the German economy might also face intractable difficulties in meeting the costs of unification.
Consequently most of the world's major stock markets lost ground during this period, and international currency exchange markets became highly unstable.
The US dollar, which had peaked at US$1.00=DM1.85 during May and June 1991 from a February trough of 1.44, had fallen back by the end of November to below 1.6, as early hopes of a rapid recovery in US consumer spending faded, and as unfavourable indicators in the employment market coincided with news of a disappointing trade balance in September.
The deutschmark was boosted by rumours that a realignment of the parities in the European Monetary System might be imminent ahead of the Maastricht summit of European Community leaders in December.
Sterling and the French franc remained weak, despite a raising of interest rates in France, and a major outflow of funds was observed from Finland into Germany, following Finland's announcement of a 12.3 per cent devaluation of the markka in mid-November [see p. 38587].
Fears of a major world stock market crash were expressed on Nov. 17-18, after a 120-point fall in the Dow Jones Industrial Average in New York.
The collapse in confidence was prompted by proposals by the US Senate to limit credit card borrowing [see also p. 38566], a move which would have damaged the revival of retail markets; markets calmed, however, following Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady"s dismissal of the idea, and the index ended the month 6 per cent down from the 3,075 level recorded at the end of October.
Worries in the USA also spread to the London market, where the FT-SE 100 index fell during the month of November from 2,550 to 2,400 on uncertainties about the strength of the UK industrial recovery.
In the Tokyo stock market the Nikkei Average also fell back during November from 25,000 to 23,500, as the implications of slowing economic growth and stock market scandals [see p. 38558]took their toll: this was 13 per cent below its 1991 peak in May, and 41 per cent down on the position at the end of 1989.
INTERNATIONAL
GATT
Failure to meet Uruguay Round deadline — New momentum in negotiations
After five years of negotiations on the Uruguay Round of multilateral trade talks of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), intended to establish new rules liberalizing world trade, negotiators failed to meet a Nov. 1 target date to produce draft agreements.
United States President Bush, meeting European Community (EC) officials in the Hague on Nov. 9, was reported to have moderated US demands for cuts in EC subsidies for farm exports, giving a new impetus to negotiations.
Lower-level meetings in the following weeks, however, failed to produce any quick breakthrough.
Agricultural export subsidies had been the crucial stumbling block on which this round of GATT talks foundered in December 1990 [see p. 37930].
The EC had moved toward a more flexible position in October when the German cabinet agreed that subsidies to farmers could be reduced and partly replaced by direct income support.
The German, French and Irish governments had hitherto been the most adamant against further concessions in the argument over agricultural exports.
Changes in the EC position took place against a background of moves to reform the Community's Common Agricultural Policy (CAP).
The USA, supported by Australia and other exporters of agricultural products, had originally wanted internal farm support to be cut by 75 per cent and export subsidies by 90 per cent over 10 years.
The EC was unwilling to cut support by more than 30 per cent.
After the Hague meeting, which brought together President Bush, EC Commission President Jacques Delors and the incumbent EC Council President, Netherlands Prime Minister Ruud Lubbers, the USA was understood to have scaled down its demands to cuts of 30 per cent(internal) and 35 per cent (exports) over five or six years.
The meeting took place after GATT negotiating groups in Geneva had failed to draw up draft agreements by Nov. 1, a target set in October by GATT Director-General Arthur Dunkel [see p. 38555].
Seven groups were working on a range of subjects including anti-dumping rules, market access, textiles, intellectual property, services and provisions for settling disputes, as well as agriculture.
In some of these areas, progress had been made but agreement was believed to be conditional on the outcome of the dispute over agricultural trade.
The meaning of any percentage figures for reductions in export support would depend on hard bargaining to determine (i) the base period against which reductions would be measured;(ii) dates for implementation; and (iii) standards for measuring export values or quantities.
It would also have to be decided whether direct income payments and other forms of support for farmers would be exempt or would be considered to be export subsidies.
After the groups failed to produce drafts, Dunkel put forward a working paper defining principles on which new rules might be based, but avoiding numbers.
He proposed full "tariffication" , a system (advocated by the USA) under which all import restraints, such as quotas, would be converted to tariffs so that they could be systematically reduced.
Environment working group
The GATT Council decided on Oct. 9 to activate a working group to discuss possible conflicts between trade rules and environmental protection.
The working group on trade and the environment had been long established, but never before convened, the Financial Times reported.
The GATT council decided that it should discuss the relationship of environmental regulations and GATT rules designed to remove trade restrictions.
INTERNATIONAL
OIL
Ministerial meeting
The Organization of Petrolem Exporting Countries (OPEC) held its six-monthly ministerial meeting in Vienna on Nov. 26-27, electing Jibril Aminu of Nigeria as OPEC President, and ending with an agreement to allow member countries to continue to produce near to capacity in the first quarter of 1992.
The decision to discuss output quotas again on Feb. 12, 1992, at a meeting of the ministerial monitoring committee in Geneva, was sufficient to reverse the pre-conference decline in prices.
OPEC's next full ministerial meeting would be on May 20, 1992, in Vienna.
Upward price movements in October, attributed largely to concerns about Soviet supplies, had taken Brent crude on Oct. 15 to $22.50 per barrel, its highest level since the Gulf War; it fell below $20 in November, but finished at $20.25 per barrel on Nov. 28.
With Iraq not currently exporting [see p. 38598]and Kuwait only gradually returning to the market, OPEC's other 11 member states had felt able to defer any reimposition of output restrictions, particularly in view of the serious uncertainty about Soviet supplies.
Their formal position was to reaffirm the "September decision" [see p. 38459], which had specified a collective OPEC output ceiling of 23,650,000 barrels per day.
Individual country quotas had last been agreed in Geneva on July 26-27, 1990, immediately prior to the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait [see p. 37632], and had been in disuse since then.
In practice total OPEC output in November was estimated by the International Energy Agency (IEA) as slightly higher than the nominal collective ceiling, at 24,100,000 bpd (23,800,000 bpd in October).
The IEA, with 21 member countries (and Finland and France reportedly due to join shortly), announced on Oct. 15 that it would convene a three-day forum in Paris in February 1992 for both producer and consumer country representatives to discuss energy efficiency, environmental issues, industrial co-operation and the exchange of information (but not prices or production levels).
INTERNATIONAL
ENVIRONMENT
Yanomami reserve
In an unexpected move the Brazilian President, Fernando Collor de Mello, issued a decree on Nov. 15 establishing a Yanomami Park — a 94,000 sq km reserve for the Yanomami people on their traditional lands in north-eastern Brazil.
Some 9,000 Yanomami lived in the area, and a further 12,000 across the border in Venezuela.
The declaration of the reserve followed a long-running campaign by environmental groups, led by Survival International, which had threatened to organize a boycott of the 1992 UN Conference on the Environment and Development (UNCED) in Rio de Janeiro in protest at the Brazilian government's repeated failure to honour promises to recognize Yanomami land rights.
In recent years, the tribe had been badly affected by diseases brought in by prospecting miners.
European Energy Charter
Delegates from 36 countries reached agreement in Brussels on Nov. 21 on a European Energy Charter, designed to ensure supplies of oil and gas from the republics of the Soviet Union.
The Charter was subject to ratification at a meeting of Energy Ministers in The Hague on Dec. 16-17.
The Charter provided for assistance to "economies in transition" (notably those of the republics of the Soviet Union) in developing their energy supplies, principally by encouraging private investment.
It was endorsed by European countries, Canada, Japan and the United States.
Environmentalists criticized it for emphasizing improved access to energy supplies while failing to ensure adequate environmental safeguards.
Soviet decision to close Antarctic station
The Chilean daily La Epoca of Nov. 7 reported that the Soviet Union had decided to close down its Antarctic research programme because of a "critical lack of resources" , and the break-up of the Union.
Withdrawal of Soviet personnel from the bases would begin in January 1992.
Californian petrol regulations
In the United States the State of California's Air Resources Board announced new regulations for petrol on Nov. 24, requiring a 30 per cent cut in emissions of air pollutants by March 1996.
It was expected to reduce the state's total emissions of air pollutants by about 5 per cent, or 1,435 tonnes per day.
As a first step, the sale of leaded petrol would be banned from January 1992.
Capping of last Kuwaiti oil fire
The last of the oil fires in Kuwait, which had been started by retreating Iraqi forces igniting well heads, was capped on Nov. 6.
The fires had burned for approximately eight months, consuming about 2,000,000 barrels of oil at a cost to Kuwait of US$100,000 million.
The 732 fires had been extinguished by 27 fire-fighting teams led by the United States expert Red Adair.
Initial estimates that it would take at least two years to extinguish all the fires proved pessimistic as the teams rapidly gained experience in the task.
Teams came from China, France, Hungary, Iran, Romania, the Soviet Union and the United Kingdom, as well as from the USA and Kuwait.
Japanese acceptance of drift net fishing ban
The Japanese government announced on Nov. 25 that it would agree to co-sponsor with the United States a UN resolution imposing an indefinite moratorium on the use of drift nets from the end of 1992.
Japan's unexpected move followed prolonged pressure from the US administration, which had in September announced a ban on the import of drift-netted fish [see p. 38459].
Japan had previously been the largest single user of the nets, up to 50 km long and intended primarily for catching tuna, squid and pink salmon, but fiercely criticized by environmentalists as "walls of death" which caused widespread unintentional deaths of marine mammals and other sea creatures.
It was estimated that in 1990 Japan's drift net fishery was responsible for the deaths of 41,000,000 sea creatures other than those it was seeking to catch.
These included 700,000 sharks, 270,000 seabirds, 26,000 marine mammals, such as whales and dolphins, and 406 sea turtles, an endangered species.
INTERNATIONAL
UNITED NATIONS
UNESCO general conference
The 26th general conference of the UN Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) was held in Paris from Oct. 15 to Nov. 7.
It approved a constitutional reform to make the members of the executive council direct representatives of their governments.
Despite the reforms the UK, the USA and Singapore, which had left UNESCO during the 1980s, said that they would not yet rejoin.
A budget of US$444,704,000 for the biennium 1992-93 was approved — a fall in expenditure of $11,000,000 compared with 1990-91, achieved by cutbacks including the loss of 62 posts.
The conference approved the accession of Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, the Marshall Islands, the Federated States of Micronesia and Tuvalu.
FAO 26th biennial conference
The UN Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) held its 26th biennial conference in Rome on Nov. 9-27.
A budget for the 1992-93 biennium, providing for expenditure of US$646,000,000 (representing a cut in real terms of 4.6 per cent), was approved without major controversy [see p. 37054 for 1989 budget disputes], and the USA undertook to pay before January 1992 its arrears for 1991, which amounted to some $34,000,000 out of a total contribution of around $75,000,000.
The accession of the European Communities (EC) to the FAO was approved on Nov. 26.
It was the first time that an organization rather than a country had been allowed to join a UN organization.
South Africa (a founder FAO member which had withdrawn in 1964) was expected to apply for readmission, but withdrew after the Organization for African Unity (OAU) had indicated that such a move was "premature" .
UNIDO general conference
The fourth general conference of the UN Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO) was held in Vienna, Austria, on Nov. 18-23.
Delegates failed to approve two sets of restructuring proposals put forward by the EC countries and by the USA.
The Neue Zürcher Zeitung of Nov. 24 described UNIDO as suffering from both a leadership and identity crisis.
A biennial budget providing for expenditure of US$180,000,000 was approved; many countries were in arrears with their contributions.
INTERNATIONAL
WHO
HIV and AIDS
 "The forthright revelation by Magic Johnson that he is infected with HIV" was welcomed on Nov. 11 by the director of WHO's global programme on AIDS, Michael H. Merson.
The US basketball star's announcement, Merson said, "drives home a basic truth about the AIDS pandemic" , that sexually active people could not consider themselves invulnerable, whatever their sexual preference.
In the UK the death of Freddie Mercury, 45, of the rock group Queen, was announced in late November shortly after his declaration that he did have AIDS; he was the latest of a number of celebrated musicians and other artists to die from AIDS.
The World Health Organization's quarterly update statistics issued on Oct. 4 had estimated worldwide cases of infection with HIV (the human immunodeficiency virus) at between nine and 11,000,000, of whom 1,500,000 had developed AIDS.
The estimated actual AIDS figure was more than three times the total of reported cases, which had reached 418,403 from 163 countries.
HIV cases would rise to 30-40,000,000 by the year 2000, and AIDS deaths to 1,000,000 per year.
A WHO analysis published on Nov. 11 in Geneva showed heterosexual intercourse to be responsible for three quarters of all cases of HIV infection.
It was the dominant form of HIV transmission in the developing world and a rising cause of infection in the industrialized world.
In the USA, where HIV first spread primarily among homosexual or bisexual men and injecting drug users, there were now an estimated 100,000 cases attributable to heterosexual intercourse.
Perinatal (mother-to-child) transmission of HIV, already responsible for 900,000 out of some seven million cases in Africa, was also rising rapidly in industrialized countries.
INTERNATIONAL
AVIATION
Arctic military air crashes
Arescue mission was launched on Nov. 1 to bring back 13 survivors from a Canadian air force transport plane which had crashed on Oct. 31 near the military surveillance base at Alert, Ellesmere Island — the northernmost settlement in Canada, close to the North Pole.
Five people had died.
At least 20 people were reported killed on Nov. 18, when a Soviet military transport aircraft crashed in bad weather at the Amderna air field on the polar Karskoe Sea.
INTERNATIONAL
FRANCOPHONE COUNTRIES
Fourth summit
The fourth summit of francophone countries, held at the Palais de Chaillot, Paris, on Nov. 19-21 was attended by delegates from 50 countries and French-speaking communities.
Delegations attending for the first time came from Cambodia, Egypt (with 250,000 French-speakers), Bulgaria (with 350,000), and Romania (with 1,100,000).
Algeria, which with 12,000,000 French speakers was the second largest French-speaking country after France, did not attend, viewing the gathering as a remnant from colonial days.
The "Chaillot declaration" approved at the end of the meeting pledged to "advance the process of democratization" .
Prime Minister Brian Mulroney of Canada announced that Canadian development aid would be tied to progress on democratization and respect for human rights.
The meeting also decided that the international francophone television channel, TV 5, should from 1992 be broadcast to Africa for one hour a day.
(TV 5 could already be received in western Europe, north America and the Caribbean).
Delegates approved a motion calling for the "re-establishment of constitutional order in Haïti and the restoration of the legitimate President, Fr Aristide" .
The fifth summit was to be in 1993 in Mauritius.
INTERNATIONAL
SPACE RESEARCH
ESA conference
At a conference in Munich, Germany, on Nov. 18-20 ministers from the 13 member countries of the European Space Agency (ESA) decided not to move on from the research to the development phase of the key Hermes spacecraft and the Columbus space laboratory projects.
Immediately before the conference Germany had expressed reluctance to commit further funds to the projects because of the costs of German unification.
Ministers agreed to open projects to the Soviet Union and Japan for collaboration and were expected to meet in late 1992 to review the situation.
Shuttle and Mir flights
In late November the United States space shuttle Atlantis undertook a mission to launch a $300,000,000 missile warning satellite, according to newspaper reports of Dec. 2.
The Soyuz TM-13 mission, launched on Oct. 2 from the Baikanur cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, carried one Austrian and two Soviet cosmonauts (one of whom was officially described as representing the Republic of Kazakhstan).
One Soviet cosmonaut was transferred from Soyuz TM-13 to the Mir space station; another, who had spent 144 days in space [see p. 38219], returned to earth on Soyuz TM-13.
INTERNATIONAL
DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
the Group of 15, on south-south co-operation within the Non-Aligned Movement, held a summit meeting in Caracas, Venezuela, on Nov. 27-29, attended by, amongst others, the heads of government of India, Indonesia, Malaysia and Senegal (which would host the next G-15 summit); third world debt, and protectionism among industrialised countries, featured prominently in discussion, and it was envisaged that a G-15 position on the new international order would be announced early in 1992.
INTERNATIONAL
ENERGY
Physicists of the Joint European Torus (JET) based near Oxford, England, suceeded for the first time in producing for two seconds energy by means of nuclear fusion.
INTERNATIONAL
INTERPOL
Albania, Lithuania, Mongolia and Vietnam joined Interpol at the 60th session of its general assembly on Nov. 4-8 in Punta del Este, Uruguay, bringing to 158 the total membership of the organization for international police co-operation.
ASIA — PACIFIC
AFGHANISTAN
Area: 652,225 sq km.
Population: 16,600,000 (1990 UNFPA est.).
Capital: Kabul.
Languages: Pashtu (official); Dari.
Religion: Islam (nearly 100% — majority Sunni Moslems); Hinduism, Sikhism and Judaism.
Armed forces: 58,000 (1990).
Currency: afghani (US$1.00=56.6172 afghanis as at Sept. 30, 1991).
Major international affiliations: ADB, ICO (membership granted to Afghan Interim Government (AIG)— see p. 36537), IPU, NAM.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
Afghanistan, which had been a monarchy until 1973, was then declared a republic following a coup.
A further coup in 1978 led by the People's Democratic Party of Afghanistan (PDPA) established the Democratic Republic in 1978, with close ties with the Soviet Union; legislative functions were assumed by a Revolutionary Council, which elected a Presidium and a Council of Ministers (Cabinet).
Opposition to the new regime led to armed insurrection, and in December 1979, 80,000 Soviet troops entered Afghanistan [see p. 30229]arousing world-wide condemnation.
At the end of 1986 the PDPA leadership announced a programme of "national reconciliation" to end the conflict with anti-government mujaheddin guerrillas who controlled large areas of the country.
A new Constitution, restoring the name Republic of Afghanistan, was approved by the Loya Jirga (Grand National Assembly or Supreme Council — a nationwide traditional gathering of tribal and other leaders) on Nov. 30, 1987.
It provided for an executive President and a bicameral National Assembly, the lower house of which would be elected for a five-year term, with the upper house being partly elected and partly appointed.
The President would appoint the Council of Ministers, subject to the approval of the National Assembly.
The PDPA would also lose its monopoly on political power.
Following the withdrawal of Soviet troops, completed on Feb. 15, 1989 [see p. 36448], a state of emergency was declared and a 20-member Supreme Council for the Defence of the Homeland, headed by President Najibullah, was announced on Feb. 19 [see pp. 36449; 36656; 37043]; a newly created Executive Committee of the Council of Ministers was appointed on Feb. 21, and in May 1990 a new Cabinet was presented [see p. 37453].
At the PDPA's second congress held on June 27-29, the party was re-named the Homeland Party [see p. 37530].
Main government leaders
President: Najibullah.
Prime Minister: Fazl Haq Khaleqiar.
Other principal ministers: Abdol Wakil (Foreign Affairs); Maj.-Gen.
Mohammad Aslam Watanjar (Defence); Raz Mohammad Paktin (Internal Affairs); Mohammad Hakim (Finance); Gholam Faruq Yaqubi (State Security).
Changes to Council of Ministers to June 1991
March 1990: dismissal of Lt.-Gen.
Shahnawaz Tanay who was replaced as Defence Minister by Watanjar; appointment of Patkin as Minister of Internal Affairs.
May 1990: nomination by Najibullah of Khaleqiar (who was not a member of the PDPA) as Prime Minister and appointment of new Cabinet [see p. 37453].
April 1991: dismissal of Sultan Ali Keshtmand as First Vice-President; appointment of Abdol Wahed Sorabi as Vice-President [see p. 38153].
June 1991: dismissal of Mahmud Barialay as Deputy Prime Minister [see p. 38295].
Ruling party
Hezb-e Watan (Homeland Party, Najibullah sec. -gen.)
Political parties
There are many insurgent groups of mujaheddin guerrillas fighting against the government.
Although the different groups co-operate with one another to varying degrees, relations are often strained by rivalry and feuding.
In May 1985 seven major groups formed a grand alliance, the Ittehad-i-Islami Afghan Mujaheddin, which subsequently became the kernel of the Pakistan-based Afghan Interim Government (AIG)[see p. 36449].
It includes three moderate groups, namely Harakat-i-Inqilab-i-Islam (Movement for Islamic Revolution, Mohammad Nabi Mohammad l.),
Jebha-i-Nejat-i-Melli Afghanistan (Afghan National Liberation Front, Seghbatullah Mujjaddedi sec. -gen.),
Mahaz-i-Melli-i-Islami (National Islamic Front, Pir Sayed Ahmed Gailani l.) and four fundamentalist Sunni groups, namely, Hezb-i-Islami (Islamic Party, two factions respectively led by Gulbuddin Hekmatyar and Mohammad Yunus Khales); Jamiat-i Islami (Islamic Society, Burhanuddin Rabbani l.);
Ittehad-i-Islami (Islamic Unity, Abdul-Rabur Rasul Sayaf l.)
In June 1987 eight Islamic Shia factions, based in Iran, formed the Islamic Coalition Council of Afghanistan under Abdul Karim Khaleeli: the Afghan Nasr Organization; the Guardians of Islamic Jihad in Afghanistan; the United Islamic Front of Afghanistan; the Islamic Force of Afghanistan; the Dawa Party of Islamic Unity of Afghanistan; the Harakat-e Islami Afghanistan (the Islamic Movement of Afghanistan, Ayatollah Asef Mohseni l.); the Hezbollah; and the Islamic Struggle for Afghanistan.
Elections
Elections to the National Assembly were held on April 5-14, 1988.
Najibullah was elected on Nov. 30, 1987, by the Loya Jirga as President of the Republic and C.-in-C. of the Armed Forces for a (renewable) seven-year term [p. 35425].
1990/91 OVERVIEW
After a period of political upheaval precipitated by an attempted coup in March 1990 [see pp. 37314-15], the government lifted the state of emergency in May and endorsed constitutional amendments aimed at ending the PDPA's monopoly on political power [for its renaming in June see p. 37530]and introducing multiparty democracy.
Efforts to end the 12-year civil war prompted the government in May to renew its call for a ceasefire [see p. 37453]; in June it proposed a peace conference, after reports that the United States and the Soviet Union had failed to resolve differences over a transition process [see p. 37669].
Hopes of a peace settlement receded following an intensification in fighting between government troops and mujaheddin which culminated in the capture in October by mujaheddin forces of Tarin Kot, the capital of Uruzgan province,[see p. 37775].
Meanwhile, moves continued, sponsored by Pakistan, to forge political unity among warring rebel factions [see pp. 37355-56; 37775].
The thaw in US-Soviet relations and the unwillingness of both super-powers to prolong the war led to the first publicly acknowledged round of talks between Najibullah and sections of the mujaheddin alliance in November [see p. 37855].
In February 1991 high-ranking Soviet officials met with mujaheddin leaders in Islamabad [see p. 38008].
Peace negotiations suffered a serious setback in April following a major mujaheddin offensive against the town of Khost which eventually fell to the rebels [see p. 38153].
A UN peace plan proposed in May 1991, and accepted by the government, was rejected by mujaheddin leaders [see p. 38194].
Efforts by Pakistan and Iran to broker a peace settlement with the mujaheddin on the basis of the UN plan were reported to be in progress as of mid-1991.
Economy
According to non-governmental sources, the economy showed no real signs of improvement.
Figures released by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) showed that Afghanistan recorded a visible trade deficit of US$220,600,000 in 1989 and a deficit of US$217,100,000 on the current account of its balance of payments.
Other estimates indicated that the economic targets of the 1986-91 five-year economic and social development plan, including a 25 per cent growth in the economy over the plan period, were unlikely to be attained.
In March 1990 the government acknowledged that the "intensification of the war" had compounded the country's economic difficulties in 1989.
The 1990/91 budget, presented on March 17, 1990, allocated 1,500 million afghanis for development expenditure in the public sector.
It forecast a 4.4 per cent increase in revenues and a 12.1 per cent increase in expenditure; investment was expected to increase by 43 per cent in 1990, with greater incentives for private capital investment.
Agricultural production grew by 1 per cent in 1989/90 as compared with the previous fiscal year.
Manufacturing industry was expected to grow by 12.9 per cent in 1990, increasing its share in the industrial gross domestic product (GDP) from 56.7 per cent to 58.6 per cent.
The foreign trade growth rate was forecast to reach 18.8 per cent, of which the growth in exports was expected to account for 36 per cent and commercial imports 13.2 per cent .
Also in March the government ordered confiscated property to be returned to private ownership in an attempt to revive the private sector [see p. 37453]and in May announced the redrafting of existing laws to encourage private and foreign investment [see p. 37453].
An IMF delegation held talks with Finance Ministry officials in Kabul in March 1991 and in May the Finance Minister, Mohammad Hakim, met in Canada officials from the Asian Development Bank (ADB) and the World Bank to negotiate project financing.
The draft budget for fiscal 1991/92, approved by the government on March 4, 1991, showed a 29.3 per cent rise in income plans and a 3.4 per cent rise in expenditure plans over the previous year.
Anticipated state income from internal sources showed an increase of 47.5 per cent.
An increase of 51.7 per cent was forecast in the state development budget owing to increased foreign assistance contributions and project loans.
A report on the first quarter of the current fiscal year, submitted by the Finance Ministry in mid-July, showed that state income had increased by 10.6 per cent in comparison with the government's estimate in its socio-economic development plan.
Foreign affairs
It was announced in January 1990 that France would be the first Western country to reopen its embassy in Kabul [see p. 37184]and Italy followed suit in July.
Diplomatic relations were established with Colombia in August and with Venezuela in December.
Relations with the Soviet Union were marked by a number of economic and trade agreements including a Soviet grant-in-aid in July 1990 to the value of 42,000,000 roubles (about US$74,000,000) to balance accounts with Afghanistan.
(According to government figures, Eastern bloc countries accounted for 68 per cent of the total foreign trade turnover in 1986/87, of which the Soviet Union accounted for 60 per cent.)
Najibullah held talks with Soviet leaders in Moscow during a visit on July 29-Aug. 25, 1990.
Najibullah visited India on Aug. 28-31, when he held talks with Indian leaders and concluded a number of bilateral economic agreements.
A wheat supply protocol was signed between the two countries in November.
Relations with Pakistan continued to be strained as a result of Pakistan's active support for the mujaheddin; an offer to normalize relations was made by Najibullah in February 1991.
In September 1990 the government criticized Saudi Arabia for extending an invitation to Pakistan-based mujaheddin for talks with Saudi leaders.
In January 1991, the government protested to Sudan for granting recognition to the AIG.
The involvement of the mujaheddin as part of the multinational force engaged in the Gulf war was criticized by the government which in February 1991 declared that military action in the Gulf had exceeded the mandate of UN Resolution 678.
ASIA — PACIFIC
BANGLADESH
Area: 143,998 sq km.
Population: 107,992,140 (1991 preliminary census returns — see p. 38394).
Capital: Dhaka.
Languages: Bengali (official — 95%); tribal dialects (5%).
Religion: Islam (state religion — 87%), Hinduism (12%), Buddhism and Christianity.
Armed forces: 103,500 (1990).
Currency:(US$1.00=taka36.4403 as at Sept. 30, 1991).
Major international affiliations: ADB, ICO, NAM, SAARC.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The People's Republic of Bangladesh (formerly East Pakistan) was unilaterally proclaimed independent on March 26, 1971, by the Awami League; de facto secession from Pakistan followed the Indo-Pakistan war which was concluded in December 1971.
Lt.-Gen. (retd.)
Hussain Mohammad Ershad who came to power in 1982 after a military coup, was forced as result of widespread demonstrations to resign as President in early December 1990.
Following a general election in February 1991 a new government led by the Bangladesh Nationalist Party (BNP) was sworn in in March.
A popular referendum in September endorsed constitutional amendments restoring full powers to the Jatiya Sangsad (the unicameral legislature with 330 seats — 300 directly elected and 30 reserved for indirectly elected women) under a parliamentary system which had been suspended in 1975.
Under the new Constitution the President, elected by the Jatiya Sangsad, assumed a largely ceremonial role.
Main government leaders
President: Abdur Rahman Biswas, formerly Speaker of the Jatiya Sangsad, was elected by its members in October 1991 to replace Acting President Chief Justice Shehabuddin Ahmed who had been sworn in as head of a transitional Council of Advisers in December 1990 [see pp. 37907; 38152; 38533].
Prime Minister: Begum Khaleda Zia was sworn in as Prime Minister in March 1991, and from October also held the portfolios of Defence, Establishment and Cabinet Division.
Other principal ministers: A. S. M. Mustafizur Rahman (Foreign Affairs); Saifur Rahman (Finance); Zahiruddin Khan (Planning); Shamsul Islam Khan (Industry); Abdul Matin Choudhry (Home).
Cabinet changes to June 1991
March 1990: resignation of Finance and Planning Ministers [see p. 37316].
July: appointment of Monzur Quader as Minister for Relief and Rehabilitation to replace Mamdudur Rahman Choudhry who was appointed Minister for Posts and Shipping.
August: appointment of M. Abdus Sattar as Minister for Industry to replace Moudud Ahmed, who was appointed Minister for Planning; M. Faruq Choudhry replaced Sattar as Minister for Fisheries and Livestock.
December: appointment of Council of Advisers [see p. 37907].
March 1991: swearing-in of new Council of Ministers [see p. 38102].
Ruling party
Bangladesh Jatiyatabadi Dal (BNP — Bangladesh Nationalist Party formed in 1978 by merger of right-of-centre groups supporting the then President Ziaur Rahman (assassinated in 1981); Begum Khaleda Zia ch.; Badruddoja Choudhry vice-ch.).
Other political parties
Awami League (Sheikh Hasina Wajed gen. sec.);
Jatiya Dal (National Party, Lt.-Gen. (retd.)
Hussain Mohammad Ershad ch.);
Jamaat-i-Islami Bangladesh (Islamic Party of Bangladesh, Abbas Ali Khan acting pres.);
Bangladesh Communist Party (Saifuddin Ahmed Malik sec. -gen).
Elections
Last Jatiya Sangsad elections: February 1991 [see pp. 38006-07; 38102]; last presidential elections: October 1991 [see pp. 38533-34].
1990-91 OVERVIEW
After a period of relative calm in the early part of 1990 (marred only by sporadic violence surrounding the election of 460 sub-district councils (upozila) on March 12-25) the Ershad regime was confronted in mid-October with massive nationwide student protests.
In November the government attempted to suppress further political unrest by imposing a state of emergency and ordering the arrest of the country's principal political leaders, including the BNP leader, Begum Khaleda Zia, and the head of the Awami League, Sheikh Hasina Wajed [see p. 37856].
Ershad's offer in early December to hold, by June 1991, simultaneous parliamentary and presidential elections was rejected by opposition parties, who demanded his immediate removal from office.
On Dec. 6 Ershad was forced to relinquish power and handed over control of the government to Chief Justice Shehabuddin Ahmed who had been nominated as Acting President by the main opposition alliances.
Ershad and a number of former ministers were arrested on charges of corruption and abuse of power, and the transitional government on Dec. 14 announced that parliamentary elections would be held on March 2, 1991 (subsequently brought forward to Feb. 27).
The February elections resulted in a substantial victory (in terms of the number of seats won rather than the percentage of votes cast) for the BNP [see p. 38006].
In March Begum Zia was sworn in as the country's first woman Prime Minister [see p. 38102].
The devastating cyclone which struck the country in late April [see pp. 38152; 38176-77]proved a serious test for the new administration, which was subjected to widespread domestic and international criticism for its handling of relief efforts [ibid].
By June the government's initially fragile hold seemed stronger after popular endorsement of its bold constitutional initiatives aimed at restoring parliamentary democracy [see pp. 38394; 38439].
Meanwhile, Ershad's Jatiya Party suffered a serious blow when a court sentenced the former President to 10 years' "rigorous imprisonment" [see p. 38288].
Security
June 1991: limited autonomy granted to Chittagong Hill Tracts (CHT)[see p. 38289].
Economy
September 1990: impact of Gulf crisis [see p. 37697].
May 1991: international economic assistance for cyclone disaster.
June: 1991/92 budget and cost of cyclone damage [see p. 38289].
Allegations of widespread economic mismanagement dogged the Ershad regime during the early part of 1990.
In its 1990 annual report to foreign-aid donor countries, the World Bank castigated the government for a "particularly poor" budgetary performance and warned that without economic growth at a sustained 5 per cent, the prospects of alleviating the country's severe poverty were dim.
(Economic growth had slowed from 4 per cent a year average in 1981-86 — modestly above population growth of 2.2 per cent— to only 2.8 per cent in 1989-90.)
The resignation in March of two senior economic ministers [see p. 37316]following a visit by the President of the World Bank, Barber Conable, lent credence to reports that almost US$500,000,000 in credits were being withheld by the Bank and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) because of dissatisfaction with the government's short-term economic policies.
In particular, concern over the country's widening trade deficit had been compounded by a sharp fall in foreign exchange reserves from a peak of US$1,007 million in February 1989 to around US$450,000,000 in March 1990.
In April the World Bank-sponsored Aid to Bangladesh Consortium promised US$1,800 million in soft loans and grants — far less than the US$2,500 million requested by the government — reportedly because of continuing concern over the government's economic policies.
In June the government presented its budget for fiscal 1990/91 which projected a total outlay of taka140,000 million with estimated revenue receipts set at just over taka75,627 million and revenue expenditure at taka73,000 million.
The government's decision to devalue the taka by as much as 11 per cent in 1990, reportedly in response to the IMF's pressure for a 15 per cent devaluation to improve the competitiveness of the country's exports, helped ease the balance-of-payments deficit, leading by May 1991 to foreign exchange reserves standing at around US$700,000,000.
Despite substantial losses resulting from the ban on exports to Iraq following that country's invasion of Kuwait in August 1990, tea exports rose 35 per cent in the second half of 1990.
In August the IMF approved a three-year arrangement amounting to about US$353,000,000 under an enhanced structural adjustment facility (ESAF).
In September the government announced new austerity measures including a reduction in public spending to counter the adverse effects of the Gulf crisis [see p. 37697]which, taking into account the loss of remittances from Bangladeshis in Iraq, loss of exports and a squeeze on jobs in other Gulf states, was expected to cause a loss of US$250,000,000.
In May 1991 the Bangladesh aid Consortium increased longer-term assistance for the 12 months running to June 1992 [see p. 38177].
In June the Zia government presented its 1991/92 budget, detailing plans to deregulate the economy [see pp. 38289; 38394].
The central bank's annual report, released in February 1991, showed that GDP had grown by 2.3 per cent in 1990, but would slow in the 12 months to end-June 1991 as a result of an increase in oil prices and the loss of remittances from Iraq caused by the Gulf war.
Agricultural production had increased by 5.6 per cent in 1989/90 while the industrial sector grew by 8.4 per cent, as compared with 2.3 per cent in 1988/89.
However, the country's balance of payments recorded a deficit of US$100,000,000 in 1989/90 after a surplus of US$6,000,000 in the previous year.
Concluding that the country's increasing debt burden would reduce its net aid receipts in the fiscal year to end-June 1991, the report projected that debt service costs would rise to US$331,000,000 (from US$290,000,000 in the previous fiscal year).
Bangladesh's principal trading partners in 1988/89 were: exports to the USA, Italy and Singapore; imports from the USA, Japan and India.
Foreign relations
August 1990: deployment of troops to Gulf multinational force [see p. 37641].
September: departure of troops to Gulf [see p. 37694].
November: allegations of Indian involvement in anti-Ershad demonstrations [see p. 37856].
May 1991: signing of accord with USA [see p. 38177].
June: visit by Zia to China and the Middle East [see p. 38289].
The early part of 1990 witnessed closer relations with France following a visit by Ershad to Paris on Feb. 4-5 and a return visit to Bangladesh by President François Mitterrand on Feb. 22-24; in April France promised US$47,400,000 in aid to Bangladesh.
A trade agreement with the Soviet Union was signed in March.
A bilateral economic agreement with China was signed in Beijing on June 30 during a state visit by Ershad.
Economic agreements with China were also signed in January, May and July.
President Ershad visited Thailand on May 4-5 and Belgium on Oct. 16-18.
Japan agreed during a visit in May by the then Japanese Prime Minister, Toshiki Kaifu to extend a loan of 31,200 million yen (US$235 million).
Relations with India were marked in July by the signing of a cultural agreement, and in September by the re-opening of rail links for freight traffic; Indo-Bangladeshi talks on border security were held in April 1991.
Defence officials from Pakistan visited Bangladesh in May 1990 and in July 1991.
ASIA — PACIFIC
BHUTAN
Area: 46,500 sq km.
Population: 1,500,000 (1990 UNPFA est.).
Capital: Thimphu.
Language: Dzongkha (official).
Religion: Mahayana Buddhism (state religion); Hinduism (25%, mainly ethnic Nepalese).
Armed forces: 5,000 (1990 est.).
Currency: ngultrum (US$1.00=25.6988 ngultrum as at Sept. 30, 1991 — at par with Indian rupee).
Major international affiliations: ADB, NAM, SAARC.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The Kingdom of Bhutan is a hereditary limited monarchy in which power is shared between the King (assisted by a Royal Advisory Council), the Council of Ministers, the National Assembly (Tsogdu) and the monastic head of the Kingdom's Buddhist priesthood (Je Khempo).
The Tsogdu is required to pass a vote of confidence in the King by a two-thirds majority every three years and has the power to replace the monarch.
Main government leaders
Jigme Singye Wangchuck, Druk Gyalpo (Dragon King) and Chair of the Council of Ministers, acceded to the throne in 1972.
Other principal ministers: Lyonpo Dorji Tshering (Finance); HRH Namgyel Wangchuck (Home Affairs); Lyonpo Dawa Tshering (Foreign Affairs); Lyonpo Om Pradhan (Trade and Industries); Lyonpo T. Tobgyal (Social Services; Communications).
Cabinet changes
None to end-June 1991.
Political parties
There are no legal political parties.
Illegal parties include: the Bhutan People's Party (R. K. Budathoki pres., D. K. Rai gen. sec.); the United Liberation People's Front (Balaram Poudyal l.); the People's Forum for Human Rights (Gopal Sharma, Vikay Thapa ls.).
Elections
The 151-member Tsogdu includes 106 directly elected representatives, each elected for a three-year term by individual constituencies at various dates depending on the expiry of their term.
1990/91 OVERVIEW
Tension between the Bhutanese (Drukpa) and Nepalese communities increased markedly in 1990 and early 1991.
The catalyst for the unrest had been the initiation of a programme of Driglam Namzha (national customs and etiquette) as part of the sixth five-year plan (1987-92).
The programme, which aimed to revitalize (Buddhist) Drukpa culture, had the effect of seriously alienating the (Hindu) Nepalese minority.
Various parties and groups were established 1989 and 1990 in Nepal itself to oppose the programme and to press for democratic reforms.
The most influential of these groups was the Bhutan People's Party (BPP), which organized a series of large demonstrations in southern Bhutan in September 1990 to protest against Drukpa domination and to demand political reforms [see p. 37711].
Many of the demonstrators were Nepalese who had crossed into southern Bhutan from India.
The demonstrations were broken up by the security forces and according to unsubstantiated BPP sources some 300 people were killed during the security operation.
There were also reports throughout 1990 detailing acts of violence carried out against Bhutanese citizens by ethnic Nepalese and various other dissident elements.
In an interview with The Times of India on Oct. 5, 1990, King Wangchuck expressed his willingness to enter into a dialogue with the dissidents.
He said that he was willing to modify parts of the Driglam Namzha programme and admitted that the current mode of representation in the Tsogdu was imperfect since it gave the Nepalese-dominated districts in the south only 16 seats out of a total of 151.
Foreign relations
Bhutan and India signed an agreement on trade and commerce for 1990-95 in February 1990.
Under the agreement, both countries would continue to have free trading arrangements as before.
Trade would continue to be transacted in Indian rupees or Bhutanese ngultrum.
King Jigme paid a four-day visit to India in late November 1990.
He held talks with the then Prime Minister, Chandra Shekhar, and President Ramaswamy Venkataraman.
During the visit a memorandum of understanding was signed providing Indian assistance for the second and third stages of the Chukha hydroelectric project [see p. 37356 for inauguration of the project's first stage by Venkataraman in October 1988].
In February 1991 the travel permit system between India and Bhutan was abolished, allowing free movement across the border.
The seventh round of bilateral boundary talks between Bhutan and China, held in Thimphu in late August 1990, was reported to have made "good progress" and yielded "positive results" [for fifth and sixth rounds see p. 37356].
ASIA — PACIFIC
BRUNEI
Area: 5,765 sq km.
Population: 250,000 (1989 est.).
Capital: Bandar Seri Begawan.
Languages: Malay; Chinese and English.
Religion: Islam (official; mainly Sunni Moslems); majority of Chinese are Buddhists, Confucians or Daoists.
Armed forces: 4,200 (1990).
Currency: Brunei dollar (US$1.00=B$1.6816 as at Sept. 30, 1991).
Major international affiliations: APEC, ASEAN, ICO.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
Having gained full internal self-government in 1971, Brunei became fully independent from the United Kingdom in 1984.
The Sultan, in whom the 1959 Constitution vests supreme executive authority, presides over and is advised and assisted by a Council of Cabinet Ministers, a Religious Council and a Privy Council.
A state of emergency has been in force and the Sultan has ruled by decree since a large-scale revolt in 1962 which resulted in the suspension of sections of the Constitution.
Main government leaders
Sir Hassanal Bolkiah, Sultan, Prime Minister and Defence Minister, effectively rules the country by decree.
Other principal ministers: Prince Jefri Bolkiah (Finance); Prince Mohamed Bolkiah (Foreign Affairs); Pehin Dato Haji Abdul Rahman (Industry and Primary Resources); Pehin Dato Haji Isa (Internal Affairs and Special Adviser in Prime Minister's Office).
Cabinet changes
None to end-June 1991.
Political parties
There are no legal political parties.
Illegal political parties include the People's Party of Brunei (Parti Ra'ayat Brunei — PRB) and the Brunei National Democratic Party (BNDP).
Elections
No elections.
1990/91 OVERVIEW
During 1990 Sultan Bolkiah encouraged the population to adopt the concept of Melayu Islam Beraja (MIB — Malay Islamic Monarchy) as the state ideology.
In a major speech delivered in October to mark the "Birth of the Prophet" , the Sultan declared that MIB was "God's will" .
MIB emphasized strict observance of Islam, the distinctive nature of Brunei culture and the sovereignty of the monarchy.
The Sultan's endorsement of traditional Moslem values was widely believed to be a response to an increase in social problems, especially unemployment which increased from 3.6 per cent in 1988 to 6 per cent in 1989.
Political parties remained banned in Brunei, but party members detained by the government were released in 1990.
Six long-term political detainees, all members of the PRB, were released in January [see p. 37190], and the leaders of the BNDP, Abdul Latif Hamid and Abdul Latif Chuchu, were released in April 1990.
However, the following month Abdul Latif Hamid died after suffering an asthma attack.
The Agence France-Presse (AFP) news agency reported on Feb. 13, 1991, that al-Arqam, a Moslem movement, had been banned by royal decree for allegedly spreading teachings contrary to Islam.
Economy
During 1989 and 1990 the Sultan and his government continued their efforts to reduce Brunei's dependence on income from petroleum and natural gas — broadening the economy was the primary aim of the fifth five-year plan (1986-90).
Economic statistics indicated that the government had made some progress in its diversification plans.
The 1989 GDP growth rate of 2.7 per cent, up from 2.2 per cent in 1988, was partly attributed to growth in the non-oil sector.
Foreign relations
The establishment of diplomatic relations between Singapore and China in October 1990 [see p. 37780]meant that Brunei became the sole ASEAN member without formal diplomatic ties with China.
A Chinese delegation, headed by Deputy Foreign Minister Xu Dunxin, visited Brunei on April 10-13, 1991, after which the government announced that it was considering the matter of establishing diplomatic relations with China and wished to have economic and cultural exchanges.
Attempts continued to be made during 1990 and 1991 to persuade Brunei to join the Five-Power Defence Arrangement (FPDA), in which Australia, Malaysia, New Zealand, Singapore, and the United Kingdom already participated.
The five held large-scale military exercises in the South China Sea in April 1991.
Shortly after the exercises, in early May, the Prime Minister of Singapore, Goh Chok Tong, visited Brunei for talks with the Sultan.
After the talks Goh said that the Sultan had shown considerable interest in joining the FPDA, and that Singapore would welcome and support such a move.
In July 1990, in response to the uncertainty over the future of US bases in the Philippines, Brunei joined Singapore in offering the USA the option of operating its forces from Brunei.
A report in the Financial Times of May 21, 1991, claimed that a UK deal to supply arms to Brunei worth some £400,000,000 (US$692,000,000) was under threat.
According to the report a protocol covering the supply of aircraft and naval vessels had been signed by Bolkiah and the then British Prime Minister, Margaret Thatcher, during the Commonwealth heads of government meeting held in Malaysia in October 1989.
However, the report stated that no firm contracts had yet been signed and that "part of the deal could be lost to German or Italian suppliers" .
The then Prime Minister of Japan, Toshiki Kaifu, visited Brunei during a tour of South-East Asia in April-May 1991 [see p. 38191].
Kaifu was the first Japanese Prime Minister to visit Brunei.
ASIA — PACIFIC
CAMBODIA
Area: 181,035 sq km.
Population: 8,200,000 (1990 UNDP est.).
Capital: Phnom Penh.
Language: Khmer (official).
Religion: Theravada Buddhism.
Armed forces: 111,800 (1990).
Currency: riel (US$1.00=799.087 riel as at Sept. 30, 1991).
Major international affiliations: ADB; NAM.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
Legislative power in the State of Cambodia (SOC), a name adopted in April 1989 by what had been since 1979 the People's Republic of Kampuchea [for previous names see p. 37289], is vested in the National Assembly.
The Assembly (which meets twice a year) elects a Council of State as its permanent organ from among its members.
Executive power is held by a Council of Ministers elected by the Assembly and responsible to it.
Much of the SOC's effective political power rests with the leadership of the country's sole legitimate party, the Kampuchean People's Revolutionary Party.
Main government leaders of the State of Cambodia
 "Legitimate Head of State" : Prince Norodom Sihanouk (since November 1991 — see p. 38573).
Chair of the Council of Ministers: Hun Sen.
Other principal ministers: Bou Thang (Vice-Chair); Chea Soth (Vice-Chair); Say Chhum (Vice-Chair); Say Phouthang (Vice-Chair; Chair of Central Control Commission); Kong Samol (Vice-Chair; Minister in charge of the Cabinet of the Council of Ministers); Gen. Tea Banh (Vice-Chair; National Defence); Hor Nam Hong (Foreign Affairs); Gen. Sin Song (Interior); Chhay Than (Finance).
Changes to Council of Ministers 1990-1991
A number of ministers were replaced in August 1990, allegedly as a result of a power struggle [see p. 37655].
In September Hor Nam Hong replaced Hun Sen as Foreign Minister and Lt.-Gen.
Nhim Venda replaced Taing Sarim as Trade Minister [see p. 37712].
National Government of Cambodia
The National Government of Cambodia (NGC), the rebel coalition government-in-exile, was proclaimed in February 1990.
It had previously been known as the Coalition Government of Democratic Kampuchea (CGDK).
The NGC is a coalition of the three rebel factions, namely:(i) the Khmers Rouges (also known as the Party of Democratic Kampuchea, Khieu Samphan pres., Son Sen vice-pres., considerable influence wielded by Pol Pot, Ieng Sary, Ta Mok and Nuon Chea);(ii) the Khmer People's National Liberation Front (KPNLF, Son Sann pres.); and (iii) the Sihanoukists (also known as the United National Front for an Independent, Neutral, Peaceful and Co-operative Cambodia — Funcinpec, Norodom Ranaridh l.).
NGC leadership: Prince Norodom Sihanouk (President); Khieu Samphan (Vice-President in charge of Foreign Affairs; Son Sann (Prime Minister).
Supreme National Council
The all-party Supreme National Council (SNC) was formed in September 1990.
It has the following members: Norodom Sihanouk (President), Hun Sen (SOC), Gen. Tea Banh (SOC), Hor Nam Hong (SOC), Maj.-Gen.
Sin Sen (SOC), Dit Munty (SOC), Im Chhunlim (SOC), Norodom Ranaridh (Sihanoukist), Khieu Samphan (Khmers Rouges, Son Sen (Khmers Rouges), Son Sann (KPNLF), Ieng Muli (KPNLF).
The SOC replaced three of its SNC members in February 1991 [see p. 38005].
In June Prince Sihanouk replaced Chausen Kosal as one of the two Sihanoukist representatives [see p. 38293].
An agreement was reached that month under which Sihanouk became the SNC's neutral chair or president.
Ruling party
The ruling and sole party in the SOC is the Kampuchean People's Revolutionary Party (KPRP, Heng Samrin gen. sec.).
Elections
Elections to the 117-member National Assembly were held in 1981.
In mid-1987 supplementary elections took place in six provinces, increasing the number of members in the Assembly to 123.
The term of the Assembly has been routinely extended, most recently in February 1991 for a period of one year.
1990/91 OVERVIEW
Progress towards agreement on UN peace plan
The third Indonesian-sponsored informal meeting of the warring Cambodian factions opened in Jakarta in late February 1990.
The meeting was concerned with a new Australian peace plan which proposed a large-scale UN involvement in Cambodia and which had met with a favourable response at the UN Security Council during January and February.
Despite the apparent progress at the UN, the Jakarta meeting (JIM 3) ended early after the Cambodian factions failed to agree on the wording of a final communiqué.
Another meeting of the factions in Tokyo in June also failed to produce an agreement.
In July James Baker, the United States Secretary of State, announced a major shift in US foreign policy towards Cambodia and Vietnam.
After talks with his then Soviet counterpart Eduard Shevardnadze in Paris, Baker told reporters that the USA would no longer support the tenure of the Cambodian seat at the UN by rebel NGC unless the Khmers Rouges were removed from the coalition.
Baker also announced that the USA would enter into a direct dialogue with Vietnam over the issue of Cambodia and that it might be prepared to provide humanitarian aid to the SOC government.
The Bush administration's revision of its Indo-China policy was partly designed to forestall a potential congressional rebellion over the issue.
At the same time, the deterioration in Sino-US relations in the aftermath of the 1989 Tiananmen Square massacre and the improvement in US-Soviet relations during 1990 had added further impetus for a US policy revision.
The five permanent members of the UN Security Council formally agreed on the Cambodian peace plan (the so-called "P-5 plan" ) in August 1990, and it was approved in September by the opposing Cambodian factions at the end of a two-day meeting in Jakarta.
The parties also agreed on the formation of a 12-member Supreme National Council (SNC), to embody Cambodian "independence, sovereignty and unity" and to occupy the Cambodian UN seat during the transitional period before UN-supervised elections.
The first meeting of the SNC convened in the disused Cambodian embassy in Bangkok on mid-September, but after two days the talks had ground to a halt, with disagreements over the appointment of a Chair.
The SNC eventually convened again in Paris in late December, without an agreement having been reached on the Chair issue.
A final statement released after the talks stated that there had been "concurrence" on most of the fundamental points of the P-5 plan, which, however, remained deadlocked during the early months of 1991.
Significant progress was nevertheless achieved in May, when the factions agreed to begin implementing a temporary ceasefire.
Further progress was made in June at a meeting of the SNC in Thailand, where Sihanouk contrived an agreement on a number of issues including (i) a permanent ceasefire;(ii) a cessation of arms supplies; and (iii) his own return to Phnom Penh.
July was another month of hectic diplomatic activity, with further progress being made towards a full agreement on the P-5 plan during a series of meetings in China.
Civil war
As in previous years it was difficult to monitor the fighting in Cambodia during 1990, as independent confirmation of conflicting claims was extremely rare.
According to Western reports, during the first months of 1990 the Khmers Rouges increased their infiltration of fighters and supplies from their border camps into Cambodia proper.
The aim of the operation did not appear to be to capture territory, but instead, to construct communication routes and to destroy those established by the SOC government.
Refugees reported that Khmer Rouge guerrillas made little effort at political indoctrination after capturing a village.
Instead, the objective appeared to be to make deals with existing village leaders.
While the Khmers Rouges provided the NGC's main military forces, in the middle of the year there were nevertheless reports of KPNLF and Sihanoukist attacks on several northern district capitals in Siem Reap, Preah Vihear and Kompong Thom provinces.
The Phnom Penh regime responded to the increased Khmer Rouge infiltration by withdrawing into the interior of the country where it was much easier to construct solid defensive lines.
One effect of this strategy was to create a large number of internal refugees — some reports estimating that some 150,000 Cambodians were displaced during 1990, either by being forcibly moved in to the interior by SOC troops, or by fleeing from Khmer Rouge attack.
The 1991 "fighting season" got under way in January, with heavy skirmishing in the north and north-west.
According to some reports Khmer Rouge fighters used tanks in some of their operations.
A ceasefire came into operation in May and all serious fighting stopped.
Internal SOC affairs
During 1990 there were signs that a power struggle was under way in Phnom Penh, the first indications of any discord within the leadership since 1981 when Pen Sovan had been removed as party chief and Premier.
The power struggle in 1990 was reported in the West as a conflict between a hardline faction headed by Chea Sim, and a liberal or reformist faction headed by Hun Sen.
In late May a number of Hun Sen's reformist allies (including Transport Minister Ung Phan) were arrested, apparently for trying to establish a rival political party.
Other supporters of Hun Sen's liberalization drive, including Khieu Kanharith, editor of the weekly magazine Kampuchea, were subsequently dismissed from their posts and replaced with supporters of Chea Sim.
Other signs that a power struggle was under way included an announcement in July that the KPRP congress, due to begin in December, had been postponed.
Economy
Cambodia faced a severe cutback in financial assistance from the Soviet Union and eastern Europe in 1991.
Since 1979 the Soviet Union, in particular, had provided Cambodia with massive amounts of import credits, grants, and technical and military aid.
However, from January 1991 Cambodia was obliged to start paying commercial rates for financial assistance and imports.
The Soviet move focused attention on the dire state of the Cambodian economy.
The continuing fighting in 1990 had meant a further decline in the country's food supply.
A shortfall of over 300,000 tonnes of rice was projected for the 1990/91 harvest, a result in part of drought and flooding, but also because of the displacement of farmers by guerrilla activity.
Inflation accelerated during 1990 (partly as a result of increased military spending necessitated by the Vietnamese troop withdrawal in 1989), leading to a fall in the value of the riel by almost 60 per cent of its value during the course of the year.
ASIA — PACIFIC
CHINA
Area: 9,571,300 sq km.
Population: 1,139,100,000 (1990 UNFPA est.).
Capital: Beijing.
Languages: Mandarin and local dialects; the Tibetans, Uighurs, Mongols and others have their own languages.
Religion and philosphy: Confucianism, Buddhism and Daoism; Islam and Christianity (minorities).
Armed forces: 3,030,000 (1990).
Currency: yuan or renminbi yuan (US$1.00=5.3241 yuan as at Sept. 30, 1991).
Major international affiliations: ADB.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The People's Republic of China was established in 1949 following the victory of communist guerrilla forces led by Mao Zedong.
Under the terms of the 1982 Constitution legislative authority is vested in the National People's Congress (NPC), the members (approximately 3,000) of which are indirectly elected for five years.
It convenes annually, and when not in session is represented by a 155-member Standing Committee.
Executive power is exercised by the State Council which is elected by the NPC.
Effective political control is in the hands of the Chinese Communist Party.
Main government leaders
Deng Xiaoping has been the dominant figure within the upper echelons of the ruling Chinese Communist Party since 1980.
Deng retired from his last official post (Chair of the State Council Military Commission) in 1990, but in his role as "elder statesman" he probably remains the supreme power-broker.
However, during 1990 Deng's position as leader was at least partly eclipsed by the rise to prominence of the anti-reformist economist Chen Yun.
President: Yang Shangkun.
Vice-President: Wang Zhen.
Premier of the State Council: Li Peng.
Other principal ministers: Yao Yilin (Vice-Premier); Tian Jiyun (Vice-Premier); Wu Xueqian (Vice Premier); Zhu Rongji (Vice-Premier); Zou Jiahua (Vice-Premier; Minister in charge of the State Planning Commission); Qin Jiwei (State Councillor; National Defence); Wang Bingqian (State Councillor; Finance); Tao Siju (State Councillor; Public Security); Qian Qichen (State Councillor; Foreign Affairs); Chen Jinhua (Minister in charge of the State Commission for Restructuring the Economy); Jia Chunwang (State Security); Cai Cheng (Justice); Hu Ping (Commerce); Li Lanqing (Foreign Economic Relations and Trade).
State Council changes, January 1990 to July 1991
Liu Zhangyi replaced He Kang as Agriculture Minister in June 1990 [see p. 37532].
Chen Jinhua replaced Li Peng as Minister in charge of the State Commission for Restructuring the Economy in September [see p. 37713].
In December Tao Siju replaced Wang Fang as State Councillor and Minister of Public Security and Li Lanqing replaced Zheng Tuobin as Minister of Foreign Economic Relations and Trade [see p. 37917].
In March 1991 Hou Jie replaced Qian Yongchang as Minister of Communications and Huang Zhendong replaced Lin Hanxiong as Minister of Construction [see p. 38097].
In April Zhu Rongji was appointed as a Vice-Premier, Zou Jiahua (Minister in charge of the State Planning Commission) was promoted to Vice-Premier, and Qian Qichen (Foreign Affairs Minister) was promoted to State Councillor [see p. 38145].
In June Hu Qili, Rui Xingwen and Yan Minfu (all of whom had been removed from high-ranking posts in the aftermath of the June 1989 "counter-revolutionary rebellion" ) were appointed to vice-ministerial posts [see p. 38290].
Other appointments
A number of provincial governors were moved in August 1990.
Li Changchun was shifted from Liaoning to Henan, replacing Cheng Weigao who went to Hebei.
The governor of Hebei, Yue Qifeng, took over Li's former post in Liaoning.
In May 1991 Zhu Senlin was appointed as acting governor of Guangdong province, replacing Ye Xuanping [see p. 38189].
Ye had been appointed Vice-Chair of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference (the government's largely ceremonial opinion-gathering forum) in April [see p. 38145].
Ruling party
The Chinese Communist Party (CCP, Jiang Zemin gen. sec).
The party's most powerful organ is the six-member Standing Committee of the Politburo (Li Peng, Qiao Shi, Yao Yilan, Jiang Zemin, Song Ping, Li Ruihuan).
There are eight other full Politburo members:(Wu Xueqian, Wan Li, Tian Jiyun, Yang Shangkun, Li Tieying, Li Ximing, Qin Jiwei, and Yang Rudai), and one alternate member (Deng Guangen).
The Secretariat is composed of four full members (Qiao Shi, Hu Qili, Deng Guangen, and Yang Baibing) and one alternate member (Wen Jiabao).
The party's powerful Central Military Commission is chaired by Jiang Zemin; Yang Shangkun is first Vice-Chair, Liu Huaqing Vice-Chair, and Yang Baibing Secretary-General.
Other political organizations
China Association for Promoting Democracy (Lei Jieqiong ch.);
China Democratic League (Fei Xiaotong ch.);
China National Democratic Construction Association (Sun Qimeng ch.);
China Zhi Gong Dang (Dong Yinchu ch.);
Chinese Communist Youth League (Song Defu first sec.);
Chinese Peasants' and Workers' Democratic Party (Lu Jiaxi ch.);
Jiu San Society (Zhou Peiyuan ch.);
Kuomintang Revolutionary Committee (Zhu Xuefan ch.);
Taiwan Democratic Self-Government League (Cai Zimin ch.).
Elections
Indirect elections to the National People's Congress were last held between September 1987 and March 1988.
Yang Shangkun was elected as President by the NPC in 1988.
1990/91 OVERVIEW
The impact of the momentous events of mid-1989, culminating in the Tiananmen Square massacre in June [see pp. 36720-22], was still evident during 1990 and the first half of 1991.
The government placed great emphasis on ideological and political education and the maintenance of a correct socialist line.
The party's sixth plenum, held in March 1990, stressed adherence to the mass line, the importance of supervision and the raising of political awareness.
The military, in particular, were subjected to intense political indoctrination.
The powerful Yang brothers (President Yang Shangkun and Yang Baibing), who effectively controlled the People's Liberation Army, initiated a major military reshuffle in April and May 1990, affecting six of China's seven military regions.
However, reports in October claimed that up to 1,300 Army officers had formed a secret group in support of the former CCP general secretary Zhao Ziyang and in opposition to the Yang brothers.
Martial law was lifted in Beijing in January 1990, seven months after its imposition.
The first anniversary of the Tiananmen Square massacre took place in June and passed off without any major incidents.
The authorities seemed to adopt a dual approach to the anniversary; on the one hand they launched a massive security operation in the city and detained a number of potential trouble makers, but on the other hand they attempted to portray an image of leniency by releasing groups of pro-democracy activists who had been arrested in 1989.
Chief among those released was Fang Lizhi, who was permitted to leave his shelter in the United States embassy in Beijing to travel to the United Kingdom.
Nevertheless, trials of dissidents continued in 1990 and 1991.
The United States based organization Asia Watch reported in May 1991 that there had been a large number of secret trials of dissidents during the previous six months.
The authorities had claimed during the previous month that the courts had "basically completed" all trials connected with the 1989 "counter-revolutionary rebellion" .
The CCP seventh plenum (of the 13th central committee) eventually took place in December 1990 after several months of delay, allegedly because of divisions between the central and provincial authorities over economic policy.
The provinces were thought to favour more rapid and radical economic reform than the centre.
The resulting communiqué, while providing broad proposals for the adoption of the eighth five-year plan and of a 10-year programme, contained little detail, prompting speculation that debate over the pace of reform was still intense.
By the time of the second anniversary of the Tiananmen Square massacre in June 1991, the party was working towards rehabilitating some of the high-level casualties of the "turmoil" .
Hu Qili, Rui Xingwen and Yan Mingfu — all former high-ranking party members and supporters of Zhao Ziyang — were appointed to vice-ministerial posts.
Zhao himself remained under investigation, although he had reportedly been allowed to retain his party membership.
Security
The government was seriously alarmed by an outbreak of unrest in April in the western Autonomous Region of Xinjiang Uygur.
Over 20 people were killed in clashes between Islamic separatists (members of the Islamic Party of East Turkistan) and police in Kizislu Kirghiz Autonomous Prefecture near Kashgar.
Commentators reported that the authorities were concerned that Moslem and separatist unrest in the Soviet Union might spread into Xinjiang Uygur.
The authorities launched a widespread anti-pornography campaign during 1990.
In mid-1991 a major anti-drug campaign was launched which resulted in the imprisonment and execution of a number of drug offenders.
The authorities continued to hold large public trials of criminals during 1990 and 1991, which would often end in mass executions; in September 1990 65 people were executed after a trial in Canton.
Economy
In March 1990 Finance Minister Wang Bingqian presented details of the 1989 economic performance and the 1990 state budget to the NPC [see p. 37373], and in March of the following year he gave details of the 1990 economic performance and the 1991 budget [see p. 38096].
Also in March 1991 the State Statistical Bureau (SSB) gave details of the achievements of the seventh five-year plan (1986-1990)[see p. 38097].
The NPC approved China's eighth five-year plan (1991-95) in April.
For the first time the government had also formulated a 10-year economic programme, covering the period 1991-2000 [see p. 38145].
In July 1991 the SSB released economic figures for the first half of 1991 [see p. 38340].
Foreign relations
The government concentrated a great deal of effort during 1990 on restoring China's image abroad, adversely affected by the Tiananmen Square massacre of 1989.
The government's international rehabilitation was greatly assisted by the Gulf war.
As one of the five permanent members of the UN Security Council, China's support for the US-led effort to reverse Iraq's annexation of Kuwait was vital.
A further factor aiding China's rehabilitation was its support for the UN peace plan for Cambodia.
By the end of 1990 China had resumed its contacts with the West, with Japan and with the major international organizations.
France resumed the granting of loans to China in February 1990, although Japan waited until November to reactive its development loan programme.
The political upheavals in eastern Europe in the late 1980s and early 1990s shocked the Chinese leadership.
The collapse of communism in Europe left China isolated as the main bastion of communist orthodoxy, and raised the spectre of renewed internal unrest.
Nevertheless relations with Moscow were not impeded by the bewildering internal developments within the Soviet Union.
Li Peng visited the Soviet Union in April 1990, the first visit by a Chinese Premier for 26 years, saying that his visit aimed to give "new impetus" to Sino-Soviet relations; seven agreements were signed during the visit.
In late August the then Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard Shevardnadze visited China for talks with his Chinese counterpart, Qian Qichen.
In March 1991 an unprecedented agreement was signed under which China would provide the Soviet Union with a commodity loan worth some US$730 million.
Jiang Zemin visited the Soviet Union in May 1991 for talks with his Soviet counterpart, President Gorbachev (who had visited China in May 1989 — see pp. 36641-42), the first visit by a Chinese party leader to Moscow since Mao Zedong's 1957 trip.
During the visit an agreement was signed on the demarcation of the eastern section of the Sino-Soviet border.
Jiang's visit had been preceded by a visit to China by the then Soviet Defence Minister Marshal Dmitry Yazov, which fuelled speculation about a major arms deal between the two countries.
Relations with the United States remained strained during 1990 and the first half of 1991.
US President Bush (who had been head of the then US liaison mission in Beijing in 1974-75), appeared to want to restore relations as they had been before the Tiananmen Square massacre, but often came under congressional pressure to adopt a policy more critical of China.
The release of dissident Fang Lizhi in June 1990 [see above]was an important symbolic gesture and helped Bush win his battle with congressional critics who had been attempting to block the renewal of China's most-favoured-nation (MFN) trading status.
Official contact at senior level resumed in November 1990 when Bush met with Qian in Washington.
In April 1991 the USA had placed China on its "301 list" of unfair trade partners [see p. 38340]and had threatened trade retaliation.
Nevertheless, in July Congress again approved the extension of MFN trading status to China.
Bush had pressed for an unconditional renewal of MFN status, but after intensive congressional pressure Bush agreed to take "strong action" if China did not lower import tariffs, end illegal textile shipments via third countries, and strengthen the protection of intellectual property rights.
In addition, further renewal of MFN status in 1992 was to be dependent on China meeting stringent conditions concerned with (i) improving human rights;(ii) ending the export of goods produced in prison labour camps; and (iii) controlling the sale of ballistic missiles to the Middle East.
Tibet
Area: 1,228,000 sq km.
Population: 2,120,000 (1988 official est.).
Capital: Lhasa.
Languages: Tibetan and Chinese.
Religion: No official religion, but almost 100% Tibetan (yellow sect) Buddhism.
Armed Forces:(Chinese) PLA and Armed Police (ests. vary between 100,000 and 500,000).
Currency: Chinese yuan (US$1.00=5.3241 yuan as at Sept. 30, 1991).
Historical background and political system
Hitherto a semi-independent region of western China ruled by the Dalai Lama, the head of Tibet's Buddhist clergy and its spiritual leader, Tibet was in 1950 occupied by the communist Chinese People's Liberation Army (PLA).
A series of revolts against Chinese rule over several years culminated in an unsuccessful armed uprising in 1959.
Tibet became an autonomous region of China in 1965, but the Tibetans continued to regard the Dalai Lama as their "god-king" and to resent the Chinese presence.
As an autonomous region, Tibet (Xizang) has its own legislature (Local People's Congress) and is administered by a People's Government.
Since pro-independence demonstrations in 1987, security has largely been controlled from Beijing.
Leaders
Spiritual leader of Tibetan people: The 14th Dalai Lama, His Holiness Tenzin Gyatso, fled to India after the failed uprising of 1959.
In 1964 China declared him to be a traitor.
Chair of People's Government: Gyaincain Norbu replaced Doje Cering in May 1990.
Chair of Local People's Congress: Ngapoi Ngawang Jigme.
1990/91 OVERVIEW
The Chinese government in May 1990 rescinded the martial law order in Lhasa (imposed in March 1989 following outbreaks of secessionist unrest), although a heavy armed presence remained in the city [see p. 37454].
Western human rights groups claimed that as many as 2,000 people had been executed by the authorities during the last six months of martial law, and many more were being held in detention.
In December 1990 the Dalai Lama renounced his previous insistence on complete separation for Tibet and proposed instead that Tibet should enter into a "loose confederation" with China.
There was no positive official Chinese reaction to the proposal [see also p. 37343].
The Dalai Lama visited the United Kingdom in March 1991, when his appeal to meet with Prime Minister John Major was refused although he met Prince Charles and the Lord Chancellor, Lord Mackay of Clashfern [see p. 38097; for December meeting with Major see p. 38679].
However, the following month the Dalai Lama met with United States President Bush in Washington, although on previous visits to the USA he had not been granted such a meeting; China made a strong protest to the USA.
 "Celebrations" were organized by the Chinese authorities in May 1991 on the 40th anniversary of the "liberation" of Tibet.
Large numbers of Chinese troops were stationed in Lhasa to prevent any pro-independence demonstrations.
Other major foreign policy events of 1990 included the renewal or establishment of diplomatic relations with Saudi Arabia, Indonesia and Singapore and an improvement in ties with Vietnam and South Korea.
Chinese and South Korean officials agreed in October 1990 to establish trade offices in Beijing and Seoul.
Li Peng paid a visit to North Korea in May 1991 and made a tour of South-East Asia in August 1990 and of the Middle East in July 1991.
ASIA — PACIFIC
HONG KONG
Area: 1,071 sq km.
Population: 5,900,000 (1990 UNFPA est.).
Capital: Victoria.
Languages: English and Chinese (official — Cantonese being most widely spoken).
Religion: Buddhism; also Confucianism, Islam, Hinduism, Daoism and Christianity.
Armed forces: 8,200 (UK, Gurkha and Hong Kong personnel — 1989).
Currency: Hong Kong dollar (US$1.00=HK$7.7304 as at Sept. 30, 1991).
Major international affiliations: ADB.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
Hong Kong island was ceded to the United Kingdom under the Treaty of Nanking in 1842; the Kowloon Peninsula was acquired by the convention of Peking in 1860; the New Territories were leased from China in 1898 for a period of 99 years.
In 1984 the UK conceded that in 1997, upon the expiry of the lease on the New Territories, China would regain sovereignty over the whole of Hong Kong.
The Sino-British Joint Declaration, initialled in September 1984, contained detailed assurances on the future of Hong Kong, with China guaranteeing the continuation of the territory's capitalist economy and life-style for 50 years after 1997.
Hong Kong is administered by a UK-appointed Governor representing the UK sovereign, who presides over an Executive Council (with four ex-officio members and 10 nominated members) and a Legislative Council (Legco) consisting of three of the ex-officio Executive Council members, seven other ex-officio members, 20 appointed members and 26 elected members (12 chosen by an electoral college and 14 by "functional constituencies" ).
Main government leaders
Governor: Sir David Clive Wilson.
Principal secretaries: Sir David Ford (Chief Secretary); Alistair Asprey (Security); Hamish MacLeod (Financial Secretary); Michael Suen (Constitutional Affairs); David Nendick (Monetary Affairs); Barrie Wiggham (Civil Service); Peter Tsao (Home Affairs); K. Y. Yeung (Treasury); John Chan (Trade and Industry).
Political parties
There are covert branches of the Chinese Communist Party and the Kuomintang in Hong Kong.
There are no genuine domestic parties, although a number of narrowly-based political groups exist.
Some are liberal in orientation (including the United Democrats of Hong Kong Martin Lee l.) and others represent business interests (including the Liberal Democratic Federation).
Elections
Urban Council (Urbco) elections were held in May 1991 [see p. 38192]; the first direct elections to the Legco were held on Sept. 15 [see p. 38436].
1990/91 OVERVIEW
In the aftermath of the mid-1989 turmoil in China the UK government and the Hong Kong authorities proposed a package of measures aimed at restoring confidence in the colony ahead of 1997.
Much of 1990-91 was spent implementing this package.
In June 1991 Hong Kong obtained a Bill of Rights, which was denounced by Hong Kong liberals as ineffectual and therefore virtually meaningless.
The Chinese government also criticized it, claiming that it was unnecessary as rights and freedoms were fully guaranteed by the Hongkong Special Administrative Region Basic Law (Hong Kong's mini-constitution) promulgated in April 1990 by the Chinese legislature, the National People's Congress.
The Law did not, however, provide for genuine representative government as demanded by many Hong Kong citizens, although it increased the number of directly elected seats to the Legislative Council to one-third of the total by 1997.
A key feature of the confidence-boosting package was the passage by the UK Parliament of the British Nationality (Hong Kong) Act in July 1990, which guaranteed British citizenship to 50,000 of the colony's "key" citizens and their families.
The legislation, which had been opposed by the Chinese authorities, aimed to give security to business people, civil servants and other professionals in Hong Kong and to dissuade them from emigrating before 1997.
Despite the act, the "brain drain" from Hong Kong continued during 1990; officials estimated that over 60,000 people emigrated in 1990, 20 per cent above 1989 levels.
At the end of February 1991 the deadline passed for citizens to apply for a "first tranche" of allocations of UK passports under the act.
The number of applications was only 65,623, far lower than the 300,000 expected [see also p. 38098, whhich includes provisional figures].
In order to boost business confidence the UK and Hong Kong authorities in 1989 approved a plan to construct a new airport and port system.
After some 20 months of negotiation the Chinese and UK governments in July 1991 issued a memorandum of understanding on the construction of the system [see p. 38340].
Disagreement over the airport project had soured relations between China and the UK, with China expressing concern that the project might leave Hong Kong in serious financial difficulties when the colony reverted to Chinese control.
The memorandum was widely seen as a victory for the Chinese side in the negotiations, with the UK effectively agreeing to Chinese demands that it should be able to set its own terms for the size and financing of the project.
The agreement was signed in September during a visit to China by UK Prime Minister John Major [see p. 38435].
Official high-level contacts with China, suspended after the Tiananmen Square massacre, were resumed in January 1991 when Sir David Wilson visited Beijing.
Lu Ping, the director of the Chinese Hong Kong and Macao Affairs Office, visited Hong Kong in March, the most senior Chinese official to visit the colony since 1989 [see p. 38097-98].
In April the UK Foreign and Commonwealth Secretary, Douglas Hurd visited both Hong Kong and China [see p. 38147]and in July Francis Maude, Minister of State at the UK Foreign and Commonwealth Office, visited China for talks on Hong Kong.
[See also above for airport negotiations.]
There was little progress on the issue of the Vietnamese "boat people" in Hong Kong.
In September 1990 Vietnam appeared to accept in principle the concept of "involuntary repatriation" , when it agreed to take back "economic migrants" who, "while not volunteering to return, are nevertheless not opposed to going back" .
It was evident that the Vietnamese government remained extremely wary of accepting non-volunteers, fearing condemnation by the United States with whom it was currently attempting to normalize relations, but in June 1991 the USA agreed to drop its opposition to negotiations between UK and Vietnam on the question of "involuntary repatriation" .
Economy
The Hong Kong economy performed poorly in the first half of 1990, but not nearly as badly as in the second half of 1989 when it had suffered from the international reaction to the upheavals in China.
Domestic exports performed badly during the first half of 1990, but growth in the re-export trade partly compensated.
Commentators expected an upturn in the second half of 1990, but the economy proved highly susceptible to the new circumstances imposed by the Gulf crisis.
The rise in the price of oil had little immediate impact, but the collapse of world stock markets, the fall in demand, especially in the USA, for Hong Kong exports and the fear that Japanese banks would cut back on investment all led to growth predictions being revised downwards, in some instance to negative growth.
ASIA — PACIFIC
INDIA
Area: 3,287,263 sq km.
Population: 853,100,000 (1990 UNFPA est.).
Capital: New Delhi.
Languages: Hindi (official, spoken by 30%) and English; 16 regional languages are recognized by the Indian Constitution.
Religion: Hinduism (80%), Islam (11%); Christianity, Sikhism, Buddhism and Jainism.
Armed forces: 1,262,000 (1990).
Currency: Indian rupee (US$1.00=Rs25.6988 as at Sept. 30, 1991).
Major international affiliations: ADB; NAM; SAARC.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The Union of India (comprising 25 self-governing states and seven union territories) first became independent, as a dominion within the Commonwealth, in 1947; in 1950, according to the Constitution inaugurated in that year, it became "a sovereign socialist secular democratic republic" .
Executive power is vested in the President, elected for a five-year term by an electoral college consisting of the elected members of the upper and lower Houses of Parliament (the Rajya Sabha and the Lok Sabha respectively) and of the Legislative Assemblies of the States.
The President appoints a Prime Minister and, on the latter's advice, a Council of Ministers, all of whom are responsible to Parliament.
Most of the 244 members of the Rajya Sabha are indirectly elected by the state assemblies (one-third being replaced every two years) while all but two of the 545-members of the Lok Sabha are directly elected for a five-year term by universal adult suffrage.
The legislative field is divided between the Union and the states, the former possessing exclusive powers to make laws with respect to matters grouped under 97 headings in the Constitution including foreign affairs, defence, citizenship and trade with other countries.
Main government leaders
President: Ramaswamy Venkataraman.
Prime Minister: P. V. Narasimha Rao (also Minister of Personnel and Public Grievances; Science and Technology; Ocean Development; Electronics; Atomic Energy; Space; Chemicals and Fertilizers; Civil Supplies and Public Distribution System; Industry (additional charge)).
Other principal ministers: Arjun Singh (Human Resources Development); Manmohan Singh (Finance); Madhavsinh Solanki (External Affairs); Sharad Pawar (Defence); Bakram Jakhar (Agriculture); S. B. Chavan (Home Affairs); M. L. Fotedar (Health and Family Welfare); Ghulam Bani Azad (Parliamentary Affairs); C. K. Jaffer Sharief (Railways); Sheila Kaul (Urban Development); Sitarem Kesri (Welfare); K. Vijaya Bhaskara Reddy (Law,, Justice and Company Affairs); Madhav Rao Scindia (Civil Aviation and Tourism); B. Shankaranand (Petroleum and Natural Gas); V. C. Shukla (Water Resources).
Cabinet changes January 1990-July 1991
In January 1990 Prime Minister V. P. Singh made some low-level appointments to the Council of Ministers [see p. 37346], and carried out the first major expansion of his Ministry in late April [see p. 37378].
In August Devi Lal, the powerful Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Agriculture, was dismissed from the Cabinet [see p. 37653].
Maneka Gandhi resigned as Minister of State for Environment and Forests in October [see p. 37774].
Singh was replaced as Prime Minister on Nov. 10 by Chandra Shekhar whose Council of Ministers was sworn in on Nov. 21 [see pp. 37854-55].
Five ministers resigned from the Chandra Shekhar government in February 1991 following their disqualification from membership of the Lok Sabha under the anti-defection laws [see pp. 38005-06].
The new Prime Minister, P. V. Narasimha Rao, was sworn in and his Council of Ministers appointed on June 21, 1991 [see p. 38288].
The Minister of State for Labour (independent charge), K. Ramamurthy, resigned in late July [see p. 38337].
Ruling party
Congress (I)(P. V. Narasimha Rao, pres., Balram Jakhar, H. K. L. Bhagat, Rajendra Kumari Bajpai, Janardhan Poojari, Ghulam Nabi Azad, Vithal Narwal Gadgil gen. secs.
Other parties
Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP, Murli Manohar Joshi pres.);
Janata Dal (JD, S. R. Bommai pres.);
Communist Party of India (Marxist)(CPI(M), Jyoti Basu, M. Basavapunnaiah, Harkishan Singh Surjeet ls., E. M. Sankaran Namboodiripad gen. sec.);
Communist Party of India (CPI, Indrajit Gupta gen. sec.);
Samajwadi Janata Party (SJP, Devi Lal gen. sec.);
Shiv Sena; Revolutionary Socialist Party; Forward Bloc; Indian Union Moslem League.
The main regionally based parties include: All-India Anna Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (AIADMK, Jayalalitha Jayaram l.);
Asom Gana Parishad (AGP, Prafulla Kumar Mahanta l.);
Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (DMK, Muthuvel Karunanidhi pres., Nanjil K. Manogaran gen. sec.);
Haryana Vikas Party; Jammu and Kashmir National Conference (JKNC, Farooq Abdullah l.);
Jharkhand Mukti Morcha; Manipur People's Party; Nagaland People's Council; Shiromani Akali Dal (Simranjit Singh Mann pres.);
Sikkim Sangram Parishad; Telegu Desam (TD, Nandmuri Tarak Rama Rao pres., P. Upendra gen. sec.).
Elections
Elections to the Lok Sabha were held in May and June 1991 [see pp. 38175-76; 38286-88].
1990/91 OVERVIEW
V. P. Singh"s minority Janata Dal government collapsed in November 1990, only 11 months after coming to power.
Singh, who had entered office promising a return to value-based politics, departed with the country in a state of unprecedented social, economic and political turmoil.
Singh was replaced by his arch-rival, Chandra Shekhar, who had spent the whole of 1990 courting anti-Singh colleagues within the Janata Dal.
Chandra Shekhar managed to secure "outside" Congress (I) support for his small band of dissident Janata Dal members, but from the outset his government was weak and beholden to its patron.
The fall of the Singh government was ultimately brought about by its response to the long-running "temple-mosque" dispute at Ayodhya in Uttar Pradesh [see below].
However, pressure on the government had increased markedly since his introduction of a controversial job reservations policy in August [see p. 37653].
The policy, which aimed to reserve 27 per cent of public-sector jobs for members of the lower castes, provoked caste-based violence across northern India (although it received a large measure of support in the predominantly low-caste south) and provided an issue around which Singh's opponents within the Janata Dal could coalesce.
It also provided an opportunity for Devi Lal, whom Singh had dismissed as his deputy in August, to rally opposition to the government [see pp. 37710-11; 37774-75].
In September supporters of the radical Vishwa Hindi Parishad had launched a march to Ayodhya to begin construction of a Hindu temple on the grounds of the disused Moslem mosque there.
The BJP leader, L. K. Advani, had also embarked on the march and his arrest in late October provoked his party to withdraw its support from Singh's government [see p. 37774].
The withdrawal of BJP support intensified divisions within the Janata Dal, which quickly split into two factions.
In early November Singh's beleaguered government lost a vote of confidence in the Lok Sabha.
Congress (I) were invited to form a new government, but its leader, Rajiv Gandhi refused, offering instead to support Chandra Shekhar's rebels [see p. 37854].
Meanwhile the Ayodhya issue continued to cause serious unrest during late 1990, with close to a thousand people being killed in communal violence across the country.
The situation calmed in 1991 as Moslems and Hindus entered into discussion.
Chandra Shekhar's efforts at keeping his minority government afloat ended in March 1991.
He resigned, no longer willing to meet the political price demanded by Congress (I) for its parliamentary support [see p. 38101].
A general election was called for May and Chandra Shekhar was asked to stay on as caretaker Prime Minister.
Voting in the elections started in mid-May but was postponed after the assassination of Rajiv Gandhi by Tamil separatists while addressing a rally in Tamil Nadu [see p. 38175].
Voting resumed in June and Congress (I) emerged as the victor [see pp. 38286-88].
The victory was far from a resounding one, however, and owed much to the "sympathy vote" aroused by Gandhi's untimely death.
Congress (I) and its allies gained only enough seats to form a minority government; the party performed particularly badly in its traditional northern "Hindi belt" heartlands, where the BJP made a major impact, eventually emerging as the main opposition party and gaining over one-fifth of the total seats.
Following the victory Congress (I) leaders set about choosing a Prime Minister.
The contest for Prime Minister within Congress (I) was between Narasimha Rao, who had replaced Gandhi as party president after his widow Sonia Gandhi had refused the post, and the Chief Minister of Maharashtra, Sharad Pawar.
Rao won the contest and persuaded Pawar to enter his new Cabinet as Defence Minister.
The new government won a vote of confidence in the Lok Sabha in mid-July [see p. 38337].
Economy
India's economy faltered during 1990, and with the impact of the Gulf war the situation worsened considerably during the first half of 1991.
When Narasimha Rao's Congress (I) government came to office in mid-1991 it was faced with a US$70,000 million foreign debt burden and a long-standing foreign-exchange crisis which had continued despite receipt of a substantial IMF package in January [see p. 38006].
The Rao government moved swiftly to try and tackle the economic crisis.
The measures included the devaluation of the rupee and the raising of interest rates, and the introduction of radical and far-reaching reform packages for trade and industry.
At the same time the new Finance Minister, Manmohan Singh, introduced his first budget which raised corporate taxes, and cut fertilizer subsidies and (in real terms) defence spending.
The budget should have been introduced by Chandra Shekhar's government in February, but had been postponed due to Congress (I) pressure [for details of Rao's reform measures and the budget see p. 38337; for 1990 budget presented by the Singh government in March 1990 see pp. 37315-16].
Foreign relations
External relations were dominated by increasing tension with Pakistan over Kashmir [see below; p. 37965; see also p. 38631].
Relations with China improved greatly during 1990-91; in February 1991 the Indian External Affairs Minister V. C. Shukla visited Beijing.
The two sides agreed to resume border trade which had been cut off since the 1962 Sino-Indian war [see p. 38006], and joint working groups on the border issue met in New Delhi in August 1990 and in Beijing in May 1991.
Toshiki Kaifu, then Prime Minister of Japan, visited India in late April 1990.
Kaifu reportedly advised Singh on the need to liberalize the Indian economy.
In November India 1990 was elected as a non-permanent member of the UN Security Council for 1991.
NORTHERN STATES
Haryana
Capital: Chandigarh
Ruling party: Congress (I)
Chief Minister Bhajan Lal
Governor Dhanik Lal Mandal 
Himachal Pradesh
Capital: Simla
Ruling party: Bharatiya Janata Party
Chief Minister: Shanta Kumar
Governor: Virendra Verma 
Jammu and Kashmir
Capital: Srinagar (summer), Jammu (winter)
Ruling party: Under President's rule
Chief Minister: Vacant
Governor Girish Chandra Saksena 
Punjab
Capital: Chandigarh
Ruling party: Under President's rule
Chief Minister: Vacant
Governor: Gen. (retd) O. P. Malhotra 
Uttar Pradesh
Capital: Lucknow
Ruling party: Bharatiya Janata Party
Chief Minister: Kalyan Singh
Governor: B. Satya Narain Reddy 
Haryana
A by-election in Haryana's Meham constituency in February 1990 provoked a crisis which seriously undermined V. P. Singh's Union government and the Janata Dal [see p. 37315].
The election, a violent and corrupt affair, was contested for the Janata Dal by Om Prakash Chauthala, the state's controversial Chief Minister.
Chauthala needed to win a seat in the Haryana state assembly to secure his post as Chief Minister, a post which he had inherited in 1989 from his father, the powerful Deputy Prime Minister, Devi Lal.
In the event the poll was countermanded, but the affair reflected badly on the government and the Janata Dal.
Chauthala eventually resigned as Chief Minister in May, but his replacement, Banarasi Das Gupta, was a close associate so that the Lal clan remained in control of the state [see p. 37452].
In July the crisis erupted again when Chauthala was re-appointed as Chief Minister [see p. 37610].
Believing that a "deal" had been struck between Singh and Lal, a number of Union ministers temporarily resigned, prompting Singh himself to offer his resignation.
In the event Chauthala resigned as Chief Minister in mid-July, to be replaced by Hukam Singh, and Devi Lal resigned as Deputy Prime Minister in August [see p. 37653].
However, in March 1991 Chauthala was once again appointed to the post of Chief Minister [see p. 38101].
He was unable to command a stable majority and the state was placed under President's rule in early April [see p. 38151].
Congress (I) won a majority of seats in state assembly elections held in Haryana in May, and in June Bhajan Lal was sworn in as the new Congress (I) Chief Minister [see p. 38287].
Himachal Pradesh
The BJP routed the incumbent Congress (I) government in state assembly elections held in February 1990, and the next month the BJP's Shanta Kumar replaced Virabhadra Singh as Chief Minister [see p. 37245].
Virendra Verma replaced B. Rachaiah as the new state governor in December 1990 [see p. 37915].
Jammu and Kashmir
Throughout 1990 militant Moslem groups in Jammu and Kashmir sustained a campaign of violence and civil unrest in support of their demands for an independent Kashmir or unification with Pakistan.
India consistently claimed that the violence was organized by militants trained in, and funded by, Pakistan.
Such claims were denied by the Pakistan government, but, inevitably, the conflict had a severely adverse effect on relations between the two countries.
Border clashes, some serious, were frequent during 1990 and early 1991.
Genuine international concern over the possibility of all-out war breaking out was expressed on a number of occasions.
In July and August 1990 Indian and Pakistani officials held talks aimed specifically at reducing the chance of war.
Although after the talks there were still reports of heavy skirmishing along the Kashmir border, at a third round of talks in Islamabad in late 1990 an agreement not to attack each other 's nuclear installations was finalized.
The militants had intensified their campaign in late 1989, prompting the government to dispatch large numbers of troops to the state and to impose widespread curfews and press restrictions.
Early in 1990 the state's Chief Minister, Farooq Abdullah, resigned and Governor's rule was imposed [see pp. 37183-84].
The Governor, Jagmohan, proceeded to dissolve the State Assembly and in April all the main militant groups were banned, including the Jammu and Kashmir Liberation Front, the Jamaat-i-Islami and the Hizbul Mujahidin [see p. 37377].
The assassination in May of Maulvi Mohammed Farooq, the main Moslem religious figure in Kashmir, led to a serious deterioration in the security situation.
Indian security forces clashed with mourners at Farooq's funeral, killing almost 50 people.
Following the incident Jagmohan was replaced as state Governor by Girish Chandra Saxena, Prime Minister V. P. Singh's security adviser [see p. 37451-52].
In June rebels claimed to have formed a "provisional government" and, for the first time, they used rockets during one of their attacks [see p. 37530].
In July Governor's rule ended and President's rule was imposed.
At the same time Saxena declared the entire Kashmir Valley a "disturbed area" , thereby giving the security forces increased powers [see pp. 37610-11].
Nevertheless, the violence continued into 1991 [see pp. 37653; 38192; 38337-38]and the state was excluded from the May-June elections by presidential order [see p. 38101; 38151].
President's rule was extended for six more months from early March 1991 [see p. 38101]and again in September [see p. 38392].
Punjab
In the absence of any concrete government initiatives, violence in the Punjab spiralled during 1990.
India Today reported that 3,560 people, the majority of them civilians, were killed in the state between Jan. 1 and Dec. 11.
President's rule was extended in April and October 1990 and in March 1991 [see pp. 37377; 37775; 38101].
Virendra Verma replaced Nirmal Mukarji as Governor in June and in December Verma was replaced by Gen. O. P. Malhotra [see pp. 37530-31; 37915].
Chandra Shekhar's short-lived government made an attempt to open negotiations with militant Sikhs on the future of the state.
In December 1990 Chandra Shekhar met for talks with Simranjit Singh Mann, leader of one of the three main Akali Dal factions [see p. 37915].
(In January 1991 senior Akali leaders representing the Mann, Badal and Longowal groups merged as a single Akali Dal, to be known as Shiromani Akali Dal, with Mann as its leader — see p. 37964.)
Two months before the meeting Mann had resigned his seat in the Lok Sabha in protest at, among other things, the government's refusal to allow a state legislature to be elected.
Little emerged from the talks, and in February five Sikh militant groups issued a statement denouncing Mann and rejecting dialogue with the government [see p. 38006].
Nevertheless, in April 1991 leading separatists met with Chandra Shekhar in Delhi, after which the Prime Minister announced that a large number of Sikh youths imprisoned for minor offences would be released [see p. 38151].
Later that month it was announced that national and state-level elections would be held in Punjab in mid-June.
However, less than 30 hours before polling was due to start, the Election Commissioner announced a postponement.
He cited an upsurge in violence during the campaigning period, including attacks on two trains in which 78 people had died [see pp. 38151; 38287].
Uttar Pradesh
The BJP defeated the JD government headed by Mulayen Singh Yadav in State Assembly elections held in May and June 1991.
Kalyan Singh was sworn in as the new Chief Minister [see p. 38287].
Eastern States
Arunachal Pradesh
Capital: Itanagar
Ruling party: Congress (I)
Chief Minister: Gagong Apang
Governor: Surendra Nath Dwiwedi 
Assam
Capital: Dispur
Ruling party: Congress (I)
Chief Minister: Hiteshwar Saikia
Governor Loknath Mishra 
Bihar
Capital: Patna
Ruling party: Janata Dal
Chief Minister: Lallu Prasad Yadav
Governor: Mohammed Shafi Qureshi 
Manipur
Capital: Imphal
Ruling party: United Legislature Front (led by Manipur People's Party (MPP))
Chief Minister: Raj Kumar Ranbir Singh
Governor: Chintamani Panigrahi 
Meghalaya
Capital:Shillong
Ruling party:Meghalaya United Parliamentary Party
Chief Minister: B. B. Lyngdoh
Governor: Madhukar Dighe 
Mizoram
Capital: Aizawl
Ruling party: Congress (I)(in coalition)
Chief Minister: Lalthanhawla
Governor: Swaraj Kaushal 
Nagaland
Capital: Kohima
Ruling party: Joint Legislature Party (Nagaland People's Council-Congress (I) coalition)
Chief Minister: Vamuzo
Governor: M. M. Thomas 
Orissa
Capital: Bhubaneswar
Ruling party: Janata Dal
Chief Minister: Biju Patnaik
Governor: Yagya Dutt Sharma 
Sikkim
Capital: Gangtok
Ruling party: Sikkim Samgram Parishad
Chief Minister: Nar Bahadur Bhandari
Governor: Adml. (retd) Radhakrishnan Hariram Tahiliani 
Tripura
Capital: Agartala
Ruling party: Congress (I)(in coalition)
Chief Minister: Sudhir Ranjan Majumber
Governor: Raghunath Reddy 
West Bengal
Capital: Calcutta
Ruling party: Communist Party of India (Marxist)
Chief Minister: Jyoti Basu
Governor: Nurul Hasan 
Arunachal Pradesh
Congress (I) retained control of the State Assembly in Arunachal Pradesh in elections held in February 1990, and Agong Apang was sworn in for a fourth term as Chief Minister in March [see pp. 37245].
Surendra Nath Dwiwedi replaced Loknath Mishra as governor of Arunachal Pradesh in March 1991 [see p. 38102].
Assam
The separatist United Liberation Front of Assam (ULFA) carried out a series of assassinations, kidnappings and bomb attacks during 1990, and in late November the deteriorating security situation provoked the government into imposing President's rule [see pp. 37854-55].
Shortly afterwards the security forces launched "Operation Bajrang" aimed at stifling the unrest.
Nevertheless, violence, often aimed at local Congress (I) politicians, continued and in January 1991 ULFA was proscribed [see p. 37964].
In February ULFA set out its terms for entering into negotiations with the central government, including a withdrawal of President's rule and a ceasefire [see p. 38006].
The next month the group declared a unilateral ceasefire and President's rule was extended for six months [see pp. 38101-02].
In April Chandra Shekhar suspended Operation Bajrang after ULFA provided assurances that it would not disrupt forthcoming national and state-level elections [see p. 38151].
Nevertheless, in May the government invoked the National Security Act as a "precautionary measure" in view of the elections [see p. 38192].
Congress (I) won the State Assembly elections held in early June and Hitashwar Saikia was sworn in as the new Chief Minister [see p. 38287].
D. D. Thakur had resigned as governor in March 1991 and had been replaced by Loknath Mishra.
Bihar
A Janata Dal-led coalition replaced Congress (I) as the Bihar state government following assembly elections in February 1990.
Lallu Prasad Yadav was sworn in as the new Chief Minister in early March [see pp. 37245; 37315].
In March 1991 Mohammed Shafi Qureshi was appointed as the new state Governor, replacing B. Satya Narain Reddy, the Governor of Uttar Pradesh, who had been given temporary responsibility for Bihar in February following the dismissal of Governor Mohammad Yunus Saleem [see pp. 38006; 38102].
Manipur
An anti-Congress (I) coalition (the United Legislature Party) took office in Manipur after state elections held in February 1990; Raj Kumar Ranbir Singh of the Manipur People's Party replaced R. K. Jaichandra Singh of Congress (I) as Chief Minister [see pp. 37245-46; for February 1991 split in Manipur People's Party see p. 38006].
Mizoram
Laldenga, president of the Mizo National Front and former Chief Minister (in 1986-88), died in London in July 1990, aged 62.
Nagaland
Defections caused Congress (I) to lose its majority in the state assembly in May 1990, and a new United Legislature Front (ULF) government, headed by K. L. Chisi, leader of the Nagaland People's Council, took office.
The ULF government collapsed in June, however, and a Congress (I) -NPC coalition (Joint Legislature Party), headed by Vamuzo of the NPC, gained control [see pp. 37452; 37531].
Orissa
Janata Dal comprehensively defeated Congress (I) in State Assembly elections held in February 1990.
Biju Patnaik replaced Hemendanda Biswal as Chief Minister [see p. 37246].
West Bengal
The CPI(M) was returned to power in State Assembly elections held in May 1991; Jyoti Basu was sworn in for a fourth term as Chief Minister in June [see p. 38287].
WESTERN STATES
Goa
In April 1990 Luis Proto Barbosa replaced Churchill Alamao as Chief Minister of the Progressive Democratic Front (PDF) government.
President's rule, which had been imposed in December after the PDF's main component, the Maharashtrawadi Gomantak Party (MGP), withdrew from the PDF, was lifted in late January 1991 and the leader of the breakaway MGP group, Ravi S. Naik, was sworn in as Chief Minister [see p. 37915; 37964].
In March 1991 B. P. Singh was appointed as governor of Goa [see p. 38102].
Goa
Capital: Panaji
Ruling party: Maharashtrawadi Gomantak Party (in coalition)
Chief Minister: Ravi S. Naik
Governor: B. P. Singh 
Gujarat
Capital: Gandhinagar
Ruling party: Janata Dal
Chief Minister: Chimanbhai Patel
Governor: Sarup Singh 
Madhya Pradesh
Capital: Bhopal
Ruling party: Bharatiya Janata Party
Chief Minister: Sunderlal Patwa
Governor: Kunwar Mahmood Ali 
Maharashtra
Capital: Bombay
Ruling party: Congress (I)
Chief Minister: Sudhakarrao Naik
Governor: C. Subramaniam 
Rajasthan
Capital: Jaipur
Ruling party: Bharatiya Janata Party
Chief Minister: Bhairon Singh Shekhawat
Governor: Debi Prasad Chattopadhyay 
Gujarat
Janata Dal took control of Gujarat from Congress (I) in State Assembly elections in February 1990; in March Chimanbhai Patel replaced Madhavsinh Solanki of Congress (I) as Chief Minister [see p. 37245].
There was an outbreak of serious communal violence in Ahmedabad in April 1990 in which some 60 people died [see p. 37378].
Sarup Singh replaced Mahipal Shastri as governor of Gujarat in December [see p. 37915].
Madhya Pradesh
The BJP defeated Congress (I) in State Assembly elections held in February 1990; Sunderlal Patwa was sworn in as Chief Minister, replacing Shyama Charan Shukla [see p. 37245].
Maharashtra
Congress (I) retained power in Maharashtra in the State Assembly elections in February 1990 and Sharad Pawar was sworn in for a further term as Chief Minister [see p. 37245].
On resigning in June 1991 to take up the post of union Defence Minister [see p. 38288]he was replaced by Sudhakarrai Naik.
Rajasthan
The BJP replaced Congress (I) as the ruling party in Rajashtan after the State Assembly elections held in February 1990.
Bhairon Singh Shekhawat replaced Harideo Joshi as Chief Minister [see p. 37246].
The Shekhawat ministry won a vote of confidence in the assembly in November 1990, necessitated by the withdrawal of support by the Janata Dal after the BJP had ended its support for the V. P. Singh government [see p. 37854].
SOUTHERN STATES
Andhra Pradesh
Capital:Hyderabad
Ruling party: Congress (I)
Chief Minister: N. Janardhan Reddy
Governor: Krishna Kant 
Karnataka
Capital: Bangalore
Ruling party: Congress (I)
Chief Minister: S. Bangarappa
Governor: Khurshid Alam Khan 
Kerala
Capital: Trivandrum
Ruling party: Congress (I)
Chief Minister: K. Karunakaran
Governor: Basavaiah Rachaiah 
Tamil Nadu
Capital: Madras
Ruling party: All-India Anna Dravida Munnetra
Chief Minister: Jayalalitha
Governor: Bhishma Narain Singh 
Andhra Pradesh
A cyclone hit Andhra Pradesh in May 1990, killing over 800 people [see p. 37452].
Hindu agitation around the disputed shrine at Ayodhya in December fuelled serious communal unrest in Andhra Pradesh, and especially in Hyderabad, where up to 200 people died.
Marri Cheni Reddy resigned as Chief Minister in mid-December and was replaced by N. Janardhan Reddy [see p. 37915].
Karnataka
A dispute within the ruling Congress (I) Party in Karnataka resulted in the imposition of a brief spell of President's rule in October 1990.
The crisis resulted in the appointment of S. Bangarappa as the new Chief Minister in place of Veerendra Patil [see p. 37775].
The Governor of Goa, Khurshid Alam Khan, took on additional responsibility for Karnataka in January 1991 following the resignation of Bhanu Pratap Singh [see p. 37964].
Kerala
Basavaiah Rachaiah replaced Sarup Singh as Governor of Kerala in December 1990 [see p. 37915].
The Congress (I) -led United Democratic Front ousted the CPI (M) -led Left Democratic Front from power in State Assembly elections held in June 1991.
K. Karunakaran replaced E. K. Nayanar as Chief Minister [see p. 38287].
Tamil Nadu
Surjit Singh Barnala was appointed governor of Tamil Nadu in May 1990 [see p. 37452].
The central government imposed President's rule in Tamil Nadu in January 1991 giving as its reason an increase in activity by Tamil militants in the state [see p. 37964].
Barnala refused formally to recommend the imposition of central rule.
In February Barnala, who refused a transfer to Bihar, resigned as governor and was replaced by Bhishma Narain Singh [see p. 38006].
The Congress (I) allied A-IADMK won a clear majority in state assembly elections held in June 1991; Jayalalitha was sworn in as the new Chief Minister [see p. 38287].
Union Territories
Andaman and Nicobar Islands
Headquarters: Port Blair
Lt.-Governor: Surjit Singh Barnala 
Chandigarh
Headquarters: Chandigarh is the joint capital of Punjab and Haryana states
Administrator: Gen. (retd) O. P. Malhotra 
Dadra and Nagar Haveli
Headquarters: Silvassa
Administrator: Khurshid Alam Khan 
Daman and Diu
Headquarters: Daman
Administrator: Khurshid Alam Khan 
Delhi
Headquarters: Delhi
Lt.-Governor: Markandey Singh 
Lakshadweep
Headquarters: Kavaratti
Administrator: J. Sagar 
Pondicherry
Capital: Pondicherry
Lt.-Governor: Har Sarup Singh 
Andaman and Nicobar Islands
In December 1990 Surjit Singh Barnala, the then Governor of Tamil Nadu, was appointed to the additional post of Administrator of Andaman and Nicobar Islands in place of Lt.-Gen. (retd) R. S. Dyal.
Delhi
Markandey Singh replaced Arjan Singh as Lt.-Governor of Delhi in December 1990 [see p. 37915].
Lakshadweep
Elections in late March 1990 for 10 island councils were the first since the formation of the union territory of Lakshadweep in 1956.
Congress (I) won a clear majority of the 79 seats contested on the territory's 10 inhabited islands.
Following the elections a 25-member Pradesh Council was created comprising 21 members elected by the island councils, the Lok Sabha representative (P. M. Sayeed, the Administrator (J. Sagar), the Collector and a female representative.
The Council was a non-legislative body which would discuss and make recommendations to the Administrator on matters of administration, policy and development concerning the islands.
Pondicherry
In January 1990 Chandravati was appointed as Lieutenant Governor of Pondicherry.
The following month Congress (I) were defeated in union territory-level elections and a DMK-led coalition took office under the chief ministership of D. Ramachandran [see p. 37246].
Chandravati was replaced as Lieutenant Governor in December by Har Sarup Singh [see p. 37915].
The DMK-JD coalition government in Pondicherry resigned in December and President's rule was imposed in January 1991.
Elections to the territory's legislative assembly were held in June and resulted in a victory for Congress (I); a six-member Congress (I) ministry led by V. Vaithilingam was sworn in in early July [see pp. 38287; 38338].
ASIA — PACIFIC
INDONESIA
Area: 1,904,569 sq km.
Population: 184,300,000 (1990 UNFPA est.).
Capital: Jakarta (on island of Java).
Languages: Bahasa Indonesia (official); about 25 local languages, including Javanese.
Religion: Islam (78%), Christianity (11%), Hinduism and Buddhism.
Armed forces: 283,000 (1990).
Currency: rupiah (US$1.00=Rp1966.94 as at Sept. 30, 1991).
Major international affiliations: ADB; APEC; ASEAN; ICO; NAM; OPEC.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The Republic of Indonesia (comprising some 13,700 islands known until 1949 as the Netherlands East Indies) is a unitary state in which executive power resides in a President who governs with the assistance of an appointed Cabinet.
The President is elected for a five-year term by the 1,000-member People's Consultative Assembly (Majelis Permusyawaratan Rakyat — MPR).
Of the MPR's members 500 are from the House of Representatives (Dewan Perwakilan Rakyat — DPR), the country's legislative organ, and the remaining 500 are government appointees (often from the armed forces), delegates of regional assemblies and representatives of parties and groups, the latter appointed in proportion to their elective seats in the DPR.
Main government leaders
President: Gen. (retd) Suharto has held the post since 1968.
Vice-President Gen. (retd) Sudharmono.
Principal ministers: Adml. (retd) Sudomo (Political Affairs and Security); Radius Prawiro (Economy, Finance, Industry and Development Supervision); Gen. (retd) Supardjo Rustam (Public Welfare); Gen. Rudini (Internal Affairs); Ali Alatas (Foreign Affairs); Gen. L. B. Murdani (Defence and Security); J. B. Sumarlin (Finance); Arifin Siregar (Trade); Wardoyo (Agriculture); Lt.-Gen.
Sugiarto (Transmigration).
Leading members of the armed forces: Gen. Try Sutrisno (C.-in-C. of the Indonesian Armed Forces; Head of Co-ordinating Agency for the Reinforcement of National Stability — Bakorstranas); Lt.-Gen.
Edi Sudrajat (Army Chief of Staff).
Cabinet changes to mid-1991
No Cabinet changes.
Ruling party
Sekretariat Bersama Golongan Karya (Sekber Golkar — Joint Secretariat of Functional Groups, Gen. (retd) Suharto pres., Gen. (retd) Wahono gen. ch., Rachmat Witoelar (sec. -gen.).
Other parties
Partai Demokrasi Indonesia (PDI, Soerjadi gen. ch., Nico Daryanto s.g.);
Partai Persatuan Pembangunan (PPP — United Development Party, Ismael Hassan Metareum pres., Mardinsyah sec. -gen.).
The following groups are in conflict with the government: Frente Revolucionario de Este Timor Independente (Fretilin, Jose Ramos Horta sec. for international relations, Jose Xanana Gusmao military commdr.);
Organisasi Papua Merdeka (OPM, Elky Bemei l.);
Free Aceh Movement (described by the government as the Security Disturbance Movement, GPK).
The Indonesian Communist Party (PKI) is banned and the government frequently executes members of the party imprisoned since the 1960s.
Elections
Elections were held to the DPR in April 1987 [see p. 35326].
1990/91 OVERVIEW
Political activity during 1990 and early 1991 was largely dominated by the presidential elections due to be held in 1993.
There was intense speculation as to whether President Suharto would run for a sixth consecutive term, and as to who, if he decided not to run, would succeed him.
Suharto's pronouncements, although clouded in typical ambiguity, certainly gave the impression that he would stand for a sixth term.
In his key-note National Day address to parliament in August Suharto appeared to endorse moves towards greater openness and democracy.
In December he supported the formation of a new Moslem organization (the Association of Moslem Intellectuals), which united a broad spectrum of Moslem interests and was widely expected to be the basis of support for his candidacy in 1993 [see p. 37919].
In April 1991 a Democracy Forum was launched by leading intellectuals and religious figures, including Abdurraham Wahid, leader of the Nahdatul Ulama, the country's largest Moslem group [see p. 38149].
Suharto's advancement of a pro-democratic line was in part a response to pressure from sections of the armed forces (ABRI).
Many of the younger ABRI leaders, eager to retain the military's dual military/political function, had started to project a more democratic image.
In an effort to appease sections of ABRI opposing his sixth term, Suharto released Gen. Hartono Resko Dharsono, the country's most celebrated dissident, from prison in September 1990 [see p. 37715].
Dharsono, an associate of the so-called "Petition of 50" dissident movement, had been in prison since 1984 [see pp. 33286-87].
In August (immediately prior to Suharto's National Day speech) a group of prominent Indonesians, including many of the original "Petition of 50" , had issued a public demand to Suharto to stand down in 1993 and to permit greater democracy.
The new openness meant that there was a marked reduction in the arrests of alleged subversives and in the closures of newspapers.
However, the new atmosphere also fostered increased debate on a number of issues which were potentially difficult for the government, including the social repercussions of increased economic growth.
Criticism was levelled at the newly expanded private sector, which, it was claimed, was growing at the expense of the poorer sections of society.
There was, moreover, a racial element to the criticisms, since many of the successful private businesses were controlled by ethnic Chinese.
There was also a political element in that the criticisms contained an implicit condemnation of the extraordinarily large and powerful business empire built up by Suharto's family and close associates.
Security
Unrest continued in East Timor during 1990, with the security forces maintaining pressure on Fretilin and demonstrators.
In November Fretilin offered the government unconditional peace talks, but the move was rejected outright by the government.
The human rights organization Amnesty International issued reports on East Timor in February and August 1991 detailing cases of detention and torture [see pp. 38011; 38397].
The security forces continued operations against members of the OPM in Irian Jaya.
Indonesian cross-border raids into Papua New Guinea in mid-1990 aimed at capturing OPM members caused friction between the two countries.
Prior to the raids relations had been warm, and in April the two countries had signed a revision of the 1979 border agreement.
The friction caused by the raids did not prevent Papua New Guinea deporting the captured OPM leader Mecky Salosa to the Irian capital Jayapura in July.
Unrest in Aceh province on the northern tip of Sumatra erupted in April when separatist insurgents (members of the Free Aceh Movement) carried out a series of attacks on police posts, which prompted a major security operation against the rebels.
By the end of 1990 there were as many as 12,000 troops active in the province.
The military crackdown caused a number of Acehnese to flee to Malaysia.
A member of the banned Indonesian Islamic Revolutionary Council was reportedly executed in February 1991 [see p. 38011].
In July two members of the PKI imprisoned in the 1960s were reportedly released from prison.
Economy
In 1990 the economy continued to expand as deregulatory reforms took effect.
In May 1990 and June 1991 the government introduced new packages of tariff reforms, the latest stages of its five-year campaign to lower trade barriers.
Inflation was a major concern during 1990, running at just under 10 per cent.
In an effort to reduce it, the government increased interest rates, which restricted growth to an estimated 6.5 per cent in 1990, almost a full percentage point down from the 1989 figure.
Rising oil prices, a result of the Gulf conflict, assured short-term gains in 1991, but alarmed the government which had as its primary economic goal the increase of non-oil exports.
The 1991/92 budget was presented to the DPR by President Suharto in January 1991 [see p. 37962].
In June 1991 the Intergovernment Group for Indonesia (IGGI) agreed on a record US$4,750 million aid package [see p. 38294].
Foreign relations
The major foreign policy event during 1990 was the restoration in August of diplomatic relations with China, during a visit to Indonesia by the Chinese Premier Li Peng.
Relations had been suspended by Indonesia in 1967 [see pp. 22278-79; 22482].
In November President Suharto visited China and in June 1991 the Chinese President Yang Shangkun visited Indonesia [see pp. 22482; 37612; 37861; 38294].
Indonesia continued to play a major diplomatic role in the Cambodian peace process during 1990 and 1991.
ASIA — PACIFIC
JAPAN
Area: 377,815 sq km.
Population: 123,611,541 (1990).
Capital: Tokyo.
Language: Japanese.
Religion.
Shintoism and Buddhism; Christianity (minority).
Self Defence Forces: 249,000 (1990).
Currency: yen (US$1.00=132.772 yen as at Sept. 30, 1991).
Major international affiliations: ADB; APEC.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
Under the Constitution adopted in 1947, Japan is a constitutional monarchy.
Legislative authority is vested in a popularly elected bicameral Diet which is composed of a 512-member House of Representatives (elected for up to four years) and a House of Councillors (whose 252 members are elected for six years, with half being due for re-election every three years).
Main government leaders
Emperor: Tsegu no Miya Akihito.
Prime Minister: Kiichi Miyazawa.
Other principal ministers: Takashi Tawara (Justice); Michio Watanabe (Deputy Premier and Foreign); Tsutomu Hata (Finance — as given on p. 38558, where Kunio Hatoyama, the new Education Minister, is also erroneously listed as Finance Minister).
Cabinet changes in 1990
There were Cabinet changes in February 1990 [see p. 37238]; September [see p. 37715]; and December [see p. 37917].
Ruling party
The Liberal Democratic Party (LDP; Kiichi Miyazawa l., Keizo Obuchi sec. -gen.) has been in office since its formation in 1955.
Other main political parties
The Democratic Socialist Party (DSP, Keigo Oouchi ch; Takahi Yonezawa sec. -gen.) founded in 1960 by right-wing members of the Japan Socialist Party; Japan Communist Party (JCP, Kenji Miyamoto ch. of Central Committee); Komeito (Clean Government Party, Koshiro Ishida ch.
Yuichi Ichikawa sec. -gen.) a Buddhist-based party founded in 1960; Social Democratic Party of Japan (SDPJ, Makouti Tanabe ch., replaced Takako Doi in July 1991 — see pp. 38292; 38343).
Formerly called Japan Socialist Party, the SDPJ constitutes the main opposition party.
Elections
The LDP was returned to power at the general election of Feb. 18, 1990 [see pp. 37237-38].
Miyazawa was elected as LDP leader and Prime Minister in October 1991 [see p. 38558], succeeding Toshiki Kaifu who had held both posts since August 1989 [see pp. 36849-50].
1990/91 OVERVIEW
1990 began with a general election for the House of Representatives in which the ruling LDP won a comfortable overall majority.
The contest was seen as a crucial test of the LDP's continuing ability to hold office.
The loss of the party's majority in the upper house in the elections of July 1989, against a background of scandals and the introduction of the unpopular consumption tax, had led to speculation that the party's 35-year period of unbroken rule was approaching its end.
In the event the 1990 results confirmed the LPD's primacy and boosted the image of Prime Minister Kaifu.
It also highlighted the strength of the party's local organization and its huge fund-raising ability.
The election result also reflected the SDPJ (then the JSP)"s inability to field a sufficient number of candidates to achieve power.
The party ran only 148 candidates, of whom 136 were elected, a larger proportion than in recent elections, but far short of the 257 seats required for an overall majority in the 512-member House of Representatives.
Although SDPJ leader Takako Doi had wanted to field more candidates she had been prevented from so doing by pressure from sitting socialist members of the Diet.
Her original wish to run two candidates in at least one-third of the country's 130 multi-member constituencies was abandoned on the grounds that it would have split the socialist vote in many areas.
In contrast with the SDPJ, the three smaller opposition parties each lost seats, with the JCP and the DSP each falling below the 20-seat minimum threshold required for a party to propose legislation in the lower house.
Their failure also appeared to reduce the chance of creating an effective opposition coalition.
The election result enhanced the stature of Kaifu (who had been appointed as a caretaker leader in 1989) and reduced the amount of factional conflict within the ruling party.
It also suggested that he would be permitted to remain as leader until the completion of his first term in October 1991, and would possibly achieve a second two-year term.
Nevertheless, the fact that Kaifu did not lead any of the LDP's factions meant that he could never be entirely secure, as he remained vulnerable to the will of the party's factional power-brokers.
This vulnerability increased during 1990 and the first half of 1991 as he grappled unsuccessfully with a series of complex problems [for his replacement in October 1991 see pp. 38528-29; 38558].
Electoral reform and Gulf war
One of the key problems faced by Kaifu in 1990-91 was the issue of electoral reform.
In May 1990 he had cautiously endorsed the reform plan suggested by the Election System Council, an advisory body to the Prime Minister.
The plan involved the replacement of the current 130 constituencies (each of which had up to six seats) with some 300 single-member constituencies, with the remaining 200 seats distributed on the basis of proportional representation.
The rationale behind the changes was to reduce the influence of "money politics" following the Recruit scandal [see pp. 37237-38].
It was argued that this could best be achieved by preventing the need for candidates from the same party to compete with each other in multimember seats, thereby reducing their need spend huge sums of money during the campaign.
There were many in the ruling party who treated the proposals with great suspicion, however, and who worked to delay and discredit them on the grounds that they would undermine the current factional structure of the LDP.
Many members of the opposition also disapproved of the planned change, arguing conversely that it would strengthen the LDP's hold on power.
The other major problem to confront Kaifu stemmed from the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait in August 1990.
Under US pressure, Kaifu announced in September a US$4,000 million contribution to the international effort against Iraq, and drew up a Peace Co-operation Bill to authorize the dispatch of 2,000 non-combatants from Japan's Self Defence Forces to assist the allied forces being deployed against Iraq.
The measure, which would have involved the first overseas deployment of Japanese forces since 1945, was condemned by the opposition as unconstitutional (it was argued that Article 9 of Japan's post-war Constitution prohibited the country's participation in acts of collective defence) and by the governments of many of Japan's neighbours as an undesirable manifestation of nascent Japanese militarism.
In the face of resolute opposition, the bill was withdrawn from the Diet in November [see p. 37859].
Under increased US pressure, Kaifu in January 1991 announced a further $9,000 million contribution to the Gulf war.
This was eventually approved by the Diet but only in the face of tough SDPJ opposition and a damaging debate which further undermined Kaifu's authority.
Once again, proposals to send Japanese forces to assist with the allied war-effort were defeated [see pp. 38010-11].
Damaged by the Gulf crisis and still without having achieved electoral reform, Kaifu's position by the end of 1990 looked considerably less secure than it had done in the immediate aftermath of the February elections.
His faltering authority was demonstrated in December when an extensive Cabinet reshuffle was forced upon him by factional leaders.
The LDP also suffered from the continuing consequences of the Recruit scandal (in October Hishashi Shinto, one of the country's most senior industrialists, was given a suspended two-year sentence for his role in the affair — see p. 37780) and the resignation from the party of a former Cabinet Minister, Toshiyuki Inamura, after being charged with large-scale tax evasion [see p. 37917].
Enthronement of Emperor
Although there were violent clashes between rioters and police in Osaka in October 1990 [see p. 37780], there were fewer attempts by the radical left than had been expected to disrupt the enthronement ceremony of Emperor Akihito.
The ceremony, together with the controversial Daijosai ritual (with its Shinto rites and implications of imperial divinity), passed off in November with only minor disturbances [see p. 37859].
Local elections
Kaifu's prospects of a second term as leader brightened considerably after LDP successes in nationwide local elections held in April 1991 [see pp. 38147-48]in which the ruling party increased both its share of the vote and the number of seats which it held.
The SDPJ lost seats in the local elections, with its worst showing since 1955.
As a result, on June 21 Doi announced her resignation, which became effective in July when Tanabe was elected as her replacement [see pp. 38292; 38343].
The only setback for the LDP was its defeat in the gubernatorial election in Tokyo where the party had withdrawn support from its veteran incumbent governor, Shunichi Suzuki, in favour of a candidate supported by the DSP and Komeito.
The deal had been struck by then LDP secretary-general Ichiro Ozawa in return for the support of the smaller parties in approving the Gulf package.
When Suzuki won a fourth term, however, receiving almost 50 per cent of the vote, Ozawa resigned.
His loss was a great blow for Kaifu as with him fell the strategy of forging a close working relationship between the LDP, the DSP and Komeito.
In June a major scandal began to emerge involving securities dealers who had made secret compensation payments to favoured clients for losses incurred through taking their advice.
In the light of the emerging scandal Kaifu pinned his hopes of re-election on his ability to achieve two pieces of legislation: the reform of the electoral system and the approval of Japan's right to send troops abroad in order to perform peace-keeping or disaster-relief roles.
A special session of the Diet was called for early August, but with the developing securities scandal leading to widespread calls for urgent measures to improve regulation of the stock market, the LDP's failure to secure the support of Komeito and the DSP, and an unknown level of support for Kaifu within his own party, it was far from certain that the Prime Minister would succeed in his legislative aims.
It was also uncertain by the middle of the year to what extent the LDP's factions were prepared to support a challenge to Kaifu for the leadership.
This uncertainty had been increased by the death in May of Shintaro Abe, the leader of the party's second-largest faction.
He was replaced in June by Hiroshi Mitsuzuka [see pp. 38191; 38292; for subsequent developments in securities scandal, special session of Diet see pp. 38342; 38397-98; for replacement of Kaifu by Miyazawa see pp. 38528-29; 38558].
Economy
Despite a slump in the equity markets, the Japanese economy grew for a fourth consecutive year during 1990.
Real gross national product (GNP) grew by 5.5 per cent in 1990, compared with 5.1 per cent in 1989 and 5.3 per cent in 1988.
The main engines of growth were capital spending (under the June Structural Impediments Initiative (SII) agreement [see below; p. 36892]the Japanese government committed itself to spend 430,000,000 million yen (US$3,200,000 million) on public works over the next 10 years) and domestic consumption (domestic demand rose by almost 6 per cent during the year).
The unemployment rate for fiscal year 1990 was 2.1 per cent, the lowest figure since fiscal year 1980.
The inflation rate for 1990 was 3.3 per cent, the highest since 1981.
There had been a fall in private consumption in 1989 following the imposition of the unpopular consumption tax.
In 1990 sales of cars, video cameras and leisure related services boomed as consumers found themselves with higher disposable incomes because of wage increases averaging 6 per cent, at least double the rate of inflation.
Among the industries which performed best were shipbuilding and construction.
In 1989 Japanese companies had secured shipbuilding orders for new vessels totalling 9,700,000 gross tonnes, double the total of the previous year, so that although orders for 1990 were down to around 3,000,000 gross tonnes, shipbuilders' order books remained full until well into 1992.
This, together with a doubling of ship prices in 1989-90, meant that five of the country's top seven shipbuilding concerns recorded profits after 10 years of losses.
In the construction industry a record volume of backlog work and the government's massive programme of infrastructure spending led to predictions of considerable growth at least until 1993.
The trade surplus fell from almost US$77,000 million in 1989 to $64,000 million in 1990, while the current-account surplus fell from almost $57,000 million to $35,800 million.
Although exports continued to grow in 1990, up 3.9 per cent at $280,000 million, imports increased by 12.3 per cent to $216,000 million because of increases in oil prices and in demand for imported consumer goods, and overseas production also increased.
The deficit on invisible items rose by 46 per cent to $22,600 million as an increasing number of Japanese made overseas visits.
Collapse of equities market
While the manufacturing sector showed its usual robust health, 1990 saw considerable volatility in Japan's financial markets, with equities plunging by nearly 15 per cent during the first three months of the year.
Hopes that the LDP election victory would stabilize the markets proved unfounded, and in March the Bank of Japan (BoJ) raised the Official Discount Rate (ODR — the rate at which the BoJ lent money to commercial banks) by 1 percentage point to 5.25 per cent, the fourth rise since May 1989.
The move was designed to ease the depreciation of the yen (which fell by 10 per cent against the dollar during the first three months of the year), dampen inflationary pressure and restore investor confidence.
However, in April there were further sharp falls in the price of shares and the value of the yen.
On April 2 share prices fell by almost 2,000 points as the Nikkei Average index plummeted by 1,987.30 points to close at 28,002.07 (compared with a record high of 38,915.87 on Dec. 29, 1989).
It was the second largest fall in the country's history, exceeded only by the 3,836 point crash on "Black Monday" in October 1987.
The slump slowed in pace but remained evident for much of 1990, and the ODR was raised to 6 per cent in August.
In October the index fell below 20,000 points, leading to government intervention to support the market.
The extent of the equity collapse was revealed in October when the country's big four securities brokers declared their worst profits since the "oil shock" year of 1973.
The decline in pre-tax profits for the first six months of 1990 ranged from 55.1 per cent for Nomura Securities, the largest trader, to 74.2 per cent for Nikko and Yamaichi Securities.
Although the slump in financial markets affected the ability of some companies to raise cheap money, its impact on the economy at large was limited.
Among the greatest losers were the country's banks which, after recent years of high asset growth, saw the value of their share holdings greatly reduced.
Fears that the share slump would drag down land prices proved unfounded, official figures showing an average national increase in land prices of 11 per cent in 1990, compared with 17 per cent in 1989.
In early 1991, however, there was some evidence that land prices had levelled off and had even begun to fall.
1990 and 1991 budgets
In May the House of Representatives approved a 66,236,791 million yen budget for the fiscal year beginning on April 1, 1990.
(The February election had delayed the Diet's consideration of the budget, and had forced the government to adopt interim budgetary measures covering the first two months of the fiscal year.)
In late December 1990 the Cabinet approved the budget for the fiscal year beginning in April 1991, in which it was predicted that the economy would grow by 3.8 per cent.
The budget, which was passed by the Diet's lower house on March 14, totalled 70,347,000 million yen, a 6.2 per cent increase over the initial budget for fiscal 1990.
It planned a 6 per cent increase in expenditure on public works (in accordance with the SII deal), but suggested that local authorities would be encouraged to increase public works expenditure by around 10 per cent.
Debt servicing expenses were set to increase by 10.8 per cent, amounting to 22.5 per cent of general account outlays.
Ministry officials attributed this increase to higher interest payments on outstanding government bonds.
Defence spending was planned to rise by 5.1 per cent, the lowest percentage rise since 1960, and a whole percentage point lower than the previous year's increase.
Finance Ministry officials specifically related the reduction in the rate of increase for defence expenditure to the relaxation of tension between what had been the Soviet bloc and the West.
The proposed expenditure figure was in line with the 1991-95 medium-term defence spending programme, which was approved by the government on Dec. 20 and became operational in April 1991.
The five-year programme was budgeted to cost 22,750,000 million yen, at an average annual increase of around 3 per cent.
The fact that the 1991 figure was more than 2 percentage points higher than this figure was attributed to higher personnel costs and to contracts scheduled to be paid during fiscal 1991.
Defence spending was calculated for 1991 at 0.951 per cent of projected GNP, less than 1 per cent; only between 1987 and 1989 had defence spending exceeded 1 per cent of GNP.
The budget also increased the allocation for supporting US forces stationed in Japan from 168,000 million yen in fiscal 1990 to 177,500 million yen in 1991.
Foreign relations
Relations between Japan and the USA were bound up with the Gulf crisis [see above], with the USA appearing to want greater financial assistance from Japan (both for the Gulf operation and for the upkeep of US forces stationed in Japan) while also seeming unenthusiastic about the prospects of Japan actually deploying forces abroad in any capacity.
The two countries achieved some progress in the sphere of trade relations, traditionally a source of mutual irritation.
In March 1990 Kaifu met US President Bush for talks on trade issues, when various measures to open Japanese markets were agreed.
This was followed in June by the successful completion of the Structural Impediments Initiative (SII) talks, which had begun in September 1989 with the aim of locating and removing structural causes for the considerable US-Japanese trade imbalance [see pp. 37376-77].
In January 1991 there were reports that the Japanese government was prepared to discuss opening its rice market to foreign imports, the source of one of the most bitter and protracted of trade disputes with the USA.
The political strength of the farmers, who constituted some 10 per cent of the population and exerted a considerable electoral influence because of the anomalies of the electoral system, and their traditional close links with the LDP meant, however, that the reports were immediately denied, and no progress on the issue was forthcoming.
In April 1991 Kaifu visited the USA for talks with Bush, and a multinational Import Board, established as a result of the SII talks, was inaugurated with the aim of reducing the US trade deficit with Japan which in 1990 had amounted to $41,000 million, almost half the total US deficit [see p. 38148].
In June the two countries agreed to extend the 1986 microchip deal by a further five years [see p. 38292], and finalized a pact granting greater foreign access to Japan's construction industry.
In July Kaifu visited Bush at his holiday home in Maine [see pp. 38341-42].
The Gulf war and its attendant debate over the dispatching of Japanese troops overseas also affected Japan's relationship with its Asian neighbours, many of whom expressed fears that such a development might be the first step towards a resurgence of military power commensurate with the country's huge economic strength.
This issue (together with the long-running territorial dispute over the disputed Senkaku islands) soured relations somewhat with China towards the end of 1990, even though earlier in the year Japan had been in the forefront of those countries arguing for a resumption of the aid to China which had been suspended after the Tiananmen Square massacre in June 1989.
Relations improved with South Korea as a result of concessions over the treatment of the Korean minority within Japan, and Japan's admission of guilt over its past treatment of Korea [see p. 38623].
This issue of past treatment was also a factor in Japan's normalization talks with North Korea which began in 1990, as was the refusal of the North Korean government to open its nuclear industry to international inspection [see pp. 38621].
There were some signs in 1990-91 that Japan's long-running dispute with the Soviet Union might be drawing to an end.
The conflict centred upon the Northern Territories, four islands (known in the Soviet Union as the Kuriles) which lay off the coast of Hokkaido, and which had been occupied by the Soviet Union in 1945.
Although the two countries had resumed diplomatic relations in 1956, the outstanding territorial issue had frozen bilateral relations to the extent that they had not even signed a peace treaty formally ending the Pacific War.
In July Kaifu made it clear that Japanese aid to the Soviet Union would not be forthcoming while the dispute remained outstanding.
At the end of August the Soviet authorities eased restrictions on Japanese visits to family graves on Etorofu, the most militarily sensitive and least accessible of the four islands, and in September the Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard Shevardnadze visited Japan and suggested that his government was prepared to negotiate over the Northern Territories.
Hopes that this would produce a settlement prior to the visit of Soviet President Gorbachev in early 1991, however, were dashed by Shevardnadze's subsequent resignation in December.
In early 1991 there was an unprecedented degree of diplomatic activity between the two countries.
Nevertheless, when Gorbachev made his visit to Japan in April it was not accompanied by any breakthrough over the territorial issue.
He did, however, acknowledge the nature of the dispute and promised to reduce Soviet forces based on the islands and to facilitate Japanese access to them still further [see p. 38148].
ASIA — PACIFIC
NORTH KOREA
Area: 120,538 sq km.
Population: 21,800,000 (1990 UNFPA est.).
Capital: Pyongyang.
Language: Korean.
Religion: Buddhism, Confucianism, Daoism, Shamanism, Chondogyu.
Armed forces: 1,111,000 (1990).
Currency: North Korean won (US$1.00=0.9689 won as at Sept. 30, 1991).
Major international affiliations: NAM.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The Democratic People's Republic of Korea was established as an independent communist state in September 1948.
Under the terms of the 1972 Constitution nominal political authority is held by a unicameral Supreme People's Assembly (SPA), the 687 members of which are elected every four years from a single list of candidates.
The SPA, which elects a standing committee to represent it when not in session, also elects the President, who in addition to being head of state holds executive power and governs in conjunction with a Central People's Committee and an appointed State Administrative Council (Cabinet).
Effective political control is exercised by the (communist) Korean Workers' Party, established in 1946.
Main government leaders
President of the Republic: Kim Il Sung.
Premier: Yon Hyong Muk.
Other principal ministers: Kim Yong Nam (Deputy Premier; Foreign Affairs); Kim Pok Sin (Deputy Premier; Chairman of Light Industry Commission).
Cabinet changes
A new State Administrative Council was made public on May 1990 [see pp. 37455-56].
Ruling party
Korean Workers' Party (KWP, Kim Il Sung gen. -sec.).
Other political parties
There are no other legal parties.
Elections
SPA elections were held on April 22, 1990 [see p. 37375].
Kim Il Sung was re-elected President in May 1990 [see pp. 37455-55].
1990/91 OVERVIEW
The collapse of communism in many countries which were hitherto allies meant that North Korea was more isolated in 1990 than at any time in its recent history.
This isolation was accentuated as, during the course of the year, the Soviet Union established diplomatic relations with South Korea and showed every sign of wanting to increase economic co-operation with the capitalist South [see p. 37714].
Even China showed signs of wishing to improve its relationship with South Korea, and in October 1990 the two countries established formal trade ties [see p. 37779].
Notwithstanding such international trends, however, the regime of Kim Il Sung, the "Great Leader" , appeared unwilling to make any compromises in its traditional ideology and structure.
In his 1991 New Year address Kim made no reference to the events in eastern Europe, choosing instead to reaffirm traditional policies and values.
There was considerable speculation (allegedly stemming from Chinese official sources) that Kim would use the occasion of his 78th birthday (on April 15) to complete the long-anticipated handover of power to his son, Kim Jong Il, the 48-year-old "Dear Leader" .
The occasion, marked by its customary extravagant celebrations, passed, however, with no such announcement.
Speculation concerning his forthcoming retirement was further dampened when in August the elder Kim proved his continuing stamina by undertaking a 19-day "on the spot guidance" tour of North Hamgyong Province.
In April the ninth SPA was elected with the usual efficiency: turnout was claimed to be 99.78 per cent, with 100 per cent of votes cast for the successful candidates.
At the 18th plenary session of the sixth KWP central committee, held in May on the eve of the first meeting of the new SPA, Choe Kwang and Han Song Yong (both of whom were aged and trusted comrades of Kim Il Sung) were promoted to the politburo [see p. 37455-56].
The appointments continued the policy of the last two years whereby Kim had promoted aged, faithful followers rather than elevating those belonging to Kim Jong Il's generation.
Kim Il Sung was re-elected President of the Republic on May 24 and restated in his inaugural speech his commitment to socialism despite the "temporary setbacks" which had occurred elsewhere in the world [ibid.].
He explicitly rejected attempting to solve socialist problems by adopting capitalist methods, but did suggest that his government was interested in improving relations with capitalist countries.
The twin trends of stagnation and decline continued to characterize the North Korean economy.
As was usual the government released no economic statistics considered reliable by international commentators.
The budget, presented to the SPA in May 1990, revealed a growth in revenue of 6.1 per cent compared with the previous year.
Relations between North and South Korea
The unification of Germany in 1990 left the Korean peninsula as the sole surviving example of formal partition originating from the Second World War.
Despite the epoch-making changes in international relations, however, progress towards Korean reunification during 1990 remained slow and uncertain.
The year began, as had become customary in recent years, with North Korean protests over the annual joint South Korean-United States "Team Spirit" military exercises.
The South's refusal to cancel the exercises led to a freeze of all negotiating channels by the North.
The most immediate casualty of this were the talks aimed at sending a single Korean team to compete in the Asian Games in China in September.
The climate was not improved by the exposure in March of further North Korean tunnelling under the Demilitarized Zone (DMZ) separating the two countries.
The talks freeze ended in July when the two sides agreed to participate in a summit meeting of their Premiers in September [see p. 37609].
There was little agreement concerning the agenda of the meeting, however, with the North favouring an immediate discussion of military, political and economic issues, while the South wanted first to agree on confidence-building measures such as exchange visits and cultural co-operation.
The talks were also jeopardized by events surrounding plans by the South to open the border with the North for five days from Aug. 13; the North insisted that dissidents from the South should be allowed to attend a pro-unification rally in Panmunjom on Aug. 15 to celebrate the anniversary of Korean liberation from the Japanese rule [see p. 37657].
The Premiers' summit took place in Seoul in September [see p. 37699].
Although it made little progress its symbolic importance (the first such meeting to be held) was considerable.
Both sides reiterated their established positions (within which there was little common ground), and the North also outlined three preconditions for further progress:(i) the scrapping of Team Spirit;(ii) no separate UN membership for the Korea states [but see pp. 38191; 38437]; and (iii) the release of those imprisoned in the South for having made unauthorized visits to the North.
A second meeting was held in mid-October [see p. 37779-80]and a third in December [see pp. 37918-19], but they also failed to make any tangible progress.
Relations between the two countries deteriorated in early 1991 against the background of the Gulf war and the approach of the 1991 Team Spirit exercises, scheduled for March.
On Feb. 18 the North suspended the fourth round of Premiers' talks which had been scheduled for Feb. 25-28, but agreement was reached the same month on joint sports teams [see p. 38010; see also pp. 38341; 38437; 38529; 38576].
Other foreign relations
Relations with the Soviet Union cooled considerably during 1990.
The Soviet decision to establish diplomatic relations with South Korea was seen as a betrayal, and the meeting in June between Soviet President Gorbachev and his South Korean counterpart, Roh Tae Woo, was condemned by the North Korean official news agency as "unpardonable, traitorous bargaining" [see p. 37533].
Relations with the hardline regime in China fared better, with the general secretary of the Chinese Communist Party, Jiang Zemin, visiting Pyongyang on March 14-16, 1990, and Kim making a reciprocal visit to China on Sept. 11, shortly before the opening of the Asian Games in Beijing in which a South Korean team participated.
In May 1991 Chinese Premier Li Peng made a three-day visit to North Korea [see p. 38191].
There was little change in relations with the United States, although in May 1990 the North for the first time handed over the remains of US servicemen missing in action from the Korean War [see p. 37456; see also p. 38295].
The most visible foreign policy progress came in relations with Japan.
In September 1990 a Japanese delegation visited North Korea [see pp. 37714]The visit was a success, a communiqué was signed calling for negotiations aimed at the restoration of diplomatic relations, and two Japanese seamen detained in the North since 1983 were released in October [see p. 37779].
Exploratory talks were held in Beijing on in November and December [see pp. 37860; 37818], after which a first round of full normalization talks was held in Pyongyang in late January 1991 and a second in Tokyo in mid-March [see p. 38098].
The main obstacles to normalizing relations appeared to be North Korea's unwillingness to allow international inspection of its nuclear facilities, and Japan's refusal to accede to the North's demand for compensation not merely for the period of Japan's colonization of the country (1910-45) but also for the post-Pacific War period.
A third round of talks was held in May, and in the same month the first direct charter flight between the two countries was made [p. 38191].
ASIA — PACIFIC
SOUTH KOREA
Area: 99,222 sq km.
Population: 42,000,000 (1990 UNFPA est.).
Capital: Seoul.
Language: Korean.
Religion.
Buddhism, Christianity, Confucianism, Daoism.
Armed forces: 650,000 (1990).
Currency: South Korean won (US$1.00=839.61 won as at Sept. 30, 1991).
Major international affiliations: ADB; APEC.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The Republic of Korea became independent in August 1948.
Under the Constitution of the Sixth Republic, adopted in February 1988, legislative authority rests with a National Assembly whose 299 members serve for four years.
Executive power is held by the President who is popularly elected for a five-year term and who governs with the assistance of an appointed State Council led by a Prime Minister.
The Constitution was adopted following sustained popular unrest during 1987.
Main government leaders
President of the Republic: Roh Tae Woo.
Prime Minister: Chung Won Shik.
Other principal ministers: Choi Gak Kyu (Deputy Prime Minister; Economic Planning Board); Lee Sang Ock (Foreign Affairs); Ahn Eung Mo (Home Affairs); Rhee Yong Man (Finance); Kim Ki Choon (Justice); Lee Jong Koo (Defence).
Cabinet changes
There were Cabinet changes in March 1990 [see pp. 37319-20]; September [see p. 37714]; October [see p. 37779]; November [see p. 37860]; December [see p. 37918]; February 1991 [see p. 38010]; and May [see pp. 38177-78].
Ruling party
Democratic Liberal Party (DLP, Roh Tae Woo pres. — see below).
Other main political parties
The New Democratic Party (NDP, Kim Dae Jung pres., the main opposition coalition constructed around the socialist Party for Peace and Democracy (PPD)); Democratic Party (Lee Ki Taek pres., formed in 1990 by RDP members opposed to the creation of the DLP), Civil Rights Party (CRP, Kim Eui Taek pres.).
Elections
Amid allegations of fraud and electoral malpractice, Roh Tae Woo, candidate of the ruling DJP, was elected President on Dec. 16, 1987 [see pp. 35768-71].
In elections to the National Assembly on April 26, 1988, the DJP emerged as the largest single party but failed to retain an overall majority for the first time since its formation in 1981 [see pp. 36019-22].
1990-91 OVERVIEW
The year began with a remarkable realignment which transformed Korean politics and once again demonstrated Roh Tae Woo's political acumen and ability to wrong-foot the opposition.
In late January 1990 it was announced that the then ruling party, the Democratic Justice Party, was to merge with the Reunification Democratic Party (RDP) and the New Democratic Republican Party (NDRP), two of the country's three main opposition groups [see p. 37187].
The move not only split the opposition, but also eradicated Roh's problem of having failed to achieve an overall legislative majority in the 1988 elections.
It also expanded Roh's electoral power-base beyond the DJP's traditional heartland of North Kyongsang province and Taegu city.
The RDP, led by veteran opposition figure Kim Young Sam, had traditionally drawn the bulk of its support from South Kyongsang province (including Pusan), while the NDRP, led by Kim Jong Pil, had been based in the north and south Chungchong regions.
The only significant political grouping excluded from the new ruling coalition was the Party for Peace and Democracy (PPD), led by Kim Dae Jung, which drew its support mainly from Cholla province and the city of Kwangju, in the comparatively underdeveloped south-west of the country.
The new Democratic Liberal Party (DLP) was formally inaugurated at a joint convention in February 1990 [see pp. 37187-88; 37247-48], and held its own first convention in May [see pp. 37456-57].
The size and political diversity of the coalition, however, meant that it was subject to factional infighting which at times threatened its very existence.
In April Park Chul Un, Roh's nephew and a key presidential adviser, became involved in a major confrontation with Kim Young Sam over control of the accelerating process of rapprochement with the Soviet Union.
Although Park had been largely responsible for South Korea's successful drive to establish diplomatic links with the countries of eastern Europe, Kim had in March visited Moscow and appeared intent on becoming increasingly involved in the process.
In the resulting confrontation the threat of Kim withdrawing his former RDP members from the DLP was eventually sufficient to force Roh to side with him.
While Kim retained his position as DLP executive chairman (a position which he elevated above his co-chairman Kim Jong Pil and Park Tae Jun), Park Chul Un was removed from the Cabinet (although he was reappointed to the Cabinet in December as Minister for Sports and Youth).
There was further dispute later in the year over the issue of whether the country should retain its current presidential system of government or should adopt a prime ministerial system.
In May the three former party leaders within the DLP had signed a secret memorandum agreeing to begin moving towards the latter system during 1990.
The unpopularity of the planned change, however, led Kim Young Sam to reverse his position and exposed him to subsequent attack by DJP supporters within the ruling party, who leaked his role in the memorandum agreement to the press.
Kim denied charges of inconsistency, and characterized the dispute as a further attempt to discredit him.
The threat of his withdrawing from the coalition was again sufficient to rally the support of Roh, who was forced to join Kim in disowning the planned constitutional reform [see p. 37860].
Beneath the surface of the factional infighting lay the key issue of the choice of the DLP's candidate in the next presidential elections.
Kim Young Sam made no secret of his wish to be Roh's successor, although there were many within the party, particularly former DJP members, who vehemently opposed his succession.
The effect of the infighting, together with the government's unimpressive pace of democratic reform, meant that the ruling party's level of support dwindled throughout the year, a fact which was translated into several humiliating by-election losses [see p. 37375].
The DLP was also damaged by the resolute opposition of the PPD.
Kim Dae Jung had accused Roh of staging a constitutional coup by his merger with the opposition, and had characterized the DLP as no more than an attempt to provide a form of constitutional legitimacy for the government's increasing authoritarianism.
This claim was given credence by the DLP's use in July of its legislative majority to enact 26 bills in defiance of normal legislative procedure.
In addition to bills to restructure the military leadership and reorganize the broadcasting media, there was also a particularly sensitive measure to settle the level of compensation for those killed or injured in the government's brutal suppression of the 1980 Kwangju uprising.
The DLP's enactment of the package of legislation provoked fighting within the National Assembly and widespread street protests.
It also resulted in a boycott of the legislature by the PPD between July and November [see pp. 37609; 37714; 37779; 37860].
Opposition criticisms that the DLP was moving with insufficient speed to eradicate the legacy of South Korea's recent history of military rule were highlighted by a scandal in October which revealed that the Defence Security Command (DSC), the counter-intelligence unit of the armed forces, was continuing to conduct surveillance operations against a broad range of civilian figures including Kim Dae Jung.
The scandal led to the dismissal of the Defence Minister on Oct. 8 [see p. 37779].
Further scandals were revealed in February 1991, including the Suso housing scandal (a massive case of bribery) which led to a Cabinet reshuffle and a televised apology by Roh on behalf of his government [see pp. 38009-10].
However the government's position was bolstered by local elections, the first to be held in South Korea for 30 years, which took place in March 1991.
The DLP won 49 per cent of the seats compared with only 19 per cent won by the PPD and 32 per cent won by independents [see p. 38098].
Also in March Roh stated that "for the sake of the nation and its political development" he should be "the last president to come from the army" .
The statement was widely interpreted as applying specifically to his ambitious brother-in-law and former Superintendent at the Korean Military Academy, Kim Bok Dong.
The result of the local elections accelerated Kim Dae Jung's attempt to unite all elements of the anti-Roh opposition within a single party.
The PPD merged with the small Party for New Democratic Alliance in April, and became the New Democratic Party [see p. 38147].
Kim was also known to be holding talks with other opposition groups.
Popular unrest — second phase of local elections
In May 1990 South Korea experienced the worst popular unrest since Roh had become President as many thousands of students participated in street protests throughout the country.
The catalyst for the demonstrations was the beating to death of a student demonstrator by riot police.
As they developed, however, the protests came to incorporate demands for the resignation of Roh's government and merged with the traditional demonstrations commemorating the Kwangju uprising.
The protests were accompanied by at least eight cases of self-immolation, several of which resulted in deaths and were themselves the focus of further protests.
In a bid to defuse the protests Roh was eventually forced to replace the Prime Minister [see pp. 38177-78].
Although the protests continued into June, their size diminished.
Following an incident on June 3 in which Chung Won Shik, the new Prime Minister, was assaulted by students, the government began taking a tougher line with the protesters [see pp. 38291-91].
Unlike the protests of 1987 which had ended the Fifth Republic, the 1991 protests, although frequently large and violent, lacked support from the country's middle class.
This was illustrated during the second phase of the local elections, held in June 1991 to determine the composition of the country's larger metropolitan and provincial assemblies.
The DLP secured an impressive victory, winning 564 of the 866 seats at stake [see p. 38292].
The results, however, also confirmed the continuing regionalism at the heart of South Korean politics, with the DLP making no headway in the opposition-dominated south-west of the country.
Economy
The speed of South Korea's recent economic growth had been remarkable.
Annual gross national product (GNP) increased dramatically from US$60,500 million in 1980 to $237,900 million in 1990.
Per capita income grew from $1,592 to $5,200 during the same period.
This cycle of growth, which was based primarily upon exports, reached its peak in 1986-88, when the annual rate of growth was in excess of 12 per cent.
This figure fell to 6.7 per cent in 1989 as exports suffered from a less favourable exchange rate, from substantial increases in labour costs and from slower growth rates in South Korea's main trading partners.
During 1990 export levels were static or fell in many key categories, including electronics and textiles, leading to concerns about the overall state of the economy.
In March 1990 there was a wholesale dismissal of those Cabinet Ministers responsible for the economy [see p. 37319].
The new team moved the focus of economic policy away from the attempt to close the gap between rich and poor and returned to the pursuit of export-led high growth rates.
Although South Korea recorded a growth rate of 9.1 per cent in 1990, this was achieved largely through a boom in the construction industry manufactured by a government-backed residential building programme which aimed to construct 2,500,000 new housing units in 1988-92.
Increased levels of domestic consumption (including expenditure on luxury items), however, suggested that a more fundamental shift was under way whereby the dynamic of the South Korean economy was changing from one which was export-led to one based upon domestic demand.
Labour disputes declined during 1990; the number of strikes was only 25 per cent of that for the previous year.
Wages rose about 9 per cent, although inflationary pressure meant that average settlements would probably rise to 12 per cent in 1991.
Rising labour costs, together with the depreciation of the won, helped to increase inflation to its highest level since 1981, with consumer prices rising by some 10 per cent in 1990, and wholesale prices by 7 per cent.
Property prices continued to rise substantially faster than inflation, and there was evidence of increasing public resentment towards speculators.
The government attempted to address the problem with a complex package of restrictions designed to limit landholdings, particularly in the larger cities; property taxes and capital gains tax were raised, while windfall gains from development projects were subject to heavy levies.
Continuing weak enforcement, however, meant that the South Korea continued to have some of the lowest real property taxes in the world.
The agricultural sector continued to lag behind other areas of the economy.
During 1990 farmers mobilized considerable support against government plans to reduce restrictions on agricultural imports.
The overall trade deficit in 1990, according to preliminary figures, was US$4,730 million — the first overall deficit to have been recorded for five years.
It was attributed primarily to the decline in exports to Japan and to the increase in oil prices resulting from the Gulf crisis.
Overall exports grew by 4.2 per cent to $64,900 million while imports grew by 13.4 per cent to $69,710 million.
The country's current account, which had consistently recorded large surpluses since the mid-1980s, fell to a $2,100 million deficit in 1990, compared with a $5,100 million surplus in 1989.
In September 1990 the Cabinet finalized the budget for fiscal year 1991 at 27,182,500 million won (US$36,800 million).
This included 7,777,400 million won for defence spending, an increase of 12.9 per cent over the previous year.
Despite this increase, however, defence spending as a proportion of the budget as a whole amounted to 28.6 per cent in the 1991 budget compared with 30.4 per cent in 1990.
As a proportion of GNP, however, defence spending remained unchanged.
Foreign relations
The most striking successes of Roh's presidency were in the field of foreign relations, particularly his policy of establishing formal relations with communist regimes previously allied to North Korea.
Diplomatic relations were established in 1990 with Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, Romania, Mongolia and the Soviet Union [see p. 37714].
Roh met Soviet President Gorbachev in San Francisco in June 1990 [see p. 37533], and in December he visited the Soviet Union, the first such visit undertaken by a South Korean leader [see p. 37918].
In January 1991 the two countries negotiated a US$3,000 million assistance package involving a $1,500 million loan to finance the purchase of South Korean consumer goods and industrial products, $500 million tied to the purchase of South Korean capital goods, and $1,000 million in notionally untied loans.
In April Gorbachev made a brief visit to South Korea, the first Soviet leader to visit either Korean state [see p. 38147].
It was estimated that trade with the Soviet Union increased by almost 50 per cent in 1990 to $889 million.
South Korean exports, including electronic consumer goods, textiles and steel products, rose from $208 million in 1989 to $519 million in 1990.
Imports, including pig iron, coal, aluminium and frozen fish, fell slightly to $370 million.
Relations with China improved at a less dramatic pace, but in October 1990, after a South Korean team had participated in the Asian Games in Beijing, the two countries signed an unprecedented trade agreement, under which trade offices would be established in each country which would perform limited consular functions and would provide the basis for the eventual normalization of diplomatic relations [see p. 37779].
Trade with China rose by 22 per cent in 1990 to $3,850 million.
South Korea's principal exports to China — synthetic fabrics, leather, paper and raw materials — were outstripped by imports of bituminous coal, crude oil, petroleum products and cement, giving rise to a $688 million deficit.
Roh also visited Japan in May 1990 to mark the resolution of several outstanding issues between the two countries, including improvements in the position of the substantial number of Koreans resident in Japan, and the acknowledgment of Japanese remorse for the occupation of Korea between 1910 and 1945 [see p. 37457].
The then Japanese Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu made a reciprocal visit to South Korea in January 1991 [see p. 37960].
Owing to the won's steep depreciation against the yen, South Korea's trade deficit with Japan worsened in 1990 to its highest ever level, exceeding $5,000 million.
Relations with the United States, South Korea's main ally, also improved in early 1990 as the Roh government appeared to accept the proposed reduction (from 44,000 to 37,000 over two years) in the number of US troops stationed in South Korea.
After talks lasting a year, the government also agreed in June to bear the cost of relocating the main US army base from Seoul to a new site south of the city.
Trading relations between the two countries were considerably better than during the late 1980s, not least because US pressure had succeeded in opening some South Korean markets, causing the trade surplus with the USA to fall from $8,600 million in 1988 to $4,700 million in 1989.
The slow pace of liberalization measures, however, particularly in the agricultural and finance sectors, continued to be a source of irritation to the USA.
ASIA — PACIFIC
LAOS
Area: 236,800 sq km.
Population: 4,100,000 (1990 UNFPA est.).
Capital: Vientiane.
Languages: Lao or Laotian (official); French and tribal languages.
Religion: Buddhism; also Christianity and Animism.
Armed forces: 55,100 (1990).
Currency: new kip (US$1.00=699.201 new kip as at Sept. 30, 1991).
Major international affiliations: ADB; NAM.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The Lao People's Democratic Republic (LPDR) was proclaimed in December 1975 following the victory of the (communist) Lao Patriotic Front in a 25-year civil war.
A President and a Council of Ministers were installed, but effective political power has since been exercised by the leadership of the sole legal political organization, the Lao People's Revolutionary Party (LPRP).
A 79-member Supreme People's Assembly (SPA) was elected in 1989 with the primary aim of drafting a constitution.
The LPDR's first Constitution, published in June 1990, was eventually endorsed by the SPA in August 1991 [see pp. 37533; 38390].
Main government leaders
President: Kaysone Phomvihane.
Prime Minister: Gen. Khamtay Siphandon replaced Kaysone Phomvihane as Premier (Chair of the Council of Ministers) in mid-August 1991 [see p. 38390-91].
Other principal ministers: Sisomphone Lovansay (Vice-Premier); Gen. Phoune Sipaseuth (Vice-Premier; Foreign Affairs); Khamphoui Keoboualapha (Vice-Premier; Economics, Planning and Finance); Brig. -Gen.
Choummali Saignakong (National Defence); Asang Laoli (Interior); Col. Phao Bounnaphon (Commerce; Foreign Trade and Economic Relations).
Cabinet changes in 1990-91
Sali Vongkhamsao, Vice-Premier and Minister of Economy, Planning and Finance, died in January 1991 [see p. 37963].
The Council of Ministers was reshuffled in August, with the appointment of a new Prime Minister, a new Minister of National Defence and a replacement for Sali Vongkhamsao [see pp. 38390-91].
Ruling party
The Lao People's Revolutionary Party (LPRP) is the sole legal political party in Laos.
The LPRP held its fifth congress in March 1991 at which (i) a new central committee and politburo were elected;(ii) the secretariat was abolished; and (iii) Kaysone Phomvihane, hitherto party general secretary, was elected as "president of the party" [see p. 38150].
LPRP politburo: Kaysone Phomvihane, Nouhak Phoumsavan, Gen. Khamtay Siphandon, Gen. Phoune Sipaseuth, Maychantane Sengmany, Lt.-Gen.
Saman Vignaket, Oudom Khatti-gna, Brig. -Gen.
Choummali Saignakong, Somlak Chanthamat, Khamphoui Keoboualapha, Thongsing Thammavong.
Other parties
The LPRP is the sole legal political party.
Elections
The LPDR's first national, central-level, elections to the SPA were held in March 1989 [see p. 36523].
The SPA elected Kaysone Phomvihane to the post of President in August 1991 [see pp. 38390-91].
1990-91 OVERVIEW
The major political event of 1990-91 was the promulgation of the new Constitution, the first since the communist victory in 1975.
Ostensibly, efforts at drafting the constitution had been under way since the mid-1970s, but real progress had only become evident in mid-1990 when a first draft was published for discussion.
The final document provided for a powerful president and inevitably, shortly after the constitution had been promulgated, Kaysone Phomvihane was elected President.
He was replaced as Prime Minister by Gen. Khamtay Siphandon, hitherto Defence Minister.
The other major political event was the LPRP's fifth congress which took place in March 1991.
Kaysone, hitherto general secretary of the party, was elected as "party president" .
He remained firmly in control of the LPRP, and his powers were possibly increased by the abolition of the central committee secretariat.
The "old guard" revolutionaries who had struggled alongside Kaysone since the 1940s, including Souphanouvong and Phoumi Vongvichit, left the politburo and, probably, active politics.
Security
There was an upsurge in anti-government guerrilla activity in 1990.
In the north of the country guerrillas were particularly active during the first half of the year.
Guerrilla sources accused the government of carrying out indiscriminate air attacks in areas under their control.
In a report on the fighting on April 10, Lao National Radio stated that government forces had recently carried out two campaigns against "bad and vandalistic" elements in the north-western province of Bolikhamsai.
Much of the insurgent activity was believed to have been carried out by the United Lao National Liberation Front.
A new rebel radio station, the "Radio Station of the Government for the Liberation of the Lao Nation" , in late July began broadcasting criticism of Kaysone and the Lao government and calling on the Lao people to follow the examples set by the peoples of eastern Europe.
In October two former deputy ministers were arrested over an alleged coup plot; the two, along with a number of other top-level officials, had reportedly formed a pro-democracy grouping, the Social Democrat Group.
Economy
The government continued to implement the policy of radical economic reform initiated in 1987.
The aim was to shift from central planning towards a more market-based economy, and towards this end the government had (i) removed subsidies and price controls;(ii) introduced a foreign investment code;(iii) restructured the banking system; and (iv) initiated a privatization programme.
In June 1990 the country's first financial conference took place in Vientiane to evaluate the implementation and the future direction of the reform programme.
The IMF in April 1991 approved a loan of SDR8,790,000 under a 1989 structural adjustment facility agreement; commenting on the reform programme, the IMF stated that most of the elements of a market-based economic system were in place in Laos.
Foreign relations
The then Prime Minister of Thailand, Gen. Chatichai Choonhaven, visited Laos in November 1990 [see p. 37857].
The Thai Army commander, Gen. Suchinda Kraprayoon, visited in March 1991 and an agreement was reached to withdraw all troops of both countries from disputed border areas.
Laos and Thailand agreed on a plan under which Lao refugees living in Thailand would be repatriated or resettled by the end of 1994, and in August a security and co-operation agreement was signed [see p. 38391].
A decision taken by the United States in 1989 to withhold aid to Laos because of its failure to assist the USA in the suppression of drug trafficking was reversed in early 1990.
Throughout 1990 Laos continued to assist the USA in the search for US servicemen reported missing in action (MIA) during the Vietnam war.
In October Foreign Minister Gen. Phoune Sipaseuth met with US Secretary of State James Baker in New York, the highest-level meeting between the two countries since the communist victory of 1975.
Delegations from Laos and China held their first meeting in Vientiane in August 1990 to discuss the delineation of a permanent border between the two countries; at the close of the meeting a provisional border agreement was signed.
Technical border teams went on to meet in Vientiane in September, Beijing in November, Yunnan province (China) in January-February 1991 and Vientiane in August.
The Chinese Premier, Li Peng, visited Laos on Dec. 15-17, and held talks with all the main political leaders in Laos, including Kaysone Phomvihane, Phoumi Vongvichit and Nouhak Phoumsavan.
During the visit the two sides signed an agreement on economic and technical co-operation, under which China granted a long-term interest-free loan of 50,000,000 yuan (US$9,500,000) to Laos for "priority work in the improvement and construction of economic bases" .
Gen. Phoune Sipaseuth visited China in late April 1991 to attend celebrations of the 30th anniversary of the establishment of diplomatic ties between the two countries.
Lao and Chinese officials met with officials from the office of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) in Yunnan province in early July.
After the meeting, the delegates signed a memorandum on repatriating Lao refugees from China.
In February 1991 Laos signed an agreement with the Soviet Union under which future trade with the Soviet Union would be calculated at world market prices, with payment in hard currency.
In February 1991 Laos and Vietnam signed an agreement on exchange of goods and payments for the 1991-95 period, under which future trade transactions between the two countries would be settled in hard currency, rather than in Soviet roubles as hitherto.
The Far Eastern Economic Review of Feb. 28 estimated that two-way trade between the two countries in 1991 would total some US$14,000,000.
The then Foreign Minister of Japan, Taro Nakayama, visited Laos in August 1990 when he announced details of a major aid package [see p. 37656].
A Lao delegation led by Souban Salitthilat, Vice-Minister of Foreign Affairs, visited Myanma in August 1990 for border demarcation talks.
In December a Myanman delegation visited Laos; memorandums were signed on a future border survey and co-operation in the suppression of the narcotics trade.
A delegation from France visited Laos in September 1990 to discuss co-operation and financial assistance during 1990-91.
Later that month a ministerial delegation paid an official visit to France.
ASIA — PACIFIC
MACAO
Area: 17 sq km.
Population: 500,000 (1990 est.).
Capital: Macao City.
Languages: Portuguese and Cantonese (official); English widely spoken.
Religion: Roman Catholicism and Chinese Buddhism.
Armed forces: 3,000 (Comando de Forças de Segurança — Comforseg)(1990).
Currency: pataca (US$1.00=P7.996 as at Sept. 30, 1991).
POLITICAL SYSTEM
Macao is a Special Territory of Portugal.
It will revert to Chinese rule in 1999, the Chinese government having already, in 1988, established a Macao Special Administrative Region (SAR).
Under the terms of the Constitution (embodied in an organic statute of Portugal, promulgated in 1976 and revised in 1990) executive power is vested in the Governor except in foreign affairs, which are the responsibility of the President of Portugal.
The Governor (who is appointed by the President of Portugal) is assisted by as many as seven Under-Secretaries with executive powers, and presides over a Superior Council of Security and a Consultative Council.
The Legislative Assembly of Macao comprises 23 members, of whom seven are government appointees, eight are indirectly elected by business associations and eight are elected by direct universal suffrage.
Main government leaders
Head of State: Mário Soares (President of Portugal).
Governor: Gen. Vasco Rocha Vieira.
Under-Secretaries: Vitor Pessoa (Economic Affairs); Jose Manuel Machado (Public Works); Brig.
Lajes Ribeiro (Public Security); Macedo De Almeida (Justice); Salavessa Da Costa (Information Services, Tourism and Culture); Jorge Rangel (Education and Administration); Ana Maria Perez (Health and Social Affairs).
Changes of Under-Secretaries in 1990-91
A reshuffle of Under-Secretaries was carried out in early 1990.
In June the Under-Secretary for Justice, Manuel Magalhaes e Silva, resigned.
In May 1991 all seven Under-Secretaries were replaced.
Political parties
There are no formal political parties, but a number of civic organizations exist, including Pro-Macao, the Electoral Union and the Flower of Friendship and Development of Macao.
Elections
Elections to the Legislative Assembly were held in October 1988 [see p. 36765].
1990/91 OVERVIEW
Carlos Melancia resigned as Governor of Macao in September 1990 following allegations of corruption.
Melancia, who had been appointed to the post in mid-1987, had been implicated in a financial scandal in February 1990.
It was alleged that he had accepted money from a German company bidding for a contract for the construction of the new Macao airport.
Melancia, who resigned after being served with a summons in connection with the alleged bribery, denied all charges of corruption and maintained that he was the innocent victim of a politically motivated smear campaign.
A staunch ally of President Soares, he had been criticized by political opponents of Soares for his soft handling of relations with China.
In an attempt to counter such criticisms Melancia had, during a visit to Portugal in June 1990, launched an unprecedented attack against what he described as Chinese interference in the internal affairs of Macao.
Upon his resignation Melancia was replaced, in an acting capacity, by Francisco Murteira Nabo, the Under-Secretary for Economic Affairs.
In January 1991, on his re-election as President of Portugal, Soares appointed Gen. Vasco Rocha Vieira as the new Governor.
Soares had paid a visit to Macao two months before his re-election.
In March 1990 the Legislative Assembly had unanimously approved the final draft of the territory's revised Organic Law (Constitution).
The revisions granted Macao increased autonomy in advance of the transfer of power to China in 1999.
In July 1991 the Draft Basic Law of the Macao SAR, which was to become the territory's new Constitution in 1999, was published.
Like Hong Kong, Macao would retain its capitalist system after 1999 and would have a high degree of autonomy, except in foreign affairs and defence.
Budget and economy
In late 1989 the government launched a five-year plan aimed at diversifying Macao's economy and thereby reducing dependence on the textile industry and tourism.
The plan aimed to upgrade existing industries and to attract a number of new ones, such as financial services.
Major problems facing the diversification plan included a lack of infrastructure and a labour shortage.
However, efforts were well under way in 1990 to address the first problem, with the construction of an airport and a new industrial park.
Macao became a contracting party to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) in 1991 [see p. 37979].
ASIA — PACIFIC
MALAYSIA
Area: 329,758 sq km.
Population: 17,900,000 (1990 UNFPA est.).
Capital: Kuala Lumpur.
Languages: Bahasa Malaysia (official); English widely used, Chinese, Tamil and Iban spoken by minorities.
Religion: Islam (about 53%), Buddhism (about 19%), Hinduism, Christianity and Animism.
Armed forces: 129,500 (1990).
Currency: ringgit or Malaysian dollar (US$1.00=2.7318 ringgits as at Sept. 30, 1991).
Major international affiliations: ADB; APEC; ASEAN; ICO; NAM.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The Federation of Malaysia, consisting of the 11 states of Peninsular Malaysia and the two states of Sarawak and Sabah situated on the northern coast of the island of Kalimantan (Borneo), is a parliamentary monarchy.
A Supreme Head of State (Yang di-Pertuan Agong) is elected every five years from among their own number by the nine hereditary Malay rulers of Peninsular Malaysia.
The Yang di-Pertuan Agong appoints a Cabinet headed by a Prime Minister.
Malaysia has a federal form of government, with a bicameral legislature, residual legislative powers resting with the states legislative assemblies.
Parliament (Parlimen) consists of (i) a 69-member Senate (Dewan Negara), serving a six-year term, two members of which are elected by the Legislative Assembly of each of the states, the remaining 43 members being nominated by the Yang di-Pertuan Agong; and (ii) a 180-member House of Representatives (Dewan Rakyat) elected for a five-year term by universal adult suffrage by simple majority in single-member constituencies.
Main government leaders
Supreme Head of State: Sultan Azlan Muhibbuddin Shah.
Prime Minister: Mahathir Mohamed (also Minister of Home Affairs).
Other principal ministers: Ghafar Baba (Deputy Prime Minister; National and Rural Development); Anwar Ibrahim (Finance); Abdullah Ahmad Badawi (Foreign Affairs); Najib Tun Razak (Defence); Rafidah Aziz (International Trade and Industry); Ling Liong Sik (Transport); Sanusi Junid (Agriculture); S. Samy Vellu (Energy; Telecommunications and Posts).
Cabinet changes in 1990-91
Mahathir appointed a new Cabinet in late October 1990 following the general election [see p. 37861].
He reshuffled the Cabinet in February 1991 [see p. 38011].
Ruling coalition
Malaysia is governed by the multiracial National Front coalition (Barisan Nasional — BN, Ghafar Babar sec. -gen.).
The principal party within the BN is the United Malays National Organization (UMNO Baru, Mahathir Mohamed pres.).
The other members of the BN are: Angkatan Keadilan Rakyat (AKAR — People's Justice Movement, Mark Koding l.);
Gerakan Rakyat Malaysia (GERAKAN, Lim Keng Yaik pres.);
Liberal Democratic Party (LDP); Malaysian Chinese Association (MCA, Ling Liong Sik pres.);
Malaysian Indian Congress (MIC, S. Samy Vellu pres.);
Parti Bansa Dayak Sarawak (PBDS, Leo Moggie Anak Irok pres.);
Parti Pesaka Bumiputra Bersatu (PBB, Abdul Taib Mahmud pres.);
People's Progressive Party of Malaysia (PPP, Mak Hon Kam pres.);
Sarawak National Action Party (SNAP, Amar James Wong Kim Min pres.);
Sarawak United People's Party (SUPP, Wong Soon Kai pres.);
United Sabah National Organization (USNO, Sakaran Bin Dandai pres.); the Sabah-based AKAR and LDP were admitted to the BN in July 1991 [see p. 38344].
Other parties
The Angkatan Perpaduan Ummah (APU) is an opposition coalition consisting of the following four parties: Barisan Jama'ah Islamiah Se Malaysia (Berjasa, Wan Hashim Bin Haji Wan Achmed pres.);
Parti Hisbul Muslimin Malaysia (Hamim, Asri Muda pres.);
Parti Islam Se Malaysia (PAS, Fadzil Nor pres.);
Semangat"46 (Razaleigh Hamzah pres.).
Other opposition parties include the Democratic Action Party (DAP, Lim Kit Siang sec. -gen.) and the former BN member Parti Bersatu Sabah (PBS, Joseph Pairin Kitingan pres.).
Elections
Azlan Shah was elected Supreme Head of State in March 1989.
Elections to the House of Representatives were held in October 1990.
At the same time elections were also held for all state legislative assemblies, except those of Sabah and Sarawak (where elections were held in July 1990 and April 1987 respectively).
Elections to the Sabah State Assembly had been held in July 1990.
A series of by-elections were held in May 1991.
State Ruling party Chief Minister or Menteri Besar Johore BN Muhyiddin Yassin Kedah BN Osman Aroff Kelantan APU Nik Abdul Aziz Nik Mat Malacca BN Abdul Rahmin bin Thamby Chik Negri Sembilan BN Mohammed Isa bin Abdul Samad Pahang BN Khalil Yaacob Penang BN Koh Tsu Koon Perak BN Ramli Ngah bin Talib Perlis BN Abdul Hamid Pawanteh Sabah PBS Joseph Pairin Kitangan Sarawak BN Abdul Taib Mahmoud Selangor BN Mohammed bin Mohammed Taib Trengganu BN Wan Mokhtar bin Ahmad 
State details
1990/91 OVERVIEW
The ruling BN coalition was returned to office in elections held in October 1990 with a reduced majority.
The elections were a major test for Mahathir's government, since for the first time the UMNO-dominated coalition faced a cohesive, multiracial coalition of opposition parties.
The opposition, grouped into an informal electoral alliance, the Gagasan Rakyat (People's Might), was led by one-time Mahathir ally Razaleigh Hamzah, leader of the UMNO offshoot Semangat"46.
The loose alliance also included the predominantly Chinese DAP and the PAS.
The PBS, a BN component since 1986, switched its allegiance to the opposition a matter of days before the election.
In the event the opposition's share of the seats increased from 37 to 53, but Semangat"46 won only eight seats, compared with the 12 it had held before the election.
Elections were also held to all 11 peninsular state assemblies; the BN formed governments in all the states except Kelantan where the APU coalition won all 39 seats.
Following his success at the elections Mahathir was unanimously re-elected UMNO president at the party's general assembly in November-December.
The assembly was the first to be held since 1987 when Mahathir narrowly survived a leadership challenge from Razaleigh, a contest which subsequently led to a split within UMNO.
In February 1991 Mahathir was forced to reshuffle his Cabinet after the Finance Minister, Daim Zainuddin, resigned from politics.
Daim was replaced by Anwar Ibrahim, who was widely regarded as Mahathir's political heir.
Events in Sabah
In July 1990 the then BN-affiliated PBS, led by Kitangan, won a clear majority of seats in elections to the Sabah State Assembly.
The only other party to win any seats was the predominantly Moslem USNO, another BN member and the chief opponent to the PBS in the Sabah Assembly.
After the elections charges were levelled that the federal government had intervened secretly on behalf of USNO in an attempt to undermine Kitangan.
Shortly before the elections the federal government had released details of an alleged plot to take Sabah out of the Federation.
Kitangan denied that any such plot existed, but four people, including one of his close associates, were placed in detention under the Internal Security Act.
Relations between the state government and the federal government worsened in October when Kitangan pulled the PBS out of the BN only five days before the general election.
In what was widely regarded as a politically motivated action Kitangan was arrested in January 1991 and charged with corruption.
He was released on bail but other members of his staff, including his brother Jeffrey Kitangan, were detained under the National Security Act under suspicion of harbouring anti-federalist designs.
In May Jeffrey Kitangan was again arrested on charges of involvement in a plot to pull Sabah out of Malaysia.
That month UMNO won a seat in the Sabah state assembly for the first time, defeating the PBS in a by-election.
Budget and economy
According to the government's economic report for 1990, the economy registered a 9.4 per cent growth in gross domestic product (GDP) as compared with 8.8 per cent in 1989.
Private investment and exports grew, while unemployment continued to fall.
The only negative aspect highlighted by the report was an increased deficit in the current account of the balance of payments; however the overall balance of payments was expected to remain positive because of large capital inflows.
The government predicted a growth rate of 7.8 per cent in 1991.
In June 1991 Mahathir announced details of a national policy initiative to replace the New Economic Policy (NEP) which had operated from 1971 to 1990.
The so-called New Development Policy (NDP) was devised to provide a theoretical framework for the Second Outline Perspective Plan (OPP2) for 1991-2000, the first phase of Mahathir's plan to build Malaysia into a fully developed state by 2020.
In July Mahathir revealed details of the Sixth Malaysia Plan (SMP), the first of the decade's two more detailed economic plans [for details of NDP, OPP2 and SMP see pp. 38100; 38293; 38344].
1990 1991 Total revenue 27,219 30,246 Tax revenue 19,835 21,776 Indirect taxes 10,042 10,337 Non-tax revenue 7,384 8,470 Total expenditure 25,993 29,040 Defence 2,288 2,500 Education 4,809 5,685 Health 1,335 1,467 Agricultural and rural development 1,012 1,118 General administration 2,516 2,828 Other purposes 14,033 15,442
1990 and 1991 budgets (million ringgits)
ASIA — PACIFIC
MALDIVES
Area: 298 sq km.Population: 214,139 (1990 census).
Capital: Male.
Language: Dhivehi (Maldivian).
Religion: Islam (Sunni majority).
Armed forces: 1,500 (1990).
Currency: rufiyaa (US$1.00=Rf10.1634 as at Sept. 30, 1991).
Major international affiliations: ADB; ICO; NAM; SAARC.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The Republic of Maldives, under British protection with internal self-government since 1887, first became fully independent as a sultanate outside the Commonwealth in 1965.
It became a republic for a second time in 1968 and a full member of the Commonwealth in 1985.
It has an executive President elected for a five-year term by universal adult suffrage, a Cabinet appointed and presided over by the President.
There is a 48-member Citizens' Assembly (Majlis), 40 of whose members are elected for a five-year term; the remaining eight are appointed by the President.
Main government leaders
President: Maumoun Abdul Gayoom (also Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces and Minister of Defence, National Security and Finance).
Other principal ministers: Fathulla Jameel (Foreign Affairs); Ahmed Mujuthaba (Trade and Industries); Umar Zahir (Home Affairs; Sports); Abbas Ibrahim (Fisheries and Agriculture).
Cabinet changes in 1990-91
President Gayoom carried out a Cabinet reshuffle on May 30, 1990.
Mujuthaba, hitherto Minister of Tourism, replaced Illyas Ibrahim (who had fled the country — see below) as Minister of Trade and Industry.
Ismail Shafeeu was appointed as the new Minister of Tourism.
Abbas Ibrahim (Illyas Ibrahim's brother and Gayoom's brother-in-law) was moved to Agriculture and Fisheries from Transport and Shipping, the latter post remaining vacant.
Gayoom's brother, Abdulla Hameed changed portfolio from Atolls Administration to Education.
Ruling party
There are no political parties.
Elections
Gayoom was re-elected President for a third term in 1988 [see p. 36350].
Elections to the Majlis were held on Nov. 24, 1989.
1990/91 OVERVIEW
The major political event of 1990 occurred in May when Illyas Ibrahim, Minister of Trade and Industry, Deputy Defence Minister and head of the National Security Service, fled the country.
Ibrahim was widely regarded as the second most powerful man in the Maldives, after his brother-in-law, President Gayoom.
Accusations of corruption had been levelled against Ibrahim for a number of years, and in May President Gayoom yielded to demands that the State Trading Organization (STO), which was under Ibrahim's control, be investigated for evidence of corruption.
At the end of the month, and before the investigation began, Ibrahim went first to Sri Lanka and then to Europe.
In August he returned to the Maldives, saying that he was willing to answer questions about the affairs of the STO.
In late July 1990 President Gayoom announced that he had pardoned Ibrahim Nasir, his predecessor as President, who had fled the country in 1978 and had subsequently been charged with corruption.
Economic indicators
Government expenditure (1989) US$71,000,000
Government revenue (1989) US$45,000,000
Current-account balance (1990 forecast) US$3,600,000
Merchandise exports (1988) US$44,600,000
Merchandise imports (1988) US$94,500,000
Tourism receipts (1988) US$37,800,000
Source: Far Eastern Economic Review Yearbook, 1991.
Foreign Relations
The Maldives signed two economic agreements with China on Feb. 20.
Under the terms of the agreements China would provide the Maldives with an interest-free loan of 5,000,000 yuan (US$1,100,000) and a grant of 5,000,000 yuan for implementing projects during the period 1990-95.
President Gayoom, accompanied by Foreign Minister Jameel, visited India in mid-March 1990 and in January 1991.
ASIA — PACIFIC
MONGOLIA
Area: 1,565,000 sq km.
Population: 2,200,000 (1990 UNFPA est.).
Capital: Ulan Bator.
Languages: Khalkha Mongolian; Kazakh.
Religion: no state religion; Buddhist Lamaism and Shamanism; 4% Moslem.
Armed forces: 21,500 (1990).
Currency: tugrik (US$1.00=41.952 tugriks as at Sept. 30, 1991).
Major international affiliations: ADB, NAM.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The People's Republic of Mongolia has been a multiparty democracy since July 1990.
The bicameral legislature comprises a parliament, the 53-seat State Little Hural, which deals with economic matters and government, and an upper house, the 430-member People's Great Hural, responsible for fundamental issues in domestic and foreign policy.
The Great Hural is elected nationally and in turn elects the 50 members of the Little Hural where parties are represented in proportion to the election results.
Three-quarters of the Little Hural deputies must also be members of the Great Hural.
The President, who is head of state, is elected by the Great Hural.
A new constitution is under discussion, proposals for which were made in June 1991 [see p. 38290].
Main government leaders
President: Punsalmaagiyn Ochirbat.
Prime Minister: Dashiyn Byambasuren.
Other principal ministers: Radnaasumbereliyn Gonchigdorj (Vice-President; Chair of Little Hural); Davaadorjiyn Ganbold (Vice-Prime Minister); Tserenpilyn Gombosuren (Foreign Relations).
Changes to Council of Ministers to November 1991
Seven ministries and three state committees were abolished (some being then reorganized) in April 1990 [see p. 37374].
Choyjamtsyn Badamhaamb was appointed Minister of Labour in the newly created ministry in August [see p. 37656].
Byambasuren was on Sept. 11 elected Prime Minister — a post which replaced that of Chair of the Council of Ministers hitherto held by Sharavyn Gungaadorj [see p. 37713].
The full composition of the Cabinet, replacing the Council of Ministers, was finally confirmed on Nov. 12 [see p. 37777].
Ruling parties
The Mongolian People's Revolutionary Party (MPRP, Budragchaagyn Dash-Yondon l.) in coalition with the Mongolian Democratic Party (MDP, Erdenijn Bat-Uul l.), the Mongolian National Progress Party (MNPP, Dagvasurengiyn Ganbold l.); and the Mongolian Social Democratic Party (MSDP, Radnaasumbereliyn Batbayar l.).
Other parties
Mongolian Revolutionary Youth League (pro-MPRP); Mongolian Party of Free Labour (MPFL, Hoovdzayn Maam l.);
Mongolian Party of Greens (MPG, Davaagiyn Basanjorj l.);
Mongolian Religious Democratic Party (MRDP, Tserengiyn Bayarsuren l.);
Party of Mongolian Herdsmen and Farmers (PMHF, unregistered).
Elections
Following political reforms in May 1990 which abolished the leading role of the MPRP, multiparty elections were held for the first time in July 1990, to the Little and Great Hurals, and to local Hurals in the 18 provinces and three municipalities [see pp. 37609-10; p. 37656].
In the Great Hural, the MPRP held 357 seats, the MDP 16, the MNPP six and the MSDP four; there were 39 members without party affiliations.
In the Little Hural the MPRP held 31 seats, the MDP 13, the MNPP three and the MSDP three.
1990/91 OVERVIEW
After the July 1990 elections the state structure was changed to re-establish a standing parliament (the Little Hural had been abolished in 1950).
On Sept. 30 Ochirbat was elected as the country's first President [see p. 37713], and the Council of Ministers was replaced with a 15-member all-party Cabinet, confirmed in November [see p. 37777].
On Sept. 29 President Ochirbat appointed two advisory institutions: a 23-member Civil Council, led by former Prime Minister, Sharavyn Gungaadorj, and a 24-member Scholarly Council, led by an economist, Budsuren Tumen [see p. 37778].
After the elections the MPRP lost much of its remaining influence.
Privileges granted to senior party members had been removed in June 1990 and its state subsidy removed in July.
The opposition umbrella organization, the Mongolian Democratic Union (MDU), established links with the parties in eastern Europe which had forced political change there (such as Poland's Solidarity).
Membership of political parties was banned for senior state officials in August 1991, which effectively removed much of the influence of the MPRP [see p. 38437].
Attitudes independent of the Soviet Union were expressed by the encouragement during 1990-91 of Mongolian culture.
On June 4, 1990, it was announced that the vertical script would be reintroduced in schools, alongside the Cyrillic script which had been introduced in 1946.
Streets in Ulan Bator were renamed to commemorate Mongolian rather than Soviet history and heroes.
A decree signed on Dec. 23 removed religious affairs from government jurisdiction and promised government help for the repair of some monasteries, of which only four had remained after the purges of monks in the 1930s and 1940s.
The reorganization of the armed forces, which began in 1989, was reported to have been completed in August 1991.
Troop numbers had been reduced to 1986 levels, and there would be no recruitment in 1991.
The crime rate was reported on July 6, 1990, to have risen by 11.9 per cent over the previous year, and on Oct. 25, 1991, to have risen by 10.9 per cent in the first nine months of 1991 over the same period in 1990.
Economy
Industrial output fell by 3.9 per cent in the first half of 1991, compared with the same period in 1990 [for economic performance figures for 1990 see p. 37960].
National revenue was down by 35.1 per cent and expenditure rose by 33.1 per cent.
Foreign trade fell by 62.9 per cent to US$328,000,000.
The start of Mongolia's move to a market economy was marked in January 1991 by partial freeing of prices and doubling of wages and benefits.
The 1991 budget was cut in July by 30 per cent[see p. 38341].
Legislation on privatization was passed in May [see p. 38190], but by late 1991 it was clear that large-scale foreign assistance would be needed to prevent hardship as Mongolia attempted to develop a market economy.
Rationing of basic foodstuffs was introduced in January 1991 [see p. 37960]and rationing of meat in May [see p. 38190].
In 1990, trade with Asia and the West accounted for about 5 per cent(approximately US$120,000,000) of Mongolia's total trade.
Trade with the Soviet Union reached US$2,000 million, but was shrinking because of the withdrawal of Soviet aid and the transfer of trade to a hard-currency basis.
Sino-Mongolian trade rose, however, in January-March 1991 by 43 per cent as compared with the same period in 1990 to reach US$10,000,000.
Chinese port facilities near Tianjin were made available to Mongolia after a visit by China's President, Yang Shangkun, in August 1991.
This would relieve pressure on the Soviet port of Nakhodka, the most frequently used route for Mongolian exports.
There were negotiations with China to supply oil to Mongolia to supplement the reduced Soviet deliveries.
In 1992, following legislation passed in February 1991 to allow foreign companies to exploit Mongolian oil reserves [see p. 38009], 10 oil prospecting concessions of 40,000 sq km each would be sold to foreign companies.
Foreigners were allowed 100 per cent ownership of enterprises and certain tax exemptions under a foreign investment law passed in 1990, and by September 1991 43 joint enterprises had been set up.
Unemployment was officially put at 22,000 in March 1991, but could be as high as 100,000 (14 per cent of the workforce) according to unofficial sources.
Foreign relations
During 1990-91 Mongolia continued to expand contacts with the industrialized world as well as to develop its relationship with China.
United States Secretary of State James Baker paid a visit (curtailed by Iraq's invasion of Kuwait which began the Gulf crisis) to Mongolia in August 1990 [see p. 37656], and in January 1991 Ochirbat became the first Mongolian head of state to visit the USA [see p. 37960].
This exchange resulted in the signing of trade agreements and in US aid to Mongolia.
Relations with Japan were also extended, with Toshiki Kaifu"s visit in August 1991, the first by a Japanese Prime Minister [see p. 38396], and a conference on aid to Mongolia held in Japan in September [see p. 38437].
In March 1991 30 Mongolian government officials visited South Korea to study the economy and discuss co-operation.
Ochirbat's visit to Seoul in October resulted in a South Korean soft loan to Mongolia of US$10,000,000.
On Oct. 4, when Mongolia established formal diplomatic relations with Israel, it was announced that Mongolia had diplomatic ties with some 108 countries.
Ochirbat visited China in May 1990 [see p. 37454], and co-operation agreements in the educational and legal fields were signed on Nov. 26 and on July 4, 1991; an agreement was signed on June 24 to increase to eight the border crossings between China and Mongolia from the hitherto sole crossing at Erenhot in the Chinese province of Inner Mongolia.
The first visit of a delegation from the Chinese PLA (People's Liberation Army) since 1961 took place in September 1991, and in a further sign of improving relations, Defence Minister Lt.-Gen.
Shagalyn Jadambaa visited China in April 1991.
However, Mongolian students staged a protest outside the Chinese embassy in Ulan Bator on June 4, 1990, to commemorate the crushing of the Chinese democracy movement in June 1989 [see pp. 36720-22], and there were further student protests in October over the issue of political prisoners in Inner Mongolia.
Contacts with China increased in 1990-91.
On Sept. 4, 1991, Mongolia became a member of the Non-aligned Movement [see p. 38458].
Kyodo News Agency had reported Mongolia as preparing to shift to a policy of armed neutrality.
The Soviet Union and Mongolia agreed in November 1990 to review all treaties signed between them since 1921, since many were now obsolete.
The difficulties in the relationship with the Soviet Union centred on repayment of Mongolia's debt, which the Soviet Union claimed stood at 9,700 million roubles, payable in hard currency.
(All Mongolian-Soviet trade went over to hard currency and world prices from January 1991, following talks in November 1990.)
It was reported that basic agreement on the settlement of the debt was reached in February 1991 [see p. 38009], with capital repayment postponed for 10 years, but with interest payments in 1991-95.
Most Soviet advisers (who had totalled 40,000) left Ulan Bator during 1991.
The second stage of Soviet troop withdrawals began in May 1990 [see p. 37454]; by June, 82 per cent of the 27,000 concerned were reported to have left (more than scheduled), and the remainder would leave by 1992.
ASIA — PACIFIC
MYANMA (BURMA)
Area: 676,552 sq km.
Population: 41,700,000 (1990 UNFPA est.).
Capital: Yangon (Rangoon).
Languages: Burmese (official); tribal languages.
Religion: Buddhism (85%); Animism, Islam, Hinduism and Christianity.
Armed forces: 230,000 (1990).
Currency: kyat (US1.00=6.0398 kyats as at Sept. 30, 1991).
Major international affiliations: ADB.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
Following the military coup of September 1988 all state organs and institutions were abolished by the ruling junta, the State Law and Order Restoration Council (SLORC), and the country was placed under martial law.
A Constituent Assembly was elected in May 1990 but the military authorities have effectively prevented it from convening.
Main government leaders
Gen. Saw Maung has served as Chair of the ruling State Law and Order Restoration Council since September 1988.
He also holds the posts of Prime Minister and Defence Minister.
Other powerful political personalities include Ne Win, the ageing "strongman" who stepped down from all his posts in 1988, and Ne Win's protegé, Brig. -Gen.
Khin Nyunt, head of the powerful Directorate of Defence Services Intelligence and First Secretary of SLORC.
Prime Minister: Gen. Saw Maung.
Other principal ministers: U Ohn Gyaw (Foreign Affairs); Brig. -Gen David Abel (Trade; Planning and Finance); Maj.-Gen.
Phone Myint (Home and Religious Affairs; Information and Culture).
Cabinet changes January 1990-July 1991
No cabinet changes.
Ruling party
No ruling party.
Political parties
Following the military coup in September 1988 SLORC announced that political parties would be allowed to function.
By early 1989 over 230 parties had registered and a total of 93 parties contested the May 1990 elections.
The main opposition party is the National League for Democracy (U Aung Shwe ch., U Lwin gen. sec. — see below for removal of previous leaders) which won 392 out of 485 seats in the May 1990 elections.
Other parties which won seats in the election (number of seats in parenthesis) were: Shan Nationalities League for Democracy (23); Rakhine Democracy League (11); National Unity Party (10 — formerly the ruling Burma Socialist Programme Party, U Tha Kyaw ch., U Tun Yi gen. sec., U Than Tin gen. sec.);
Mon National Democratic Front (5); National Democratic Party for Human Rights (4); Chin National League for Democracy (3); Kachin State National Congress for Democracy (3); Party for National Democracy (3); United Paoh National Organization (3).
In the aftermath of the elections the SLORC de-registered a number of parties, including the Party for National Democracy (Sein Win l.); the Anti-Fascist People's Freedom League (Bo Kyaw Nyunt ch., Cho Cho Kyaw Nyein gen. sec.); the League for Democracy and Peace (U Nu l., U Thein Sein gen. sec.); the United League of Democratic Parties; the National Politics Front for Youth; and the Patriotic Democratic Youth front.
Elections
Elections to a Constituent Assembly in May 1990 resulted in victory for the opposition National League for Democracy.
The SLORC subsequently prevented the Assembly from convening.
Guerrilla groups
The National Democratic Front (NDF, Saw Maw Reh pres., Nor Mong Onn vice-pres., Tu Ja sec. -gen.) is the 11-member umbrella group co-ordinating the rebel effort for national self-determination.
In 1988 the NDF created the Democratic Alliance of Burma (DAB) which incorporated a further 11 dissident groups, including students, monks and expatriates.
The NDF is divided into three regional commands.
Southern command:(i) Arakan Liberation Party (ALP, Maj. Khaing Ye Khaing ch., military wing — Arakan Liberation Army (ALA) Maj. Khaing Ye Khaing, c/s.);(ii) Karen National Union (KNU, Ba Thin sec. -gen.; military wing — Karen National Liberation Army (KNLA) Maj.-Gen.
Bo Mya, pres. and c/s.);(iii) New Mon State Party (NMSP, Nai Nol Lar pres.; military wing — Mon National Liberation Army (MNLA) Nai Nol Lar c/s.);(iv) Lahu National Army.
Central command:(i) Karenni National Progressive Party (KNPP, Bya Reh ch.; military wing — Karenni Revolutionary Army (KRA) Brig. -Gen.
Bee Htoo c/s);(ii) Pa-O National Organization (PNO), Aung Kham Hti ch., military wing — Pa-O National Army (PNA) Col. Htoon Yi c/s.);(iii) Wa National Organization (WNO, Ai Chau Hseu ch.; military wing — Wa National Army (WNA), Ai Chau Hseu c/s.);(iv) Chin National Front (CNF).
Northern command:(i) Kachin Independence Organization (KIO, Brang Seng ch.; military wing — Kachin Independence Army (KIA), Maj.-Gen.
Zau Mai, c/s.);(ii) Shan State Progress Party (SSPP, Col. Sai Lak gen. sec., military wing — Shan State Army (SSA), Lt.-Col. Gaw Lin Da c/s.);(iii) Palaung State Liberation Organization (PSLO, Khrus Sangai ch.; military wing — Palaung State Liberation Army (PSLA), Maj. Ai Mong c/s.).
The principal guerrilla group outside the NDF is the Communist Party of Burma (CPB, Ba Thein Tin ch.).
The military strength of the CPB was seriously diminished in 1989 following a mutiny by Wa tribesmen, who constituted an estimated 80 per cent of the CPB's membership.
The party's leaders fled into exile in China, while the leaders of the mutiny entered into discussions with the government.
Various private armies exist, mainly funded by illegal drug production and trafficking, most notably the Mong Tai Army (formerly the Shan United Army) led by "narcotics warlord" Khun Sa (Chang Shee Fu).
1990/91 OVERVIEW
SLORC, the military junta which had assumed power at the height of 1988's political unrest, allowed a general election to take place in May 1990 for a Constituent Assembly which would be charged with drafting a new constitution.
Before the election commentators predicted that the military would interfere in the polling process to ensure victory for the National Unity Party (NUP), the descendant of the former ruling Burma Socialist Programme Party.
In the event, the election was considered to have been free and orderly because the party most openly opposed to military rule, the National League for Democracy (NLD), won some 80 per cent of seats in the new Assembly.
Despite the NLD's overwhelming victory, the military refused to sanction a transfer of power to a civilian government.
Throughout 1990 and the first half of 1991 the SLORC had imposed a series of legal restrictions on the NLD and other opponents which effectively frustrated their political ambitions.
Decree 1/90, issued in July 1990, formally stated that the SLORC would continue as the de facto government until a new constitution (to be drawn up by the SLORC) was submitted to a referendum.
In late 1990 the SLORC initiated a major crackdown against opposition activities in order to force all parties to pledge allegiance to the decree [see p. 37857].
In April 1991 Lt.-Gen.
Than Shwe, the SLORC Vice-Chair, officially announced that the SLORC would not transfer power to the Assembly elected in May 1990, on the grounds that the parties involved were "unfit to rule" .
Also in April 1991 the two main opposition leaders, Aung San Suu Kyi and Gen. (retd) Tin U (respectively general secretary and chair of the NLD) were removed from the party; the two had been detained by the military since mid-1989.
As of July 1991 over 80 Assembly members, mostly from the NLD, had died, been imprisoned or had fled the country.
The SLORC frequently resorted to violence and terror to subdue its opponents.
In August 1990 two Buddhist monks were shot dead by soldiers at an anti-government demonstration in Mandalay.
In September soldiers opened fire on political prisoners who had gone on hunger strike in Insein prison (Yangon); four were killed and many others were injured.
Nevertheless, protest continued.
A "parallel government" (the National Coalition Government of the Union of Burma), formed on the border with Thailand in December contained members elected to the Constituent Assembly, representatives of ethnic rebel groups, student dissidents and monks [see pp. 37655; 37711; 37915-16].
Security
Government forces made some progress during 1990 in their long struggle against ethnic insurgents operating on the country's periphery.
The NDF's southern command suffered serious defeats, with the KNLA and the MNLA both being dislodged from their heartlands during dry-season offensives.
In the north the KIA remained effective, but previously CPB-controlled areas along the border with China came under government control.
In January 1991 the state radio reported serious clashes between government troops and guerrillas of the KNLA, MNLA and KIA [see p. 37963].
In April government forces used fighter bombers to attack guerrillas along the Thai border after rebels had launched an attack on troops based in Phaw Hta [see p. 38151].
That month the government claimed to have signed a peace agreement with the PNO (of the NDF's central command).
Economy
Official provisional statistics registered a 7.4 per cent growth in gross domestic product (GDP) in 1989/90, compared with a negative growth rate of 11.4 per cent in fiscal 1988/89.
In late 1990 the country's foreign debt was estimated at over US$5,000 million.
The revised budget for 1989/90 showed a deficit of 1,367 million kyats, compared with the planned surplus of 7,000,000 kyats.
The planned 1990/91 deficit was 4,624 million kyats, but commentators estimated that, with little foreign aid to offset increased spending, it could amount to over 15,000 million kyats, or some 14 per cent of GDP.
Inflation was a serious problem during 1990, reaching as high as 70 per cent according to some estimates.
A number of factors contributed to the high inflation rate, including increased government expenditure, the disappointing performance of the private sector and the poor state of the country's infrastructure.
The SLORC did manage to attract some foreign investment during 1990, mainly in the oil and gas industries and in timber and mineral extraction.
However, foreign investment was seriously impeded by the unrealistic exchange rate; the official rate remained at US$1.00=6.5 kyats throughout the year, while the black market rate fluctuated between 50 and 75 kyats to the dollar.
The absence of foreign banks also hampered foreign investment.
In an attempt to remedy this the SLORC introduced new banking laws in July 1990 which allowed foreign banks to open branches in Myanma.
Foreign relations
The SLORC's refusal to hand over power to the NLD in May 1990 was harshly criticized by many states, including the United States, Japan and the members of the European Communities.
As a result, the country received little in the way of bilateral aid from these countries and various forms of trade sanction were imposed.
However, relations with China remained close, as did those with neighbouring Thailand and with BO>Singapore.
In late 1990 Myanma reportedly agreed to purchase arms worth some US$1,000 million from China.
India, Myanma's other large neighbour, maintained a critical attitude towards the SLORC.
ASIA — PACIFIC
NEPAL
Area: 147,181 sq km.
Population: 19,100,000 (1990 UNFPA est.).
Capital: Kathmandu.
Languages: Nepali (official); Maithir and Bhojpuri.
Religion: Hinduism (majority); Buddhism and Islam.
Armed forces: 35,000 (1990).
Currency: nepalese rupee (US$1.00=Nrs42.7512 as at Sept. 30, 1991).
Major international affiliations: ADB; NAM; SAARC.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
Under the provisions of the 1990 Constitution, Nepal is a constitutional monarchy, with a bicameral legislature, comprising a 205-member House of Representatives (Pratinidhi Sabha), elected on the basis of adult franchise, and a 60-member National Council (Rashtriya Sabha), 10 of whom are nominees of the King, 35 (including three women) are elected by the House of Representatives, and 15 are elected by an electoral college.
The King is described in the Constitution as "the symbol of Nepalese nationality and of the unity of the people of Nepal" .
Main government leaders
Head of state: King Birendra Bir Bikram Shah Deva succeeded to the throne in 1972.
Prime Minister: Girja Prasad Koirala (also Minister of Defence, Foreign Affairs and Royal Palace Affairs).
Other principal ministers: Mahesh Acharya (Finance); Sher Bahadur Deupan (Home Affairs); Gopal Man Shrestha (Commerce); Tara Nath Bhatt (Law and Justice; Parliamentary Affairs).
Cabinet changes in 1990-91
Numerous Cabinet changes occurred at the height of the political unrest in Nepal in late March and April 1990 [see p. 37362].
On April 6 King Birendra dismissed the Prime Minister, Marich Man Singh Shrestha, and appointed in his place Lokendra Bahadur Chand, who resigned on April 16 to be replaced by the Nepali Congress Party president, Krishna Prasad Bhattarai; a new government was sworn in three days later.
After the general election of May 12, 1991, Girija Prasad Koirala was sworn in as the new Prime Minister on May 26 and three days later he appointed a new Cabinet [see p. 38193].
In early July Mahesh Acharya and Ram Badan Yadav were appointed as Minister of Finance and Minister of Health respectively [see p. 38339].
Ruling party
Nepali Congress Party (Krishna Prasad Bhattarai pres., Girija Prasad Koirala gen. sec., Ganesh Man Singh l.).
Other parties
King Birendra lifted the ban on political parties in April 1990.
The Constitution promulgated in November 1990 specifies that no law may be adopted which bans, or imposes restrictions on, political parties.
The major parties include: the United Nepal Communist Party (Man Mohan Adhikari l.) formed in January 1991 by the merger of the Marxist-Leninist and Marxist factions of the Nepal Communist Party; the United People's Front (Tanka Prasad Acharya, Dilli Raman Regmi ls.) formed in February 1991 by the merger of the Nepal Praja Parishad and the Nepali National Congress; the Nepali Sadbhavana Parishad Party (Gajendra Narayan Singh pres.); the National Democratic Party (Chand)(Lokendra Bahadur Chand l.); the National Democratic Party (Thapa)(Surya Bahadur Thapa l.); the United Left Front (Sahana Pradhan l.); the National People's Liberation Forum (M. S. Thapa ch.).
Elections
Elections to the House of Representatives and the National Council were held in May and June 1991 respectively [see pp. 38193; 38339].
1990/91 OVERVIEW
During 1990 Nepal was transformed from an absolute monarchy into a multiparty democracy.
In February the combined opposition parties (the so-called Movement for the Restoration of Democracy, MRD) launched a peaceful "stir" aimed at restoring full democracy, organizing peaceful strikes and demonstrations.
The government responded by carrying out mass arrests of pro-democracy activists, and by the end of February violent confrontations were taking place between demonstrators and the security forces.
The protests continued and in early April, in an effort to contain the mounting unrest, King Birendra dismissed the Prime Minister, Marich Man Singh Shrestha, and appointed in his place the moderate Lokendra Bahadur Chand.
However, the situation worsened considerably the next day when as many as 200,000 protestors descended on the royal palace in Kathmandu and troops opened fire on them, killing at least 50 people.
The killings exacerbated the discontent and the King was forced to act; he quickly lifted the ban on political parties, dissolved parliament and met the MRD leaders for talks.
In the middle of the month he appointed a new multiparty Cabinet headed by Nepali Congress Party president Krishna Prasad Bhattarai.
The following month the King formally delegated the powers of parliament to the Bhattarai Cabinet and announce a general amnesty for all political prisoners.
In late May a committee was established to prepare a new constitution.
The King approved the committee's draft in September, but the following month he submitted a number of counter-proposals, prompting large numbers of demonstrators to take to the streets of Kathmandu.
In early November the King formally proclaimed a new Constitution to replace that of 1962 which had enshrined the absolute powers of the monarchy and the multitiered system of panchayat representation.
The new Constitution guaranteed (i) parliamentary government;(ii) a multiparty system;(iii) a constitutional monarchy;(iv) an independent judiciary; and (v) freedom of expression, the press, peaceful assembly and association.
The first multiparty general election since 1959 was held on May 12, 1991, and resulted in a victory for the Nepali Congress Party which went on to form a new government under Girija Prasad Koirala.
Bhattarai, the incumbent Prime Minister, had lost his seat in the election.
Elections to the National Council, the upper house, were held in June 1991.
Economy
Finance Minister Mahesh Acharya presented the 1991/92 budget to the House of Representatives on July 11, 1991.
Of total expenditure of NRs26,600 million (approximately US$620,000,000), NRs16,890 million (US$395,000,000) was allocated for development, most of which was earmarked for rural areas.
Approximately 70 per cent of development expenditure was to be financed from foreign assistance and loans.
Acharya estimated that the budget would leave a deficit of NRs2,080 million (US$49,000,000), to be covered by domestic borrowing and the sale of treasury bills.
During his budget speech Acharya also announced plans to privatize much of the business sector.
Nepal devalued its rupee by 20.96 per cent against the US dollar in early July, in line with a devaluation of the Indian rupee [see p. 38337].
Foreign relations
Nepal's relations with India improved greatly during 1990.
In June India finally agreed to restore trade and transit concessions which in March 1989 it had withdrawn, partly in protest at Nepal's decision to purchase Chinese weaponry.
A communiqué restoring trade relations and re-opening transit points was signed by Prime Minister Bhattarai during his visit to India in June.
Chandra Shekhar visited Nepal in February 1991, the first Indian Prime Minister to do so since 1977.
ASIA — PACIFIC
PAKISTAN
Area: 803,943 sq km.
Population: 122,600,000 (1990 UNFPA est.).
Capital: Islamabad.
Languages: Urdu (national); Punjabi, Sindhi, Pushto, English.
Religion: Islam (state religion — 97%); Hinduism and Christianity.
Armed forces: 550,000 (1990).
Currency: Pakistani rupee (US$1.00=Rs24.4266 as at Sept. 30, 1991).
Major international affiliations: ADB, ICO, NAM, SAARC.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The Islamic Republic of Pakistan was proclaimed in March 1956, having been a British dominion since the partition of the Indian Empire in August 1947.
Military governments have been in power almost continuously since independence, the most recent headed by General Zia ul-Haq who assumed control in July 1977.
After Zia was killed in an air crash on Aug. 17, 1988, the acting President, Ghulam Ishaq Khan, ordered parliamentary elections to be held on Nov. 16.
On Dec. 2 Benazir Bhutto, leader of the Pakistan People's Party which won the largest number of seats in the National Assembly, was appointed Prime Minister of a new civilian government.
On Aug. 6, 1990, the President dismissed the Bhutto government and ordered fresh elections to be held on Oct. 24.
An interim government headed by Ghulam Mustapha Jatoi was replaced on Nov. 10 by an elected government headed by Mian Mohammad Nawaz Sharif, leader of the Islamic Democratic Alliance, which won an absolute majority of seats in the National Assembly.
The present Constitution promulgated in April 1973 provides for a parliamentary system and a bicameral federal legislature consisting of a 217-member lower house (the National Assembly) elected every five years and an 87-member upper house (the Senate) elected every six years, with one-third of its members relinquishing their seats every two years.
The President, who is head of state, is elected by the federal legislature for a (renewable) term of five years.
Main government leaders
President: Ghulam Ishaq Khan.
Prime Minister: Mian Mohammad Nawaz Sharif, also Minister of Foreign Affairs.
Other principal ministers: Sayed Ghaus Ali Shah (Defence); Mir Hazar Khan Bijrani (Defence Production); Choudhry Shujat Hussain (Interior); Sartaj Aziz (Finance and Economic Affairs); Sheikh Rashid Ahmad (Industries and Culture).
Changes to Council of Ministers to June 1991
February 1990: resignation of Sind Chief Minister [see p. 37246].
August: dismissal of Bhutto government and appointment of caretaker government [see pp. 37652-53].
November: swearing-in of Sharif government [see p. 37855].
February 1991: resignation of Foreign Minister [see p. 38007].
March: resignation of Minister for Local Government and other Cabinet changes [see p. 38102].
April: assumption of Foreign Affairs responsibilities by secretary-general at Foreign Affairs Ministry [see p. 38153].
May: appointment of woman minister [see p. 38194].
Ruling party
The Islami Jumhoori Ittehad (IDA — Islamic Democratic Alliance, Mian Mohammad Nawaz Sharif l.) is a nine-party coalition composed of the Jamaat-e-Islami Pakistan (JIP, Amir Kazi Hussain Ahmad, sec. -gen.); the Jamiat-e-Ulema-i-Pakistan (JUP, Shah Ahmad Noorani pres.); the National People's Party (NPP, Ghulam Mustapha Jatoi, l.; the Pakistan Muslim League (PML, two factions led by Mohammad Khan Junejo and Fida Mohammad Khan); the Islamic Ahle Hadith; the Jamaat-ul Mashaikh; the Hezb-i-Jihad (Murtaza Pooya l.; the Azad Group; and the Nizam-i-Mustafa Group.
Other political parties
Pakistan People's Party (PPP — Benazir Bhutto sec. -gen.);
Mohajir Qaumi Mahaz (MQM — Mohajir (Urdu-speaking migrants) National Movement, Altaf Hussain pres.);
Awami National Party (ANP — People's National Party, Khan Abdul Wali Khan pres.);
Jamiat-e-Ulema-Islam (JUI — Society of Islamic Scholars, Fazlur Rahman pres.);
Jamhoori Watan Party (JWP — Democratic National Party, Mohammad Akbar Bugti l).
Elections
Last general election to the National Assembly: October 1990 [see p. 37763]; last election to the Senate: March 1991 [see p. 38102].
Presidential elections due by December 1993.
1990/91 OVERVIEW
The government of Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto, already weakened by the withdrawal of the Muhajir Qaumi Mahaz (MQM)[see p. 37043], suffered a serious setback in May 1990 following the outbreak of some of the worst incidents of urban violence in Sind between rival ethnic groups.
The inability of the PPP — dominated provincial government to handle the crisis led opposition politicians to call for its immediate dismissal and prompted the army to press in June for full emergency powers to check the spiralling communal violence.
The government's political difficulties were compounded by growing differences with President Khan, who openly criticized its handling of the crisis.
Reports that the President was increasingly taking the part of some sections of the armed forces led to speculation that a military take-over was imminent.
Although the dismissal in August 1990 of the Bhutto government by presidential decree [see pp. 37652-53]did not, as expected, lead to military rule, the event was marked by controversy centring on the President's arbitrary exercise of power [see p. 37764]and on the haste with which criminal proceedings were brought against Bhutto and some of her former ministers.
Elections held in October 1990 under the administration of a caretaker civilian government resulted in a landslide victory for the pro-Islamic and right-wing anti-Bhutto coalition — the Islamic Democratic Alliance (IDA)— led by Sharif, the former Chief Minister of the Punjab [see pp. 37763-64].
Among the new government's earliest measures was the introduction in April 1991 of the Sharia bill, which was aimed at the creation of an "Islamic welfare state" , passed in May by the National Assembly.
The bill was reportedly designed to restore the government's Islamic credentials which its critics maintained had been undermined by Pakistan's participation in the Western-dominated multinational force opposing Iraq in the Gulf [see pp. 37639; 37641; 37694].
Strains also emerged in the government's relations with sections of the army which regarded the government's Gulf policy as increasingly subservient to United States and "Zionist" interests.
Attempts by the Sharif government to reduce inter-provincial rivalry and tensions between states and central government led in April 1991 to a fresh award for the division of financial resources.
The scheme, based on each province's population, provided for the centre retaining one-fifth of the total pool, with the remainder being split between the Punjab (57.88 per cent); Sind (23.28 per cent ); North-West Frontier Province (13.50 per cent ) and Baluchistan (5.30 per cent ).
Economy
Urban violence, inadequate infrastructure and, at 3.1 per cent a year, the fastest population growth in southern Asia were among the chief obstacles in the way of the Bhutto government's attempts to revitalize the economy.
Gross domestic product (GDP), which was targeted to expand by 5.8 per cent in the fiscal year ending in June 1990, slowed to around 4.6 per cent because of poor industrial and agricultural production.
The budgetary deficit, which in January 1990 had been estimated to stand at around Rs55,800 million, widened in June to Rs64,400 million [see p. 37530]largely because of increased defence spending projected in 1990/91 at Rs63,300 million, or approximately 37 per cent of total expenditure [see p. 37530].
Pakistan was badly hit by revenue losses resulting from the Gulf crisis and by the suspension in October of US economic aid [see below; p. 37764].
In November 1990 the country's foreign exchange reserves dropped perilously low, although reviving marginally in December to stand at around US$200 million.
According to the government's annual economic survey published in May 1991, GDP was expected to grow by 5.6 per cent in the current fiscal year to June 1991, owing to an increase in agricultural production of 5.1 per cent, up from 2.1 per cent a year earlier.
The survey showed that exports in the current fiscal year grew 22 per cent while imports rose 10 per cent.
The Gulf crisis was estimated to have cost the economy around US$700 million.
Economic reform under the Sharif government consisted primarily of measures aimed at deregulating the economy and introducing a systematic programme of privatization [see p. 38538].
The government was also committed to reducing radically the budget deficit by implementing cuts in social spending; defence expenditure, however, is set to increase by almost 11.6 per cent[see p. 38289].
Pakistan's principal trading partners in 1989/90 were: exports to the USA, Japan and the Federal Republic of Germany; imports from the USA, Japan and Kuwait.
Foreign affairs
February 1990: deterioration in relations with India [see p. 37246].
August: commitment to Gulf multinational force [see pp. 37639; 37641].
September: despatch of troops to Gulf multinational force [see p. 37694].
June: US-Pakistan talks; economic agreement with Iran [see p. 38289].
Relations with the USA which had generally been amicable under the Bhutto government, underwent a serious crisis in October 1990 following the suspension of aid worth around US$570 million on grounds that Pakistan was engaged in a nuclear weapons programme [see p. 37764].
Despite an intensification of fighting in Kashmir in the first half of 1990 talks with India continued, with the fourth round completed in April 1991.
Close relations with China, marked by a large number of defence and economic co-operation agreements, were maintained during 1990-91.
Sharif visited China on Feb. 26-March 1, 1991.
France announced the sale to Pakistan of a nuclear power plant for commercial purposes during a visit by French President Mitterrand on Feb. 18-21, 1990.
The first consignment of 32 Mirage jets from Australia arrived in Pakistan on Nov.29, 1990, following negotiations which had begun in late 1988.
ASIA — PACIFIC
PHILIPPINES
Area: 300,00 sq km.
Population: 62,400,000 (1990 UNFPA est.).
Capital: Manila.
Languages: Pilipino (native national language); Cebuano, Tagalog, Iloco, Ifugao, English, Spanish.
Religion: Christianity (Roman Catholicism); Islam.
Armed forces: 108,500 (1990).
Currency: Philippine peso (US$1.00=P26.2065 as at Sept. 30, 1991).
Major international affairs: ADB; APEC; ASEAN.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The Republic of the Philippines became independent in July 1946.
In 1965 Ferdinand Marcos became President and retained power thereafter through the increasing use of political corruption and coercion.
In an attempt to rally domestic support and to placate the United States government (upon which his regime was heavily dependent), Marcos agreed to hold a Presidential election in February 1986.
He was opposed by Corazon Aquino, the widow of the country's most prominent opponent of the Marcos regime until his murder in 1983.
Although Marcos claimed victory it was generally believed that Aquino had secured a greater number of votes.
In the face of huge popular demonstrations in favour of Aquino and a growing mutiny within the armed forces, Marcos fled the country on Feb. 25 and Aquino was declared President.
A new constitution was approved by referendum in February 1987.
Under its terms legislative authority was vested in a bicameral popularly elected Congress consisting of a 24-member Senate (elected for six years) and a 250-member House of Representatives.
Executive power is in the hands of a President (directly elected for a single six-year term) and an appointed Cabinet.
Main government leaders
President: Corazon Aquino.
Other principal ministers: Gen. Renato de Villa (Defence); Jesus Estanislao (Finance); Raul Manglapus (Foreign Affairs).
Cabinet changes to mid-1991
Catalino Macaraig was dismissed as Cabinet Executive Secretary in December 1990 [see p. 37919]; his replacement, Oscar Orbos, resigned in July 1991, as did the Defence Secretary, Gen. Fidel Ramos [see p. 38344].
Ruling party
President Aquino is supported by a loose coalition centred upon the Laban ng Demokratikong Pilipino (LDP, established in 1987, Neptali Gonzales pres., Jose Cojuangco sec. gen.).
The LDP is itself a coalition comprising the PDP-Laban Party (founded in 1983 from a merger of the Pilipino Democratic Party (PDP) and Laban (Lakas ng Bayan — People's Power Movement), the party led by Aquino's husband prior to his assassination) and the Lakas ng Bansa (People's Struggle).
Traditionally, the Aquino presidency has also been supported by those elements of the PDP-Laban Party (Aquilino Pimentel ch.) which chose to remain outside the LDP; and the bulk of the Liberal Party (established in 1946, but split in 1988 when supporters of Kalaw joined the GAD — see below — Jose (Jovito) Salonga l.).
Other main political parties
Communist Party of the Philippines — Marxist-Leninist (CPP-ML, split from the pro-Soviet PKP in 1968, Benito Tiamzon ch., Saturnino Ocampo gen. sec.)— the CCP-ML's military wing, the New People's Army (NPA), has been waging a guerrilla war since 1969; Grand Alliance for Democracy (GAD, established in 1987 to co-ordinate the anti-Aquino opposition in the legislative elections, the GAD included the Mindanao Alliance, Nacionalista Party, Social Democratic Party and the Kalaw wing of the Liberal Party, Juan Ponce Enrile pres.);
Kilusan Bagong Lipunan (KBL — New Society Movement, established in 1978 as the ruling party of former President Marcos, Vicente Mellora sec. gen.);
Mindanao Alliance (established in 1978, committed to the protection of civil rights and the economic development of Mindanao, Homobono Adaza l.; Nacionalista Party (originally established in 1907, resurrected in 1988 by Aquino's opponents, Salvador Laurel pres., Juan Ponce Enrile sec. gen.);
National Democratic Front (NDF, ostensibly a wide coalition of leftist groups, but in practice tends to operate as a legal front for the CCP-ML and the NPA, Antonio Zobel ch., Saturnino Ocampo spokesman); Partido Komunista ng Pilipinas (PKP — Communist Party of the Philippines, established in 1930, pro-Soviet, Felicisimo Macapagal pres.);
Partido ng Bayan (New People's Alliance) established 1986 by Jose Maria Sisson, former head of the illegal CCP-ML, Fidel Agcaoli ch.);
Union for National Action (UNA, established in 1988 as an opposition coalition, Salvador Laurel l.).
Elections
The approval of the constitution by referendum in February 1987 was accepted as a de facto election of Aquino as President [see pp. 35319-20].
In a general election on May 11, 1987, candidates endorsed by the President won a decisive majority in both chambers of the new Congress [see pp. 35321-22].
1990/91 OVERVIEW
Politics
Aquino's frustration with the tortuous complexity of Filipino party politics was evidenced by her announcement on June 12, 1990, of the formation of the Kabisig movement, derived from the Tagalog word meaning "arm-in-arm" or "brotherhood" [see p. 37534].
The new movement, which was characterized as a non-party coalition, was an attempt to inject new life into her government's programmes by reaching beyond the ruling LDP and its traditional patterns of patronage.
As such, the move attempted to recapture the populist politics of "People Power" from which Aquino had mobilized so effectively against Marcos.
Although Aquino gave assurances that the Kabisig would not be turned into a political party, the leadership of the LDP treated the new movement with great suspicion, believing that it represented an independent vehicle which could be used by Aquino to run her own favoured candidates in the 1992 elections.
Following an LDP conference, the party leadership announced on Sept. 19 that it planned to break away from the coalition which had backed Aquino.
The decision, if fully implemented, threatened to split the LDP, many senior members of which had given their approval to, or accepted positions within, the new movement.
Aquino reiterated her assurances that the movement would not become a political party, and expressed her optimism that an accommodation could be reached between Kabisig and the LDP.
In February Aquino became the first President of the Philippines to appear in court as she took the stand as a witness in support of her libel case against a newspaper columnist, Luis Beltran.
The case arose from Beltran's claim that Aquino had hidden under her bed during a coup attempt.
Aquino's decision to press the case — and to undergo a ferocious and lengthy cross-examination — was seen by some to have needlessly exposed her already tarnished public image to further damage, whilst others applauded it as further proof of the tenacious courage which she had displayed in opposing Marcos.
Increasingly, the key domestic political issue was the forthcoming presidential election of 1992.
With Aquino adamant that she would not stand for a second term, the jostling for position amongst those ambitious to succeed her intensified in late 1990 and early 1991.
Security
Throughout the first half of 1990 there were continuing reverberations from the December 1989 coup attempt — the most serious to date [see pp. 37120-21].
Although several of the coup leaders were arrested many others escaped, including Gregorio "Gringo" Honasan, a key member of the Reform the Armed Forces Movement (RAM), one of the clandestine right-wing organizations within the military which had been involved in repeated coup attempts against Aquino.
In February 1990 the leading member of the opposition, Juan Ponce Enrile, was arrested on charges arising from the coup [see p. 37250], although a Supreme Court decision in June led to a reduction of the charges [see p. 37534].
An attempt in March to arrest Rodolfo Aguinaldo, the former Governor of Cagayan, led to a small rebellion which, although easily crushed, continued to demonstrated the unreliability of sections of the armed forces [see p. 37320].
Further evidence of this was provided by the escape from prison of Lt.-Cdr.
Bilbastro "Billy" Bibit, the alleged leader of the coup attempt [see p. 37376].
Bibit and four companions were believed to have been assisted by members of the Young Officers Union (YOU), a shadowy right-wing military organisation similar to RAM.
Bibit was recaptured in January 1991 [see p. 37961].
Small bombs exploded in Manila almost daily, the bulk of which were believed to have been planted by military dissidents.
For the most part the explosions caused few casualties and little material damage, but were effective in fostering an impression of insecurity.
Some of the bombings were acknowledged as the work of "Cobra" , a new right-wing military organization in the tradition of RAM and YOU.
In October 1990 another prominent participant in the coup attempt, Col. Alexander Noble, emerged from hiding to lead a revolt on Mindanao.
The rebellion was easily crushed, and immediately afterwards Congress approved legislation which made the act of rebellion punishable with life imprisonment [see p. 37781].
Several military dissidents were arrested in December and in January 1991 [see p. 37961].
In February Lt.-Col. Victor Batac, allegedly a leading member of RAM, and Maj. Abraham Purugganan, a member of YOU, were arrested in Manila [see pp. 38011-12].
Another leading member of RAM, Capt. Edgardo Divina, was captured in April, as was a Navy captain, Juancho Sabban, allegedly a leading participant in the 1989 coup attempt.
By mid-1990 the government acknowledged that the threat posed by "military rightists" was a more serious problem that which emanated from the insurgency campaign of the communist New People's Army (NPA).
During 1990 it was believed that the strength of the NPA had fallen to around 19,000 compared with 25,600 in 1988, as a result of the continuing success of the armed forces in disrupting and demoralizing the guerrillas by targeting the movement's leadership.
In May 1990 Aquino dismissed the guerrillas as "a moribund movement, an organization which has lost its cause" .
Nevertheless, there was some evidence that the NPA was successfully shifting the central focus of its campaign from its traditional rural areas of operation to urban centres, particularly Manila.
Amongst the victims of the urban campaign was Col. Saturnino Dumlao, a senior intelligent agent, who was ambushed as he drove through the southern Manila suburb of Paranaque on June 11, 1990.
At the end of August Aquino offered to hold peace talks with all of her enemies including the right-wing military dissidents and the NPA [see pp. 37657-58].
Although her initiative represented a reversal of her previous stance, it produced little progress [see p. 37716].
In the first half of 1991 the NPA increased its activities throughout the country in an apparent attempt to win back lost ground.
Between January and April it was estimated that 563 government soldiers had been killed in clashes with the guerrillas.
The third source of armed resistance to the government lay in the long-running secessionist struggle being waged by Moslems in Mindanao and its neighbouring territories.
Elections were held in February 1990 in the newly created Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao.
The region comprised a non-contiguous amalgamation of Sulu, the Tawi Tawi island group and the mainland Mindanao provinces of Maguindanao and Lanao del Sur (the four provinces had approved the autonomy plan in the November 1989 referendum held in the 13 southern provinces of the Philippines — see p. 37042).
The newly elected Governor, Zacaria Candao, was immediately confronted by an outbreak of serious fighting in June arising from a dispute between rival family clans.
Nevertheless, the autonomous region assumed some degree of credibility when, on Oct. 12, Aquino granted limited executive powers to the Candao government.
An official statement said that the functions of the departments of public works, labour and employment, local government, environment and natural resources, tourism, science and technology and social services had all been transferred to the Autonomous Regional Government.
The creation of the autonomous region had been opposed by the Moro National Liberation Front (MNFL), the largest of the separatist guerrilla organizations, on the grounds that it made insufficient concessions to Moslem autonomy and failed to meet the terms of the 1976 Tripoli Accord [see p. 28440].
The MNLF continued its guerilla campaign, as did the smaller Bansa Moro National Liberation Front (BMNLF).
Issues concerning Marcos
On Sept. 28, 1991, a special court finally sentenced airforce Brig. -Gen.
Luther Custodio and 15 other members of the military to life imprisonment for the 1983 murder of Benigno Aquino and Rolando Galman at Manila Airport.
A further 20 defendants were acquitted.
Aquino expressed her disappointment that, after an exhaustive legal process, the court had not directly implicated those, including the Marcoses, who were widely believed to have ordered the crime [see p. 37716].
Aquino had suffered an earlier disappointment when Imelda Marcos, widow of the former dictator, was in July 1990 acquitted by a US federal court on corruption charges [see p. 37613].
However, in December the government achieved a breakthrough in its protracted campaign to trace and retrieve the huge sums believed to have been looted from the country by the Marcos family, when the Swiss Supreme Court ruled that funds held by the family in Swiss bank accounts should be returned to the government of the Philippines, but stipulated that this could be done only after a Philippines' court had ruled against Marcos [see p. 37961].
In March 1991, although Aquino confirmed that Imelda Marcos continued to be banned from the country, she suggested that she would be allowed to return at some point in order to face corruption charges.
In April a US District Court ordered Marcos to stand trial in May 1992 on civil fraud charges.
Imelda, who vigorously protested her innocence of all crimes, continued to suggest that she wished to return to her homeland in order to honour her husband's dying wish by interring his body in the Philippines.
Many observers saw her wish to return as also motivated by the desire to use the Marcos patronage network to participate (directly or indirectly) in the 1992 elections.
By mid-1991 there were increasing signs that the ban could be lifted before the end of the year.
Economy
The December 1989 coup attempt and the abortive revolts which followed it damaged international investor confidence in the Philippines.
By mid-1990 withdrawals of foreign investments had amounted to US$145,000,000, almost double the comparable figure for 1989.
Other factors adversely affecting the economy included the Luzon earthquake [see p. 37613]and frequent power-cuts caused by a serious energy shortage.
The situation was worsened when Iraq invaded Kuwait in August 1990, as some 65 per cent of the country's energy requirements were met by imported oil, and some 500,000 or more Filipino workers in the Middle East remitted between $1,000 million and $2,000 million each year.
Figures for the first half of 1990 showed that the trade gap had grown by 62 per cent to $1,870 million.
On July 4 the government drew up a budget for 1991 which was described officially as designed to curb inflation, reduce the budget deficit and maintain economic growth.
The 247,400 million peso budget involved increasing spending by 17.9 per cent over the adjusted 1990 budget of 209,800 million pesos.
The government predicted that the deficit would shrink from 17,000 million pesos in 1990 to 1,400 million in 1991, and that inflation would fall from its current rate of 12.2 per cent to 9.5 per cent by the end of the year.
The rate of growth for 1990 was forecast at between 4.8 per cent and 5.2 per cent compared with 5.6 per cent in 1989.
One of the key economic problems for the Philippines was the size of the country's foreign debt, estimated at US$26,100 million in June 1990, almost unchanged from the previous year.
Despite several restructuring agreements since 1983 the cost of debt servicing continued to consume approximately one-third of export revenues.
In recent years a major balance-of-payments crisis had been prevented only by assistance from foreign governments and loans from multinational institutions (particularly the World Bank and the Asian Development Bank).
The expense of servicing the debt burden increased the budget deficit, which in turn stimulated inflation.
The public-sector deficit was expected to expand from 33,900 million pesos in 1989 to at least 55,100 million by the end of 1990.
In order to combat the growing deficit the IMF had insisted on cuts in government spending and liberalization measures for trade and investment, demands which were rejected by the Congress.
Failure to reach an agreement with the IMF over an economic stabilization programme worsened the situation during 1990 by causing the withholding of agreed loans worth $715 million from the IMF, the World Bank and Japanese government agencies.
The situation was also aggravated by a series of natural disasters, the most serious of which was the earthquake which devastated the infrastructure of central Luzon in July and killed more than 1,650 people [see p. 37613].
Following the earthquake there was strong pressure from the Congress to declare a unilateral moratorium on all debt repayment, a move which Aquino stated that she was determined to resist.
Despite a 30 per cent increase in petrol prices imposed in September, a debt rescheduling agreement signed with Japan in October, and a devaluation of the peso by 8.7 per cent on Oct. 31, by November official forecasts predicted that the budget deficit would reach 60,000 million pesos at the end of 1990.
Gradually Congress was won over to the need for tax increases and cuts in public expenditure.
In December petrol prices were raised by a further 32 per cent, whilst on Jan. 3, 1991, Aquino signed an executive order which imposed an additional 9 per cent duty on almost all imports, including oil.
The levy, which would be effective until June 30, 1992, was designed to raise at least 20,000 million pesos in additional revenue.
Following these moves, it was announced on Jan. 17 that government officials had reached an agreement with the IMF over all measures to be included in a stabilization programme.
A new 18-month standby credit facility was approved in February [see p. 38012].
Also, on Feb. 27, major donor countries and international organizations pledged $3,300 million in fresh loans and aid.
The government also derived revenue from its privatization programme designed to return to private ownership many of the state companies acquired during the 20-year rule of Marcos.
The largest privatization to date was completed in October 1990 when the Nonoc Mining and Industrial Corporation, a nickel refinery complex in the south of the country, was sold to the Philippine Nickel Corporation (Philnico) for $325 million to be paid over six years.
Official statistics for the first nine months of 1990 suggested that the growth in real GDP fell to 2.8 per cent compared with 5.6 per cent in the comparable period of 1989.
The country recorded a current-account deficit of US$2,430 million for the first 11 months, a 63 per cent increase over the equivalent period for 1989.
At the end of December total foreign debt stood at US$28,549 million, an increase of 3.37 per cent over the previous year, whilst inflation averaged 10.6 per cent for the year.
This economic slowdown, which threatened to become a full-blown recession, had the effect of highlighting structural weaknesses hitherto obscured by the comfortable consumer-led growth of the previous three years.
Nevertheless, as with the complex issue of land reform, there appeared no evidence that the Aquino government had either the political will or the reserves of public confidence to undertake a programme of comprehensive structural reform.
Foreign relations
Relations with the USA were dominated by the issue of the future of the US bases in the Philippines, particularly the giant facilities of Clark Field air base and the Subic Bay naval installation.
With the current leases due to expire in September 1991, talks between the two sides began in May 1990 [see p. 37458], having been delayed by the December 1989 coup attempt.
The issue at the heart of the talks of the relationship between the Philippines and its former colonial master was made more complex by the huge economic importance of the bases to the Philippines in terms of employment opportunities and hard-currency earnings, and by the fierce opposition to their continued presence by the majority of those on both the political left and right.
The negotiations continued into 1991 [see pp. 37658; 37716; 37861; 37919; 38195], but the situation was abruptly altered when Mount Pinatubo began erupting in June, causing extensive damage to both the Clark and Subic bases [see p. 38294].
By mid-1991 it was unclear whether an agreement would be reached over the future of the bases before the deadline, and whether, if reached, it would be ratified by the Senate as stipulated by the constitution of the Philippines.
ASIA — PACIFIC
SINGAPORE
Area: 623 sq km.Population: 2,700,000 (1990 UNFPA est.).
Capital: Singapore City.
Languages: Malay (national); Chinese (Mandarin), Tamil and English.
Religion: Daoism, Buddhism, Islam, Christianity and Hinduism.
Armed forces: 55,000 (1990).
Currency: Singapore dollar (US$1.00=S$1.6816 as at Sept. 30, 1991).
Major international affiliations: ADB, ASEAN, APEC, NAM.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The Republic of Singapore, which was granted internal self-government by the United Kingdom in 1959, was declared an independent, sovereign state in 1965 when it separated from Malaysia.
Its Constitution provides for a President as head of state, elected by Parliament every four years.
The President appoints a Prime Minister and Cabinet who are responsible collectively to Parliament.
Parliament is unicameral and consists of 81 members elected by single-member wards and group representation constituencies (GRCs).
The GRC or "Team MPs" were returned for the first time by the 1988 general election to ensure continued minority representation.
Main government leaders
President: Wee Kim Wee.
Prime Minister: Goh Chok Tong.
Other principal ministers: Lee Kuan Yew (Senior Minister, Prime Minister's Office); Ong Teng Cheong (Deputy Prime Minister); Brig. -Gen. (reserve) Lee Hsien Loong (Deputy Prime Minister; Trade and Industry); Yeo Ning Hong (Defence); Wong Kan Seng (Foreign Affairs); Richard Hu Tsu Tau (Finance); Suppiah Dhanabalan (National Development); Shanmugam Jayakumar (Home Affairs; Law).
Cabinet changes in 1990 and 1991
Goh Chok Tong replaced Lee Kuan Yew as Prime Minister in November 1990 and the Cabinet was reshuffled at the same time [see p. 37860].
In late June 1991 the Cabinet was again reshuffled [see p. 38295].
Goh relinquished the Defence portfolio, appointing in his place Yeo Ning Hong, hitherto Minister of Communications and Information and Second Minister of Defence (Policy).
Brig. -Gen.
George Yeo was appointed to head the new Ministry for Information and Arts and also as Second Minister for Foreign Affairs.
Other appointments were: Lee Boon Yang as Minister in the Prime Minister's Office and Second Minister for Defence; Mah Bow Tan as Acting Minister for Communications and Minister of State for Trade and Industry; Seet Ai Mee as Acting Minister for Community Development; and Sidek Saniff as Minister of State for Education.
Goh announced a limited Cabinet reshuffle in early September [see p. 38441].
Ruling party
The People's Action Party (Lee Kuan Yew sec. -gen.) has been in power since 1959.
Other parties
The Singapore Democratic Party (Chaim See Tong l.) won three seats in the 1991 general election.
The Workers' Party (J. B. Jeyaretnum sec. -gen.) won one seat.
Three other parties contested the election: the National Solidarity Party, the Singapore Justice Party and the Pertubohan Kebangsaan Melayu Singapura.
Other political parties registered in Singapore include: Alliance Party Singapura; Angkatan Islam; Barisan Socialis; National Party of Singapore; Partai Rakyat (Singapore State Division); Parti Kesatuan Ra'ayat (United Democratic Party); People's Republican Party; Persatuan Melayu Singapura; Singapore Chinese Party; Singapore Indian Congress; Singapore United Front (Barisan Bersatu Singapura); People's Front; United National Front; United People's Front; and United People's Party.
Elections
A general election was held in August 1991 [see p. 38397]; Wee Kim Wee was elected for a second four-year term in August 1989 [see p. 37574].
1990/91 OVERVIEW
Lee Kuan Yew finally resigned as Prime Minister in late November 1990, after 31 years continuously in office [see pp. 37860-61].
The First Deputy Prime Minister, Goh Chok Tong, was duly sworn in as Lee's replacement.
Lee remained in the Cabinet as a Senior Minister and his son (Goh's chosen successor), Lee Hsien Loong, was promoted to Deputy Prime Minister.
Parliament voted to change the Constitution in January 1991 to convert the ceremonial office of president into a directly elected post whose holder would enjoy reserve veto powers over financial provision and senior public service appointments [see p. 37962].
Critics claimed that in its new form the post was earmarked for Lee Kuan Yew.
Parliament adopted regulations in late August 1990 which a required foreign publication to obtain an annual permit if more than 300 copies were distributed in Singapore or if it carried articles on politics "in any country in south-east Asia" .
The Asian Wall Street Journal, the circulation of which had been restricted in Singapore since 1987 [see p. 35463], halted all circulation in mid-October in protest at the new legislation.
In November 1990 Parliament had approved new legislation which the government said was intended to ensure religious harmony, despite criticism from opposition parties that the law would in practice restrict religious freedoms and suppress dissent.
The Maintenance of Religious Harmony Bill provided for fines and imprisonment for those found guilty of heightening tension between members of different faiths, of inciting others to defy or challenge secular government policies, or to mobilize followers for subversion.
Vincent Cheng, a Catholic social worker whom the government had accused of leading a "Marxist conspiracy" , and Teo Soh Lung, one of Cheng's co-conspirators, were conditionally released from prison in June 1990 [see p. 37533].
Cheng and Teo were the last to be released of 22 people detained in 1987 for their involvement in the "conspiracy" [see p. 35462].
A long-running legal dispute came to an end in April 1991 when J. B. Jeyaretnam, a former MP and the secretary-general of the Workers' Party (WP), withdrew his appeal before the Singapore Court of Appeal for reinstatement of his parliamentary status.
Jeyaretnam had been disqualified as an MP in 1986 [see pp. 35462-63]over alleged irregularities in the collection of WP funds.
In 1989 he began libel proceedings in the UK against the Singapore government after the Privy Council had expressed "deep disquiet" over his treatment by the government [see p. 37574].
Jeyaretnam finally withdrew his case from the Court of Appeals on the grounds that the Attorney General had failed to respond to his proposal that the case be appealed to the Privy Council.
(Civil cases in Singapore could only be taken to the Privy Council in London if both parties agreed in advance of hearings at the Court of Appeals.)
Economy
Finance Minister Hu Tsu Tau introduced to Parliament on March 1, 1991, the budget for the fiscal year beginning April 1, 1991,[see p. 37575 for details of 1990 budget].
Analysts described the budget as "neutral" , despite predictions of a slowdown in economic growth in 1991.
Hu announced an increase in the employer's contribution to the Central Provident Fund (CPF, the compulsory pension scheme) by 1 percentage point, to 17.5 per cent starting in July 1991.
By contrast, he responded to heavy trade union lobbying by announcing a modest reduction of 0.5 of a percentage point in the employee's CPF rate, to 22.5 per cent.
The budget forecast that overall government expenditure would increase by 15.4 per cent in the 1991/92 fiscal year to S$15,800 million.
Total revenue would increase by S$1,900 million, to S$17,200 million, allowing for an overall surplus (that is, surplus minus net lending and plus net capital receipts) of S$3,500 million, or 5.3 per cent of gross domestic product (GDP).
The Far Eastern Economic Review of March 14 reported that a surplus of S$5,300 million was expected for fiscal 1990/91.
State of economy in 1990
The 1990 growth in GDP of 8.3 per cent was down from 9.2 per cent in the previous year and from 11 per cent in 1988.
For the second year in succession the largest contribution to economic growth came from the financial and business services sector, which grew by 15 per cent, compared with 10.1 per cent in 1989.
Manufacturing grew by 9.5 per cent, down from 9.8 per cent in 1989.
The commerce sector was down to 7.8 per cent growth in 1990, from 8.3 per cent in 1989, and transport and communications also recorded a slight fall in growth, at 8.8 per cent compared with 9.4 per cent in 1989.
Construction expanded by 7.2 per cent after five successive years of sluggish performance.
A shortage of labour remained a key problem in 1990, despite the addition of some 60,000 people to the workforce during the year.
The labour shortage served to drive wages up by 6.4 per cent, against productivity growth of only 3.4 per cent .
As a result, unit labour costs grew during the year, particularly in comparison with the other Asian newly industrialized countries (such as Taiwan, Hong Kong and South Korea).
A rise in exports in 1990 by 9.3 per cent to S$95,200 million served to emphasize the country's heavy dependence on its foreign trade.
Despite the increase in exports, the overall trade deficit rose S$4,900 million to S$14,600 million in 1990.
Non-oil exports constituted just under half the total export figure, rising by 8.5 per cent, compared with 10 per cent growth in 1989.
Exports of oil increased by 30 per cent to S$17,100 million, largely as a result of increased volumes passing through Singapore following the onset of the Gulf crisis.
Consumer electronics exports grew more slowly than in the previous year, but sales of computer disks rose by 31 per cent to S$7,200 million.
The Economic Development Board (EDB) reported in January 1991 that Singapore had attracted a record US$1,410 million in manufacturing investment in 1990, with the United States surpassing Japan as the principal source.
Investment commitments had mainly been in the electronics industries, which accounted for almost 49 per cent of the total, and in chemicals, which had almost 29 per cent.
Foreign
Singapore established diplomatic relations with China in October 1990 [see p. 37780].
Commentators claimed that formal relations with China would not strain Singapore's strong ties with Taiwan.
The move followed a visit to Singapore in August by the Chinese Premier, Li Peng [see p. 37656], and the renewal that month of China's diplomatic relations with Indonesia, and was followed a few weeks later by a visit by Lee Kuan Yew to China [see p. 37780].
In May 1991 Lee Hsien Loong headed a delegation to China and Hong Kong.
In November 1990 Singapore and the United States signed an agreement which allowed the USA increased use of Singapore's military facilities [see p. 37860].
Lee Kuan Yew subsequently paid a visit to Malaysia to brief Prime Minister Mohamed Mahathir on the agreement.
In May 1991 the then Prime Minister of Japan, Toshiki Kaifu, visited Singapore as part of a tour of South-East Asia [see pp. 38191-92].
Bilateral relations with Malaysia and with Indonesia remained good during 1990.
Much discussion between the three countries centred on the development of Goh Chok Tong's plan for an "economic growth triangle" involving Singapore, the Malaysian state of Johore and the Indonesian island of Batam. , 1989, 1990 Total GDP (US $million), 28,800, 34,600 Real GDP growth (%), 9.2, 8.3 GNP per capita(US$), 10,752, 12,765 Components of GDP (%), Private consumption, 46.6, 44.4 Total investment, 34.4, 38.6 Government consumption, 10.8, 10.6 Net exports, 8.9, 5.9 Consumer prices (% change p.a.), 2.4, 3.4 Retail sales volume (% change p.a.), 11.3, 1.7 Individual production (% change p.a.), 10.1, 9.5 Unemployment (% of labour force), 2.2, 1.7 Reserves minus gold (US$ million), 20,300, 28,400 Money growth (M1 % p.a.), 14.9, 10.8 Minimum Lending Rate (% p.a.), 6.2, 7.7 Public external debt (US$ million), 71.1, 38.3 Debt service ratio (%), 0.7, 0.2 Current Account Balance (US$ million), 2,500, 2,300 Exports (US$ million), 44,700, 52,600 Imports (US$ million), 49,700, 60,500 Trade balance (US$ million), -5,000, -7,900 Main trading partners, Exports (% by value), USA, 23.3, 22.0 Malaysia, 13.7, 13.5 Japan, 8.5, 9.0 Imports (% by value), Japan, 21.4, 20.2 USA, 17.1, 16.0 Malaysia, 13.2, 13.6 Source: Financial Times.
Detailed economic figures, 1989-90
ASIA — PACIFIC
SRI LANKA
Area: 64,453 sq km.
Population: 17,200,000 (1990 UNFPA est.).
Capital: Colombo (seat of government is Sri Jayawardene Kotte).
Languages: Sinhala, English and Tamil (all official).
Religion: Buddhism (70%), Hinduism (15%, Tamil speakers), Islam, Christianity.
Armed forces: 65,100 (1990).
Currency: Sri Lanka rupee (US$1.00=Rs41.8083 as at Sept. 30, 1991).
Major international affiliations: ADB; NAM; SAARC.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
Known as Ceylon until 1972, and an independent state within the Commonwealth since 1948, under the 1978 Constitution the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka has a presidential form of government; the President is directly elected for a six-year term, appoints the Prime Minister and cabinet, and is also empowered to dissolve the 168-member parliament which is elected by proportional representation.
In response to Tamil demands for a separate state in the Northern and Eastern provinces of Sri Lanka, Parliament in August 1983 approved an amendment to the Constitution making the advocation of separatism illegal.
Militant Tamil MPs elected in 1989 boycotted Parliament from mid-1990 [see p. 37611, but see also p. 38439 for partial ending of boycott in September 1991].
Main government leaders
President: Ranasinghe Premadasa (also Minister of Defence; Buddha Sasana; Policy Planning and Implementation).
Prime Minister: Dingiri Banda Wijetunge (also Minister of Finance; Minister of State for Defence).
Other principal ministers as of late September 1991: Harold Herath (Foreign Affairs); Renuka Herath (Health; Women's Affairs); Festus Perera (Public Administration, Provincial Councils and Home Affairs); S. Thondaman (Tourism; Rural Development); Ranil Wickremasingh (Industries, Science and Technology); A. R. Mansoor (Trade and Commerce).
Changes to Council of Ministers, March 1990 to June 1991
A major reshuffle took place in March 1990 [see p. 37316].
A further reshuffle took place in March 1991 following the assassination of Ranjan Wijeratne [see p. 38103].
Lalith Athulathmudali and G. N. Premachandra resigned in late August 1991 [see pp. 38393; 38440]; the departure of these UNP dissidents created the vacancies still unfilled as of end-September.
Ruling party
United National Party (UNP, Ranasinghe Premadasa l., Sirisena Cooray gen. sec.), with a minor coalition party, the Tamil-based Ceylon Workers' Congress (CWC, S. Thondaman l.).
Other political parties
Bahejana Nidahas Pakshaya (Chandrika Kumaranatunge l.), formed in early 1991 and allied with SLFP, LSSP, NSSP and Communist Party for May 1991 local elections; Eelavar Democratic Front (EDF, V. Balakumar l.) formed in 1990 on the basis of the former Eelam Revolutionary Organization of Students or EROS; Mahajana Eksath Peramuna (MEP — People's United Front, Dinesh Gunawardene gen. -sec.);
Sri Lanka Freedom Party (SLFP, Sirimavo Bandaranaike l., Anura Bandaranaike national organizer); Sri Lanka Mahajana Party (SLMP, Ossie Abeygoonasekara l., part of the USA in 1988); Sri Lankan Moslem Conference (SLMC); Tamil United Liberation Front (TULF, K. Padmanabha sec. -gen., Vardharaja Perumal l.); for the 1989 elections the TULF front included the Eelam People's Revolutionary Liberation Front (EPRLF); United Socialist Alliance (USA, Vasudeva Nanayakkara l.) a grouping formed in 1988 and including the Communist Party and the historically Trotskyite Lauka Sama Samaja Party (LSSP) and Nava Sama Samaja Party (NSSP).
Guerrilla groups
The fierce factional fighting between Tamil separatist groups in late 1989 and early 1990, in the wake of the withdrawal of the Indian Peace Keeping Force, confirmed the ascendancy of the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE, Velupillai Prabhakaran l., Anton Balasingham political spokesman).
Rival militant groups which had co-operated with the Indian forces were effectively relegated to politics in exile.
Various groups broadly sympathetic to the LTTE, which had formed the EDF alliance [see parties above]and won 13 parliamentary seats in the 1990 elections, boycotted parliament after a ceasefire between the government and the LTTE broke down in mid-1990.
The (nominally left-wing) Sinhala guerrilla Janatha Vimukti Peramuna (JVP — People's Liberation Front) was effectively wiped out as a serious threat by ruthless army action in southern areas in late 1989 and early 1990 [see pp. 37042; 37353].
Elections
A general election, the first under proportional representation, was last held on Feb. 15, 1989, when the ruling UNP won 125 of the 225 seats and the main opposition SLFP won 67 [see p. 36467]; local elections were held in March and May 1991 [see pp. 38103; 38193].
Presidential elections were held in December 1988 [see p. 36381].
1990/91 OVERVIEW
The UNP's comfortable parliamentary majority and the fact that the Premadasa regime faced no imminent electoral test after February 1989 [see p. 38193 for May 1991 local elections], left the political opposition without a clear focus for action in 1990.
Criticism grew, however, within the establishment and among some ambitious but sidelined UNP politicians, over what was seen as Premadasa's increasingly autocratic style of government and his reliance on a small group of personally appointed presidential advisers.
The abrupt decision in June 1991 to ban all casinos, despite the involvement of erstwhile Premadasa associates in the rapidly expanding gambling industry, was seen by many observers as a sign of the President's confidence in his own authority, and thus as a contributory factor in precipitating the unsuccessful attempt, launched in August, to impeach him [see pp. 38440; 38534].
The Tamil secessionist struggle continued to overshadow the political scene.
The LTTE effectively took total control of the north when the Indian Peace Keeping Force (IPKF) pulled out in March 1990.
The LTTE's Tamil rivals, the groups which had set up provincial governments under IPKF protection, were destroyed and many thousands fled to Tamil Nadu state in southern India.
The Sri Lanka government and armed forces swung from their position in early 1990 of coexistence with the LTTE to the pursuit of military victory over them (in which regard they achieved a series of successes from mid-1991 — see pp. 38392; 38439; 38534), while providing sporadic indications of willingness to seek a negotiated settlement.
The state of emergency was repeatedly extended, and a string of massacres gave rise to continuing claims and counter-claims about the disregard for human rights, although in February 1990 the repeal of emergency regulation 55F removed the authority under which the security forces could dispose of bodies without any inquest (a particular feature of their late 1979 campaign in crushing the JVP insurgency in the south).
The ability of the LTTE to find volunteers for suicide missions added to the problem of protecting prominent political figures.
The assassination in March 1991 of the hardline security chief, Minister of State for Defence Ranjan Wijeratne [see p. 38103], although denied by the LTTE, was seen as linked with the May 21 killing in India of Rajiv Gandhi [see p. 38175].
This latter attack, widely held to have been the work of a Tamil Tiger suicide squad, again called into question India's desire after the IPKF withdrawal to remain at arm's length from the Tamil conflict in Sri Lanka — a major security issue, with India such a short journey from the LTTE's Jaffna stronghold across the Palk Strait, or from Mannar along the string of islands at Adam's Bridge.
Economy
The Sri Lankan economy, shrinking in real terms prior to 1990 (with 2 per cent nominal growth in 1989 far outstripped by inflation), recorded 6 per cent growth in 1990, with similar rates persisting into 1991, despite exaggerated initial fears of damaging repercussions from the Gulf crisis.
The annual rate of inflation, at 21.5 per cent in 1990, had fallen to 12 per cent by August 1991.
The balance of payments, benefiting from a small increase in the value of exports from US$1,959 million in 1989 to $1,982 million in 1990, returned to a positive figure with the inclusion of invisible earnings (including some recovery in tourism).
Major earners were again garments and textiles, tea (a record crop in 1990 and exports of 215 million kg, outstripping India as the leading world exporter), refined petroleum products and gemstones.
The commercial banking and finance sector was booming as of September 1991.
In March 1991 foreign exchange controls were relaxed to attract foreign investment, while on Sept. 13 the IMF approved a further three-year enhanced structural adjustment facility, providing credits to a total of 336 million special drawing rights (US$455 million) in support of the government's 1991-94 economic and financial programme.
ASIA — PACIFIC
TAIWAN
Area: 36,000 sq km.
Population: 20,200,000 (1990 est.).
Capital: Taipei.
Language: Chinese (Mandarin).
Religion: Buddhism; also Islam, Daoism, Christianity and Confucianism.
Armed forces: 370,000 (1990).
Currency: new Taiwan dollar (US$1.00=NT$26.5116 as at Sept. 30, 1991).
Major international affiliations: ADB; UN membership ceased in 1971.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The government of Taiwan (formerly Formosa) is derived from that which ruled the Chinese mainland prior to the 1949 communist revolution; it maintains its claim to legal jurisdiction of this lost territory and continues to designate itself as the Republic of China (ROC).
Executive power is in the hands of a President who is elected for a six-year term by the National Assembly (Kuo-Min Ta-Hui).
Under the terms of the 1947 Constitution legislative authority is vested in the Assembly which receives legislative proposals from the Legislative Yuan (Li-Fa Yuan).
The Executive Yuan or Cabinet is the highest administrative organ and is responsible to the Legislative Yuan.
In addition there are also Control, Judicial and Examination Yuans.
The majority of the members of the National Assembly and the Legislative Yuan hold seats for life, having originally been elected in 1947-48 to represent constituencies on the Chinese mainland.
However, under a series of major constitutional amendments introduced in April 1991, all "senior parliamentarians" would be forced to retire by the end of the year [see p. 38146].
Main government leaders
President: Lee Teng-hui.
Prime Minister: Gen. (retd) Hau Pei-Tsun.
Other principal ministers: Shih Chi-yang (Vice-Premier); Wu Po-hsiung (Interior); Vincent Siew (Economic Affairs); Wang Chien-shien (Finance); Frederick Chien Fu (Foreign Affairs); Chen Li-an (National Defence); Lu You-wen (Justice); Shirley Kuo (Director-General of Council for Economic Planning and Development; Minister Without Portfolio).
Cabinet changes in 1990-91
Gen. Hau was appointed as Premier in May 1990 and reshuffled the Cabinet (Executive Yuan)[see pp. 37454-55].
In April 1991 the Communications Minister Clement Chang resigned after being implicated in an insider stock trading scandal [see p. 38147].
The Cabinet was reshuffle again in June 1991 [see pp. 38290-91].
Ruling party
Kuomintang (KMT, Lee Teng-hui ch., James Soong sec. -gen.).
Other parties
China Democratic Socialist Party (CDSP, Wang Shih-hsien ch., Wong Hou-sen sec. -gen.);
China Socialist Democratic Party (CSDP, Chu Kao-cheng l.);
Chinese Freedom Party; Chinese Republican Party (CRP, Wang Yin-chun ch.);
Democratic Liberal Party; Democratic Progressive Party (DPP, Huang Hsin-chieh ch., Chang Chun-hung sec. -gen.);
Kuntang (KT, Wang Yi-hsiung ch., Yau-nan Wang sec. -gen.);
Workers' Party (Lou Meiwen l.);
Young China Party (YCP, Li Huang ch.).
Elections
In 1986 84 additional members were elected to the National Assembly (KMT 68, DPP 11, CDSP 1, independent 4).
As of mid-1990 the Assembly had 691 members.
Elections were held in December 1989 for 101 seats in the Legislative Yuan (KMT 72, DPP 21, and independents eight — see pp. 37122-23).
As of mid-1990 the Legislative Yuan had 267 members (KMT 227, DPP 21, YCP seven, CDSP three and independents nine).
1990/91 OVERVIEW
President Lee Teng-hui made substantial progress with his programme of political reform in 1990-91, although he faced considerable opposition to the reform measures from conservative elements within his own KMT and from opposition leaders who questioned the pace of the programme.
Lee's most solid achievement was in late April 1991 to terminate the "Temporary Provisions" , the continuation of which had acted as a block to any major political reforms.
The Provisions, adopted in 1948, had enhanced powers of the President and frozen in office the mainland-elected members of the various deliberative assemblies, pending hypothetical recovery of the mainland.
Lee also received National Assembly approval for a number of other major constitutional amendments, which reapportioned the seats in the three elected branches of government so that most of the delegates would be elected from Taiwanese (as opposed to mainland Chinese) constituencies.
They also established a timetable for elections and the political reform process [see p. 37917].
1990 had started bleakly for Lee, who ran into serious difficulties gaining the KMT nomination for the election due in March to the presidency, a post which he had held since the death of Chiang Ching-kuo in early 1988 [see p. 37515].
Lee was challenged by a powerful conservative faction which threatened him with selecting instead Lin Yang-kan, the populist president of the Judicial Yuan and Gen. Chiang Wei-kuo, Chiang Kai-shek's only surviving son.
In the event Lin and Chiang pulled out at the last moment, prompting speculation that Lee had made a deal with the conservatives over the reform programme or over Cabinet posts.
Having survived the challenge in March he was elected by the National Assembly for a six-year term [see p. 37318].
The Assembly session had opened in February but had been seriously disrupted by DPP protests.
There was renewed unrest in May when Lee appointed a new Cabinet headed by Gen. Hau, a former Defence Minister.
Hau was widely regarded as a conservative, and violent street protests erupted in Taipei when news of his appointment emerged.
However, by the year end Gen. Hau had become a genuinely popular figure in Taiwan, largely as a result of the emphasis which he placed on finding solutions to various social problems [see pp. 37454-55].
Security
Shortly after his election as President in May, Lee Teng-hui announced a presidential amnesty for all political prisoners.
At the same time those convicted of political offences had their civil rights restored.
However, by the middle of 1990 there were reports of fresh sentences being passed on various dissidents who had recently returned to Taiwan.
Economy
The gross national product (GNP) growth rate fell from 7.3 per cent in 1989 to 5.3 per cent in 1990.
Officials blamed the fall on a collapse in the stock market, lower industrial production and falling domestic investment.
The Executive Yuan approved an ambitious six-year development plan in late January 1991 [see p. 38009].
Foreign relations
Relations with mainland
In late April 1991 Lee signed a document declaring the end of the "Period of Mobilization for the Suppression of the Communist Rebellion" , which effectively brought to an end more than four decades of "civil war" between Taiwan and the Chinese mainland.
While Lee declared that Taiwan had not abandoned its "one-China policy" , his action paved the way for further significant progress in relations between Taiwan and the mainland [see pp. 38146-47].
Throughout 1990 Lee had adopted a conciliatory approach towards relations with the mainland while nevertheless continuing to reject mainland China's advocacy of the principle of "one country — two systems" as a basis for reunification, proposing instead the rival notion of "one country, two regions" .
In his inaugural speech in May Lee offered to abandon the "three no's" policy (no contact, no compromise, no negotiation), but only on condition that the mainland renounced the use of force against Taiwan and implemented political and economic reforms [see p. 38190].
New mechanisms to facilitate contact between Taiwan and the mainland were created in 1990.
A National Unification Council (NUC), chaired by Lee, and a Mainland Affairs Council (MAC) were established in October.
In November the Straits Exchange Foundation (SEF) was established to deal with administrative and notionally non-political issues [see p. 37859].
Although ostensibly independent, the SEF was answerable to the MAC.
The NUC formulated a national unification programme in early 1991 which was endorsed by the KMT in March [see p. 38098].
Elements of the programme, which contained no timetable, were welcomed by the mainland.
In April-May an SEF delegation visited the Chinese mainland, the first formal visit by a Taiwanese delegation [see p. 38190].
In November 1990 the DPP had formed a Taiwan Sovereignty Independent Movement Committee to advocate what the party asserted was Taiwan's "independent sovereignty" which excluded mainland China.
Lee declared that the DPP's actions would be dealt with according to the law which prohibited the advocacy of independence.
Other foreign relations
Taiwan's policy of "flexible diplomacy" continued to pay some dividends during 1990.
Canada and Australia agreed to upgrade their offices in Taipei.
The decision by Nicaragua to open diplomatic relations with Taiwan in November meant that only Mexico of the Central American countries maintained ties exclusively with the mainland.
However, in August Saudi Arabia dealt the government a severe blow when it established diplomatic relations with the mainland.
Other setbacks included the decisions by Indonesia and Singapore to resume (or open) diplomatic relations with China, without either government having formal relations with Taiwan.
As of late 1990 Taiwan was recognized by 28 countries, the majority of which were small developing countries in Central and Latin America and in Africa.
Relations with the Soviet Union improved in 1990-91; the Soviet Minister of Culture, Nikolai Gubenko, paid a private visit in November, the most senior Soviet politician to visit Taiwan.
A Taiwanese trade delegation visited the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe in May 1991.
ASIA — PACIFIC
THAILAND
Area: 513,115 sq km.
Population: 55,700,000 (1990 UNFPA est.).
Capital: Bangkok.
Languages: Thai (national); small minorities speak Chinese, Malay and indigenous languages.
Religion: Buddhism (Theravada); Islamic and Christianity (minorities).
Armed forces: 283,000 (1990).
Currency: baht (US$1.00=B25.4592 as at Sept. 30, 1991).
Major international affiliations: ADB; ASEAN; APEC.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
Prior to February 1991, when the armed forces toppled the elected government in a bloodless coup, Thailand was a constitutional kingdom, with a bicameral National Assembly (the legislature comprising the Senate and the House of Representatives).
After the coup martial law was imposed (and lifted in May), the country's Constitution was terminated and the National Assembly and the Cabinet were dissolved.
The heads of the armed forces created a ruling National Peace-Keeping Assembly (NPA — previously given as NPKA — see p. 38391).
In March King Bhumibol approved an interim Constitution which provided for the appointment of a 292-member National Legislative Assembly to draw up a permanent constitution and prepare for a general election.
In the same month the NPA appointed a civilian Prime Minister and a new Cabinet [see pp. 38003-04; 38099].
Main government leaders
Head of state: King Bhumibol Adulyadej (Rama IX)(also Head of the Armed Forces).
National Peace-Keeping Assembly: Gen. Sunthorn Kongsompong (chair); Armed Forces Supreme Commander and Army C.-in-C.
Gen. Suchinda Kraprayoon (vice-ch.);
Navy C.-in-C.
Adml.
Praphat Kritsanachan (vice-ch.);
Air Force C.-in-C.
Air Chief Marshal Kaset Rojanani (vice-ch.);
Deputy Army C.-in-C.
Gen. Issarapong Noonpakdi (sec. -gen.).
Prime Minister: Anand Panyarachun.
Other principal ministers: Sanoh Unakul (Deputy Prime Minister); Police Gen. Pow Sarasin (Deputy Prime Minister); Meechai Ruchuphan (Deputy Prime Minister); Gen. Issarapong Noonpakdi (Interior); Adml.
Praphat Kritsanachan (Defence); Arsa Sarasin (Foreign Affairs); Suthee Singsaneh (Finance).
Cabinet changes in 1990-91
In January 1990 Meechai Ruchupan resigned as Minister attached to the Prime Minister's Office [see p. 37188].
In March Gen. Chaovalit Yongchaiyut resigned as Army C.-in-C. and made his long-awaited entry into civilian politics as Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Defence in Prime Minister Maj.-Gen.
Chatichai Choonhaven"s Cabinet, from which he resigned in June [see pp. 37317; 37532].
Chatichai carried out a major reshuffle in August, including the replacement of Finance Minister Pramual Sabhavasu and Foreign Minister Air Chief Marshal Siddhi Savetsila [see p. 37655].
A dispute between ministers and the armed forces necessitated another reshuffle in November [see p. 37857].
In mid-December Chatichai formed a new government, replacing a number of parties in the ruling coalition which was then toppled in a military coup in February 1991 [see pp. 37916; 38003].
The ruling junta appointed an interim Prime Minister (Anand Panyarachun) and Cabinet in early March [see p. 38099].
Ruling party
There has been no ruling party since the February 1991 military coup.
Main political parties
Chart Thai (Chatichai Choonhavan l.);
Democrat Party (Chuan Leekpai l.);
Ekkaparb (Bunchu Rothchanasathian l.);
New Aspiration Party (Gen. Chaovalit Yongchaiyut l.);
Palang Dharma (Chamlong Simaung l.)
Prachakorn Thai (Samak Sundaravej l.);
Puangchon Chao Thai (Gen. Arthit Kamlang-Ek l.);
Rassadorn (Gen. Mana Rattanakoset sec. -gen.);
Samakki Tham Party (Narong Wongwan l.);
Social Action Party (Montree Pongpanit l.).
The main illegal organization is the Communist Party of Thailand (Thong Jaemsri sec.).
Elections
The House of Representatives elected in July 1988 was dissolved in February 1991 by the military junta, which appointed a National Legislative Assembly in mid-March.
Under an interim constitution promulgated at the start of the month, the National Assembly had no fixed term; its primary task was to draft a new Constitution with a view to the holding of a general election before the end of 1991.
1990/91 OVERVIEW
The elected government of Gen. Chatichai Choonhaven was overthrown in a bloodless military coup in February 1991.
A military junta, the National Peace-Keeping Assembly (NPA), took control of the country, giving political corruption as the main justification for their action.
However, the coup was also in response to what leading factions within the army perceived as attempts by Chatichai to undermine their influence.
The dominant figure in the NPA, and the effective coup leader, was Army C.-in-C.
Gen. Suchinda Kraprayoon [see pp. 38003-04].
Chatichai's final year as Prime Minister had been a turbulent one, with widespread allegations of corruption, Cabinet disputes and serious labour unrest.
In March 1990 Chatichai had moved to stabilize his government by bringing Gen. Chaovalit Yongchaiyut, hitherto Army C.-in-C. and Chatichai's strongest political rival, into his Cabinet as Deputy Premier and Defence Minister.
Gen. Suchinda Kaprayoon replaced Chaovalit as the army leader.
Less than three months after his appointment Chaovalit resigned after a Cabinet colleague, Chalerm Yubamrung (who was thought to be close to Chatichai), accused him of corruption.
Chaovalit waited until October before registering his own New Aspirations Party to contest the next election.
In July Chatichai's government survived a vote of no confidence in the House of Representatives, sponsored by the opposition on grounds of corruption and incompetence.
The following month he enlarged his coalition, incorporating Puangchon Chao Thai, the party of former Army "strongman" Gen. Arthit Kamlang-Ek, and reshuffled his Cabinet in an attempt to deflect increasingly damaging allegations of corruption.
Chatichai was forced to demote Chalerm in November after the armed forces had threatened to intervene.
In December Chatichai resigned, but quickly formed a new coalition government incorporating former opposition parties Ekkaparb and Prachakorn Thai and discarding the Democrat Party, the Social Action Party and Muan Chon [see above].
Following the February coup the junta declared martial law, abrogated the Constitution and dissolved parliament and the Cabinet.
An interim Constitution, approved by the King, was published in March and promised a new Constitution and fresh elections by the year end.
Later that month the junta appointed a civilian Prime Minister, Anand Panyarachun, who formed a new Cabinet, and a military-dominated National Legislative Assembly.
One of the Assembly's first actions was to approve legislation in April dissolving all of the country's powerful state enterprise unions [see p. 38151].
Under Chatichai such unions had wielded considerable power and had caused serious disruption to the government's privatization plans.
In May martial law was lifted in most areas of the country and a ban on political activity was also lifted.
1989/90 1990/91 Total receipts 335,000 387,500
Economy
Budgets for 1989/90 and 1990/91 (million baht), year ending Sept. 30.
Taxation 282,755 347,511
Borrowing 25,000 n/a Others 27,244.6 39,988 Total expenditure 335,000 387,500
Education 59,962 73,979
Defence 54,758 63,077
Debt service 69,574 58,592
Public health/utilities 42,506 52,109
Economic services 68,966 85,686
Others 39,231 54,054
The economy grew by an estimated 9.9 per cent in 1990, following growth rates of 12.2 per cent in 1989 and 13.2 per cent in 1988.
The export-led economic boom generated numerous problems, made worse by an inadequate infrastructure.
Efforts were made during 1990 to resolve the infrastructure problem; the Cabinet approved a road and rail scheme and a mass transmit system for Bangkok, and a contract was signed for the installation of some 3,000,000 new telephone lines.
The new port at Laem Chabang, on the eastern seaboard, was scheduled for completion in 1991.
Following the coup the ruling junta made few changes to economic policy.
However, it quickly neutralized the country's state enterprise unions, paving the way for the increased role of the private sector in the development of state enterprises.
The junta also implemented certain populist policies, including the provision of wage supplements for rural workers.
Foreign relations
Foreign relations continued to be dominated by events in Indo-China.
Thailand, like its ASEAN partner Indonesia, was intricately involved in the Cambodian peace process, and various meetings of the warring Cambodian factions were held in Bangkok and Pattaya.
The Chatichai government maintained its policy of increased support for the State of Cambodia (SOC) and the Vietnam governments alongside a sterner approach towards the Thai-based Cambodian resistance.
The policy was a product of Chatichai's influential group of advisers and was reportedly opposed by the Foreign Ministry itself; in August veteran Foreign Minister Siddhi Savetsila was replaced, largely because of his opposition to Chatichai's Indo-China policy.
Following the military coup in February 1991, foreign policy reverted to a more traditional role.
Increased support was provided for the Cambodian resistance and Chatichai's aim of turning Indo-China "from a battlefield into a marketplace" was no longer a priority.
However, relations with Vietnam continued to improve and in June 1991 Gen. Sunthorn visited Hanoi.
Chatichai had nevertheless made every effort to maintain traditional close relations with China, the principle patron of the Cambodian resistance.
In August 1990 Chinese Premier Li Peng visited Bangkok, and in October Chatichai travelled to Beijing.
In June 1991 President Yang Shangkun of China visited Thailand.
Thailand maintained close relations with neighbouring Myanma despite widespread international disapproval of the failure of the ruling junta in Myanma to transfer power to elected civilians.
Relations between the Thai and Myanman armies were especially close and reportedly extended to co-operation in business dealings and in the suppression of ethnic insurgency along their common border.
Relations with the United States remained strong, although evidence emerged of increasing US frustration over the failure of the Thai authorities to guarantee full intellectual property and copyright protection.
Chatichai visited Washington in June 1990.
ASIA — PACIFIC
VIETNAM
Area: 329,566 sq km.
Population: 66,700,000 (1990 UNFPA est.).
Capital: Hanoi.
Language: Vietnamese.
Religion: Buddhism, Daoism, Confucianism, Hoa Hoa, Caodaism and Christianity.
Armed forces: 1,052,000 (1990).
Currency: dong (US$1.00=10538 dong as at Sept. 30, 1991).
Major international affiliations: ADB; NAM.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The Socialist Republic of Vietnam was proclaimed in 1976 after North Vietnam-backed communist insurgents had reunified the country in April 1975 by overthrowing the United States-supported government of South Vietnam after some 16 years of war.
Under the terms of the 1980 Constitution legislative power is vested in a 496-member National Assembly (Quoc Hoi) elected for a five-year term, which elects a Council of State (the collective presidency) and a Council of Ministers headed by a Chair.
Real political power rests in the hands of the Communist Party of Vietnam (CPV), which permeates the entire political structure, including the National Assembly, the Council of Ministers and the army.
Main government leaders
President of the Council of State: Senior Gen. Vo Chi Cong.
Chair of the Council of Ministers (Premier): Vo Van Kiet.
Other principal ministers: Pham Van Kai (Vice-Chair); Senior Gen. Dong Sy Nguyen (Vice-Chair); Tran Duc Luong (Vice-Chair); Nguyen Khanh (Vice-Chair and General Secretary of Council of Ministers); Gen. Doan Khue (National Defence); Nguyen Manh Cam (Foreign Affairs); Lt.-Gen.
Bui Thien Ngo (Interior); Do Quoc Sam (Chair of State Commission for Planning).
Cabinet changes in 1990-91
A reorganization of the Council of Ministers was carried out in April 1990 [see p. 37375].
In August 1991 Vo Van Kiet replaced Do Muoi as Premier and the Council of Ministers was again reshuffled [see p. 38390].
Ruling party
The Communist Party of Vietnam (CPV, Do Muoi sec. -gen.) is the only authorized political party; its seventh congress was held in June 1991 [see p. 38271-72].
Members of the political bureau: Do Muoi; Le Duc Anh; Vo Van Kiet; Dao Duy Tung; Doan Khue; Vu Oanh; Le Phuoc Tho; Pham Van Kai; Bui Thien Ngo; Nong Duc Manh; Pham The Duyet; Nguyen Duc Binh; Vo Tran Chi.
Elections
The National Assembly was elected in April 1987.
1990/91 OVERVIEW
Progress towards political reform under Nguyen Van Linh (then secretary-general of the CPV)"s programme of renovation (doi moi) was effectively halted by apprehension within the higher echelons of the CPV over the momentous events taking place in the Soviet Union and eastern Europe during 1989-91.
Political reform was a central issue at the party's ninth plenum of the sixth central committee in March 1990 [see p. 37374].
Expressing concern over events in eastern Europe, it rejected outright the possibility of major political reforms and a leading reformist Tran Xuan Bach was dismissed from the politburo.
Following the plenum the leadership adopted a hardline approach to dissent while increasing efforts to regain the support and trust of the large numbers of people who had become disenchanted with the widespread corruption within the government and the party.
Large numbers of officials were dismissed and fined or imprisoned during 1990 as the result of a major anti-corruption campaign.
In April the powerful state security apparatus launched a campaign, apparently aimed particularly at southerners, of arresting people who sought to undermine political security.
Stringent press restrictions imposed in late 1989 were upheld throughout 1990, although the party journal, Tap Chi Cong San, published a series of articles in early 1991 in which prominent intellectuals were highly critical of the party and its line on political reform.
The strict anti-reformist line resulting from the ninth plenum was largely absent from the resolutions of the 10th plenum held in December 1990.
Some analysts pointed to the absence of Le Duc Tho, leader of a conservative faction within the party, who had died in October.
At the 10th plenum a new draft political platform was released, which some commentators saw as marking a return to central planning, while others saw it as an essentially reformist tract.
The party's seventh congress was held in late June 1991, after delays attributed to the debate within the party over economic and political policy.
However, in the event the congress avoided real discussion of the more controversial policy details relating to doi moi.
Widespread leadership changes were approved, however, including the appointment of Do Muoi as secretary-general in place of Nguyen Van Linh.
Security
In a trial held in October 1990, 38 members of the National United Front for the Liberation of Vietnam (NUFLVN) resistance movement were sentenced to long terms of imprisonment after being found guilty of attempting to overthrow the government.
Two Roman Catholic activists, Fr Chan Tin and Nguyen Ngoc Lan, were arrested in May 1990 and charged with "anti-government preaching" .
Nguyen Ngoc Lan was subsequently placed under house arrest, while Fr Chan Tin was transferred to a different church.
In November a Vatican delegation visited Vietnam for the first time.
Economy
During 1990 and early 1991 the Vietnamese leadership continued to try to implement the plan initiated by Nguyen Van Linh in 1986 to transform the country's centralized economy to a market-orientated system.
However, the reform programme was seriously hampered by a series of external factors, including the maintenance of a trade embargo by the United States, the country's ineligibility (since 1985) for credit from the IMF and major reductions in Soviet aid (to approximately US$110 million for 1991).
Beginning in 1991 Vietnam was also obliged to pay in hard currency, rather than in roubles, at international prices, for goods imported from the Soviet Union.
In an attempt to compensate for the reduction of Soviet aid the government made serious efforts during 1990 to improve economic relations with its Asian neighbours, including Thailand, Indonesia and Taiwan.
The Soviet Union had been by far the largest aid donor to Vietnam since the inception of the republic in 1976.
As of 1990 Vietnam was estimated to owe the Soviet Union some US$18,350 million, of which US$10,340 million was due to be repaid before 1995.
The reduction in Soviet exports of materials had a serious impact on heavy industry and textiles manufacturing, both of which had been adversely affected by internal subsidy reductions.
The reduction of imports of Soviet fertilizer was also seen as a threat to grain production, one of Vietnam's major successes in recent years.
In 1989 Vietnam had exported 1,400,000 tonnes of rice, making it the third-largest rice exporter in the world.
Estimates for 1990 suggested that well over 1,400,000 tonnes would be exported in 1990.
The reduction in Soviet assistance further increased Vietnam's budget deficit, already large because of the high level of government subsidies to ailing state concerns, and because of measures to offset threatened increases in inflation and unemployment.
The budget deficit for 1990 was estimated at over 2,000,000 million dong, or some 7.7 per cent of gross domestic product (GDP).
Unemployment had risen partly because of the demobilization of large numbers of soldiers following the Vietnamese withdrawal from Cambodia in 1989, and also because of the return of workers from eastern Europe.
In order to combat inflation the government imposed strict controls on foreign currency.
Despite the country's economic difficulties, international business interest in Vietnam increased during 1990 in anticipation of the normalization of relations with the USA and the attendant liberalization of international funding.
In March 1991 Vietnam held its first foreign investment forum.
One encouraging sign was the intensification of offshore oil exploration; in October 1990 it was announced that a Vietnamese-Soviet joint venture had discovered an oil field (Dai Hung) estimated to contain some 250 million barrels.
New banking legislation was introduced in October after a pyramid scheme operated by the Thanh Huong perfume company had collapsed, emphasizing the current banking system's deficiencies, and provoking major public protests in Ho Chi Minh City.
The managers of the company were sentenced to long terms of imprisonment in October.
Foreign relations
During 1990 and the first half of 1991 relations altered dramatically with the Soviet Union, which, struggling with momentous internal political and economic problems, made major cuts in its aid programme to Vietnam, and a cutback in the Soviet naval and air base at Cam Ranh Bay; in October 1990 the Soviet ambassador to Vietnam announced that the Soviet Union had started to withdraw its troops from the base.
In May 1991 Do Muoi and Nguyen Van Linh visited the Soviet Union for talks centring on economic and foreign relations.
The drastic change in its relations with the Soviet Union motivated Vietnam to improve relations with China and with the USA.
Relations with China improved markedly during 1990.
In June Chinese Vice-Minister of Foreign Affairs Xu Dunxin visited Hanoi, the highest level visit since 1979.
In September a secret meeting of government and party leaders was held in China, and later that month Vice-Premier Vo Nguyen Giap openly visited Beijing.
A further important step towards normalization occurred at the CPV's seventh congress in June 1991 when the long-serving Foreign Minister Nguyen Co Thach, a leading opponent of a pro-Chinese foreign policy, was removed from the politburo (being replaced in his ministerial capacity in August).
Relations with the United States also improved during 1990.
In July USA Secretary of State James Baker announced that the USA would enter into direct dialogue with Vietnam on the issue of Cambodia; the talks opened in New York in August.
In October Baker and Nguyen Co Thach also held talks in New York, a significant move towards the resumption of diplomatic relations.
However, in September US President Bush extended the US trade embargo against Vietnam for another year, despite significant congressional and business pressure not to do so [see p. 37712].
The following month the USA blocked an International Monetary Fund (IMF) move to formulate a structural adjustment programme for Vietnam.
During his visit to the USA in October Thach also visited Washington for talks with Gen. John Vessey, Bush's special envoy on US servicemen missing in action (MIA) in Indo-China.
Joint US-Vietnamese search missions for MIAs continued throughout 1990 and into 1991, and in April 1991, following a visit by Vessey to Hanoi, it was agreed that the USA would establish a "temporary office" in Hanoi to investigate outstanding MIA cases.
Also in April the US government proposed a four-stage programme for the resumption of diplomatic relations, conditional on a diplomatic settlement of the Cambodian conflict and on significant progress on the MIA issue [see p. 38141].
Japan remained Vietnam's largest non-communist trading partner in 1990.
In October Foreign Minister Nguyen Co Thach visited Tokyo, the highest level visit by a Vietnamese official since re-unification in 1976.
In June 1991 the then Japanese Foreign Minister, Taro Nakayama, visited Vietnam.
President Suharto of Indonesia visited Vietnam in November 1990.
In February 1991 Malaysia became the first ASEAN country to open a diplomatic office in Ho Chi Minh City, the country's commercial capital.
In October 1990 the European Communities announced the restoration of diplomatic relations with Vietnam.
ASIA — PACIFIC
APEC
Full title: Asia-Pacific Economic Co-operation.
Date of foundation: November 1989.
Objective: To promote multilateral trade in the Asia-Pacific region.
Member states: Australia, Brunei, Canada, Indonesia, Japan, South Korea, Malaysia, New Zealand, the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand, United States.
Senior officials from ASEAN and other Pacific rim countries met in Canberra, Australia, in November 1989 to inaugurate APEC.
In an opening address to the conference, Australian Prime Minister Bob Hawke stressed that APEC had no "hidden agenda" and was a genuine attempt to encourage "open, multilateral trade" in order to prevent the world economy from fragmenting into "defensive trading blocs" .
The second ministerial meeting of APEC, held in Singapore on July 30-31, 1990, was a hesitant affair from which nothing concrete emerged.
Promises were made to conduct "urgent reviews" of negotiating positions to facilitate a breakthrough at the deadlocked "Uruguay Round" of GATT negotiations.
Members also set themselves the task of finding an acceptable formula to bring the "three Chinas" into the grouping, although Chinese Premier Li Peng stated in August that China was not prepared to join the organization as one of "three Chinas" [see pp. 37613; 37656].
ASIA — PACIFIC
ASEAN
Full title: Association of South-East Asian Nations.
Date of Foundation: August 1967.
Objectives: Acceleration of economic progress and stabilization of the south-east Asian region.
Member states: Brunei, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Singapore and Thailand.
Secretary-General: Rusli Noor.
1990/1991 OVERVIEW
The United States decision in July 1990 to withdraw its support from the seating of the rebel National Government of Cambodia at the UN and to enter into dialogue with Vietnam came as an immense shock to the ASEAN members [see p. 37598].
The conflict in Cambodia, and in particular the US policy change, inevitably dominated the 23rd annual ASEAN Foreign Ministers' meeting on July 24-25 in Indonesia [see p. 37613].
The new US position led to a closing of ASEAN ranks, with little evidence of the internal quarrelling over Cambodia which had surfaced at the 22nd annual meeting of Foreign Ministers in Brunei in 1989.
The question of US military bases in Asia remained a source of intra-ASEAN tension during 1990.
Malaysia, and to a lesser extent Indonesia, expressed concern at a November agreement which provided for increased US use of Singapore's military facilities.
Unease over the bases issue did not, however, frustrate Singaporean efforts to promote an innovative economic "growth triangle" involving itself, Johore state in Malaysia and Riau province in Indonesia.
Meanwhile negotiations between the US government and the Philippines over the future of Clark air base and of Subic Bay naval base remained effectively deadlocked, with the Philippines government continuing to insist that it would take over the bases when the current agreement expired in 1991.
[For compromise agreement announced in October 1991 see p. 38534.]
In October 1990 ASEAN economic ministers convened in Indonesia for their 22nd annual meeting.
The ministers amended the terms of the ASEAN industrial joint-venture (AIJV) plan to include allowing non-ASEAN investors to hold up to 60 per cent of equity.
They also adopted a new plan for common effective preferential tariffs on selected industrial products "to facilitate the free flow of goods within ASEAN" .
In March 1991 President Suharto of Indonesia, Singapore Prime Minister Goh Chok Tong, Sultan Sir Hassanal Bolkiah of Brunei and Malaysian Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamed convened in Bali for a seminar, which was attended by over 1,000 Asian and American delegates, with the theme "ASEAN and the world economy" [see p. 38101].
A major topic of discussion at the seminar was Mahathir's proposal, made in January, for an East Asian Economic Grouping (EAEG).
Mahathir's proposal was one of a number of plans for enhanced intra-ASEAN economic co-operation which came under discussion at the 24th annual meeting of ASEAN Foreign Ministers held in Malaysia in July 1991 [see p. 38345-46].
The issue dominated the meeting and discussion on the ongoing peace process in Cambodia was relegated to second place.
For the first time the Soviet Union and China were represented at the meeting.
South Korea was accepted as ASEAN's seventh full "dialogue partner" at the post-ministerial conference.
ASIA — PACIFIC
SAARC
Full title: South Asian Association for Regional Co-operation.
Foundation: December 1985.
Status: Regional co-operation association.
Members: Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Maldives, Nepal, Pakistan and Sri Lanka.
Chair: Maumoon Abdul Gayoom (Maldives).
Sec. -Gen.: K. K. Bhargava (India).
The fifth summit meeting of the SAARC was held in the Maldives in November 1990 [see p. 37856-57].
The SAARC council of ministers met in the Maldives on July 3-4, 1991, when it was agreed that the sixth SAARC summit would take place in Sri Lanka in November 1991.
The ministers agreed to take "co-ordinated action" to combat the menace of terrorism which they said threatened to destabilize the South Asian region.
The ministers also agreed to an Indian proposal that each member state should give the other most-favoured-nation treatment in trade, manufacturing services and tourism.
ASIA — PACIFIC
AUSTRALIA
Area: 7,682,300 sq km.
Population: 16,900,000 (1990 UNFPA est.).
Capital: Canberra Language: English.
Religion: Christianity (76% — Anglican Roman Catholic, other Protestant, Orthodox); most of the rest do not profess a religion.
Armed forces: 68,100 (1990).
Currency: Australian dollar (US$1.00=A$1.2481 as at Sept. 30, 1991).
Major international affiliations: ADB; APEC.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The head of state of Australia, an independent member of the Commonwealth, is the British sovereign, represented by a Governor General.
Under the Federal Constitution which came into force in 1901, legislative authority within the Commonwealth of Australia is vested in a bicameral Federal Parliament consisting of the Senate whose 76 members (12 from each of the country's constituent states and two each for the Northern Territory and the Capital Territory of Canberra) are directly elected for a six-year term and retire by rotation, one-half from each state on June 30 of each third year; and the 148-member House of Representatives elected for three years; each state has its own legislature, government and constitution.
Main government leaders
Governor General: Bill Hayden.
Prime Minister: Paul Keating (who replaced Bob Hawke — in office since March 1983 — in December 1991).
Other principal ministers: Gareth Evans (Foreign Affairs and Trade); Brian Howe (Health, Housing and Community Services); John Dawkins (Treasurer); John Button (Industry, Technology and Commerce)
State Premiers
New South Wales — Nick Greiner (Lib); Queensland — Wayne Goss (ALP); Tasmania — Michael Field (ALP); Victoria — Joan Kirner (ALP); South Australia — John Bannon (ALP); Western Australia — Carmen Lawrence (ALP).
Chief Minister of the Northern Territory — Steve Hatton (ALP).
1990-91 Cabinet changes
A major reshuffle took place in April 1990 [see p. 37378]; a reshuffle was occasioned by the resignation of Paul Keating as Treasurer and Deputy Prime Minister in June 1991 [see p. 38294].
Ruling party
Australian Labor Party (ALP)(John Bannon nat. pres.).
Other main political parties
Australian Democrats Party (Janet Powell l.);
Green Party; Liberal Party of Australia (John D. Elliott fed.
pres.);
National Party of Australia (Stuart McDonald fed.
pres.).
Elections
In the general election of March 1990 the ALP was narrowly returned for a fourth successive term [see pp. 37320-21; for final Senate results see p. 37876].
1990/91 OVERVIEW
Politics
In March 1990 the ALP (then led by Bob Hawke) won an unprecedented fourth consecutive federal election victory.
By the middle of the year the ALP was also in control of every state government except New South Wales, where it had lost power in 1988.
Superficially, the party's position looked unassailable, and commentators repeatedly claimed that, under Hawke's premiership, the ALP had been transformed into the natural party of government.
During 1990 and the first half of 1991, however, this contention looked increasingly mistaken as, within weeks of the election victory, both Hawke and his party were recording high levels of public dissatisfaction in opinion polls.
This was increased by the growing popularity of new Liberal-National parliamentary coalition leader John Hewson, who replaced Andrew Peacock after the election [see p. 37378].
Careful analysis of the electoral results showed that the ALP's narrow victory — its majority in the House of Representatives fell from 18 to eight and it suffered a negative swing of almost 2 per cent— had been achieved through skilful targeting of marginal constituencies and preference voters.
The ALP finished with 0.2 per cent less of the two-party preferred vote than did the opposition coalition, and in at least 10 instances the ALP won because they received the second preference votes of supporters of the Greens.
(The defeat of National Party leader Charles Blunt was a direct result of the transference to Labor of second preference Green votes.)
The National Party's poor showing in the elections — it lost three seats to the ALP — came despite the economic problems affecting much of rural Australia.
As such, its loss of support was part of the continuing legacy of the Fitzgerald inquiry into corruption within the Queensland government, where the Nationals had been in power for 30 years until defeated in 1989.
The inquiry had been established in 1987 by National Party state Premier Sir Johannes Bjelke Petersen as a sop to the opposition, but gradually developed into a thorough examination of institutionalized corruption within the state.
By mid-1991 more than 200 people — including police officers, judges, businessmen and former members of Sir Joh's Cabinet — had been charged with criminal offences.
In early August 1991 the former police commissioner, Sir Terence Lewis, was sentenced to 14 years' imprisonment [see p. 38398].
The trial of Sir Joh himself was due to begin later in the year.
The Democrats achieved their best ever showing in the general election — polling 11 per cent of the vote — and retained the balance of power in the federal Senate.
In so doing, however, the party lost its leader, Janine Haines, who gave up her seat in the Senate in an unsuccessful attempt to win a seat in the House of Representatives (in which the party had no members).
She was replaced as party leader by Senator Janet Powell.
Although Hawke retained much of his former Cabinet following the general election, one notable absence was that of former Finance Minister Peter Walsh who retired from government because he felt that the Hawke administration lacked sufficient political will to tackle the country's pressing financial problems [see p. 37378].
Federal Treasurer Paul Keating retained his post and added to it the title of Deputy Prime Minister, thereby increasing speculation that he would succeed Hawke as Prime Minister [see above].
On Sept. 24 a specially convened ALP party conference in Canberra reversed the party's traditional hostility to privatization by backing the government's plans to allow a degree of competition for Telecom, the state-owned telecommunications authority, and to sell Australian Airlines (the state-owned domestic airline) and 49 per cent of Quantas, the national overseas carrier.
It also approved the partial privatization of the federal government bank, the Commonwealth Bank, established 78 years earlier as Labor's first step into public ownership.
On Nov. 8 Hawke stated that the telecommunications market would be opened to unlimited competition by mid-1997.
Hawke achieved a further personal triumph on Oct. 31 when most of his plans for constitutional and structural reform were approved in principle by representatives of the country's eight state and territory governments.
The reforms, which were discussed at a two-day conference in Brisbane, were designed to eliminate regional differences in regulations and services.
The key to the achievement of a consensus lay in Hawke's agreement to increase the financial autonomy of individual states by expanding their powers to raise taxes and by loosening controls on how they spent money transferred to them by the federal government.
In return the states agreed to co-operate with the federal government in reducing duplication of health and welfare services, cutting losses in state-owned businesses, co-ordinating infrastructure spending, and harmonizing regulations in areas such as environmental protection and professional qualifications.
The most immediate impact would be on transport, through the creation of a national rail freight corporation and a national registration and taxation scheme for heavy vehicles.
Both federal and state leaders at the conference warned, however, that the reforms would face stiff opposition from vested interests in state governments, public service, trade unions and the business community.
On Nov. 20, 1990, the government announced an agreement with the trade unions, estimated to cost A$1,000 million per year, whereby it would increase tax cuts in return for continued wage restraint.
The deal, which was designed to reduce inflation, was the latest in a series of accords between the ALP government and the trade union movement.
A prices and incomes accord, negotiated in 1983, had (with several revisions) covered the whole of the Hawke government's period in office and was credited by its advocates with having created 300,000 jobs, reduced real unit labour costs and underpinned one of the longest periods of industrial harmony in the country's history.
In the face of persistent inflation (more than 7 per cent per annum in 1990) many commentators predicted the imminent collapse of the accord.
As the recession deepened [see below], the Hawke government began 1991 some 18 percentage points behind the opposition in opinion polls, raising questions concerning Hawke's future as leader, particularly as Keating had let it be known at a National Press Club dinner in December that he believed he would make a better Prime Minister than Hawke.
On June 3 the rivalry between the two men culminated with a challenge by Keating to Hawkes' leadership.
Hawke won the ballot by 66 votes to 44, but the allegations concerning his judgment and honesty which were highlighted by the challenge left him politically damaged [see p. 38294; for Hawke's eventual defeat by Keating see p. 38675].
Keating was replaced as Treasurer by Kerin.
ALP's position in the states
By mid-1991 the ALP remained deeply unpopular at federal level and in all the states except Queensland, where the party continued to benefit from reaction to the corruption of the former National Party government [see above].
In Victoria the opinion polls suggested that the ALP would be defeated at the next election.
State Premier Joan Kirner had inherited office when John Cain was forced to resign in August 1990 after a Royal Commission inquiry into the collapse of the merchant banking arm of the state bank, Tricontinental, revealed a record of financial mismanagement, but she had been unable to reverse the consequent unpopularity of her party.
In Tasmania there was increasing friction between the minority ALP administration and the Green Party legislators on whose support it depended.
In South Australia another Royal Commission had raised doubts concerning the judgement of ALP Premier Bannon, the national party president, who was forced to provide a A$970 million rescue package for the state bank only months after he had assured the legislature that he had every confidence in the bank.
The party was in most trouble in Western Australia, where in November 1990 the state government was forced to establish a Royal Commission to examine claims of corrupt links between politicians, bureaucrats and businessmen.
State Premier Carmen Lawrence, who had resisted such a move since taking office at the beginning of 1990 [see p. 37250], finally conceded that an inquiry similar to the Fitzgerald inquiry was necessary to restore public confidence in the electoral system.
Although the investigation was to cover the period from 1980 onwards, most of the allegations related to the so-called "W. A. Inc." period from 1987 to 1989, when ALP state governments led successively by Brian Burke and Peter Dowding had sought to promote economic development through close links with local entrepreneurs.
Among the financial disasters of this policy were the state's attempt to rescue the failed Rothwell merchant bank, and a joint venture with the Bond corporation involving a petrochemical plant which was never built.
The cost to the public of the mismanagement was estimated at A$400 million by Lawrence and at A$900 million by the opposition.
As the inquiry progressed its revelations increased the unpopularity of the ALP state government, which was due to face re-election by 1993.
In mid-1991 the ALP lost a by-election in Geraldton (which it had held for more than 70 years), winning only 16.7 per cent of the primary vote and recording an unprecedented negative swing of 30 per cent.
On April 29 Burke resigned as Australian ambassador to Ireland and the Vatican.
Although the inquiry was still in its early stages by mid-1991, there were suggestions that its impact would not be limited to Western Australia.
Evidence given on April 11 by Laurie Connell, the former chairman of Rothwells, alleged that at an ALP fund-raising lunch in June 1987 Hawke had promised that the federal government would not abolish the company tax exemption for gold-mining companies.
Hawke immediately denied the allegation to the federal parliament, claiming that he had given no such promise and that a decision about the tax was not made until a month after the lunch.
Almost immediately it was revealed that he had told a radio interviewer on the morning of the lunch that there would be no such tax on gold-mining companies, and he was forced to return to parliament later on April 11 to admit that his memory of events had been mistaken.
Aboriginal issues
The World Council of Churches issued a report on Feb. 4, 1991, which criticized the treatment of the Aboriginal population (some 1.5 per cent of the total population).
The report accused the government of abdicating its responsibility, and society of "justifying the continued systematic destruction of an indigenous culture, language and spirituality" .
It concluded that "the impact of racism by Australians on the aboriginal people in this nation is not just horrific, but genocidal and must be addressed" .
The same month Medical Journal of Australia published a report which found that the suicide rate for Aborigines had risen 10-fold since 1981, and was six times higher than that for other Australians.
In 1988 there were 105.3 suicides per 100,000 Aborigines in South Australia, compared with only 10.1 per 100,000 in 1981.
In May Aboriginal campaigners persuaded Edinburgh University, in Scotland, to return the remains of more than 300 Aborigines from its anthropological collection in order that they could be reburied according to Aboriginal traditions.
The decision marked an important victory in an ongoing campaign to secure the return of collections of Aboriginal remains by institutions throughout Europe.
Economy
Corporate failures
Business confidence was undermined in 1990 by a series of spectacular corporate failures.
Heavy corporate borrowing in the 1980s (encouraged by government deregulation) together with a sustained period of high interest rates and, from 1990, with a contracting economy, proved a fatal combination for many companies.
Several high-profile companies collapsed, including Qunitext, a television and leisure resort company headed by Christopher Skase; Rothwells, the Perth-based merchant bank; and the Hooker Corporation, a property and retail group headed by George Herscu.
The largest failure involved the Bond Corporation [see p. 37877].
It was reported on Oct. 3 that in the previous two weeks Australian groups had recorded combined losses of around A$6,500 million.
There was also turmoil in the media sector.
In September the television station Network Ten went into receivership with debts of A$445,000,000, while the largest network, Nine, owned by Alan Bond, was bought by Kerry Packer, the head of Consolidated Press Holdings.
The John Fairfax Group, burdened by debts of A$1,700 million, went into receivership on Dec. 9.
The country's other major media group, News Corp., headed by Rupert Murdoch, admitted to short-term debts of A$508,650,000 at the end June 1990.
Cost cutting measures employed by the company included the merger of two Melbourne newspapers (the Sun News-Pictorial, a morning tabloid, and the Herald, an evening broadsheet) and two in Sydney (The Daily Telegraph, a morning tabloid, and the Daily Mirror, an evening tabloid).
The year ended with News Corp. negotiating a US$8,000 million debt restructuring package with a group of 150 banks.
Personal misfortune also struck several of Australia's most renowned corporate entrepreneurs.
Robert Holmes à Court died of a heart attack on Sept. 2, while on Oct. 7 Packer suffered a massive heart attack whilst playing polo.
Bond was arrested on Dec. 6 following an investigation into the 1988 collapse of Rothwells Ltd., a merchant bank run by his business associate, Laurie Connell [see p. 37920].
On the same day Herscu was found guilty of paying a A$100,000 bribe to a Queensland Cabinet Minister in 1983.
Skase was charged with two counts of corruption in May 1991, and was declared bankrupt on June 13.
In early October 1990 the government attempted to restore confidence by announcing tougher regulations to limit the scope of the sort of corporate flamboyance which had characterized much of the 1980s.
The measures included increased fines for insider trading.
On Oct. 15 the Reserve Bank of Australia attempted to counter collapsing confidence by cutting official interest rates by one percentage point to 13 per cent.
The Commonwealth Bank immediately announced that its rate for leading corporate customers would be reduced from 16.5 per cent to 15.5 per cent.
After 18 months of monetary restraint, it was the fifth cut to have been effected since the beginning of 1990 (by the end of the year the basic rate had been reduced to 12 per cent).
Treasurer Keating had used high interest rates as his main weapon in the struggle to reduce the country's current account deficit, but they had been for blamed for contributing to the loss of business confidence.
Confirmation of economic recession
Figures issued at the end of November 1990 confirmed that the economy was in recession.
Real gross domestic product (GDP) fell by 1.6 per cent in the three months to September, following a fall of 0.4 per cent in the June quarter.
Taken together, the two quarters showed the weakest rate of growth for a six-month period since March 1972.
Keating described the situation as "the recession that Australia had to have" in order to reduce its huge current-account deficit which had exceeded A$21,000 million in 1989/90.
Nevertheless, the Treasurer suggested that the worst was probably over, and that the recession would not be as deep as that of 1982/83 when GDP had declined for four consecutive quarters and both inflation and unemployment had exceeded 10 per cent.
By the end of February 1991 unemployment had reached 738,000, a six-year high at 8.7 per cent.
Inflation was close to 7 per cent and the current-account deficit was running at an annual rate of around A$17,000 million.
Although Keating once again expressed optimism that the recession was bottoming out, he ruled out any further cuts in interest rates in the immediate future.
Trade liberalization measures
On March 12 Hawke announced a package of market-liberalization measures designed to make the economy more competitive and to reduce the current account deficit.
The centrepiece of the package involved cuts in average import tariffs from 15 per cent to 5 per cent by 1996.
Tariffs on passenger vehicles were to be reduced from 35 per cent in 1992 to 15 per cent by 2000, and protection for textiles, clothing and footwear was to be cut from a maximum of 55 per cent to 25 per cent.
Import quotas would be abolished by 1993.
Announcing the measures to parliament, Hawke stated that "the days of our being able to hitch a free ride in a world clamouring, and prepared to pay high prices, for our rural and mineral products are behind us" .
Many commentators criticized the package, however, for its failure to include a reform of the labour market or the public sector.
It was not unusual for a single employer to have to negotiate with five or more of the more than 300 trade unions.
Companies were also bound to match wages and conditions laid down in federal (and sometimes state) awards for their industry.
This situation was widely held to be responsible for Australia's slowness in adopting new technology — automation in the motor industry was far less advanced than in western Europe — and for persistently low levels of labour productivity.
An OECD survey suggested that output per worker in the public utilities was less than half the average of those of the organization's 24 members.
With nationalized industries accounting for more than 25 per cent of the country's non-housing investment (compared with less than 10 per cent in the United States and Japan), the efficiency of the public sector had a considerable impact throughout the whole of the economy.
Further cuts in interest rates — Replacement of Treasurer
There was a further easing of monetary policy on April 4, 1991, when interest rates were cut by half a percentage point to 11.5 per cent.
Australia's largest private bank, Westpac Banking Corp., immediately lowered its prime rate by half a percentage point to 15 per cent.
A further cut of 1 per cent was announced by the Australian Reserve Bank on May 16, following the release of figures for the three months to March which showed the annualized rate of inflation had fallen from 6.9 per cent to 4.9 per cent, the lowest for nine years.
Less welcome news for the government was that unemployment had risen to 844,000 (9.9 per cent of the workforce) by the end of April, the worst figure since 1983, the year that the ALP had come to power.
In early June Keating unsuccessfully challenged Hawke for the ALP leadership, in a move which most commentators agreed left Hawke politically damaged.
Hawke did receive a boost from the unemployment figures, however, which showed that there had been a fall in May to 9.4 per cent, the first reduction for five months.
The country's current-account deficit for the first 10 months of the fiscal year also showed a fall of 27 per cent compared with the same period in 1989/90.
The figure to the end of April 1991 was A$13,990 million compared with A$19,000 million to the end of April 1990.
In a series of interviews on June 12 the new Treasurer, John Kerin, stated his commitment to his predecessor's tight budgetary policies, and reaffirmed the government's inflation target of 4 per cent for 1991/92.
Disasters
Serious bush fires menaced the Sydney suburb of Allambie Heights on Dec. 25, 1990, destroying several homes.
Officials declared the north-east coast of Queensland a disaster area on Dec. 26, after cyclone "Joy" inflicted damage estimated at A$40 million with winds of up to 145 miles per hour.
More than half of the state was again declared a disaster area in April 1991 when several days of heavy rains produced severe flooding for the second consecutive year.
In addition to causing severe damage, the floods were responsible for the deaths of at least five people.
Foreign relations
Australia sent two frigates and a support ship to the Gulf to assist the multinational blockade of Iraq, following its invasion of Kuwait in August 1990.
The government reviewed its relations with Taiwan, but decided to maintain its current policy of recognizing only the People's Republic of China as the sole legitimate government of China, acknowledging China's claim that Taiwan constituted a province of the mainland.
In November 1990, however, the government acknowledged the growing trade links between Australia and Taiwan by announcing its intention to create a Taiwan Market Service in Australia, to encourage the establishment of direct air links between the two countries, and to create an Australian Education Centre in Taipei.
The planned multi-function polis (MFP), a Japanese-inspired "city of the future" to be built in Adelaide, continued to prove controversial.
The project was heavily criticized by the Liberals in the 1990 election campaign, and opinion surveys showed that there were considerable public misgivings about the enterprise, and the government worked hard in the post-election period to increase investment in the project from countries other than Japan.
ASIA — PACIFIC
NEW ZEALAND
Area: 267,844 km.
Population: 3,400,000 (1990 UNFPA est.).
Capital: Wellington.
Languages: English (official), Maori.
Religion: Christianity (75%).
Armed forces: 11,600 (1990).
Currency: dollar (US$1.00=NZ$1.7612 as at Sept. 30, 1991).
Major international affiliations: ADB; APEC.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The head of state of New Zealand, an independent member of the Commonwealth, is the British sovereign, represented by a Governor-General.
Legislative authority is vested in a unicameral House of Representatives which consists of 97 members who are popularly elected for up to three years.
The Prime Minister and Cabinet are responsible to the legislature and are appointed by the Governor-General acting on its advice.
Main government leaders
Governor-General: Dame Cath Tizard.
Prime Minister: Jim Bolger (since October 1990; also Minister in Charge of the Security Intelligence Service).
Other principal ministers: Don McKinnon (Deputy Prime Minister; External Relations and Trade; Foreign Affairs); Bill Birch (Labour and Immigration); Ruth Richardson (Finance).
1990/91 Cabinet changes
A Cabinet reshuffle took place in January 1990 [see p. 37189]; in September Mike Moore replaced Geoffrey Palmer as Prime Minister [see pp. 37716-17]; in October the general election was followed by the formation of a National Party government [see p. 37781].
Ruling party
New Zealand National Party (conservative, one of the country's two main parties, James G. (Jim) Bolger l.; John G. Collinge pres.; Cindy Flook (sec. -gen.).
Other main political parties
Democratic Party (also known as New Zealand Democratic Party, NZDP; founded in 1953 as New Zealand Social Credit Political League; Garry Knapp l.; Chris Leitch pres.);
Green Party of Aotearoa (The Greens; founded 1972 as New Zealand Values Party, Chris Thomas and Wendy Lynch conveners); Labour Party (democratic socialist, and one of the country's two main parties, Michael Moore parl. l.; Ruth Dyson pres.; Anthony Timms gen. sec.);
New Labour Party (NLP)(Jim Anderton l.);
New Zealand Self-Government Party (Mana Motuhake o Aotearoa; seeks greater political and economic autonomy for the country's 400,000 indigenous Maoris, Matia Rata l.).
Elections
The general election of Oct. 27, 1990, was won by the Nationalist Party led by Jim Bolger, with 48 per cent of the vote and 67 seats [see p. 37781].
1990/91 OVERVIEW
On Oct. 27, 1990, the Labour Party, by then led by Mike Moore, suffered a crushing general election defeat at the hands of the conservative National Party.
The result had been widely predicted by opinion polls which showed that the Labour Party (in government since 1984) had lost the confidence of the electorate.
One of the chief reasons for its loss of support had been the protracted struggle between Prime Minister David Lange and his Finance Minister, Roger Douglas, the architect of Labour's laissez faire approach to the economy, colloquially known as "Rogernomics" .
The conflict led to Douglas's dismissal from the Cabinet in December 1988 and Lange's resignation as Prime Minister in August 1989 when Douglas was voted back into the Cabinet by the Labour caucus.
Lange's replacement as party leader and Prime Minister, Geoffrey Palmer, lacked the authority and style to improve Labour's standing with the voters.
With the election due on Oct. 27, the latest date allowed by the Constitution, the party took a final desperate gamble by persuading Palmer to resign in September [see pp. 37716-17]and replacing him with the more dynamic Mike Moore.
The new leader succeeded in reducing the huge gap between the two parties, and announced a hastily concocted "growth agreement" with the Council of Trade Unions which was designed to lay the ghost of "Rogernomics" .
It proved to be too little, too late, however, and Labour emerged from the election with fewer MPs than at any time for 50 years.
Although Labour's defeat was crushing (its share of the vote dropped by almost 13 percentage points), the National Party victory was less decisive than it first appeared.
The party increased its share of the vote by almost 4 percentage points, but nearly 7 per cent of votes cast went to the Greens and more than 5 per cent to the New Labour Party.
Nevertheless, the first-past-the-post electoral system ensured that only one member of the minor parties was elected (the leader of the NLP, who retained the seat he already held) and that the National Party achieved a proportion of MPs considerably greater than that of its share of the vote.
The government's economic policy, including severe cutbacks in the welfare state and extensive deregulation [see below], exacerbated existing divisions within the National Party which had been concealed but not resolved in the run-up to the election.
The size of Bolger's election victory also meant that the government had a somewhat unwieldy caucus of backbenchers with widely differing views on the economy.
Although the party's leadership was committed to Richardson's economic strategy, many National Party MPs advocated a more Keynesian approach involving greater government spending to stimulate economic growth and combat unemployment.
This latter group was personified by Winston Peters, a young, articulate, part-Maori MP, who, prior to the election, had characterized his party's official economic policy as "drivel" .
Brought into the Cabinet by Bolger, Peters toned down his criticism but made no secret of his opposition to the policy of spending cuts.
Opinion poll results showed that he was consistently more popular than Bolger with the electorate, and many commentators expected him to launch a challenge for the party leadership.
Defence
A White Paper on defence released on May 21, 1991, suggested that future defence considerations would be based less on the South Pacific, as had been the case over the last six years, and more on New Zealand taking an active part in global security matters.
It suggested that defence should be based on "self-reliance and partnership" and a "new internationalism" designed to correspond with the country's current trading patterns.
According to the White Paper, in addition to maintaining its defence relationship with Australia, the government's objectives were to re-establish an "effective defence relationship" with traditional partners including the USA and the UK, and to maintain and develop defence co-operation with ASEAN.
Economy
The new government inherited an economic position which, as measured by macro-economic indicators, was far from encouraging.
The economy had grown by only 0.6 per cent over the four years to the end of 1990, and actually shrank by 0.3 per cent during 1990 itself.
The current account had been in deficit for the last 17 years and by late 1990 constituted around 7 per cent of gross national product (GNP).
External debt amounted to 73 per cent of gross domestic product (GDP) in December 1990.
Unemployment stood at 9 per cent as according to international criteria but at 14 per cent by domestic criteria.
The principal cause of New Zealand's economic problems was its failure to respond quickly enough to the post-war decline in prices for agricultural commodities, which constituted almost two-thirds of exports.
In an attempt to continue funding its advanced welfare state, successive governments had borrowed overseas to finance budget deficits, while also presiding over one of the most heavily regulated economies in the capitalist world.
Adversely affected in the 1970s by the United Kingdom's entry to the European Communities and by fluctuating oil prices, New Zealand declined from a position of having the third highest standard of living (as measured by per capita GDP) in 1951 to 15th in 1971 and 23rd by 1991.
Faced with this inexorable decline, the Labour Party from 1984 onwards had embarked upon a massive programme of deregulation which included (i) scrapping import licensing;(ii) reducing or abolishing tariffs or export subsidies;(iii) floating the currency;(iv) deregulating the banking sector;(v) reforming the tax system;(vi) establishing an independent central bank; and (vii) privatizing large state-owned companies including Air New Zealand, NZ Telecom, NZ Steel, the government-owned energy group, Petrocorp, and two banks.
The National Party's economic strategy, designed largely by Finance Minister Ruth Richardson, planned to continue Labour's tight budgetary and monetary controls, while also undertaking further privatization and deregulation.
Richardson stated that her aim was the reduction of public expenditure from its current level of 41.7 per cent of GNP to the 1970 level of 30 per cent by the end of the decade.
During the election campaign the party had asserted that the advanced welfare state was safe in its hands, but this promise quickly appeared to be a less than certain guarantee of the continuation of welfare programmes which in some cases had been in effect since the 1930s.
Soon after taking office the National Party government estimated that the budget deficit by the end of fiscal 1991/92 (June 1992) would be NZ$3,700 million, rising to NZ$5,200 million at the end of fiscal 1992/93.
On Dec. 19, 1990, Richardson presented a mini-budget which contained cuts in government spending on health, education, housing, defence and home loan subsidies to a total value of NZ$601 million in the current fiscal year, and NZ$2,370 million in the fiscal year ending June 1992.
The cuts included reductions in unemployment and family benefits and in medical and sickness payments, and moves towards means-testing and charges for medical and educational services.
Among the casualties was the family benefit (currently NZ$6 per week for each child), an icon of the welfare state since 1946.
Basic unemployment benefits were reduced, while other supplementary benefits for unemployed people, for single parents and for the sick were to be subjected to means testing.
Those made redundant were to wait for 26 weeks before being entitled to unemployment benefit.
The mini-budget was accompanied by the announcement of legislation aimed at extensive deregulation of the labour market.
The changes, to be implemented in May 1991, involved the scrapping of the country's mandatory system of conciliation and arbitration which had been in operation since 1984.
Compulsory membership of a trade union, in force since 1936 with only a brief interlude, was to be abolished, and employers were to be released from their obligation to recognize or negotiate with unions or to be bound by pay awards negotiated at a national level.
Employees and employers were to decide their own bargaining mechanisms in the form of individual or collective contracts, which could prohibit strikes and lockouts, and would be enforceable in the courts.
The government promised in February 1991 to continue with the sale of state assets.
The list of concerns to be privatized included the Bank of New Zealand (in which the government held a 63 per cent stake), the Electric Corp (which produced and distributed the electricity supplies), and the Land Corp (which controlled government land holdings).
No timetable for the sales was announced.
In March Richardson announced a NZ$750 million increase in government borrowing to fund a revised budget deficit of NZ$1,400 million for the year ending June 1991.
Lower than expected corporate tax revenues and rising welfare expenditure were held to be accountable for the increased projection.
Nevertheless, an OECD report published in the same month estimated that there were signs of a modest economic improvement.
Inflation had fallen from a high of 15.7 per cent in 1987 to 4.9 per cent at end-1990, but at the cost of falling output and a sharp rise in unemployment.
The report predicted economic growth of 1.5 per cent in 1991, rising to 2.3 per cent in 1992, driven by growth in investment and exports.
It was predicted that inflation would continue to fall, but that consumption would remain depressed, with a continuing high level of unemployment and of current-account deficit.
On April 1, as most of the welfare cuts were implemented, there were widespread protests throughout the country involving up to 100,000 people, the largest demonstrations since those in 1981 against the South African rugby tour.
Effigies of Bolger and Richardson were burned in Auckland [see p. 38153].
Bolger claimed success for Richardson's strategy when in mid-1991 the inflation rate was shown to have fallen to a 25-year low of 2.8 per cent, compared with 7.6 per cent a year earlier.
Rising unemployment and continuing high interest rates, however, resulted in declining National Party support.
Opinion polls in June 1991 suggested that support for the National Party had fallen to 35 per cent, while that for the Labour Party had risen to 42 per cent .
Foreign relations
Relations with the United States had been severely strained by the Labour government's ban on nuclear-powered or nuclear-armed ships entering New Zealand ports or waters.
The ban led to New Zealand's suspension from ANZUS, the trilateral defence treaty signed in 1951, and an effective freezing of relations with the USA, including an end to the exchange of intelligence information and the holding of joint military exercises.
The National Party had in March 1990 committed itself to maintaining the ban which then ceased to be a domestic political issue.
After the election the new government in November 1990 again expressed its support for the ban and confirmed that it remained in place.
Nevertheless, Bolger also made no secret of his desire to improve relations with the USA.
During the Gulf war New Zealand dispatched two army medical teams and two air force Hercules transport aircraft to assist the US-led coalition against Iraq.
On March 1, 1991, Bolger personally telephoned US President Bush to congratulate him on the allied victory.
Notwithstanding the membership of some staunchly pro-ANZUS people (such as Foreign Minister and Deputy Prime Minister Don McKinnon), the government as a whole appeared more committed to improving general relations with the USA rather than to seeking a return to the particular relationship which had been embodied within the ANZUS alliance.
New Zealand's relationship with Australia, its other ANZUS partner, was not greatly affected by the nuclear prohibition policy.
On July 1, 1990, the then Prime Minister, Palmer, visited Canberra to mark the abolition of the final restraints on free trade in goods between the two countries.
The elimination of the final barriers came five years ahead of the schedule agreed in the Closer Economic Relations agreement signed in 1983.
Both sides also committed themselves to achieving free trade in services and to beginning work on the harmonization of business, competition, securities and investment law.
The government also repaired relations with several other countries during late 1990-91.
In September 1990 Forestry Minister John Sutton made a visit to China, the first such visit since New Zealand had condemned the Chinese government's 1989 suppression of the pro-democracy movement in Tiananmen Square.
On May 9, 1991, the governments of New Zealand and China signed an agreement to establish relations at consulate-general level.
In April 1991 Michel Rocard visited New Zealand, the first French Prime Minister to do so.
His visit, during which he apologised for the French role in the Rainbow Warrior affair, marked a considerable improvement in bilateral relations [see p. 38153; but see also p. 38345 for New Zealand condemnation of the honouring of the French agent involved in the Rainbow Warrior affair].
NEW ZEALAND ASSOCIATED TERRITORIES
NIUE
Area: 259 sq km.Population: 2,100 (1989).
Capital: Alofi.
Languages: English and Niuean.
Religion: Christianity Currency: New Zealand dollar (US$1.00=NZ$1.7612 as at Sept. 30, 1991).
Political system
Since 1974 Niue has been a self-governing territory in free association with New Zealand, which in addition to providing economic assistance, has responsibility for the territory's defence and foreign policy.
The Niue Assembly comprises 20 members (14 village representatives and six elected on a common roll); it chooses a Premier from amongst its number who appoints three Cabinet members, also chosen from the legislature.
Main government leaders
Premier: Sir Robert Rex, re-elected in the April 1990 general election [erroneously given as May on p. 37887](also Minister for Economic Affairs, Public Services and Police).
Other ministers: Tama Lata Fonu Posimani (Agriculture, Community Affairs, Telecommunications); Young Vivian (Finance, Education); Fisa Pihigia (Public Works, Broadcasting, Business Relations).
Ruling party:
None.
Other political parties
Although the Niue political system is not based upon formal political organizations, the Niue People's Action Party (NPAP), led by Young Vivian, was established in 1987 as an unofficial opposition to the Rex government.
1990/91 overview
Opponents of Sir Robert Rex, the Premier since 1974, made substantial gains in the April 1990 general election, with the NPAP and its sympathizers winning 12 of the 20 seats in the legislature.
Their attempts to take control of the legislature were foiled, however, when Rex, using all of his political experience and powers of patronage, induced four opposition legislators to defect to the government benches.
In September Rex dismissed two of his three Cabinet colleagues for joining opposition calls for a change of premier, but he once again preserved his majority by appointing Young Vivian and another opposition member to the Cabinet.
When the legislature convened in October, one of the those dismissed moved a vote of no confidence which was defeated by 15 votes to five.
Economy
In February 1990 Niue was hit by a cyclone which caused considerable damage, particularly in Alofi.
COOK ISLANDS
Area: 237 sq km.Population: 17,185 (1985 census).
Capital: Avarua.
Languages: English and Cook Islands' Maori.
Religion.
Christianity Currency: New Zealand dollar (US$1.00=NZ$1.7612 as at Sept. 30, 1991).
Major international affiliations: ADB.
Political system
Since 1965 the 15 Cook Islands have been a self-governing territory in free association with New Zealand, which in addition to providing economic assistance, has responsibility for the territory's defence and foreign policy.
The Parliament of the Cook Islands comprises 24 members (nine representing the main island of Raratonga, 14 representing constituencies on other islands, and one representing the many Cook Islanders resident in New Zealand) sitting for up to five years.
It chooses a Premier from amongst its number, who then appoints a Cabinet.
Main government leaders
Queen's representative: Apenera Short.
New Zealand Representative: Tim Caughley.
Prime Minister: Geoffrey Henry (also Minister of Finance, Foreign Affairs, Tourism, Customs, Inland Revenue, Public Works, and Budget and Planning).
Other ministers: Inatio Akaruru (Deputy Prime Minister); Vaine Tairea (Agriculture, Marine Resources, Trade, Labour, and Transport).
Ruling party
Cook Islands Party (CIP, Geoffrey Henry l.).
Other political parties
Democratic Party (DP, Pupuke Robati l.);
Democratic Tumu Party (DTP, Vincent Ingram l., split from DP in 1985).
Elections
The CIP won 12 seats in the January 1989 general election, the DP nine seats, the DTP two, and an independent one.
Overview
By the beginning of 1991 the number of seats held by the CIP had increased from 12 to 14 — one member of the DP having defected to the CIP, and the sole independent member having joined the CIP — thereby giving the party, in alliance with the DTP, the two-thirds majority required to enact constitutional changes.
Although Henry stated that he favoured constitutional reform — including an increase in the size of the Cabinet and a greater recognition of the role of political parties — he denied suggestions that his eventual aim was to achieve complete independence from New Zealand.
Prime Minister Henry met United States President Bush on April 18, 1990 during a three-day private visit to the USA.
The meeting was described by US State Department spokeswoman as primarily a "get-acquainted session" .
In late May 1991 it was reported that there had been a serious outbreak of dengue fever in the Cook Islands, with almost 800 cases having been reported since the beginning of the year.
TOKELAU
Status: Non-self-governing territory under New Zealand administration.
Population: 1,690 (1986); there are also 2,316 Tokelauans resident in New Zealand.
All executive and administrative authority is vested in an appointed Administrator, who is responsible to New Zealand's Minister of Foreign Affairs.
In practice most powers are delegated to the Official Secretary, who heads the Office of Tokelau Affairs.
Each of the territory's three atolls elects a commissioner (Faipule), who jointly chair the advisory assembly, the General Fono.
Government leaders
Administrator: N. D. Walter.
Faipules: Peniuto Semisi (Fakaofo); Salesio Lui (Nokunonu); Kuresa Nasau (Atafu).
ROSS DEPENDENCY
Status: Non-self-governing territory under New Zealand administration.
The Ross Dependency comprises eastern Antarctica and its associated islands.
It includes a land area of 400,000 sq km and an ice-shelf of 330,000 sq km.
Apart from scientific personnel it is uninhabited.
ASIA — PACIFIC
UNITED NATIONS TRUST TERRITORY
BELAU
Status: sole remaining component of UN Trust Territory of the Pacific, administered by the USA.
Area: 508 sq km.
Population: 15,105 (1990).
Capital: Koror, on Koror Island.
Languages: English, Palauan.
Religion: Christianity Currency: US dollar.
Political system
Belau was one of the four components of the UN Trust Territory of the Pacific established in 1947 and administered by the United States.
The three other components (the Federated States of Micronesia, the Marshall Islands and the Northern Mariana Islands) adopted revised constitutional relationships between 1978 and 1991 [see pp. 29288; 38XXX].
Although a compact of free association was signed in 1982 between Belau and the USA, it could not be implemented until the territory altered its Constitution (which required a 75 per cent vote in favour in a referendum) to rescind the clauses which banned the entry, storage or disposal of nuclear, chemical or biological weapons.
Repeated referendums were held between 1983 and 1990 in an attempt to achieve this end, but each failed to secure the necessary 75 per cent approval level [see p. 37251].
Belau has a President, elected for a four-year term by popular vote, who appoints a Cabinet.
The legislature (the Olbiil Era Kelulau) is bicameral: a House of Delegates comprising one representative from each of the territory's 16 states, and a 14-member Senate.
There is also a Council of Chiefs, and each state has its own political institutions.
Main government leaders
US Interior Department's resident representative in Belau: J. Victor Hobson Jr.
President: Ngiratkel Etpison.
Other principal minister: Kuniwo Nakamura (Vice-President; Minister of Justice).
Political parties
Although the territory does not have formal political parties, two loose coalitions have evolved in response to the protracted debate over the compact of free association: the Coalition for Open Honest and Just Government opposes the compact, while the Ta Belau Party supports it.
Elections
Presidential elections were held on Nov. 2, 1988.
1990/91 OVERVIEW
A further referendum on the compact of free association with the USA, the seventh in nine years, was held in February 1990, but delivered a "yes" vote of only 59.8 per cent, the lowest thus far recorded [see p. 37251].
In September 1990 the scheduled meeting took place between Belau's senior leaders and the US Interior Secretary Manuel Lujan.
The meeting was prompted by a draft secretarial order, issued by the US Interior Department in July, which provided for an expanded role for the new resident US representative in Belau [see p. 37885].
Following the meeting a revised order was issued which, while not complying with all of the islanders' requests, was considerably more acceptable to them than had been the original directive.
In November Victor Hobson was appointed as the Interior Department's resident representative in Belau.
Hobson had been associated with the UN Trust Territory since 1963, and had served in Belau until 1977 when he was transferred to Saipan (Northern Marianas).
Belau's economy, already adversely affected by debts arising from the Aimeluk power station constructed in the early 1980s and from a delay in US aid consequent upon the compact impasse, suffered a further setback in late 1990 when the territory was severely damaged by Typhoon "Mike" .
ASIA — PACIFIC
FIJI
Area: 18,376 sq km.
Population: 800,000 (1990 UNFPA est.).
Capital: Suva.
Languages: Fijian, Hindi, English.
Religion.
Christianity (50%), Hinduism (40%), Islam (10%).
Armed forces: 5,000 (1990).
Currency: Fiji dollar (US$1.00=F$1.4567 as at Sept. 30, 1991).
Major international affiliations: ADB.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
Fiji became an independent country within the Commonwealth in 1970, under a Constitution which provided that the head of state was the United Kingdom sovereign, represented by a Governor-General, who would appoint the Prime Minister and Cabinet in accordance with the wishes of the bicameral Fijian Parliament.
The Alliance Party (which represented the native Melanesian population) governed the country from independence, but was defeated in the general election of April 1987.
The new government was composed of representatives from an alliance between the multiracial Fiji Labour Party and the National Federation Party which was closely allied to the interests of those of Indian extraction who slightly outnumbered the Melanesian population.
On May 14, 1987, there followed a coup led by Lt.-Col. (subsequently Maj.-Gen.)
Sitiveni Rabuka and supported by the (predominantly Melanesian) armed forces, which involved the detention of the new government and the establishment of a military regime.
Although civilian government was later restored, Rabuka and his supporters remained influential within the Council of Advisors which was established as an interim administration by the Governor-General, Ratu Sir Penaia Ganilau.
An agreement in September to create a racially bipartisan administration, as a prelude to returning the country to full democracy, prompted Rabuka to stage a second coup on Sept. 25.
The Constitution was revoked and on Oct. 6 he declared the Republic of Fiji.
Queen Elizabeth II accepted the resignation of Ratu Ganilau on Oct. 15, and ceased to be Fiji's head of state (and the Commonwealth heads of government, meeting in Vancouver, Canada, on Oct. 16 declared Fiji's membership to have lapsed — see pp. 35606-07).
The country was returned nominally to civilian rule on Dec. 5, when Ratu Ganilau was sworn in as President.
A new Constitution which guaranteed Melanesian control of the legislature was promulgated in July 1990.
Main government leaders
President: Ratu Sir Penaia Ganilau.
Prime Minister: Ratu Sir Kamisese Mara (also Minister of Foreign Affairs and Public Service).
Other principal minister: Josefata Kamikamica (Deputy Prime Minister; Finance and Economic Planning).
1990/91 Cabinet changes
The most significant Cabinet change was in July 1991 when Rabuka rejoined the government [see also below], and Public Utilities Minister Apisai Tora was dismissed for accepting the presidency of a newly created political party.
Ruling party
None.
Main political parties
Fiji Labour National Federation Parties, an opposition coalition composed of the Fiji Labour Party (est. 1985) and the National Federation Party (est. 1960, Hanish Chandra Sharma pres.);
Fijian Political Party (est. 1990 by the Great Council of Chiefs); All National Congress (est. 1991, Apisai Tora l.);
Fijian Conservative Party (est. 1989, Isireli Vuibau l.);
Fiji Indian Liberal Party; Indian Congress Party (est. 1991); Nationalist Christian Party (Sakeasi Butadroka l.).
Elections
The last elections were held in 1987 [see above].
1990/91 OVERVIEW
In January 1990 Fiji was restored to nominal civilian rule [see p. 37189].
The interim government finally produced a new Constitution for the country in July which, as expected, guaranteed a majority in both houses of the bicameral legislature to the Melanesian population [see pp. 37613-14; 37881-82]who, since 1987, had become the majority [see below].
A considerable amount of power was also vested in the Bose Levu Vakaturaga (Great Council of Chiefs), a traditional structure consisting of some 100 Melanesian leaders.
The Constitution also weighted Melanesian representation disproportionately in favour of the rural communities (dominated by traditional chiefs) as against urban areas.
The Constitution was open to revision after seven years, and then after every 10 years, but only with the consent of the Melanesian majority.
Although the Constitution contained guarantees of human rights and freedoms, it also stated that it "shall be the overall responsibility of the Republic of Fiji Military Forces to ensure at all times the security, defence and well-being of Fiji and its peoples" .
The clause was criticized by some as giving implicit authority to the army to stage further coups should they be deemed necessary.
The Constitution also allowed a majority of MPs to declare the existence of a threat, and then to pass emergency laws and regulations to override all other parts of the Constitution.
The interim government promised elections under the new Constitution in 1991, two years later than had originally been suggested, but in April 1991 the likely election date was revised to 1992.
The opposition Fiji Labour National Federation Parties, led by Adi Kuini Bavadra (the widow of the ousted Prime Minister who had taken over the party leadership after her husband's death from cancer in 1989), denounced the Constitution as racist and anti-democratic and announced its refusal to participate in elections held under its auspices.
Prior to the 1987 coups the Indian population slightly outnumbered that of the country's native Melanesian community.
(Native Fijians were basically of Melanesian origin, although many also had some Polynesian inheritance particularly in the eastern islands; the inhabitants of Rotuma, an island 390 km north of Suva — for which special provision was made in the Constitution — were almost exclusively Polynesian).
There was heavy Indian emigration after the second coup, however, particularly among those Indians with sufficient skills and capital to establish themselves elsewhere.
The loss of such people caused shortages in key ares of the economy and necessitated the importation of expatriate skills, often at high cost.
The drain did, however, also ensure that the Melanesians once again became the majority.
At the end of 1990 the population was estimated to amount to 733,450, of whom 358,667 were Melanesians, 335,153 were Indians, and 39,630 were of other origin.
In March 1991 the Great Council of Chiefs proposed the creation of a Fiji Political Party (FPP), which coup leader Rabuka immediately suggested that he might lead.
Rabuka made a series of confusing statements during 1990-91, but appeared to indicate that he continued to harbour political ambitions, including a desire to be Prime Minister.
On June 8, 1991, he called on the government to resign and, on June 11, mobilized the army reserves as though preparing for another coup.
On the following day he apologized for his actions and pledged his allegiance to the government.
Eventually, on July 15, he left the armed forces and returned to the government as Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Home Affairs (to leave in late November in order to participate actively in the FPP).
He was succeeded as army commander by Brig.
Ratu Epeli Ganilau, son of the President.
In April Bavadra resigned as chairman of the Labour Party after announcing her engagement to Clive Speed, an Australian businessman.
Economy
The economy grew by 5.3 per cent in 1990, compared with 12.5 per cent in 1989 and 0.8 per cent in 1988.
Most of the growth was fuelled by the traditional industries of sugar and tourism.
The sugar harvest was delayed because of a dispute over terms for a new harvesting contract between the government-controlled milling company, Fiji Sugar Corp., and the 22,000 (pre-dominantly Indian) sugarcane growers.
Although the harvest yield was expected to be slightly less than in 1989, buoyant world prices meant that the growers were likely to reap record payments.
Tourism also prospered in 1990, with 275,000 arrivals.
Although several hotels undertook regrading programmes, no major work was undertaken in the construction of new resorts as investors appeared to be waiting for further indications of a permanent return to political stability.
Although agriculture remained the largest sector of the economy (accounting for almost 20 per cent of gross domestic product (GDP) and 80 per cent of employment), there was a rapid growth in the non-sugar manufacturing sector, which had declined by 6.6 per cent in 1987, but grew thereafter by 3.2 per cent, 5.4 per cent and 7.8 per cent respectively in subsequent years.
The growth resulted primarily from the introduction of the tax free factory (TFF) scheme.
By the end of 1990 at least 113 TFFs were operational, 74 of which produced garments, while the remainder produced items such as furniture, leather goods and footwear.
Some 8,000 people were employed making garments, and the industry in 1990 earned F$183 million, a figure exceeded only by sugar exports (F$248 million) and tourism (F$340 million).
Annual inflation in 1990 was 8.1 per cent, compared with 6.5 per cent in the previous year, and the level of foreign reserves was steady at around F$330 million, the equivalent of four to five months-worth of imports.
On Nov. 21, 1990, Finance Minister Kamikamica presented the 1991 budget, which predicted growth of 3.4 per cent in 1991, and a narrowing of the budget deficit to F$69,700,000 in 1991 compared with F$74,700,000 in 1990.
In mid-1991 labour relations deteriorated sharply with the sugarcane harvest once again delayed because of disputes over payments for the previous year's crop.
There was also a protracted and violent strike by 700 miners at the Emperor gold mine, the country's largest gold producer.
The government responded to the unrest with a series of decrees which curtailed trade union rights and inflicted severe penalties on those convicted of disrupting key industries.
The response exacerbated the strikes, and by the end of June 1991 both disputes were growing in scope and intensity.
Foreign relations
Relations with India, which had been difficult since the 1987 coup, deteriorated further in 1990 as a result of the discriminatory nature of the proposed constitution.
In May 1990 the Fijian government ordered the closure of the Indian embassy.
Relations with New Zealand and Australia, traditionally the largest source of aid for Fiji, improved somewhat but remained strained.
The then Australian Prime Minister Bob Hawke described the new Constitution as "seriously flawed" but called upon the opposition to participate in future elections.
A visit due to be made to Suva by Australian Foreign Minister Gareth Evans in November 1990 was cancelled by Mara after a speech to the UN General Assembly in which Evans derided the new Constitution.
In January 1991 Don McKinnon (Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs) and Warren Cooper (Minister of Defence) became the most senior New Zealand ministers to visit Suva since the coups.
President Ganilau made a state visit to China on April 22-29, 1991, during which he held talks with Chinese leaders.
During the course of 1990 Mara made trips to China, Egypt, Israel, Malaysia, Singapore, Taiwan, the United States and the UK.
ASIA — PACIFIC
FEDERATED STATES OF MICRONESIA
Area: 700 sq.
km.
Population: 91,440 (1985).
Capital: Pohnpei Island.
Language: English (official), local languages.
Religion.
Christianity.
Currency: US dollar.
Major international affiliations: ADB.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
As part of the UN Trust Territory of the Pacific, established in 1947, the Federated States of Micronesia (FSM) was administered by the US government.
In 1982 the government of the FSM signed a compact of free association, implemented in 1986, under which the USA granted internal sovereignty and US aid in return for continuing US control of the country's defence and foreign policies.
In December 1990 the UN Security Council approved the termination of the Trust status for the FSM.
The FSM has four constituent states — Chuuk (formerly Truk), Kosrae, Pohnpei and Yap — each of which has its own government.
Federal authority is vested in a President who is elected by the 14-member federal legislature, the National Congress, which is composed of 10 senators elected for two-year terms, and four at-large senators (one from each state) who are elected for four years.
Both President and Vice President must be chosen from amongst the at-large senators.
Main government leaders
President: Bailey Olter.
Other principal ministers: Jacob Nena (Vice President); Andon L. Amaraich (External Affairs); Aloysius Tuuth (Finance).
Cabinet changes
A new Cabinet was appointed in May 1991.
Political parties
None.
Elections
A general election was held in March 1991; Olter was elected President in May [see p. 38197].
1990/91 OVERVIEW
The FSM became an independent state (although, under the Compact of Free Association, the USA continued to control its defence and foreign relations) following the UN Security Council's approval of the termination of the UN's Trusteeship on Dec. 22, 1990 [see p. 37920].
The move opened the way for the FSM to join the UN in September 1991 [see p. 38458].
Diplomatic relations were established with South Korea on April 5.
ASIA — PACIFIC
FRENCH OVERSEAS TERRITORIES
France's four Overseas Territories (territoires d'outre-mer) are French Polynesia, New Caledonia, the Wallis and Futuna Islands and the French Southern and Antartic Territories.
They are regarded as an integral part of France and each (apart from the Southern and Antartic Territories) elects its own territorial assembly and sends representatives to the French legislature in Paris.
FRENCH POLYNESIA
Area: 4,200 sq km.
Population: 196,000 (1989).
Capital: Papeete.
Languages: French, Polynesian languages.
Religion: Christianity.
Currency: franc of the Comptoirs français du Pacifique (franc CFP or Pacific franc)(US$1.00=101.54 francs CFP as at Sept. 30, 1991).
Political system
French Polynesia has a Territorial Assembly of 41 members, elected by universal suffrage for up to five years.
From within its own members the Assembly elects a Territorial President who appoints a Council of Ministers.
Main government leaders
President of the territorial government: Gaston Flosse.
Ruling party
Coalition of Tahoeraa Huiraatira/Rassemblement pour la République (RPR, Gaston Flosse l.) and Ai'a Api (New Land, Emile Vernaudon l.).
Other main political parties
Front de Libération de la Polynésie/Tavini Huiraatira (FLP — Oscar Temaru,(l.);
Ia Mana Te Nunaa (Jacqui Drollet sec. -gen.);
Pupu Here Ai'a Te Nunaa Ia Ora (Jean Juventin pres.);
Te Tiarama (Alexandre Léontieff l.).
Elections
Legislative elections were held on March 17, 1991, and elections for the President of the territorial government on April 4.
1990/91 overview
The Constitution of Polynesia was amended by the French Parliament with effect from July 1990 to increase the powers of the President of the territorial government and those of the Territorial Assembly, and to establish five consultative local councils composed of elected territorial and municipal representatives.
In the March 1991 legislative elections Tahoeraa Huiraatira — the opposition party led by Flosse which had been ousted from government in December 1987, after controlling the territory's government since March 1982 — captured 18 of the 41 seats in the Territorial Assembly.
An alliance between the parties of the incumbent President of the territorial government, Léontieff, and the President of the Territorial Assembly, Juventin, secured only 14 seats.
The moderate independence party headed by Drollet, lost its three seats, while the FLP, a hardline independence party, increased its share of seats from two to four.
Ai'a Api held five seats.
Following the election Flosse formed a coalition government with Ai'a Api, led by Vernaudon, who, like Léontieff, was one of French Polynesia's two deputies in the French National Assembly in Paris.
A similar Flosse-Vernaudon coalition in 1982 had lasted only 110 days.
Two other legislators were also reported to have joined the coalition following the elections.
In the elections for President of the new Territorial Assembly on March 28 Vernaudon was supported by both the Flosse and the Léontieff coalitions and received 37 votes compared with the four cast for Temaru, the only other candidate.
On April 4 Flosse was formally elected as President of the territorial government.
The new government immediately announced a rigorous cost-cutting programme, claiming that the financial position was catastrophic.
Although no official figure was released, Flosse indicated that public debt amounted to around 60,000 million francs CFP, and represented some 16 per cent of tax revenues.
The proposed introduction of new and increased indirect taxes (French Polynesia had no income tax) led to protests in June, and serious rioting in the territory's capital, Papeete, on July 10.
Peace was restored after the government agreed to abandon the tax increases.
Shaken by the violence, Flosse retired for a week of reflection on July 12, turning the presidency over to his deputy, Michel Buillard.
He resumed his executive duties on July 19 [see p. 38346].
French nuclear tests
The use of Mururoa and Fangataufa atolls for the conducting of French nuclear tests continued to attract fierce criticism.
On Nov. 14, 1990, France conducted a test in Fangataufa involving the detonation of a device with explosive power less than 100 kilotonnes.
It was the fifth test since the French government's adoption of a new policy of disclosing all such tests, announced in May 1990 [not 1989 as wrongly stated on p. 37886].
The new policy was one of several steps taken by the government to defuse criticism of its testing program.
Others involved a reduction in the number of annual tests from eight to six, and an invitation to foreign researchers to visit Mururoa to test France's claims that there had been no severe environmental damage.
NEW CALEDONIA
Area: 19,103 sq km.
Population: 164,000 (1989).
Capital: Noumea.
Languages: French (official); Melanesian and Polynesian languages.
Religion: Christianity.
Currency: Comptoirs francais du Pacifique (franc CFP or Pacific franc)(US$1.00=101.54 francs as at Sept. 30, 1991).
Political system
New Caledonia is divided into three provinces (North, South and Loyalty Islands) each of which has its own directly elected assembly (consisting of 32, 15 and seven members respectively) elected for up to six years.
The three provincial assemblies together constitute the Territorial Congress.
The assemblies and the congress are each led by an elected president.
Main government leaders
President of the Territorial Congress: Simon Loueckhote.
Ruling Party
Rassemblement pour la Caledonie dans la République (RPCR, Jacques Lafleur l.).
Other political parties
Front National (FN, Guy George, l.);
Front Uni de Liberation Kanak (FULK, Yann Celene Uregei l.); expelled from the FLNKS coalition in January 1990; Kanak Socialist National Liberation Front (FLNKS, Paul Neaoutyine, pres.), a four-party coalition committed to independence for New Caledonia;
Elections
In legislative elections in June 1989 the RPCR won 27 of the 54 seats compared with 19 won by the FLNKS.
Loueckhote was re-elected President in July 1990 [see p. 37887].
1990/91 overview
Although the 1988 Matignon Accords formed the basis of a ceasefire in the struggle for the New Caledonian independence, there was increasing discussion during 1990 of the possibility that the planned independence referendum — scheduled for 1998 — could be abandoned in favour of a form of independence in association with France.
Supporters of the plan claimed that it would allow an immediate settlement of the territory's status and therefore end the climate of uncertainty which was adversely affecting foreign investment.
In May 1991 Lafleur, leader of the RPCR and president of the South province, threw his support behind the idea by calling for a "consensual solution" to the future status of the territory to be adopted prior to 1998.
Although Neaoutyine suggested that the pro-independence forces were "open to any discussion" , an FLNKS congress in June reasserted its position that the planned referendum was "a determining stage in New Caledonia's march towards independence" .
WALLIS AND FUTUNA ISLANDS
Area: 274 sq km.Population: 12,408 (1983 census).
Capital: Mata-Utu.
Languages: French, Wallisian.
Religion.
Christianity.
Currency: Comptoirs francais du Pacifique (franc CFP or Pacific franc)(US$1.00=101.54 as at Sept. 30, 1991).
Political system
The Territorial Assembly has 20 members and is elected by universal adult suffrage for up to five years.
It appoints three of the six-member Council of the Territory (the other three being the traditional Kings whose kingdoms formed the territory).
The Council assists the Chief Administrator who is appointed by the French government.
The Territorial Assembly elects its own President.
Main government leaders
President of Territorial Assembly: Clovis Logologofolau.
Ruling party
Coalition consisting of Rassemblement pour la République (RPR, Clovis Logologofolau l., and the Union Populaire (UPL, Falakiko Gata l…
Other political parties
Union pour la Democratie Francaise (UDF); Lua kae tahi (affiliated to UDF).
Elections
In legislative elections in March 1987 the RPR won seven seats and formed a government in coalition with the UPL which had won six seats.
1990/91 overview
Tension over the status of the territory continued in 1990, continuing allegations from Logologofolau that his elected colleagues, together with the traditional chiefs, were not being given a sufficient say in decision-making by the French-appointed Chief Administrator.
In August 1990 the French government attempted to appease this growing discontent by promising to hold discussions in 1991 on the territory's future.
ASIA — PACIFIC
KIRIBATI
Area: 861 sq km.Population: 69,000 (1989 est.).
Capital: Bairiki.
Language: I-Kiribati, English.
Religion.
Christianity.
Currency: Australian dollar (US$1.00=A$1.2481 as at Sept. 30, 1991).
Major international affiliations: ADB.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The Republic of Kiribati, which is composed of 33 Pacific atolls within an area of 5,000,000 sq km, became an independent republic within the Commonwealth in July 1979.
Legislative power is vested in a unicameral House of Assembly (Maneaba), comprising 39 members popularly elected for up to four years and one appointed representative of the Banaban community.
The head of state is the Beretitenti (President) who is popularly elected from among the members of the Assembly; he governs with the assistance of an appointed Cabinet and is empowered to dissolve the Assembly and to call a general election.
Main government leaders
President: Teatao Teannaki (also Minister of Foreign Affairs and International Trade).
Other principal ministers: Taomati T. Iuta (Vice-President; Finance and Economic Planning); Ieremia T. Tabai (Environment and Natural Resource Development).
Cabinet changes in 1990-91
A new Cabinet was appointed in July 1991 after the presidential election [see p. 38345].
Ruling party
National Progressive Party (Teatao Teannaki l.).
Other political parties
Christian Democratic Party (Teburoro Tito l.);
Kiribati United Party (Tewareka Teutoa l.).
Elections
A general election was held on May 8, 1991,(with an additional round of run-off contests on May 15 — see p. 38196); Teatao Teannaki was subsequently elected as President in July [see p. 38345].
1990/91 OVERVIEW
On April 4, 1990, the governments of Kiribati and Taiwan approved a fishing agreement.
Under the terms of the pact Taiwan was permitted to operate 20 fishing vessels within Kiribati's economic zone in return for annual payments of $250,000.
It was reported on Sept. 4 that Kiribati and the Soviet Union had decided to establish diplomatic relations at ambassadorial level.
ASIA — PACIFIC
MARSHALL ISLANDS
Area: 180 sq.
km.
Population: 43,355 (1989).
Capital: Dalap-Uliga-Darrit Municipality on Majuro Atoll.
Language: Marshallese (official), English.
Religion: Christianity.
Currency: US dollar.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
As part of the UN Trust Territory of the Pacific, established in 1947, the Marshall Islands were administered by the United States government.
In December 1990 the UN Security Council approved the termination of its Trusteeship in relation to the Marshalls [see p. 37920], and the country joined the UN in September 1991 [see p. 38458].
The Marshall Islands has a 12-member Council of Chiefs (the Iroij), composed of traditional leaders with consultative authority on matters relating to land and custom.
Legislative power resides in a 33-member legislature (the Nitijela), which is elected for four years and which chooses a President from among its members.
The President is both head of state and head of government and appoints a Cabinet.
Main government leaders
President: Amata Kabua (also Minister of Resources and Development).
Other principal ministers: Thomas Kijiner (Finance); Christopher Loeak (Justice).
Ruling party
None.
Other main political parties
The Ralik Ratak Democratic Party, founded in June 1991 by Tony DeBrum, a former protegé of Kabua and Foreign Minister, in opposition to the Kabua government.
Elections
Legislative elections were held in November 1991; the legislature was due to meet in January 1992 to elect a new government.
Kabua was re-elected President in 1987.
1990/91 OVERVIEW
China, which as one of the permanent members of the UN Security Council had supported the termination of the UN Trust Territory status, established an embassy in the Marshall Islands in January 1991.
President Kabua undertook a nine-day official visit to China in March, during which he signed agreements on economic and technological co-operation.
Diplomatic relations were established with South Korea on April 5.
ASIA — PACIFIC
NAURU
Area: 21 sq km.
Population: 9,000 (1989).
Capital: No official capital.
Languages: Nauruan, English.
Religion: Christianity (Nauruan Protestant Church).
Currency: Australian dollar (US$1.00=A$1.2481 as at Sept. 30, 1991).
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The Republic of Nauru, which achieved independence in January 1967, is an associate member of the Commonwealth.
Legislative power is vested in an 18-member unicameral Parliament, elected for up to three years, which selects a President from among its members.
The President, who is the head of state, governs with the assistance of an appointed Cabinet.
Main government leaders
President: Bernard Dowiyogo (also Minister of Internal Affairs, External Affairs, Island Development and Industry, Public Service, Civil Aviation).
Other principal ministers: Kennan Adeang (Justice); Kinza Clodumar (Finance).
1990/91 Cabinet changes
None.
Ruling party
None.
Other main political parties
The only political party is the Democratic Party of Nauru (Kennan Adeang l.).
Elections
Nauru's first President, Hammer DeRoburt, who had dominated the political structure of the island since independence, was forced to resign in August 1989 after a vote of no confidence.
Following a general election on Dec. 9, 1989, Bernard Dowiyogo was elected as President on Dec. 12 by 10 votes to six [see p. 37126].
1990/91 OVERVIEW
On Jan. 16, 1991, Australia delivered a submission to the International Court of Justice at The Hague arguing against a compensation claim lodged in May 1989 by the government of Nauru for the cost of restoring soil and vegetation cover to much of the island.
On Feb. 8 the Court gave the government of Nauru until July 19 to reply to the submission.
The compensation claim covered a period between 1919 and 1967 when Nauru was under Australian administration, during which time its phosphates were extracted and sold at below market prices.
A press release issued by the Australian government on Feb. 1 reiterated its claim that the issue "was definitely settled in the UN-supervised independence arrangements" which gave Nauru "total control and benefit of the phosphate mining industry" .
It also claimed that the revenue generated from the industry had provided Nauru with "the highest per capita income in the world and would have allowed the Nauruan government to rehabilitate the mined areas if it so wished." 
The Nauruan government, which was unhappy at being forced to pay A$21,000,000 for the phosphate facilities which it had inherited after independence from the British Phosphate Commissioners (BPC — established by the governments of the Australia, New Zealand and United Kingdom) never accepted that the matter had been settled.
The news in 1985 that the international assets of BPC were to be wound up had provided the impetus for the compensation claim.
The compensation issue was important because 80 years of phosphate mining had left 80 per cent of Nauru uninhabitable, and the phosphate deposits (formed over many centuries from accumulated bird droppings) were almost exhausted.
The lack of ground cover and the convection current produced by the sun-heated exposed rock had resulted in little ground water and in reduced rainfall, so that the bulk of the island's drinking water had to be transported by the ships arriving to collect phosphate.
Although the country had extensive overseas investments, the government-owned Air Nauru and the Nauru Pacific shipping line were thought to have made losses in recent years of hundreds of millions of dollars.
ASIA — PACIFIC
PAPUA NEW GUINEA
Area: 462,840 sq km.
Population: 3,900,00 (1990 UNFPA est.).
Capital: Port Moresby.
Languages: Pidgin, English, Motu (all official); there are also some 700-800 local languages.
Religion: Pantheism, Christianity.
Armed forces: 3,500 (1990).
Currency: kina (US$1.00=K0.9418 as at Sept. 30, 1991).
Major international affiliations: ADB.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The head of state of Papua New Guinea, an independent member of the Commonwealth since September 1975, is the British sovereign, represented by a Governor-General.
Legislative power is vested in a unicameral National Parliament, the 109 members of which are elected for up to five years by universal adult suffrage.
Executive power is exercised by a Prime Minister and a National Executive Council (Cabinet), who are responsible to Parliament and are appointed by the Governor-General acting upon its advice.
Main government leaders
Governor-General: Wiwa Korowi was elected on Nov. 11, 1991 (Sir Vincent Serei Eri resigned on Oct. 1 — see p. 38534).
Prime Minister: Rabbie Namaliu.
Other principal ministers: Akoka Doi (Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Fisheries and Marine Resources); Arnold Marsipal (Defence); Fr John Momis (Provincial Affairs); Michael Somare (Foreign Affairs).
1990/91 Cabinet changes
Cabinet reshuffles were conducted in late 1990 and in March, June and October 1991 [see p. 38535].
Ruling coalition
Both the government and the opposition are supported by loose coalitions consisting of many political parties.
Like the parties themselves, these coalitions are usually unstable, and tend to be based upon personalities and patronage rather than ideology.
The ruling coalition includes the Pangu Pati (Rabbie Namaliu l.); the Melanesian Alliance (Fr John Momis ch.); the National Party (formerly People's United Front, Michael Mel l.); the League for National Advancement (Karl Stack l.); the People's Action Party (PAP, Akoka Doi l.); elements of the Melanesian United Front (MUF); and independents.
Other political parties
People's Democratic Movement (Paias Wingti l.);
People's Progress Party (Sir Julius Chan l.).
Elections
A general election held in June 1987 resulted in the return to power of a coalition government led by Paias Wingti, but this was defeated in a parliamentary vote of no confidence on July 4, 1988, and replaced by a coalition led by Namaliu.
1990/91 OVERVIEW
Bougainville crisis
The secessionist crisis on Bougainville Island continued to dominate domestic politics during 1990-91 [see pp. 37879-80 for summary to November 1990].
Although the rebel Bougainville Revolutionary Army (BRA) forced government units to withdraw from the island in March 1990, the consequent blockade and failure to achieve international recognition for the island's declaration of independence resulted in a stalemate.
The Endeavour Accord, signed by the two sides on Aug. 5, involved an agreement to defer the implementation of the independence declaration in return for a lifting of the government blockade [see p. 37658].
The agreement broke down almost immediately, however, when the first supply ships to reach the territory were found to contain government security forces and were forced to withdraw.
In September government troops recaptured Buka Island (north of Bougainville), allegedly in response to requests for assistance from the islanders themselves.
In the resulting fighting with the BRA at least 23 people were reported killed.
Following further negotiations the Honiara Accord was signed in late January 1991 [see p. 37962].
The government agreed not to station security forces on Bougainville on condition that the BRA disbanded itself and surrendered its weapons and prisoners to an international peace-keeping force.
The immediate impetus for the agreement was the need to relax the blockade, which was causing immense hardship to the island's 120,000 population and which, according to some estimates, had resulted in the deaths of as many as 3,000 people.
Although the accord meant that essential medical and fuel supplies began reaching the island in mid-February, the agreement's failure to address the central issue of Bougainville's future status meant that it could not provide a final solution to the conflict.
In April the government landed troops in the north of Bougainville, which led to increased clashes with the BRA.
Although further peace negotiations were scheduled for the latter half of 1991, the situation remained unresolved.
The conflict caused a considerable strain on PNG's relationship with its neighbouring states.
In June 1991 the government made an official protest to the Solomon Islands alleging that the BRA had been given government facilities in Honiara to promote its cause.
Relations with Australia were also damaged in June by an admission from the PNG military that helicopters provided by the Australian government for transport and surveillance purposes had been used in February 1990 to dump the bodies of executed BRA rebels into the sea.
Other issues
In late October 1990 Namaliu adjourned parliament early in order to avoid a planned no confidence motion (over the Bougainville situation — see above), and in November he announced that the legislature would remain adjourned until July 1, 1991.
The move was denounced by the opposition as unconstitutional and dictatorial.
In January 1991 the Supreme Court ruled that the adjournment was in breach of the Constitution (which contained an obligation for the legislature to meet at least three times a year), causing Namaliu to announce that the legislature would reconvene in May.
Other important issues in PNG during 1990-91 were rising crime, and corruption charges against the Deputy Prime Minister, Ted Diro.
The former, a longstanding problem in the country, resulted in March in the launching of a much-publicized "crackdown" .
This included conventional proposals such as increased funding for the police, prosecution service and prisons, together with more controversial measures including the imposition of selective urban night curfews, the establishment of a national guard (to provide a form of employment for the country's growing pool of unemployed youths), the tattooing of the foreheads of convicted criminals, and the imposition of the death penalty for crimes such as murder and rape.
Legislation to this effect was passed on Aug. 28, 1991, by 48 votes to 19.
Diro affair
The government's Ombudsman Commission presented a report to the public prosecutor in April 1991 which recommended that Diro should be prosecuted on 73 counts of misconduct and corruption in connection with his post of Forestry Minister.
The decision of Diro (the leader of the PAP, one of the most important components in the government coalition) not to resign from the Cabinet in the face of such charges was supported by Namaliu.
Although Diro continued to cling to office, by mid-1991 his position looked increasingly untenable; in September he was convicted on 81 charges of corruption, and he resigned in October [see pp. 38534-35].
Economy
The Bougainville conflict [see above]affected the country's economy adversely, as the giant Panguna copper mine, which had previously provided about 17 per cent of national revenue and more than 40 per cent of foreign exchange earnings, remained closed.
An economic austerity programme was imposed in early 1990, involving a 10 per cent devaluation of the kina, cuts in government spending, and restrictions on wage increases.
While making primary products more competitive, the devaluation of the kina inevitably resulted in higher inflation which, by the end of 1990, was running at around 7 per cent per annum.
In early 1991 the central bank of PNG warned that the country's budget deficit had ballooned, in 1990 and criticized the government for achieving annual spending cuts equivalent only to US$2,200,000, compared with projected reductions of US$73,800,000.
The government requested international assistance to support the balance of payments and to stem the decline in international reserves.
On April 26, 1990, the IMF approved an assistance package of a total value of 69,200,000 special drawing rights (SDR — US$90,000,000) which included SDR42,800,000 available immediately and SDR26,400,000 available under a 14-month standby arrangement.
A further US$710,000,000 was promised by the World Bank and other Western donors, including Australia and Japan.
The long-term outlook for the economy remained buoyant, however, because of the country's immense natural resources.
In addition to other recent mineral discoveries, the first significant oil deposits (other than in the Kutubu oilfield area) to have been located in the area since the 1950s were discovered on the southern slopes of the Highlands.
The deposits, whose discovery was announced by Command Petroleum on April 2, 1991, were believed to be situated close to the proposed route of a 260-km pipeline currently under construction to transport Kutubu oil to the Gulf of Papua.
Foreign relations
Relations with Indonesia continued to improve despite further incursions by Indonesian troops in pursuit of Melanesian separatists from Irian Jaya.
A new border agreement was signed in March 1990, and in late October the two countries agreed to co-ordinate more closely in security efforts along their 800-km common border.
In December the commander of the Indonesian Armed Forces made an official visit to Port Moresby.
ASIA — PACIFIC
SOLOMON ISLANDS
Area: 27,556 sq km.
Population: 314,707 (1990 est.).
Capital: Honiara (island of Guadalcanal).
Languages: English (official), Pidgin, more than 80 local languages.
Religion: Christianity.
Currency: Solomon Islands dollar (US$1.00=SI$2.7229 as at Sept. 30, 1991).
Major international affiliations: ADB.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The head of state of the Solomon Islands, an independent member of the Commonwealth since July 1978, is the United Kingdom sovereign represented by a Governor-General.
Legislative authority is vested in a unicameral National Parliament, the 38 members of which are popularly elected for up to four years.
The Prime Minister (who is elected by MPs from among their number) and an appointed Cabinet exercise executive power and are responsible to Parliament.
Main government leaders
Governor-General: Sir George Lepping.
Prime Minister: Solomon Mamaloni (since March 1989 — see p. 36526).
Other principal ministers: Peter Kenilorea (Foreign Affairs and Trade); Christopher Abe (Finance and Planning).
1990/91 Cabinet changes
A new Cabinet was appointed in October 1990 [see p. 37862].
Ruling party
Mamaloni resigned as leader of the People's Alliance Party in October 1990 but remained Prime Minister at the head of a coalition government of "national unity" .
Other main political parties
Nationalist Front for Progress (NFP, the main opposition group, Andrew Nori l.);
United Party (UP, Peter Kenilorea l.).
Elections
The 1989 general election was won by the PAP [see p. 36465].
1990/91 OVERVIEW
Prime Minister Mamaloni came under increasing pressure in 1990 both from opposition leader Nori and from growing dissatisfaction from within the ruling PAP.
Although Mamaloni successfully defeated a motion of no confidence in May, a second vote was scheduled when the legislature reconvened in October.
A week before it was due, Mamaloni resigned as leader of PAP and announced that he would continue in office as the head of a government of national unity.
He dismissed five of his ministers (including Deputy Prime Minister Danny Philip) and replaced them with four members of the opposition and one PAP backbencher [see p. 37862].
The remaining PAP ministers refused party demands that they resign from the government and they were subsequently expelled from the party in early 1991.
The formation of a coalition government and the splitting of both the ruling party and the opposition suggested a return to the traditional political style, under which political structures revolved around personalities and party affiliations remained weak and without clear ideological foundations.
ASIA — PACIFIC
TONGA
Area: 748 sq km.
Population: 98,000 (1989 World Bank est.).
Capital: Nuku'alofa.
Languages: Tongan, English (both official).
Religion.
Christianity (mainly Wesleyan).
Currency: pa'anga or Tongan dollar (US$1.00=TS1.2481 as at Sept. 30, 1991).
Major international affiliations: ADB.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The Kingdom of Tonga, an independent constitutional monarchy within the Commonwealth, was a British Protected State for 70 years before achieving full independence in 1970.
The Tongan sovereign is head of state and exercises executive power in conjunction with an appointed 10-member Privy Council which functions as a Cabinet.
The 29-member unicameral Legislative Assembly consists of the King, Privy Council, nine hereditary nobles (elected by their peers) and nine popularly elected representatives.
Elected representatives hold office for three years.
Main government leaders
Head of state: King Taufa'ahau Tupou IV.
Prime Minister: Baron Vaea (also Minister for Agriculture; Forestry and Fisheries; Marine Affairs)— replaced Prince Fatafehi Tu'ipelehake in mid-1991.
Other principal ministers: Crown Prince Tupouto'a (Foreign Affairs; Defence); Cecil Cocker (Finance).
1990/91 Cabinet changes
None.
Political parties
None.
Elections
The most recent elections were held on Feb. 15, 1990 [see p. 37251].
1990/91 OVERVIEW
The success of three "pro-democracy" commoner candidates — ably led by Akilisi Pohive — in the 1990 general election increased the pressure for reform of the absolutist power of the Tongan King and his appointed government.
The focus for this pressure was a tenacious campaign for information concerning the sale of Tongan passports [see pp. 37884; 38103].
Pohive and the pro-democracy movement took the case to the courts in 1989, and it was due to be heard in the Supreme Court on Feb. 22, 1990.
The Privy Council, however, reconvened Parliament for an emergency session on Feb. 18 and pushed through amendments to the Nationality Act, the Passport Act and the Constitution itself, in order to provide a retroactive legal basis for the sale; denied its legal foundation, the court case was dismissed.
Increasingly the passport issue was seen as an illustration of the country's need for constitutional reform.
Finance Minister Cocker admitted to parliament that the government had made T$29,600,000 from the sale of passports up to Jan. 31, 1991.
The King claimed that all the funds acquired through the passport sales had been accounted for.
Amongst the alleged uses were the refinancing of the government-owned airline, hurricane relief, the purchase of stock in the Bank of Tonga, and the acquisition of land in London upon which to build a high commission.
There was also speculation concerning the health of both Taufa'ahau Tupou and his aged Prime Minister, the former having cancelled a state visit to Japan in order to travel to Australia for medical treatment, the latter having been incapacitated for a number of years after suffering a stroke.
By mid-1991 several commoner MPs were calling openly for Prince Fatafehi Tu'ipelehake's resignation and for his replacement by an elected Prime Minister.
On Feb. 11, 1991, the government freed the pa'anga from its fixed link with the Australian dollar, choosing instead to determine its value against a weighted basket of currencies.
In late June 1991 the legislature passed the 1991-92 budget for the financial year beginning on July 1.
The budget totalled $T40,000,000, a rise of $T2,700,000 over the previous year.
ASIA — PACIFIC
TUVALU
Area: 26 sq .Population: 8,229 (1985).
Capital: Funafuti atoll.
Languages: English, local languages.
Religion: Christianity.
Currency: Australian dollar (US$1.00=A$1.2481 as at Sept. 30, 1991).
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The head of state of Tuvalu, an independent special member of the Commonwealth since October 1978, is the United Kingdom sovereign, represented by a Governor-General.
Legislative authority is vested in a unicameral 12-member Parliament which is popularly elected for up to four years.
Executive power is exercised by a Prime Minister elected by MPs from among their number, and a Cabinet appointed by the Governor-General upon the advice of the Prime Minister.
Main government leaders
Governor-General: Toalipi Lati.
Prime Minister: Bikenibeu Paeniu (also Minister of Foreign Affairs; Economic Planning).
Other principal ministers: Alesana Seluka (Deputy Prime Minister; Minister of Finance and Commerce); Ionatana Iontana (Works and Communications); Toomu Sione (Natural Resources; Home Affairs Works and Communications).
Political parties.
None.
Elections
Bikenibeu Paeniu became Prime Minister following a general election in September 1989 when he defeated Tomasi Puapua, who had held the post since 1981 [see p. 36977].
1990/91 OVERVIEW
Toalipi Lati succeeded Sir Tupua Leupena as Governor-General of Tuvalu on Oct. 1, 1990.
Following a large budget deficit in 1990 the Minister of Finance and Commerce announced plans to reduce public spending.
ASIA — PACIFIC
UNITED STATES PACIFIC TERRITORIES
NORTHERN MARIANAS
Status: US Commonwealth Territory.
Area: 457 sq km.
Population: 31,563 (1987 est.).
Capital: Saipan.
Languages: English (official); also Chamorro, Carolinian and Japanese.
Religion: Christianity.
Currency: US dollar.
Political system
Originally part of the UN Trust Territory of the Pacific administered by the United States, the Northern Mariana Islands voted to become a US Commonwealth Territory in 1975, and a new Constitution became operational in 1978.
One of two US Commonwealth Territories (Puerto Rico is the other — see p. 38241), its inhabitants have US citizenship.
Technically, however, the territory's new status was not internationally recognized until the formal termination of the UN's Trusteeship in December 1990 [see below; p. 37920].
Executive authority is vested in a popularly elected Governor, who is assisted by the Northern Marianas Commonwealth Legislature.
The legislature consists of a nine-member Senate and a 15-member House of Representatives; its members are elected for two-year terms.
Main government leaders
Governor: Lorenzo (Larry) De Leon Guerrero.
Political parties
Political activity mirrors that on the US mainland, and is therefore dominated by the Democratic Party and the Republican Party.
Elections
Following gubernatorial and legislative elections in November 1989, the Republicans controlled the office of Governor and the Senate, while the Democrats had a majority in the House of Representatives [see p. 37886].
1990/91 OVERVIEW
The UN Security Council formally approved the termination of the UN Trust Territory on Dec. 22, 1990 [see p. 37920], thereby giving full legality to the Commonwealth status of the Northern Marianas Islands.
AMERICAN SAMOA
Status: US Unincorporated Territory.
Area: 195 sq km.
Population: 38,2003 (1989 est.).
Capital: Pago Pago.
Languages: English, Samoan.
Religion: Christianity.
Currency: US dollar.
Political system
Executive authority is vested in a Governor, who is popularly elected for a four-year term.
The legislature (Fono) consists of an 18-member Senate elected for four years by Matai (traditional clan leaders), and a popularly elected House of Representatives elected for two years.
The territory also elects one (non-voting) delegate to the United States House of Representatives.
In 1986 a constitutional convention comprehensively revised the territory's constitution, but the changes have yet to be ratified by the US Congress.
Main government leaders
Governor: Peter Coleman.
Elections
Coleman was elected Governor in November 1988.
1990/91 OVERVIEW
A referendum held in November 1990 decisively rejected the proposal that the Governor's power of veto should be restricted.
GUAM
Status: US Unincorporated Territory.
Area: 549 sq km.
Population: 132,726 (1990 est.).
Capital: Agana.
Languages: English (official); also Chamorro and Japanese.
Religion: Christianity.
Currency: US dollar.
Political system
Executive authority is vested in a Governor, popularly elected for a four-year term.
The Guam Legislature consists of 21 members (senators) who are popularly elected for two years.
The territory elects one (non-voting) delegate to the US House of Representatives.
Main government leaders
Governor: Joseph F. Ada, in office since 1987.
Political parties
Political activity mirrors that on the US mainland, and is therefore dominated by the Democratic Party and the Republican Party.
Elections
Ada was re-elected Governor in November 1990.
In legislative elections the same month the Democrats won 11 seats compared with 10 for the Republicans.
1990/91 OVERVIEW
Discussions continued throughout 1990 between the Guam commission for self-determination, led by Ada, and the US government on the terms of the territory's future Commonwealth status.
(In a referendum in 1982 Commonwealth status had been the most popular option).
The main obstacles to an agreement appeared to be the desire of the Guam government to retain veto powers over the application within the territory of US federal legislation, and the issue of self-determination for the indigenous Chamorros, who constituted some 45 per cent of the population.
The issue of the US military bases on Guam was also discussed [see p. 37886].
ASIA — PACIFIC
VANUATU
Area: 12,190 sq km.
Population: 152,000 (1989 World Bank est.).
Capital: Port Vilau.
Languages: English, French, Bislama (all official).
Religion: Christianity.
Currency: vatu (US$1.00=110.953 vatu as at Sept. 30, 1991).
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The Republic of Vanuatu became an independent member of the Commonwealth in July 1980.
Legislative authority is vested in a unicameral Parliament, the 46 members of which are elected for four years on the basis of universal adult franchise.
Executive power is exercised by a Prime Minister (who is elected by Parliament from among its members) and by a Council of Ministers which consists of MPs appointed by the Prime Minister.
The President, the republic's head of state, is elected for five years by an electoral college composed of the Parliament and the Presidents of the Regional Councils (local government bodies, to which a considerable degree of power is constitutionally devolved).
Main government leaders
President: Fred Timakata.
Prime Minister: Maxime Carlot replaced in December 1991 Donald Kalpokass, who had replaced Fr Walter Lini, in September [see pp. 38442; 38676].
Other principal ministers: Sethy Regevanu (Finance; Housing).
1990/91 Cabinet changes
On Nov. 19, 1990, Lini conducted a reshuffle in which he took over the portfolios of Civil Aviation and Tourism; Energy; Fisheries; and Foreign Affairs.
Another reshuffle on Feb. 4, 1991, included the replacement of Finance Minister Sela Molisa, and on June 27 four Ministers were dismissed, including Kalpokas, hitherto Education and Foreign Affairs Minister.
Ruling party
The Union of Moderate Parties (UMP, Maxime Carlot l.); the traditional francophone opposition to Lini's anglophone government, won 42 per cent of the vote and 19 seats in elections in December 1991 [see p. 38676].
Other main political parties
The Vanuaaka Pati (VP — Our Land Party, Walter Lini l.), a vehicle for "Melanesian socialism" ; Melanesian Progressive Party (MPP, Barak Sope ch.); established in 1988 by former members of the VP.
Elections
In a general election held on Dec. 2, 1991, the UMP finished as the largest single party [see p. 38676].
1990/91 OVERVIEW
Although the VP remained the dominant force in Vanuatu, the party was unable to regain the authority which it had lost during the leadership struggle of 1988 [see p. 36381].
The party was effectively opposed by the new MPP (founded by Barak Sope, Lini's rival, whose conviction following the 1988 coup attempt had been quashed on appeal — pp. 36397-98; 36526), in alliance with the conservative UMP.
The VP's position was also undermined by Lini's poor health (he had been left partially disabled by a stroke in 1987) and by the charge that the government was too authoritarian.
This charge was highlighted in mid-1990 when the government announced the establishment of a review committee to examine the possibility of constitutional reform prior to the 1991 general election [see pp. 37882-83].
Of the 35 members of the committee 24 were drawn from the VP.
Lini's increasing insecurity was reflected in his decision in late 1990 to assume responsibility for several key Cabinet portfolios, and his dismissal of Finance Minister Molisa in early 1991.
Numerous political appointees and civil servants were also replaced by friends and relations of Lini, whom he considered to be more loyal.
Although the VP won local elections in February 1991, there was evidence of increasing discontent within the party over Lini's leadership, accentuated in May 1991 when he suffered a heart attack.
In an effort to bolster support Lini demanded a pledge of loyalty from each of his ministers.
After undergoing medical tests in Australia, Lini returned to work on June 14 and, on June 27, dismissed four ministers who had not acceded to his loyalty pledge.
These included Donald Kalpokas, the VP's general secretary, who was sacked as Minister of Education and Foreign Affairs, together with Home Affairs Minister Iolu Abbil, Lands Minister William Mahit and Trade Minister Harold Qualao.
Vanuatu's 1991 budget, as presented to the legislature in late 1990, called for expenditure the equivalent of US$42,000,000, an increase of 7.8 per cent compared with 1990.
President Timakata made a state visit to China in October 1990.
ASIA — PACIFIC
WESTERN SAMOA
Area: 2,831 sq km.
Population: 168,000 (1988).
Capital: Apia.
Languages: Samoan, English.
Religion: Christianity.
Currency: tala (US$1.00=2.385 tala as at Sept. 30, 1991).
Major international affiliations: ADB.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
Western Samoa achieved independence from New Zealand in 1962 and became a member of the Commonwealth in 1970.
The head of state, the O le Ao O le Malo, acts as a constitutional monarch with the power to dissolve the unicameral 47-member Fono (the legislative assembly) and to appoint a Prime Minister upon its recommendation.
The Fono is elected by universal suffrage for up to three years, although the right to stand for election remains confined to members of the Matai (elected clan leaders).
Main government leaders
O le Ao O le Malo: Susuga Malietoa Tanumafili II.
Prime Minister: Tofilau Eti Alesana (also Minister for Foreign Affairs; Broadcasting; Police and Prisons).
Other principal ministers: Tuilaepa Sailele Malielegaoi (Finance); Fuimaono Lotoman (Justice).
1990/91 Cabinet changes
A new Cabinet was appointed in May 1991 after the April general election [see pp. 38196-97].
Ruling party
Human Rights Protection Party (HRPP, Alesana l.).
Other main political party
Samoan National Development Party (SNDP, Va'ai Kolone l.).
Elections
In the general election of April 1991 the HRPP was returned to office with 26 seats, while the opposition SNDP won 18 [see pp. 38153-54].
1990/91 OVERVIEW
At the beginning of 1990 the Matai (elected clan chiefs) continued to dominate the electoral system by constituting both the electorate and the only source of candidates for 45 of the 47 seats in the Fono.
The system was being increasingly undermined, however, both by the growing numbers of those holding Matai titles and by a reduction in the traditional structures through which the chiefs had exercised authority.
In October 1990 all citizens over the age of 21 were invited to vote on two proposed constitutional reforms.
The first, which involved the creation of an electoral system based on universal suffrage, was narrowly approved; the second, the proposed creation of an upper legislative chamber composed of Matai, was rejected.
Despite opposition from the SNDP, the result of the referendum was translated into legislation which was passed by the Fono in December.
The Fono was dissolved in February 1991 and a general election was held on April 5, some weeks later than had originally been scheduled because of the difficulties involved in registering the 80,000 newly enfranchised electors.
Initial results gave the HRPP 26 seats compared with 18 for the SNDP and three independents.
Among the defeated candidates was opposition leader Tupua Tamasese Efi.
By the time that the new Fono convened in early May, the traditional political manoeuvring had increased the HRPP's legislative strength to 30 seats, compared with 16 for the SNDP and one independent.
Alesana was re-elected Prime Minister for what, he later stated, would be his final term in office.
Among the new ministers appointed by the Prime Minister was Fiame Naomi, the country's first female Cabinet member.
ASIA — PACIFIC
SOUTH PACIFIC FORUM
Background: The SPF, created in 1971, is a regional organization of independent and self-governing states in the South Pacific.
Membership: Australia, the Cook Islands, Fiji, Kiribati, the Marshall Islands, the Federated States of Micronesia (FSM), Nauru, New Zealand, Niue, Papua New Guinea (PNG), the Solomon Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu, Vanuatu and Western Samoa.
Executive body: South Pacific Forum Secretariat.
Secretary-General: Henry Fati Naisali.