

SOUTH AFRICA
White approval for constitutional change
In a "whites-only" referendum on March 17, 68.6 per cent of voters responded positively to the question: "Do you support continuation of the reform process which the State President began on Feb. 2, 1990 [see p. 37232], and which is aimed at a new constitution through negotiation?" 
Announcing the result, State President F. W. de Klerk was triumphant, declaring that "today we have closed the book on apartheid" .
The size of the "yes" vote surprised both the National Party (NP) government, which was seeking a renewal of its mandate for negotiating a political settlement with anti-apartheid organizations, and the Conservative Party (CP) which led the "no" campaign.
Particularly unexpected was the extent of Afrikaner support for the reform process.
This (majority) section of the white population had been considered to be especially resistant to change, but analysts estimated that 62 per cent of Afrikaners participating voted "yes" (compared with 79 per cent of the English-speakers).
NP organizers declared themselves delighted with the breadth of support for the government.
The result of the referendum was hailed worldwide.
Prime Minister Ruud Lubbers of the Netherlands said that the result was "beautiful" .
President Ibrahim Babangida of Nigeria, chair of the Organization of African Unity, sent congratulations.
Cape Town and Durban recorded the highest "yes" majorities; Pietersburg in the conservative northern Transvaal was the only one of the 15 regions to record a majority "no" vote.
The campaign
The NP "yes" campaign (backed by the Democratic Party — DP) began on Feb. 20 with the announcement of the referendum [see p. 38750]by the State President.
The main thrust of the campaign, designed by the United Kingdom-based advertising agency Saatchi & Saatchi, was to reveal what the government believed the scenario would be if the white electorate voted "no" .
Voters were told that sanctions would be stepped up, unemployment and crime would escalate and the black population would rise in revolt.
The government also took advantage of successes by the South African cricket team in the cricket world cup in Australia to argue that without reform, South Africa would once again have to withdraw from the international sporting scene.
As the campaign drew to a close, a more positive note was sounded with advertisements offering a vision of a "new South Africa" with racial harmony and economic prosperity.
The "yes" campaign was also supported by the president of the African National Congress (ANC), Nelson Mandela, who, whilst abhorring the notion of the white population deciding the political fate of the country, appealed to whites to vote "yes" for democratic change.
He gave a warning that a "no" vote would be a declaration of war against blacks and would herald unprecedented chaos.
There was also strong support for the "yes" campaign in the media as well as in industrial and business circles.
The "no" campaign was steered by the CP, the Afrikaner Resistance Movement (AWB) and the Reformed National Party (HNP).
Its message was simple: vote "no" to stop the advance of communism led by the ANC and the South African Communist Party (SACP).
This argument was supported by former president P. W. Botha, who broke ranks with his NP entirely by urging whites to vote "no" .
He declared that de Klerk had fallen victim to a Communist plot and that the reform process would "lead us into an abyss" and "the suicide of my people" .
Rising violence
The referendum campaign took place against a background of mounting violence.
In the period between Feb. 20 (the day the referendum was called) and March 17 (the day of the poll) more than 270 people were killed.
The majority of deaths were, according to monitoring groups, related to vigilante action in Natal and the Pretoria-Witwatersrand-Vereeniging (PWV) region of the Transvaal.
On March 10 de Klerk, his wife and Justice and National Intelligence Service Minister Kobie Coetsee were attacked with tear gas at the Orange Free State University at Bloemfontein.
According to the police, right-wing students, thought to be members of the AWB, were responsible for the attack.
Progress of constitutional talks
Buoyed by its success in the referendum, the government moved swiftly to present revised constitutional proposals.
These were tabled on March 23 at the Convention for a Democratic South Africa (CODESA) and were based on NP plans for a two-phase transition, as outlined in September 1991 and expanded in January [see pp. 38442; 38704-05].
Under the revised proposals multiparty transitional councils would be appointed by CODESA during the first phase to oversee regional and local government, finance and multiracial elections; ultimate responsibility would remain with the NP government.
The second phase would begin with elections for a transitional administration which would remain in power for up to 10 years.
This phase would include a multi-person presidency and a constitution-drafting parliament.
The government's proposals were met with opposition from all the other participants in CODESA, except the Zulu-based Inkatha Freedom Party.
The ANC, while welcoming the plan for the constitution to be drafted by an elected body, rejected other aspects of the proposals which it believed left the government as "both player and referee" in the first period of the transition.
The ANC also firmly rejected the government's insistence that it disband its armed wing, Umkhonto we Sizwe (MK), before a full transitional government was in place.
On March 30 the Minister of Constitutional Development and Planning, Gerrit Viljoen, gave further details of the government's plans for the constitution-making body.
The constitution, he said, should arise from the negotiations within a bicameral elected body — the lower house elected by proportional representation and the upper house elected in such a way as to ensure "special representation" for minorities and regions.
The two houses would have absolute veto rights over each other.
Viljoen argued that the ANC's commitment to a single-chamber constituent assembly would amount to a "simple majoritarian [sic]system" which ran contrary to the government's "power-sharing" approach.
The ANC rejected the proposal, saying that the government was opposed to majority rule "not so much because of the principle involved but because of dissatisfaction with whom the majority will be" .
It made counter-proposals on March 31 which called for the constitution to be drafted and adopted by a 400-member body elected on the basis of "one-person-one-vote" and using a system of proportional representation.
It proposed that the minimum threshold for representation in the assembly should be "relatively low" to allow for the widest possible representation, and that decisions within the assembly should be by a two-thirds majority.
Region % "yes" % "no" Beaufort West 61.6 38.4 Bloemfontein 58.6 41.4 Cape Town 84.9 15.1 Durban 85.0 15.0 East London 78.3 21.7 George 65.4 34.6 Germiston 65.4 34.6 Johannesburg 78.3 21.7 Kimberley 54.5 45.5 Kroonstad 51.5 48.5 Pietermaritzburg 76.0 24.0 Pietersburg 43.0 57.0 Port Elizabeth 74.5 25.5 Pretoria 57.4 42.6 Roodepoort 52.4 47.6 Turnout: 85.08%.
Referendum results
SOUTH KOREA
General election setback for DLP
The ruling Democratic Liberal Party (DLP) suffered a humiliating defeat in the general election of March 24, losing its majority in the National Assembly.
The main opposition Democratic Party (DP) and the Unification National Party (UNP — formed in January 1992) both did better than had been expected.
The election, the first for the legislature since 1988 [see pp. 36019-21], was seen as a test of popular support for President Roh Tae Woo, and as an important indicator of the likely result of the presidential elections due later in 1992.
It was also the first opportunity at national level for the electorate to deliver its verdict on the DLP, which had been formed by Roh in January 1990 through the merger of his minority ruling party with two of the three main opposition parties [see pp. 37187-88].
Although this merger initially appeared as a shrewd means of transforming a minority government into a government which commanded more than two-thirds of the seats in the legislature, it also produced a considerable level of public disquiet over its legitimacy.
This was exacerbated by the instability and personal feuding which characterized the new ruling group.
Details of election results
A total of 1,047 candidates — 223 independents and 824 party representatives — contested the 1992 elections.
According to figures released by the Central Election Management Committee (CEMC) voter turnout was 71.9 per cent, compared with 75.8 per cent in 1988.
The DLP won 38.5 per cent of the total vote, the DP 29.2 per cent and the UNP 17.3 per cent.
The DLP won 116 of the 237 seats open to popular election, thereby entitling it to 33 of the 62 seats awarded on the basis of proportional representation, bringing its total in the 299-member Assembly to 149, one seat sort of an overall majority.
The opposition DP, led by veteran dissident Kim Dae Jung together with Lee Ki Taek, won 97 seats (75 directly elected and 22 of those distributed by proportional representation).
The UNP — led by Chung Ju Yung, the founder of the Hyundai group, the country's second-largest industrial conglomerate — secured 31 seats (24 in direct voting and seven in the national constituency) after a vigorous, centrist, pro-business campaign, which attacked the economic record of the Roh government, and in particular its inability to reduce inflation, currently running at an annualized rate of approximately 10 per cent.
By exceeding the threshold of 20 Assembly seats the UNP was entitled to form a formal negotiating caucus on the floor of the House.
The minor Party for New Political Reform (PNPR) won a single seat, and there were 21 independents elected.
As expected, there were strong regional voting patterns, although these appeared a little less rigid than in the 1988 election.
The DP held its traditional stronghold of North Cholla province, although the DLP unexpectedly captured two seats in this opposition heartland.
As in 1988, the DP failed to win any seats in the Kyongsang provinces, the traditional base of the governing party, and also failed to win any of the 16 seats in Pusan or the 11 seats in Taegu, the home town of Roh.
In the more marginal areas, most notably Seoul and its surrounding Kyonggi province, the DP secured an unexpectedly high level of support; it won 25 of the 44 directly elected seats in the capital, compared with 16 for the DLP and two for the UNP.
Consequences of election results
President Roh reacted to the election defeat by stating, on March 25, that "the government and the ruling party should humbly acknowledge the people's will" , and should seek to improve its management of the economy.
He also suggested that it was imperative that the DLP should put an end to the internal discord which had characterized much of its existence.
The immediate problem of the DLP's lost legislative majority was overcome by March 26, when negotiations secured the support of at least two of the independents.
The fact that a significant number of the independents who were elected were DLP sympathizers who had failed to secure party endorsement as candidates, meant that most observers expected Roh to be able to construct a working majority within the new Assembly.
The election's impact on the longer term future of the DLP was less easy to assess, however, particularly in terms of its effect on the delicate and potentially explosive balance between the three disparate groups from which the party had been forged.
Each of these three DLP factions was damaged by the election results.
The largest, that led by Roh, suffered the loss of seats in its heartland of North Kyongsang province and Taegu, whilst the smallest, that led by Kim Jong Pil, suffered heavy defeats in its power-base of the city of Taejon and the surrounding province of South Chungchong.
Immediately after the scale of the defeat became apparent, Kim offered his resignation as co-chairman of the DLP.
The second-largest DLP faction, that led by former opposition leader Kim Young Sam, maintained its dominance in Pusan, but saw many of its candidates defeated in Seoul and elsewhere.
As leader of the election campaign for the party as a whole, Kim was also blamed for the losses suffered by the other factions.
He rejected calls for his resignation as DLP executive chairman, however, arguing that it was the government's poor economic record rather than the DLP's inadequate election campaign which had cost the party its legislative majority.
With the prospect of renewed factional discord, however, and with the strength of his faction in the new Assembly reduced from 40 to 22 seats, Kim's ambition to succeed Roh as President appeared to have been badly shaken by the election.
Nevertheless, on March 28 Kim announced that he would be a candidate for the party's presidential nomination.
The selection was due to be made at a DLP convention to be held before May 9.
The election result improved the presidential chances of Kim Dae Jung, and seemed to make it certain that he would contest the presidency for a third time, having been defeated in 1971 and 1987.
Following the strong showing of the UNP, Chung Ju Yung also hinted strongly that he was considering a bid for the presidency.
Cabinet changes
Roh carried out a Cabinet reshuffle on March 30, replacing four of his Ministers.
Former Home Affairs Minister Lee Sahng Yeon replaced Suh Dong Kwon as Director of the Agency for National Security Planning, after several Agency members had been found illegally campaigning for the opposition during the election.
The other appointments were Lee Dong Ho, who became Home Affairs Minister, Kang Hyon Wook who was made Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries Minister, and Noh Won Il who became Transport Minister.
Visit by Russian Foreign Minister
Russian Foreign Minister Andrei Kozyrev arrived in South Korea on March 17 for a three-day official visit before going on to Japan [see p. 38820].
In discussions between Kozyrev and South Korean Foreign Minister Lee Sang Ock, it was reported that the former had given assurances that Russia would not provide North Korea with any offensive weapons, and had promised to consult with the South Korean government during future discussions of military matters with North Korea.
He was also said to have pledged support for South Korea if it proved necessary to apply for UN sanctions against the North over the issue of nuclear inspections [see also p. 38818-19].
Lee also requested that Russia undertake legal guarantees to repay the US$1,800 million which South Korea had provided, or had committed itself to provide, to Russia and the other members of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) in 1991.
Lee promised to deliver the outstanding balance of US$330 million as soon as the guarantees had been agreed.
The two Foreign Ministers also agreed in principle to conclude a treaty on basic relations between their two states in time for the expected visit to South Korea of Russian President Boris Yeltsin in September.
AFRICA
SUDAN
Intensification of war in south
A military initiative by government troops in late February and early March was interpreted by some observers as a drive to break the hold of the rebel Sudan People's Liberation Army (SPLA) over the south-west of Sudan.
Troops advanced from the garrison towns of Malakal and Juba, while the government said that it was still prepared to participate in any future peace talks with the rebels which Nigeria might succeed in mediating [for October 1991 postponement of talks see p. 38519].
It was noted that SPLA forces had been weakened both by internal divisions [see pp. 38426; 38666]and by the May 1991 change of government in Ethiopia, which had meant that they could no longer operate from bases there.
Taking advantage of the dry season, which would probably end in April, government units were said now also to be attacking the SPLA from across the border in Ethiopia itself.
Agence France-Presse (AFP) on March 18 cited reports that Sudanese troops had been gathering, in preparation for an attack on the rebels in Sudan, at the town of Gambella, on the Ethiopian side of the border.
The AFP report also said that Ethiopian forces had on March 9 participated in the successful attack on the border town of Pochala (held by the SPLA since 1985).
The Ethiopian government had already, on March 12, categorically denied any involvement of Ethiopian troops.
The leader of the Sudanese ruling Revolutionary Command Council (RCC), Lt.-Gen.
Omar al-Bashir, on March 25 reiterated previous official denials of reports that Iranian troops were present in Sudan.
The opposition umbrella National Democratic Alliance (NDA) had claimed in a statement issued in Cairo on Feb. 20 that 8,000 Iranian soldiers had been deployed by the Iranian government in the southern town of Juba.
Reports of Libyan and Chinese military assistance were also denied by the government.
Reports of repression against Nuba — Relocation of Khartoum refugees
The Deputy Governor of Kordofan state in central Sudan, Umar Sulayman Adam, on March 12 denied allegations that the Nuba people of the Nuba mountains in his state were being subjected to official repression.
A report published by the Africa Watch human rights organization on Dec. 10, 1991, had detailed evidence of what it described as a "steady war of attrition" in which the Sudanese authorities allegedly sought to eliminate community leaders and the educated classes among the Nuba, especially since 1989.
Reports by other human rights organizations also spoke of government efforts to "Islamicize" the Nuba, and of widespread killings and "disappearances" by government-backed militias, in addition to looting by SPLA forces.
On Dec. 29, 1991, the official news agency Suna had announced that a jihad (holy war) had been declared in south Kordofan.
Foreign press reports in March claimed that over the past year up to 400,000 people from shanty towns in the outskirts of Khartoum had been forcibly relocated to areas outside the city [for December 1991 killings of shanty-town dwellers see p. 38666].
The UN, the US embassy in Khartoum and other foreign embassies were reported to have appealed to the government to halt the relocation programme.
Many of those affected by the relocation had left the south as refugees from the conflict there in the previous decade.
The authorities claimed that they had been living illegally on land which had been allocated to others, in Khartoum suburbs such as Karmuta where large numbers of mud-brick houses had reportedly now been vacated and then destroyed by bulldozers.
Bernard Kouchner, the French Minister-Delegate for Humanitarian Action, on March 11 visited one of what the official media called "displaced locations" , to which people had been moved, near Omdurman, Khartoum state.
AFRICA
SOMALIA
Ceasefire failure
UN Under-Secretary-General James Jonah, after heading a 10-member delegation to Mogadishu, the Somali capital, on Feb. 29-March 4, declared himself "deeply depressed to note that efforts to relieve the starving people of Mogadishu have been recklessly disrupted" .
[For Jonah's visit in January see p. 38710.]
By the end of the month, however, a UN technical mission appeared to have implemented a truce between the two sides at least for the areas around the airport and the docks.
Jonah had succeeded on March 3 in securing the signatures of both interim President Ali Mahdi Mohammed and Gen. Mohammed Farah Aydid on a ceasefire document [for ceasefire negotiations in New York see p. 38755].
Although 45 tonnes of food supplies sent by the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) had arrived from Nairobi by air on Feb. 29, a ship carrying supplies from the UN World Food Programme was turned back on March 3 and 5 from the docks at Mogadishu due to shelling.
UN officials said that 100,000 women and children demonstrated for peace in the north of Mogadishu on March 8.
They also said that there were signs the ceasefire was beginning to be respected.
On March 22 a UN technical mission arrived in Mogadishu.
Its brief, according to a resolution unanimously agreed at the UN Security Council on March 17, was to look at the requirements for a future peacekeeping operation and to create "mechanisms to ensure humanitarian aid can get through unhindered" .
The mission, led by Robert Gallagher, consisted of 20 military and civilian personnel together with representatives of the Organization of African Unity (OAU), the Arab League and the Islamic Conference Organization.
AFRICA
KENYA
Banning of political rallies
On March 19 the government banned all political meetings indefinitely after weeks of serious violence in western Kenya.
Earlier in the month there had been rioting in Nairobi.
President Daniel arap Moi warned on March 20 that he would tolerate no demonstrations and threatened a media clampdown.
According to the police at least 70 people were killed and 142 injured in March in the worst outbreak of ethnic violence since independence in 1963.
The Rift Valley, the scene of the clashes involving Moi's minority Kalenjin people, was described a war zone.
The government was blamed by opposition groups for inciting the violence, claiming that the Moi regime would use the clashes as an excuse to impose an state of emergency and thus delay forthcoming multiparty elections.
The Democratic Party [see p. 38707]claimed that agents provocateurs had been used in the area.
These suspicions were echoed by the country's Catholic bishops, who, in a pastoral letter delivered on March 22, made an unprecedented attack on the government, accusing it of fomenting ethnic tensions.
According to the bishops the conflict was "all part of a wider political strategy" involving "well-trained arsonists" who were "transported to the scene" .
The allegations were denied by the government which suggested that foreign governments and "communists" were behind the violence.
Nairobi rioting
Riot police in Nairobi clubbed four women unconscious on March 3.
The incident occurred as police used tear gas and batons to drive a group of women protestors and their supporters away from a park.
About 50 women, demanding the release of 52 political prisoners, had begun a hunger strike in Nairobi's Uhuru Park on Feb. 28.
The government, denying that it held any political prisoners, ordered the women to end their protest, saying that opposition supporters were taking advantage of it to cause unrest.
The police action sparked two days of rioting by supporters of the women.
Withdrawal of seats from dissident KANU MPs
On March 9, the Speaker of the National Assembly declared vacant 11 parliamentary seats whose holders had left the ruling Kenya African National Union (KANU).
The Speaker said that the Constitution required all members of the assembly to be members of KANU.
The opposition members lost their seats despite the recognition of a multiparty system in December 1991 [see p. 38661].
AFRICA
CHAD
Reaction to alleged coup attempt
Reacting to what the government claimed was an unsuccessful military coup against the regime of President Idris Déby on Feb. 21, the Foreign Minister Mahamat Saleh Hamat on March 2 asked foreign diplomats to ensure that their staff did not "intervene in the internal political affairs of Chad" .
The authorities claimed that the Feb. 21 fighting, which broke out in the south of N'Djamena, the capital, had started when "armed men in military uniform" attacked a police station.
There had also been reports of dissident troops moving towards the area from a camp in the centre of the town.
Six civilians, one policeman and six of the assailants were killed and 20 arrests were made.
Saleh Hamat said that the abortive coup had been the culmination of "an insurrectional and separatist climate in certain parts of the capital" .
The authorities later specified that certain French residents in Chad were under suspicion in connection with the Feb. 21 incident, and on March 31 the French government repatriated "for security reasons" four French citizens working on official co-operation projects.
Opposition groups including the Chadian League for Human Rights (LDHT) meanwhile claimed that the coup incident had been manufactured, in a context of mounting public indignation against the actions of Chadian soldiers stationed in the capital, who were reported to have robbed and killed civilians.
Joseph Behidi, a lawyer and LDHT vice-president, had been killed in N'Djamena on Feb. 16, in an attack which LDHT sources attributed to two soldiers of Déby's Zaghawa clan.
Thousands of people marched in two separate demonstrations on the following day, demanding the resignation of Déby and of Prime Minister Jean Alingue Bawoyeu, and a general strike call by the LDHT and other opposition groups was widely observed on Feb. 17-18.
Sending of reinforcements from France
On Feb. 27, 150 French paratroopers arrived in N'Djamena from their bases in the Central African Republic.
They joined the French forces based in Chad, which had already been reinforced in October 1991 and January 1992 [see pp. 38519; 38710].
Recognition of political parties
On March 16 the government approved the creation of two political parties: the Rally for Democracy and Progress (RDP), lead by the mayor of N'Djamena, Lol Mahamat Choua; and the Chadian Union for Democracy and Progress (UPDT) headed by Elie Romba.
These were the first opposition parties to be approved under the legislation of the previous October [see p. 38519].
At least four other parties were recognized, or applied for recognition, in March and the first week of April.
They included the Union for Democracy and the Republic (UDR), which on March 2 elected Prime Minister Alingue Bawoyeu as its chair but still awaited official recognition; and the Movement for Democracy and Socialism in Chad (MDST) which on April 5 confirmed as its president Ngarbaye Tombalbaye, son of the late Chadian President Tombalbaye.
On March 29 the second-in-command of the National Front for the Liberation of Chad (Frolinat), Mahamat Djerma, claimed that Frolinat had on Feb. 2 been dissolved, and that its militants were now members of a new political party, the National Union.
These claims were denied by the chairman of Frolinat and former President of Chad Goukouni Oueddei, from his exile in Algiers.
On Feb. 23 the US Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs Herman Cohen had met with opposition representatives and President Déby while on a visit to N'Djamena, and had expressed continued US support for the "democratic process in Chad" .
Rehabilitation of Maldom Bada Abbas
When on Feb. 15 the composition of a new Provisional Council of the Republic was announced, it included Maldom Bada Abbas, the former Interior Minister and vice-president of the ruling Patriotic Salvation Movement (MPS).
Maldom Bada had been under arrest since the alleged coup attempt of October 1991 [see p. 38519]and his inclusion therefore signified his political rehabilitation.
AFRICA
NIGERIA
Census results
The results of the national census carried out in November 1991 [see p. 38563]were released on March 19, and recorded a total population of 88,514,501, or some 20,000,000-30,000,000 less than figures routinely used by the UN and World Bank.
Nigeria was confirmed as the most populous African country, with its northern states (46,800,000 people) shown as more populous than those in the south (41,200,000 people).
Disputes over the size of populations of the north and south had resulted in previous censuses being challenged and ultimately cancelled.
The revised calculation of annual per capita income, using the new population total, gave a figure of US$360 rather than US$250.
Currency flotation
On March 6 the Central Bank of Nigeria, having the previous day decided to float the naira, set a new starting exchange rate of 17.8 naira to the US dollar, compared with 10.6 naira earlier in the week; bank officials said that a devaluation of about 30 per cent was expected.
The move, supported by the IMF, the World Bank and Western creditors, followed two days of intense speculation in the foreign exchange markets.
It was regarded as an attempt by the government to reach a new agreement with the IMF and to secure more favourable terms on the rescheduling of its $34,000 million external debt.
The flotation went some way to offset criticism of the Nigerian government in a World Bank report, the details of which were given in the Financial Times of March 16.
The report said that the country's economic management lacked "transparency and accountability" and indicated that there were "inconsistencies" in the government accounts.
The report also expressed concern about the former exchange system.
New election dates
Humphrey Nwosu, chairman of the National Electoral Commission, announced on March 18 that elections to the National Assembly were being brought forward from Nov. 7 and would take place on July 4.
The Assembly would be inaugurated on July 27.
No change was made to the date of the presidential elections due on Dec. 5 [see p. 38708].
Ethnic tension
Local media sources reported on March 10 that at least 100 people had been killed in Taraba state in recent clashes between the Jukun and Tiv ethnic groups over farming rights.
The violence, which had first begun in October 1991, was thought to have resulted in up to 5,000 deaths and to have created 30,000 internal refugees.
AFRICA
NIGER
Army mutiny — New Cabinet
Mutinous soldiers occupied the state radio station in Niamey, the capital, on three occasions between Feb. 28 and March 1 and held prisoner for several hours both André Salifou, Chairman of the High Council of the Republic (HCR — the transitional legislative assembly), and Interior Minister Mohammed Mousa.
Although their demands centred on pay issues, the troops also called for the release and rehabilitation of Capt. Maliki Boureima, imprisoned in October 1991 in connection with a massacre of Tuaregs in May 1990 [see p. 37703].
They agreed to return to their barracks after the government undertook to pay them their January and February salaries.
On March 1 thousands of Niamey residents demonstrated against the soldiers' actions.
A call by the Federation of Niger Trade Unions (USTN) for a general strike "in defence of democracy" was widely observed on March 2 but was called off on March 3 following government pledges that no political concessions would be made to the mutineers.
Prime Minister Amadou Cheiffou announced the dissolution of the transitional government on March 23, and appointed a Cabinet on March 27.
According to Radio France International Cheiffou said that progress had been hindered by various obstacles including intrigues by political parties and the unjustified expectations of the army.
His new Cabinet included eight new ministers, two changes of portfolio, and the dismissal of four ministers.
Mohammed Mousa was replaced as Minister of the Interior by Daouda Rabiou, but remained in the cabinet as Minister of Commerce, Transport and Tourism.
Abdou Tiousso was named as Minister of Justice and Keeper of the Seals and Mamame Moussa, hitherto Secretary of State for Defence, was promoted to full ministerial rank as Minister Representative of the Prime Minister.
AFRICA
MALI
Mali election results
Legislative election results
The second round of multiparty legislative elections on March 8 confirmed the lead of the Alliance for Democracy in Mali (ADEMA) in the first round on Feb. 23 [see p. 38754].
ADEMA captured 76 of the 116 seats voted for by the internal electorate; 13 seats were reserved for Malians abroad.
The election was marked by a boycott by the majority of political parties.
The results were, however, contested by 14 of the parties which had participated in the elections.
They called into question various electoral procedures including the drawing up of electoral lists and the issuing of ballot papers.
Another concern was the exceptionally low turnout, estimated at only 21.09 per cent over both rounds.
On March 12 the government announced the further postponement of the presidential elections [see p. 38754]to allow candidates sufficient time to campaign throughout the country.
The new date was set for April 12, with a second round if necessary on April 26.
Tuareg peace agreement
On March 25 the government and the Unified Movements and Fronts of Azawad, representing Tuareg rebels, reached a peace pact to end almost two years of fighting.
The agreement came at the end of the third round of peace negotiations which began on March 15 in Algiers [see p. 38709 for talks in January].
Under its terms provision would be made for the repatriation of refugees, and some control of local and regional affairs would be conferred on the Tuaregs.
It was agreed that a formal signing of the pact would take place on April 9 in Bamako, the Malian capital, following an exchange of prisoners on April 8 in Algeria.
AFRICA
MAURITANIA
Legislative elections
Legislative elections, held in two rounds on March 6 and March 13, resulted in the Social Democratic Republican Party (PRDS) winning a majority of the 79 seats in the National Assembly.
The official results of the country's first multiparty legislative elections gave the PRDS (formed in 1991 under the sponsorship of President Moaouia Ould Sidi Taya — see p. 38425) 67 seats.
The Rally for Democracy and National Unity (RDUN) and the Mauritanian Renewal Party (PMR), both also recognized in September 1991 [ibid.], each won one seat, and independent candidates won 10.
The polls were boycotted by six opposition groups, including the leading opposition party, the Union of Democratic Forces (UFD).
Their refusal to participate was based on experiences in the January presidential elections [see p. 38709].
They alleged widescale vote rigging and claimed that the names of opposition supporters had been excluded from electoral lists.
The elections were thus marked by a high rate of abstention: only 38.89 per cent of the electorate voted in the first round and 33.38 per cent in the second.
The UFD, claiming that the government had not received a popular mandate, warned President Taya that its supporters would not accept the result.
Ahmed Ould Daddah, a leading opposition figure who had stood against Ould Taya in the presidential elections, said that the regime was "governing with the support of a fraction of the population, in total isolation" .
According to French radio reports on March 16, the opposition had decided to boycott senatorial elections scheduled for April 3.
Human rights demonstration
The National Assembly elections were preceded by a large human rights rally.
Africa No. 1 radio reported that more than 200,000 people gathered in Nouakchott, the capital, on March 3.
The demonstration, the largest in 30 years, was organized by the Mauritanian Human Rights League and the Co-ordinating Committee of the Mauritanian Opposition.
Protestors demanded that the government respect human rights, and condemned racial discrimination.
AFRICA
GUINEA-BISSAU
Election dates
On March 9 it was announced that multiparty presidential and legislative elections would be held on Nov. 15 and Dec. 13, 1992.
The opposition had called for voting in June.
The dates were fixed by the national council of the ruling African Party for the Independence of Guinea-Bissau and Cape Verde (PAIGC) during a meeting on March 4-6.
The Council also elected Saturnino Costa as permanent secretary to the PAIGC central committee, replacing Vasco Cabral, who had held the post since 1987 [see p. 35491].
The authorities for the first time gave permission for an opposition demonstration on March 7.
A crowd estimated by foreign media sources to be 30,000 people heard speakers denounce the "corruption of the PAIGC's leadership" and accuse the police and security services of human rights abuses.
AFRICA
COTE D'IVOIRE
Imprisonment of opposition leaders
Laurent Gbagbo, leader of the Front populaire ivorien (FPI), received a two-year prison sentence on March 6 for "acts of violence" and the destruction of "private and public property" .
Gbagbo said that he was imprisoned in order to disqualify him from standing in presidential elections due in 1995.
The charges arose from events on Feb. 18 when a peaceful rally ended in violence [see p. 38753].
The prosecution admitted that Gbagbo and his coaccused had not themselves committed any crimes, but argued that they were responsible for the violence committed that day.
Eleven other defendants including human rights campaigner René Degni Segui, FPI deputy Mollé Mollé and three senior members of the Parti ivorien travailliste also received prison sentences.
On March 14 President Félix Houphouët-Boigny warned that he would not yield to pressure to release Gbagbo and the other opposition figures.
He was thought to be reacting to a resolution passed by the European Parliament on March 12 which deplored the "unacceptable repression" of opposition in the country.
AFRICA
GHANA
Timetable for civilian rule
On March 6, Independence Day, Flt. -Lt.
Jerry Rawlings, chair of the ruling Provisional National Defence Council (PNDC), set out a timetable for returning to civilian rule culminating in the inauguration of a Fourth Republic on Jan. 7, 1993.
Speaking on the 35th anniversary of independence, Rawlings said that the electoral process would begin on April 28 when popular approval would be sought in a referendum for a constitution drafted by the Consultative Assembly [see pp. 38379-80; 38664].
He also announced that the ban on party politics would be lifted on May 18, rejecting opposition demands that the prohibition should be lifted prior to the referendum in the interests of a full and fair debate.
Presidential elections were scheduled for Nov. 3, with parliamentary elections on Dec. 8.
The government's plans were criticized by the Co-ordinating Committee of Democratic Forces of Ghana (CCDFG), an opposition alliance group launched in August 1991.
In a statement issued on March 24 the CCDFG argued that the constitution was too complex a document to be subjected solely to a referendum, and called for the PNDC government to step down in favour of a national transitional government.
The CCDFG denounced the continued existence of "repressive laws" and called for the release of political prisoners and detainees.
Political amnesty
On March 20 the government announced the reprieve and release from prison, in the furtherance of the policy of national reconciliation, of 17 people convicted of subversion following a coup attempt in 1987 [see pp. 35940-41].
An amnesty was also granted to a number of unidentified people being held for breach of national security.
AFRICA
CAMEROON
Legislative elections
In the first multiparty legislative elections since 1964 the ruling Cameroon People's Democratic Rally (RPDC) on March 1 won 88 of the 180 parliamentary seats — three seats short of an absolute majority.
The elections originally scheduled for Feb. 16 [see pp. 38518; 38664]were postponed in response to opposition calls for polling to take place in May.
With opposition groups still voicing concerns about the March poll date, 16 of the 48 registered political parties boycotted the election.
These included two of the four main opposition parties — the Social Democratic Front (SDF) and the Cameroon Democratic Union (CDU).
Although the national turnout was officially given as 60 per cent, the elections were marked by a high rate of regional abstention.
This was especially noticeable in the west in areas most affected by the "Dead Cities Campaign" in 1991 [see p. 38379].
In these areas the turnout was estimated to be only 10 per cent.
Of the other parties represented in the new National Assembly, the National Union for Democracy and Progress (UNDP) won 68 seats; the Union of the Peoples of Cameroon (UPC) won 18 (despite a split between party leader Ndeh Ntumazah, who insisted on a UPC boycott of the polls, and secretary-general Frederic Augustin Kodock, who urged participation) and the Movement for the Defence of the Republic (MDR) won six seats in the far north of the country.
On March 9, the day before the first session of the new Assembly, President Paul Biya held talks with MDR leader Dakole Diassala, reportedly in an attempt to secure the MDR's support for the RPDC, and thus to give the ruling party an absolute majority in the Assembly.
AFRICA
CONGO
Constitutional referendum — New electoral timetable
Over 96 per cent of voters approved on March 15 a constitution instituting a multiparty system.
The turnout for the referendum, postponed on several occasions [see pp. 38752-53], was over 70 per cent.
On March 25 the Higher Council of the Republic (CSR — the transitional legislature) approved the amendment of the electoral timetable in order that irregularities identified as a result of holding the referendum could be corrected.
Local elections were consequently scheduled for April 26.
These would be followed by two rounds of legislative elections on May 10 and May 24.
Senatorial elections would be held on May 31, with voting for the president taking place over two rounds on June 14 and June 28 [see pp. 38752-53 for February 1992 amendments to timetable set by national conference].
AFRICA
ZAIRE
Cabinet reshuffle
A partial reshuffle of the Cabinet was announced on March 28 with eight changes in portfolios.
There was also a minor reorganization of ministries including the merger of the Ministry for Relations with Parliament and with that for Relations with Political Parties.
The changes included the appointment of Lukamba Omokoko, hitherto Land Affairs Minister, as Minister of Justice and Keeper of the Seals.
No appointment to the Ministry of Youth, Culture and Tourism was made.
Nyamwisi Movingi had resigned from this post on March 22, accusing the government of leading the country to disaster.
AFRICA
UGANDA
Cabinet changes
On March 28 President Yoweri Museveni announced a Cabinet reshuffle as well as the reorganization of a number of ministries.
In an attempt to facilitate the implementation of the national recovery plan the President merged the Finance and the Planning and Economic Development Ministries, with Joshua Mayanja-Nkangi (the Planning and Economic Development Minister) at its head; the Finance Minister, Crispus Kiyonga, was dismissed.
A new Ministry of Commerce, Industry and Co-operatives led by Richard Kaijuka (hitherto Minister of Energy) was given responsibility for the development of import substitution and the promotion of exports.
First Deputy Prime Minister Eriya Kategaya was also named as National Political Commissar.
Third Deputy Prime Minister Abubakar Mayanja was given additional responsibilities as the Minister of Justice and Attorney General.
AFRICA
RWANDA
Protocol of understanding
Three opposition parties signed a protocol of understanding with the ruling National Republican Movement for Democracy and Development on March 14 signalling the imminent formation of a transitional unity government.
According to a Rwandan radio report, the Republican Democratic Party (MDR), the Liberal Party and the Social Democratic Party agreed to participate in a transitional government if certain commitments were incorporated in its brief.
These included the initiation of peace negotiations with the rebel Rwanda Patriotic Front, and the convening of a national conference before the holding of elections.
Under the agreement the opposition would withdraw from the unity government if they were opposed to the President's choice of prime minister.
The report said that the opposition made clear their desire for the prime minister to be chosen from the MDR; it added that each of the opposition parties had claimed three ministerial posts and the ruling party six.
Ethnic violence
Following their agreement with the government the three opposition parties cancelled a demonstration in Kigali against renewed violence in the south of the country.
The attacks on the minority Tutsis by Hutus in the Bugesera region were first reported on March 7.
Despite the declaration on March 9 of a state of emergency in the region and the imposition of a dusk-to-dawn curfew, by March 20 the official death toll was 152.
AFRICA
BURUNDI
Constitutional referendum — Coup attempt
A draft constitution was given overwhelming popular approval in a referendum on March 9.
Over 90 per cent of the 97.05 per cent turnout voted for constitutional changes allowing for multiparty politics.
Under the terms of the new Constitution, which was formally adopted on March 13, executive power was vested in a President elected by direct universal suffrage for a five-year term.
Political parties based on ethnic or regional groups were prohibited.
The Constitution had been drafted by a commission inaugurated after the adoption of a National Unity Charter in February 1991 [see p. 37994].
The Burundi Democratic Front (FRODEBU) campaigned for a "no" vote, demanding instead that the constitution be drafted by a national conference.
However, when the results of the referendum were known, it agreed to participate in the new system.
The Constitution was endorsed by members of the armed forces, whose votes were counted separately, with over 97 per cent backing the changes.
On March 4, however, 30 soldiers made an unsuccessful attempt to overthrow the government.
The rebel troops, stationed 15 km north of Bujumbura, the capital, were arrested after they were unable to rally support from armoured units.
According to Prime Minister Adrien Sibomana those involved were "in the pay of" former President Jean-Baptiste Bagaza who was overthrown in September 1987 [see pp. 35631-32].
For several days prior to the incident rumours had circulated in Bujumbura that a coup attempt led by Bagaza and the imprisoned former Minister of Public Works Isidore Nyaboya was imminent.
Sibomana also suggested Libyan involvement.
AFRICA
ANGOLA
Defection of senior UNITA officials
After several days of speculation.
The Union for the Total Independence of Angola (UNITA) confirmed on March 6 that two of its most senior officials had left the organization.
In its initial statement, UNITA said that Gen. Miguel N'Zau Puna and Gen. Tony da Costa Fernandes had asked to be relieved of their duties in order to concentrate their efforts on a resolution to the issue of the secession of the Cabinda enclave.
However, later UNITA reports made it clear that the two men had in fact defected, and accused Portugal of assisting them.
N'Zau Puna, formerly secretary-general of UNITA, was ranked third in UNITA's hierarchy with the title "interior minister" .
Fernandes, a founder member of UNITA, had been "foreign affairs minister" .
Both men were from Cabinda and had been expected to play a crucial role during the September election campaign in capturing support among non-Ovimbundu ethnic groups particularly in the north.
Their departure effectively left UNITA as an entirely Ovimbundu movement.
N'Zau Puna contacted the British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) in London on March 10 and said that he and Fernandes had left UNITA because of "mistakes and irregularities at the heart of the organization" .
In a statement issued in Paris on March 24, the two men accused UNITA of human rights abuses and political killings including those of Tito Chingunji, a former UNITA representative in Washington, and Wilson dos Santos, a former Lisbon representative, both of whom were reported on March 23 to have "disappeared unaccountably" .
UNITA admitted that abuses had occurred, but blamed N'Zau Puna, who was also said to be responsible for the disappearances.
Fernandes was accused of attempting to extort US$15,000,000 from the UNITA leadership.
Both men were accused of being part of a plot to assassinate UNITA leader Jonas Savimbi.
On March 31 it was reported that US Secretary of State James Baker had sent a letter to Savimbi demanding a full explanation of the charges made by N'Zau Puna and Fernandes.
According to diplomatic sources, Baker warned that failure to address the charges could derail the peace process.
AFRICA
BOTSWANA
Land scandal — Ministerial resignations
President Ketumile (formerly Quett) Masire was forced to make Cabinet changes on March 9 after the resignations of Peter Mmusi as Vice-President and Minister of Local Government and Lands and of Daniel Kwelagobe as Minister of Agriculture.
It was not clear whether Mmusi would remain secretary-general of the ruling Botswana Democratic Party.
A commission of inquiry chaired by Englishman Kgabo, looking into land allocations in villages surrounding Gaborone, had reported that Mmusi had been involved in improper land transfers, and that on two occasions he had interceded in favour of Kwelagobe in decisions of the local land board.
The report warned that the government's "credibility and integrity" were at stake.
Michael Tshipinare who was also implicated by the report, resigned as Assistant Minister of Local Government and Lands on March 8.
On March 9 Masire named Festus Mogae as Vice-President and Minister of Local Government and Lands; Mogae retained the Finance and Development Planning portfolio.
Keatlemang Morake was named as Minister of Agriculture.
On March 17 the Botswana National Front and Botswana People's Party called on the government to resign within six months and to call an early general election.
They also demanded that Mmusi, Kwelagobe and Tshipinare be dismissed as members of the National Assembly, and called for a judicial investigation into all parastatal organizations.
Their demands, which were repeated by students demonstrating in Gaborone on March 10, were rejected by the President who called them a "gross over-reaction" .
AFRICA
ZIMBABWE
Land Acquisition Bill
The controversial Land Acquisition Bill was passed unanimously by the House of Assembly on March 19 [see p. 38751 for introduction].
The legislation made provision for the compulsory purchase of 5,500,000 hectares of predominantly white-owned land earmarked for redistribution to black families.
A number of clauses were dropped after a parliamentary legal committee reported that sections of the bill violated the Constitution.
One significant clause to be deleted was that which denied farmers the right to challenge compensation payments.
The bill was passed despite fierce opposition from the white commercial farming community which warned that it would transform productive commercial farms into subsistence smallholdings and could turn Zimbabwe from a food exporter to an importer.
Concern about the job security of farmworkers on acquired farms was voiced by the General Agricultural and Plantation Workers' Union.
The union, representing 50,000 of the country's 300,000 agricultural workers, called on the government to give priority to such workers in its reallocation programmes.
AFRICA
MALAWI
Criticism of government
For the first time since independence in 1966, criticism of the government of President Hastings Kamuzu Banda, previously only expressed by groups in exile, was voiced inside the country.
On March 10 eight Roman Catholic bishops were arrested and interrogated for several hours after a pastoral letter, termed by the government as "seditious" , had been read out in churches.
The letter, Living our Faith, spoke of the gap between rich and poor, and criticized the government for human rights violations and for preventing freedom of expression.
The letter was thought to have been heard by one-quarter of the population.
The arrest of the bishops and their subsequent house arrest led to condemnation of the government by the United Front for Multi-Party Democracy (UFMD), an opposition group based in Zambia.
On March 16 police in Zomba opened fire on protestors responding to UFMD calls for peaceful demonstrations.
At a conference in Lusaka, the Zambian capital, on March 19-23, Malawian exiles and critics of the Banda government met to discuss the prospects for democracy in the country.
It was agreed that Chakufwa Chihana, general secretary of the Lilongwe-based Southern African Trade Union Co-ordination Council, would organize a national conference of "democratic forces" inside Malawi.
Earlier in the month the human rights organization Amnesty International accused the government of human rights abuses.
Its report, published on March 6, accused the Banda regime of routinely torturing and ill-treating prisoners and of making arbitrary arrests.
These and similar allegations by the Southern African Human Rights Foundation were categorically denied by the government.
AFRICA
MOZAMBIQUE
Third peace protocol
After several weeks of deadlock at the ninth round of the peace talks, the government and the rebel Mozambique National Resistance (MNR or Renamo) signed Protocol Number 3 on March 12 [for earlier protocols see pp. 38517; 38565].
The agreement, signed in Rome and drawn up with Italian mediation, established the principles of the country's future electoral system as well as enshrining the freedom of the press and access to the media, and of association, expression and movement.
It also addressed the issue of the return and reintegration of refugees and displaced people.
It was agreed that (i) a system of proportional representation in the Assembly of the Republic (legislature) would be adopted;(ii) legislative and presidential elections would be held simultaneously within one year of the signing of a ceasefire accord, although this deadline could be extended;(iii) presidential candidates would be at least 35 years old and their candidacies supported by a minimum of 10,000 signatures;(iv) the minimum voting age and that for the representatives in the Assembly would be 25 years, although there was an expectation that these would be reduced to 18 years after the first set of elections;(v) a National Electoral Commission, one-third of whose members would be appointed by the MNR, would organize the electoral process, determining for example the number of seats per region; and (vi) the government would assist the MNR to secure appropriate facilities to carry out its political work in at least every provincial capital.
AFRICA
MAURITIUS
Republic status
Mauritius formally dropped ties with the British crown on March 12 to become a republic within the Commonwealth.
The last Governor-General, Sir Veerasamy Ringadoo, assumed the position of President for a transitional period expected to last three months.
Guest of honour at the celebrations, which coincided with the 24th anniversary of the country's independence, was Indian Prime Minister P. V. Narasimha Rao.
During his two-day visit, Rao recalled the strong cultural and religious links between the two countries — an estimated 52 per cent of Mauritians were of Indian origin.
He also announced the contribution of Rs200,000,000 (about US$7,000,000) to an Indo-Mauritian fund to promote joint ventures between the two countries and indicated that India would play an increasing role in Mauritian industrial development.
AFRICA
BURKINA
On March 12 it was announced that legislative elections postponed in December would be held on May 24; it was later announced that the number of representatives in the National Assembly would be increased from 77 to 107.
AFRICA
ETHIOPIA
The Council of Representatives announced on March 20 that local elections were scheduled to be completed by the end of the first week of June 1992, with the preparatory elections concluded before April 22 [for December 1991 decrees on regions see p. 38660].
AFRICA
MADAGASCAR
Jean-Marie Henri resigned as Economy Minister on March 12 for "health reasons" , although there was speculation that the move was prompted by criticism of Henri by the IMF and World Bank; Roger Vony was appointed in his place.
AFRICA
NAMIBIA
The Ministry of Information said on March 12 that fisheries patrol boats had been instructed to fire on foreign vessels fishing illegally inside the country's 200-mile exclusive economic zone.
AMERICAS
UNITED STATES
Presidential election campaign
Events in March went a considerable way towards determining the outcome of the contests for the Democratic and Republican presidential nominations.
With primaries or caucuses held in 28 states, the nature of the campaign altered from the close-quarters politics of New Hampshire, to the continental sweep of regional campaigning.
Of particular importance were the two clusters of primaries and caucuses on March 3, "Junior Tuesday" , and March 10, "Super Tuesday" .
By the end of the month the Republican challenge to President George Bush by right-wing journalist Patrick Buchanan had all but been neutralized, while the campaign of former Ku Klux Klansman David Duke had failed to make any significant impact.
Among the Democrats, three of the candidates withdrew from the contest during the month: Nebraska senator Bob Kerrey, Iowa senator Tom Harkin, and former Massachusetts senator Paul Tsongas.
Their exit left the contest as a straight fight between the front-runner, Arkansas Governor Bill Clinton, and the maverick outsider, former Governor of California Jerry Brown.
Democrats Jerry Brown 8 8 29 Bill Clinton 57 34 27 Tom Harkin 2 6 2 Bob Kerrey 5 5 12 Paul Tsongas 24 40 26 Republicans Pat Buchanan 36 30 30 George Bush 64 70 67 
Percentage of votes cast in March 3 primaries Georgia Maryland Colorado
Junior Tuesday contests
The "Junior Tuesday" group of contests held on March 3 included primary elections in Maryland, Georgia and Colorado.
Although Bush won all of the Republican contests, his margins of victory were not sufficiently large either to destroy Buchanan's candidacy, or to disguise the sizeable portion of Republicans who were dissatisfied with Bush's record.
In Georgia Buchanan came very close to the 37 per cent which he had scored in New Hampshire, whilst in Colorado and Maryland, where he had hardly campaigned, he won 30 per cent.
Amongst the Democrats Clinton won in Georgia by a sufficiently large margin to assuage some of the widespread doubts produced by the earlier allegations of marital infidelity and draft avoidance [see pp. 38714; 38756].
The victories of Tsongas in the Maryland primary and the caucuses in Utah and Washington, however, proved that the Massachusetts senator could win support outside New England, and had the effect of reinforcing his status as Clinton's chief rival for the nomination.
The other beneficiary of Junior Tuesday was Jerry Brown who unexpectedly won his first primary in Colorado.
While Brown's victory did not immediate transform his candidacy from the status of quixotic eccentric to serious contender, it did establish him in third place behind Clinton and Tsongas, and ensured the continuance of federal matching funds.
This latter point was of considerable importance as Brown restricted all donations to $100 or less, as a means of underlining his campaign's opposition to conventional US "money politics" .
Having earlier been widely dismissed as a crank — he was frequently referred to disparagingly as "Governor Moonbeam" because of his interest in mysticism and Zen Buddhism — Brown's victory in Colorado ensured a more serious hearing for the policies central to his campaign such as the creation of a Canadian-style health care system and the adoption of a 13 per cent flat rate of income tax.
The main Democratic victims of Junior Tuesday were Harkin and Kerrey.
After achieving only 12 per cent in Colorado and less in every other contest, Kerrey cancelled his scheduled appearance in Florida and returned to Washington DC to "reassess" his campaign.
Having achieved narrow wins in the Minnesota and Idaho caucuses Harkin stated his determination to continue the fight at least until the Illinois and Michigan primaries, on March 17, when he hoped that his trade union support would assist him.
Withdrawal of Kerrey from contest
At a press conference on March 5 Kerrey announced his withdrawal from the nomination contest, "with regret but with great pride" .
He cited a lack of funds as the main reason for his decision.
Although he refrained from endorsing any of his Democratic rivals, he sought to retract some of his recent attacks upon them, stating that "I have exercised political hyperbole on occasion and called them unelectable, but with each passing day it is clear to me that the only unelectable politician running for office is George Bush" .
Kerrey's withdrawal was seen as particularly good news for Clinton as it offered the prospect of removing from the campaign the rancorous legacy of the Vietnam war.
Kerrey, a distinguished Vietnam veteran who had lost part of a leg in combat, had castigated Clinton as unelectable because of his avoidance of service in Vietnam.
If Clinton were to win the nomination, claimed Kerrey, Bush would use the issue to "open him up like a soft peanut" .
On announcing his withdrawal Kerrey stated that, if Clinton were to secure the nomination, he would "campaign feverishly to make certain he wins the election in November" .
March 7 contests
On March 7 there was a primary in South Carolina and Democrat caucuses in Wyoming and Arizona.
Bush won the Republican primary in South Carolina with 67 per cent of the vote.
Although Buchanan's share was reduced to 26 per cent, the result was nevertheless interpreted in most quarters as a less than full endorsement of the President.
The South Carolina election also saw the entry of former Ku Klux Klansman David Duke who had come close to winning the governorship of Louisiana in 1991.
His achievement of only 7 per cent of the vote was widely seen as a decisive rejection of his racially oriented campaign.
Speaking on the day after polling, Buchanan promised to continue the fight until the final primaries.
Emphasising that his anti-tax, anti-big government, America First campaign was for "the heart and soul of the Republican Party" , he stated that he could "lose 50 primaries to George Bush and still win the national debate" .
Among the Democrats the South Carolina primary was won by Clinton with 63 per cent of the vote.
In doing so he also provided further evidence of his ability to mobilize significant numbers of black and working class white voters in the South.
Tsongas scored 19 per cent in South Carolina, while Harkin and Brown each achieved 6 per cent.
Clinton also won the caucus in Wyoming, his first victory outside the South, with 28 per cent of the vote.
Brown polled 23 per cent, Harkin 14 per cent , Tsongas 12 per cent , and a further 22 per cent of votes were uncommitted.
In the other caucus, in Arizona, Tsongas won 34 per cent, Clinton 29 per cent , Brown 28 per cent and Harkin 8 per cent .
Withdrawal of Harkin
On March 9, on the eve of Super Tuesday, Harkin announced the ending of his campaign, but avoided expressing a preference for any of the remaining Democratic candidates.
On the previous day Harkin had won only 1 per cent of the vote in the Nevada caucus, which had been won by Brown with 35 per cent; Clinton had polled 26 per cent , Tsongas 20 per cent , and 17 per cent of the votes had been cast for uncommitted delegates.
Super Tuesday
Despite his strong showings in New Hampshire and Georgia, Buchanan admitted that he needed to win a state in order to maintain the momentum of his campaign.
For this purpose the focus of his Super Tuesday campaign was in Louisiana and Mississippi, although he also hoped to embarrass the President in Bush's adopted home state of Texas.
Duke also had high hopes for Super Tuesday, especially in his native Louisiana.
In the event, on March 10, Bush won all eight state primaries [see table].
Nevertheless, Bush's victory was attenuated by a leading opinion poll which, for the first time ever, showed him marginally behind both Clinton and Tsongas.
The poll also gave a popular approval rating of 39 per cent for the President, the lowest ever recorded by Bush.
A further discordant note for the Bush campaign was struck by Buchanan's outright refusal to abide by calls from senior Republicans to abandon his campaign in the interests of party unity.
Super Tuesday also saw the comprehensive destruction of Duke's challenge.
He achieved a double figure percentage of the vote only in Mississippi, and scored a derisory 9 per cent in his home state, compared with the 39 per cent which he had achieved there in the November 1991 gubernatorial contest.
Among the Democrats Clinton once again demonstrated his appeal in the South, but was comprehensively defeated by Tsongas in Massachusetts and Rhode Island [see table].
This pattern was repeated in the three Democratic caucuses held on March 10, with Clinton winning in Missouri and Hawaii, and Tsongas securing victory in Delaware.
The results tended to reinforce the view that while Clinton could command the support of white working-class southern and black voters, Tsongas was the preferred choice of middle-class liberals and, possibly, of the northern and mid-western working-class voters.
This division of support had potentially serious consequences as it was commonly accepted that all four constituent groups had to be united behind a single candidate if the Democrats were to regain of the White House.
State Brown Clinton Tsongas Bush Buchanan Duke Florida 12 51 34 68 32 * Louisiana 7 69 11 62 27 9 Massachusetts 15 11 66 66 28 2 Mississippi 10 73 8 72 17 11 Oklahoma 17 71 * 70 27 3 Rhode Island 19 21 53 63 32 2 Tennessee 8 67 19 73 22 3 Texas 8 65 19 70 24 3
Percentage of votes cast in Super Tuesday primaries Democrats Republicans
*Candidate did not appear on the ballot.
Primaries in Illinois and Michigan
Despite an eve-of-poll accusation by Brown that Clinton had used his position as Governor of Arkansas to direct state business to his wife's law firm — a charge furiously denied by Clinton — the Democratic front-runner secured overwhelming primary victories in the key mid-western states of Illinois and Michigan on March 17.
In Illinois Clinton scored 51 per cent of the vote, compared with 26 per cent for Tsongas and 15 per cent for Brown.
Clinton also polled 51 per cent in Michigan, compared with 27 per cent for Brown and 18 per cent for Tsongas.
In the Republican contest Bush won 76 per cent of the votes in Illinois, compared with 22 per cent for Buchanan.
In Michigan Bush scored 67 per cent compared with 25 per cent for Buchanan.
Although Buchanan committed himself to continue the fight, he accepted that only "celestial intervention" could prevent Bush from securing the nomination.
In recognition of this he promised to alter the style of his campaign in order to avoid attacks on Bush which could prejudice his chances of victory in the November election.
Suspension of campaign by Tsongas
Speaking in Boston on the evening of March 19, Tsongas unexpectedly announced the suspension of his campaign.
He acknowledged that the Illinois and Michigan results had given Clinton a strong lead, and admitted that his own campaign "didn't have the resources to fight the media battle in New York" , the next key primary, due on April 7.
To have remained in the contest under these circumstances would have been to play the role of a "spoiler" said Tsongas, and, thereby, to "become the agent of the re-election of George Bush" .
Tsongas did not endorse either of the remaining candidates, and stated that he would retain his 430 hard-won delegates until the party convention in July.
It was significant that Tsongas decided to suspend rather than terminate his campaign, as it underlined the doubts which remained concerning Clinton.
Although Clinton now appeared certain to win the nomination — he had amassed 947 delegates compared with the 129 won by Brown — many senior Democrats believed that his candidacy could be beset, and possibly destroyed, by further personal scandals.
Defeat for Clinton in Connecticut primary
The first major contest following the withdrawal of Tsongas was in Connecticut, on March 24, where Clinton stumbled badly by losing to Brown.
Although the margin between them was fewer than 3,000 votes — Brown polled 37 per cent, Clinton 36 per cent and Tsongas (despite his withdrawal) won 20 per cent — the symbolic importance of the loss was considerable.
By breaking the sequence of victories it damaged the aura of invincibility acquired by Clinton since Super Tuesday.
The Connecticut campaign was characterized by ferocious attacks by Brown on the character of Clinton.
Brown assailed him as "Slick Willie" , "the greatest bluffer to enter American politics in my lifetime," a man whose nomination would "ruin the whole Democratic Party" .
With the polls showing that 46 per cent of Connecticut votes believed that Clinton lacked the honesty and integrity to be president, the candidate acknowledged that Brown's negative tactics had been effective.
In the Republican contest in Connecticut Bush won 67 per cent of the vote compared with 22 per cent for Buchanan, 2 per cent for Duke, and 9 per cent for uncommitted delegates.
On the day after the Connecticut contest Clinton defeated Brown in the US Virgin Islands' caucus.
Vermont caucuses — Campaign in New York
The month ended with caucuses in Vermont, on March 31, which were won by Bush and Brown respectively.
Bush polled 88 per cent of the vote compared with 2 per cent for Buchanan (who had not campaigned in the state) and 17 per cent for uncommitted delegates.
Among the Democrats Brown scored 46 per cent compared with 17 per cent for Clinton, 9 per cent for Tsongas and 25 per cent for uncommitted delegates.
By late March the focus of the campaign was New York, where Clinton suffered further personal attacks from Brown and was also forced to endure numerous allegations from the press concerning his record as Governor of Arkansas.
Although at times he displayed symptoms of stress and irritation, in general Clinton continued to show the resilience which had maintained his scandal-ridden campaign.
He was boosted on March 26 with the endorsement of Harkin.
Having prematurely begun campaigning against Bush, however, he was forced to refocus his campaign on Brown, whom he attacked for advocating a taxation system which would favour the rich.
Presidential veto of congressional tax reduction and economic growth package
President Bush on March 20 vetoed a US$77,500 million tax relief and economic growth bill only a few minutes after Congress completed work on it.
In so doing he became the first US President since Harry S. Truman to veto a major spending bill.
In announcing his veto to a White House gathering of Republican lawmakers and businessmen, Bush denounced the "irresponsibility" of Congress for having rejected the economic recovery measures which he had outlined in his State of the Union address in January [see pp. 38711-13].
He rejected the alternative package offered by Congress on the grounds that its tax increases for the rich would "not stimulate growth but stifle it" and were indicative of the inability of the Democrats to resist "their natural impulse to raise taxes" .
House of Representatives Speaker Thomas S. Foley, who earlier in the day had urged conciliation between Congress and the President, angrily characterized Bush's remarks as "the most partisan speech I have ever heard in the guise of a presidential address" .
Since Bush's State of the Union address, Congress had moved at an unusually rapid pace to adopt a tax package which would be responsive to his demands but would also shift a greater proportion of the tax burden on to the wealthy.
The resulting bill, which was approved by 211 votes to 189 in the House and by 50 votes to 44 in the Senate, would have increased the top rate of income tax from 31 to 36 per cent and would have placed a 10 per cent surtax on millionaires to finance tax relief — particularly in the form of a permanent tax credit of $300 per child — for lower- and middle-income tax payers.
Whereas the tax relief would have affected some 78,000,000 families, the proposed increases would have applied to only around 1,000,000 couples and individuals.
The legislation also incorporated — to varying degrees — six of the seven anti-recession proposals which Bush had outlined in his State of the Union speech.
The only presidential proposal omitted was a $5,000 credit for first-time home buyers, which Congress had concluded was too costly.
Republicans insisted, however, that it was an essential component to generating jobs in the construction industry.
Failure to override veto
Although an attempt to override the presidential veto was made in the House on March 25, it fell considerably short of the two-thirds majority required, failing even to muster a simple majority.
The motion to override was defeated by 215 votes to 211, with 52 Democrats joining 163 Republicans in voting it down.
With the outcome a foregone conclusion, House Democratic leaders did not exert pressure on their colleagues to vote for the motion.
Nevertheless, they maintained that the veto would work in their favour during the election campaign by suggesting that the Republicans were more concerned with protecting the interests of upper-income citizens than in providing tax relief for the middle class.
Revelation of "Rubbergate" banking scandal
A banking scandal developed during March when it was revealed that more than 300 current members of the House of Representatives had abused the House bank by writing cheques which their accounts did not have sufficient funds to honour.
Although no tax-payers' money was involved, the affair received intensive media coverage.
Early opinion poll results suggested that the banking scandal, reinforcing public cynicism and hostility towards Congress, could act as a catalyst for the election defeat in November 1992 of a number of incumbent US legislators unprecedented in the modern era.
The scandal began in September 1991 when an inquiry revealed that thousands of cheques had been drawn in excess of the account-holders' funds at the House bank, thereby providing the offenders with limitless and interest-free credit.
The resulting public outcry led to the closure of the bank in October 1991, and to the establishment of an inquiry by the House ethics committee.
The findings of the investigation were released on March 11, with the committee voting to reveal the names of the 24 past and present member of the House adjudged to have been the worst offenders.
A press and public campaign demanded the publication of a full list of those legislators involved.
A number of Republicans within Congress also encouraged a full exposure of the scandal and, confident that the majority of the offenders were Democrats, called for the appointment of a special prosecutor to investigate the affair.
President Bush had made it part of his re-election campaign to attacked the alleged incompetence and corruption of the Democrat-controlled Congress, which he blamed for the shortcomings of the Republican administration.
Under growing pressure the House voted on March 13 to make public all 355 names (the 24 worst offenders together with another 277 current members and 54 former members) of those involved.
Following this vote, a procession of legislators came forward to acknowledge their guilt in the affair prior to the list's publication.
Although the majority of these were Democrats, some leading Republicans were also involved, including the House's outspoken minority whip, Newt Gingrich.
More embarrassing still for the Republican Party was the admission on March 17 that three former members of the House who were currently in Bush's Cabinet — Defence Secretary Dick Cheney, Labour Secretary Lynn Martin, and Agriculture Secretary Edward Madigan — had also written uncovered cheques during the 39-month period (July 1988-October 1991) covered by the investigation.
Cheney declared himself "stunned, angry and frustrated" by his involvement in the scandal and, like many other offenders, blamed dubious administrative practices by the bank for not keeping a more accurate record of the state of his account and for not keeping him more closely informed of his financial position.
The person responsible for the running of the 160-year-old bank, Sergeant-at-Arms Jack Russ, had resigned on March 12 after being criticized in the Ethics Committee's report for the manner in which he had administered the bank.
Russ had also written a number of uncovered personal cheques himself, despite not having an account at the bank, and had ignored auditors' advice to stop abusing his position at the bank.
With so many offenders claiming mistakes in the records of the bank, it became increasingly difficult to proceed with the publication of the list of names of those involved.
By the end of March the list had still not been published, although more people came forward voluntarily almost every day.
It was also reported that the US attorney for the District of Columbia was conducting a preliminary inquiry to determine whether transactions at the bank had involved criminal wrongdoing.
Amongst the possible charges which legislators could face were fraud (a fraud statute of the District of Columbia made it a felony for a person knowingly to write a cheque which exceeded the amount in the relevant account by more than $100), tax evasion, and the violation of disclosure and campaign fund laws.
Controversy over proposed abortion legislation
The House judiciary subcommittee on civil and constitutional rights opened hearings on March 4 on an abortion rights bill known as the Freedom of Choice Bill.
The proposed legislation, which had 131 co-sponsors in the House and 31 in the Senate, prohibited individual states from restricting the right of a woman to terminate her pregnancy before the foetus was viable or "at any time, if such termination is necessary to protect the life or health of the woman" .
The bill's supporters, most of whom were Democrats, insisted that it did no more than enshrine into law the rights already guaranteed in Roe v. Wade, the landmark 1973 Supreme Court ruling which had established the principle of legal abortion in the USA.
The newly established conservative majority on the Supreme Court had undermined Roe in 1989 [see p. 36809], since when numerous pieces of legislation had been enacted in individual states to restrict or eliminate access to abortions.
With the Supreme Court committed to ruling on the constitutionality of one such law, passed in Pennsylvania, there was every chance that the 1973 precedent could be overturned in its entirety.
In the emotionally charged atmosphere in which the hearings on the Freedom of Choice Bill began, its opponents (most of whom were Republicans) claimed that it would extend abortion rights beyond those already established by Roe v. Wade.
This view was held by Attorney General William P. Barr, who questioned Congress's authority to enact such a law, and, in a letter released on March 3, suggested that the legislation would impose "an unprecedented regime of abortion on demand" .
On the same day Bush reiterated his total opposition to the bill, declaring that it was "not right" and would "not become law as long as I am President" .
Settlement of claims against Drexel Burnham Lambert
Manhattan District Court Judge Milton Pollack announced on March 9 that a single "global" settlement had been reached to the hundreds of civil litigation suits which had arisen from the 1990 collapse of the Drexel Burnham Lambert investment bank [see pp. 37412-13; 37848].
The settlement, which concluded four months of negotiations, obviated the need for the separate cases to be heard in court.
The agreement provided for a pool of $1,300 million to be divided between Drexel's numerous creditors.
It was estimated that $85,000,000 of this would go to Drexel's fixed creditors, while the remainder would be split between the various litigants at the discretion of the court and Securities Exchange Commission.
The chief contribution to the pool was to come from Michael Milken, former head of the bank's "junk bond" department [for whose conviction in November 1990 see p. 37848].
In addition to the $400 million which he had already paid into an SEC disgorgement fund, he was due to provide a further $500 million to be contributed in tranches over five years.
The $500 million was believed to constitute 80 per cent of Milken's remaining personal wealth, but did not take into account the assets held by his wife and immediate family.
In June 1990 the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), a leading government claimant, had established a special task force to investigate whether Drexel had contributed to the failure of any of the savings and loans institutions ( "thrifts" ) which had been big customers of the bank.
A few months later — in conjunction with the Resolution Trust Company (RTC), which was overseeing the thrifts rescue effort — the federal agency called in a New York law firm to see if funds could be recovered from Drexel.
Thereafter FDIC and RTC pressure became the driving force behind both the Drexel bankruptcy proceedings and the related civil litigation.
The bankruptcy, which began in February 1990, was tackled first.
Drexel assets were calculated at some $2,600 million and it was agreed to divide these between the bank's creditors and the various litigants.
Attention was then turned towards possible funds which could be recovered from former Drexel employees, most notably Milken.
A further portion of the $1,300 million pool was to be provided by the 200 former Drexel employees who were to give up $300 million-worth of partnership interests in return for immunity against future legal action.
The final $100 million was to be provided from insurance carriers under directors' and officers' liability policies.
AMERICAS
CANADA
Constitutional developments
The ruling Progressive Conservative Party (PCP), together with the two main opposition parties in the federal legislature — the Liberals and the New Democratic Party (NDP)— endorsed a package of constitutional proposals on March 1, designed to avoid the break-up of the Canadian federation.
The proposals represented the federal government's most significant contribution to the debate over the country's future since the collapse of the Meech Lake Accord in 1990 [see pp. 37519-20].
Federal Prime Minister Brian Mulroney described the proposals as a further stage of the consultative process and gave assurances that a "precise constitutional offer" would be presented to Quebec in mid-April.
The package of proposals was published on Feb. 29, in the form of a report by an all-party parliamentary committee of 10 senators and 20 members of the House of Commons, and was designed to provide an agenda for forthcoming negotiations between the federal government and the provinces.
One of the most widespread public criticisms of the Meech Lake process was that the federal-provincial negotiations had been conducted behind closed doors and with little consultation with the electorate.
Consequently, following the failure of Meech Lake, the government had embarked on a process of mass consultation culminating in the report of the parliamentary committee.
The 131-page report went beyond Meech Lake in its proposed redistribution of power from federal to provincial governments, particularly to Quebec, and in acknowledging the inherent right to self-government by Canada's native Indian and Inuit populations.
On the issue of reform of the Senate, the committee recommended an elected upper chamber, based not on equal provincial representation but on representation in accordance with each province's population.
The committee proposed greater provincial control over areas such as regional development, energy, manpower training, tourism, forestry, mining, housing, recreation and urban affairs.
Recognizing the distinct nature of Quebec's French-speaking culture, it asserted that "the first priority is to ensure that Quebec feels itself a full and willing partner in the constitutional family once again" .
The report fell short, however, of the Quebec government's demand for sole control over 22 areas of jurisdiction and shared control in others.
The collapse of the Meech Lake Accord had been widely interpreted in Quebec as an rebuff by English-speaking Canada, and there had been an upsurge in popular support for the concept of outright independence for Quebec.
In recent months, however, with Quebec suffering badly from the effects of Canada's economic recession, opinion polls had recorded a decline in support for secession among Quebeckers, from the peak of about 70 per cent to between 50 and 60 per cent.
Nevertheless, under pressure from the separatist Parti Québecois (PQ), the Liberal provincial government of Robert Bourassa had already committed itself to a referendum on secession by Oct. 26 unless an agreement had been reached on a new constitutional structure.
Bourassa stated on March 3 that the all-party report was "rather disappointing" and was unacceptable to Quebec in its current form.
 "On the key question of sharing power, there is not much on the table," he said, and what there was appeared "very vague" .
He did, however, recognize the report as a "starting point" for further talks.
Jacques Parizeau, leader of the PQ, rejected the entire report as an "affront" to Quebec's legitimate demand for self-government.
There was also hostility towards the report from some of the provincial premiers who had opposed Meech Lake on the grounds that it had made too many special concessions to Quebec.
Alberta Premier Donald Getty stated that the possibility that Quebec could have a veto over the reform of the Senate was "completely unacceptable" .
Meeting of Atlantic Premiers
One of the consequences of Canada's uncertain future was increasing regional co-operation between groups of the English-speaking provinces.
There was further evidence of this on March 1 when the four Premiers of the country's Atlantic provinces met to explore the concept of creating an informal "common market" by eliminating trade barriers between them.
The four leaders, Clyde Wells of Newfoundland and Labrador, Donald Cameron of Nova Scotia, Joe Ghiz of Prince Edward Island and Frank McKenna of New Brunswick, also discussed methods through which they could co-ordinate economic and fiscal strategies in their forthcoming budgets.
Although not directly connected to the constitutional difficulties being experienced by Canada, McKenna acknowledged the indirect connection when, speaking of the growing co-operation between the four provinces, he admitted that he had "seen more co-operation during the last six months than I've seen in the last five years that I've been Premier" .
AMERICAS
HAITI
Blocking of vote over return of Aristide
Politicians opposed to the return of President Jean-Bertrand Aristide, deposed in a military coup on Sept. 30, 1991 [see pp. 38430; 38522-23], staged a walk-out of the parliament on March 18.
In doing so, they left the remaining senators and deputies short of the 55-member quorum needed to vote on an agreement, reached by the Organization of American States (OAS) on Feb. 23, for Aristide's peaceful return to power [see p. 38758].
The agreement centred on the acceptance of René Théodore as the new Prime Minister.
Both the interim President Joseph Nerette and the acting Prime Minister Jean Jacques Honorat had earlier argued that to approve the agreement would be unconstitutional, a view endorsed by the Supreme Court on March 27.
Théodore, however, insisted on March 26 that he intended to form a government of national consensus, warning that the economy was falling apart and the country was already "passing away" .
The failure to hold a vote fed rumours that some MPs had been paid up to US$10,000 each to disrupt the proceedings, and reinforced the belief that those who had benefited most from the coup were obstructing Aristide's return.
In recent weeks, many opposition politicians had campaigned for guarantees of future immunity from prosecution on charges of corruption.
Diplomats based in Haiti estimated that since October as much as US$14,000,000 had been stolen from public funds.
The military high command, led by coup leader and Armed Forces C.-in-C.
Lt.-Gen.
Raoul Cédras, was now adopting a neutral stance on Aristide's restoration, stating that it was still a matter for parliament to decide.
This stance was rejected by extremist elements in the military, and by the richest and most right-wing families who had been the most fervent supporters of the coup.
AMERICAS
JAMAICA
Resignation of Manley — New Prime Minister
Prime Minister Michael Manley, 68, announced his resignation on March 15, on grounds of ill-health.
His resignation took effect from March 28 when delegates of the ruling People's National Party (PNP) elected a new party president who automatically became Prime Minister.
Manley's two earlier terms as Prime Minister in 1972-1980 had been marked by extensive state intervention in the economy.
However, during his last period in office, since 1989, the government had moved towards a market-driven economy with the privatization of state enterprises and trade liberalization.
On March 28 the PNP elected Percival Patterson to succeed Manley by almost a three-to-one majority over the other candidate, Portia Simpson, Minister of Labour, Welfare and Sports.
Patterson had been dismissed as Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Finance and Planning in December 1991 after a scandal involving tax waivers for an oil company [see pp. 38670-71].
Prior to his dismissal he had been widely regarded as Manley's heir-apparent, and he had served as acting Prime Minister for several periods during Manley's illness in 1990.
AMERICAS
ANTIGUA AND BARBUDA
Violent unrest — Budget
Several weeks of unrest, amid calls for the resignation of Prime Minister Vere Bird Sr over alleged misappropriation of funds, spilled over into violence in late February and early March.
In February demonstrators calling for Bird's departure were dispersed by police using tear gas and rubber bullets.
Fires on March 8 and 10, at the homes of the parliamentary Speaker Casford Murray and former high commissioner to the United Kingdom Ron Saunders, were being treated in police inquiries as arson.
The offices of the ruling Antigua Labour Party had been damaged by fire on two occasions in previous weeks.
The opposition United National Democratic Party denied responsibility for any of the attacks.
In the 1992 budget presented on March 5, Finance and Trade Minister Molwyn Joseph predicted a surplus of EC$81,196 and said that the government would seek to reduce public spending and to spend "more wisely" .
No new taxes were announced.
AMERICAS
EL SALVADOR
Accusations of non-compliance with peace agreement
The government and the Farabundo Martí National Liberation Front (FMLN) in early March each accused the other of failing to comply with the peace agreement formally signed in January to end 11 years of civil war [see p. 38716].
The FMLN denied government claims that it was refusing to withdraw its forces to appointed territories, that it had under-reported its arms and troop inventories, or that it was encouraging land occupations and was planning to establish agrarian settlements in a disputed border area with Honduras.
In its turn, the government rejected FMLN accusations that it was misleading national and international opinion into believing that the Treasury Police and National Guard had been disbanded when, according to the guerrillas, these forces continued to occupy the same installations, with the same structures and weapons but wearing a different uniform.
The government stated that the members of both forces were to be absorbed into the army and would not be part of a new National Civilian Police force.
The FMLN also claimed that aid from international organizations was being prevented from reaching them and that captured FMLN members were now being held as political prisoners.
UN Under-Secretary-General Marrack Goulding visited El Salvador on March 12-14 and held talks with both sides in an effort to resolve the dispute.
As a contribution to the reconciliation process, the FMLN announced that it would release two combatants on March 16 to stand trial locally (rather than in the USA, as the US government had previously insisted) on charges of murdering two US advisers whose helicopter was shot down in January 1991 [see pp. 37956-57].
AMERICAS
HONDURAS
Agricultural reform
Legislation streamlining agricultural laws was approved during March, according to the Financial Times of March 20, amending 20 existing laws and decrees, and clarifying land tenure rules and pricing and credit policies.
On land reform, 1975 legislation was amended to give only two grounds for compulsory redistribution: abandonment for 18 months (two years in exceptional circumstances) and individual holdings above the (generally high) 1975 ceilings.
Members of the country's 2,800 land reform co-operatives would be allowed to break up their farms and receive individual, negotiable shareholdings.
Women were for the first time identified in their own right as potential land reform beneficiaries.
Critics of the law maintained that "it rings the death knell of land redistribution, casting in stone the existing, highly polarized tenure structure" .
On prices, changes introduced during 1991, such as the abolition of the state monopoly on foreign trade in grain and the introduction of a 15 per cent tariff on imported grain, were confirmed.
Central America Report of March 6 stated that opposition by ecological activists had resulted in parliament rejecting a 40-year exploration concession with the US transnational paper concern, Stone Container Corp.
This would have allowed the corporation to deforest over 1,000,000 hectares in the Mosquitia region of eastern Honduras with an option to explore a larger area if it did not yield sufficient pulpable material.
The government would in turn have undertaken various projects to improve the region's infrastructure.
AMERICAS
COLOMBIA
Municipal elections
More than 90,000 candidates contested local elections held on March 8 for 1,024 mayorships, 10,000 council posts and 600 seats in departmental assemblies.
An estimated 68 per cent of the 15,000,000 electorate abstained.
In the capital, Bogotá, the ruling Liberal Party (PL) suffered a notable set-back (as did the former guerrilla April 19 Movement (M-19)), losing a council seat with their support falling by 30,000 votes.
Former Interior Minister Carlos Lemos Simmons [see pp. 37312; 37484]and former Justice Minister Enrique Parejo González [see p. 35756]obtained the highest number of votes in their election to Bogotá's council.
Both were fierce opponents of the government's policies of not extraditing drug traffickers [see pp. 38187; 38332]and of holding peace talks with left-wing guerrillas [see below].
Coalition slates won the key mayorships of the cities of Medellín and Cali, both centres of drug trafficking.
Most symbolically, a coalition candidate (a Salesian Roman Catholic Priest, Fr Bernardo Hoyos) won in Barranquilla on the Caribbean coast with support from the M-19, a PL faction and various civic groups in a campaign against official corruption and political patronage.
Unlike previous elections, guerrillas of the National Liberation Army (ELN) and the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) did not declare a truce, but their attempts to sabotage the poll, reduced in most areas to peaceful attempts to persuade people not to vote, had little effect.
In Bogotá a bomb killed one person and injured two more, and elsewhere a municipal council candidate and an electoral registration worker were shot dead.
Peace talks
A fourth round of peace talks, adjourned since November, between the government and the Simón Bolívar National Guerrilla Co-ordinating Group (CNGSB), jointly representing the FARC, ELN and the Popular Liberation Party (EPL), opened in Tlaxcala, Mexico, on March 10 but quickly broke down [see pp. 38187; 38283; 38333; 38387; 38433; 38570 for earlier talks].
The government delegation was withdrawn following the news that a former minister, Argelino Durán Quintero, 76, abducted by the EPL on Jan. 26, had died in captivity of a heart attack.
The talks had been postponed in February because the government claimed that the CNGSB had not defined its position, that its delegation contained no leaders "with full powers to commit all parties" , and that it persisted with attacks on oil installations and townships.
In response the guerrillas appointed Timoleón Gómez of the FARC and Nicolás Rodríguez of the ELN as chief negotiators, and submitted a 12-point political proposal to Congress, which included proposals for stimulating industry and agriculture without the "shock treatment" prescribed by the IMF and international banks.
AMERICAS
VENEZUELA
Appointment of COPEI ministers
Amid continuing calls by opposition parties for his resignation and sporadic anti-government protests, President Carlos Andrés Pérez on March 10 announced that the centre-right Social-Christian Party (COPEI) with the second-largest representation in the legislature, had agreed to join in government with his own ruling Democratic Action (AD) party.
In a television address on the same day, Pérez said that the ensuing ministerial changes did not mean that a coalition government had been created, but were evidence of the COPEI's "sense of responsibility" in agreeing to "demonstrate its solidarity with the Venezuelan democratic government" .
Of the five new Cabinet ministers announced in the new "Cabinet of national unity" , one, the Foreign Minister Humberto Calderón Bertí, was a member of the COPEI.
One of two new ministers of state, José Ignacio Moreno Leon, who became president of the Venezuelan Investment Fund, was also a COPEI politician (and, like Calderón Bertí, a former Minister of Petrol).
Luis Piñerúa Ordaz, who became Interior Minister, was well-known for speaking out against corruption in the political system.
José Mendoza Angulo became Minister of Justice (replacing Arminda Quintana, who had resigned by March 6 after only 10 days in office, claiming that her proposals for judicial reform were being ignored), Pedro Vallenilla Minister of Development and Teresa Alvanez Barnola Minister of the Family.
Earlier in the month the acting Minister of Energy and Mines Rafael Guevara had been replaced by Alirio Parra.
Plans for reform
On March 5 Pérez stated, in an address to the nation delivered in the presence of members of the Congress, that legislation for "immediate constitutional reform" would be drawn up.
Planned reforms included the creation of the office of Prime Minister, measures to ensure that the judiciary was independent of political parties, changes in the police and penal systems in order to "guarantee respect for human rights" , and measures to promote internal democracy within the trade unions.
A referendum would be held, by May 1992 at the latest, on the constitutional amendments necessary to allow the convening of a constituent assembly which would have the authority to approve these reforms.
This referendum, Pérez said, "means turning over to the people the overall solution of the crisis, fully exercising popular sovereignty" .
Pérez announced in the same speech that prices of electricity (for both domestic and industrial consumers), petrol and basic foodstuffs would be frozen, that prices of medicines would be "stabilized" and that financial provisions for public transport, home ownership, housing for the military and small businesses would be improved.
Those behind the Feb. 3-4 coup attempt [see pp. 38759-60], he said, followed a "totalitarian and extremist ideology" ; they would have prevented the holding of the local elections due later in the year, and would have introduced a period of "silence and persecution" .
He praised the armed forces as "the leading players in the fundamental action of defending democracy" and attacked "the organized campaign of rumours" which, he said, sought to exaggerate the crisis in Venezuela.
Anti-government demonstrations
Tension and rumours of a possible second coup attempt continued.
Leaflets, posters and graffiti were reported extolling the leader of the attempted coup, Lt.-Col. Hugo Chávez Frías, who continued to release public statements from the San Carlos garrison in northern Caracas.
In the early hours of March 1 a group of four soldiers seized weapons and ammunition from the Ministry of Defence headquarters in the fort of Tiuna in the capital.
They had gained access because their leader had been an officer whose face was known to the guards.
On the night of March 10 a deafening cacerolazo ( "saucepan-hitting" ) was heard throughout the valley of Caracas, reportedly emanating from middle-class areas, poor areas and villages and organized by neighbourhood and student associations.
Police reported eight deaths among demonstrators demanding Perez's resignation.
Household lights were repeatedly switched on and off, in protest against the government's economic adjustment programme.
There were demonstrations in Caracas on March 4 and 19 demanding the resignation of Pérez and the release of soldiers imprisoned after the February coup attempt.
Two students were killed on March 23 during anti-government demonstrations in the town of Merida, 600 km south-west of Caracas, and there were violent incidents in the Caracas suburb of Los Teques on the same day.
AMERICAS
BRAZIL
Dismissal of Brazilian Environment Minister
The controversial Brazilian Environment Minister, José Lutzemberger, was dismissed from his post by President Fernando Collor de Mello on March 22.
An environmental activist prior to his appointment in 1990 [see p. 37312], Lutzemberger had been outspoken in his criticism of Brazilian institutions which he believed were contributing to environmental destruction, particularly that of the Amazon rainforest.
Most recently, he had denounced the state environment agency, Ibama, as a corrupt "agent for the woodchoppers" .
His replacement was Education Minister José Goldemberg, who was to hold the post on an interim basis.
Annulment of conviction in Chico Mendes murder trial
The conviction of a cattle rancher, Darly Alves, for planning the 1988 murder of the environmentalist Chico Mendes[see pp. 36459; 36782; 36793; 37914]was annulled on Feb. 28.
The Justice Tribunal Court of the state of Acre ruled that there had been insufficient evidence to convict Alves, who would now face a retrial.
AMERICAS
BOLIVIA
Cabinet changes
President Jaime Paz Zamora restructured his Cabinet on March 18 in an effort to boost the flagging fortunes of his ruling Patriotic Accord (AP), which faced internal divisions and a wave of labour and student protests against its neo-liberal economic policies.
The AP coalition was composed of Paz's social democratic Movement of the Revolutionary Left (MIR) and the conservative National Democratic Action (ADN).
The ADN leader, former military ruler Hugo Banzer Suárez, faced an internal party rebellion due to the resignation of 2,000 local leaders who claimed that the party was increasingly authoritarian.
In the March 18 reshuffle nine ministers were confirmed in their positions.
Chief amongst the eight changes was the replacement of Foreign Affairs Minister Carlos Iturralde Ballivián (ADN), heavily criticized in the press and in the Congress for his handling of recent border disputes with Chile, by Ronald Maclean Abaroa, also of the ADN.
The appointments preserved the balance of portfolios between the two parties, except that the Ministry of Information, previously held by Mario Rueda Pena of the New Majority faction of the MIR (MIR-NM), now went to Jaime Céspedes Toro (ADN).
The other six changes of personnel were the appointments of Jorge Quiroga Ramírez (ADN) to Finance, Fernando Campero Prudencio (MIR) to Industry, Commerce and Tourism, Alvaro Rejas Villarroel (MIR) to Mining and Metallurgy, Carlos Aponte Pinto (ADN) to Transport and Communications, Osvaldo Antezana Vaca Diez (ADN) to Campesino Affairs, Agriculture and Livestock, and Carlos Dabdoub Arrien (MIR) to Social Services and Public Health.
Discontent within military
The Bolivian Workers' Centre (COB), the main union confederation, contacted the Spanish news agency EFE on March 9 to report that it had received communiqués from the Bolivarián Military Movement (MMB), a dissident grouping within the military, which claimed that "discontented" elements within the army were willing to follow the example of fellow officers in Venezuela [for Venezuela coup attempt see pp. 38759-60]to stem corruption in the government and the higher echelons of the armed forces.
The MMB stated that aid from the USA was being siphoned off "to satisfy personal appetites" , and warned that the continuous increase in the number of US advisers to assist in the government's drug eradication policy was "jeopardizing the national sovereignty of the country" .
AMERICAS
CHILE
Proposed reforms
On the second anniversary of his coming to office President Patricio Aylwin Azócar presented to the Congress on March 11 a package of constitutional reforms designed further to distance the government from the previous military regime.
Chief among the proposals was a clause allowing for the removal of the heads of the armed forces, something forbidden under the 1980 Constitution approved by the military.
Aylwin stated that this did not apply to the present Chief of the Armed Forces, Gen. Augusto Pinochet Ugarte, the former dictator, who was not due to retire until 1998, but that it would "re-establish to future presidents of Chile a power which they would not wish to be denied" .
Espionage controversy
Horacio Toro, head of the Investigaciones plain-clothed police, was forced to resign on March 20, having been accused of compiling detailed reports on political parties, trade unions and public figures across the political spectrum, including the meetings of Pinochet with business leaders and politicians.
The disclosure was made by the right-wing Independent Democratic Union (UDI), a pro-Pinochet party during the dictatorship, which called for an inquiry and accused the government of repeating "the errors of the past" .
The government denied involvement in Toro's activities but few observers believed that he had been acting on his own initiative.
Political prisoners' hunger strike
An estimated 26 out of 41 prisoners who claimed political status were reported to have started an "indefinite hunger strike" on March 9 in a prison in Santiago, in protest over the character and conduct of their trials.
AMERICAS
MONTSERRAT
On March 6 Chief Minister Reuben Meade, presenting his first budget, announced a EC$58,900,000 package for 1992-93 which featured the need for more efficient tax collection; no new taxes were announced and extra tax allowances were granted to pensioners and parents.
AMERICAS
PERU
The government and five leading banks agreed on March 18 to cut interest rates by an average of 3 percentage points in an effort to hold down the exchange rate for the sol which had strengthened against the US dollar from the beginning of 1992.
ASIA — PACIFIC
AFGHANISTAN
Najibullah's resignation offer
In a speech delivered on March 18 President Najibullah announced that he was prepared to resign "all powers and all executive authority" on the establishment of an interim government — a central part of a UN-backed peace plan for Afghanistan.
Najibullah's public declaration was issued after he had held a series of long meetings in Kabul with the UN special representative for Afghanistan, Benon Sevan.
Commentators claimed that it would help Sevan in his efforts to persuade hardline mujaheddin groups, in particular Gulbuddin Hekmatyar's Hezb-i-Islami, to attend an "Afghan gathering" in Europe in April as a first step towards the establishment of an interim government.
Najibullah's offer was welcomed by the Pakistan government but spurned by the hardline mujaheddin groups.
In a statement issued on March 19 Hekmatyar called on Najibullah to resign immediately.
Najibullah's appeal for US assistance
In an interview in the New York Times of March 9, Najibullah appealed to the USA (which had committed substantial support to the mujaheddin) to help his government in its fight against the spread of Islamic fundamentalism in central Asia, and to provide economic and humanitarian assistance.
Ethnic conflict — Rocket attack on Kabul
The Far Eastern Economic Review of April 2 reported serious unrest in the strategic northern city of Mazar-i-Sharif.
According to the report local militias dominated by Uzbek, Tajik and Shia Ismaeli ethnic groups had formed an alliance with local mujaheddin units (including fighters commanded by Ahmed Shah Masud) in late March, and together they had taken over control of the city from Pashtun units.
The report claimed that events in Mazar-i-Sharif were indicative of a wider ethnic divide between Pashtuns and non-Pashtuns, which was threatening to split not only Najibullah's ruling Hezb-e Watan, but also the mujaheddin.
A mujaheddin rocket attack on Kabul on Feb. 29 killed at least 21 people.
The mujaheddin had launched a fresh rocket offensive against the city on Feb. 26.
Mujaheddin guerrillas claimed on March 15 to have captured a strategic district in the northern province of Samangan, bordering Uzbekistan.
ASIA — PACIFIC
KIRGIZSTAN
Presidential visit to India
President Askar Akayev began a three-day visit to India on March 17 during which he met President Ramaswamy Venkataraman and Prime Minister P. V. Narasimha Rao.
On March 18 the two countries signed six agreements establishing diplomatic relations and looking forward to the development of co-operation in the areas of trade, agriculture and science, and technology.
They also agreed on joint mineral exploration ventures in Kirgizstan.
India committed itself to training Kirgiz students in agriculture, banking, management and foreign service.
Akayev took advantage of his visit to dispel concerns about the possible formation of a federation of Moslem states by former Soviet central Asian republics.
Speaking at a press conference on March 18, Akayev said he thought such a federation impossible.
ASIA — PACIFIC
TAJIKISTAN
Agricultural reform — Arrest of Dushanbe mayor
It was announced on March 6 that the Tajik Supreme Soviet had approved a land reform law, giving all citizens the right to lifetime ownership of land and to lease and inherit land.
Reports in February had described plans to revive traditional Tajik farming and to resettle deserted mountain villages with workers from the cotton farms.
Maksud Ikramov, chair of the executive committee (mayor) of Dushanbe and a member of the Tajik Supreme Soviet, was arrested on March 6, accused of misusing his authority and of bribe-taking.
A report from a Tajikta correspondent on March 8 said that he had been stripped of his deputy's immunity by a two-thirds vote in the Supreme Soviet and arrested in the parliament building.
He was replaced on March 23 by Mirzo Timur Mirzoyev.
In September 1991, after the banning of the republican Communist Party, Ikramov had ordered the removal of Lenin's statue in Dushanbe — a controversial order which appeared to precipitate the return to power of the majority communist faction in the Supreme Soviet [see p. 38418].
According to the news agency Postfactum, Ikramov was the third member of Dushanbe city authorities to be arrested on bribery charges.
The leaders of the Democratic Party and the Rastokhez movement were also both under investigation for insulting the honour of President Rakhman Nabiyev and for slandering Supreme Soviet chair Safarali Kenjayev.
The opposition claimed that the active campaign against them had started after the visit of US Secretary of State James Baker in February [see pp. 38771-72]and that Baker had tacitly sanctioned repression against the democratic and Islamic political opposition in exchange for Tajikistan's not allying itself with Iran.
ASIA — PACIFIC
TURKMENISTAN
Development of relations with Iran
The governor of the Central Bank of Iran, Muhammad Hossein Adeli, visited Turkmenistan on March 4-5, and steps were agreed to improve trade between the two countries, including the establishment of a joint Tehran-Ashkhabad chamber of commerce.
On March 8 Ovlyakuli Khojakov Minister of Agriculture, announced an agricultural agreement with Iran under which the two countries agreed to exchange experts and students.
The accords followed the signing a friendship and co-operation memorandum with Iran on Feb. 20 which looked forward to the development of closer political, economic and cultural ties.
ASIA — PACIFIC
UZBEKISTAN
Foreign relations
An official visit to Hungary by Uzbek Prime Minister Abdulhashim Mulatov ended on March 3 with the establishment of diplomatic relations.
An agreement on trade and bilateral economic relations, signed on March 2, provided for trade worth US$200 million in 1992 and for payments in convertible currency.
Uzbekistan would provide cotton and chemicals in return for food, light industry products and Ikarus buses.
A protocol on diplomatic relations with Turkey was signed on March 4.
Addressing on March 4 a Turkish delegation which had arrived in Tashkent that day during a tour of central Asia, President Islam Karimov reportedly caused surprise and embarrassment by remarking that he was convinced that "the day will come when we will all meet in one parliament" .
Turkish Foreign Minister Hikmet Cetin announced at official talks later on March 4 that Turkey would extend loans and would help with Uzbekistan's conversion from Cyrillic to Roman script, and that Uzbek banknotes would be printed in Turkey.
A protocol between the two foreign ministries committed Turkish embassies to represent Uzbek interests abroad if requested.
An education co-operation agreement was announced on Feb. 29, and on March 19 it was announced that Uzbekistan would relay Turkish television.
Oil discovery
On March 8 it was reported that a newly discovered oil and gas field in the Fergana valley would provide Uzbekistan with up to 12,000,000 tonnes of oil per year — well above its domestic needs.
ASIA — PACIFIC
PAKISTAN
Report on financial scandal
A judicial inquiry into allegations of financial corruption involving the misappropriation of public funds by a network of Punjab-based credit co-operative societies [see pp. 38438; 38533]released a report on March 10 absolving the government of any wrongdoing.
Prime Minister Mohammad Nawaz Sharif (whose relatives owned two of the four co-operatives implicated — see p. 38438) and Interior Minister Choudhry Shujat Hussain had admitted to receiving loans but said that all of them had been repaid.
The inquiry's report, however, observed that "no foundation exists for alleging that the Prime Minister and his family were using co-operative societies like their personal account" , and also exonerated Hussain.
Appointment of new Chief Minister of Sind — Realignment within ruling IDA alliance
The Sind provincial assembly on March 6 elected Muzaffar Hussain Shah as Chief Minister of Sind to replace Jam Sadiq Ali who died on March 5 after only 18 months in office.
Shah, a 46-year-old lawyer, had served as the province's Minister for Law and Parliamentary Affairs.
Shah's appointment came amid major realignments within the country's ruling Islamic Democratic Alliance (IDA) which resulted in the expulsion on March 19 of one of its constituent parties, the National People's Party (NPP), led by former Prime Minister Ghulam Mustapha Jatoi.
Jatoi was accused of conspiring with the Pakistan People's Party (PPP) to install his son Masroor Jatoi as Sind's Chief Minister.
Earlier, the Pakistan Times of March 13 had confirmed that another of his sons, Ghulam Murtaza Khan Jatoi, had been dismissed as federal Minister of Communications, reportedly for contacting the government's political opponents.
A spokesman for the PPP, which joined other parties to give Shah a rare unanimous vote of confidence, was reported on March 20 as saying that his party had resisted contesting the Chief Ministership to "save the assembly" from dissolution.
The gesture followed months of escalating political violence in Sind during which the PPP had claimed that the provincial government had launched a political vendetta against its members [see pp. 38338; 38393; 38683].
In a brief address to the assembly following his election, Shah said that he would curb all political discrimination.
However, reports questioning Shah's independence grew after it emerged that Irfanullah Marwat Khan, implicated in the alleged gang-rape of a close friend of the PPP leader Benazir Bhutto [see p. 38683], had been retained as an adviser to the new provincial government.
Growing pressure from the government's fundamentalist ally, the Jamaat-i-Islami, fuelled reports that it had contributed to the appointment on March 3 of Lt.-Gen.
Javed Nasir, a lay preacher, as head of the Inter-Services Intelligence Agency (ISI).
The move, described as "a balancing act" , was widely regarded as an attempt by the government both to pacify religious fundamentalists critical of recent changes in its policy towards Afghanistan [see pp. 38725-26], and to secure closer co-operation from the ISI.
(Under Nasir's predecessor, Maj.-Gen.
Asad Durrani, appointed in August 1990 — see p.37652 — the ISI had developed sharp differences with UN peace mediators in Afghanistan.)
Reports of arms sales
Reports in early March suggested that the US administration had defied a ban on military sales to Pakistan by issuing licences to commercial companies worth US$100,000,000 for the export of military spare parts.
According to the administration's critics, the licences, issued during 1990 and 1991, might have violated the terms of the Pressler Amendment, under which all military assistance to Pakistan was suspended in October 1990 on the grounds that Pakistan was engaged in a nuclear weapons programme [see p. 37764].
US State Department officials quoted in the Washington Post of March 7, however, defended the administration's decision, claiming that the Pressler Amendment applied only to government aid.
Negotiations with France for the purchase by Pakistan of 40 Mirage-2000 jet aircraft worth F8,000 million (about US$1,434 million) were reported by Le Monde on Feb. 27.
Halt of issue of bearer bonds
The State Bank of Pakistan on March 22 halted the world-wide sale of foreign exchange bearer certificates.
Some Western governments, including the USA and UK, had blocked the issue of bonds, claiming that they could be used to launder drugs money.
Advertisements for the bonds in the USA had assured prospective buyers that they would not be required to disclose their identities or the source of their funds.
ASIA — PACIFIC
INDIA
Indian budget
Lok Sabha approval of budget
The government survived the threat in March of a motion of no confidence over its latest series of radical economic initiatives outlined in the recent 1992-93 budget [see p. 38762].
Opposition parties of both the left and the right accused the government of surrendering to the dictates of the World Bank and the IMF, but on March 9 the Lok Sabha (lower house of parliament) approved by a simple voice vote the government's sweeping economic reforms, as detailed in the budget, which aimed at opening up the country's protected economy.
The budget envisaged, for the first time, the partial free convertibility of the rupee.
Holders of foreign exchange would be allowed to change up to 60 per cent of their foreign currency at market rates, with only 40 per cent subject to the official exchange rate.
To curb gold smuggling, returning and expatriate Indians would be allowed to import 5 kg of gold each, paid for (with 15 per cent duty) from foreign currencies earned abroad.
Customs duties were scheduled to be cut from a peak of 150 per cent to 110 per cent over three to four years, bringing them in line with other industrializing developing countries.
The budget proposed selling off an estimated US$1,300 million worth of state-run enterprises; expanding stock and bond markets; and rationalizing the tax structure, with the reduction of the top tax rate from 62 to 52 per cent, and further projected cuts the following year.
Deflationary pressure in the budget was expected to come from a continuing reduction in the fiscal deficit, to 5 per cent of gross domestic product (GDP) in 1992-93 (compared with 8.4 per cent in 1990-91 and 6.5 per cent in 1991-92. i.e. the year ending March 31, 1992).
Although controlling inflation, running at around 12 per cent, remained a priority, the government hoped to boost private lending and enterprise by cutting the floor rate on commercial lending by 1 percentage point to 14 per cent [for last interest rate rise see p. 38533].
The budget projected total expenditure in 1992-93 to rise by only 5 per cent(i.e. less than inflation) to Rs1,190,000 million.
Defence spending would rise by 7 per cent to Rs175,000 million, implying a cut in real terms, for the second year running, of about 5 per cent[see p. 38337].
(US$1.00=Rs27.278 as at March 9, 1992.)
On March 17 the government moderated some of the impact of the railway budget introduced on Feb. 25 [see p. 38762], with concessions for second-class rail season tickets and the withdrawal of an increase in long-distance sleeper charges, amounting to a total loss in revenue of Rs600,000,000.
Foreign exchange and commodity markets reacted to the budget by registering early falls in the value of the rupee and the price of gold.
On March 3 the rupee depreciated by 9.4 per cent, although share prices rose sharply on the Bombay Stock Exchange.
Meanwhile, the price of gold bullion on March 3 dropped by Rs100 to Rs4,600 per 10 grammes.
Talks on nuclear non-proliferation — Resignation of Solanki
In what was regarded as an important shift in foreign policy India agreed, during high-level talks in Washington on March 8-10, to resume bilateral discussions with the USA on nuclear non-proliferation.
The Foreign Secretary, J. N. Dixit, who led the Indian delegation, stressed, however, in a statement on March 9, that India did not intend to sign the nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) or to participate in any five-state conference on the NPT involving China, India, Pakistan, Russia and the USA [see also p. 38289].
Dixit's visit coincided with the leak of a US Defence Department memo suggesting that the USA "should discourage Indian hegemonic aspirations over other states in South Asia and the Indian Ocean" .
Resignation of External Affairs Minister
External Affairs Minister Madhavsinh Solanki resigned on March 31 after admitting that he had handed over a note to his Swiss counterpart, René Felber, requesting the Swiss government to slow down its investigations into pay-offs to high-ranking Indian officials allegedly deposited into Swiss bank accounts by the Swedish armaments company AB Bofors [see pp. 35336; 35382].
The note, from a private Indian lawyer reportedly acting at the behest of one of the middlemen who received pay-offs, was understood to have been delivered by Solanki on Feb. 1 while attending the World Economic Forum in Davos.
Solanki had told the Lok Sabha on March 30 that "I now regret that I handed over this note" but that "neither I nor my ministry instructed the Swiss authorities to stop or impede investigations into the Bofors case" .
Solanki's resignation, the first by a member of the current government, led opposition parties in the Lok Sabha to call for an immediate motion of censure against the government.
On March 31 "almost the entire opposition" in the Rajya Sabha (upper house of parliament) staged a walk-out in protest against a decision by Prime Minister P. V. Narasimha Rao not to make a statement on the resignation.
Amnesty report
The government on March 26 rejected as "totally one-sided" a report released on March 24 by the human rights organization Amnesty International, alleging that "many hundreds, if not thousands, of people [in India]have been tortured to death during the last decade" .
Amnesty International, barred from visiting India since 1984, claimed on the basis of information obtained from sources in the local press and human rights organizations that the country's legal system, free press and civil liberties bodies were powerless to curb widespread and "routine" police torture.
The report alleged that human rights violations had been particularly blatant in areas of armed insurgency, notably Punjab, Kashmir and Assam, where security forces were given a "licence to torture and kill" .
States developments
More than 70 people died during March in a fresh wave of violence in parts of Punjab.
One of the worst incidents involved the shooting on March 11 of 19 Hindu engineers at a textile factory in Harkishanpura which had defied orders by Sikh militants to close down during the state elections in February [see p. 38762].
The Nagaland State Assembly was dissolved on March 27 on the recommendation of Chief Minister Vamuzo, whose government agreed to continue as caretaker until fresh elections were held.
In Assam rebels of the United Liberation Front of Assam (ULFA) resumed fighting with government forces following reports of a breakdown in peace talks which began on March 31.
In Jammu and Kashmir president's rule was extended with effect from March 3.
ASIA — PACIFIC
NEPAL
Economic reforms
The government announced on March 4 that the rupee would become partly convertible.
Under the new arrangement those in receipt of hard currency would be required to surrender 35 per cent to the central bank at an official rate determined by the rupee's value against a basket of currencies, while the remaining 65 per cent could be exchanged on the open market.
At the same time new regulations on imports were issued allowing the import of around 40 items, including consumer durables, computers, chemicals, shoes and vegetable and mineral oils, from countries other than India.
The changes were aimed at developing industry and increasing exports, in particular to other countries apart from India.
According to the central bank governor, Harishankher Tripathi, they were necessitated by the liberalization of India's financial and currency regime [see p. 38812], which would directly affect Nepal because of the open border between the two countries.
New political party
Supporters of the former non-party panchayat system abandoned in 1991 formed a new political party, the National People's Council, on March 11.
Two former Prime Ministers, M. P. Koirala (a half-brother of the current Prime Minister) and Kirtinidhi Bista, were elected leader and deputy leader respectively.
The party committed itself to the defence of "democracy, national identity and sovereignty" .
Influx of refugees from Bhutan
Koirala told parliament on March 9 that more than 20,000 Bhutanese refugees had arrived in Nepal since July 1991 and more were arriving at the rate of 200 a day.
Nepalese sources and exiled Bhutanese opposition groups accused the Bhutan government of forcing ethnic Nepalese to accept Bhutanese culture and religion or leave the country [see p. 38534].
Koirala visit to China
The Prime Minister, Girja Prasad Koirala, paid an official visit to China on March 16-31.
In Bejing he met the Chinese President, Yang Shangkun, the Prime Minister, Li Peng, and other senior officials.
Koirala described his visit as a "goodwill visit" aimed at strengthening the friendly relations between the two countries.
An agreement on economic and technical co-operation was signed on March 22.
ASIA — PACIFIC
CHINA
Strengthening of reformist line
Deng Xiaoping, China's "elder statesman" leader, had considerable success during March in his effort to reinforce the reformist line which he had been actively promoting since early January.
Deng had launched his current campaign in January in response to attacks on his reformist allies within the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) by hardliners, particularly from within the central advisory commission (CAC), the so-called "council of elders" headed by arch-conservative Chen Yun.
Deng was reported to have been particularly incensed by an attack on the country's five special economic zones (SEZs), widely regarded as showcases for the reformist line.
Accompanied by a number of his key allies, he had travelled to the southern SEZs in January to launch his counteroffensive [see pp. 38722; 38764].
His line received the open support of the CCP general secretary Jiang Zemin in February along with prominent coverage in the official media organs.
By the end of the month it had been codified into a document which was widely circulated for study among work groups.
In the document, Central Document No. 2, Deng stressed the need for adopting new economic reforms, including stock market and enterprise reform.
He also called for the abolition of the CAC.
According to a Far Eastern Economic Review report of March 19, another, more critical, document had been circulated to a smaller number of top officials, reportedly criticizing a number of prominent hardliners, including Song Ping, a member of the politburo standing committee, Wang Renzhi, the party central committee ideology head, Deng Liqun, CAC ideologue, Gao Di, director of the party newspaper Renmin Ribao, and He Jingzhe, the acting Culture Minister.
The Far Eastern Economic Review suggested that the restricted distribution of this more critical document was an attempt by conservatives to "rein in Deng's resurgent authority" .
The politburo convened on March 9-10, and on March 12 all official media organs gave prominent coverage to the resultant communiqué which declared unequivocally that economic reform should be "firmly maintained for a hundred years" .
Reversing the party line adopted after the "turmoils" of 1989, the politburo decided that "left deviationism" was a greater threat than that of the right.
Reports of unrest in Xinjiang and Inner Mongolia
In a speech delivered on March 6, Tomur Dawamat, chair of the Xinjiang Uygur autonomous regional government, admitted that there had been a recent upsurge in Moslem separatist activity in the region.
Tomur also voiced long-held Chinese fears that the break-up of the Soviet Union would encourage China's own restive minorities, such as the Uygurs, Kazhaks, Tajiks and Uzbeks of Xinjiang.
Tomur said that "hostile forces both at home and abroad have stepped up their infiltration, subversion and sabotage" .
 "The changeable international situation," he said,"has affected and is still affecting Xinjiang's social stability.
A handful of national splittists in Xinjiang, colluding with national splittists outside Xinjiang, have stepped up their splitting activity."
A report issued by the New York-based human rights group Asia Watch in late March claimed that there had been a recent crackdown against dissident activity in Inner Mongolia, reflecting government fears of nationalist influence spreading from neighbouring Mongolia.
Decision of UN Human Rights Commission not to consider resolution on Tibet
The UN Human Rights Commission voted on March 4 not to consider a resolution condemning China for human rights abuses in Tibet.
After an extended debate the vote was 27 to 15, with 10 abstentions.
The resolution had been sponsored by the European Communities and other Western countries.
Police were reported to have broken up a pro-independence demonstration in Lhasa, the Tibetan capital, on March 20.
Foreign relations
Presidential veto of US trade restrictions
On March 2 the US President George Bush vetoed a bill which sought to link China's most-favoured-nation (MFN) trade status with "substantial progress" on human rights, weapons proliferation and trade imbalances.
In his veto message Bush said that if China was presented with such an ultimatum "the result will be weakened ties to the West and further repression" .
The Senate had approved the bill on Feb. 25 by 59 votes to 39, eight less that the two-thirds majority which would be required if an attempt were made to override the presidential veto.
In November 1991 the House of Representatives had approved the bill by 409 votes to 21.
In a statement issued on March 3 a spokesman for the Chinese Ministry of Foreign Economic Relations and Trade described Bush's veto as "a very wise decision which will be of great help to the future development of Sino-US relations" .
Trade pact with Russia — Relations with other former Soviet republics
China and Russia signed a trade pact on March 5, their first official agreement since the collapse of the Soviet Union.
The agreement, which aimed to provide "a framework and main direction" for Sino-Russian trade, was signed in Beijing by Li Lanqing, Chinese Minister for Foreign Economic Relations and Trade, and Pyotr Aven, the Russian Minister for Foreign Economic Affairs.
The Russian Foreign Minister, Andrey Kozyrev, visited China on March 16-18.
China had established diplomatic relations with Russia on Dec. 27, 1991 and at the same time recognized the 10 other republics of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) and Georgia.
The Prime Minister of Kazakhstan, Sergei Tereshchenko, visited China on Feb. 24-28.
The President of Uzbekistan, Islam Karimov, visited China on March 12-14.
Visit by Foreign Minister to UK and Germany
The Chinese Foreign Minister Qian Qichen visited the United Kingdom and Germany on March 8-12 [see p. 38815 for Qian's talks in the UK on Hong Kong].
In the UK Qian presented Prime Minister John Major with the instrument of China's accession to the 1968 Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty [see p. 38678].
The Treaty instrument was also handed to Russia and USA during March.
In Germany Qian held talks with Chancellor Helmut Kohl and other leaders.
ASIA — PACIFIC
TAIWAN
KMT central committee split on presidential election proposal
The central committee of the ruling Kuomintang (KMT) convened in Taipei on March 14-16 to discuss the details of President Lee Teng-hui's constitutional reform programme.
The plenum preceded the opening of a 60-day National Assembly session on March 20.
The committee failed to reach agreement on the sensitive issue of the method of implementing popular election of the president, its final instruction being that a system should be agreed upon before 1996, when President Lee's term ended.
Two opposing positions had emerged: KMT liberals advocated directed presidential elections, in line with the policy of the opposition Democratic Progressive Party (DPP), but conservatives supported a proposal described in Chinese as wei ren zhi xuan (direct vote by proxy).
According to the Far Eastern Economic Review of March 26, 1992, under such a system candidates for election to the National Assembly would campaign as proxies to vote under obligation for a particular presidential candidate.
Agreement was reached on a number of other issues, including shortening the presidential term from six to four years; strengthening the role of the National Assembly; and the introduction of direct elections for the governor of Taiwan and the mayors of Taipei and Kaohsiung.
Sentencing of pro-independence activist
Chen Wan-chen, founder of the pro-independence Organization for Taiwan Nation-Building, was sentenced to 46 months' imprisonment on March 16 after being found guilty of "preparing to commit sedition" under the controversial Article 100 of the Criminal Code [see p. 38765 for Chen's arrest in February].
Foreign relations
The President of Nicaragua, Violeta Barrios de Chamorro, visited Taiwan on March 3-7.
The two sides signed three co-operation agreements covering diplomatic, agricultural and cultural fields.
South African Foreign Minister R. F. "Pik" Botha visited Taiwan on March 20-23 as part of an Asian tour which also included visits to Japan, South Korea and Singapore.
At a press conference on March 20 Botha described South Africa's "friendship" with Taiwan as "precious" , and affirmed that South Africa was "not interested" in developing formal relations with China.
Chen Li-an, Minister of National Defence, confirmed in early March that Taiwan was planning to purchase 16 Lafayette class frigates from France at a cost of some US$4,800 million.
Chen also said that Taiwan would spend US$5,000 million on weapons programmes during the next fiscal year beginning in July.
ASIA — PACIFIC
MONGOLIA
Freeing of prices — MPRP congress — Foreign relations
The government more or less completed its price deregulation programme on March 1 when it freed most fixed prices for food and daily necessities; only bread and flour prices remained controlled.
The Financial Times of Feb. 28 commented that the move was likely to add to inflation, already running at an annual rate in excess of 100 per cent.
Mongolia opened its first stock exchange in Ulan Bator on Feb. 7 as part of its ambitious privatization plan launched in 1991 [see pp. 38190; 38290].
MPRP congress
The 21st congress of the Mongolian People's Revolutionary Party (MPRP — the principal component of the government coalition) was held in Ulan Bator on Feb. 26-29.
The congress was attended by over 600 delegates representing some 80,000 party members, approximately 20,000 less than at the time of the 20th congress held in February 1991 [see pp. 38008-09].
For the first time in the party's history the congress took place without the participation of foreign fraternal party delegations.
The official Chinese news agency Xinhua reported on Feb. 29 that the congress had agreed to the party's conversion into a fully national and democratic organization.
According to the report, the Doctrine of the Mean, the Golden Principle of the Confucian School, had replaced socialism and communism as the MPRP's guiding ideology.
The congress re-elected Budragchaagiyn Dash-Yondon as chair of an enlarged 147-member central committee.
Reported departure of MDP from ruling coalition — Formation of new coalition
The Reuters news agency reported on March 3 that the Mongolian Democratic Party (MDP), the country's second largest party after the MPRP, had "decided to leave the government coalition because of the slow rate of economic reform" .
Radio Moscow World News reported on March 21 that the MDP, the National Progressive Party (NPP) and the United Party of Mongolia had agreed to form a coalition "with a view to ensuring democratic victory at the parliamentary elections in June" .
Visit by Prime Minister to Russia — Mongolian statement on troop withdrawal
Dashiyn Byambasuren, the Prime Minister, visited Russia on March 4-8 for talks on commercial and economic co-operation.
An agreement was reached on the delivery of Russian oil and petrol to Mongolia.
In a statement issued on March 28 the Mongolian Foreign Ministry announced that it expected Russia to abide by a March 1990 Soviet-Mongolian agreement which stipulated that all Soviet troops would withdraw from Mongolia by Aug. 30, 1992 [see p. 37318].
Visit by Prime Minister to Germany — Other foreign relations
Byambasuren paid a visit to Germany on Feb. 25-26, the first by a Mongolian Premier to the united Germany.
Among the topics discussed was the issue of the repayment of some DM47,000,000 (about US$28,500,000) in loans granted to Mongolia by the former East German government.
Tserenpilyn Gombosuren, Minister of Foreign Relations, visited Japan on March 23-28 to discuss various issues, including an international conference on aid to Mongolia due to take place in Tokyo in late May.
Radnaasumbereliyn Gonchigdorj, the Vice-President, left Mongolia on Feb. 7 for a one-month tour of the Asia-Pacific region, including South Korea, Nepal, Pakistan, Philippines and Australia.
ASIA — PACIFIC
HONG KONG
Appointment of advisers — Sino-British negotiations
Appointment by China of advisory panel
The Chinese government formally appointed 44 advisers on affairs in Hong Kong at a ceremony in Beijing on March 11.
The ceremony was attended by Premier Li Peng, President Yang Shangkun and Chinese Communist Party general secretary Jiang Zemin.
The role of the advisers was to "facilitate mutual understanding" between China and Hong Kong and to reflect the views of the people of Hong Kong.
The Far Eastern Economic Review of March 26 reported that there were fears in Hong Kong that the advisers would constitute a second, unelected power-base in the colony.
The report also stated that the narrowness of representation among the advisers had served to highlight Hong Kong's misgivings.
The majority of the advisers were "long-time pro-Peking figures and confirmed establishment types" .
There was no representation for either of the two dominant political groups in the Hong Kong Legislative Council (Legco)— the liberal United Democrats of Hong Kong and the conservative Co-operative Resource Centre — whereas the pro-Chinese New Hong Kong Alliance and Liberal Democratic Federation, both of which had performed badly in the 1991 Legco elections, enjoyed significant representation.
Sino-British discussions
Qian Qichen, the Chinese Foreign Minister, held talks in London on March 9 with John Major, the United Kingdom Prime Minister, and Douglas Hurd, the Foreign and Commonwealth Secretary.
Reporting on the talks the Financial Times of March 10 stated that the UK had failed to persuade China to "speed the work" of the Sino-British Joint Liaison Group (JLG), which dealt with problems arising from the 1997 transfer.
The JLG held its 22nd meeting on March 24-26.
Topics discussed included the Hong Kong government's plan to privatize Radio Television Hong Kong, a move opposed by China [see p. 38765].
The group also discussed the future of military facilities in the colony.
1992-93 budget
On March 4 Hamish Macleod, the Hong Kong Financial Secretary, unveiled the budget for the fiscal year beginning April 1, 1992.
Macleod forecast a surplus of HK$5,000 million with revenue of HK$126,200 million set against expenditure of HK$121,200 million (US$1.00=HK$7.7461 as at March 30, 1992).
The key features of the budget were a rise in the corporate tax rate (by 1 per cent to 17.5 per cent) and the closing of a number of tax loopholes.
Macleod was attacked by both liberals and conservatives in the Legco for failing to provide sufficient tax concessions to middle income earners.
The budget was also criticized by Lu Ping, the head of China's Hong Kong and Macao Affairs Office, who claimed that it was in contravention of Hong Kong's post-1997 Basic Law, which stipulated that government spending should be kept within the limits of the revenue it raised.
The Far Eastern Economic Review of March 19 said that Lu's comment was based on "the mistaken belief" that tax increases imposed by Macleod had been necessary to avoid a deficit.
Significantly, Macleod announced during his speech that the government planned to ensure that Hong Kong's fiscal reserves would stand at HK$71,600 million by March 1997 (Hong Kong was to revert to Chinese sovereignty in July 1997).
Although this figure was less than the current level of HK$91,000 million, it was almost three times the amount promised to China by the UK in the 1991 memorandum of understanding, which was the condition for Chinese approval for Hong Kong's new airport
ASIA — PACIFIC
MYANMA
Military offensive against Karen rebels — Rohingya refugees issue
The government offensive against Karen rebels based along the Thai border escalated during March.
The fighting, which often spilled into Thai territory, increased tension between the military authorities in Myanma and Thailand.
According to some commentators the Myanman military had set out to capture the Karens' last two bases on the Thai border (Manerplaw and Kawmoora) by March 27, the country's Armed Forces Day.
However, as of late March both bases were still believed to be under rebel control.
On March 14 government forces captured the strategic Sleeping Dog Hill near Manerplaw, and then advised Thai forces to retreat from the area or face air and artillery attack.
Thailand responded by placing air force units on alert and by reinforcing troop numbers along the border.
On March 17 Thai and Myanman forces fought a fierce gun battle following Myanman incursions.
The next day Thai fighter-bombers attacked Myanman positions on the Thai side of the border, killing at least five soldiers.
The attack came only a few hours after the Thai Interior Minister, Gen. Issarapong Noonpakdi, had issued a "last warning" to the Myanman military to withdraw all its troops from the Thai side of the border.
Reports on March 19 suggested that at least 30 Myanman troops had been killed in the Thai offensive.
Rohingya refugees issue
Large numbers of Moslem Rohingya refugees from Arakan state in Myanma continued to cross over into Bangladesh during March to escape persecution and the effects of a military offensive against rebel forces in the state.
By mid-March as many as 210,000 were living in makeshift camps in Bangladesh and the numbers entering were increasing daily amid reports of mass killings, forced conscriptions and torture in Arakan province.
Talks between Bangladesh and Myanma during January and February had yielded few results and so in March the Bangladesh government launched a diplomatic offensive in an attempt at spurring the international community into preventing a major tragedy occurring.
The Bangladesh government approached the UN Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali, asking him to raise the issue at the Security Council, and on March 10 the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) launched an appeal for international assistance.
The Malaysian Foreign Minister, Abdullah Ahmad Badawi, summoned the Myanman ambassador in Kuala Lumpur on March 10 to express concern over Myanma's treatment of the Rohingya minority.
On March 12 Indonesian Foreign Minister Ali Alatas said that the refugee situation was threatening the stability of the region.
Traditionally, South-east Asian countries had been reluctant to criticize the military regime in Myanma, adopting instead a policy of "constructive engagement" , and in an interview in the Financial Times of March 17 the Prime Minister of Singapore, Goh Chok Tong, ruled out any unified initiative by the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN).
New Defence Minister — Other Cabinet changes
Gen. Saw Maung, the Prime Minister and Chair of the ruling military State Law and Order Restoration Council (SLORC), who was believed to be in poor mental and physical health, relinquished the post of Defence Minister on March 20, having already given up the Foreign Affairs portfolio in September 1991 [see p. 38440].
Gen. Than Shwe, Deputy Commander of the Defence Services, became Minister of Defence.
Also on March 20 Maj.-Gen.
Myo Nyunt, commander of the Yangon Command, was appointed to head the new Ministry of Religious Affairs.
Religious Affairs had previously been under the control of Lt.-Gen.
Phone Myint, who retained charge of Home Affairs and Culture.
On March 5 the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry Affairs had been divided into two separate ministries.
Lt. Gen. Chit Swe, hitherto Minister of Agriculture and Forestry Affairs, was appointed Minister of Forestry Affairs.
Maj.-Gen.
Myint Aung, Chair of the Irrawaddy Division Law and Order Restoration Council and commander of South-West Military Command, was appointed as Agriculture Minister.
At the same time, Maj.-Gen.
Mya Thinn, chair of the Arakan State Law and Order Restoration Command and commander of the Western Military Command, replaced Lt.-Gen.
Aung Ye Kyaw as Minister for Co-operatives.
[For January 1992 Cabinet reshuffle see p. 38725].
Abolition of political parties
The SLORC abolished a further 19 political parties during March [see p. 38767 for abolition of parties in January and February].
By the end of March there remained only 10 legal political parties under the Political Parties Registration Law.
A National League for Democracy representative was "allowed to resign" from the People's Assembly on March 4 "because of health reasons" .
ASIA — PACIFIC
THAILAND
Thai election results
General election
A general election was held on March 22, 13 months after the armed forces had toppled the elected government of Gen. Chatichai Choonhaven [see pp. 38003-04].
The elections were to a 360-member House of Representatives as stipulated under the Constitution which had been drawn up by the military and promulgated in December 1991 [see p. 38681].
Conduct of elections
The elections were contested by 15 parties, four of which failed to win a single seat (Kaset Seri, Ruam Palang Mai, United Democratic Party and Thong Tin Kao Na (Rural Progressive)).
Nationwide turnout averaged 59.24 per cent; turnout in Bangkok was registered at 42 per cent .
The outgoing military-appointed government of Anand Panyarachun had established an independent group, Poll Watch, to monitor the conduct of the elections.
Poll Watch received 274 complaints of suspected electoral violations, mostly involving vote-buying.
According to the Far Eastern Economic Review of April 2 the establishment of Poll Watch had driven the parties' extensive vote-buying network underground and sometimes out of business.
Nevertheless, Poll Watch estimated that up to 50 per cent of votes cast throughout Thailand involved an exchange of money, with the figure rising to between 70 and 90 per cent in the Isarn (North-East Thailand).
It was estimated that the parties spent between 3,000 and 5,000 million baht (US$117 million-G195 million) on the polls, the largest spenders being Samakkhi Tham and the New Aspiration Party.
Election results
No party won an overall majority of seats; the largest number (79) was won by the air force's protégé party, Samakkhi Tham.
Samakkhi Tham performed particularly well in the Isarn, as also did Gen. Chaovalit Yongchaiyut's New Aspiration Party and the Social Action Party.
Maj.-Gen.
Chamlong Srimaung's Palang Dharma performed extremely well in Bangkok, winning 32 of the capital's 35 seats and in the process effectively destroying the pro-military Prachakorn Thai's electoral base.
The Democrats maintained their southern support, winning 26 out of 45 seats in the south, and Chart Thai performed strongly in the central regions, winning 42 out of 83 central seats.
Eight ministers in the Chatichai government who had been ruled "unusually rich" by the military's Assets Verification Committee (AVC) contested seats in the election.
Of the eight, five were returned; Pramual Sabhavasu, Pramarn Adireksarn, Sanoh Thienthong, Vatana Asavahame, and Montri Pongpanich.
Appointment of Senate
The ruling military junta appointed a 270-member Senate on March 22.
Under the December 1991 Constitution the Senate was a potentially powerful force, with the right to vote on censure motions against the government and on royal decrees.
Of the 270 members, 116 were civilians, the rest being military and police officers.
Thailand's economic elite were strongly represented in the Senate.
Ministers in the Anand government, officials of the military-appointed National Legislative Assembly, academics, the media, labour unions, lawyers, doctors, Moslems and women were all afforded token representation.
Post-election manoeuvring
Following the elections the main pro-military parties met with the leading members of the junta to attempt to form a workable coalition.
Together the four parties had 191 seats, a working majority of 11.
The meeting, at the air force headquarters, comprised Narong Wongwan of Samakkhi Tham, Somboon Rahong of Chart Thai, Montri Pongpanich of the Social Action Party, Samak Sundaravej of Prachakorn Thai, Gen. Sunthorn Kongsompong, the chair of the ruling junta, and Air Chief Marshal Kaset Rojananin, the air force commander.
At a press conference on March 25 Narong announced that Rassadorn, with four seats, had joined the coalition and that an agreement had been reached to form a government headed by himself.
Also on March 25 parties of the so-called "pro-democracy" alliance (New Aspirations Party, Palang Dharma, Ekkaparb and the Democrats) held a joint press conference and called into question the credibility of Narong as Prime Minister, in the light of a recent US State Department allegation that he had been denied a visa in mid-1991 because of his suspected ties with drug trafficking.
ASIA — PACIFIC
CAMBODIA
Continued implementation of UN peace plan
Arrival of first UNTAC personnel — Debate on funding
The UN Transitional Authority in Cambodia (UNTAC) was officially established on March 15 with the arrival in Phnom Penh of the chief co-ordinator, Yasushi Akashi [see p. 38767 for UN Security Council approval of UNTAC in late February].
Akashi was accompanied by Lt.-Gen.
John Anderson, the Australian commander of UNTAC's military component.
UNTAC's first military contingent, a group of some 850 Indonesian soldiers, had arrived in Cambodia on March 11.
They were joined on March 20 by a Malaysian battalion.
According to Akashi, the 22,000-strong UNTAC team would be fully deployed by May 20.
The regroupment, cantonment and demobilization of the four Cambodian factions would begin by June.
A controversial debate over the funding of the UNTAC operation continued during March.
Akashi, during a visit to Japan on March 11, said that he expected the Japanese government to contribute a third of UNTAC's estimated total cost of US$1,900 million.
However, under the current annual assessed UN contribution rates, Japanese was required to pay only 12.5 per cent of the mission's cost, with the USA liable to pay over 30 per cent.
The Japanese Foreign Minister, Michio Watanabe, told Akashi that the government was prepared to pay a higher rate for refugee resettlement and for economic reconstruction operations, both of which were separate from the UNTAC budget.
The US Congress was reportedly reluctant to contribute the full 30 per cent of UNTAC's cost.
In late March Hun Sen, the Prime Minister of the State of Cambodia (SOC) or Phnom Penh government, visited the USA, when he warned US officials that a delay in funding might help the Khmers Rouges to return to power through the use of military force.
Before Hun Sen's visit to the USA (his first), he had visited Japan where he had made a specific request that Japanese troops participate in the UNTAC.
Japanese Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa told Hun Sen on March 23 that he was determined to win parliamentary approval for a bill enabling Japanese forces to participate in the mission.
Hun Sen also visited France in late March.
Start of refugee repatriation programme
One of the largest repatriation programmes undertaken by the UN began on March 30 when 527 out of an estimated 380,000 Cambodian refugees living in camps along the Thai-Cambodian border were transported to a temporary reception site in the western town of Sisophon.
Under the UN peace plan all refugees would be repatriated by the end of 1992.
Release of final batch of prisoners
The Phnom Penh government released the last of its political prisoners and prisoners of war on March 29.
However, the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), present at the release ceremony, expressed concern over "a new spate of detentions" .
Funcinpec congress
Funcinpec, the Sihanoukist party, held a congress in the north-western province of Oddar Meanchey on Feb. 27-28.
The party elected Prince Norodom Ranariddh as chair.
Reports of fighting around Kompong Thom
Reports in March indicated that Khmer Rouge forces had recently escalated their military activities in an attempt to cut government access to the northern provinces, especially that of Preah Vihear.
Towards this end Khmer Rouge guerrillas had seized sections of national highways 6 and 12.
UN officials announced on March 22 that fighting between Khmer Rouge and government forces had, for the first time in two years, reached the outskirts of Kompong Thom.
However, Lt.-Gen.
Anderson said on March 25 that he would not deploy UNTAC troops in the area until the factions agreed to abide by a ceasefire.
The SOC government issued a communiqué on March 29 stating that it had ordered an offensive against Khmer Rouge forces in Kompong Thom province, in an attempt to reopen strategic highways.
First MIA search in Cambodia
For the first time Cambodian, Vietnamese and US officials met in Phnom Penh on March 6 to discuss co-operation in the search for the remains of US servicemen listed as missing in action (MIA) during the Vietnam war.
Following the meeting a US military excavation team carried out its first MIA search in Cambodia; it announced on March 23 that it had recently unearthed some remains which were believed to be of members of US television crews killed in Cambodia in 1970.
ASIA — PACIFIC
LAOS
Signing of narcotics suppression treaty
Laos, Myanma and Thailand on March 14 signed a draft co-operation treaty on narcotics suppression in Bangkok.
The treaty called upon all countries, whether production, transit or destination countries, to step up controls on chemicals used in manufacturing narcotics and hallucinogens.
The three countries agreed to promote co-operation in reducing the supply and demand for narcotics through exchanges of information and training.
The signing of the treaty followed a visit by the Prime Minister of Laos, Gen. Khamtay Siphandon, to Myanma on Feb. 24-27.
The Foreign Minister of Myanma, U Ohn Gyaw, visited Laos on March 2-7 to attend a meeting, also attended by officials from the UN International Drug Abuse Control Programme, on bilateral narcotics suppression.
Visit by senior US official
Richard Solomon, US Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs, visited Laos on March 5-6 for talks with, among others, Gen. Khamtay.
A report on Lao National Radio on March 6 stated that Khamtay and Solomon had concluded that Lao-US relations had progressed to the point that ties would soon be elevated to ambassadorial level.
SPA session — Approval of 1992 budget
The eighth plenary session of the Supreme People's Assembly (SPA) was held in Vientiane, the capital, on March 13-14.
The SPA approved the 1992 budget, which projected a gross revenue of 110,320 million new kip and a gross expenditure of 205,300 million new kip (US$1.00=704.057 new kip as at March 16, 1992).
The session agreed for the government to "apply some necessary measures to ensure an increase in the revenue and a reduction in the expenditure" .
ASIA — PACIFIC
MALAYSIA
Kedah by-election
The ruling National Front (Barisan Nasional, BN) coalition managed to retain the Jerai parliamentary seat, with a reduced majority, in a by-election in the northern state of Kedah on March 4 — the first since the 1990 general election.
The Parti Islam SeMalaysia (PAS) increased its vote, and, according to the Far Eastern Economic Review of March 19, 1992, its continuing influence in the Malay-dominated north was worrying some members of the United Malays National Organization (UMNO), the chief component of the BN.
ASIA — PACIFIC
INDONESIA
Cancellation of Netherlands aid and disbandment of IGGI
In late March the Indonesian government responded to recent attempts by various Western countries to establish a link between human rights concerns and development aid by announcing its rejection of all aid from the Netherlands and the disbandment of the Netherlands-chaired 14-member aid consortium, the Inter-Governmental Group on Indonesia (IGGI).
The decision was announced in a March 25 letter from Radius Prawiro, the Minister for Economy, Finance, Industry and Development Supervision, to the Netherlands Foreign Affairs Minister, Hans van den Broek.
In his letter Prawiro said that Indonesia had made great efforts to forge a relationship with the Netherlands after "an exceedingly painful historical past resulting from centuries of inhuman colonial subjugation" .
However, relations between the two countries had, he said, deteriorated sharply as a consequence of the "reckless use" by the Netherlands of development assistance as an "instrument of intimidation" .
In a statement issued on March 26 Maj.-Gen.
Moerdiono, the State Secretary, cited the Netherlands' decision to review future aid following the killing of civilians by soldiers in East Timor in November 1991 [see also below]as an example of Netherlands intimidation.
The Netherlands government expressed its disappointment over the Indonesian decision and regret over "the words in which it was phrased" .
The Far Eastern Economic Review of April 9 reported that although the decision to cancel Netherlands aid had been taken by President Suharto, it was widely supported by the government and bureaucracy.
The report also speculated that the move might prove to be a political asset for the ruling Golkar grouping ahead of parliamentary elections scheduled for June 9, 1992.
Commentators claimed that the Indonesian government was confident that there would be no serious economic implications.
In 1991 the Netherlands contribution to the US$4,800 million IGGI commitment was US$91,000,000 less than 2 per cent of the total.
Following the announcement Prawiro invited the World Bank to form a new consultative group for aid co-ordination.
Continued repercussions of "November 12 incident" 
Prior to the announcement of the cancellation of Netherlands aid, events continued to be dominated by the repercussions of the massacre of pro-independence demonstrators in East Timor in November 1991 [see pp. 38579-80; 38677; 38769-70].
The government succeeded in deterring a Portuguese "peace ship" , the Lusitania Expreso, from landing in East Timor in early March.
The vessel had left Portugal in January, docked in Darwin, Australia, on March 8, and set sail for East Timor on March 9.
Its 120 passengers, among whom were the former Portuguese President António Eanes, and students, politicians and reporters from 21 countries, intended to lay a wreath at the site of the November massacre, the Santa Cruz cemetery in Dili.
However, the ship turned back on March 11 after coming within two miles of Indonesian territorial waters.
Indonesia, which had on Feb. 25 declared its territorial waters closed to the ship [see pp. 38769-70], had deployed a number of warships to prevent the boat entering its waters.
The first trials of civilians arrested in Dili at the time of the November massacre opened in Dili on March 16.
Two students, Fernando de Araujo and Joao Freitas de Camara, were charged with subversion.
Another three Timorese went on trial on March 17 accused of "general crimes" .
A spokesman of the left-wing nationalist guerrilla movement Fretílín announced on March 12 that the organization's second-in-command, Jose da Costa, had escaped from a military hospital in Dili.
Da Costa had reportedly been captured by Indonesian forces in January.
ASIA — PACIFIC
PAPUA NEW GUINEA
Military raids against Solomon Islands
Commando units from Papua New Guinea (PNG) launched raids on the Solomon Islands on March 12 and March 17 in order to destroy a fuel storage depot.
The attacks were motivated by the belief that the depot had been used to supply the Bougainville Revolutionary Army (BRA) in its secessionist war against the PNG government.
The raids led to a strong diplomatic protest from the Solomons' Prime Minister Solomon Mamaloni, who described them as "provocative" .
Relations between the two neighbouring states had been tense in recent years because of the Bougainville conflict.
The close racial and cultural connections between the inhabitants of Bougainville and those of the Solomons, together with the geographical proximity of the territories, meant that BRA units had frequently operated from within Solomon Islands' territory and had often received unofficial military and political assistance.
After initially denying responsibility for the attacks, the PNG Prime Minister, Rabbie Namaliu, later made a formal and personal apology to Mamaloni.
Although Namaliu suggested that disciplinary action might be taken over the "regrettable incident" , he also expressed concern over the assistance allegedly being provided to the BRA by the armed forces of the Solomons.
Namaliu stressed that the raids had been authorized by field commanders rather than by the government, and suggested that similar occurrences could be avoided in the future if both countries co-operated in border surveillance measures to prevent BRA members from using Solomon Islands' territory.
ASIA — PACIFIC
PHILIPPINES
Release of US hostage — IMF approval of recovery programme
Police launched a series of raids in Manila on March 18, which culminated in the release of Michael Barnes, a US businessman who had been kidnapped in the city on Jan. 17.
Barnes was unhurt, but 14 people were reportedly killed and two arrested during the police action.
Barnes, vice-president and general manager of Philippine Geothermal — a subsidiary of the Union Oil Company of California (Unocal)— and director of the American Chamber of Commerce, was believed to have been abducted by members of the Red Scorpions, a breakaway faction from the rebel communist New People's Army (NPA).
The kidnappers were believed to have demanded a ransom from Unocal, which operated a power plant in Laguna Province and had reportedly received demands from the NPA to pay US$5,000,000 in "revolutionary taxes" .
This was the first kidnapping for ransom since November 1986, when the NPA had seized a Japanese executive, releasing him four months later after the payment of a ransom.
A second US citizen, Arvey Duane Drown, had been held in the Cordillera region in the north of the country since his abduction by NPA guerrillas in October 1990.
The rebels claimed that Drown, a former US Army officer, was assisting the Philippines military in its counterinsurgency campaign, an assertion denied by the US and Philippine authorities.
In negotiations conducted through church officials the NPA stated that Drown would be released only if government troops in the region ceased operations and returned to barracks.
The kidnappings, together with the NPA's continuing military campaign — the guerrillas had killed 41 government troops in a single ambush on Feb. 15, provided evidence that, contrary to recent government claims, the NPA was not a spent force.
It was generally accepted, however, that the organization was in some disarray as a result of splits over revolutionary doctrine and personal leadership.
The NPA's founding chairman, Jose Maria Sison, 52, who was based in the Netherlands, was believed to be committed to retaining the organisation's Maoist strategy of a peasant-based guerrilla war designed to control the rural areas and isolate the cities.
Others were in favour of an immediate switch in the emphasis of the guerrilla campaign from the country to the cities, while still others, including the Philippines-based acting chairman, Benito Tiamzon, advocated greater pragmatism, including the possibility of gaining power through participation in elections.
It was reported on March 3 that a senior NPA member, Ricardo Capili Reyes, had been apprehended at a checkpoint in Manila.
IMF approval of economic recovery plan
Finance Secretary Jesus Estanislao announced on March 5 that the board of the IMF had formally approved an economic plan by the Philippines designed to curb inflation and reduce public spending.
The approval, which was considered a formality following IMF endorsement of the plan in February, enabled the Philippines to proceed with its scheme to restructure US$5,300 million of its debt to commercial banks, and also facilitated the release of the remaining $US80,000,000 of a US$400 million package of IMF credits held since 1990.
The IMF had suspended lending to the Philippines in July 1991 after the Aquino government had failed to meet various fiscal targets [see p. 38769].
ASIA — PACIFIC
NORTH-SOUTH KOREA
Progress of nuclear inspection negotiations — Talks on implementation of December reconciliation agreement
The recent dramatic progress in relations between North and South Korea appeared threatened in March by continuing disagreements over the issue of international and bilateral inspections of nuclear facilities.
In December 1991 the two states had negotiated a non-aggression agreement and an accord to prohibit nuclear weapons from the Korean peninsula.
These became effective on Feb. 19, when they were formally signed and exchanged at the sixth round of Premiers' talks in Pyongyang [see pp. 38766-67].
North Korea had also signed long-delayed nuclear inspection accords with the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) at the end of January, but had stated that these would not become effective until ratified by the Supreme People's Assembly — the country's legislature — which was unlikely to occur before April.
If ratification went ahead in April, the North Korean government would then be obliged to declare all of its nuclear sites to the IAEA, and submit by May a precise inventory of all the uranium and plutonium which they contained.
This would open the way for the first full IAEA inspection to take place in June at the earliest.
At the beginning of March both the USA and the IAEA were pressurizing North Korea to allow inspections of its nuclear facilities to begin before June.
The most immediate object of international concern was a complex located near the Yongbyon river, 100 km north of Pyongyang, which included two large nuclear reactors and a nuclear fuel reprocessing plant.
According to US intelligence reports North Korea was only a matter of months away from acquiring nuclear weapons capability.
Concern was heightened by the knowledge that, since the late 1970s, the North Koreans had also been developing ballistic missiles capable of carrying nuclear warheads.
Also, unlike the nuclear programmes of many developing countries, that of North Korea was not highly dependent on foreign equipment or expertise but was largely self-sufficient.
Amidst suspicions that the North Korean government was prevaricating in order to relocate and conceal evidence of its nuclear weapons programme, the South Korean and US governments on March 2 reiterated their demand that North Korea had to submit to inter-Korean and IAEA inspections by April and May respectively.
The most likely means of achieving agreement on this appeared to lie in the dialogue over the formation of a Joint Nuclear Control Committee (JNCC)— the instrument of inter-Korean nuclear inspection contained within the joint denuclearization declaration — which had begun on Feb. 27.
At the seventh session of talks, on March 14, an agreement was reached to establish the JNCC within the next week.
It was also agreed that both sides "shall jointly make efforts to adopt documents for the verification of the denuclearization of the Korean peninsula within two months after the first meeting of the North-South Joint Nuclear Control Committee" , and that inspections would begin within 20 days of the adoption of these documents.
The JNCC held its first meeting on March 19 at which both sides were reported to have put forward proposals.
Whereas the South's contribution was reportedly focused on timing, inspection site selection, inspection procedures and post-inspection measures, the North's proposals concentrated primarily on achieving international guarantees for a nuclear-free Korean peninsula and the opening to inspection of US military bases in South Korea.
Although little headway was made at the meeting, the committee agreed to meet again on April 1.
Other avenues of North-South dialogue
Despite the rising tension over the nuclear issue the new avenues of contact stipulated by the December 1990 Agreement on Reconciliation, Non-aggression, Exchange and Co-operation went ahead as scheduled.
The three new subcommittees each met in Panmunjom, but none of them produced any significant progress.
The first meeting of the North-South Political Subcommittee was held on March 9.
Both sides discussed proposals for implementing the measures contained within the December 1991 reconciliation agreement.
The subcommittee held a second meeting on March 27, and agreed to meet again on April 23.
The North-South Military Subcommittee held its inaugural meeting on March 13, with both sides proposing ways of implementing the non-aggression elements of the December accord.
The atmosphere of the meeting was strained by the failure to agree upon the formation of the JNCC, and by the issue of nuclear inspections.
A second meeting was held on March 31.
The North-South Exchanges and Co-operation Subcommittee met on March 18, and agreed to prepare a supplementary agreement on inter-Korean exchanges and co-operation for signature at the next round of Premiers' talks in Seoul on May 5.
ASIA — PACIFIC
JAPAN
Difficulties of Miyazawa government — Progress of scandals — Approval of budget — Visit by Russian Foreign
Minister
The beleaguered government of Kiichi Miyazawa, beset by scandals, economic recession and falling levels of popularity, suffered a further blow on March 8 with the loss of the Miyagi prefecture by-election.
The defeat, the second in a by-election to the House of Councillors (the upper chamber of the Diet) within a month, occurred despite the investment of huge campaign resources.
It intensified speculation concerning Miyazawa's future as leader of the Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) and, therefore, as Prime Minister.
The Miyagi by-election victor Koki Hagino, the candidate of Rengo-no-kai (the political arm of Japan's largest labour organization), polled 396,532 votes compared with the 393,615 votes won by the LDP candidate, Nobuo Onodera, and 67,378 votes achieved by Hisashi Tsujihata, the candidate of the Japan Communist Party.
Hagino was also supported by the principal opposition party, the Social Democratic Party of Japan (SDPJ), and three smaller parties: the Democratic Socialist Party (DSP), the United Social Democratic Party and the Progressive Party.
An identical opposition coalition had backed the victorious Rengo-no-kai candidate in the Nara prefecture by-election on Feb. 9.
Prior to the Miyagi defeat most commentators had expected Miyazawa to survive as party leader at least until the elections for half of the 252 upper house seats, scheduled for July.
However, the two by-election defeats together with consistently poor opinion poll ratings, appeared to have increased pressure — particularly from those 75 LDP legislators whose seats were at stake in July — for Miyazawa to be replaced prior to the election.
With the party apparently heading for defeat, however, no senior members of the LDP appeared eager to succeed Miyazawa before the July poll.
Progress of current spate of scandals
The two main issues in the Miyagi contest were the state of the country's economy, and the current spate of scandals surrounding the Miyazawa government.
The success of Hagino in exploiting the scandals issue provided further impetus for the opposition's campaign to investigate the extent of the government's involvement in (i) the Kyowa bribery scandal, which had already resulted in Fumio Abe, a close aid and ally of Miyazawa, being charged with accepting bribes from a steel frame manufacturer;(ii) the Sagawa Kyubin scandal, in which it was alleged that up to 200 Diet members had accepted bribes from a transport firm with criminal connections; and (iii) the Recruit affair, which had forced Miyazawa's resignation as Finance Minister in 1988 [For details of recent scandal developments see pp. 38720-21].
Hiroyasu Watanabe, the former president of Tokyo Sagawa Kyubin — the regional affiliate at the heart of the Sagawa Kyubin affair — was indicted on March 6.
Together with three associates he was charged with organising 64,500 million yen in improper loans.
The first Cabinet member to be linked with the Sagawa scandal was Transport Minister Keiwa Okuda, who on March 1 admitted that the salary of one of his aides had been paid for by the transport group at the centre of the scandal.
Nevertheless, as the month progressed it became clear that the scandal involved opposition party members as well as members of the LDP.
A senior SDPJ legislator, Ryoichi Yasutsune, agreed to resign from the party on March 16 after admitting that he too had received funds from Tokyo Sagawa Kyubin.
Although he insisted that he had done nothing remiss — he admitted receiving a 5,000,000 yen loan from an associate of the firm in 1989 but claimed to have repaid the money — he agreed to resign from the party (but not from the Upper House) for having caused embarrassment to the SDPJ.
The president of Daiwa Securities, Japan's second-largest securities company, resigned on March 11 in connection with a stock scandal which threatened to reignite the controversy over the relationship between brokers and major clients which had been at the root of a series of scandals in mid-1991 [see pp. 38292; 38342-42].
Masahiro Dozen announced his resignation after Daiwa reported a loss of 72,000 million yen as a result of the settlement of claims against the company by five major clients.
The loss resulted from a practice known as tobashi, which involved brokers shifting investment losses by one client to another, in order to prevent a favoured client from having to report the loss.
Although the Recruit scandal had broken in 1989, the protracted series of criminal trials resulting from the investigation — together with the renewed opposition interest in Miyazawa's role in the affair — had the effect of making it once again a contemporary issue.
On March 24 Takeshi Kato, a former vice-Minister of Labour, was given a two-year suspended prison sentence and a fine of 6,810,000 yen after being found guilty of accepting bribes from Recruit.
He was the fourth person to be convicted on charges arising from the scandal; charges against eight others, including former Cabinet Secretary Takao Fujinami, remained outstanding.
Approval of budget
One of the factors widely deemed as critical to Miyazawa's chances of short-term survival was the need to obtain Diet approval for the 1992 budget by April 1, the beginning of the fiscal year.
The budget debate had been delayed by opposition demands for an investigation into the government's role in the various scandals.
In late February the opposition parties had boycotted the budget hearings in pursuit of its demand that former Prime Minister Zenko Suzuki and former state minister Jun Shiozaki — both of whom were members of the Miyazawa faction of the LDP — testify concerning their links with the steel frame manufacturer Kyowa Company.
The boycott was sufficient to force both to testify before a special session of the lower house budget committee on Feb. 25.
Suzuki admitted that he had received 10,000,000 yen from Abe which he had neither declared as a political donation nor as personal income, and Shiozaki acknowledged the receipt of 20,000,000 yen but denied that it had been a bribe.
On Feb. 28 the boycott was again imposed in order to force testimony from Fumio Abe who had earlier been indicted for receiving money in the Kyowa scandal.
The opposition agreed in early March to halt its campaign of disruption, and on March 13 the 72,200,000 million yen budget was passed by 268 votes to 211 in the lower house (US$1.00=133.926 yen as at March 16, 1992).
It was expected that the budget would be passed by the upper house.
Even if it was rejected, however, under the terms of the country's constitution approval by the lower house was sufficient for it to become law within 30 days regardless of its fate in the upper chamber.
The budget represented an increase in spending of 2.7 per cent, the lowest in five years.
Military spending was set to rise by 3.78 per cent, the lowest increase for 32 years.
The budget also included plans to give the economy a mild boost through increased spending on public works, funded by a modest rise in borrowing.
LDP by-election victory
The Miyazawa government received another boost late in the month when the LDP won two lower house seats in the rural Gunma prefecture on March 29, including one previously held by the SDPJ.
Opinion polls taken in late March, however, continued to suggest that Miyazawa was in serious trouble, his approval rating having fallen to 26.5 per cent, compared with 32.5 per cent in February and 55.5 per cent in November 1991.
Implementation of new law against gangsters
The first comprehensive law against the 90,000-strong yakuza — criminal syndicates — went into operation on March 1.
It was estimated that the yakuza consisted of some 3,300 separate gangs, although the three largest organizations — the Yamagushi-gumi, the Inagawa-kai and the Sumiyoshi-kai — were responsible for almost half of all activity by the gangs.
The new law empowered police to designate as criminal syndicates those organizations which met certain criteria, including a proportion of convicted felons among their membership.
Once designated, a syndicate would become more vulnerable to police scrutiny, particularly in areas of non-violent crime such as extortion, loan-sharking, drug-dealing and prostitution.
Visit by Russian Foreign Minister
The Russian Foreign Minister, Andrei Kozyrev, visited Japan on March 19-22 for discussions concerning the longstanding territorial dispute over the Kurile Islands, known in Japan as the Northern Territories.
Although both sides acknowledged the difficulty of resolving the dispute, the tone of the visit was positive.
Kozyrev suggested that Russia would honour the 1956 bilateral agreement under which the Soviet Union had offered to return two of the four disputed territories to Japan.
The visit followed a meeting between Miyazawa and Russian President Boris Yeltsin at the UN headquarters in New York in January 1992, when it had been confirmed that Yeltsin would visit Japan in September 1992, and when Yeltsin reportedly gave assurances that Russia would honour the 1956 agreement.
In the following month the Japanese Deputy Foreign Minister, Kunihiko Saito, had visited Moscow for the first working-level negotiations on the dispute since the termination of the Soviet Union.
On Feb. 11 Saito restated the belief that Japanese public opinion would prevent the extension of economic assistance to Russia while the territorial dispute remained outstanding.
He also stated, however, that the two days of talks had been fruitful and that the Russian government was "much more positive, much more serious" about negotiating a treaty with Japan than had been its Soviet predecessor.
ASIA — PACIFIC
BANGLADESH
On March 15 the Interior Ministry announced that it was to drop the charges pending against about 6,000 people for illegal political activities during the regime of Gen. Hossain Mohammad Ershad.
On March 22 the former President and three others were charged with profiting personally from the purchase of aircraft by the government in 1989.
ASIA — PACIFIC
BHUTAN
On March 11 Bhutan signed an agreement with Bangladesh on expanding bilateral trade and economic co-operation.
ASIA — PACIFIC
BRUNEI
Brunei established diplomatic relations with Vietnam on Feb. 29 (during a visit to the country by Vietnamese Premier Vo Van Kiet), and with Czechoslovakia on March 2.
EUROPE
FRANCE
Regional elections
In regional elections on March 22 the ruling Socialist Party (PS) of President François Mitterrand polled only 18.3 per cent of the vote in metropolitan France, compared with 29.88 per cent at the last regional elections in 1986.
Libération of March 23 declared: "These elections mark without doubt the end of the Mitterrand years." 
The vote marked a rejection of all the traditional parties of government, with the centre-right Union for France (UPF — comprising the Gaullist Rally for the Republic — RPR — and the centrist Union for French Democracy — UDF) together polling only 33 per cent(39.3 per cent in 1986).
The extreme right-wing National Front (FN) led by Jean-Marie Le Pen polled 13.9 per cent nationally (9.7 per cent in 1986) and 19.76 in its heartland — Provence-Alpes-Côte d'Azur.
The two environmentalist parties (the Greens led by Antoine Waechter and Génération Ecologie led by Environment Minister Brice Lalonde) between them also polled 13.9 per cent of the vote.
The elections were conducted on the basis of proportional representation.
At stake were 1,671 seats on metropolitan France's 22 conseils régionaux (regional councils) and 158 seats on the four overseas conseils régionaux.
These had been directly elected for the first time in 1986 [see p. 34305].
The turnout was 68.7 per cent.
During the campaign several FN rallies were cancelled because the authorities feared violence.
Le Pen accused the PS of creating "an atmosphere of violence to intimidate FN supporters" .
On March 12 Bernard Tapie, who was chair of the Adidas sports concern and owner of the Marseilles football club, and who headed an "Energie-Sud" list backed by the PS in Provence-Alpes-Côte d'Azur, was fined F1,500 (US$265) for calling the FN and those who voted for it "salauds" ( "bastards" ) at a rally on Jan. 28; he was also ordered to pay symbolic damages of one franc each to three FN leaders.
The PS won 24.84 per cent in Provence-Alpes-Côte d'Azur.
Towards the end of the campaign the PS changed its tactics and was among the groups which refused to participate in an anti-Le Pen rally in Paris on March 18.
The march was attended by 3,500 (as compared with 100,000 at a similar march in January — see p. 38736) and passed peacefully except that afterwards members of a Trotskyist group, the Revolutionary Communist Youth, broke away and battled with the police preventing them from reaching a hall where Le Pen was speaking.
On March 19 demonstrations were held by over 100,000 students nationwide in protest at the government's planned reforms — intended to reduce the high failure rate among first degree students — which students maintained would made the university system more selective.
Cantonal elections
Also on March 22 the first round of cantonal elections were held for 2,025 general councillors (including 79 overseas), with a second round on March 29 [for last cantonal elections in 1985 see p. 36705].
Of the 96 metropolitan départements the PS remained in the majority on 20 (26 in 1985 and 43 in 1979).
The turnout on March 22 was 70.23 per cent and on March 29 was 62.01 per cent.
French election results (metropolitan France, Interior Ministry figures)
Resignation of Soisson
In the ensuing (indirect) elections for the presidents of the new conseils régionaux, the PS was sucessful only in Limousin.
Both Jean-Pierre Soisson and Jean-Marie Rausch (Minister for the Civil Service and Administrative Modernization and Minister-Delegate for Posts and Telecommunications respectively and both members of France-unie), elected regional presidents of Burgundy and Lorraine respectively, were allegedly assisted by FN deputies in the second round of voting.
As a result Cresson dismissed Soisson (who declined to resign from his Burgundy post) from the Cabinet on March 28, while Rausch decided not to take up his regional post.
[Cresson's resignation as Prime Minister on April 2 will be covered in the April News Digest.]
Closure of Renault works at Billancourt
On March 31 the Renault car plant on the Seguin island in the Seine at Billancourt, south-west Paris, was closed after 94 years in operation, ending an era of French industrial history.
Renault had decided two years previously to close the plant, with the loss of 4,000 jobs; production was moved to more functional and efficient sites in north-east France.
EUROPE
BELGIUM
Belgian Cabinet
**Jean-Luc Dehaene (CVP) Prime Minister
**Guy Coëme (PS) Deputy Prime Minister; Communications and Public Enterprises
**Willy Claes (SP) Deputy Prime Minister; Foreign Affairs
**Melchior Wathelet (PSC) Deputy Prime Minister; Justice and Economic Affairs Philippe Maystadt (PSC) Finance
**Philippe Moureaux (PS) Social Affairs
*Jean-Maurice Dehousse (PS) Scientific Policy
**Robert Urbain (PS) Foreign Trade and European Affairs
*Freddy Wyllockx (SP) Pensions
**Louis Tobback (SP) Interior and Public Affairs
**Miet Smet (CVP)(f) Employment and Labour responsible for equality policy between men and women
*André Bourgeois (CVP) Agriculture; Small and Medium-sized Enterprises
*Leo Delcroix (CVP) National Defence
*Laurette Onkelinx (PS)(f) Social Integration
*Mieke Offeciers-Van De Wiele (CVP)(f) Budget
**Eric Derijcke (SP) Secretary of State for Development Co-operation attached to Claes
* New appointment.
** Altered or additional responsibilities.
Women are denoted by (f).
Formation of government
On March 7 Jean-Luc Dehaene was appointed Prime Minister in place of Wilfried Martens, who had held the post for nearly 13 years as the head of nine different coalitions.
Negotiations to form a government had continued for more than three months, following the general election of Nov. 24, 1991 [see p. 38589], before the four parties in the outgoing coalition eventually agreed to continue in office.
Dehaene, 51, came from the trade union wing of the Flemish Christian Socials (CVP); he had negotiated the formation of the last coalition in 1988 [see pp. 36047-49]and was seen as an expert mediator.
In the outgoing government he had been a Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Communications and Institutional Reform.
The coalition parties were the two Christian Social parties (the CVP and the Walloon Parti social chrétien — PSC), and the two Socialist parties (the Flemish Socialistische Partij — SP and the Walloon Parti socialiste — PS).
Between them they commanded 120 seats in the 212-member Chamber of Representatives, but fell well short of the two-thirds majority required to approve any constitutional changes.
Government programme
Presenting his government programme on March 9 Dehaene said that priorities were (i) completion of the constitutional reforms started under Martens [see p. 38465];(ii) "social renovation" ; and (iii) reducing the public debt and the budget deficit.
On March 16 the government announced tax changes effective April 1.
The top rates of value added tax (VAT)— of 25 and 33 per cent— would be abolished and the standard VAT rate raised from 19 to 19.5 per cent .
New spending on defence was to be frozen and civil service recruitment limited.
For Belgium to qualify for the European Communities' final stage of economic and monetary union [see p. 38658], the budget deficit would have to be reduced from the current 6.4 per cent of gross domestic product (GDP) to 3 per cent by 1996.
Anti-racist march
On March 22 an anti-racist demonstration was attended by between 65,000 and 150,000 people, protesting in particular against the anti-immigrant rhetoric of the right-wing Flemish nationalist Vlaams Blok which had gained ground in the November election.
EUROPE
UNITED KINGDOM
1992-93 budget — Election announcement
The Chancellor of the Exchequer, Norman Lamont, on March 10 presented the budget for the financial year beginning April 5, the last to be presented to the House of Commons during the Conservative government's third term of office.
Lamont declared it to be a "budget for recovery" which he predicted would "start slowly but gather pace" .
The only change to the personal taxation system was the reduction of the basic rate of tax on the first £2,000 of taxable income to 20 per cent from 25 per cent at a cost of £1,770 million.
Lamont described the move as "a decisive first step towards the government's objective of a 20 pence [in the pound]basic rate" .
Although the tax cuts were lower than many commentators had predicted, Lamont forecast a higher public-sector borrowing requirement (PSBR) for both the 1991-92 and 1992-93 financial years than had been expected by financial analysts.
He estimated the 1991-91 PSBR at £13,800 million (2.25 per cent of GDP) and the 1992-93 PSBR at £28,100 million (4.5 per cent of GDP).
Lamont also announced a reform of the UK budget system, hitherto presented in two parts, with expenditure plans announced in the autumn economic statement and revenue measures detailed in the March budget.
Adopting a Labour Party proposal, Lamont said that from December 1993 the two parts would be combined.
Ending months of intense speculation, Prime Minister John Major announced on March 11 that the general election would be held on April 9.
Parliament was dissolved on March 16, with the last days of business occupied almost exclusively with the Finance Bill which incorporated the fiscal measures announced in the budget.
Crisis at Lloyd's
Lloyd's, the international insurance market, faced a growing crisis during February and March as investors, making allegations of negligence and fraud, instigated legal proceedings.
An out-of-court settlement on Feb. 15 gave 987 "names" — individuals whose assets support underwriting at Lloyd's — £116,000,000 in compensation for massive losses sustained in reinsurance contracts assumed in 1982 by a number of Lloyd's agents, the most prominent of which was RHM Outhwaite Underwriting; the "names" had alleged negligence and breach of contract by the underwriters.
Their victory encouraged other "names" to take grievances against Lloyd's to court and several sought court injunctions to prevent Lloyd's drawing from deposits to cover losses.
By the end of the month there were reports of "names" in Australia, Canada and the USA taking similar action.
The Feb. 15 settlement also coincided with moves by 25 Conservative members of parliament who were "names" to press the government to tighten measures regulating Lloyd's.
Lloyd's responded to the criticism by appointing Sir David Walker, chairman of the Securities and Investment Board and a member of the Lloyd's Council, to head an independent inquiry into allegations of malpractice.
By the time of the committee's first meeting on March 5 controversy had mounted further still as allegations were made that "names" working inside Lloyd's had an unfair advantage in trading at the insurance market.
On March 31 the Association of Lloyd's Members, representing over 9,000 "names" , circulated figures which suggested that losses at Lloyd's for 1989 could reach almost £1,650 million.
Asylum for refugee
On March 4 temporary permission to remain in the UK was granted to a Sudanese man who fled racist attacks in Germany.
The ruling was made on the grounds that he had a "well-founded fear of persecution in Germany" where monitoring groups had reported an increase in racist attacks [see also p. 38782].
It marked the first occasion on which the UK had taken steps to grant political asylum to a refugee from another Western country.
The refugee was one of several people travelling on false documents who, when detained in the UK, asked for asylum not only from their countries of origin but also from Germany.
Legalizing of homosexual activity
On March 31 the parliament of the Isle of Man, the House of Keys, bowing to international pressure, lifted legislation prohibiting homosexual sex.
EUROPE
NORTHERN IRELAND
Resumption of all-party talks
The inter-party talks on the future of Northern Ireland, initiated by the United Kingdom Northern Ireland Secretary Peter Brooke, resumed briefly on March 9.
The talks between the leaders of four parties — James Molyneaux of the Ulster Unionist Party, the Rev. Ian Paisley of the Democratic Unionist Party, John Hume of the Social Democratic and Labour Party and John Alderdice of the Alliance Party — had been suspended in January [see p. 38738].
The four parties agreed to reconvene having received assurances from UK Prime Minister John Major and UK Labour Party leader Neil Kinnock that talks would be held on the same basis whatever the outcome of the general election.
The meeting was, however, adjourned at the end of March 9 and no further discussions were held since the parties agreed that talks would be suspended following the formal announcement of the UK general election, which was made on March 11 [see p. 38821].
EUROPE
GERMANY
Resignation of Defence Minister
Gerhard Stoltenberg, 63, resigned as Defence Minister on March 31.
He was replaced by Volker Rühe, 49, the general secretary of the Christian Democratic Union (CDU).
Stoltenberg's resignation followed a controversy over the sale of German armoured vehicles to Turkey, and the widespread public condemnation of their use by Turkish government forces in an offensive against Kurds in south-east Turkey [see p. 38834].
Foreign Minister Hans-Dietrich Genscher told a news conference on March 26 that "the persecution of the Turkish civilian population by military units was unacceptable" .
Military equipment which had belonged to the East German army had been supplied to Turkey during the Gulf war in 1991 on condition that it was only used to defend the borders of Turkey or other NATO member-states.
All German arms supplies to Turkey were suspended on March 26, but it was then revealed on March 27 that 15 Leopard-1 main battle tanks had been supplied illegally to Turkey in late 1991, due to a "bureaucratic error" and in contravention of a parliamentary ban of Nov. 7 on further deliveries of Leopard tanks supplied under a 1988 agreement.
The Turkish government responded with indignation to the German move, repeating previous allegations that Germany supported the PKK at a political level.
In an interview with the Cumhuriyet newspaper of March 29 President Özal of Turkey said that since unification Germany had sought "to intervene everywhere…to prove that it was a major power" and that "in the past Hitler's Germany did the same thing, although in other ways" .
Stoltenberg, who had already been criticized in October 1991 over the illegal sale of arms to Israel [see p. 38687], was the CDU's longest-serving Cabinet member.
He had been the Land Minister President in 1971-82 in Schleswig-Holstein, where his resignation from the federal government was expected to be a factor in elections in early April.
New Mecklenburg-West Pomerania Minister President
Alfred Gomolka (CDU) resigned on March 16 as Minister President of Mecklenburg-West Pomerania over the privatization of the five main shipyards in the region.
He was replaced on March 19 by Berndt Seite, the CDU Land general secretary.
Gomolka had lost a vote of confidence on March 14 after dismissing his Justice Minister, Ulrich Born, who had criticized his handling of the privatization.
As announced on March 10 two shipyards in the Rostock area were to be sold to the Norwegian firm Kvaerner and one in Wismar to the German concern Bremer Vulkan; the already much reduced workforce of 10,300 at these yards would be cut to 7,000.
Buyers had still to be found for the other two shipyards.
During March nearly half the total eastern German shipbuilding workforce of 20,000 had occupied yards in the region in protest at their sale to several different companies.
Gomolka was the third Minister President to resign within a year in eastern Germany [for those in Saxony-Anhalt in July 1991 and Thuringia in February 1992 see pp. 38354; 38782].
Other developments concerning eastern Germany
A Bundestag (lower house of federal parliament) debate on March 12 set up a commission of inquiry into the former East German regime.
It would comprise 16 parliamentary deputies and 11 private citizens and would be headed by Rainer Eppelmann, a leading peace campaigner and dissident under the former East German regime.
Eppelmann said that the inquiry would, by the end of 1993, produce "a judgment of communism and its methods" .
On March 4 the leader of the alternative New Forum/Alliance 90 on a local Brandenburg council, Detlef Dalk, committed suicide in protest at the federal government's property restitution policy.
[For Bundestag member's suicide in February see p. 38782.]
On March 10 Gustav Just resigned as a Social Democrat (SPD) deputy in the Brandenburg parliament after admitting that he had participated in the execution by firing squad of six Ukrainian Jews in July 1941.
On March 13 the lawyer Wolfgang Vogel was arrested on suspicion of having extorted property and money from at least 18 clients under the East German communist regime.
Vogel had negotiated the release of over 34,000 prisoners whose freedom was bought by West Germany, had arranged for some 250,000 people to leave East Germany and had also arranged spy swaps.
He was released on bail on March 30.
On March 31 Hans Modrow, chair of the East German Council of Ministers from November 1989 to April 1990 and a former head of the communist Socialist Unity Party (SED) in Dresden, was charged in Dresden with electoral fraud in the May 1989 local elections [see also pp. 38782; 37827].
His immunity as a Bundestag deputy had been lifted on March 19.
EUROPE
AUSTRIA
Cabinet reshuffle
Chancellor Franz Vranitzky in late March carried out a minor Cabinet reshuffle which affected only the posts held by his own Social Democratic Party (SPÖ).
Rudolf Streicher, the SPÖ candidate in the presidential election due in April [see p. 38590], left the government, and was replaced by Viktor Klima, 44, as Minister of Transport and Public Economy.
Michael Ausserwinkler, 35, replaced Harald Ettl as Minister for Health, Consumer Protection and Sport, while Brigitte Ederer, 36, replaced Peter Jankowitsch as a Minister at the Chancellery.
Controversy within FPÖ
On March 4 a majority within the leadership of the right-wing Liberal Party of Austria (FPÖ) backed the party chair, Jörg Haider, over a policy disagreement which had precipitated resignations on the party's more moderate liberal wing.
Georg Mautner Markhof, 65, a leading industrialist, had announced his resignation as an FPÖ vice-president on Feb. 27.
Shortly afterwards the FPÖ presidential candidate, Heide Schmidt, claimed that an FPÖ deputy in the Nationalrat (lower house of parliament), Andreas Mölzer (who enjoyed Haider's support), did not represent the party when he declared that the German culture and people were being swamped.
Norbert Gugerbauer resigned as FPÖ leader in the Nationalrat on March 5 to make way for Haider's election to this post on March 10.
Formation of new "anti-party" 
On Feb. 4 the Economic Party (Wirtschaftspartei) was founded in Vienna.
Led by Martin Zumtobel, a leading retailer, the party saw itself as an "anti-party" strongly committed to the free market.
Amendment of anti-Nazi legislation
On Feb. 27 the Nationalrat voted unanimously to amend anti-Nazi legislation by reducing the minimum sentence for offences from five years to one, and making a specific crime the denial of the Nazi holocaust.
The move was intended to increase the number of successful prosecutions, of which there had been 14 since 1980, for neo-Nazi activities.
The FPÖ, which supported the legislation only "for reasons of state" , would reportedly have preferred legislation which also covered crimes committed by all totalitarian regimes including Stalinist communist ones.
The president of the Austrian Chamber of Engineers, Walter Lüftl, resigned on March 13, after protests over his statements (published by a neo-Nazi revue, Halt) describing the mass extermination of the Jews in concentration camps as "technically impossible" .
Waldheim visit to Germany
President Kurt Waldheim paid an unofficial visit to Munich, Germany, on March 27, and had lunch with German Chancellor Helmut Kohl and Bavarian Minister President Max Streibl.
Elected as President in 1987 amid controversy over his war record while serving in the German Army, Waldheim had not been received officially by any Western country, and the World Jewish Congress criticized Kohl for his "shocking lack of moral sensitivity" in breaching this de facto Western diplomatic boycott.
EUROPE
SWITZERLAND
Abolition of death penalty
On March 2 the Ständerat (upper house of the Federal Assembly) approved legislation abolishing the death penalty for wartime offences.
This bill had been approved unanimously by the Nationalrat (lower house) on Oct. 4.
[For government decision on issue in September 1991 see p. 38447.]
EUROPE
PORTUGAL
Resignation of Education Minister
The Education Minister Diamantino Gomes Durao was replaced on March 16 by Antonio Couto dos Santos, after a series of student strikes and demonstrations in late February and early March.
The protests had been triggered on Feb. 25 by the paper set in the 1992 General Access Test (PGA)(university entrance examination).
Teenagers in Lisbon, Oporto, Figueira da Foz and the Azores joined protests claiming that the paper assumed a level of general cultural knowledge which favoured those from wealthier backgrounds.
Durao had announced that those who had failed the paper would be able to re-take the exam in May, but the controversy had highlighted the need for reform in the Portuguese education system.
In the budget for 1992 announced on Jan. 20, 1992, spending on education had been increases by 19 per cent over the previous year.
New CDS leader
The party of the Christian Democrats, the Social Democratic Centre (CDS), chose Manuel Monteiro as its new president in late March.
He replaced Diogo Freitas do Amaral, who resigned in October 1991, after the party had polled only 4.4 per cent of the vote in that month's general election [see p. 38546].
EUROPE
SPAIN
Ibercorp scandal
In March rumours and fresh revelations continued to emerge concerning the governor of the Bank of Spain, Mariano Rubio Jiménez, and one of Spain's best-known financial services groups, Ibercorp.
Rubio had on Feb. 17 offered his resignation, but Economy and Finance Minister Carlos Solchaga had declined to accept it.
His present term as central bank governor expired on July 24, 1992.
The director of Ibercorp, Manuel de la Concha, had since 1965 been responsible for handling Rubio's personal investments, worth some 12,000,000 ptas (US$115,000).
There appeared to have been a possibility that, contrary to correct practice, financial information had passed between the two men.
Attention focused particularly on a company called Sistemas Financieros (SF) which was part of Ibercorp.
In the spring of 1990 a number of SF shareholders, including Rubio and former Finance Minister Miguel Boyer, appeared to have been protected from losses by means of insider knowledge.
On March 2 the Bank of Spain assumed responsibility for Banco Ibercorp, the merchant bank of Ibercorp, which was in deep financial difficulties and had failed to find a buyer.
On Feb. 20 Rubio had given evidence to the economic commission of the Congress of Deputies.
On Feb. 25, however, following fresh revelations in the El Mundo newspaper, the conservative Popular Party (PP) called for a wider parliamentary inquiry.
Some saw the affair as yet another move in the on-going feud between the left of the ruling Spanish Socialist Party (PSOE), headed by the party's deputy secretary-general Alfonso Guerra, and those on the right who supported Solchaga's policies of economic liberalization.
Boyer was a personal friend of Solchaga, and was also, as a prominent Madrid socialite, a favoured target for the left.
The question of possible mis-dealings by Rubio also raised sensitive issues at the level of the European Communities (EC), as the EC prepared to give to the central bank governors by the end of 1993 increased powers in determining monetary policy.
Catalan elections
In elections to the regional parliament of Catalonia on March 15, Jordi Pujol Soley was returned as president for a fourth term.
His conservative nationalist Convergence and Union (CiU) increased its majority in the 135-member parliament.
In the previous elections, held in 1988 [see p. 36359], the CiU had won 69 seats with 45.7 per cent of the vote.
It now had 71 (with 46.4 per cent of the vote), followed by the Socialist Party of Catalonia (PSC), with 39 seats and 27.3 per cent(compared with 42 and 29.7 per cent in 1988).
The more radical nationalist Catalan Republican Left (ERC), led by Angel Colom, won 11 seats with 8 per cent(six and 4.1 per cent in 1988), on a platform calling for a referendum on independence for Catalonia and the other autonomous regions.
The communist Catalan Initiative (IC) won seven seats with 6.4 per cent(nine seats and 7.7 per cent in 1988) and the People's Party also won seven, with 6 per cent (six seats and 5.3 per cent in 1988).
The Democratic and Social Centre (CDS) with 0.9 per cent of the vote did not gain representation (three seats and 3.8 per cent in 1988).
Voter turnout was relatively low, at 54.8 per cent(59.4 per cent in 1988).
Pujol was also the leader of the CiU at national level.
The party had 20 members in the Congress of Deputies in Madrid and, as a moderate nationalist movement, had increasingly good relations with the ruling PSOE.
Pujol had been president of the regional government since Catalonia became autonomous in 1979.
Capture of ETA leaders in France
On March 29 the French police captured three senior commanders of the Basque separatist organization Euzkadi ta Askatasuna (ETA).
They were the organization's military commander, Francisco Mugica Garmendia, one of its most important ideologues, José Luis Alvares Santacristina, and its logistics commander, Joseba Arregui Erostarbe.
The three were arrested after a house was stormed at Bidart, close to France's Atlantic coast.
Mugica was reputed to be a Marxist Leninist who had taken over the ETA leadership after the killing of his less hardline predecessor, Eduardo Moreno Bergaretxe, in 1976 [see p. 28087].
News of the arrests prompted demonstrations demanding the leaders' release in the Basque towns of San Sebastian and Ordizia.
On March 31 a parcel bomb blew up in the hands of a retired air force colonel in Madrid, in what was believed to be an ETA retaliation for the arrests.
Since the news in early March that the leading party in the Basque parliament, the Basque Nationalist Party (PNV) was, controversially, in a process of negotiation with ETA's political wing, Herri Batasuna, there had been increasing speculation that the Spanish government might be considering negotiating a settlement with more moderate elements within the ETA leadership.
Commemoration of expulsion of Jews
A ceremony at Madrid's only synagogue marked the 500 years since, on March 31, 1492, King Ferdinand and Queen Isabella of Spain gave Spanish Jews the choice of conversion to Christianity or expulsion under threat of death.
King Juan Carlos delivered a speech of reconciliation before an audience including Israeli President Chaim Herzog.
[See also p. 38834.]
EUROPE
ITALY
Killing of Lima — Other Mafia-style killings
The mafia was believed responsible for the killing on March 12 of Salvatore Lima, a member of the European Parliament (MEP) and an associate of Prime Minister Giulio Andreotti.
As general election campaigns got under way Andreotti on March 18 issued a communiqué to Italy's 92 civil governors warning that certain forces were attempting to disrupt the electoral process.
Lima was shot by two gunmen on a motorcycle which approached his car in Mondello, near Palermo, Sicily.
He was a former Christian Democrat (DC) mayor of Palermo and a member of the DC's national executive.
According to some press comment he had provided the link between the Mafia and the DC leadership and had thus been important in keeping Sicilian voters solidly behind the DC.
During the 1970s Lima had at least four times been the object of investigations by parliamentary commissions which had looked into his connections, as a member of local government, with the local construction sector in the 1960s.
He had always denied any allegations of improper dealings.
Some observers noted that the killing appeared to mark a new outbreak of conflict between old and new Mafia clans, which in spite of the electoral reforms approved in June 1991 [see pp. 38299-300]still expected to influence the outcome of elections.
On March 11 a local councillor of the Democratic Party of the Left (PDS — formerly the Communist Party), Sebastiano Corrado, was killed at Castellamare di Stabia near Naples.
He had criticized the role of the local Mafia-style organization, the Camorra, in providing medical and other supplies to the local health services.
On March 12 the Sicilian Salvatore Gaglio, secretary of the Bravante regional section of the Socialist Unity (PSU) party (formerly the Italian Socialist Party — PSI), was shot dead in Brussels.
Arrests of alleged Mafiosi
The arrests of 26 people in Palermo, Milan and Modena on March 18 came as part of a police operation to break up what was alleged to be a network operated by the Sicilian Mafia.
The police provided the press with details of the case, which appeared to implicate, among others, Giovanni Lo Cascio of the Corleonesi clan of the Mafia.
Lo Cascio was said to have established links with Colombian and Venzuelan drug cartels, while the financial side of the operation was the work of Ulrich Bahl, a German businessman who for some months had been imprisoned in the USA on charges of passing forged banknotes.
Another area of the operation had involved laundering profits through the illegal currency market in Russia, as well as trade in east European arms.
Arrest of Milan Socialist political activist
Mario Chiesa was arrested in the final week of February and accused of having used his position as director of a prestigious charitable institution in Milan, the Pio Albergo Trivulzio, an old people's home, for profit to the tune of US$9,650,000, partly by directing business towards Milan's leading firm of undertakers, whose director was a friend and a fellow socialist activist.
Although Chiesa was campaign director for the Socialist leader Bettino Craxi, the party was quick to expel him, and denied any knowledge of his illicit dealings.
Sentencing of Japanese Red Army member
On March 20 Junzo Okudaira was sentenced in absentia to life imprisonment after being found guilty of planting a car bomb which killed five people outside a US servicemen's club in Naples in 1988 [see p. 35989].
Okudaira was still at large and was said to be a member of the Japanese Red Army underground group.
EUROPE
SAN MARINO
Principal members of San Marino Congress of State
New coalition
On March 19 the majority Christian Democrats (PDCS) formed a coalition government with the Social Democrats (PSDS).
The PDCS had withdrawn from their alliance with the Progressive Democratic Party (PDP — until March 1990 the Communist Party — PCS) on Feb. 24, declaring that it regarded the coalition, which had been in office since 1986, as outmoded.
EUROPE
CIS
Foreign debt agreement
The major achievement of a meeting in Moscow on March 13 of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) was the agreement on repayment of the foreign debt of the former Soviet Union, made possible by a Ukrainian change of policy.
The Moscow meeting was attended by heads of government from six CIS member states, while Russia, Byelarus, Tajikistan and Turkmenistan sent plenipotentiary representatives, and Azerbaijan sent a non-plenipotentiary representative.
Tengiz Sigua, head of the Georgian government, was reported to have attended as an observer.
In October 1991 Ukraine had refused to sign the G-7 (Group of Seven industrialized countries) memorandum on joint responsibility [see p. 38537], and foreign credits to Ukraine had been frozen (except for a Can$50,000,000 credit opened by Canada in February), preferring to pay its 16.37 per cent share of the estimated $84,000 million debt independently.
However, Ukraine invited representatives from the other CIS states to meet on Feb. 25 to negotiate repayment mechanisms; at the meeting, which Russia had not attended, Ukraine had offered to become responsible for the share of the debt incurred by Moldova, Azerbaijan and Uzbekistan, which had also refused to sign the memorandum (their share of the debt being minimal).
It appeared that the "Paris Club" of Western creditor governments had softened its insistence that Ukraine should assume collective responsibility for the former Soviet Union's foreign debt, following a meeting between Vitold Fokin, the Ukraine Prime Minister, and Jean-Claude Trichet, the Paris Club president, on March 3.
It was agreed at the March 13 meeting that a special division of the former Soviet Vneshekonombank (Foreign Economic Bank — taken over by Russia [see p. 38581]), independent of any CIS state, would administer the debt.
An Interstate Council, to be chaired by Russia, Ukraine and one other CIS member in rotation, was formed to oversee repayment.
Decisions were to be adopted by 80 per cent of the votes.
Uzbekistan appended a document to the agreement detailing its objections.
On March 16 Fokin announced Ukraine's intention of signing the G-7 memorandum, defending the change of stance on the grounds of the concessions obtained by Ukraine on Vneshekonombank.
Other agreements signed at the March 13 meeting included pension provision, joint tax policy, and the servicing of the internal debt.
A protocol on banking, which asked the heads of central banks in CIS member states to set up a co-ordinating body, was reinforced by their decision to conduct a co-ordinated finance policy, reported on March 17.
A body to monitor prices was established and ordered to prepare a restricted list of goods for price regulation in inter-state deliveries.
The republics failed, however, to reach agreement on a council for railway transport (Ukraine objecting on the grounds that it resembled the former USSR Railway Ministry), and also on the organization of economic links.
The document on the formation of a customs union was not unanimously agreed.
States which did not consider a customs union to be necessary could conclude agreements with the customs union on a free-trade zone.
Heads of state summit in Kiev
CIS heads of state held a summit meeting in Kiev (Ukraine) on March 20.
The agenda included 21 items, grouped in two issues: the division of property of the former Soviet Union, and military problems.
The session was marked by the frank and abrasive attitude taken by Ukrainian President Leonid Kravchuk towards the CIS (whose collapse he apparently regarded as imminent) and his combative response when Russian President Boris Yeltsin suggested that the legal basis had been set for joint CIS armed forces.
The meeting was attended by the heads of state of all CIS members bar Turkmenistan (represented by the chair of the Supreme Soviet) and Azerbaijan (represented by a State Secretary).
As at the Moscow meeting, Georgia had observer status.
Uzbek President Islam Karimov chaired the session.
Ukraine put forward a proposal making all members of the CIS successors to the former Soviet Union and dividing its property abroad between them, in proportion to their original contribution.
However, the issue of the division of property was removed from the agenda on Yeltsin's proposal.
Nevertheless, a resolution acknowledged that "all CIS member states are the legal successors of the rights and obligations of the former Soviet Union" .
Russia had been internationally recognized as the successor on the formation of the CIS [seep. 38656].
A commission would be formed to discuss the relevant issues.
Col. Viktor Samsonov was appointed as Chief of General Staff, Gen. Yury Maksimov as strategic forces commander and Col.-Gen.
Vladimir Semenov as conventional forces commander.
The military budget was not discussed, although the issue of financing the armed forces had been passed on from a working meeting of CIS Defence Ministers on Feb. 27-28.
An agreement on the status of border troops was signed by five states.
The establishment of joint forces had been agreed by eight states in February [see p. 38771].
The issue of the division of the Black Sea Fleet [see p. 38732]had not yet been decided.
All the participant states accepted (although Turkmenistan did not sign) motions tabled by Kazakhstan on (i) setting up a group of military observers as a collective CIS peacekeeping force for preventing and settling conflicts arising on CIS member states' territory;(ii) banning the use or threat of force between member states; and (iii) collective action for the peaceful resolution of disputes and conflicts.
Russia and Kazakhstan established diplomatic relations on March 20.
Russian Federation Defence Ministry
Yeltsin issued a decree on March 16 creating a Russian Federation Defence Ministry, and temporarily took on the portfolio himself.
Proposals on the creation of a Russian Army were to be prepared.
On March 4 Yeltsin had transferred former Soviet troops serving in Germany, Poland, Mongolia and Cuba to Russian Federation jurisdiction on the formation of the Russian Defence Ministry.
In an interview on March 24, Shaposhnikov admitted that the Transcaucasus military district and the Caspian naval flotilla had been temporarily transferred to Russian jurisdiction.
Kazakhstan, Byelarus, Uzbekistan
On March 16 Kazakhstan announced that it was establishing a national guard of unspecified numbers, subordinate to the President.
On March 17, a further decree announced improved material provision for servicemen, including pay rises and housing.
It was reported on March 17 that the Uzbek Supreme Soviet Presidium had decided to recall within a month Uzbek servicemen from republics not in the CIS (the Baltic states and Georgia), from CIS member states establishing their own armed forces (Ukraine, Moldova and Azerbaijan) and from the Transcaucasus military district and Caspian flotilla.
The Byelarus Supreme Soviet on March 18 adopted a decision on setting up republican armed forces from March 20.
Reports said that they would number 90,000-100,000 in the first two years.
Nearly twice that number of former Soviet troops were currently stationed on its territory.
Transfer of nuclear weapons from Ukraine
Kravchuk announced at a press conference on March 12 that Ukraine was suspending the transfer of tactical nuclear weapons to Russia for their destruction, because of doubt over the safety of the weapons.
He claimed that they were being stockpiled rather than dismantled and that Ukraine could not guarantee they would "not fall into undesirable hands" .
Under the CIS agreement signed in December 1991, all tactical nuclear weapons in Ukraine were to be dismantled by July 1, 1992, and all strategic weapons by the end of 1994 [see p. 38655].
Kravchuk suggested that Ukraine might construct its own facilities for dismantling nuclear weapons.
The move provoked anger in Russia, and confusion ensued as Yeltsin told the Russian Supreme Soviet on March 18 that Kravchuk had reversed his decision and that the original deadline of July 1 would be observed; NATO officials claimed that identical assurances had been given by Ukraine.
This, however, was denied by Kravchuk on March 19, and at the Kiev summit he denied Yeltsin's claims of a telephone conversation between them over the issue on March 16.
Suspended publication of Pravda
The former organ of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, Pravda, announced on March 14 that it was suspending publication because of financial problems.
The Pressa (Pravda) publishing house, which in November became Russian property, had called in the paper's debts.
Pravda had been suspended temporarily by order of the Russian government in August, for its alleged support for the failed coup [see p. 38418].
Thereafter, with its circulation collapsing, it had been in a state of crisis.
Directors of Pressa's printing works in 18 towns had written to Russia's Minister for the Press and Mass Media, Nikolai Poltoranin, warning that because of financial difficulties, publication of central newspapers would cease in Russia's regions unless emergency measures were taken.
Broadcasting
Izvestiya of March 5 published a letter from Yegor Yakovlev, head of the Ostankino state television and radio company [for its formation in December see p. 38655], to CIS heads of state, proposing that an international broadcasting company be set up on the basis of the Ostankino company.
Yakovlev noted confusion over the role and financing of the Ostankino company between the Russian Federation and other CIS member states, and the perception of programmes as biased towards Russia.
The Ostankino company had agreed to pay the costs of transmission to the other CIS members for the first quarter of 1992, but no decisions had been reached on covering the costs for the rest of the year.
The issue was discussed at the Kiev summit and an agreement in principle reached on using ITAR-TASS (news agency) and Ostankino to cover the requirements of a "single [CIS]information space" .
EUROPE
RUSSIA
Russian Federation treaty
On March 31 a Federation Treaty was signed by 18 of the 20 autonomous republics within the Russian Federation, delimiting powers between the centre and the regions.
All 18 had initialled the treaty on March 13, but there had been some doubt before the final signature that Baskhkortostan would sign.
The treaty gave central bodies jurisdiction over international relations, minority rights, transport and economic policy.
The federal authorities and the republics would jointly control natural resources, taxation within the republics, and the principles of local self-administration.
In all other respects, the republics were given "complete state power on their territory" .
They were allowed to be "autonomous participants in international and foreign economic ties" .
The Federation Treaty was an important step towards the signing of a new Russian Constitution, which was planned for the Congress of People's Deputies (the highest legislative body) opening on April 6.
The Treaty defined the demarcation of powers between the federation and the constituent republics as a component element of the new Constitution.
The smaller regional administrative units had initialled the Treaty on March 18.
Under the new constitution, four of the five autonomous oblasti (regions) in the Russian Federation were to be upgraded to the status of republic (Adygey, Gorny Altai, Karachai-Circassia and Khakassia), making 20 in all.
Refusal to sign treaty by Tatarstan and Chechen-Ingushetia
Two autonomous republics, Tatarstan and Chechen-Ingushetia, both refused to initial or sign the Federation Treaty.
A referendum on self-government held on March 21 in Tatarstan was seen as posing a potential challenge to the integrity of the Russian Federation.
The referendum question, which gained a 61.4 per cent "yes" vote (81.6 per cent turnout), asked whether Tatarstan should be "a sovereign state, a subject of international law, which builds its relations with the Russian Federation…on an equal basis" .
The Russian Federation government's attempts to prevent the referendum included appeals from President Boris Yeltsin and a ruling by the Russian Constitutional Court that the wording of the referendum question was unconstitutional.
Tatarstan's population of about 4,000,000 included 51 per cent non-Tatars.
Observers believed that the referendum was intended to build legitimacy for at least greater economic control over Tatarstan's oil production (approximately 600,000 barrels per day), if not outright secession from Russia.
Tatar President Mintimer Shaymiyev said that the referendum was "a question of new relations and of a union with Russia as equals" .
Demands for the independence on Chechen-Ingushetia were discussed on March 12-14 in Sochi by Russian and Chechen delegations, who recommended negotiations on the issue in April.
Chechen President Dzhakhar Dudayev called on the oil-producing republics of Azerbaijan, Tatarstan, Bashkortostan and Turkmenistan to unite in defence of their interests against Russia.
A draft law passed by the Russian Federation Supreme Soviet on March 20 envisaged forming an Ingush republic in Russia within two years, thereby splitting Chechen-Ingushetia between the independence-seeking Chechenia and Ingushetia (which had declared its intention to remain a part of the Russian Federation).
A state commission would examine border issues, Cossack interests and the election of local bodies.
The law stated that the Chechen republic would be considered "after the settlement of the crisis in the republic" , where Dudayev was under pressure from his opponents.
On March 31 the broadcasting centre in the capital, Grozny, was captured by opposition forces and a state of emergency declared.
The military was reported to have remained neutral.
German statehood
A decree signed by Yeltsin on Feb. 21 envisaged measures to rehabilitate the statehood of Russian Germans within the Russian Federation.
As a first stage, German national districts would be established on the territory of Volgograd and Saratov oblast "without impinging on the interests of the local population" .
Attempted revival of USSR body
An attempt to hold a sixth extraordinary session of the defunct USSR Congress of People's Deputies ended in farce on March 17, when 217 of the original 2,250 deputies met for 50 minutes by candlelight outside Moscow, having failed to find a venue in the city.
On March 11, the Presidium of the Russian Supreme Soviet had condemned the plan as "an attempt on the state sovereignty of the Russian Federation" .
The Congress of People's Deputies had been created by former Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev to be a new legislative body for the Soviet Union, and was elected in 1989 [see pp. 36401; 36512-13].
In September 1991 it had effectively dissolved itself when new union structures were created after the failed coup [see p. 38415].
Deputies to the session elected a 14-person presidium, including Col. Viktor Alksnis, Gen. Albert Makashov and historian Roy Medvedev, and led by Sazhi Umalatova, who at the December 1990 Congress had called for a vote of no confidence in Gorbachev [see p. 37903].
About 15 resolutions declared, inter alia, the continued existence of the Soviet Union and the unconstitutional nature of the Commonwealth of Independent States.
Anatoly Lukyanov, one of the coup leaders, sent his greetings from prison.
A rally in Moscow on the evening of March 17 attracted about 70,000 demonstrators who called for the restoration of the Soviet Union.
The demonstration had at first been banned by the Moscow city soviet.
Economy
An ECU 500 million (about US$625 million line of credit for food and agricultural products guaranteed by the European Communities (EC) to the former Soviet Union, which had been delayed since November, was finally granted to Russia alone, it was announced on March 4 by Deutsche Bank, whose Luxembourg subsidiary was the lead bank of the consortium providing the credit.
The delay had been caused by uncertainty over the status of Vneshekonombank, the former Soviet foreign affairs bank, which had been taken over by Russia in December [see p. 38581].
A credit of ECU 1,250 million remained blocked, because Russia was refusing to accept EC conditions that CIS republics which wished to borrow submit to court action in the event of default on repayment.
Budget — Economic reforms
On March 27 the Russian Supreme Soviet rejected the government's draft budget for the second quarter of 1992 and ordered it to present a new version in April.
The freeing of oil prices was postponed until June from the target date of April 1.
The budget proposal provided for a deficit of 108,310 million roubles and for expenditure of 555,600 million roubles in the second quarter, and a 245,340 million roubles deficit and 2,103,000 million roubles expenditure for the whole year.
The first quarter deficit had been about 80,000 million roubles, although January and February had shown a 12,200 million rouble surplus, as concessions on social spending and tax cuts had been made towards the end of the first quarter.
Izvestiya of March 12 reported that officials were predicting a budget deficit in the first quarter of around 10 per cent of gross national product (GNP) against the government's target of 1 per cent.
On March 18 the Deputy Prime Minister in charge of social policy, Aleksandr Shokhin, announced a rise of over 100 per cent in the minimum wage from April, and a near doubling of pension rates.
The government decided on March 7 to lift price ceilings on bread, milk and other staples, and encouraged local administrations to use the savings on food subsidies to increase social security funds.
The State Committee for Statistics issued figures, quoted on Russian Television on March 18, showing that only 7 per cent of the population received what was considered to be the minimum sufficient income.
However, the Supreme Soviet criticized the government over its social protection measures.
Economy Minister Andrei Nechayev reported that volume of production had fallen in February by 12.5 per cent, compared with 15 per cent in January.
An International Labour Organization (ILO) report of March 30 said that the slump in production would mean that more than 15,000,000 jobs would be lost in the former Soviet Union in 1992 — 12 per cent of the workforce.
Foreign relations
Russian Foreign Minister Andrei Kozyrev made a working visit to Norway on March 7-8, signing a protocol on bilateral co-operation with his Norwegian counterpart Thorvald Stoltenberg.
On March 7, Kozyrev had held talks with Danish Foreign Minister, Uffe Ellemann-Jensen in Copenhagen; a fishing co-operation agreement was signed between Russia, Denmark and Greenland.
The Russian delegation to Denmark included representatives from the St Petersburg and Kaliningrad regions who discussed the development of transport, tourism and investment in the region.
From Norway Kozyrev went on to Belgium where he attended the March 10 North Atlantic Co-operation Council (NACC) meeting [see p. 38841].
Earlier, Kozyrev had visited Turkey and on Feb. 4 initialled a friendship and co-operation agreement with the Turkish Foreign Minister, Hikmet Cetin.
Italian President Francesco Cossiga began an official visit to Russia on March 30.
Among the topics discussed was Italian credits to Russia.
This followed a visit to Italy on March 8-18 by Economy Minister Nechayev.
It was agreed that 75 per cent of the Italian government's credits to the former Soviet Union granted in 1990, which had been delayed from December [see p. 38656], would go to Russia.
EUROPE
GEORGIA
Return of Shevardnadze
On March 6 Eduard Shevardnadze, the former Soviet Foreign Minister and for 13 years first secretary of the central committee of the Communist Party of Georgia, returned to his native Georgia for first time in three years.
Four days later the Military Council, which had ruled in Georgia since the flight of Zviad Gamsakhurdia in January [see pp. 38731-32], transferred its legislative and executive powers to a newly created State Council of which Shevardnadze was to be the chair.
The new body comprised 50 people including representatives of various minority groups described by the Guardian of March 11 as "at odds with Tbilisi during Gamsakhurdia's tenure" .
Its presidium included Shevardnadze as chair, Dzhaba Iosseliani (leader of the Mkhedrioni militia commander instrumental in toppling Gamsakhurdia) as deputy chair, Tengiz Sigua (hitherto acting as Prime Minister) and Tengiz Kitovani (head of the Georgian National Guard).
On March 12 some 70 pro-Gamsakhurdia deputies from the Supreme Council of the Republic, the former Georgian parliament, met across the border in Groznyy, the capital of the Chechen Ingushetia autonomous republic in Russia.
They approved a resolution declaring that "bloody events in Georgia were started by former party bureaucrats, communist mafia and criminal gangs" .
In a Russian television interview on March 30 Gamsakhurdia asserted that Shevardnadze was "the main character in those bloody events, that bloody putsch, and in the anarchy and destabilization which is obvious in Georgia now" .
Security situation — Fighting in west
On March 3 the curfew in Tbilisi, the Georgian capital, was extended until April 1.
Outbreaks of fighting continued during March especially in western Georgia, where Gamsakhurdia supporters held positions in the autonomous republic of Abkhazia, and further south around Zugdidi and the Black Sea port of Poti.
The Abkhaz parliament banned all rallies and imposed a curfew on March 2, although demonstrations continued in Sukhumi, the capital of Abkhazia [see also p. 38774].
In Zugdidi on March 9 an explosion at the police headquarters killed three policemen.
On March 12 a civilian helicopter transporting 18 Georgian National Guards was shot down near Zugdidi and its occupants taken hostage.
On March 13 there were reports that six militiamen had been killed in an attack on a military detachment.
A ceasefire agreement was signed in Zugdidi on March 17, and by the end of the month the pro-Gamsakhurdia forces had freed over 40 hostages, including (on March 21) the local commander of the National Guard, Georgiy Karkarashvili.
On March 28 Gamsakhurdia supporters seized four other towns in western Georgia — Tsalendzhikha, Khobi, Abasha, and Senaki.
The State Council gave the armed groups an ultimatum to lay down their arms by March 30 and to open transport routes.
By March 31 Gamsakhurdia forces were said to be in retreat although railways and roads were still blocked.
Situation in South Ossetia
In South Ossetia, an autonomous region within Georgia, sporadic fighting continued between Georgian forces and Ossetian separatists.
Across the border in North Ossetia (an autonomous republic within Russia), a group of Russian "volunteers" had arrived in late February in the regional capital, Vladikavkaz, according to the Georgian daily Sakartvelos Respublika of Feb. 27, ostensibly to "protect Russia's southern borders" , and a small number of these "volunteers" , apparently unarmed, had travelled on by helicopter to Tskhinvali, the South Ossetian capital.
The commander of the unit of Russian (formerly Soviet) Internal Troops still based in Tskhinvali made it clear, however, that the "volunteers" would not be allowed to mount attacks against Georgian villages, and that his forces were there "to prevent the Georgians and Ossetians…from drawing one another into a war" .
On March 20 an agreement in principle was reportedly reached between Georgian and North Ossetian officials to hold tripartite talks on South Ossetia in Vladikavkaz.
Recognition by EC and USA
On March 23 the European Communities (EC) recognized Georgia.
US recognition followed on March 24, when Georgia also joined the CSCE [see p. 38841]Georgia had not joined the CIS and was now the only former Soviet republic which was not a member of the UN [see also p. 38842].
Application for IMF membership — Abolition of taxes
The IMF reported on March 12 that Georgia had applied for membership, and on March 16 Shevardnadze met an IMF delegation.
According to the Guardian of March 11 he had already "set up a fund…to co-ordinate and encourage economic investment in Georgia" .
On March 18, in order to boost foreign economic activity, Georgia abolished (i) a registration tax for joint ventures introduced on Nov. 28, 1991;(ii) a 15 per cent customs duty levied on exported goods in transit; and (iii) an import tax.
EUROPE
AZERBAIJAN/ARMENIA
Nagorny Karabakh dispute
The conflict in the disputed Armenian-populated enclave of Nagorny Karabakh within Azerbaijan intensified sharply during March.
The ascendancy of nationalist forces within Azerbaijan and Armenian military gains forced the resignation of Azerbaijan's President Ayaz Mutalibov.
International mediation efforts began and there were fears that with the involvement of Turkey and Iran the conflict could spread.
A statement from Armenian President Levon Ter-Petrosyan on March 3 described Nagorny Karabakh as "Azerbaijan's internal affair" .
Armenia had no territorial claims on Azerbaijan (the statement thus reversing Armenia's claim to Nagorny Karabakh — see p. 37664); however, "any decision on Nagorny Karabakh must be adopted by the Azerbaijan leadership and the elected leaders of the Nagorny Karabakh republic" .
On March 6 the Nagorny Karabakh Supreme Soviet (established in December 1991 — see p. 38657) was reported to have established a defence council.
Military conflict
Azerbaijan claimed that an attack on the Azeri-populated town of Khojali (with a population of 10,000) in Nagorny Karabakh on Feb. 26-27 had left 1,000 dead, and decreed three days of mourning.
Armenia claimed that the reports were exaggerated to divert attention from large-scale Azeri attacks.
It appeared that Armenian militia had attacked a convoy of refugees from Khojali to Agdam (a town in Azerbaijan close to the Nagorny Karabakh border).
The Armenians for their part reported attacks on villages by Azeri forces, with that on Kazanchi resulting in 27 deaths on March 4-5, and the shooting down of a helicopter evacuating civilians from Nagorny Karabakh to the Armenian capital, Yerevan, on March 3, with 17 deaths.
A rocket attack was reported on Stepanakert, the capital of Nagorny Karabakh, on March 12, and Azeri forces reportedly attacked the town of Askeran, on the road to Stepanakert.
A temporary ceasefire agreed on March 11 was broken the following day.
Agdam came under Armenian fire on March 12, and the Azeri-held town of Shusha was surrounded.
Withdrawal of CIS troops
On Feb. 28, Marshal Yevgeny Shaposhnikov, Commander-in-Chief of Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) forces, ordered the withdrawal of CIS troops stationed in Nagorny Karabakh and on the Armenia-Azerbaijan border, and the destruction of all weaponry which could not be removed.
By March 9, helicopters had evacuated the 366th motorised infantry regiment from Stepanakert to Georgia.
According to an Izvestiya report of March 4, defections to both sides of the conflict and desertions had reduced the 1,800-strong regiment to 300-350 men.
The 7th and 4th Armies remained stationed in Armenia and Azerbaijan.
Ten officers taken hostage on March 8 by Armenian militia in return for arms were released on March 11, following negotiations with officers from Russia.
There were calls from Russian military leaders for the withdrawal of all CIS troops from the Transcaucasus region.
Resignation of Azerbaijan President
On March 6, during an extraordinary session of the Supreme Soviet, Mutalibov resigned, following an all-night demonstration outside the parliament building.
He was accused of failing to defend Azeri lives in Nagorny Karabakh.
The newly elected Chair of the Supreme Soviet, Yagub Mamedov, was appointed interim President (presidential elections were later announced for June 7).
Prime Minister Gasan Gasanov [given as Hassan Hasanov on p. 38774]was requested to form a new government, as the Supreme Soviet relieved the Council of Ministers of its responsibilities.
On March 17, Mamedov appointed Rakhim Gasiyev as Defence Minister.
He also appealed to the leader of the influential opposition Azerbaijan People's Front (APF) Ebulfez Echibey for co-operation.
The APF held only 30 of the 350 seats in the Supreme Soviet but was demanding transfer of power from the Supreme Soviet to the National Council, which comprised 50 Supreme Soviet deputies, half from the APF.
On March 24, the APF was invited to join a coalition government.
Turkish and Iranian involvement — Signature of agreement in Tehran
On March 8, following a visit to CIS states, Turkish Foreign Minister Hikmet Cetin requested support for a ceasefire from the USA, France and the UK.
However, Armenia accused Turkey of "not being neutral" in the conflict, and refused to examine a Turkish peace plan unveiled on March 11.
Turkish President Turgut Özal called for support for Azerbaijan, suggesting a blockade of Armenia's export route to the Black Sea.
On March 9 Iran called on the UN to impose an arms embargo on the two states.
Iran was suspicious of Turkey's aims in the region and had criticised its call for US involvement.
An agreement between Armenia and Azerbaijan, envisaging a ceasefire and the lifting of economic sanctions, was signed in Tehran on March 15.
Iranian Deputy Foreign Minister Mahmud Va'ezi, supervising the ceasefire, began a visit to the two republics on March 17.
However, Nagorny Karabakh accused Azerbaijan of breaking the week-old ceasefire by shelling Stepanakert on March 29.
CSCE peace plan — Involvement of other international organizations
The Foreign Ministers of member states of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE), meeting in Helsinki in March [see p. 38841], agreed to set up a peace conference in Minsk comprising 10 CSCE members (Armenia, Azerbaijan, Czechoslovakia, France, Germany, Italy, Russia, Sweden, Turkey and USA) and with the participation of a delegation from Nagorny Karabakh.
The CSCE current president, Czechoslovak Foreign Minister Jiri Dienstbier, arrived in Baku, the capital of Azerbaijan, on March 31 at the head of a CSCE delegation.
The agreement to set up a peace conference followed a meeting of senior CSCE officials in Prague on Feb. 28, which proposed a peace plan recognizing that Nagorny Karabakh belonged to Azerbaijan but proposing that it should be allowed self-determination.
Peace talks scheduled for March 19 between Azerbaijan and Armenia, in the context of the CIS summit in Kiev [see p. 38825], were abandoned at the last minute.
However, on March 25 it was announced at the CSCE summit that a meeting on a ceasefire would take place between Azerbaijan, Armenia and Nagorny Karabakh in parallel with the CSCE peace conference.
The North Atlantic Co-operation Council (NACC), meeting on March 10 in Brussels, also called for efforts to bring an end to the conflict.
The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) on March 18 obtained a local ceasefire in order to send a mission to Stepanakert, where it planned to set up an operational base.
UN special envoy Cyrus Vance began a visit to the two republics on March 16.
Armenia and Azerbaijan had become members of the UN on March 2 [see p. 38842].
Armenian fuel crisis
Fuel shortages led on March 25 to the introduction of an economic state of emergency in Armenia.
An Armenian Radio report of March 9 claimed that although there was no economic blockade, Azerbaijani rail workers were "intentionally delaying" oil supplies to Armenia.
Gas supplies via Georgia were meeting a part of the energy needs.
EUROPE
UKRAINE
Rukh congress
The third congress of the opposition movement Rukh, held on Feb. 29-March 1, voted to work for Ukraine's departure from the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) and to oppose the government if it ignored Rukh's programme.
The movement avoided a split with the election of a compromise leadership, consisting of outgoing chair Ivan Drach, the chair of the Rukh political council Mykhailo Horyn, and Vyacheslav Chornovil, after Drach had attempted to lead out of the congress a faction willing to work with the Ukrainian leadership of President Leonid Kravchuk.
Chornovil, who had won 23 per cent in the Ukrainian presidential election [see p. 38656], resigned on March 20 as chair of the soviet in Lvov oblast (region).
Relations with Hungary
The signing in Budapest, the Hungarian capital, of a bilateral Hungarian-Ukrainian military co-operation agreement was announced on March 3.
Hungarian Defence Minister Lajos Für described the agreement with neighbouring Ukraine as important because it was unclear how the Soviet-Hungarian military agreement signed in December [see p. 38687]extended to individual states.
Oil deal with Tyumen region — Oil dispute with Turkmenistan
On March 5 Ukraine concluded a deal with the Siberian oil-producing region of Tyumen by which Ukraine would obtain 4,000,000 tonnes of oil per month in return for foodstuffs and an immediate supply of 110 tonnes of pipes.
The agreement concluded with Iran in January [see p. 38732]would provide Ukraine with a smaller amount of oil at a later date.
Cuts in oil supply from Russia were jeopardizing Ukraine's spring sowing, and farmers had been given supplies from the state reserves.
Turkmenistan had also cut off gas supplies to Ukraine from March 1 in a dispute over its price.
On March 27 the Ukrainian Prime Minister, Vitold Fokin, proposed unsuccessfully that supplies from Turkmenistan should be resumed pending conclusion of a price agreement.
The dispute concerned the cost of transportation, which Ukraine was refusing to pay on top of a 25-fold rise on 1990 prices.
Ukraine threatened to retaliate by closing the pipelines on its territory transporting Turkmen gas to third countries.
Economic reform
From March 1, roubles were no longer accepted for cash transactions in the state sector, being replaced by coupons or transactions in rouble bank accounts.
An economic plan envisaging the rapid introduction of a separate currency was approved in principle by the Supreme Soviet on March 24, although its details were criticized.
On March 5, Privatization Minister Volodimir Lanavoi became Minister for the Economy, and Kravchuk was given added executive powers.
A foreign investment law on March 11 offered compensation to foreign companies whose business was impeded by bureaucracy, and tax incentives for foreign business in Ukraine.
The chair of the Ukrainian central bank, Volodimir Matvienko, was replaced by Vadim Hetman on March 24.
EUROPE
BYELARUS
Pressure for referendum on Constitution
The parliamentary opposition party, the Byelarussian People's Front, was in early March collecting the 350,000 signatures needed by law to support a proposal for a referendum.
The proposal, which was for a referendum on the dissolution of the Byelarus Supreme Soviet, was denounced in a statement by the Council of Ministers on March 4 as an attempt to increase "social tension and confrontation" by blaming the Supreme Soviet and the Council of Ministers for the recent drop in living standards.
Relations with Poland
Diplomatic relations with Poland were established on March 2, though an agreement signed by the Ministers of Foreign Affairs — Krzysztof Skubiszewski for Poland and Petr Kravchenko for Byelarus.
A draft treaty of co-operation was also exchanged, and an education agreement signed on March 5 allowed for the establishment of Polish-language schools in Byelarus for the Polish-speaking minority there.
A trade co-operation agreement was signed the next day.
EUROPE
MOLDOVA
State of emergency over separatist conflict
Moldovan President Mircea Snegur imposed a state of emergency and direct presidential rule on March 28, and called on the population to prepare to fight for the "motherland" , following a month of skirmishes and fighting in the self-proclaimed Dnestr republic [for formation in September 1990 see p. 37723].
Reports spoke of 50 deaths in fighting during March, and of 5,200 refugees (mainly Ukrainian and Russian) fleeing to Ukraine's Odessa region.
A committee was set up to supervise the implementation of the emergency conditions.
The government of the majority Russian- and Ukrainian-populated "Soviet Socialist Dnestr Republic" was unhappy at what it saw as the Moldovan government's policy of drawing closer to Romania and imposing Romanian culture and language on the whole republic.
The Dnestr region was important economically for Moldova, as the source of much of its energy supplies [see p. 38417].
Moldovan presidential advisers suggested that a special economic zone be introduced in the Dnestr region and that the introduction of Moldovan as the official language be delayed there until 2000.
Foreign Ministry officials from Romania, Moldova, Ukraine and Russia were due to meet on March 31 to discuss the situation.
On March 30 the Dnestr republic's Supreme Soviet condemned the emergency decree and urged measures to ensure the (Dnestr) republic's security "including using the 14th Army stationed in the republic as a guarantor of its citizens' safety" .
Fighting had begun when the Dnestr National Guard, said to number 1,000, attacked Moldovan police headquarters on March 1-2 and blockaded roads to the town of Dubossary.
On March 2 Igor Smirnov, elected President of the Dnestr republic in December 1991 [see p. 38657], imposed a curfew and conscription.
Cossack forces from Russia began arriving in Moldova to fight in support of the Dnestr republic.
There was confusion over the role of the former Soviet Army stationed in Moldova.
Bases of the 14th Army had come under attack from civilians looking for weapons, and initial assurances that the Army would remain neutral were followed by a statement issued on March 17 that, should war in the region become a reality, the Army would act to defend itself.
On the same day the Moldovan parliament passed four laws on military affairs and on March 18 Snegur became C.-in-C. of the Moldovan armed forces.
Moldova planned to undertake from March 25 to April 3 the process of "placing the army under Moldovan control" .
Negotiations during March with a delegation led by the deputy commander of Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) armed forces, Col.-Gen.
Boris Pyankov, discussed which sections of the armed forces stationed in the republic could be transferred to Moldovan control.
Snegur on March 31 protested to CIS C.-in-C.
Marshal Yevgeny Shaposhnikov about the "violation of Moldova's airspace" by the CIS airforce, and requested measures to ensure the "non-interference of servicemen of the 14th Army in Moldova's internal affairs" .
Several ceasefires negotiated between Moldovan and Dnestr leaders, including a conciliation protocol on March 18-19, were short-lived.
Ukrainian and Romanian involvement
Ukraine mobilized its border forces on March 17 to protect its internal security, and threatened "possible retaliatory measures" against Cossacks travelling through Ukraine.
The Romanian government on March 8 denied a Moscow television report that Romanians had been involved in the fighting.
President Ion Iliescu expressed concern to the Ukrainian and Russian Presidents on March 19 over the course of events and protested against the actions of Cossack forces.
On March 29 he offered "all necessary support to the leadership of Moldova in its efforts to defend the republic's territorial integrity and to stop the escalation of the conflict" .
EUROPE
LITHUANIA
Economic agreement with Russia
During a visit to Moscow on March 6 Prime Minister Gediminas Vagnorius signed a protocol on trade and economic co-operation for 1992.
Under this agreement Russia would provide oil, natural gas and nuclear energy in exchange for meat, milk and dairy products and manufactured goods such as television parts, integrated systems for the arms industry and black boxes for aircraft.
Relations with Poland
On March 9 the Polish Foreign Ministry protested to the Lithuanian government about a decision to ban by April 1 all textbooks printed in foreign countries, which in particular affected Polish schools in Lithuania as they had been using history books printed in Poland.
Poland threatened to take the matter to the Council of Europe in Strasbourg in order to defend the rights of the 300,000-strong Polish minority in Lithuania.
On March 18 the Lithuanian Supreme Council (parliament) extended for a further six months the direct rule imposed in September 1991 on the Vilnius and Salcininkai local regions [see p. 38419], and also voted to postpone fixing a date for elections to the local councils there.
Again the Polish Foreign Ministry complained and on March 25 Polish Foreign Affairs Minister Krzystof Skubiszewski held talks with his Lithuanian counterpart Algirdas Saudargas in Helsinki, Finland.
Both sides said only that there was a "frank" exchange of views.
Visit to Japan
President Vytautas Landsbergis visited Japan on March 4-9 and held talks with Japanese Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa and Foreign Minister Michio Watanabe.
Issues discussed included Japanese technological assistance to and investment in Lithuania, education and cultural exchanges.
EUROPE
ALBANIA
DP general election victory
Two rounds of voting in a general election, on March 22 and 29, produced a victory for the Democratic Party (DP).
The DP's president, Sali Berisha, said on March 24 that he hoped to form a coalition government with "outside personalities" .
The DP secured 62 per cent of the vote, winning an overall majority with 92 of the 140 seats in the new People's Assembly (including 90 of the 100 seats directly elected by individual constituencies — see February 1992 electoral law p. 38775).
The SPA won 38 seats with 25 per cent of the vote, only six of these seats being directly elected and 32 of them coming from the 40 seats to be allocated on the basis of proportional representation.
The Social Democratic Party won seven seats, only one of them directly elected.
The Human Rights Union (HRU) won two directly elected seats and the Republican Party (RP) one.
[For results of Albania's first multiparty elections on March 31 and April 7, 1991, see pp. 38106; 38160.]
The HRU drew its support from the community of some 400,000 Greek Albanians in the south of Albania.
The Omonia organization, which had previously represented their interests and had won five seats in the 1991 general election, had been barred from presenting candidates under the February 1991 electoral legislation.
From June 1991 until Dec. 4, 1991, the DP had participated, as the main opposition party, in an administration dominated by the former communist party, the Socialist Party of Albania (SPA).
Since then Albania had had a non-party administration pending elections.
With public order close to disintegrating, the DP had emphasized during its campaign that it was the party best placed to secure further foreign food aid and investment.
It was understood that Berisha and his second-in-command Gramoz Pashko (who had from June to December 1991 been Deputy Prime Minister and Economy Minister), were hopeful that in the longer term the USA, with its 600,000 Albanian Americans, might be a source of such aid and investment.
On Dec. 20, 1991, Berisha had announced that the DP would be presenting candidates in all 100 constituencies, except for that of the SPA-appointed President, Ramiz Alia, "since it's he who will carry out the reforms" .
Berisha, a 47-year-old cardiologist, had previously been a member of the SPA, although never holding any important office in the former ruling party.
He had swiftly risen to prominence during student demonstrations in favour of a multiparty system in Tirana in December 1990, and the DP had that month been the first opposition party to be formed [see p. 37924].
The official figure for voter turnout was over 1,600,000 people, representing just over 90 per cent of those registered to vote.
The electoral process was watched by a seven-strong observer committee from the Council of Europe.
On March 27 President Alia announced that the next session of the People's Assembly would begin on April 4.
Food supplies and public order
In the weeks leading up to the elections, there had been numerous scenes of near-anarchy as food was looted from factories and warehouses and robbers held up cars on country roads.
In the countryside farmers began to claim as their own the land that had previously been state-owned.
Inflation reached levels beyond the control of the authorities, and mines and bakeries were among the few concerns continuing to operate, as workers did not arrive to work or raw materials were lacking.
Warehouses were looted daily on March 1-5 in Librazhdi.
Other such incidents were reported on Feb. 29 at Pecinje in central Albania, where a youth and a policeman died, on Feb. 25 in Pogradec (south-east of Tirana), where two people suffocated in a looting crowd which also attacked shops and a textile factory, and in early March at Louchnje.
In the port of Dürres on March 29 police again unsuccessfully attempted to disperse a crowd which had gathered in the hope of emigrating.
In Tirana on March 10 two schools and a hospital were looted.
[See also public order bill p. 38775.]
Food aid continued to be distributed from Italian military lorries, as part of the European Communities Operation Pelican programme of food aid to Albania [for EC and food aid see also pp. 38351; 38400; 38448].
Tensions in relations with Greece
The Greek ambassador to Albania was summoned to the Foreign Ministry on March 10 to receive a complaint concerning pamphlets in Greek expressing "chauvinist and nationalist" sentiments which had been distributed illegally in southern Albania.
The pamphlets had explicitly sought to influence voters in their choice of candidate in the general election.
On March 13 the Greek government denied that there had been any interference in Albania's internal affairs, and dissociated itself from a recent declaration by the Metropolitan of Konitsa in which the archbishop had urged Greek Albanians to return to Albania in order to vote in the elections.
On March 15 two Albanians who had crossed the border illegally into Greece were killed by Greek police, in what was reportedly a scuffle, followed by a chase, in the Filiaton region.
An Albanian had already been seriously wounded by a Greek military patrol on March 12 in Kalpaqi near Ioaninna.
On March 17 the Albanian Foreign Ministry protested about the incidents to the Greek ambassador in Tirana, claiming that there was "systematic mistreatment" of Albanian would-be migrants [see also pp. 38690; 38775]
EUROPE
BULGARIA
De-communization bill — Anti-government rallies
 "De-communization" legislation under discussion in early March was aimed, according to Sasho Stoyanov, the Union of Democratic Forces (UDF) National Assembly member who was responsible for its drafting, "mainly against the former nomenklatura and State Security agents" .
In opposing the legislation, the Bulgarian Socialist Party (BSP — which until April 1990 was the Bulgarian Communist Party) had the support of President Zhelyu Zhelev.
Zhelev maintained on March 9 that the legislation, if approved, could constitute a restriction on political freedoms and an obstacle to Bulgaria's membership of the Council of Europe and association with the EC.
[See also law on confiscation of BSP property p. 38686.]
On March 6 a compromise solution was reached between Foreign Minister Stoyan Ganev and Zhelev over the National Intelligence Service, which would be the subject of legislation to allow for parliamentary supervision of it.
Ganev and the UDF had been angered by some documents leaked in late February in an attempt to smear him, and had demanded that the secret services by placed under the control of the Interior Ministry rather than the Presidency as at present.
On March 13 Ganev told the National Assembly that his ministry would be dismissing about 200 diplomats, in consulation with the two relevant trade unions.
Those connected with the former State Security or the former Communist Party would no longer be needed, he said.
Pensioners', disabled and war veterans' associations took part in a rally organized by the BSP in Sofia on 12, demanding increased allowances and pensions.
The organizers had strongly denied government accusations that the protest was an attempt to heighten political tensions.
About 20,000 BSP supporters demonstrated in Sofia during the weekend March 21-22.
Party spokespersons criticized the free-market policies of the UDF government, as well as violence against BSP members.
Land privatization
On March 20 the National Assembly approved amendments to legislation passed a year earlier to liberalize the market in agricultural land.
According to the latest amendments all agricultural co-operatives would be dissolved on Nov. 1 and foreigners would be allowed to buy agricultural land in joint ventures in which the majority shareholders would be Bulgarians [see also law on foreign investment p. 38776].
Budget — IMF agreement
The budget, after much parliamentary debate, was presented on March 24 by Finance Minister Ivan Kostov as being in accordance with IMF and World Bank recommendations.
A high priority was given to attracting foreign investment, and an annual rate of inflation of 65 per cent was anticipated.
National Assembly members had criticized the budget as "consumption orientated" and as constituting a withdrawal of the state from the economy, as spending on state administration, defence and various government agencies was reduced.
On Feb. 27 Kostov had announced agreement in principle of a new standby arrangement with the International Monetary Fund (IMF), following two weeks of negotiations and IMF approval of the 1992 budget plans.
On his return from the USA on March 12 Prime Minister Filip Dimitrov told journalists that the IMF and the World Bank had stipulated, as pre-conditions to the release of the second tranche of their major re-structuring loan to Bulgaria, that legislation on privatization had to be passed and land legislation amended.
Dimitrov's visit to USA
Dimitrov met with US President George Bush in Washington on March 4 and among other things discussed Bulgaria's position on the recognition of the former Yugoslav republics.
On March 11 Dimitrov discussed the UN peacekeeping operation in Yugoslavia with UN Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali.
Visiting various US cities during his March 1-10 visit, he was hoping to encourage US investment in Bulgaria.
He met IMF officials and also secured some official US aid in the form of grants for agricultural development, educational grants and food supplies.
Defence agreement with Turkey
It was announced on March 12 that Turkey and Bulgaria would sign a technical and defence co-operation agreement in Sofia between March 16 and March 19.
It was understood that the agreement would cover co-operation on military training and other spheres and would be signed by the two Defence Ministers [see also p. 38734].
The Minister of Defence Dimitur Ludzhev on a visit to Ankara on March 10 stressed that it was the first visit to Turkey by a Bulgarian Defence Minister since 1917.
There was continuing low-level tension between the two countries, however, over the incursions made by Turkish fishing vessels into Bulgarian territorial waters in the Black Sea.
It was reported on March 13 that a Bulgarian seaman had died in hospital following an incident in which two Bulgarian patrol boats had fired at eight Turkish fishing boats, one of which had responded by ramming a Bulgarian boat.
EUROPE
CZECHOSLOVAKIA
Calling of general election
On March 3 the Federal Assembly presidium decided that the general election should be held on June 5-6.
Elections to the Slovak and Czech National Councils would be held at the same time.
The last general election, in June 1990 [see pp. 37542-43], had given deputies a two-year mandate to agree on a federal and regional constitutional framework.
However, negotiations had reached an impasse in February 1992 [see p. 38776]and on March 11 Dagmar Buresova and Frantisek Miklosko, chairs respectively of the Czech and Slovak National Councils, agreed that the talks should be adjourned until after the elections.
Anniversary of founding of Slovak state
March 14, the 53rd anniversary of the founding of a separate Slovak state shortly after the Nazi invasion of Czechoslovakia, was marked in Bratislava, the Slovak capital, by a rally organized by the Slovak National Unity Party and attended by over 3,000 people.
There were demands for Slovakia's independence and at rallies during this period the Czechoslovak flag was burnt on two occasions.
The major Slovak parties boycotted the event.
President Vaclav Havel commended Slovaks who did not attend the rally and "thus took a stand in favour of a further development of democracy in our state" .
On March 23 the Slovak parliament rejected for the third time a motion proclaiming Slovakia's sovereignty.
Investigation of Meciar
On March 25 Czechoslovak federal police launched an investigation into the activities of Vladimir Meciar, the leader of the Movement for a Democratic Slovakia (MDS or HZDS).
The Slovak parliament's defence and security committee alleged that Meciar was registered with the security police or StB from 1985 and that he had removed incriminating evidence and promoted loyal former agents in the Slovak Interior Ministry after November 1989.
Meciar had been a leading member of the Public Against violence movement (PAV or VPN) at the time of the 1989 revolution, was subsequently Slovak Interior Minister and then held office as Slovak Prime Minister from June 1990 to April 1991 [see pp. 37543; 38161].
Party political developments in Slovakia
On March 7 a faction split away from Slovakia's ruling Christian Democratic Movement (CDM), deciding to contest the election separately as the Slovak Christian Democratic Movement (SCDM).
According to the Financial Times of March 9, the SCDM faction advocated a "a more left-wing and nationalist platform" and the split showed "the growing nationalism pervading all political parties in the Slovak republic" .
The SCDM was led by Jan Klepac, deputy chair of the Slovak National Council, and Viliam Oberhauser.
On March 14 Alexander Dubcek, Prime Minister during the 1968 "Prague Spring" and since December 1989 the chair of the Federal Assembly, announced that he would stand as the leading Social Democratic candidate in the forthcoming federal election.
On March 28 Dubcek was elected chair of the Social Democratic Party of Slovakia; a founder member of PAV in 1989, he had left in July 1991 [see p. 38351], joining at that time Meciar's increasingly nationalistic MDS.
On March 29 the Civic Democratic Union-Public Against Violence (CDU-PAV) voted to amend its name (in use since October 1991 — see p. 38541) by dropping "PAV" so that it would be known henceforth simply as the CDU.
Dismissal of Federal Prosecutor — Report on events of Nov. 17 investigations
Havel dismissed Ivan Gasparovic as Federal Prosecutor on March 2 on the grounds that he lacked the authority to carry out his job.
Centre-right parties had called for his resignation in February for failing to take effective action against former members of the now dissolved StB security service.
Gasparovic was replaced by the Slovak prosecutor Martin Lauko.
During a debate on March 4 on the final report of the Commission for the Investigation of the Events of Nov. 17, 1989 (when student protests had been crushed by police — see p. 37026; see p. 37737 for initial report), the Federal Assembly approved legislation to allow Czechoslovak citizens access to files kept on them by the StB.
Arrest of Rude Pravo editor
Zdenek Porybny, the editor of Rude Pravo (the former organ of the communist party, relaunched as an independent newspaper in November 1990), was arrested on March 17, and released on bail on March 19, in connection with criminal proceedings opened against him on March 11 for fraud and illegal business practice.
Porybny, a director of Florenc (the party-owned and latterly state-owned company which published Rude Pravo), had founded a joint-stock company, Borgis, which then took over Rude Pravo.
He was alleged to have gained Kr<24,000,000 (about US$800,000) for himself and colleagues at the expense of the state.
Foreign relations
Foreign Minister Jiri Dienstbier visited Brussels on March 10-11, meeting EC Commission President Jacques Delors and attending the meeting of the North Atlantic Co-operation Council [see p. 38841].
Dienstbier visited the United States on March 20-23.
Czechoslovakia, which joined the Council of Europe in February 1991 [see pp. 37969; 38469], on March 18 ratified the European Convention on Human Rights, the first east European country to do so.
Catherine Lalumière, Secretary-General of the Council of Europe, expressed concern earlier in the month about "deficiencies and loopholes" in the Screening Law passed in October 1991 [see p. 38541], while the International Labour Organization (ILO) had called on the government to abolish or amend the law.
EUROPE
HUNGARY
Ruling on prosecution of communists
The Constitutional Court on March 3 ruled unconstitutional a bill passed in November 1991 [see p. 38585], which would have allowed prosecutions for serious crimes committed between Dec. 21, 1944, and May 2, 1990 (notably in the postwar purges and the repression of the 1956 uprising), which had not been prosecuted at the time for political reasons as being in conflict with the Constitution.
President Arpad Göncz, himself imprisoned for six years for joining the 1956 uprising, had refused to sign the bill and referred it to the Constitutional Court, whose unanimous ruling described the law as "vague, ambiguous and unreliable" .
The Court declared that "laws must be made in advance of a crime, not afterwards" and that "only the [former communist]state and not the individual" could be "considered guilty" .
The ruling was described by Le Monde of March 5 as representing as serious setback for the conservative government of Prime Minister Jozsef Antall.
On March 4 his Hungarian Democratic Forum (HDF or MDF) denounced the ruling as "morally unacceptable" .
Bill annulling former political sentencing
On Feb. 19 the Országgülés (National Assembly or parliament) had passed a bill declaring null and void sentences previously imposed under the communist regime for "crimes against the state" committed between 1963 and 1989.
Justice Minister Istvan Balsai declared that the legislation was intended to allow the government to proceed with the political, moral and legal compensation of those sentenced as part of the "unlawful acts of the past regime" .
Privatization programme
On March 11 the State Property Agency (SPA) launched the second phase of its privatization programme [see p. 38479 for initial privatization of 20 flagship state concerns].
In the second phase assets affected were worth 25,000 million forints (as at March 23, 1992, US$1.00=89.5858 forints; there had been 1.9 per cent devaluation on March 16), three times as much as in the first phase.
On March 24 bills were presented covering (i) the handling and utilization of undertakings scheduled to remain public concerns;(ii) the sale, utilization and protection of assets temporarily in state ownership (i.e. scheduled for privatization), and (iii) amendments to existing outdated decrees on state assets.
Economic arrangements with former Soviet republics
Hungary's March 2 trade agreement with Uzbekistan [see p. 38811]and the military co-operation agreement with Ukraine [see p. 38828]followed agreements on joint ventures and investment projects with Russia, Ukraine, Lithuania, Byelarus, Bashkiria and the Komi republic (the last two being within Russia), worth $4,000 million in 1992.
Similar agreements with Armenia, Azerbaijan, Estonia, Latvia and Tatarstan (Russia) were in preparation.
EUROPE
POLAND
Economic programme and 1992 budget
The economic programme presented in February, which relaxed the monetarist controls implemented over the previous two years and sought to lift the economy out of recession by investing in state enterprises and boosting imports [see pp. 38774-75], was rejected by the Sejm (lower house of parliament) on March 5 by 171 votes to 138 with 38 abstentions.
The unexpected rejection came about because the former communist Democratic Left Alliance (SLD) and the right-wing Confederation for an Independent Poland (KPN) opposed the programme on the grounds that it was too rigorous, while the Democratic Union (UD) and the Liberal Democratic Congress (KLD) opposed the programme on the grounds that it was not tough enough.
Prime Minister Jan Olszewski declared that he would not, however, resign unless the 1992 budget, to be presented on March 23 [see below], was rejected by parliament when it was debated in April.
Describing his government's policy on March 8 as the "only possible programme" , Olszewski sought to broaden the base of his coalition, sworn in in December 1991 [see pp. 38685-86].
The current coalition comprised independents and members of Olszewski's Centre Alliance (CA), the Christian National Union (ZChN) and the Peasant Party (PL).
During March talks were held in particular with the KLD, led by Jan Krzysztof Bielecki (who had preceded Olszewzski as Prime Minister), and with the UD led by Tadeusz Mazowiecki (who preceded Bielecki).
1992 draft budget
The 1992 draft budget presented on March 23 provided for a 65,550,000 million zloty (US$4,500 million) deficit, representing 5 per cent of gross national product (GNP).
In order to keep to this limit the budget doubled council housing rents, reduced state subsidies on coal, gas, electricity and transport and cut benefits.
Old age and disability pensions would be cut and social security payments no longer linked to pay.
The budget had been conditionally approved by the IMF during a visit to Washington by Finance Minister Andrzej Olechowski on March 16-17.
Olechowski needed the support of the IMF if he were to renegotiate the terms of Poland's US$1,600 million three-year extended facility which had been approved in April 1991 [see p. 38162]but suspended in October after the previous government failed to meet IMF performance criteria on the budget deficit and expansion of domestic credit.
Although Olszewski had originally (as announced in his economic programme in February) favoured a relaxation of the previous government's stringent policies, on March 23 he called on the Sejm to recognise the importance of retaining the confidence of the IMF.
Reports on March 9 had also indicated that the World Bank had warned that the present situation might "lead Poland to hyperinflation, obliterate the achievements of the past two years and plunge the economy into even greater recession" .
It proposed withdrawing coal subsidies and introducing a 100-150 per cent tax on alcohol, tobacco and petrol and a sales tax on all still untaxed goods.
New head of National Bank
On March 5 the Sejm approved the appointment of Hanna Gronkiewicz-Waltz as the (non-party) president of the National Polish Bank.
The post had been vacant since August 1991 [see pp. 38449; 38399]and Gronkiewicz-Waltz, who had been proposed by President Lech Walesa, had been rejected in an earlier vote in December.
Other developments
Tadeusz Stanski was elected chair of the Polish Independence Party (PPN) on March 7 in place of Romuald Szeremietiew who had resigned upon being appointed Deputy Defence Minister.
EUROPE
ROMANIA
NSF convention
The ruling National Salvation Front (NSF) held a national convention in Bucharest on March 27-29.
The NSF leader Petre Roman (Prime Minister until September 1991 — see p. 38450) was confirmed as party president, and his free-market reform programme, entitled "The future — today" , was approved by 802 out of 1,268 votes, marking what he described as "a true, clean and clear-cut break with the past" .
In recent months Roman's leadership had come under pressure from "old-guard" NSF members including President Ion Iliescu.
The Independent of March 30 reported that the NSF, formed in 1989 as "a broad movement" , now appeared "to be making the transition from an old-style Leninist party…to a Western-style party with a specific political platform" .
The issue of selecting an NSF candidate for the (as yet unannounced) presidential elections was not resolved when it emerged that any candidate would be required to endorse Roman's programme.
On March 30 at least seven parliamentary members withdrew from the NSF parliamentary group to form a "NSF-Dec. 22 Group" , the name referring to the date of Ceausescu's overthrow in 1989.
They accused Roman of introducing "tension and a non-democratic and elitist spirit" into the NSF [see also p. 38108], and blamed the party's recent election losses on this [see pp. 38777-78; below].
Local elections
Run-off local elections were held on March 1 and 8 following the February local elections.
The Rompress news agency reported on March 10 that the NSF had received 33.6 per cent of votes cast in the local polls as compared with 24.3 per cent for the Democratic Convention, an alliance of opposition parties.
The NSF had come first in 28 counties, the Hungarian Democratic Union of Romania (HDUR) in six, the Democratic Convention in five and the Romanian National Unity Party in one.
On March 10 Roman attributed the NSF losses to the economic difficulties in the cities, which had thus far borne the brunt of economic restructuring, and to the divisions within the party.
Foreign relations
On Feb. 27 an "open skies" agreement, signed in May 1991 between Hungary and Romania and allowing for surveillance flights in each country's airspace, came into force.
A Hungarian military delegation visiting Romania on Feb. 29-March 1 discussed co-operation between their respective armies.
Relations with Hungary nevertheless remained strained.
Protests by ethnic Hungarians in Romania on March 9, variously estimated as involving 6,000 to 20,000 people, focused on their demand for continuing Hungarian-language education.
On March 18 a Romanian Foreign Ministry spokesperson said that the Romanian ambassador to Hungary, Simion Pop, had not been called home because of pro-Hungarian feelings, but had simply been retired for health reasons.
EUROPE
YUGOSLAVIA
Moves towards Bosnian independence — Ethnic violence
The disintegration of Yugoslavia proceeded further in March with constitutional moves within the central republic of Bosnia-Hercegovina towards independence.
Fighting erupted between rival Moslem and Croatian irregulars on the one hand and Yugoslav People's Army (JNA) troops and Serb irregulars on the other in Bosnia-Hercegovina, ethnically the most complex republic within the old federation, after a popular vote for independence — a development which mirrored the outbreak of war between Serbs and Croats following Croatia's declaration of independence in June 1991.
Developments in Bosnia-Hercegovina
In a referendum held in Bosnia-Hercegovina on Feb. 29-March 1, 99.4 per cent of those voting opted for full independence.
The turnout was 63 per cent.
The overwhelming majority of Serbs, who accounted for some 31 per cent of the population, boycotted the referendum on the grounds that they had already made clear their preference in local referendums for Bosnia-Hercegovina remaining within Yugoslavia.
The leader of the main Serbian party in Bosnia, Radovan Karadzic, a close ally of the Serbian President Slobodan Milosevic, declared that "we are not going to accept an independent Bosnia-Hercegovina" .
(Moslems formed some 44 per cent of Bosnia-Hercegovina's population and Croats 17 per cent.)
Holding a referendum had been one of the conditions demanded by the European Communities (EC) before it would consider diplomatic recognition of an independent Bosnia-Hercegovina [see pp. 38703-04].
President Alija Izetbegovic on March 3 proclaimed the republic's independence from Yugoslavia.
In the wake of the referendum tension between Serbs and Moslems in particular increased sharply.
There were clashes in Sarajevo, the Bosnian capital, and surrounding areas and in the north-western region around Bosanski Brod (mainly between Serbs and Croats).
Talks between representatives of the three communities appeared to defuse some of the tension.
The government called for calm and warned against the kind of communal violence which had led to the loss of thousands of lives in neighbouring Croatia.
The UN special envoy Cyrus Vance also arrived in Sarajevo on March 5 to try to secure a commitment from political leaders to find a peaceful settlement.
Leaders of the three main ethnic groups on March 18 signed an agreement, negotiated under the auspices of the EC, on the future of the republic which provided for its division into three autonomous units along ethnic lines.
The territory of each unit would be based on the "national absolute or relative majority" in each municipality.
It was acknowledged, however, not least by the participants, that the agreement was primarily regarded as a means of defusing ethnic tensions and the possibility of civil war rather than as a concrete proposal to accommodate the political aspirations of Moslems, Serbs and Croats.
Many of the details of the division were not worked out.
It was generally agreed that in any case it would be very difficult to achieve because very few areas were in fact exclusively inhabited by any one of the three communities.
Differences of interpretation emerged within days of the signing of the Sarajevo agreement as ethnic violence continued to escalate.
Serb leaders in particular declared their continuing commitment to the inclusion of the republic in Yugoslavia.
The (Moslem) Democratic Action Party (SDA), led by Izetbegovic, on March 25 called on all citizens to reject the division of the republic along ethnic lines alone and to accept the concept of a unitary state.
It also accused the Serbian and Croatian governments of collaborating with extreme Serb and Croat forces in Bosnia-Hercegovina to bring about the division of the republic between the two countries.
Izetbegovic stated that an ethnic division was not possible because the population was very mixed.
Asked why he had initially accepted the Sarajevo agreement, he replied that he had been isolated and that the EC mediators had insisted on acceptance as a precondition for diplomatic recognition, which was his government's "main objective" in the short term.
Serb leaders on March 27 proclaimed the "Serbian Republic of Bosnia-Hercegovina" and declared its loyalty to the "all-Serb state of Yugoslavia" .
Towards the end of the month violence increased sharply.
Fighting was concentrated around the towns of Bosanski Brod in the north and Neum in the south.
Most of the clashes were between Serbs, backed by the JNA, and Croats.
The Bosnian government on March 27 asked the UN to send in military observers to monitor a ceasefire in Bosanski Brod, which failed to hold, however.
First UN forces in Croatia
Lt.-Gen.
Satish Nambiar, the commander of the UN Protection Forces for Yugoslavia (UNIPROFOR), arrived in Yugoslavia on March 9 accompanied by the first advance party of the peace-keeping force agreed by the Security Council in February [see p. 38778].
Military, police and reconnaissance experts immediately began to prepare for the arrival of the 14,000-strong force in the UN-protected areas of Eastern and Western Slavonia and Krajina, three Serb-held enclaves in eastern and southern Croatia.
On March 26 the Yugoslav government urged the UN to speed up the arrival of the full contingent of UNIPROFOR, planned for the first half of April, because of the deteriorating security situation in the Croatian border areas.
Ceasefire violations
The ceasefire in Croatia agreed in January [see p. 38703]was broken on several occasions in March.
In the worst incident seven people were killed in the eastern Croatian city of Osijek during clashes between JNA/Serbian and Croat forces on March 8.
On the following days ceasefire violations increased in southern Croatia.
Further fighting was reported in eastern and central Croatia and in Dalmatia on several occasions between March 15 and 24.
Developments in other republics
Serbia
Opposition groups staged mass protests in Belgrade on consecutive days on March 9-12, calling for the resignation of Serbian President Milosevic.
At the first and largest rally a prominent opposition leader, Vuk Draskovic, called for a campaign of civil disobedience.
On March 10-11 a rally by students demanded free elections, freedom of the media and a democratic constitution.
The protesters accused the Milosevic government of leading Serbia into an unnecessary war with Croatia which, although successful in military terms, had left the country's economy in ruin, cut living standards and cost over 6,000 lives.
The demonstrations were the largest since the start of hostilities in July 1991, but observers noted that the turnouts were not as high as its organizers had hoped.
Macedonia
Macedonia took a further step towards independence with the withdrawal of JNA forces from the republic on March 26.
Both sides noted at an official ceremony the following day that the transfer of JNA troops, facilities and equipment had proceeded without serious incident.
The process had been set in motion on March 15 with the handing over of border crossings to units of a newly formed Macedonian army.
Macedonia and Slovenia established diplomatic relations on March 17.
Montenegro
Montenegrins on March 1 voted overwhelmingly in favour of the republic remaining part of Yugoslavia.
Some 96 per cent of voters opted for the status quo.
The turnout was 66 per cent, with the ethnic Albanian and Moslem minorities largely boycotting the vote.
The Montenegrin and Serbian authorities had expressed their commitment to the continuation of the Yugoslav state in February [see p. 38779].
The electorate of the capital, Titograd, also voted to reinstate the city's old name of Podgorica.
It had been renamed in honour of Josip Broz Tito, Yugoslavia's communist leader until his death in 1980.
Devaluation
The Yugoslav dinar was devalued by 20 per cent on March 1 to a new rate against the deutschmark of DM1.00=85 dinars [for major devaluation in January see p. 38704].
EUROPE
TURKEY
Air-raids into Iraq
Bombing raids against the guerrilla bases of the Kurdish Workers' Party (PKK) were resumed on March 1-2, 9-11 and 25.
As in August and October 1991 [see pp. 38403; 38547], the operation took Turkish aircraft over the border into Iraq, where they attacked bases from which the Turkish PKK guerrillas were operating.
Official accounts of the raids emphasized that no civilian buildings were targeted, and denied reports of civilian deaths.
Following the first of the month's raids, the UN High Commissioner for Refugees, Sadako Ogato, expressed concern for the killing of nine people, including women and children, in an Iraqi Kurdish village 30 km inside the border.
According to the radio statio operated by the Iraqi Kurdish Democratic Party (DPK) on March 3, the raids had caused a number of civilian deaths — "12 in the village of Kijik alone" .
DPK leader Masoud Barzani on March 3 asked the DPK representative in Ankara to lodge a protest with the Turkish government.
Turkish television described a raid in the early hours of March 10 against a PKK camp "consisting of about 13 tents" 8-9 km inside northern Iraq.
Another camp of about 20 tents was also destroyed, and there were further air strikes on March 10.
On March 11 at least 28 guerrillas were reported killed when Turkish troops and helicopters attacked a PKK base near Genc, in eastern Turkey.
On March 3 and 11 the Iraqi government protested to Turkey over "repeated flagrant violations of its sovereignty and territorial integrity by Turkish aircraft" .
Kurdish New Year clashes
An unprecedented upsurge of violence in Kurdish-populated areas had begun even before the celebrations for the Kurdish New Year (Nevros) on March 21.
On the weekend March 21-22 at least 50 people were killed in various towns as the New Year was observed by mass demonstrations in support of the PKK.
There were clashes between troops and demonstrators in the towns of Cizre, Nusaybin, Yuksekova, Van and Sirnak.
In Cizre the violence became an open battle on the city streets between PKK youths using assault rifles and government troops.
At Sirnak after the disturbances troops carried out house-to-house searches, looking for arms and PKK guerrillas.
Officials claimed that large numbers of weapons had been found in various towns.
At the end of the month curfews remained in force in Cizre, Sirnak, Idil and Silopi.
In only one of a number of retaliatory attacks in various Turkish towns, the extreme left Dev Sol organization claimed responsibility for an attack on a bus in Istanbul on March 24 in which two employees of the National Intelligence Agency were killed; the statement linked the attack with the Kurdish issue.
Kurdish demonstrators abroad demonstrated outside, and in some cases attacked, the Turkish embassies in Oslo, Stockholm, Paris, Brussels, the Hague, Geneva, Bonn and London between March 22 and 24.
[For controversy over sending of arms by Germany see p. 38822.]
Increasingly open discussion of the subject in the Turkish press made it clear that the Kurdish issue would continue to be the main political problem facing the government.
Observers noted that Prime Minister Suleyman Demirel appeared far from being able to implement any of the liberal measures towards the Kurds of the south which he had promised on taking office in October 1991 [see p. 38592].
In late February, 49 deputies in the National Assembly — mainly but not exclusively drawn from the Social Democratic Populists (SHP) and the People's Labour Party (HEP)— published a document calling for a ceasefire in the Kurdish areas of eastern Turkey, for the lifting of the state of emergency and for the bringing to account of those responsible for torture and assassinations.
On March 17, after much debate, the renewal of the state of emergency for a further four months was approved by a parliamentary vote.
The state of emergency had been in force since 1987 and covered the 10 predominantly Kurdish provinces.
Mining disaster — Earthquake
An explosion and fire killed 265 mineworkers at the Incirharmani coal-mine at Kozlu on the Black Sea coast (180 km north-west of Ankara) on March 3.
On March 5 another outbreak of fire caused the search for some 150 missing men to be called off as the mine was sealed.
The explosion, the worst in Turkish mining history, appeared to have been caused by the ignition of methane gas, which in 20 seconds had reached dangerous levels inside the mine, apparently foiling a sophisticated alarm system.
About 700 men had been working at three pit levels up to 560 metres below the ground, over a 2 sq km area.
Thick smoke and dangerous levels of carbon monoxide prevented rescuers from reaching trapped men.
Later the trade unions Turk-Is and the Genel Maden-Is challenged the version of events which referred to a sudden surge in the level of methane gas and said that human negligence was probably responsible.
Later 43 people were arrested while distributing leaflets which blamed the management of the state-run Coal Enterprise mining company for negligence.
Since 1945 107 people had already been killed in the Kozlu mines in five previous disasters.
An earthquake measuring 6.2 on the Richter scale struck the provincial capital of Erzincan in eastern Turkey on March 13, killing up to 500 people.
Up to 80,000 people of the town's population of 145,000 were made homeless.
About a quarter of the town was destroyed — an estimated 2,000 buildings, including a medical school, apartments and a hospital building.
Swiss, French, Danish, Russian Belgian and Greek relief teams assisted in searching in the rubble or providing medical assistance, in an emergency operation co-ordinated by the Council of Europe.
The quake was the biggest tremor Erzincan had known since 1939, when an earthquake killed 30,000 people.
Attack on synagogue — Killing of Israeli diplomat
A passer-by was wounded when two grenades were thrown at the Neve Shalom synagogue, the largest in Istanbul, on March 1.
Members of the World Sephardi foundation were arriving in Ankara on that day for a two-day visit in commemoration of the 500th anniversary of the Jews' arrival in Istanbul [see p. 38823 for commemoration of expulsion of Jews from Spain].
One of the attackers was captured and one escaped; the Interior Ministry said they were members of the Turkish Hezbollah organization.
At the same synagogue in September 1986 at least 21 people were killed in an attack attributed to the Palestinian Abu Nidal group [see p. 35136].
The Turkish Foreign Ministry said that the previously unknown Islamic Revenge Organization (IRO) had claimed responsibility for the killing in Ankara on March 7 of Ehud Saha, the security chief at the Israeli embassy there.
A caller from the IRO told a newspaper that the car-bomb had been in revenge for the killing by the Israeli airforce of Sheikh Abbas Musawi, of the Lebanese Hezbollah [see p. 38750].
Iran protested to Turkey after an Istanbul court on March 12 ruled that the Iran-bound cargo of the ship Cape Maleas, impounded in October 1991 [see p. 38740], should be confiscated.
The Iranian Foreign Office described the decision as a "violation of international rights and commercial relations" and demanded financial compensation.
EUROPE
COUNCIL OF BALTIC STATES
Inaugural meeting
The foreign ministers of all 10 Baltic littoral states met in Copenhagen, Denmark, on March 5-6 and agreed to establish a Council of Baltic States.
The German-Danish initiative brought together Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Germany, Latvia, Lithuania, Norway, Poland, Russia and Sweden.
Its aim was to create a community in which assistance could be given to Russia, Poland and the three former Soviet Baltic states to transform themselves into free-market societies.
However, Danish Foreign Minister and co-chairman of the meeting Uffe Ellemann-Jensen emphasized that the Council would be closely linked to existing European organizations.
He foresaw the Baltic region as a "region within the European Communities" and said that regional co-operation would "facilitate the linkages of the European Communities with the non-member countries of the region" .
On March 6 Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania attempted to raise the issue of the delay in the withdrawal of former Soviet troops from their territory [see p. 38786].
However, Ellemann-Jensen stressed that the work of the Council would not duplicate that of existing international organizations and that security matters fell outside the scope of the new body.
It was agreed that the foreign ministers of member states would meet annually, with the next meeting scheduled for March 2-3, 1993.
US aid to Baltic republics
US Secretary of Agriculture Edward Madigan announced on March 9 that the USA would allocate to each of the three former Soviet Baltic republics further food aid worth US$5,000,000.
Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania had each received 100,000 tonnes of grain from the USA at the beginning of 1992.
EUROPE
EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
Finnish application for membership
On March 18 Finland applied for membership of the European Communities (EC).
The Eduskunta (parliament) had approved the move earlier that same day by 108 votes to 55 with 32 abstentions and four absent.
Outside the parliament building around 2,000 Finns staged protests; farmers were particularly concerned that they would lose substantial subsidies.
In a speech at the opening of parliament on Feb. 7 President Mauno Koivisto had maintained that "we will be best exercising our freedom of choice by applying for EC membership" .
Finland was the third country in the seven-member European Free Trade Association (EFTA) to apply for EC membership, after Austria July 1989 [see p. 36822]and Sweden in July 1991 [see p. 38353].
There was speculation that applications from Norway and Switzerland could follow shortly.
Turkey's April 1987 application was effectively stalled following the Commission's December 1989 opinion [see p. 37133].
Cyprus and Malta had applied in July 1990 [see p. 37625].
A report was being prepared for the June 1992 European Council summit in Lisbon on the institutional changes which would be needed if the EC were to expand its membership significantly.
Proposals for 1992/93 agricultural price support measures
On March 18 the Commission proposed carrying forward to 1992/93 the 1991/92 agricultural price support measures [see pp. 38022-23; 38202].
Ray MacSharry, the Commissioner responsible for agriculture, said that he hoped this would enable EC Agriculture Ministers to take an early decision on reforming the common agricultural policy as proposed during 1991 [see pp. 38022-23; 38352-53].
EUROPE
EFTA
Agreement with Czechoslovakia
On March 20 Czechoslovakia signed in Prague a free trade agreement with the European Free Trade Association (EFTA), which was to come into effect on July 1, 1992, after completion of the ratification process.
[For EFTA joint declarations signed with Czechoslovakia, Hungary and Poland in June 1990 see p. 37535.]
The agreement covered industrial goods, processed agricultural goods and fish.
Trade in agricultural products would be covered by bilateral agreements.
Under the agreement the seven EFTA member countries would immediately abolish trade barriers on all goods covered except for certain sensitive products, while Czechoslovakia would abolish them over a 10-year period.
Czechoslovakia's trade with EFTA countries accounted for almost 9 per cent of total exports in 1991.
[For similar EFTA agreement signed with Turkey in December 1991 see p. 38691.]
EUROPE
ORTHODOX CHURCH
Relations with Vatican
The heads of 14 Orthodox Churches met in Istanbul on March 14-15 for a conference called by Patriarch Bartholemew who as Archbishop of Constantinople (since October 1991 — see p. 38547), was "first among equals" of the five leaders of Orthodox Christianity in Europe and Asia.
Divisions between the Orthodox and Roman Catholic Churches were growing, as the Orthodox Church accused Rome of seeking converts in "its" territory.
Pope John Paul II had created new dioceses during 1991 in the former Soviet Union and appointed six apostolic administrators (five bishops and one archbishop).
Aleksi II, Patriarch of All Russia, accusing the Roman Catholic Church of "expansionism" had refused Pope John Paul II's invitation to a Synod on Europe held in November-December 1991 [see p. 38691].
A meeting in Geneva on March 2-3 between envoys of the Vatican and the Moscow Patriarchate to discuss their differences had resulted, according to Le Monde of March 6, in an "armistice" .
The Uniate (Eastern rite Catholic) Church in Ukraine was a particular point of contention.
Subsumed within the Orthodox Church in 1946, it was re-legalized in 1989 [see p. 38104-05].
The Orthodox hierarchy accused the Roman Catholic Church of encouraging Uniate demands for the restitution of property from the Orthodox Church in Ukraine.
Ukraine and the Vatican had established diplomatic relations on Feb. 8.
Removal of Bulgarian Patriarch
On March 9 the Bulgarian government removed Patriarch Maxim from his post.
The Parliamentary Committee on Religious Faiths said that his election as Patriarch of the Bulgarian Othodox Church in 1971 had not been legitimate, because proper procedure had not been observed.
A BTA (Bulgarian news agency) report cited in Le Monde of March 12 claimed that Patriarch Maxim had collaborated with the security services under the communist regime.
EUROPE
CENTRAL EUROPEAN INITIATIVE
On March 20-21 in Klagenfurt, Austria, the foreign ministers of Austria, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Italy and Poland elected Croatia and Slovenia (whose foreign ministers were also present) as members with observer status [for February renaming of Hexagonale grouping see p. 38786].
EUROPE
GREECE
On March 31 Mikis Theodorakis resigned from the government, leaving the ruling New Democracy party with a one-seat majority; the National Economy Minister, Epthymios Christodoulou, had left his post on Feb. 10 to head the Bank of Greece, and was replaced by Stefanos Manos.
EUROPE
LIECHTENSTEIN
In a referendum on March 14-15 71.4 per cent of voters approved a motion to allow referendums on state treaties; the turnout was 64.7 per cent and the result reversed a similar motion defeated in 1989.
EUROPE
MALTA
Karmenu Mifsud Bonnici announced on March 6 that he was resigning as leader of the Malta Labour Party (MLP), following its defeat in the elections of Feb. 22 [see p. 38784]; he proposed George Vella as his successor.
EUROPE
NETHERLANDS
At a congress in Nijmegen on March 13-14 the Party of Labour (PvdA) elected Felix Rottenberg, 34, as chair and Ruud Vreeman, 43, as vice-chair.
The Guardian of Feb. 29 reported that the foreign intelligence service had been disbanded following allegations of illegitimate espionage and fraud.
EUROPE
SWEDEN
A former employee of the Soviet KGB (state security committee) declared on Swedish television on March 10 that the Swedish diplomat Raoul Wallenberg, who had enabled thousands of Hungarian Jews to escape deportation to concentration camps during the Second World War, and who disappeared after his arrest by the Soviet military in Budapest in 1945, had died in 1947 during a prison interrogation [see also p. 37162].
EUROPE
VISEGRAD THREE
Meeting in Budapest on March 6 the defence ministers of Czechoslovakia, Hungary and Poland sought to co-ordinate policy towards NATO's North Atlantic Co-operation Council; they committed themselves to an "open barracks" policy along similar lines to the existing "open skies" policy but stressed that they wished to act in the spirit of dialogue and consultation rather than to set up a closed grouping.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
ISRAEL
Announcement of Levi's resignation
The central committee of Likud, the main party of the right-wing ruling coalition, convened on March 1-2 to elect a ranked list of 50 candidates for the general election scheduled for June 23.
The elections proved to be a disaster for Foreign Minister David Levi and his supporters.
Levi had unsuccessfully challenged Itzhak Shamir for the party leadership in February [see p. 38787].
The final results of the internal Likud elections left Levi fourth in the list, behind Shamir, Defence Minister Moshe Arens and Housing and Construction Minister Ariel Sharon.
Careful collaboration between the Shamir-Arens camp and supporters of Sharon also resulted in the defeat of almost all of Levi's supporters.
So shocking was the defeat that some of Levi's supporters openly called for mass resignation from the Likud and the formation of their own independent list.
Levi's support base was within the large Sephardi community (members or descendants of the western branch of European Jews who settled in Spain and Portugal and latterly in north Africa, as opposed to the Askhenazi — the northern European Yiddish-speaking Jews), and many of his supporters claimed that the Shamir-Arens-Sharon collaboration had been nothing short of ethnic discrimination by the "Ashkenazi bosses" .
The threat of a potentially disastrous ethnic split within the Likud increased considerably on March 29 when Levi announced his intention to resign as Foreign Minister at a meeting of his supporters in Herzliya.
Legislation for election of Prime Minister
The Knesset approved legislation on March 18 which provided for the direct election of the Prime Minister.
However, the legislation would not be applicable in the aftermath of the June 1992 general election.
Death of Begin
Menachem Begin, Israel's Prime Minister from 1977 to 1983, died on March 9, aged 78.
Begin had suffered a heart attack on March 3.
Under his premiership Israel signed a peace treaty with Egypt, ceded the Sinai peninsula and launched a major invasion of Lebanon.
Israeli and world leaders paid tribute to Begin who was buried alongside fellow-fighters in the Irgun Zva'i Leumi, the Jewish guerrilla group he commanded in the 1940s.
Assassination of diplomat in Turkey — Bomb attack on embassy in Argentina
Ehud Sadan, an Israeli diplomat, was killed in Ankara, Turkey, when his booby-trapped car exploded on March 7.
Anonymous telephone calls claimed the attack had been carried out by various groups, including Islamic Jihad and Hezbollah, in revenge for Israel's assassination of the Hezbollah secretary-general Sheikh Abbas Musawi in February [see p. 38750].
A car bomb exploded outside the Israeli embassy in Buenos Aires, Argentina, on March 17, killing 28 people (24 Argentineans and four Israelis) and wounding over 200 others.
The next day Islamic Jihad released a statement in Beirut claiming responsibility for the attack.
The bomb, it said, had been planted by a suicide bomber, named as Abu Yasser.
The statement claimed that the bombing was in revenge for the assassination of Musawi.
Foreign Minister Levi told the Knesset (parliament) on March 18: "Those who carried out the murder and those who sent them are destined for a painful punishment.
The government will decide on the place, the form and the manner to avenge the blood of the fallen."
Five people were arrested in Buenos Aires on March 21 in connection with the attack.
Arrest of Arabs for killing of soldiers — Tel Aviv stabbing attack
Four Arab Israeli citizens were arrested on March 4 in connection with the killing of three Israeli soldiers at an army camp in mid-February [see p. 38787].
Ya'acov Terner, Israel's chief of police, said that the four constituted an Islamic Jihad cell.
According to Terner the four had confessed to the killings.
A Palestinian stabbed two Jews to death and wounded 20 others in Tel Aviv on March 17.
The assailant was shot dead by police.
As the attack occurred on Purim, a Jewish holiday when revellers dressed up in costumes and played pranks, many of those injured had initially believed the attack to be a practical joke.
Release of Abie Nathan
Veteran peace campaigner Abie Nathan was released from prison on March 30 after serving six months of an 18-month sentence for meeting Yassir Arafat, chair of the Palestine Liberation Organization.
Deterioration in relations with USA
Relations between Israel and the USA deteriorated sharply during March.
By the end of the month Israeli leaders were reported effectively to have withdrawn their controversial request for some US$10,000 million in loan guarantees to finance immigrant absorbtion programmes, in the face of persistent US demands linking the loans with a cessation of settlement construction in the occupied territories.
The month opened with a fresh controversy which further soured relations.
An article by the former New York mayor, Ed Koch, in the New York Post of March 8 alleged that US Secretary of State James Baker had made obscene remarks about US Jews to Republican Party workers.
Baker denied the allegations, but Koch's allegations only served to increase tension between the two countries.
On March 17 at a meeting with senators involved in the drafting of the 1992 Foreign Aid Bill, US President George Bush announced his rejection of a compromise formula on the loan guarantees issue.
Senator Patrick Leahy (chair of the Senate subcommittee preparing foreign aid legislation) had proposed giving Israel US$1,000 million in loan guarantees, with the remainder conditional on the halting of new settlement building.
Bush subsequently made a final offer to Israel, which included a number of concessions.
Israel, he said, would be allowed to complete a pre-agreed number of houses which were in the process of construction in the occupied territories at the start of 1992, in exchange for US$300 million in guarantees immediately and the remaining US$9,700 million staggered over six years.
Shamir responded on March 23, stating that he would never accept US demands to freeze settlement activity.
The next day Shamir pointedly announced that he was receiving large offers of money from Jews around the world.
Defence Minister Arens visited the USA in mid-March.
His visit coincided with press reports that Israel had passed on US arms technology to third countries, including China.
Both Israel and China denied the allegations, but the US Defence Department nevertheless announced its intention to mount an inquiry.
On March 22 a visiting US army team began inspecting Israel's Patriot missile sites.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
PALESTINIAN AFFAIRS
Hamas election success — Progress of intifada
Further signs of divisions within the Palestinian leadership in the occupied territories emerged in March.
On March 3 the Hamas-backed Islamic bloc won 10 out of 11 seats in elections to the Ramallah and al-Bira Chamber of Commerce.
Nationalist candidates managed to win only one seat, despite the area's reputation as a stronghold of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO).
Only 1,200 people voted in the elections, but the process was traditionally regarded as important since election to Chambers of Commerce and professional associations represented the sole form of democratic practice in the occupied territories [see p. 38788 for Gaza elections in January and February].
Following the elections there were outbreaks of fighting between supporters of Fatah and Hamas and between Fatah and the Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine (DFLP) in which at least two people died.
There was a marked increase in intifada-related violence in March, with at least 15 deaths.
A report in Middle East International of April 3 claimed that Palestinian casualties at demonstrations were declining, while shooting of targeted activists, often by Israeli undercover units, was increasing.
At a press conference on March 19 Palestinian leader Faisal al-Husseini accused the Israeli security forces of summarily executing Palestinians.
Israeli security forces launched a major search and arrest operation in the West Bank town of Jenin on March 11-12.
One Palestinian was killed and three wounded during the action.
Israel sealed off the Gaza Strip from March 19-22 in protest at the killing of two Israelis in Jaffa on March 17 [see this page].
The Israeli action prevented as many as 50,000 Palestinians from working in Israel.
On March 20 Israeli soldiers killed a Palestinian man in Ramallah during a sudden upsurge in intifada-related violence and unrest.
The 16th anniversary of Land Day (March 30), however, passed off peacefully in the occupied territories.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
LEBANON
Economic crisis
A sharp drop in the value of the Lebanese pound in February and March sent prices soaring and provoked outbursts of public discontent against the government of Umar Karami.
The Banque du Liban (central bank) had announced on Feb. 19 that it would no longer draw on reserves to prop up the value of the Lebanese pound on foreign exchange markets.
This move had the effect of driving the value of the pound down by 25 per cent against the US dollar in February (as at Feb. 24 US$1.00=L£992.561).
The government formed an emergency economic committee, but on March 6 a nationwide general strike was held to protest against the economic situation.
On March 11 the government issued a decree reducing bread and petrol prices, aiming to finance the price reductions by raising taxes on alcohol, cigarettes and other imported goods.
Italian aid package
On Feb. 27 details were released of a US$461 million Italian aid package to support Lebanon's reconstruction programme.
Aid from the European Communities (EC) had been frozen pending the release of the two German hostages being held in Lebanon.
The package, which confirmed Italy's position as the Western state most committed to Lebanese reconstruction, comprised US$240 million in export credits, US$94 million in concessionary loans, US$64 million in grants and US$63 million in mixed credits.
The details were announced by Al-Fadl Chalak, chair of Lebanon's Council for Development and Reconstruction (CDR).
Visit to Iran by new Hezbollah leader
Sheikh Hassan Nasrallah, who had succeeded Sheikh Abbas Musawi as secretary-general of Hezbollah in February [see p. 38750], visited Iran in early March for talks with high-ranking officials.
At a press conference in Tehran on March 4 Nasrallah said that his organization was not seeking to kidnap Westerners in Lebanon as a response to the assassination of Musawi by Israeli forces.
Hezbollah, he said, was moved by "divine incentives, not revenge" .
However, the organization would continue its struggle "in order to defend our homeland and our nation" .
Re-election of Berri as Amal leader
Nabi Berri was re-elected as leader of the Shia Amal movement at the close of its congress on Feb. 29.
War casualties
Official figures published on March 9 gave the number of deaths between 1975 and 1990 resulting from the civil war as 144,240; 17,415 people had disappeared and more than 197,500 were injured.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
JORDAN
Economic developments
Rescheduling agreement — Standby credit agreement
Ziyad Fariz, the Minister of Planning, announced on March 2 that the "Paris Club" of Western creditor governments had agreed to reschedule part of Jordan's estimated US$7,200 million foreign debt.
Fariz provided no details of the amounts involved, but said that the accord provided a 10-year repayment period with 10 years' grace for official debt originally due for repayment between 1991 and mid-1993.
Government-backed loans would be repaid over 15 years, including an eight-year grace period.
Finance Minister Basil Jardana held talks with the "London Club" of commercial creditors in London in early March.
The negotiations, on rescheduling debts payable between mid-1991 and mid-1993, made some progress but no agreements were signed.
The Middle East Economic Digest of March 20, citing a Jordanian economist, Fahed Fanek, said that the London Club creditors had agreed to reschedule US$500 million over 20 years, including 10 years' grace.
On Feb. 26 the IMF had approved a standby credit for Jordan, authorizing drawings up to the equivalent of SDR 44,400,000 (US$61,100,000) over 18 months, in support of the government's economic and financial reform programme.
King Hussein's tour to North America and Western Europe
King Hussein visited Iceland, Canada, the USA, France and Germany during the first half of March.
On March 12 in Washington he met US President Bush for the first time since the start of the Gulf crisis in August 1990.
Resolution on banning of alcohol
The House of Representatives passed a resolution on Feb. 28 recommending to the government a ban on the consumption, sale and manufacture of alcohol.
Supported by the Moslem Brotherhood, it was passed by 34 votes to 20.
The Middle East International of March 6 commented that the "Islamic movement had managed to score a moral victory over the government and to show that a solid secular force in Jordan does not actually exist" .
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
SYRIA
New term of office for Assad
President Hafez al-Assad was sworn in for a fourth term in office on March 12.
Assad's continuation in the post had been confirmed by a national referendum held in December 1991 [see p. 38695].
Assad delivered a major speech to the People's Assembly at the oath-taking ceremony on March 12.
In his speech Assad lauded the achievements of the Progressive National Front (the ruling Ba'ath-dominated coalition), but refused to rule out the future launch of new political parties.
Assad also hinted at further economic liberalization, promising a government statement on future economic policy.
During his speech Assad delivered a harsh attack on the relationship between Israel and the USA.
He accused the USA of attempting to strip Arabs of their military strength to force them to give in to Israeli demands in the Middle East peace negotiations.
According to the Independent of March 13 Assad's attack on the USA coincided with the ending of a virulent Syrian propaganda campaign against Iraq.
The report cited a number of subtle changes in Syria's relations with Iraq, including a resumption in postal services and Syrian television's decision to broadcast Baghdad weather forecasts.
At the same time, the report contended that Syria's relations with Damascus-based Iraqi opposition groups had deteriorated sharply.
Announcement of release of political prisoners
The Middle East Economic Digest of April 10 reported that Mohammad Harbah, the Interior Minister, had announced the release of some 600 "mainly political prisoners" in late March to mark the start of Assad's fourth term.
In December the government had announced the release of over 2,800 political prisoners [see p. 38695], although there had been no independent confirmation that all had been freed.
Visit to Egypt by Assad
President Assad visited Egypt on March 17-18 for talks with President Hosni Mubarak [see p. 38788 for February visit to Egypt by Syrian Prime Minister Mahmoud Zubi].
The talks focused mainly on the Middle East peace process.
The two leaders attended a news conference at the close of their talks at which Assad confirmed that Syria would "adhere to the peace process" ; Israel, he contended, was eventually "bound to appear as a state which does not want peace" .
During the course of the news conference both Assad and Mubarak said that they opposed any renewed military action against Iraq; Syria and Egypt had both committed ground forces to the US-led coalition which had ousted Iraq from Kuwait in February 1991.
The Financial Times of March 19 described Assad and Mubarak's comments as an "apparent signal" to the USA not to carry out further military action against Iraq.
Signing of agreement on nuclear safeguards
Syria and the International Atomic Energy Association (IAEA) signed accords in Vienna, Austria, on March 25 which allowed for the future inspection of all nuclear sites in Syria [see p. 38788 for visit by IAEA officials to Syria in February].
The Lebanese newspaper Al Hayat of March 26 reported that the Syrian People's assembly had approved the purchase of two small nuclear reactors from China.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
MIDDLE EAST
Fourth round of peace talks
The fourth round of bilateral Middle East peace talks between Israeli, Jordanian, Syrian, Palestinian and Lebanese delegations which had opened on Feb. 24 [see p. 38786]ended in Washington on March 4.
At the close of the round no significant progress had been achieved.
The delegations again failed to agree on when or where the negotiations should resume.
On March 3 the Palestinian delegation expanded on the self-government proposal placed on the table by them at the third round of talks held in Washington in January [see p. 38740].
The delegation presented a 16-page plan for the election of a Palestinian legislature to govern a demilitarized West Bank and Gaza Strip.
Predictably, the plan was rejected by the chief Israeli negotiator Elyakin Rubinstein, who described it as "a plan for a Palestinian state in all but name" .
Before concluding the fourth round, the chief negotiators of all five delegations met with US Secretary of State James Baker.
According to the Washington Post of March 6 Baker urged the delegations to focus on negotiating specific proposals.
Baker also reportedly criticized the Palestinian delegation for "posturing." 
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
IRAQ
Destruction of Scud missiles
UN ballistics experts confirmed in Baghdad on March 25 that they had "begun the process of destroying [Iraq's]ballistic missile repair and production facilities" used for its Scud missile programme.
The disclosure was made by Derek Boothby, head of a 35-member team which arrived in the country on March 21.
It followed Iraq's formal acceptance that it would comply with a UN directive demanding that it submit by March 27 a comprehensive plan for the destruction of equipment and installations used for its ballistic missiles programme.
Revealing details of Iraq's latest assurances delivered on March 20, Rolf Ekeus, head of the joint UN and International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) special commission on Iraq, told a press conference in New York the same day that his commission was "satisfied there are undertakings that the Iraqis are willing to go along with the destruction [of]capabilities" which they had not previously agreed to destroy.
Ekeus also indicated that Iraq had conceded "full, final and complete disclosure" of various other ballistic and chemical weapons programmes and had admitted to destroying up to 800 missiles not previously declared to UN inspectors — a move subsequently verified by Boothby on March 23.
(In January 1992 the USA had claimed that questions still remained about Iraq's short- and long-range missile capabilities — see pp. 38742-43.)
Iraq's decision to bow to UN pressure had been preceded by a robust defence of its policies by the Deputy Prime Minister, Tariq Aziz.
Aziz told the UN Security Council on March 12 that although his government was ready to co-operate in providing details of its weapons programme, it "will not bargain over [Iraq's]independence [and]its people's freedom" .
Claiming that some weapons equipment "could be diverted to civilian use" , Aziz stressed that Iraq had to be allowed to establish civilian industries which would "benefit our people" .
(On Feb. 28 the UN Security Council had warned Iraq of "serious consequences" after ballistic experts were refused permission to destroy Scud missile equipment, on the grounds that they could be of use in civilian industry — see p. 38788.)
On March 12 the UN Security Council responded to Aziz by reiterating that Iraq had "not yet complied fully and unconditionally" with Gulf ceasefire resolutions and that it "must immediately take the appropriate actions in this regard" .
In an apparently conciliatory gesture, the statement also noted that the Council "hopes that the goodwill expressed by the Deputy Prime Minister of Iraq will be matched by deeds" .
Press speculation over plans by Western allies to take military action against Iraq to force compliance intensified after US officials confirmed on March 13 that the US aircraft carrier America had entered the Gulf to send a "clear signal" to President Saddam Hussein.
A United Kingdom parliamentary select committee report, released on March 16, blamed the Ministry of Defence and the Department of Trade and Industry for failing to recognize that Iraq was engaged in the manufacture of a "super-gun" [see pp. 37390-91; 37471; 38361; 38743; 38788].
The report dismissed earlier suggestions of a deliberate cover-up by civil servants or government ministers [see p. 38788].
Destruction of chemical weapons
A sixth UN chemical weapons inspection team which began work in late February [see p. 38788]left the country on March 24 after overseeing the destruction of more than 460 leaking 122mm rockets at a munitions site in Khamisiya, 300 km south of Baghdad [for fifth chemical weapons inspection see pp. 38548; 38598].
The team headed by Michel Desgranges which had been due to leave Iraq on March 13, postponed its departure after the discovery of hundreds of additional leaking chemical rockets.
Talks on nuclear weapons destruction
Iraq was ordered by the IAEA on March 25 to demolish "relevant equipment and facilities" at the Al-Atheer site, south-west of Baghdad [see p. 38548], on the grounds that the "IAEA remains convinced that the technical core of the facility was designed for special processes needed for nuclear weapons development and manufacturing" .
The order, issued at the end of talks between IAEA and Iraqi officials in Vienna on March 20-25, was described as "unfair" by the chief Iraqi negotiator, Khalid Ibrahim Sa'id, who had reportedly argued against Al-Atheer's destruction, saying that it had originally been conceived as a civilian facility and should be allowed to continue operating as such.
Reports in early March had indicated that the IAEA had sought to play down the significance of a recent report submitted to the UN in which it was claimed that Iraq was offering "better co-operation" to IAEA inspectors.
Resumption of oil talks
Talks between UN and Iraqi officials on the sale of limited quantities of Iraqi oil for humanitarian purposes [see pp. 38742; 38788-89]resumed in Vienna on March 26-28, but ended amid reports of continuing differences between the two sides.
Despite initial optimism expressed by Abdul Amir al-Anbari, Iraq's permanent representative at the UN and head of the Iraqi delegation, it was understood that the UN side, led by Assistant Secretary-General Giandomenico Picco, had been severely constrained by the terms set by UN Security Council resolutions on Iraqi oil exports [see pp. 38406; 38452; 38548].
A Health Ministry report released on March 9 said that a further 21,772 Iraqis, of whom 8,081 were children under five, had died over the past two months from a shortage of humanitarian supplies [see also pp. 38696; 38742; 38789].
Condemnation by UN Human Rights Commission
The UN Human Rights Commission (UNHRC) adopted a resolution on March 5 condemning Iraq for human rights violations of "the gravest nature" , including systematic torture and mass executions.
The resolution, based on a report submitted to the UNHRC in February [see p. 38789], was passed by a vote of 35 to one (Iraq), with 16 abstentions.
On March 3 the government had announced the creation of a human rights department in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to examine and promote human rights in Iraq and abroad.
International support for Kurdish autonomy
The head of the Kurdish Democratic Party (KDP), Massoud Barzani, held talks in early March with government leaders in the UK, France and Germany, and was assured of continuing Western support for Kurdish autonomy.
Reports on March 19 said that Iran would supply food and fuel at low prices to Kurdish-controlled areas to undermine a government-imposed blockade of northern Iraq [see pp. 38548; 38598; 38743; 38789].
According to an Agence France-Presse (AFP) report on March 9, representatives from the KDP and the Iraqi government held talks in Baghdad in early March to discuss the government's embargo and the outbreak of renewed fighting in northern Iraq.
A National Assembly statement issued on March 26 rejected a resolution adopted by the European Parliament on March 12 condemning the "siege imposed on the Kurds" .
The statement claimed that "foreigners in northern Iraq are preventing the delivery" of essential supplies.
Budget for 1993 — War damage estimate
The 1993 budget, of which no details were released, was approved by the National Assembly on Feb. 13.
Reports indicated, however, that as in the 1992 budget [see p. 38211 where it was wrongly given as the 1991 budget; for 1991 budget see p. 38072], there was special emphasis on the reconstruction of the country's social, economic and industrial infrastructure.
War damage to the industrial sector was estimated at US$4,000 million, according to a statement issued on Feb. 27 by the Minister of Industry, Minerals and Military Industrialization, Lt.-Gen.
Ammir Hammoudi al Saadi.
Opening of Baghdad stock exchange
Prime Minister Muhammad Hamzah al-Zubaydi opened the Baghdad stock exchange on March 23, the first in the Iraqi capital since 1938.
Planned before the Gulf war, it formed part of the government's privatization programme which had led between 1987 and 1990 to the privatization of some 80 state-owned businesses.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
IRAN
Expulsion of ICRC representatives
The Foreign Ministry on March 21 announced that International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) operations in Iran were to be frozen and all its 15 staff were to leave the country by March 28.
The ICRC in Geneva denied allegations that the ICRC delegates had gone beyond the limits of their competence within the Geneva conventions.
The Iranian government had claimed that they had supplied information for the UN report on human rights in Iran, published in February, which noted the continuing use of torture and other abuses.
On Feb. 14 an agreement was signed in Geneva by Iran and Iraq, under the auspices of the ICRC, to bring to completion the repatriation of 20,000 prisoners of war from both countries who still remained from the Iran-Iraq war.
These final exchanges were to have taken place at the border town of Mundhiriya from March 14, but did not in the event go ahead as scheduled.
The expulsion of the ICRC delegates therefore appeared to be linked to the run-up to the general election due on April 10, as conservatives maintained that the government exerted insufficient pressure on the ICRC for the return of some 5,000 Iranian prisoners who some believed had survived in Iraq: the ICRC had been unable to locate prisoners in these numbers, while it was supervising the return of some 20,000 prisoners from Iran to Iraq.
The head of the judiciary, Ayatollah Mohammed Ali Yazdi, at Friday prayers on March 20 mentioned the unprecedented access that ICRC delegates had recently been given to Iranian prisons, and said that the delegates should be replaced by a more competent team because they had given their "legal work…a political hue" .
Observers also noted that the ICRC tended to be associated in Iranian eyes with the Swiss government — with which there were continuing tensions because Switzerland appeared ready to allow the extradition to France of Zeyal Sarhadi, an Iranian suspected of involvement in the August 1991 murder of former Prime Minister Shapour Bakhtiar [see pp. 37409; 38697].
Further reports of nuclear weapons purchases
Iran's nuclear programme continued to be a focus of attention, as the German magazine Stern of March 15 cited intelligence sources for a report that Iran had obtained two nuclear warheads and a medium-range delivery system from newly independent Kazakhstan.
There was speculation that the warheads were to be used as models for Iranian production of similar armaments, since Iran did not have the codes which were necessary to fire them.
Earlier reports of such purchases by Iran from the former Soviet republics and North Korea had been denied on Jan. 8 by Iran's mission to the UN Security Council The permanent representative of the Russian Federation at the UN, Yuliy Vorontsov, had made similar denials on Jan. 23.
On Jan. 29 the Iranian government denied claims made in the UK press that it was seeking to recruit nuclear scientists from the former Soviet Union.
Iranian interests in USA
A government spokesman confirmed on March 11 that Pakistan, rather than Algeria, would henceforth represent Iranian interests in the USA.
Algeria's relations with Iran had deteriorated after the moves to deny electoral victory to the Islamic Salvation Front in January [see pp. 38702-703]and the arrests of FIS activists.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
SAUDI ARABIA
Decree on Consultative Council
A royal decree on March 1 provided for the creation within six months of a Consultative Council (majlis ash-shoura), to be composed of 60 members and a chairman.
The decree noted that the creation of the Council was in fulfilment of the Islamic injunction on the umma (community of believers) "to engage in consultations" .
The Council would be "founded on adherence to God's bonds and commitment to the sources of Islamic jurisprudence" .
Its 60 members would be appointed every four years and would be "chosen by the King from amongst scholars and men of knowledge and expertise" .
The decree defined the areas on which the Council would "express opinions" as including the general plan of economic and social development, annual reports submitted by ministries, international laws and treaties and the interpretation of laws.
Membership of the Council was a salaried position and members would not be allowed to combine membership of the Council with any other government post, or with company directorships — unless they had special permission from the King.
Regional authorities and law of government
Two other decrees on March 1 provided the legal framework for the creation of regional authorities and for a "basic law of government" .
The law of government amounted to a written constitution, decreeing that Saudi Arabia was an hereditary monarchy and that "citizens are to pay allegiance to the King in accordance with the Holy Quran and the Prophet's tradition" .
The decree ruled on the procedure for the appointment of the judiciary, the Council of Ministers and military commanders.
The "freedom of private property" was to be protected by the state, and taxes were to be imposed "on a basis of justice and only when the need for them arises" .
The state "protects human rights in accordance with the Islamic Sharia,…supports the system of social security" and "provides job opportunities for whoever is capable of working" .
It was for the state to legislate "to protect" both employer and employee.
The decree on regional authorities defined the duties of the Amir of each of Saudi Arabia's regions.
He would be accountable to the Minister of the Interior and would head a regional council which would include, as well as local officials, "not less than 10 people of learning, experience, and competence from the public" .
The people of learning would be appointed every four years.
The creation of some form of consultative body had been promised since at least a year earlier.
The legislation was hailed as a cautious first move by the Saudi government towards modifying the power of the monarchy, which until then — in theory at least— had been absolute.
The decrees trod a line between concessions towards radical Islamic sentiment on the one hand and towards the business community on the other.
In an interview with the Kuwaiti newspaper Al-Siyasa of March 28 King Fahd said that the "prevailing democratic system in the world" was not suitable for the region, and that Islam favoured "the consultative system and the openness between the ruler and his subjects" rather than the "free elections" , which might be suitable for other countries.
According to the Middle East Times of March 10-16 some Saudi women were disappointed to find no mention of women in the legislation.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
LIBYA
UN resolution anticipating sanctions
The UN Security Council on March 31 approved Resolution 748 that if Libya on April 15 had still failed to comply with the UN resolution of Jan. 21 by handing over the two Lockerbie bombing suspects [see p. 38743], UN member-states would impose mandatory sanctions against Libya.
The sanctions anticipated for April 15 included (i) the denial of airport facilities to any aircraft flying to or from Libya, except in cases of urgent humanitarian need;(ii) the withholding of aircraft insurance or maintenance services, aircraft and aircraft components from Libya;(iii) the withholding of any kind of arms, military equipment or paramilitary police equipment;(iv) the withdrawal of any military advisers currently advising the Libyan authorities;(v) significant reductions in staff levels at diplomatic missions in Libya;(iv) moves to "prevent the operation" of Libyan Arab Airlines; and (vii) the denial of entry, or expulsion, of Libyans expelled or excluded from other states due to their "terrorist activities" .
The sanctions would not include, however, an embargo on the purchase of Libyan oil, or other forms of trade embargo.
The Security Council took a position on the broader issue of Libyan sponsorship of "terrorist groups" , noting that the "suppression of acts of international terrorism…is essential for the maintenance of international peace and security" .
It called on Libya to show with "concrete measures" that it had renounced the use of terrorist methods.
Such measures were understood to include the closing of camps in Libya in which groups from various parts of the world were said to receive training.
Like the Jan. 21 resolution, this resolution also urged Libyan co-operation with the French inquiry into the 1989 incident over Chad [see p. 38599].
Five of the 15 Council members — Cape Verde, China, India, Morocco, and Zimbabwe — abstained from the vote, which was supported by the other 10 countries.
There was reported to have been intense lobbying of UN delegates by US and other officials in the days preceding the vote, which was originally scheduled for March 30, but was postponed to avoid offending Islamic sensibilities on the feast-day of Laila al-Qadr.
This was only the fourth time on which the UN had imposed sanctions, the previous occasions being sanctions against Rhodesia, South Africa and Iraq.
Alternative proposals
Earlier in March there had been a number of developments in the on-going extradition dispute.
On Feb. 29 Sweden announced that it had rejected a Libyan request made earlier in February via UN officials for the two Libyans, Abdel Baset Ali Mohammed al-Megrahi and al-Amin Khalifa Fhimah, to be tried in Sweden.
On March 1 the Libyan Secretary for Foreign Affairs, Ibrahim Bishari, said after a meeting in Cairo with the Russian Foreign Minister Andrei Kozyrev that Libya "is ready to hand over the two suspects for trial in front of a neutral court in any neutral country" .
In mid-March President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt was said to have proposed that the two men should stand trial in Morocco.
King Hassan of Morocco at the beginning of the month had said that the trial should be held "on neutral ground" , possibly under UN auspices.
Stephen Mitchell, a United Kingdom lawyer representing the two Libyans, was quoted on UK television as saying that Cyprus, Egypt, France or Italy would be acceptable as neutral ground for a trial.
Libyan application to Hague Court
On March 3 Libya appealed to the International Court of Justice in the Hague (as the judicial arm of the UN), asking it to take measures to prevent the dispute escalating.
Three days later the ICJ announced that on March 26 it would open hearings on Libya's application concerning the interpretation by the USA and the UK of the 1971 Montreal Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Civil Aviation.
Libya had asked the ICJ Court to "enjoin" the UK and the USA from taking action "calculated to compel and coerce" Libya into surrendering the two men.
A US State Department representative Edwin Williamson on March 27 told the hearing that the Libyan application was an attempt to "short-circuit" the UN Security Council, and that the USA sought to break all links "between Libya and terrorism" .
After a session on March 26-27, the ICJ was due to resume the hearings on April 4.
Arab League intervention
An Arab League meeting in Cairo on March 22 appeared to have produced an acceptable compromise proposal: al-Megrahi and Fhimah would be handed over first to the Arab League, which would then through UN channels deliver them to either the UK or the US judicial authorities; the League then sent a delegation to Tripoli to negotiate the terms of the handover.
The USA and the UK were reported on March 23 to have suspended their campaign for the approval of UN sanctions, but in a volte-face on March 25 Libya refused to hand the two men over.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
ALGERIA
Dissolution of FIS — Suspension of municipal councils
The Islamic Salvation Front (FIS) was dissolved on March 4 by a decision of the administrative chamber of the Algiers Court of Appeal.
The lawyer representing the FIS leadership, Abdenour Ali Yahya, said an appeal would be made against the decision.
The decision concluded a judicial process that had been initiated on the petition of the Interior Minister, Maj.-Gen.
Larbi Belkheir on Feb. 9.
Belkheir had accused the FIS of "multiple violations" of the law on political parties of July 1989, which among other things forbade any party created exclusively on the basis of religion [see p. 36834].
The announcement of the dissolution of the FIS gave rise to protests in the east of Algeria, in Constantine, Jenis and Jechan (resulting in one person being killed and 30 injured).
The dissolution was criticized by the Socialist Forces Front (FFS) and by Ahmed Ben Bella, leader of the Movement of Democracy in Algeria (MDA).
The secretary-general of the former ruling party, the National Liberation Front (FLN), Abdelhamid Mehri, said that the banning did not solve the two major problems facing Algeria, namely widespread demands for change "which the FIS has been able to channel to its advantage" , and the existence of a "well-rooted Islamic movement which must be taken into account in one way or another" .
On March 29 the Cabinet approved the suspension of municipal and provincial councils, announcing that the measure would affect 397 out of the country's 1,541 municipalities, and 14 of its 48 provinces.
Newly created "executive delegations" would carry out the functions of the dissolved councils.
The move was an attempt to break the hold over local government of the FIS, which in June 1990 had won control of 853 municipalities and 32 provinces [see pp. 37549-50].
Official figures on detentions — Releases
The authorities hastened to present details of the detentions carried out since mid-January, which had attracted concerned comment from both Algerian and international human rights organizations.
The Interior Minister Larbi Belkheir said on March 12 that 6,786 people interned in January and February were being held in five camps in the Sahara.
A further two camps were later set up further south, in the Tamanrasset region, and on March 22, detainees' families heard that some 600 prisoners had been transferred there.
Of a further 2,217 people who had been charged in court by March 12, over half had been sentenced to prison terms.
Belkheir said that in the unrest since January 103 people had died (a revision of the previous figure — see p. 38790) and 414 had been wounded.
Of those killed, 31 had been members of the police or army.
The human rights organization Amnesty International criticized the detentions and the treatment of detainees in a report on March 27.
On March 31, 150 detainees were released from the Reggane camp (1,600 km south of Algiers) in time for the end of the holy month of Ramadan on April 3.
Other releases were reported from Ouargla and In-Salah.
Among those released on March 31 was Rabeh Kebir, described as the head of the FIS political and foreign relations committee [see pp. 38703; 38790].
Ali Yahya (who was also chair of the Algerian League of Human Rights — LADH) said that charges against Kebir had been dropped as a result of an Algiers court hearing.
Death sentences
Three members of the illegal Hezbollah organization were condemned to death on March 1 by a criminal court in Tlemcen.
They were found guilty of murder and of illegal carrying of arms in connection with an incident near Tlemcen in July 1990, when a guard was killed as they attempted to seize explosives from a quarry.
Little was known about the Algerian Hezbollah, although a group of that name had unsuccessfully applied for recognition as a political party in March 1990.
Lifting of subsidies
It was announced on March 31 that subsidies were to be lifted from 16 consumer commodities, i.e. all except for semolina, flour, milk and bread.
No details had yet been published of an economic recovery plan which the government had announced in January.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
EGYPT
Alleged fundamentalist plot
Further details were published by the Egyptian press on March 10 of an alleged Islamic fundamentalist plot that had been uncovered in February.
Its leaders were said to have been three executives of the Salsabil computer company, who were now under arrest.
Police said that the company's records showed that the Moslem Brotherhood had been involved in a plot to overthrow the Egyptian government and create an Islamic state, with the support of foreign countries including Afghanistan, Iran, Iraq, Pakistan and Turkey.
The three alleged leaders arrested were Moslem Brotherhood members, although their lawyer on March 15 denied that they had been involved in any type of illegal activity.
In February the authorities had said that the three had been providing unspecified international agencies with information on human rights in Egypt and on public opinion with respect to the economic situation.
The Salsabil company was also said to have supplied false statistics to be used by Egyptian opposition groups.
The Interior Minister, Mohammed Abdel-Halim Moussa was reported on March 13 to have told journalists that university professors, politicians and members of educational organizations who were influential in trade unions were implicated in this plot.
The Public Prosecution Office was completing its investigations.
The (unnamed) organization responsible for the conspiracy was said to be directed by a committee of 75 members, and there were also allegations of plans to mount a money-laundering operation.
A further 25 members of the alleged group had initially been arrested.
Alleged Israeli spy-ring case
On March 29 in a session in camera, the judges of the court of Heliopolis, a Cairo suburb, decided to remand in custody the four defendants in the alleged Israeli spy case for 45 days pending further investigations [see p. 38792].
An opponent of the Egyptian government, Gen. Saadeddine Chazli, 70, was arrested on March 14 as he arrived from Algeria, where he had lived in exile since the late 1970s.
In July 1983 he had been sentenced, in his absence, to three years of forced labour for revealing information likely to harm state security.
Killing of policeman
On March 10 the official news agency reported that approximately 150 sympathizers of an Islamic group had been arrested in the province of Fayoum.
A senior security service officer had been machine-gunned a week earlier in Fayoum town (about 100 km from Cairo) as local tensions that dated from the previous year had flared up.
The Egyptian press gave various names to the fundamentalist group allegedly involved.
Sporadic tension continued between Moslems and Coptic Christians, and on March 11 there were reports of a clash in Asyut in which three people were killed and five injured.
Attack on fundamentalism and ethnic intolerance by Mubarak
In a speech on March 30 to mark the Moslem feast-day of Lailat al-Qadr, President Hosni Mubarak made more direct criticism than previously of "religious fanaticism" which had strayed from the correct teachings of Islam, and "ethnic fanaticism" (the latter an allusion to attacks against Coptic Christians).
He said that "intellectual terrorism" was incompatible with true religious thinking, and made indirect allusion to the phenomenon of Islamic investment companies, which in the late 1980s had attracted the savings of small investors.
Subsequent allegations of mishandling of funds had led the government to intervene through the socialist people's prosecutor.
Mubarak thus referred to those "who falsely use the Islamic logo to cover up their acts;…religion to these people becomes a trade." 
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
MOROCCO
On March 3 King Hassan announced that at some time prior to the legislative elections which were scheduled for Oct. 9, 1992, constitutional changes to establish a better balance between legislative and executive bodies would be put to a referendum.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
TUNISIA
On March 13 it was announced that a human rights unit had been created within in the Foreign, Justice and Interior Ministries "with responsibility for following up international organizations' activities in the sphere of human rights" ; this followed a report released by Amnesty International on March 3, which had alleged the routine use of torture.
INTERNATIONAL
CSCE
Foreign Ministers' meeting — Signature of "Open Skies" treaty
The third meeting of the Council of Foreign Ministers of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE) was held in Helsinki on March 24-26 [for previous meeting see p. 38745].
Membership of the CSCE increased to 51 countries with the admission of Croatia, Georgia and Slovenia.
Although the primary purpose of the meeting was to initiate a follow-up conference on the future role of the CSCE, the meeting was dominated by discussions on the resolution of the conflict in Nagorny-Karabakh [see pp. 38827-28].
On March 24 delegates also signed the "open skies" treaty [see below].
The main outcome of the meeting was a commitment to the principle that the CSCE should have a peacekeeping capability.
Observers noted that while there was general agreement that the CSCE was the best forum for taking political decisions on peacekeeping forces, it was as yet undecided whether the organization should have its own forces (as proposed by the German government) or whether other bodies such as the Western European Union, the North Atlantic Treat Organization (NATO) or the UN should provide forces (as advocated by the USA, the United Kingdom and others).
The blueprint for strengthening the CSCE's ability to deal with crises and conflicts in Europe would be worked out by senior officials in a three-month conference, to culminate in a CSCE summit in July.
Signature of "open skies" treaty
Foreign ministers attending the CSCE conference in Helsinki on March 24 signed an agreement regulating reconnaissance flights over each other 's territories.
Known as the "open skies" treaty, it was heralded as first arms control agreement of the post-Cold-War.
The concept of "open skies" was first proposed by President Eisenhower in 1955, but rejected at that time by the Soviet Union.
It was resurrected in May 1989 by US President Bush at the NATO summit [see pp. 36642-44; 37112]as a means of enhancing trust and building confidence between NATO and Warsaw Pact member countries as well as of monitoring compliance with arms-control and disarmament treaties.
It was agreed in principle by the 16 NATO and seven Warsaw Pact countries at a conference in Ottawa, Canada, in February 1990 [see pp. 37259-60]but then stalled because of concerns by the Soviet Union and its disintegration.
Negotiations were resumed in December 1991 under the auspices of the CSCE.
The treaty outlined a complex system of quotas and agreed technology (including cameras, video cameras, infra-red scanning equipment and all-weather radar) to allow signatory countries to overfly at 72 hours' notice other countries for military reconnaissance purposes.
Any information gained from aerial surveillance would have to be made available to other signatory countries on request.
A commission would meet annually to reallocate flight quotas and to discuss technical questions and improvements.
CSCE members who were not members of NATO or the defunct Warsaw Pact would invited to accede to the treaty before it took effect in 1993.
Observers noted that the open skies treaty would offer a source of information on military movements for countries which lacked a satellite capability, the main means by which the USA and the Soviet Union gathered such intelligence on each other in the past.
Other confidence-building measures
The CSCE countries on March 4 reached agreement on a wide range of confidence-building measures.
These included an extensive exchange of technical data on new weapons systems, exchange of information on the mobilization of military units, and a ban on military activities involving more than 400,000 troops or 900 tanks more than once every two years.
INTERNATIONAL
NATO
NACC meeting
The North Atlantic Co-operation Council (NACC), the joint security forum of the members of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and the former Warsaw Pact set up in November 1991 [see pp. 38600, 38699], held its second meeting in Brussels on March 10.
All the former Soviet republics with the exception of Georgia were admitted as members.
At the meeting, which was dominated by exchanges on the conflict in Nagorny-Karabakh [see pp. 38827-28], the foreign ministers agreed to hold regular joint discussions on political and security concerns in post-Cold-War Europe, on arms control measures, and on the conversion of arms industries to civilian use.
A final statement declared: "We are determined to work together towards a new, lasting order of peace in Europe through dialogue, partnership and co-operation." 
Particular attention was paid to the future role of the council, in view of the significance of other intergovernmental bodies such as the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE).
Several NATO representatives suggested that "NATO could lend material support or even troops to the CSCE if needed and if agreed by our member countries" , in the words of the Dutch Foreign Minister, Hans van den Broek.
He suggested that NATO peacekeeping troops could act under the aegis of the CSCE after it had exhausted its political mechanisms.
Wörner visit to Poland and Baltic states
The Secretary-General of NATO, Manfred Wörner, visited Poland, Latvia, Estonia and Lithuania between March 11 and 16.
He held meetings — the first of their kind — with government leaders in each of the four countries.
Throughout his tour he reiterated NATO's pledge that no "security vacuum" would be allowed to develop in eastern Europe.
He insisted that all countries of the region would benefit from NATO's stabilizing influence, but warned that the alliance would not be able to offer formal security guarantees or membership.
Wörner had visited Romania on Feb. 21.
INTERNATIONAL
DISARMAMENT
Chinese signature of NPT
China formally acceded to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) on March 10.
The Chinese Foreign Minister, Qian Qichen, described his government's decision as a "major step in a process towards the complete prohibition and thorough destruction of nuclear weapons" .
He also denied that China had in the past "advocated, encouraged or engaged in the proliferation of nuclear weapons" and promised that China would seek to help prevent the spread of nuclear weapons and work for nuclear disarmament.
The treaty was agreed by the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom and the USA in 1968 [see p. 22787-90].
France had announced in June 1991 that it would sign the treaty [see p. 38314].
Baker-Kozyrev meeting
The US Secretary of State, James Baker, and the Russian Foreign Minister, Andrei Kozyrev, held a meeting in Brussels on March 11 to discuss nuclear disarmament issues [for their first meeting in February see pp. 38792-93].
They declared that they both agreed on the need for further reductions in their respective nuclear stockpiles, but that they had not yet agreed on which types of weapons should be reduced and the speed of reductions.
At the concluding press conference Baker affirmed that there was "a genuine desire to move beyond the requirements" of the Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty (START) signed by US President Bush and the former Soviet President, Mikhail Gorbachev, in July 1991 [see p. 38320].
Kozyrev highlighted the spirit of co-operation between the two sides: "We worked as friends and allies standing on one side of the barricade of all the problems that beset us on the other." 
The Russian government called for a speedier reduction of multiple-warhead (MIRV) missiles than was envisaged in the START treaty, possible even their elimination by the year 2000, while the US side preferred a longer time-scale to enable it to make a more detailed assessment of its perceived nuclear defence needs.
It was agreed to have further meetings on the issue in advance of the US-Russian summit planned for June in Washington.
INTERNATIONAL
ARMS TRADE
Arrival of North Korean Scuds in Iran
A North Korean cargo ship, Dae Hung Ho, docked at the Iranian port of Bandar Abbas in the Strait of Hormuz, having evaded a threatened interception by the US navy in the Persian Gulf.
The vessel, monitored by the US navy since its departure in late February from North Korea, had (while docked in Singapore) given its ultimate destination as Equatorial Guinea.
It was allegedly carrying Scud-C missiles for delivery to Iran or Syria, a claim dismissed by the North Korean government, which condemned the US pressure as illegal intereference in its shipping.
The Scud-C missile, built in North Korea, was an advanced version of the Soviet-designed Scud-B missile (used by Iraq in the 1991 Gulf war), and had a maximum range of about 500 km.
According to the USA, 24 Scud-Cs had been delivered by North Korea to Syria in March 1991 as part of an agreed sale of 150.
The USA was authorized both by international law and by UN sanctions to intercept shipping destined for Iraq in the wake of the Gulf war, but had no authority to divert shipments bound for Iran or Syria because Iran, North Korea and Syria were not signatories to the Missile Technology Control Regime.
Its aim in threatening to intercept the Dae Hung Ho had been to underscore the US position against missile proliferation in the region.
In the following week US officials expressed concern at alleged fresh shipments of weapons aboard North Korean ships, reported to be Scud-Cs, surface-to-surface missiles or Chinese M-9s.
They also alleged that North Korea was developing new long-range missiles [for US concern over North Korea's nuclear programme, see p. 38819].
Allegations of Israeli supply of missile technology to China
Israel, which had urged the USA to block the Dae Hung Ho, continued throughout March to deny charges that it had transferred US Patriot missile technology (also used in the 1991 Gulf war) to China in defiance of controls agreed with the US administration.
US inspectors sent to Israel to investigate the claims (which followed a Defence Department-commissioned report by the Rand Corporation) finished their work on March 29 but did not comment on its results.
The Rand Corporation's report claimed that Israel had become a back door for Chinese acquisition of military technology.
Other Western arms trade developments
The USA accounted for a dominant two-thirds share of 1991 arms sales to the Middle East, the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute (SIPRI) stated in March.
SIPRI also reported that countries in south-east Asia had overtaken the Middle East in the purchase of weapons.
Press reports pointed to efforts by Western arms companies to expand this market to compensate for falling sales to the USA and Europe since the end of the Cold War.
In a deal with the US Justice Department in March, the Japan Aviation Electronics Industry paid a US$15,000,000 fine for the illegal export to Iran of defence-related products made under licence from US companies.
On March 26 Germany halted military aid and arms supplies to its NATO ally Turkey in protest at the latter's repression of its Kurdish minority [see p. 38822].
INTERNATIONAL
UNITED NATIONS
New members
On March 2 the UN General Assembly approved applications for membership from eight former Soviet republics and San Marino, bringing the UN's total membership to 175.
The Security Council had recommended the applications during February.
All the former Soviet republics except Georgia were now UN members.
Ukraine and Byelarus had been members since 1945, the three Baltic states joined in September 1991 [see p. 38458], Russia assumed the Soviet Union's seat in December [see p. 38744], and the eight joining on March 2 were Armenia, Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan, Kirgizstan, Moldova, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan.
INTERNATIONAL
GATT
Uruguay Round deadlock
Negotiations for a new world trade agreement under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) remained blocked by disagreement between the USA and the European Communities (EC), despite a new US offer on farm support rules.
The crucial obstacle was still the dispute over agricultural exports and farm subsidies, but reports that the USA wanted to exempt its key service sectors from freer trade rules added new tensions to the negotiations.
Under planned reforms of the EC's common agricultural policy, the EC intended to bring in direct income support payments for farmers, to compensate in part for cuts in price support subsidies.
The US side had previously wanted these payments to be considered like other farm supports, and reduced accordingly, in the framework of GATT's current Uruguay Round.
Press reports suggested that the US side was now showing greater flexibility on this issue, in new proposals in a letter from US President Bush to EC Commission President Jacques Delors.
US Secretary of State James Baker announced the existence of the new US offer, but no details of its content, after a meeting with Delors in Brussels on March 10.
However, EC officials said that major disagreements remained.
Disagreements remained over US demands for cuts in the volume of EC farm exports, the level of reductions in price subsidies, and EC proposals to limit US exports to the EC of cereal substitutes.
The Uruguay Round of GATT talks, begun in 1986, aimed at creating a new framework for world trade.
After missing an earlier deadline of December 1990 and a series of other target dates for completing the round, negotiators were trying to meet GATT Secretary-General Arthur Dunkel's new target of April [see p. 38746].
German Chancellor Helmut Kohl said after talks with Bush in the USA on March 21-22 that both men and the other EC leaders all wanted an agreement by the end of April.
He said that there would have to be compromise but gave no indication of any new breakthrough.
In the Financial Times of March 28 Bush's spokesman, Marlin Fitzwater, was reported as saying in the week following the talks that the President was concerned about "the possible collapse" of the Uruguay Round.
He was speaking after meetings in Washington between Dunkel and US trade officials.
US proposal to exempt service sectors
Press reports in the week of March 23 said that the USA was seeking exemptions from free trade rules for four key service sectors: maritime transport, financial services, air transport and basic telecommunications.
EC officials said that the move endangered attempts to reach an overall GATT agreement.
Under the proposed exemptions, the USA would refuse to guarantee equal treatment, or "most-favoured-nation" status, to its trade partners in these sectors.
The Financial Times of March 26 quoted the US ambassador to GATT, Rufus Yerxa, as saying that the USA was seeking the exemptions because the proposals of other nations to open their markets were not adequate to ensure a balanced accord.
GATT criticism of US policies
A report by the GATT secretariat expressed concern over US trade policies on March 12, in an unusual criticism of a member state.
It contrasted US emphasis on regional and bilateral accords with the principles of freer world trade.
 "Concern about the erosion of basic GATT principles by regionalism, bilateralism, unilateralism or various forms of" managed "trade is increasing," the report said.
The USA was negotiating a North American free trade arrangement (NAFTA) with Canada and Mexico [see p. 38761], and was discussing arrangements with other countries of the Americas.
GATT said that such preferential agreements could have a far-reaching impact on world trade.
INTERNATIONAL
COMMODITIES
Sharp fall in gold price
The price of gold fell to its lowest level for six years on March 17, to US$336 per troy ounce at the London bullion market (compared with over $800 in 1980).
Experts attributed the fall to a range of short-term factors, including a usual seasonal slump (following a period of peak consumption at Christmas and at the Chinese New Year) combined with the Islamic holy month of Ramadan (during which trading was traditionally subdued in Middle Eastern countries), selling by central banks in Eastern Europe and former Soviet republics, and the lifting of the ban on gold imports by the Indian government (which was expected to reduce the price of gold in that country, one of the world's major importers).
Longer-term factors which had led to a decline in the gold price were lack of demand because of the prolonged recession in the USA and the slowdown in activity in other major industrialized countries, a switch by investors from the gold market to financial markets, and a failure to limit production and thus reduce supplies (particularly in South Africa, the world's largest producer).
US withdrawal from ISO
The United States on March 24 announced its decision to withdraw from the International Sugar Organization (ISO), which brought together all major producers and consumers of sugar.
The decision was taken after other member countries refused to accept US demands for a reduction of its contribution to the ISO's budget and for its redefinition as a "study group" rather than a body with price-stabilizing powers.
The US insisted that so-called "economic provisions" be removed from the International Sugar Agreement which was currently under renegotiation.
AT US insistence the existing agreement, which had come into force in 1987, had already been stripped of its provisions to intervene in the market.
INTERNATIONAL
ENVIRONMENT
CITES meeting
Representatives of the 114 governments which had signed the 1975 Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of wild fauna and flora (CITES) held their triennial meeting on March 2-13 in Kyoto, Japan [for 1989 meeting see pp. 36988-89].
Ivory trade ban.
The African elephant had been classified in 1989 as an endangered species (i.e. placed on the CITES Appendix I list), so that trade in the species and its products was banned.
However, five southern African countries — Botswana, Malawi, Namibia, South Africa and Zimbabwe — argued that their elephant herds were healthy and growing, and that they should be allowed to manage them through "sustainable utilization" , including regulated trading in ivory and other products from legally culled elephants.
During the Kyoto session the southern African representatives advanced a compromise formula, which would allow them to resume regulated trade (i.e. with reclassification of the African elephant to Appendix II), and to resume selling elephant hides and meat, but with an initial zero quota (until 1994) for ivory.
Western countries including France, Germany, the UK and, after initial uncertainty, the USA, supported continuing total protection for elephants (as for rhinoceroses, cheetahs and leopards).
Other African countries were vocally hostile to allowing any legal trade, which, they said, would merely provoke an upsurge in poaching since it would effectively be impossible to check the origin of products offered for the market.
The southern African delegations withdrew their proposed compromise on March 10, amid complaints of "conservation imperialism" and warnings that they would now have to confer with their governments on the question of remaining within CITES.
Protection for black bear.
The Danish government successfully sponsored a proposal originating with US conservationist groups, but opposed by the US government, to list the black bear in Appendix II and thereby limit trade in bear gall bladders (which, like rhino horn and other exotic products, were used in oriental traditional medicine).
Major importing countries such as Taiwan and South Korea, however, were not CITES signatories.
Controversy over bluefin tuna.
A Swedish proposal to ban fishing for bluefin tuna in the west Atlantic, and to limit catches in the eastern Atlantic, was withdrawn on March 10.
Japan, which consumed 40 per cent of the world's annual catch of 38,000 tonnes, joined with Canada and the USA (where bluefin tuna were caught for sport) and Morocco in arguing that stocks were effectively monitored by the International Commission for Conservation of Atlantic Tuna.
Catch reductions were promised, however.
Dutch proposals to include two tropical hardwood tree species under CITES listing provoked the angry Malaysian response that CITES "should not be used as a tool to straitjacket international trade in timber" , for which the International Tropical Timber Organization was already responsible.
A report to the meeting listed 135 infractions of CITES trade restrictions in 1989-91, over half involving EC countries.
Altogether some 2,500 animal species and 35,000 plants were listed either in Appendix I or Appendix II; the Kyoto meeting added a further 45 and approved the upgrading of protection for some 35 species transferred to the Appendix 1 list.
The organization's Swiss-based secretariat and new Secretary-General,
Russian nuclear accidents
A radiation leak occurred at the Russian nuclear power station at Sosnovyy Bor, 90 km west of St Petersburg, on March 24.
The incident rated two on the seven-point scale of nuclear accidents used by the International Atomic Energy Agency, and resulted in slight increases in radiation in the surrounding area, including parts of Finland, but not sufficient to threaten human health, according to Russian and Finnish experts.
The leak took the form of steam escaping from a fuel channel in the core of reactor number three at the plant, probably as a result of a ruptured seal.
The reactor was of the RBMK type — the same as that which exploded at Chernobyl in 1986 [see pp. 34460-62].
An electrical fire forced the temporary shut-down of the third power unit at the Balakovo nuclear power station, 900 km south-east of Moscow, on March 4.
The fire was reported to have been caused by a wiring short circuit.
No radiation was released as a result.
Abrogation by Hungary of Gabcikovo dam treaty
The Hungarian National Assembly voted on March 24 to accept a government proposal to abrogate the 1977 treaty with Czechoslovakia governing the construction of the Gabcikovo-Nagymáros dam on the Danube river frontier between the two countries.
Both the Hungarian government and environmental activists had opposed the Czechoslovak administration's determination to proceed with the project, following Hungary's withdrawal in 1989 [for February developments see p. 38777].
US reversal on vehicle pollution
President George Bush announced on March 13 that the US administration would not, as originally suggested, compel vehicle manufacturers to install on all new models canisters designed to trap petrol vapours during refuelling; the scheme would have increased manufacturing costs.
In its place, service stations were to be required to install vapour traps directly on to petrol pumps.
INTERNATIONAL
SPACE
Appointment of NASA head — Creation of Russian space agency
On March 11 US President Bush named Daniel Goldin as the new head of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) in place of Rear Adml.
Richard H. Truly who had been dismissed on Feb. 13.
Adml.
Truly, a former astronaut, who had served in the post for two years [for his appointment see p. 37437], had been criticized by the Bush administration for his support for the shuttle programme, which was deemed insufficiently cost-effective when compared with rival launching systems.
Goldin was a senior vice-president of TRW, a major US defence concern, and had since 1987 been general manager of its space and technology division.
Le Monde of March 13 reported that President Boris Yeltsin of Russia had established a Russian Space Agency (RKA) to replace the former Soviet programme.
The new agency would be directed by Yuri Koptev, who had worked with the former Soviet military complex VPK, and would had a staff of 150 people.
Its budget of 2,500 million roubles would require approval by both the military and the Russian parliament.
After over 300 days in space the cosmonaut Sergei Krikalyov returned safely to earth from the Mir space station on March 25, his return having been delayed since December.
The Soyuz TM-13 flight which relieved him was the first to be undertaken since the demise of the Soviet Union.
INTERNATIONAL
ICRC
The Assembly of the International Committee of the Red Cross on March 19 elected Peter Fuchs as the organization's new Director-General in succession to Guy Deluz [see p. 38795].
INTERNATIONAL
IMF
Byelarus, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan in March became the latest of the former Soviet republics to file applications for membership of the International Monetary Fund; it was reported in late March that the IMF was near to finalizing the terms of membership for Russia and the other republics.