

AMERICAS
PERU
Presidential coup
President Alberto Keinya Fujimori on April 5 seized power in an army-backed coup, suspending those sections of the Constitution which recognized the authority of the Congress and of the judiciary.
In a statement on April 22 designed to convince a visiting fact-finding mission from the Organization of American States (OAS)[see below]of his democratic intent, he promised to submit his decision to a plebiscite on July 5, and pledged that proposed constitutional reforms would also be subjected to the popular vote on Aug. 31.
In addition, he confirmed that the previously scheduled municipal and regional elections would go ahead on Nov. 8, that elections for a new Congress would be held on Feb. 23, 1993, and that he would not remain in office beyond his term of 1995, as set down in the 1979 Constitution.
These pledges were rejected by First Vice-President Maximo San Román Cáceres, who on his return from the USA was sworn in symbolically on April 21 as "Constitutional President" in front of 200 members of the deposed congress.
He took over this "constitutional" role from Second Vice-President Carlos García García, who had assumed it in his absence.
San Román, who was expelled from the ruling Cambio 90 party as a "traitor" , challenged Fujimori's authority to rule and said that he would establish his own government.
He also rejected, along with other opposition leaders, Fujimori's subsequent offer of a "national dialogue for peace and development" .
In response to the setting up of the "constitutional" government, the Fujimori government authorized sentences of between four and seven years for dismissed public officials who refused to relinquish their posts or for those who took up office, performed duties or issued orders without due authorization.
This latest gesture by Fujimori was interpreted by informed observers as a sign that he was succumbing to mounting pressures, especially in the wake of the April 21 resignations of Roberto MacLean, ambassador to the USA, and of his internationally respected Economy and Finance Minister Carlos Boloña Bohr.
International financial bodies, headed by the International Monetary Fund (IMF), had informed Boloña that notwithstanding the country's creditable performance in meeting IMF austerity targets, economic aid would be suspended pending a return to democratic rule.
It was reported that Boloña had been replaced by the Foreign Minister, Augusto Blacker Miller, one of his bitterest critics, but it was subsequently learned that Fujimori had persuaded Boloña to withdraw his resignation [see below for Cabinet changes].
Organization and execution of coup
The April 5 coup was meticulously planned in advance by military advisers close to Fujimori, chief among whom was Capt. Vladimiro Montesinos, a previously little-known figure.
It came as a surprise to the majority of the Cabinet and took place on the eve of the reopening of Congress (in which Fujimori lacked a majority) after the summer recess.
The style and ease of the execution of the coup gave credence to the view that Fujimori was still in control of the army which, in keeping with his claim that his main purpose was to root out corruption in the Congress and the judiciary, restricted its actions to seizing control of government buildings in the capital, Lima, and placing under house arrest a dozen opposition politicians (who were subsequently released), including the main opposition American Popular Revolutionary Alliance (APRA) former Economy Minister Abel Salinas, the former Interior Minister Augustín Mantilla, and a leading APRA trade unionist, Luis Negreiros.
The presence of troops and tanks on the streets, mainly at key intersections, caused minimal disruption to normal life and provoked no immediate public protests, although four major bomb attacks between April 8 and 14 by Sendero Luminoso guerrillas in Lima and its port Callao killed at least 10 people and wounded dozens more.
A protest march of an estimated 1,000 construction workers took place on April 7 in Lima.
However around the country, 40 per cent of which was already under direct military control, no abnormal disturbances were reported.
Press restrictions were imposed (but quickly lifted) and the weekly current affairs magazine Caretas was closed down for a time, commentators thereby inferring that the chief target of the coup was APRA.
The new APRA secretary-general, former President Alan García Pérez, had been recently cleared on corruption charges by the Supreme Court, a decision which had angered the government and the military [see p. 38718]and fuelled allegations that the Supreme Court was APRA-dominated.
García went underground and issued calls for national resistance, but this found little echo on the streets, and subsequent opinion polls suggested that Fujimori retained the overwhelming confidence of the public.
There was widespread support for his contention that both the Congress and the judiciary were corrupt and were obstructing the government's economic structural adjustment programme.
The Roman Catholic Church pronounced itself against the coup while conceding that "effective action" was needed to eradicate terrorism, drug-trafficking and corruption.
Issue of "basic decrees" — Dismissal of judges
The first act of Fujimori's self-styled national emergency and reconstruction government was on April 6 to issue "basic decrees" which formalized the dissolution of the Congress and set an agenda for constitutional reform and for the "normalization" of the administration.
The decrees authorized a crack-down on the judiciary and the reorganization of the national penal system.
Of the 28 Supreme Court judges, 13 were dismissed; it was reported on April 25 that 12 "provisional" members of the Supreme Court had been appointed.
A further 134 judges from Lima and Callao were dismissed on April 23.
The Comptroller General Luz Aurea Saenz was dismissed.
The appointment of his replacement, Maria Herminia Drago Correa, was reported on April 27.
Also approved was "drastic" action against Sendero Luminoso and the illegal drugs trade.
The increasing judicial leniency shown to Sendero suspects had especially alienated the army from the judiciary, many of whose circuit judges had been habitually subjected to death threats by the guerrillas or were known to have accepted bribes from them.
There were fears that the army and military police would now move quickly to impose control on the Miguel Castro Castro prison in Lima, where an estimated 900 Sendero inmates had created no-go areas to emphasize their political status.
Resignations — Cabinet changes
In response to the coup the Prime Minster, Alfonso de los Heros Perez Alba, immediately resigned as did the Attorney General, Pedro Méndez Jurado, who was replaced by Hugo Ernesto Denegri Cornejo.
Jorge Chávez Alvárez, the president of the Central Reserve Bank of Peru, resigned in late April and was replaced by German Suárez Chávez.
Fujimori named Oscar de la Puente Raygada, hitherto Education Minister, as the new Prime Minister and, following the late April dismissal of Blacker Miller, as Foreign Minister.
Jorge Camet was named as the new Industry, Commerce and Tourism minister in place of Víctor Joy Way.
There were no other Cabinet changes.
OAS and international response
An emergency meeting of OAS foreign ministers on April 13 "deeply deplored" Fujimori's action but, in marked contrast to the OAS position following the September 1991 coup in Haiti [see p. 38522], decided not to impose economic sanctions.
Blacker Miller, still then Foreign Minister [see above], was invited to address the meeting formally (whereas San Román was only given a private hearing), and described the outcome as "adequate" .
An OAS delegation subsequently visited Peru and produced a non committal report.
The USA suspended US$320,000,000 in aid but continued to assist in the government's anti-drugs campaign.
Venezuela suspended diplomatic relations and Colombia cut off trade links.
The foreign ministers of the Rio group of 11 Latin American countries joined the Bolivian, Chilean, Honduran and Jamaican governments in expressing their deepest concern, as did Argentina and Brazil, but none withdrew recognition of Fujimori in favour of San Roman as the legitimate President.
Spain froze US$50,000,000 in aid, and Germany froze US$110,000,000.
The European Communities (EC) denounced the coup on April 8.
Japan made no move to cut off US$527,000,000 in aid, fuelling rumours that Fujimori had cleared his coup plans with the Japanese government during his official visit in March.
Army attack on Sendero Luminoso
In the first serious clash since the coup, the army, now given a broader mandate to destroy the Marxist Sendero Luminoso ( "Shining Path" ) guerrillas, on April 28 moved into the Raucana shanty town on the outskirts of the capital Lima, run as a "model" Sendero development; one person was killed and over a dozen more seriously wounded.
Raucana's general secretary Valentín Capcha was arrested on terrorist charges.
Government critics predicted that violence would now escalate, arguing that Fujimori had played into the hands of Sendero, which had long wished to provoke a military coup in the hope of establishing itself as the sole democratic force opposed to a repressive government.
Attack on US aircraft
Peruvian jet aircraft on April 24 attacked an unarmed US C-130 transport plane over the Pacific ocean, wounding two of the 16 on board; a third person was sucked out to his death before the damaged plane managed to land at Tara, 1,000 km north of Lima.
Fujimori, justifying the air force action, said that the C-130, one of many used to support US anti-drug operations in the northern Upper Huallaga Valley (the world's largest single source of coca), carried no markings and failed to respond to radio and visual warnings.
As part of the government's new basic decrees, the air force had ben assigned to control airstrips in Upper Huallaga, with the authority to shoot down aircraft which failed to identify themselves.
The US government said that it was very concerned about the incident, denying Peruvian claims that the aircraft, en route to Panama, was off course.
ASIA
AFGHANISTAN
Fall of Najibullah — Establishment of mujaheddin regime
After 14 years of fighting, Afghan mujaheddin guerrillas finally toppled the former Soviet-backed communist government in April.
The creation by the mujaheddin of an Islamic State of Afghanistan was the latest in a series of political upheavals which had beset the country since the ousting of the monarchy in 1973.
The country remained in a state of turmoil, with simmering ethnic, religious and personal rivalries threatening to erupt into a fresh war.
In particular, the fall of the old regime rendered a serious blow to the political dominance of the Pashtun ethnic group, raising serious concerns over an eventual Pashtun rebellion against the newly powerful, northern-based Tajik, Uzbek and other smaller ethnic minorities.
The mujaheddin victory also had major regional implications, particularly for Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, Iran and the former Soviet republics bordering the north of the country.
Events leading to Najibullah's removal
A series of events in March had presaged the collapse of President Najibullah's Kabul-based regime.
On March 18 Najibullah formally announced for the first time that he was prepared to resign to further the progress of a UN peace plan, the initial aim of which was to establish an interim, all-party government [see p. 38811].
The UN special representative for Afghanistan, Benon Sevan, subsequently established an April 28 deadline for the formation of such an interim government.
Given that there was no mujaheddin consensus on the formation of an interim regime, or on the direction of the peace plan in general, Sevan's establishment of a deadline prompted all the major factions to assess their positions.
In the north of the country the position on the ground had started to change swiftly in March, with the capture by mujaheddin forces of the strategic city of Mazar-i-Sharif and other northern strongholds.
The dominant military figure leading the northern assault was Ahmed Shah Masud, a Tajik commander fighting under the banner of Burhanuddin Rabbani's moderate Jamiat-i Islami.
The fall of the north was generally peaceful, with Masud arranging a series of local alliances with government militia leaders who were also from non-Pashtun minority groups.
As Masud's forces closed on Kabul from the north and east, encountering little opposition and making fresh alliances along the way, fighters from Gulbuddin Hekmatyar's rival, hardline Hezb-i-Islami closed on the city from the south and east.
By early April both forces were poised to take the city, while on the diplomatic front Sevan was making desperate efforts to broker a peaceful transfer of power.
Removal of Najibullah
President Najibullah was removed from power on April 15, after elements of the ruling Hezb-e Watan, with some military support, carried out what was effectively a low-key coup.
Najibullah attempted to flee the country, but was prevented from reaching Kabul airport by troops under the command of Gen. Abdul Rashid Dostam, an Uzbek militia leader previously deployed by the government against Pashtun mujaheddin groups, who had switched alliance to Masud.
Najibullah was forced to take refuge in Sevan's UN office in Kabul, where he reportedly remained as of late April.
Najibullah had headed the Kabul regime since 1986, when, as Security Chief, he replaced Babrak Karmal as leader of the ruling communist party, the People's Democratic Party of Afghanistan (which changed its name to Hezb-e Watan in 1990).
In late 1987 he was elected President for a seven-year term.
When Soviet forces completed their withdrawal from Afghanistan in February 1989, commentators predicated Najibullah's imminent downfall, but he remained in office and managed to survive a serious coup attempt in 1990.
Gen. Gholam Faruq Yaqubi, Minister of State Security, committed suicide on April 15 after learning of Najibullah's downfall.
The situation in Kabul was extremely confusing in the immediate aftermath of Najibullah's removal.
Najibullah was replaced as President on an acting basis by Abdorrahim Hatef, hitherto one of four Vice-Presidents.
However, real power fell into the hands of the commander of the Kabul garrison, Gen. Mohammad Nabi Azimi, a Tajik.
The Hezb-e Watan, hitherto led by Najibullah, was placed under the control of Farid Ahmad Mazdak, a Tajik and a member of the party's executive council.
However, such appointments were largely cosmetic, as the fate of the city rested in the hands of Masud and Hekmatyar.
Leading military and government officials, including Foreign Minister Abdol Wakil, immediately entered into urgent negotiations with the two mujaheddin commanders in an attempt to secure a peaceful transition.
Masud assured government officials that he would not attack Kabul, but Hekmatyar insisted on immediate surrender and threatened an assault on the city.
Meanwhile both groups began infiltrating the city in an attempt to gain control of key locations.
Throughout the rest of the country the removal of Najibullah caused most local militias to abandon all links with the local government and either surrender to, or enter into power-sharing arrangements with, local mujaheddin units.
In this way, all the major towns fell peacefully into mujaheddin hands, although fighting, often ethnically rooted, did break out in a number of areas.
The removal of Najibullah also prompted large numbers of Afghan refugees in Pakistan and Iran to begin moving back into Afghanistan.
Agreement on power transfer plan
With the collapse of the Najibullah regime, Pakistan initiated efforts to broker a plan for a peaceful transfer of power.
Pakistani officials, including Prime Minister Mian Mohammad Nawaz Sharif, organized meetings in Peshawar between the various mujaheddin groups and other regional powers.
Initial discussions were fruitless, but on April 24 a majority of the mujaheddin groups agreed to a three-stage plan.
The plan called for the creation of a 51-member Islamic Jihad Council (IJC) to take power in Kabul for a two-month period.
It would then be replaced by an interim government, which would in turn be replaced by a permanent government after four months.
Seghbatullah Mujjaddedi, secretary-general of the moderate Jebha-i-Nejat-i-Melli Afghanistan group, was elected as leader of the IJC, which also included 30 mujaheddin field commanders, 10 clergymen and 10 intellectuals.
The interim government which would replace the IJC was to be headed by Rabbani, and a number of portfolios were allocated to various groups, including the premiership to Hekmatyar and the Defence portfolio to Masud.
Hekmatyar, however, refused to approve the plan (although he took a more conciliatory position after failing to win military control in Kabul — see below).
The Iranian-based Shi'ite factions also withheld their support.
Entry of mujaheddin forces into Kabul — Fighting between Hekmatyar and Masud factions
Hekmatyar's and Masud's forces entered Kabul on April 25, the latter having been placed in charge of a six-member Kabul City Security Commission, created by the IJC in Peshawar.
There was no resistance from government forces, most of whom had already allied themselves with Masud.
Hekmatyar had gained the support of some Pashtun hardliners in the former regime, including the Minister of Internal Affairs, Raz Mohammad Paktin, and the Defence Minister, Maj.-Gen.
Mohammad Aslam Watanjar.
Fighting between the two rival factions began almost immediately, with Masud's forces quickly gaining the upper hand.
There was fierce fighting in the city involving tanks, artillery and aircraft on April 26, but the next day Radio Pakistan reported that a complete ceasefire had come into effect in the city.
On April 28, Hekmatyar's fighters were ejected from the Interior Ministry, their final stronghold.
After losing the battle for Kabul, Hekmatyar adopted a more conciliatory attitude towards the Peshawar peace plan.
He announced late on April 28 that one of his commanders, Ustad Farid, would serve in Rabbani's interim government as Prime Minister.
Establishment of Islamic State
Power was passed from the Republic of Afghanistan government to the IJC at a ceremony on April 28 at the Foreign Ministry building in Kabul.
Mujjaddedi, who had travelled overland from Peshawar along with 20 other IJC members, was formally appointed as head of state of the new Islamic State of Afghanistan.
The reins of power were transferred by Abdol Wahed Sorabi, one of the former Vice-Presidents.
One of the first acts of the new government was to announce an amnesty for all members of the old regime, except Najibullah.
On April 29 Nawaz Sharif, accompanied by a number of his ministers, paid a short visit to Kabul.
EUROPE
YUGOSLAVIA — FORMER YUGOSLAV REPUBLICS
Formation of new Yugoslav state
The Federal Assembly adopted on April 27 the constitution of a new Yugoslav state, the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (FRY), comprising only two republics — Serbia (together with its autonomous provinces of Kosovo and Vojvodina) and Montenegro.
This effectively acknowledged the separate existence of Croatia, Slovenia, Bosnia-Hercegovina and Macedonia.
The declaration on the formation of the FRY stated that the FRY would be ready to recognize the former Yugoslav republics which had declared independence, after "outstanding questions" had been negotiated, and it denied territorial claims.
The "Serbian Republic of Krajina" (within Croatia) welcomed the creation of the FRY as its "own mother state" .
The new constitution (approved by 73 votes to one with three abstentions) had already been accepted by both the Serbian and Montenegrin republican assemblies on April 23.
In draft form it had been agreed on April 1, based on principles agreed in February [see p. 38779], and following the Montenegrin referendum in March [see p. 38833].
According to the new constitution, the Federal President (to be elected by the legislature) and Prime Minister might not be from the same republic.
Elections to the Chamber of Citizens and to the Chamber of Republics, which together comprised the new Federal Assembly, were scheduled for May 31.
The new constitution described the FRY as a "sovereign federal state based on the principle of equality of its citizens and its member republics" ; the republics had sovereignty over issues not within the competence of the FRY.
The Yugoslav National Army (JNA) would become the Army of the Republic of Yugoslavia, and would comprise only FRY citizens, under the command of a Supreme Defence Council chaired by the FRY President.
The FRY Army would operate only on FRY territory.
Although the constitutional law granted cultural minority rights, the Albanian and Hungarian minorities, concentrated in Kosovo and Vojvodina respectively, distanced themselves from the FRY, criticizing the constitution's omission of collective political rights.
Leaders of the Serbian province of Kosovo pressed for independent membership of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE) and for recognition by the international community.
Bujar Bukoshi, president of the provincial government in Kosovo (which was 90 per cent ethnic Albanian) visited Albania on April 28, when the new Albanian President, Sali Berisha, welcomed him and stated: "We must demand the right for self determination of the Albanians in ex-Yugoslavia." 
Foreign reactions
The ceremony on April 27 proclaiming the new Yugoslavia was boycotted by representatives of member countries of the European Communities (EC), except for Greece, but was attended by representatives of Canada, China, Russia, and non-aligned countries.
The Greek Prime Minister, Constantine Mitsotakis, visited Belgrade for talks with Serbian President Slobodan Milosevic on April 30.
Greece and Serbia had a common interest in delaying international recognition of Macedonian independence [see p. 38779 and below].
The formation of the FRY preceded a CSCE meeting on April 30 in Helsinki, which was to debate Yugoslavia's possible exclusion from the CSCE.
The Helsinki session, while welcoming Bosnia-Hercegovina as a member [see also below], decided to allow Yugoslavia to retain its seat, while stressing that thereby it was not accepting a solution of the succession to the former Yugoslavia.
(The new FRY laid claim to the former Yugoslavia's diplomatic representation abroad, and undertook to continue its non-aligned status, as well as to be guided by the CSCE's 1990 Charter of Paris for a New Europe — for which see p. 37838.)
Economy
On April 10 the National Bank of Yugoslavia (NBY) announced that it was seeking rescheduling of its foreign debts, which totalled US$15,000 million.
On April 13, Yugoslavia once again devalued the dinar, this time by 57 per cent, the official rate against the Deutschmark falling from DM1.00=85 dinars to a new initial rate of DM1.00=200 dinars [for devaluations in January and March see pp. 38704; 38833].
The dinar was still official currency in all republics except Slovenia and Croatia [see pp. 38513; 38685].
The EC had conditionally ended trade sanctions against Serbia on April 7 [for their imposition see pp. 38559; 38684], but warned of renewed sanctions, and even a severing of diplomatic links with Yugoslavia, if fighting involving Serbian forces in Bosnia-Hercegovina had not abated by April 29.
Bosnia-Hercegovina
The fighting in Bosnia-Hercegovina, which began after the republic's declaration of independence on March 3 [see p. 38832], intensified throughout April.
By the end of the month an estimated 350 people had been killed and 420,000 left homeless.
EC-sponsored peace talks, and a series of EC-backed ceasefires, failed to end the conflict; on April 28 the UN agreed in principle to extend its involvement in Yugoslavia to Bosnia-Hercegovina.
International recognition of Bosnia-Hercegovina
EC Foreign Ministers, meeting in Luxembourg on April 6, recognized the independence of Bosnia-Hercegovina from April 7.
The USA also recognized the republic's independence (and that of Croatia and Slovenia) on April 7, in a reversal of its previous policy.
In response a Serbian republic of Bosnia-Hercegovina was declared by ethnic Serbs who feared separation from Serbia proper, and who had boycotted the Feb. 29-March 2 referendum on independence [see p. 38832].
Croatia, Czechoslovakia, Finland, Hungary, Poland and Slovenia were also among the first countries to recognize Bosnia-Hercegovina.
On April 21, Bosnian president Alija Izetbegovic rejected the resignation of Jure Pelivan as Prime Minister (submitted on April 6 when a state of emergency was imposed in Sarajevo), appointing him as Prime Minister-designate to a radically restructured future government.
Course of fighting
On April 5 and 6, a 7,000-strong peace demonstration in Sarajevo was fired on by snipers from inside one of the capital's hotels, which was then stormed by demonstrators.
Fighting at this stage centred around Mostar and the eastern towns of Visegrad and Foca.
Air force jets attacked Croatian towns in western Bosnia on April 7.
Fighting worsened from April 14 on the Bosnian-Serb border and on the northern border with Croatia few days later, as Serbian forces appeared to be attempting to create a corridor from Bosanska Krajina (a Serb enclave in western Bosnia-Hercegovina) to Serbia.
Serb forces took the towns of Zvornik, Srebrenica and Bratunac near Sarajevo, and two districts of Sarajevo itself.
Most main roads were cut, creating supply problems.
Fighting also set alight the oil refinery in Bosanski Brod on the Bosnian-Croatian border.
Sarajevo itself came under artillery fire on April 21; the Bosnian leadership believed that the Serbs were attempting to cut the city in two.
Moslem counter-attacks followed on April 22, with hospitals and EC monitors' headquarters coming under fire.
An EC-brokered ceasefire on April 23 [see below]collapsed within hours as heavy fighting resumed.
On April 27 there was a heavy bombardment of Sarajevo, and fighting intensified thereafter.
Attempts to implement ceasefire arrangements and peace talks
Lord Carrington, chair of the EC peace conference on Yugoslavia, brokered a ceasefire on April 23 (which was, however, broken within hours — see above).
The ceasefire was signed by the leaders of the three national parties: President Izetbegovic of the (Moslem) Party for Democratic Action (SDA), Radovan Karadzic of the Serbian Democratic Party (SDS) and Mate Boban of the Croatian Democratic Community (HDZ)[for ethnic composition of Bosnia-Hercegovina see p. 38832; see also map].
The talks resumed in Lisbon on April 27.
Bosnia-Hercegovina's ethnic leaders had agreed at the April 23 round of EC peace talks to continue their March 18 accord [see p. 38832]to negotiate a new constitution.
The Presidents of the six republics formerly comprising Yugoslavia agreed to work to restore their economic links.
Earlier in the month, a truce on April 12 brokered by EC envoy José Cutilheiro had effectively been ignored.
EC negotiators also held talks with Serbian President Milosevic, acting Federal Defence Minister Col.-Gen.
Blagoje Adzic, and President Franjo Tudjman of Croatia.
UN envoy Cyrus Vance arrived in Belgrade on April 15 and also visited Sarajevo.
JNA involvement
The JNA and Serbian leaders consistently denied that the JNA was a participant in the fighting in Bosnia-Hercegovina.
The JNA's role, they said, was to restore order against the Croatian armed forces and irregular Moslem militia.
The Yugoslav presidency also rejected a CSCE declaration of April 16 which accused Serbian irregulars and the JNA of "violating the territorial integrity of and human rights in Bosnia-Hercegovina" .
The intensified fighting at the end of April was apparently due to a report disseminated by Tanjug news agency on April 29 that the Bosnian leadership had called for a blockade of JNA forces in Bosnia-Hercegovina, and that Moslem forces had virtually declared war on the JNA.
The report was strongly denied by the Bosnian Territorial Defence.
UN forces in Croatia
On April 7, the UN Security Council recommended the full deployment of the United Nations Protection Force in Yugoslavia (UNPROFOR), which was to be stationed in Serb-populated areas within Croatia [see p. 38778], and a $26,000,000 net reduction in its estimated cost.
The ceasefire in Croatia negotiated in January generally held, although there were conflicting claims of violations and reports of deaths from both the JNA and the Croatian side, and fighting appeared to intensify on April 3 prior to the deployment of UNPROFOR.
The Great People's Assembly of the Serbian enclave of Slavonia, Baranja and Western Srem in Croatia adopted a statute on April 4 incorporating the region as a territorial unit within the "Serbian Republic of Krajina" [see p. 38685].
International recognition of Slovenia and Croatia
South Africa recognized Slovenia and Croatia on April 3.
The USA did so on April 7 at the same time as recognizing Bosnia-Hercegovina [see above].
Israel was reported on April 16 to have recognized Slovenia and Croatia, and on April 28 established diplomatic relations with Slovenia, while calling for Croatia to recognize its role in the Holocaust.
On April 27 China recognized both republics.
France established diplomatic relations with Slovenia on April 23, and with Croatia on April 24, confirming that it would support Slovenia's request for UN membership and for co-operation with the EC.
Croatian government reshuffle
Croatian Prime Minister Franjo Greguric announced on April 11 a major government reshuffle.
None of the 11 new ministers named had previously served in the cabinet.
On April 10, the press had reported the resignation of Interior Minister, Ivan Vekic, although he had made no announcement to the Sabor (parliament).
His replacement, Ivan Jarnjak, had hitherto served as Deputy Interior Minister.
Minister of Education and Culture Vladimir Pavletic had also resigned on April 10, following criticism from parliamentary deputies over schoolbooks which continued to name the mother country as Yugoslavia.
New Slovenian government
On April 22 the Slovene Assembly passed a vote of no confidence in the government.
Lojze Peterle resigned as President of the Executive Council (Prime Minister), saying afterwards that he would devote himself to his political party work (as leader of the Christian Democratic Party).
The Assembly voted by 126 out of the 208 votes cast to appoint Janez Drnovsek, chair of the Liberal Democratic Party, as the new Prime Minister-designate.
Drnovsek said that a new government would be formed within days, and promised early elections.
The DEMOS (Democratic Opposition of Slovenia) coalition, consisting initially of six parties and elected in April 1990 [see p. 37381], had led Slovenia to independence.
In December 1991, however, it had dissolved itself [see p. 38685], and split into conservative and liberal factions, respectively the Christian Democratic Party and the People's (formerly Peasants') Party, and the Liberal Democratic Party and the Democratic Party.
The early part of 1992 had seen controversy within the government over policy and the government's composition.
With 27 ministries and little co-ordination between them it was recognized to be cumbersome and inefficient.
The government had also faced criticism over its slowness in implementing economic reforms.
In February, a group of deputies, led by Marko Voljc, who was said to be a candidate for a post in the new government, had called for a no confidence vote against the government.
Peterle (born in 1948) had been leader of the Christian Democrats since autumn 1989, and as the leader of the largest coalition party, had been appointed Prime Minister after the elections.
Latterly, he had been criticized for being more concerned about "restoring dignity to politics" and strengthening Slovenia's Catholic and conservative traditions than about solving the economic problems resulting from communist rule and independence.
Macedonia
International recognition of Macedonia was still delayed.
President Kiro Gligorov, responding to the failure of the EC meeting in Luxembourg on April 6 to recognize Macedonia, accused Greece of "abusing its position as an EC member" [for Greek objections to recognizing Macedonia see p. 38779].
Macedonia's parliament adopted on April 26 a government proposal for Macedonia's own currency, the denar, which for a one-year transitional period would be represented by a coupon at the rate of DM1.00=360 denars.
On March 30, Macedonia and Croatia established diplomatic relations.
Macedonia recognized Bosnia-Hercegovina on April 26.
[For Macedonia-Slovenia diplomatic relations see p. 38833.]
The Albanian minority in Macedonia (approximately 21 per cent of the population) held demonstrations in early April in the capital Skopje and in the north-west, demanding that the Albanian population be given the status of a constituent nation as a precondition for international recognition of Macedonia.
Reports spoke of Albanians having proclaimed their republic of Ilirida in north-west Macedonia.
The first enlistments to the Macedonian army were reported on April 13, although Albanians were said to be refusing to obey the call-up.
AFRICA
SOUTH AFRICA
MPs' membership of ANC — De Klerk's constitutional proposals
Five Democratic Party (DP) members of parliament (MPs) joined the African National Congress (ANC) and announced on April 21 that they would in future sit in the whites-only House of Assembly as independents (the ANC not being registered as a political party).
The ANC, while expressing delight at their decision, nevertheless continued to call for the dissolution of the tricameral parliament, which it regarded as essentially racist.
David Dalling, DP chief whip, Jan van Eck, Jannie Momberg, Pierre Cronje and Robert Haswell declared that in joining the ANC they had joined "the struggle…to end racism, distrust, minority fears and poverty" .
They were acting, they said, in the interests not only of their white constituents but also of those who were "politically disenfranchised" .
The ANC described the membership of the five MPs (who were subsequently expelled from the DP) as formalizing a "long-standing relationship which has earned them the greatest respect" and as underlining the ANC's commitment to "a truly non-racial South Africa" .
Constitutional developments
In a speech during the budget debate in Parliament on April 23 State President F. W. de Klerk made new, more detailed constitutional proposals which the ruling National Party (NP) would table at a meeting of the Convention for a Democratic South Africa (CODESA) scheduled for May.
The NP would retain its earlier proposals for a transitional government with a two-chamber parliament [see p. 38798], but would propose an executive council to replace the state president and carry out the functions of the head of state and head of government.
De Klerk had earlier suggested that executive power be held by a supreme council appointed by an elected legislature [see p. 38422].
Under the terms of his new proposal the chair of the executive council, with the title President, would rotate on a six-monthly basis.
A key change to previous proposals was the suggestion that the executive council be directly elected by all South African citizens.
Each party would be entitled to nominate one candidate, and the council would comprise those candidates (between three and five in number) who obtained the highest number of votes.
De Klerk did not specify the length of the executive council's term in office, but he had previously indicated his desire for the interim leadership body to remain in power for several years [see p. 38798].
The proposals were met with opposition from across the political spectrum.
They were firmly rejected by the ANC which described them as a plan to perpetuate white rule and delay true democracy.
Speaking on April 24, ANC president Nelson Mandela said: "It is evident that what they really seek is the continued incumbency of the National Party even in the event that it loses the election." 
Similar objections were voiced by the Pan-Africanist Congress (PAC) and the Labour Party.
The conservative Reformed National Party (HNP), on the other hand, condemned the proposals as a means to confer power on the ANC and the South African Communist Party "through the political back door" .
CP movement towards negotiations
Following its decisive defeat in the all-white referendum on political reform in March [see p. 38798], the Conservative Party (CP) parliamentary caucus agreed on April 25 to enter talks with the NP on the establishment of a white state — volkstaat.
In January President de Klerk had offered to put the option of a volkstaat on the agenda at the CODESA talks [see p. 38705].
The CP acceptance of the offer was seen as a first step to its entering the CODESA process.
In a seemingly contradictory move, however, Koos van der Merwe, one of the party's most enthusiastic supporters of negotiations, was expelled from the CP on April 27 apparently on disciplinary grounds.
Calls for peace force
On April 3 Mandela, declaring that the government had "abdicated its responsibilities in the black townships" , called for the deployment of an international peacekeeping force.
Speaking after a tour of Alexandra township, north-east of Johannesburg, where over 30 people had been killed and 2,600 made homeless in the three preceding weeks, the ANC president said that he would be placing this demand urgently before the government.
He said that the ANC would be approaching the UN Secretary-General and the Secretary-General of the Organization of African Unity with a view to dispatching monitors to the "nerve-centres" of violence in Transvaal and Natal provinces.
Mandela's call was echoed by anti-apartheid leaders who held an "emergency summit on violence" in Johannesburg on April 22.
The meeting brought together representatives from a broad range of opposition groups including the ANC, the PAC, the Azanian People's Organization (AZAPO), Inkatha, trade unions and religious groups.
They agreed to appoint a committee to facilitate the international monitoring of the violence.
Death sentence for police officer
On April 30 a Pietermaritzburg Supreme Court judge sentenced a police station commander, Brian Mitchell, to death after finding him guilty of murdering 11 black mourners at a funeral in December 1988.
It was the first conviction of a white police officer on charges arising from such killings.
Four black special police constables were given 15-year prison terms.
The judge indicated that he believed that police of all ranks had been involved in a cover-up of the initial investigation of the massacre and called for a public inquiry.
Winnie Mandela
Nelson Mandela announced on April 13 that he was separating from his wife, Winnie, after 34 years of marriage.
The ANC president said that the decision was the result of "tensions" arising from differences on a number of issues.
The announcement came in the midst of renewed allegations about Winnie Mandela's involvement in the death of a youth, "Stompie" Moeketsi Seipei, in 1988 [see pp. 38179; 38324 for her trial on charges arising from his kidnap]as well as in the murder of a Soweto doctor, Abubaker Asvat.
On April 15 Winnie Mandela resigned as head of the social welfare department of the ANC.
Her decision, she said, was taken out of loyalty to the organization and not because of the "false allegations" against her.
Ministerial resignation
The announcement by Finance Minister Barend du Plessis on April 25 that he would retire from politics at the end of the month was met with intense speculation about divisions in the NP.
Du Plessis, who took on the Finance portfolio in 1984 and was regarded as heir-apparent to de Klerk, said that he was retiring because he was "exhausted" .
His departure was widely portrayed as a defeat for the liberal wing of the party.
Foreign relations
South Africa's relations with African states improved dramatically in April, beginning with the visit of President de Klerk to Nigeria on April 9-10.
State President de Klerk and Foreign Minister Roelof "Pik" Botha were greeted by a 21-gun salute and the South African national anthem as they arrived in Nigeria, hitherto a leading critic of the South African regime.
De Klerk said his visit showed South Africa and the world that "we are moving back to the fold" .
Nigerian President Ibrahim Babangida heaped praise on de Klerk, comparing him to other South African anti-apartheid leaders including Nelson Mandela, Archbishop Desmond Tutu and Steve Biko, the leader of the Black Consciousness Movement who died in police custody in 1977 [see p. 28663].
He declared his delight that "we have at last someone in South Africa with whom we can do business" .
Both leaders repeatedly stressed their joint vision of a new Africa, built around Nigerian-South African co-operation, which would enhance the influence of the continent in international relations.
While the visit produced few concrete results in terms of trade agreements or diplomatic relations, the encounter established the potential for a more fruitful relationship.
Following the official announcement of the visit to Nigeria, a number of other African countries announced improving relations with South Africa.
On April 6 Seychelles established consular relations.
On April 7 Djibouti lifted all trade and travel restrictions whilst Côte d'Ivoire announced the establishment of full diplomatic relations, making it the second African country (after Malawi) to exchange ambassadors.
On April 11 Zambia said that it would be taking steps to develop tourism links with South Africa.
On April 6 the European Communities (EC) Foreign Ministers agreed to lift the EC oil embargo imposed in 1985 as well as all remaining bans on sporting, scientific and cultural links.
AFRICA
NAMIBIA
Cabinet changes
On April 10 President Sam Nujoma reshuffled the Cabinet for the second time since independence in March 1990 [see pp. 38087-88 for February 1991 changes].
The reshuffle was prompted by the departure of Finance Minister Otto Herrigel, who resigned for "personal reasons" .
He was replaced by Gerhard Hanekom, hitherto Agriculture, Water and Rural Development Minister; former Deputy Minister of Trade and Industry Anton von Wietersheim took over Hanekom's portfolios at a time of national emergency as a result of the drought [see p. 38855].
Hanekom's appointment ensured the continued Cabinet representation of German-speakers.
Richard Kabelwa Kabajani, hitherto Minister of Works, Transport and Communication, and Marco Hausiku, hitherto Minister of Lands, Resettlement and Rehabilitation, exchanged portfolios.
AFRICA
ANGOLA
Election date — Cabinet changes
Speaking at the opening session of the National People's Assembly on April 2, President José Eduardo dos Santos announced that multiparty presidential and legislative elections would be held on Sept. 29 and 30.
On April 9 dos Santos reshuffled his government following the resignation of the Minister of Territorial Administration, Lopo Fortunato Ferreira do Nascimento.
He was replaced by Col. António Paulo Kassoma, hitherto Minister of Transport and Communications.
Kassoma's deputy, André Luis Brandao, was promoted to Minister of Transport and Communications.
Francisco Ramos da Cruz moved from the Ministry of Fisheries (where he was replaced by Maria de Fatima Jardim) to become the governor of Cuanza Sul province.
Norberto Fernandes dos Santos was appointed State Secretary for Social Affairs.
The resignation of do Nascimento led to speculation that he would be given the key role of director-general of the national electoral commission, as the government came under increasing pressure from the USA, Russia and Portugal to hasten election preparations.
Accusations of accord violations
In his April 2 speech dos Santos accused the rebel Union for the Total Independence of Angola (UNITA) of violating the May 1991 peace agreement [see p. 38180], saying that UNITA members had carried out "acts of barbaric and gratuitous violence" , and that UNITA had prevented free political activity in areas still under its control.
Similar accusations were made by Gen. Miguel N'Zau Puna who had defected from UNITA in March [see p. 38803].
On April 7 local media sources reported claims by N'zau Puna that 20,000 UNITA soldiers, hidden near Licua, would be mobilized should UNITA lose the elections.
Under the terms of the peace accord, both UNITA and the government should have confined their troops to assembly points.
Execution of coup plotters
Responding to an open letter from the recently established Democratic Renewal Party, the government on April 10 confirmed that the principal plotters in the May 1977 coup attempt [see p. 28489]had been executed.
Among those listed were Nito Alves, Bakalof, Pedro Fortunato and M'bala Neto.
No details were given of the date of execution.
The government insisted that it held no political prisoners.
Devaluation
The kwanza was devalued in April for the third time since November 1991 [see pp. 38561; 38666].
With effect from April 15 the initial base rate was set at 550 new kwanzas to one US dollar — a devaluation of 69 per cent.
Consumers were assured that the measure would not mean a significant increase in prices except for fuels.
AFRICA
MOZAMBIQUE
Public expenditure cuts
According to a three-year public investment plan agreed with the IMF in early April, overall state investment would be reduced by 30 per cent by 1993 with the heaviest cuts expected in agriculture, mining and manufacturing industry.
Under the plan, state investment in the manufacturing sector, which in 1991-92 amounted to almost US$345,000,000, would be reduced by 80 per cent.
Investment in agriculture, mining, water supply and public administration would be cut by between 40 and 64 per cent.
The plan followed the publication of figures which indicated that gross domestic product (GDP) had increased by only 0.9 per cent in 1991, compared with the projected figure of 4.5 per cent.
The standard of living was also reported to have declined, with private consumption having decreased by 3.9 per cent in 1990 and 4.6 per cent in 1991.
Although acknowledging that since the implementation of a structural adjustment programme it had managed to halt continual economic decline, the government was nonetheless disappointed by the poor performance.
It attributed this to the prevailing civil war and climatic conditions as well as to deficiencies in state apparatus.
Reinstatement of Interior Minister
Col. Manuel José António resumed his duties as Interior Minister on April 10 after charges against him relating to a coup attempt in August 1991 [see p. 38377]were dropped.
AFRICA
MALAWI
Harassment of opposition
The government of President Hastings Kamuzu Banda came under increasing pressure from Western governments to improve its human rights record as it took action to arrest the pro-democracy campaigner, Chakufwa Chihana, and to expel Mgr John Roche, Roman Catholic bishop-elect of Mzimba.
Chihana, general secretary of the Southern African Trade Union Co-ordination Council (SATUCC), who had announced his intention to return to Malawi to arrange a national conference of "democratic forces" [see also p. 38804], was arrested on his arrival at Lilongwe airport on April 6.
Together with five members of SATUCC staff arrested on April 7, he was expected to be charged with sedition.
On April 17, security officials interrupted the Good Friday service of Mgr Roche to serve him with an expulsion order.
The Irish-born bishop had worked as a member of the Catholic Church in Malawi for 20 years and was one of the signatories of a Lenten pastoral letter which condemned human rights abuses [ibid.].
He was given 24 hours to leave the country.
Dissolution of parliament
On April 16, Banda dissolved the National Assembly and announced that legislative elections would be held in May or June.
The Zambia-based United Front for Multi-Party Democracy declared on April 21 that it was ready to participate in elections and called on the President to delay the election date to allow for the registration of opposition parties.
AFRICA
BURUNDI
Cabinet reshuffle
President Pierre Buyoya announced a Cabinet reshuffle on April 2, when he relinquished the Defence portfolio.
The changes, involving the appointment of nine new ministers and the reassignment of five portfolios to existing members of the Council of Ministers, altered the ethnic composition of the Cabinet; 60 per cent were identified in the press as Hutus, including François Ngeze, the new Minister of the Interior and Local Government.
Adrien Sibomana Prime Minister
Principal Burundi ministers
*Libere Bararunyeretse Foreign Affairs and Co-operation
**François Ngeze Interior and Local Government
**Lt. -Col.
Leonidas Maregarege Defence Jumaine Hussein Agriculture and Livestock Gabriel Toyi Rural Development Gerard Niyibigira Finance Astere Girukwigomba Commerce and Industry
*Altered portfolio.
**New appointment.
Women are denoted by (f).
Arrest of former ministers
Cyprien Mbonimpa, Minister of Foreign Affairs and Co-operation prior to the April 2 reshuffle, and Charles Kazatsa, a former Minister of the Interior, were arrested on April 9 in connection with a failed coup attempt in March [see p. 38803].
They were accused of having plotted to overthrow the government on behalf of former President Jean-Baptiste Bagaza, in exile in Libya.
According to diplomatic sources, Mbonimpa had been opposed to the moves by President Buyoya to include Hutus in the government.
AFRICA
RWANDA
Transitional government
On April 2, President Juvénal Habyarimana appointed Dismas Nsengiyaremye as Prime Minister.
He replaced Sylvestre Nsanzimana whose appointment in October 1991 had been rejected by the majority of opposition parties [see p. 38662].
The President instructed Nsengiyaremye, a member of the Republican Democratic Party (MDR), to form a coalition government to oversee the remaining period before multiparty elections.
These, he said, would take place within one year of the new government taking office.
On April 16, Nsengiyaremye named a 19-member transitional government drawn from five political parties.
The portfolios were distributed according to an agreement reached on April 7.
The coalition involved the former ruling and sole legal party, the National Republican Movement for Democracy and Development (MRND), and four main opposition parties: the MDR, the Social Democratic Party (PSD), the Christian Democratic Party (PDC) and the Liberal Party (PL).
On April 24, the new Council of Ministers agreed to the appointment of Nsanzimana as Special Adviser to the President with responsibility for special missions as well as that of Enoch Ruhigira, hitherto Minister of Finance, as Director in the Office of the President.
Military retirement of Habyarimana
On April 22 Habyarimana announced his retirement from the army.
He said as well as having reached the statutory retirement age, he also wished to comply with constitutional legislation preventing members of the military from joining political parties.
Dismas Nsengiyaremye (MDR) Prime Minister Boniface Ngulinzaira (MDR) Foreign Affairs
Principal Rwanda ministers
*Faustin Munyazesa (MRND) Interior and Communal Development Stanislas Mbonampeka (PL) Justice
**James Gasana (MRND) Defence Marc Rugenera (PSD) Finance
*No change.
**Altered responsibilities.
AFRICA
ZAIRE
Resumption of national conference
The national conference, suspended on Jan. 19 on the instructions of Prime Minister Jean Nguza Karl-I-Bond [see p. 38706], resumed on April 6.
On April 17, disregarding Nguza's order that it should refrain from any attempt to take over the running of the country, the conference adopted sovereign status, and on April 21 the Most Rev. Monsengwo Pasinya was confirmed as chairman of the conference [see p. 38662 for his election in December 1991].
There was no official reaction to the decisions of the conference from President Mobutu Sese Seko, although on April 27 the President, in unusually conciliatory terms, said that he was confident that it would bring about peaceful democratic change.
Ministerial resignation
It was reported on April 8 that Michel Mokuba Bokulo Mena, who had been appointed in the Cabinet reshuffle on March 28, had resigned as Minister of Institutional Reforms apparently after disagreeing with the Prime Minister.
Cash shortage
All commercial banks were forced to restrict cash withdrawals from April 20 as a result of a shortage of banknotes.
Withdrawals were limited to amounts between the equivalent of US$10 and US$15.
With inflation running at 16,500 per cent, and the largest denomination note of 100,000 zaïres worth well under one US dollar, banknotes were reportedly being weighed rather than counted.
Death sentences
The Higher War Council on April 4 handed down death sentences on 16 soldiers tried by court martial on charges of military rebellion arising from the occupation of the national radio station in January [see p. 38706].
The soldiers had demanded the resumption of the national conference.
AFRICA
CAMEROON
New Cabinet
President Paul Biya appointed a new Cabinet on April 9.
Simon Achidi Achu, a veteran Anglophone politician from the north-west of the country who had held the Justice portfolio under President Ahmadou Ahidjo in 1972-75 was named as Prime Minister.
Although the new Cabinet was described as a coalition, it remained dominated by Biya's Cameroon People's Democratic Movement (RDPC).
Press reports identified 25 ministers, including the Prime Minister, as RDPC members.
Most of the members of the former Cabinet were retained, including the Ministers of Defence, of Territorial Administration and of Justice.
A number of posts were created; thus Joseph Owana, whose portfolio included Higher Education, became Secretary-General at the Presidency, while Marcel Niat-Njifenjou was appointed to the newly created post of Vice-Prime Minister.
Dakole Daissala, the new Minister of Posts and Telecommunications, was the leader of the Movement for the Defence of Democracy (MDR), which had won six seats in the March parliamentary elections [see p. 38802].
The MRD's support would give the RDPC, which won 88 seats, an overall majority in the 180-seat assembly.
Principal Cameroon ministers
*Simon Achidi Achu Prime Minister
*Marcel Niat-Njifenjou Vice-Prime Minister in charge of Mines Water Resources and Energy
**Joseph Owana Secretary-General at the Presidency Laurent Esso Director of Civil Cabinet at the Presidency Gilbert Andze-Tsoungui Territorial Administration Edouard Akame Mfoumou Minister Delegate at the Presidency in charge of Defence Jacques-Roger Booh-Booh Foreign Affairs Douala Moutome Justice and Keeper of the Seals Justin Ndioroa Yombo Finance Moussa Tchouta Planning and Regional Development
*New appointment.
**Altered responsibilities.
AFRICA
LIBERIA
Progress of peace process
On April 7-8 the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) Committee of Five on Liberia met in Geneva.
The meeting brought together Amos Sawyer, interim President of Liberia, Charles Taylor, leader of the rebel National Patriotic Front of Liberia (NPFL), President Félix Houphouët-Boigny of Côte d'Ivoire, President Abdou Diouf of Senegal, and President Blaise Compaore of Burkina.
Nigeria was represented by Vice-President Augustus Aikhomu.
The Committee signed an accord reaffirming the October 1991 Yammoussoukro IV peace agreement [see p. 38518].
Thus it was agreed that a buffer zone policed by the regional peacekeeping force ECOMOG (ECOWAS Monitoring Group) was to be established as soon as possible along the border with Sierra Leone.
As a concession to Taylor, it was agreed that the NPFL would be allowed to send unarmed observers to the buffer zone.
Taylor refused to agree to his troops being disarmed while they remained under attack from the United Liberation Movement for Democracy in Liberia (ULIMO — a coalition of supporters of former President Samuel Doe, reportedly based in Sierra Leone), which had launched a renewed attack on the NPFL as the Geneva talks began.
On April 14 Taylor declared that he had been forced to signed the Geneva agreement, which, he claimed was "unbalanced and unsatisfactory" .
He ruled out the deployment of ECOMOG in areas under his control, arguing that this "amounted to the abandonment of Liberia's sovereignty to a foreign force controlled by a military command" .
On April 29, however, Taylor reversed his position.
He announced that his "government" would be dissolved within 72 hours and that his troops would withdraw from within 3 km of the Sierra Leone border.
This unexpected move came at the end of an NPFL conference which called for the continuation of the peace process and the enforcement of the Yammoussoukro agreement as outlined in the Geneva agreement.
On April 30, ECOMOG began deploying in areas controlled by the NPFL.
AFRICA
MAURITANIA
New Cabinet
Following the appointment by President Moaouia Ould Sidi Mohamed Taya of Sidi Mohamed Ould Boubaker, hitherto Finance Minister, to the post of Prime Minister on April 18, a new Cabinet was announced on April 20.
The new appointments were made in the wake of the legislative election victory in March by the Republican Democratic and Social Party (PRDS) led by President Taya [see p. 38802].
The opposition Union of Democratic Forces (UFD) commented"The same faces have resurfaced…
This means a continuation of the policy of ruin."
The UFD also made it clear that, since accepting the position of Minister of Equipment and Transport, Mohamed Ould Lamar had ceased to be a member of the UFD.
Principal Mauritanian ministers
**Sidi Mohammed Ould Boubaker Prime Minister
**Mohammed Abdrahmane Abou Ould Moine Foreign Affairs and Co-operation
**Col.
Ahmed Ould Minnih Defence
*Sow Adema Samba Justice Hasni Ould Didi Interior, Posts and Telecommunications Kan Acheikh Finance
**Mohammed Ould Michel Planning Ahmed Ould Ghanahallah Fisheries and Maritime Economy
*No change.
**Altered responsibilities.
AFRICA
MALI
Presidential elections
Alpha Oumar Konare, leader of the Alliance for Democracy in Mali (ADEMA), was elected President in the second round of voting on April 26, winning 69.01 per cent of votes cast.
Konare, a former teacher, was one of the key figures in the uprising which toppled former President Moussa Traoré in March 1991 [see pp. 38083-84].
His party won the majority of seats in parliamentary elections held in March [see p. 38801].
Having failed to secure an absolute majority in the first round on April 12 (his share of the vote was 44.95 per cent), Konare was obliged to contest a run-off against Tieoule Mamadou Konate, leader of the Sudanese Union-African Democratic Rally (US-RDA)(who won 14.51 per cent of the vote in the first round.
The seven other candidates eliminated in the first round included Mountaga Tall, leader of the National Committee for Democratic Initiative (CNID), the second largest party in the National Assembly, with 11.41 per cent of the vote.
Both rounds were marked by a very low turnout, with only 20.87 per cent of the electorate participating in the second round.
On April 29, Konare, whose electoral campaign focused on the promotion of dialogue, indicated that he intended to involve representatives of other political parties in government, and called on all forces which had played a part in the overthrow of Traoré to unite.
Exchange of prisoners of war
According to local news sources, a ceremony marking the exchange of prisoners between the government and the Unified Movements and Fronts of Azawad, representing the Tuareg rebels, was held on April 13 in Gao.
The prisoner exchange followed the signing of a national peace pact between the government and rebels on April 11 [see pp. 38801-02 for negotiations].
On April 25 a committee to monitor the implementation of the pact was established, with an equal number of delegates from each side as well as representatives from Algeria, which had helped to broker the agreement.
Among the government's representatives was Lt.-Col. Amadou Toumani Touré, head of state until the election of Konare.
AFRICA
NIGERIA
Fuel crisis
A government official announced on April 20 that Nigeria, the world's 13th largest producer of crude oil and a leading member of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), had imported 45,000,000 litres of petroleum products from Europe in the previous week.
The imports, costing US$9,000,000, were enough to cover domestic needs for less than two days.
On April 21 the Nigerian National Petroleum Corporation confirmed that 8,000,000 litres of petroleum products were being imported daily.
Petrol shortages had begun in the north in late 1991 and had spread to Lagos and other southern areas by the beginning of April 1992.
The shortages were partly the result of reduced capacity at two main refineries which helped process the 1,700,000 barrels of crude oil produced per day.
The Warri refinery had reportedly cut output to 80,000 barrels per day after power supply problems, while the Port Harcourt refinery had been disrupted by routine maintenance work.
Shortages were exacerbated by the smuggling of petrol to neighbouring Benin, Cameroon, Chad and Niger as well as by local hoarding.
Consumers began to stockpile fuel as fears grew that the government would try to combat smuggling by cutting petrol subsidies to raise the price from about US$0.5 a litre to something nearer that of neighbouring countries.
Claims of human rights abuses
A Nigerian group, the Committee for the Defence of Human Rights (CDHR), claimed in a report published on April 18 that the security forces had routinely tortured suspects and had carried out at least 27 summary executions in 1991.
An equally critical report was published on April 21 by the US-based group Africa Watch.
In its 29-page report Africa Watch accused the military government of President Ibrahim Babangida of regarding itself as "above the law" , and of denying justice to its critics.
It condemned the use of secret trials and accused the government of refusing to allow the free expression of opposition views.
On April 9 the government closed the offices of Africa Concord magazine after it ran the headline: "Has Babangida given up?" .
The publishers were accused of undermining state security.
AFRICA
SIERRA LEONE
Report of coup
President Joseph Saidu Momoh was reported to have fled to neighbouring Guinea on April 30 after mutinous soldiers said that they had seized control of the country.
In a statement broadcast on national radio, the soldiers, who appeared to be led by Capt. Valentine Strasser, announced that they were setting up a National Provisional Defence Council.
The soldiers demanded the settlement of pay arrears and improved military conditions.
They denounced the government which they claimed had brought the country "permanent poverty and a deplorable life" .
AFRICA
SAO TOMÉ AND PRINCIPE
Dismissal of government
President Miguel Trovoada on April 22 dismissed the government of Prime Minister Daniel Lima dos Santos Daio in office since January 1991 [see p. 37949], and invited the ruling Party of Democratic Convergence (PCD) itself, to form a new administration.
The move was fiercely condemned by the PCD itself which claimed that the President's action was unconstitutional.
Trovoada had been under increasing popular pressure to take action against Daio after the latter publicly criticized him on April 3.
On April 8 a crowd of more than 7,000 people converged on the presidential palace to demand the dismissal of the government.
Demonstrators held Daio responsible for the country's economic difficulties which they said were a direct result of the structural adjustment programme Daio had agreed with the IMF and World Bank.
While not criticizing Daio's economic measures, Trovoada cited the failure of institutions to function properly, a lack of dialogue between the government and the presidency, and the impossibility of reaching a consensus, as reasons for the government's dismissal.
He insisted that he had acted within the Constitution and reaffirmed his commitment to multiparty democracy.
Daio's administration, he said, would remain in place until a new executive was appointed, but he indicated that if the PCD failed to elect a new leader promptly he would dissolve the National Assembly and call legislative elections.
AFRICA
TOGO
Electoral arrangements
A new electoral calendar [see p. 38754 for earlier timetable]was announced on April 8.
Popular approval for a new constitution would be sought on May 31 coinciding with local elections; legislative elections would take place over two rounds on June 21 and July 5; and the two rounds of presidential elections would end on Aug. 23.
No official reason was given for the postponement of voting.
Following the announcement of the revised schedule the premises of the national radio station were briefly occupied by a group of soldiers.
They broadcast a statement reaffirming the army's support for the process of democratization and denouncing the delays in the electoral process.
They also demanded that funds of the former ruling Rally of the Togolese People (RPT) be returned to the people.
Following fierce debate the High Council of the Republic (the transitional government) on April 15 adopted an amendment to the electoral code, raising from 40 to 45 the minimum age for presidential candidates.
The amendment also specified that candidates had to have resigned from the armed forces or security forces.
Prime Minister Joseph Kokou Koffigoh, who was born in 1948, was effectively excluded under the new amendment from contesting the 1992 presidential election.
Amnesty condemnation of Eyadema regime
A report published by the human rights organization by Amnesty International on April 7 accused the regime of President Gen. Gnassingbe Eyadema of human rights abuses in the period prior to the reduction of his powers by the national conference in 1991 [see p. 38379].
According to Amnesty, human rights violations increased from early 1990 as opposition to Eyadema grew.
AFRICA
KENYA
General strike
At least one person was killed and 163 were arrested during a general strike on April 2-3.
The action was called by the opposition Forum for the Restoration of Democracy (FORD) to demand the release of political prisoners and the lifting of the ban on political meetings, imposed on March 19 [see p. 38800].
The government declared the strike illegal and insisted that its security forces would deal firmly with demonstrators.
In Nairobi, the area most affected by the strike, commerce and transport were disrupted on both days.
On April 2 the police used batons, tear gas and live ammunition to disperse hundreds of youths who had set up roadblocks and stoned and burned cars in shanty towns on the outskirts of the capital.
The ban on political rallies was lifted on April 8.
Continuing ethnic violence
As ethnic violence in western Kenya [see p. 38800]continued throughout April, the government blamed the conflict on leading members of FORD.
Rejecting such accusations, FORD made counter-claims that the clashes had been instigated by President Daniel arap Moi.
Regional news sources estimated that 200 people had been killed and 10,000 made homeless between the beginning of March and the end of April.
AFRICA
SUDAN
Fall of southern towns to government forces
The capture of Pochala by government forces in March enabled them by April 4 to take the towns of Kongor and Bor.
Forces of the rebel Sudanese People's Liberation Army (SPLA) which remained under the command of Col. John Garang continued to hold the area around the towns of Torit and Kapoeta, in the south of Equatoria state.
It was anticipated that the rains which were expected in May would slow the government's military campaign, as they had done in previous years.
On April 4 Bor, which had been under SPLA control since April 1989, fell to a government force of some 2,000 men, which was armed with heavy artillery against the SPLA's lighter arms.
Yirol, to the north-east of Bor (under SPLA control since December 1985), fell to the government on April 11, and Pibor on April 23.
Mongalla, south of Bor, was captured two days later, but a column of government troops which moved south-eastwards from Juba was contained by SPLA forces at Ngangala.
Government forces were also attempting to move southwards from Wau towards Tambura.
Garang was reported in Le Monde of April 24 to have said that the government push had effectively been halted throughout the south.
Referring to SPLA dissidents known as the Nasir group [see pp. 38426; 38666], he said that the only towns taken by the government forces were those "which depend on our dissidents…who have defected and chosen the camp of Gen. Bashir" .
Threat to food supplies
On April 13 the UN Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali expressed concern about intensified fighting in the south of Sudan.
He said that "international humanitarian agencies have been compelled to withdraw from the areas concerned" .
Personnel of the Operation Life-Line Sudan programme had on March 31 been forced by fighting to leave Bor for the second time in two weeks, although some 6,000 malnourished children were being fed from that distribution point.
The suspension in March of the southern part of the Life-Line programme, in which the UN World Food Programme and UNICEF were participating, had cut airborne food supplies to some 1,500,000 southerners.
A further 260,000 people depended on aid brought by road or river.
On April 19 the government lifted a ban imposed in early March on flights bringing UN food relief from Kenya.
Flights were authorized only to the towns of Nasir, Wau and Akobo.
On April 20 an SPLA spokesperson in Nairobi said that the three towns were in areas held by the Nasir group and that in areas held by Garang's forces almost 150,000 villagers and displaced persons were without food aid.
By April 27 it was reported from Khartoum that the Sudanese government had agreed in principle to hold peace talks with the SPLA in the Nigerian capital Abuja on May 24.
Report of coup attempt
The government announced that on April 15 it had arrested a group of soldiers and retired army officers who had been planning to overthrow the government.
On April 17 a Lebanese newspaper reported, citing Sudanese government sources, that the plotters had planned to reinstall the former President Jaafer al-Nemery and that the Cairo-based opposition umbrella group, the National Democratic Alliance (NDA), had known of the plot and had sought to arrange a meeting between Nemery and Garang.
[For February reported coup attempt see p. 38754.]
Amnesty report on November 1991 killings
The human rights group Amnesty International, in a report published on April 14, claimed that forces allied to the Nasir group of SPLA dissidents had in November 1991 massacred over 2,000 civilians in the area around Bor as they had moved southwards.
Isolated press reports at the time had noted that most of these forces were from the Nuer tribe, and their victims had been mainly from the Dinka tribe, of which Garang was a member.
The Amnesty report also said that "no credibility" should be given to government denials of certain human rights abuses which, Amnesty claimed, included the torture of political detainees in specially adapted houses known as "ghost houses" .
AFRICA
ETHIOPIA
Ceasefire agreement
On April 15 the Ethiopian People's Revolutionary Democratic Front (EPRDF) and the Oromo Liberation Front (OLF) signed a ceasefire agreement brokered by the USA and the provisional government of Eritrea.
In a joint statement the EPRDF and the OLF recognized the need for the creation of an atmosphere conducive to free and fair elections, and declared their mutual belief that problems should be resolved in a peaceful manner.
Both sides agreed to confine all their forces to camp within one week of the signing of the agreement and to cease all hostilities immediately.
The ceasefire agreement came after a number of OLF supporters were reported to have been killed.
According to an Agence France-Presse (AFP) report on April 2, at least 25 OLF supporters were killed during a demonstration in Weter in western Ethiopia.
The pro-OLF radio Voice of Oromo Liberation reported on April 7 that EPRDF soldiers had killed 200 civilians and wounded 300 others during a peaceful OLF rally in the eastern Harerge province.
AFP later reported the killing of 126 OLF fighters on April 18 during clashes with EPRDF forces in Mechara and Mechata.
Announcement of referendum on Eritrea
The provisional government of Eritrea announced on April 9 that a referendum on the question of independence would be held in the third week of April 1993, if not before.
Eritreans would be asked to respond yes or no to the question: "Do you wish Eritrea to be an independent country?" 
A five-member referendum commission to draw up procedures for the process was established on April 23.
Suspension of UNHCR efforts
The Office of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees announced the suspension of its relief efforts in south-eastern Ethiopia after the killing of one of its workers.
The agency said that 15 relief workers had been killed in Ethiopia in the previous seven months.
AFRICA
SOMALIA
UN relief initiative
An initiative by UN Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali, intended to relieve starvation and restore law and order in Somalia, failed to win the complete backing of the UN Security Council on April 24.
While the council agreed to dispatch 50 observers to monitor a ceasefire agreement between the supporters of interim President Ali Mahdi Mohammed and Gen. Mohammed Farah Aydid [see p. 38800], it deferred a decision on the proposal to send 500 armed soldiers to escort food convoys.
It said that the support of at least one side was required before troops could be deployed.
Farah Aydid was reported to have agreed to the deployment of UN guards and unarmed observers, but had rejected the sending of armed soldiers.
The UN was criticized by relief agencies for failing to deliver food aid since the signing of the peace agreement on March 3.
According to the Save The Children Fund the country was on the edge of famine and was about to "plummet into large-scale death from malnutrition" .
Escape of Siyad Barre
Mohammed Siyad Barre fled to Kenya on April 29 after forces of the United Somali Congress (USC) captured the south-western town of Garbaharrey where the former President had been living since being ousted from Mogadishu in January 1991 [see pp. 37946-47].
The USC had on April 18 repulsed an offensive by Siyad Barre's Somali National Front (SNF) which brought it within 30 km of Mogadishu, and had then pursued Siyad Barre and 1,200 of his supporters to the Kenyan border.
Kenyan Foreign Ministry officials declined to reveal whether the former President had requested asylum.
AFRICA
SOUTHERN AFRICA
Moves to relieve famine
At a meeting in Pretoria on April 21, South Africa and five of the nine members of the Southern African Development Co-ordination Conference (SADCC) agreed to a joint project for the importation and movement of grain.
The agreement was reached in the face of one of the worst droughts in the region this century [see p. 38755]and marked the first occasion on which South Africa and members of the SADCC had agreed to co-operate economically.
Zimbabwe relaxed its earlier objections to collaborating with South Africa and joined Botswana, Malawi, Mozambique and Zambia to combat the threat of mass starvation.
Under the terms of the agreement, representatives from these five countries would help oversee the movement of millions of tonnes of grain and other food aid expected to arrive at South African ports.
AFRICA
HORN OF AFRICA
Regional summit
A summit of the heads of state and representatives of rebel forces active in the Horn of Africa was held on April 8-9 in Addis Ababa, the Ethiopian capital.
Calling for regional peace, the leaders issued co-operation guidelines which included the establishment of a joint body to formulate and implement aid policy.
They also called for international aid.
According to UN estimates 23,000,000 people in the region were at risk from starvation and disease.
AFRICA
CILSS
Summit meeting
The 10th heads of states conference of the Permanent Inter-state Committee on Drought Control in the Sahel (CILSS) was held on April 10-11 in Ouagadougou, Burkina.
The meeting, which brought together the heads of state and governments of 11 countries, focused on the committee's long-term redress and recovery plan.
To this end the minister co-ordinator of the ICDCS was charged with drafting a series of measures for submission at an emergency ministerial meeting in November.
This was in part a response to the demand of Western governments and the UN for a complete restructuring of the entire CILSS system.
The conference unanimously elected President Blaise Compaore of Burkina as chairman of the heads of state conference for a period of two years, and Antonio Alberto do Rosario, Cape Verde Minister of Rural Development and Fisheries, as CILSS minister co-ordinator.
It was agreed to hold the next ordinary session in Praia, Cape Verde, in 1994.
AFRICA
COMOROS
The national conference, under way since Jan. 24 (but boycotted by representatives from Moheli island), ended on April 8 with agreement on a new constitution and on an electoral schedule commencing with a referendum on the draft constitution on May 24, followed by multiparty legislative elections on June 21 and the election of island governors and town councillors on July 19.
AFRICA
DJIBOUTI
Opposition groups criticized as inadequate a preliminary draft of a new constitution presented on April 4 by the constitutional committee set up by President Hassan Gouled Aptidon in January [see p. 38711]; the proposal retained a strong executive presidency.
AFRICA
THE GAMBIA
Provisional results from the general election on April 29 indicated that Sir Dawda Jawara, leader of the Progressive People's Party (PPP), had secured at least 60 per cent of votes cast in the presidential poll; in the elections to the 36-member House of Representatives, with the results from eight seats still to be counted, the PPP had won 20 seats, the National Convention Party five, the Gambia People's Party one, and independent candidates two.
AFRICA
GHANA
In a referendum on April 28, over 90 per cent of voters approved a draft constitution under the terms of which the 1982 ban on political parties would be lifted on May 18; the turnout was estimated at 60 per cent.
AFRICA
MAURITANIA-SENEGAL
Mauritania and Senegal announced the restoration of diplomatic relations on April 23; ties had been broken by Senegal in August 1989 as relations had steadily deteriorated since violent disturbances in April [see pp. 36579-80; 36840].
AFRICA
SEYCHELLES
Following his return from exile on April 12, former President James Mancham, ousted in a coup in 1977, met with President France-Albert René on April 21.
AMERICAS
UNITED STATES
Rioting following acquittals of police officers in Rodney King case
Serious rioting broke out in Los Angeles on April 29 after four white officers of the Los Angeles Police Department (LAPD) were unexpectedly acquitted of having assaulted a black motorist, Rodney King, in March 1991.
The arrest of King had been videotaped by an amateur cameraman, and the resulting footage showed him receiving 56 baton blows and being brutally kicked by police.
The case had received massive publicity and became symbolic of the institutionalized racism and brutality alleged by many to exist within the LAPD [see pp. 38091; 38139], and led to an independent commission of inquiry [see pp. 38329-30].
The trial began amid controversy when the presiding judge, Stanley M. Weisberg, chose to move the venue to Ventura County, an almost exclusively white area inhabited by a disproportionately large number of police officers.
The resulting jury of six men and six women contained one Hispanic and one Asian-American, but included no blacks.
The videotape provided the centrepiece of the proceedings, although there were also 55 witnesses, the bulk of whom were police officers or medical personnel.
Of considerable importance was the testimony of Officer Theodore J. Briseno, who was defended separately from his three colleagues.
Briseno testified that two of the officers — Lawrence Powell and Timothy Wind — had used excessive force on King, and that the fourth defendant, Sgt. Stacey C. Koon, the officer in charge of the arrest, had mishandled the situation.
Briseno stated: "It looked like they were just hitting him everywhere.
I thought the whole thing was out of control.
It was wrong."
Despite the overwhelming prosecution evidence, the defence dwelt upon King's behaviour prior to the arrest — he was intoxicated and had failed to comply with police attempts to stop his speeding car — and sought to cast the police officers as a part of a "thin blue line" standing between law-abiding citizens and the "jungle" .
The jury began deliberating upon its verdict on April 23.
After four days it acquitted three of the defendants on all charges, and acquitted Powell — who had delivered most of the blows — on all but one minor count upon which the jury remained undecided.
Within hours of the verdicts there was violence and looting on a scale not seen in the city since the Watts riots of 1965.
Motorists were dragged from their cars and beaten, and hundreds of shops and properties were looted and burnt.
With police apparently keeping a low profile, the violence intensified during the night.
Governor Wilson declared a state of emergency, imposed a curfew and called in reinforcements from the California Highway Patrol.
On April 30 President Bush appeared on television to appeal for "calm and tolerance" , but the violence continued to spread into new areas of the city.
There were also reports of outbreaks of unrest in San Francisco, Georgia, Atlanta, Tampa, Dallas and elsewhere.
By the end of April over 30 people were reported to have been killed in the violence and many hundreds injured or arrested.
Presidential election campaign
Primaries in New York and elsewhere
The front runner for the Democratic Party presidential nomination, Bill Clinton, won primaries in New York, Wisconsin and Kansas on April 7, and a non-binding contest in Minnesota.
In doing so he recovered from three consecutive defeats at the hands of outsider Jerry Brown, the most recent of which had been in the Alaska caucus on April 2, where Brown had won 33 per cent of the vote compared with Clinton's 30 per cent.
Once again demonstrating the resilience which had become a characteristic of his candidacy, Clinton campaigned strongly in New York, and even chose it as the venue for his first foreign policy speech since December.
Accusing President George Bush of pursing a foreign policy which was "reactive, rudderless and erratic" , he committed himself to maintaining close ties with Europe and NATO, repudiated protectionism, and promised economic assistance for Russia.
In an attempt to detach some of Clinton's black support, Brown announced his intention, if nominated, to invite the black populist leader the Rev. Jesse Jackson to serve as his vice-presidential nominee.
The move provoked the hostility of much of the Jewish community which, since the 1984 presidential campaign, had labelled Jackson as anti-Semitic.
In the event Clinton won the New York contest comfortably, and saw Brown beaten into third place by Paul Tsongas who had already withdrawn from the contest.
There was no Republican primary in New York, but the contests held elsewhere on April 7 were won easily by Bush.
Contests in Virginia and Pennsylvania
The April 7 results gave Clinton a total of at least 1,264 of the 2,145 delegates required to assure him of his party's nomination.
While it appeared that the race might well remain technically undecided until the final round of primaries in June, the resurgence of Clinton's campaign had the effect of dampening speculation concerning a brokered convention and made it almost certain that the Arkansas Governor would win the Democratic nomination.
Despite continuing reservations concerning "character" issues — throughout the campaign Clinton had been assailed over various aspects of his private life and judgment — there was evidence throughout April that many senior Democrats had accepted the inevitability of his nomination and had begun closing ranks around him in preparation for the campaign against Bush.
On April 14 Clinton also secured the unanimous endorsement of the leadership of the AFL-CIO, the country's main labour confederation.
The organization's president, Lane Kirkland, persuaded the 35-member executive — which included several erstwhile supporters of Brown — to support Clinton.
Clinton achieved further successes in the contests staged during the remainder of the month.
In the Virginia caucus held on April 11-13, he won 52 per cent of the delegates, while 36 per cent were uncommitted and 12 per cent went to Brown.
In the Pennsylvania primaries on April 28 Clinton received 56 per cent of the vote, compared with 26 per cent for Brown and 13 per cent for Tsongas.
In the Republican contest in Pennsylvania Bush received 77 per cent of the vote compared with 23 per cent for Pat Buchanan.
Withdrawal from contest by Duke
David Duke, a former Ku Klux Klansman, abandoned the contest for the Republican nomination on April 22.
Duke had had difficulty in getting his name on the ballot in many states.
Even where his name had appeared, however, the percentage of the vote which he had managed to achieve was smaller than had been widely anticipated.
Brown Clinton Tsongas Buchanan Bush New York 26 41 29 — Wisconsin 35 38 22 17 77 2 Kansas 13 51 15 15 62 16 Minnesota* 32 33 23 25 68 3
Results of primaries held on April 7 Democrats Republicans Uncommitted
*Non-binding contest.
Implementation of death sentence in California
Robert Alton Harris, a convicted murderer, was executed in the gas chamber at San Quentin State Prison on April 21.
It was the first execution in California for 25 years and was conducted amidst an unprecedented degree of legal wrangling and confusion, a context which fuelled the divisive national debate concerning the legitimacy of the death sentence.
Harris had been sentenced to death for the murder of two teenage boys in San Diego on July 5, 1978, in order to steal their car for use in a bank robbery.
Although his crime had been extremely callous — after killing the boys he had consumed the remains of their half-eaten lunch — opponents of the death sentence had appealed for clemency on the grounds that Harris was mentally unfit for execution, having suffered from foetal-alcohol syndrome and extensive childhood abuse.
After exhausting the appeals process, the final execution date — the fifth to have been set for Harris — was arranged on March 14.
On April 16 the Governor of California, Pete Wilson, an advocate of the death penalty, refused clemency.
State and federal appeals were filed on April 17 based on the claim that Harris's brother (who had been a prosecution witness) had fired the shots which had killed the boys.
These were rejected on April 17 and 18 respectively.
On April 18, however, US District Judge Marilyn Hall Patel granted a 10-day stay of execution to allow a hearing on the claim that the use of the gas chamber violated the constitutional prohibition on "cruel and unusual punishment" .
(Of the 36 US states which used the death penalty, only three used gas, which, it was alleged, could take 12 minutes or more to kill a condemned prisoner.)
Patel's temporary restraining order was lifted by the 9th US Circuit Court of Appeals on April 19.
On the following day the court rejected two further appeals but granted two further stays for a consideration of the claim regarding Harris's brother and the constitutionality of the use of the gas chamber.
Both stays were immediately lifted by the Supreme Court.
Judges from the 9th Circuit issued two further stays on April 21, the last of which was granted after Harris had actually been strapped into the gas chamber.
This final stay was overturned by the Supreme Court by seven votes to two, and, in an unprecedented move, the Court prohibited any further intervention in the case by lower courts.
Harris was duly executed, being pronounced dead at 6.21 a.m. local time, six hours after the scheduled time of the execution.
The case drew international attention not simply because of the issue of Harris's mental health, but also because of California's large number of prisoners on death row (328 after the death of Harris, out of 2,588 in the USA as a whole), and its tradition of liberalism.
There had been 169 executions in US states since the death penalty was restored by the Supreme Court in 1976, most of them in conservative Southern states, but on April 6 Arizona had carried out its first execution for 29 years, while in March the first execution in Delaware since 1946 had been implemented.
Noriega trial verdict
After four-and-a-half days of deliberation and a seven-month trial, a federal jury in Miami on April 9 found Gen. Manuel Antonio Noriega, the former Panamanian military dictator, guilty on eight out of 10 counts of drug trafficking, money-laundering and racketeering.
Bush hailed the verdict as a "victory against the drug lords" but Noriega's chief attorney Frank Rubino, promising lengthy appeals, stated that it had been a political case; the defence had effectively been prevented from treating it as such, and the judge had instructed the jury on April 3 not to consider any political aspects of the case.
Rubino claimed that the verdict projected the USA in the role of "world policeman" , capable of "imposing its will upon so-called independent sovereign nations" , a reference to the December 1989 US military invasion of Panama during which Noriega was seized before being flown to the USA [see pp. 37112-13].
It was expected that Noriega's appeal would question the legal basis for trying a foreign head of state taken into custody during a US military invasion and who now claimed to be a prisoner of war.
In a report published on April 10, Charles Schumer, the Democratic chairman of the Congressional sub-committee on crime and criminal justice, stated that the costs of capturing Noriega (estimated to be at least US$164,000,000) and putting him on trial (estimated at US$20,000,000) paled in comparison to the "unprecedented costs" incurred by the prosecution in plea bargaining deals with scores of convicted drug traffickers and other convicted criminals to build its case [see p. 38429].
In return for testimony, 29 convicts were released from a total of six life-without-parole sentences and 1,109 years of prison time, while six informants were placed in a witness protection programme with all living expenses paid.
Nature of trial
The prosecution, relying heavily on hearsay testimony from convicted drug traffickers, sought to prove a link between Noriega and the activities of the Colombian Medellín drug cartel, alleging among other things that Noriega had used President Fidel Castro of Cuba to mediate a dispute between him and the Colombian Medellín drug cartel.
It rested its case on Dec. 17, 1991.
The defence, calling and cross-examining a number of US Drug Enforcement Agency officials, presented its case between Feb. 2 and March 10, 1992, after a delay due to heart bypass surgery on Judge William Hoeveler.
Rubino, attempting to show that his client was the victim of a political vendetta by the Bush administration, had sought access to classified government documents, to obtain evidence that the US administration had maintained a formal or covert relationship with Noriega.
Judge Hoeveler himself, in August 1991, overruled Justice and State department objections to Rubino's request for access to such documents [see p. 38429].
However, virtually without exception during the trial, the judge prevented (on grounds of irrelevance to the "common criminal charges" in the indictment) the efforts by the defence to introduce evidence that Noriega was supported by and worked closely with US military and intelligence services.
At an extraordinary hearing on April 4, the prosecution and defence disagreed the final version of the indictment to be submitted to the jury; Noriega, in his only appearance on the witness stand, successfully contested the inclusion in the indictment of the evidence of a key opposition informant, a convicted Colombian drug-trafficker, Boris Olarte.
Disclosure of "Rubbergate" House members
On April 17 the ethics committee of the House of Representatives issued a "full disclosure" of the House banking scandal which had become popularly dubbed as the "Rubbergate" affair [see p. 38807].
The disclosure came 211 days after the General Accounting Office had issued its initial report on the numerous unauthorized overdrafts run up by members of the House.
It took the form of a list of 303 names of members and former members who had written at least one uncovered cheque during the 39-month period which ended on Oct. 3, 1991.
A list had already been published (on April 1) of the 22 worst "abusers" of the House bank, those who had run account deficits which exceeded their next month's pay for 20 per cent of the months in which they had held an account at the bank.
The two lists together included 205 Democrats, 119 Republicans and one independent.
A total of 269 names were those of current members of the House, while the remaining 56 were former members.
Among those on the list were the current Speaker, Tom Foley, his predecessor, Jim Wright, Majority Leader Dick Gephardt, four former members currently in the Bush Cabinet (Edward Madigan, Richard Cheney, Lynn Martin and Jack Kemp), and five former members currently in the Senate.
The publication of the two lists fuelled expressions of public disgust over the affair, and appeared to intensify the widespread public dissatisfaction with incumbent politicians which had been evidenced by the original exposure of the banking scandal.
This had been consistently illustrated in opinion polls and in the growing support for term limits for elected politicians at national and state level.
It had also been exploited by the re-election campaign team of President Bush, which had sought to portray the Democrat majority in Congress as responsible for sabotaging the Republican administration's domestic policy initiatives.
The disclosure of the lists was also accompanied by numerous complaints.
Many commentators criticized the lists for giving only the names and the numbers of uncovered cheques, while omitting details of the size of individual overdrafts.
Many of those whose names appeared on the lists also complained, arguing that their overdrafts had been a product of the chronic inefficiency of the bank and its slack accounting procedures.
Further S&L developments — Sentencing of Keating
The House of Representatives voted on April 1 to reject a measure which would have provided an additional US$17,000 million funding for the Resolution Trust Corp.
(RTC), the body empowered to deal with the country's stricken Savings and Loans industry.
The vote, by 298 to 125, defied the wishes of both the Bush administration and the Democratic and Republican leadership in both houses of Congress.
The move meant that although the RTC would continue to take over insolvent institutions, it would be unable to liquidate them as it would lack the funding required to compensate depositors.
It was interpreted by most commentators as being indicative of the concern felt by members of the House (all of whom faced re-election in November) over the level of public anger arising from the enormous cost of the S&L rescue operation, currently estimated to have exceeded $88,000 million.
Since 1989 almost 700 S&Ls had been taken over by the RTC.
Announcement of new S&L and banking regulations
The Bush administration issued new regulations on April 2 (to become effective after 30 days) which eased lending conditions for real estate and permitted "well-capitalized" S&Ls to open branches in any US state.
This unexpected development was accompanied by a White House statement which said that "the nation can no longer afford to wait for Congress to act" on proposed legislation to allow inter-state banking.
Under the new rules the amount of capital that banks and S&Ls were required to hold "against conservatively underwritten loans for construction of pre-sold homes" was reduced.
Also, the threshold for requiring licensed appraisals on loans secured by real estate was raised from $50,000 to $100,000.
Sentencing of Charles Keating
The man who came to personify the recklessness and corruption at the centre of the S&L scandal, Charles Keating Jr, 68, was sentenced on April 10 to 10 years in prison and was fined $250,000.
The sentence, handed down by Los Angeles Superior Court Judge Lance A. Ito, was the maximum permitted.
Keating's lawyer gave immediate notice of his intention to appeal, but Keating was denied bail on the grounds that he represented a "significant flight risk" .
The 1989 collapse of Keating's California-based Lincoln S&L [see p. 37405]was one of the most expensive single failures, costing the US taxpayer some $2,600 million.
He was also involved with five Senators, all of whom later faced an ethics inquiry [see p. 38568].
In December 1991 Keating had been found guilty in a Californian state court on 17 counts of fraud [see p. 38669].
He was due to face trial on federal fraud, racketeering and conspiracy counts later in 1992.
Abortion
Large pro-choice demonstration — Supreme Court consideration of Pennsylvanian anti-abortion law
Up to 500,000 people marched through Washington DC on April 3 to demonstrate their support for continued access to legal abortion.
The march was organized by the National Organisation of Women (NOW) to illustrate the level of public support for abortion rights.
It was held prior to the Supreme Court — with its newly-established conservative majority — beginning a consideration of Roe v. Wade, the beleaguered 1973 legal precedent which had established legal abortion as a constitutional right.
Roe v. Wade had already been weakened by the 1989 Webster v. Reproductive Services ruling [see pp. 36809-10], which had allowed individual states greater latitude in restricting access to abortion.
Among the numerous pieces of legislation which followed was a law passed in Pennsylvania [see pp. 38714-15; see also below]; its five key provisions
The Bush administration reiterated its opposition to abortion when, on April 6, Solicitor General Kenneth W. Starr filed a brief which appealed to the Supreme Court to use its consideration of the Pennsylvanian law as an opportunity to overturn Roe v. Wade.
 "The protection of innocent human life, in or out of the womb, is the most compelling interest that a state can advance," stated Starr.
 "In our view, a state's interest in protecting foetal life throughout pregnancy, as a general matter, outweighs a woman's liberty interest in abortion." 
The Supreme Court heard oral arguments on the Pennsylvania law under Planned Parenthood of Southeastern Pennsylvania v. Casey, on April 22.
It was due to announce its decision by mid-1992, prior to its summer recess.
Striking down of Guam law — Renewed protests outside clinics
In other abortion-related developments during April, the 9th US Circuit Court of Appeals struck down a 1990 anti-abortion law which had been passed in the US territory of Guam[seep. 37310].
Using Roe v. Wade as its starting point, the court ruled on April 18 that the Guam law, one of the most draconian pieces of anti-abortionist legislation enacted anywhere in the USA, was "clearly unconstitutional" .
It was expected that the ruling would be appealed to the Supreme Court.
As the Supreme Court began its deliberations on the Pennsylvanian legislation, an extreme anti-abortionist group, Operation Rescue, held a mass picket of an abortion clinic in Buffalo, New York.
On April 22, the second day of the picket, at lest 150 opponents of abortion were arrested as they attempted to breach police lines around the clinic.
Operation Rescue had been involved in mass pickets of abortion clinics in Wichita, Kansas, in mid-1991 [see p. 38383].
Conviction of John Gotti
In a verdict hailed by federal prosecutors as the most important achieved against the Mafia since that against Al Capone in 1931, a New York court of first instance on April 2 convicted John Gotti, reputedly the head of the New York Gambino "family" , on 13 counts including murder, conspiracy to murder, illegal gambling, loan sharking, obstructing justice, bribing a public official, and tax evasion.
The conviction followed an 11-hour deliberation by the jury and a 10-week trial [for opening of trial see p. 38715].
Gotti had been prosecuted on three previous occasions — while the current trial was in progress the foreman of the jury in the 1987 trial was indicted for conspiring with Gotti to return a not guilty verdict in exchange for $60,000 — and had been acquitted each time.
The trial involved a formidable quantity of prosecution evidence, including six hours of secretly recorded FBI tapes and 38 witnesses, including Gotti's former deputy and trusted friend, Salvatore "Sammy Bull" Gravano.
One of the highest-ranking Mafia figures ever to testify for the authorities, Gravano claimed to having participated in 19 murders, and insisted that those committed during the last 10 years had been on the orders of Gotti.
He alleged that both he and Gotti were present at the murder of former Gambino family boss, "Big Paul" Castellano and his bodyguard on Dec. 16, 1985, in Manhattan.
Shortly afterwards Gotti had been chosen as Castellano's successor.
The defence sought to discredit Gravano as a "serial killer" and habitual liar who was seeking to evade life imprisonment by striking a deal with the authorities.
The defence, by contrast, called only one witness, as five others who were willing to testify in favour of Gotti were disqualified from appearing by the presiding judge.
This, together with the replacement of three jurors during the course of the trial — one of whom was removed only a day before the jury's deliberations began — was thought likely to form the basis of an appeal against the convictions.
The authorities had also prevented Gotti from being represented by either his first or second choice of lawyer.
Gotti was due to be sentenced on June 23, and faced a maximum of life imprisonment.
His co-defendant, Frank "Frankie Locs" Locascio, was also convicted of murder and racketeering, although he was acquitted on one count of illegal gambling.
Both men stated their intention to appeal against their convictions.
AMERICAS
CUBA
Tightening of US trade embargo
US President George Bush issued an executive order on April 18 closing US ports to ships engaged in trade with Cuba.
This move followed a marked increase in anti-Castro broadcasts by the Florida-based TV Martí, run by right-wing Cuban exiles and supported by the US administration.
The regime of President Fidel Castro had lost a major source of economic and military aid with the collapse of the Soviet Union.
According to the latest US estimates, subsidies from the new Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) to Cuba in 1992 would total approximately US$65,000,000, or only about 6 per cent of aid received in 1991 and 2 per cent of the 1990 figure.
Among other privations, energy rationing had been introduced for the first time in the capital, Havana, in mid-April.
Cuban radio denounced the tightening of the US trade embargo.
Manuel Salgado, the interim president of the Ecuadorian Congress, currently visiting Cuba, stated that it showed that "US governing circles have not modified in the least their imperial policies, which dream of a unipolar world rooted in subjugation and slavery" .
Reaction within the USA was varied.
The US Cuban anti-Castro lobby pushed for further measures, supporting a bipartisan bill currently before Congress which would prevent foreign-based subsidiaries of US companies from trading with Cuba.
(The value of such trade had more than doubled between 1988 and 1990, to a record US$705,000,000, as US firms sought to capitalize on Cuba's need for new financial partners.)
Ernest Corrado, president of the American Institute of Merchant Shipping, claimed that the tighter embargo on shipping was "insane" and that Bush was interfering with trade and inviting retaliation around the world.
Foreign relations
Diplomatic relations at ambassadorial level were established with Byelarus on April 17 and with Georgia on April 18.
AMERICAS
HAITI
Cabinet changes
Changes to the army-backed provisional government, installed following the overthrow of Fr.
Jean Bertrand Aristide in September 1991 [see pp. 38430; 38522-23], were announced on April 14.
In the reshuffle, seven ministers lost their posts (one of whom, Interior Minister Col. Gracia Jean, had already tendered his resignation, citing "personality clashes" with Prime Minister Jean Jacques Honorat).
The Honorat regime had threatened to arrest members of the legislature if they tried to ratify the February 1992 US-sponsored Washington accord between the legislature and President Aristide, providing for the latter's eventual return to power [see pp. 38758; 38808].
René Théodore, designated as Prime minister under the Washington accord, called on Haitians to put pressure on the military government to force its resignation, and on April 13 the Congress rejected a proposal by the C.-in-C. of the Army, Gen. Raoul Cédras, for a "national conference" ostensibly intended to find ways to restore stability.
Cédras's "national conference" invitation, issued also to business and religious leaders, was described by the opposition mayor of Port-au-Prince, Evans Paul, now in hiding, as a piece of "pure demagogy" .
Congressional delegates supported instead a proposal to create a committee to arbitrate "between the executive and legislative branches to revive the ratification process of the Washington agreement" .
Jean Jacques Honorat Prime Minister Serge Charles Interior and National Defence
New provisional Haiti Cabinet
**Jean-Robert Simonise Foreign Affairs and Worship Serge Cotel Commerce and Industry Charles Beaulieu Economy and Finance
**Joseph Desir National Education
**Greger Jean-Louis Public Health and Population
*Marc-Henri Rousseau Francois Public Works, Transport and Communications Jacques Baker Agriculture Evariste Midy Planning, External Co-operation, Public administration Gerarde Bissainthe Information, Co-ordination and Culture Jacquelin Montalvo Despeignes Minster without Portfolio Guy Francis Secretary for State of the Interior and National Defence
*No change.
**Altered responsibilities.
AMERICAS
ST LUCIA
General election
In the general election held on April 27 the United Workers' Party (UWP) of Prime Minister John Compton, 66, won a third consecutive five-year term of office.
The conservative UWP, in office since 1964 except for 1979-82, won 11 of the 17 parliamentary seats, the remaining six going to the Saint Lucia Labour Party (SLP) led by Julian Hunte.
The left-wing Progressive Labour Party (PLP) received only 97 votes in the one constituency it contested.
In the two general election held in April 1987 [see pp. 35187-88]the UWP had won nine seats and the SLP eight, although one of the eight SLP members, Neville Cenac, then defected and joined the Compton government as Minister of Foreign Affairs.
The 1992 campaign was dominated by the issue of which party was fit to manage the economy.
The SLP attacked the leadership style of Compton, whom critics described as a "benevolent dictator" practised in the art of "clientist" politics.
Compton said that his victory was important for the continuation of the process of political union with the three other members of the Windward Islands group — Dominica, Grenada, and St Vincent and the Grenadines.
AMERICAS
MEXICO
Guadalajara explosion
A series of explosions killed at least 200 people, mostly children, and injured 1,500 others and destroyed 30 blocks in the central working class Reforma district of Guadalajara, capital city of the western state of Jalisco, on April 22.
The Attorney General of the Federal District, Ignacio Morales Lechuga, was given 72 hours by President Carlos Salinas de Gortari to find the culprits.
On April 26 he attributed responsibility to four executives of the national oil company (PEMEX) and to five local officials — the mayor of Guadalajara, Enrique Dau Flores (who had "temporarily" resigned on April 24), the Jalisco Secretary of State for Urban Development, Aristeo Mejías, and three local water company officials.
The fatal blasts, Morales said, had been caused by large amounts of petrol from a ruptured PEMEX pipeline and lesser amounts of gas, including the volatile solvent hexane, which had leaked into the sewers.
He rejected PEMEX's claim that leaking hexane gas from the privately owned La Central cooking oil factory was primarily to blame.
Days before the explosions the water company had been told by local people of the strong smell of gas in the district, but it had not ordered an evacuation.
AMERICAS
VENEZUELA
Restoration of constitutional guarantees
Interior Minister Luis Piñerúa Ordaz announced on April 9 that the government had approved the restoration of constitutional guarantees suspended since the military coup attempt in February [see pp. 38759-60].
The announcement came in the wake of a "civic strike" the previous day, chiefly in the capital Caracas, where most schools were closed but little disruption was reported, and in cities and towns around the country.
Protesters called for the dismissal of President Carlos Andrés Pérez and the restoration of certain liberties, in particular the right to demonstrate.
National Guard troops reportedly fired in the air to disperse demonstrators in south-western districts of Caracas, and rioting was reported in Valencia, 80 km west of the capital.
A "procession of silence" for the restoration of constitutional rights, declared illegal by the government on April 1, had proceeded in Caracas on April 2 and had been dispersed by police using water cannon, tear gas and birdshot.
On April 23, police and National Guard units used tear gas to disperse students supporting policemen striking over pay and conditions in the Andean city of Merida.
No arrests or injuries were reported.
Resignation of Central Bank governor
Miguel Rodríguez, who was appointed as president of the Central Bank only in February, resigned on April 1 and was replaced by Ruth de Krivoy, the first woman to hold the post.
Rodríguez, the main architect of Pérez's highly unpopular economic austerity programme, had reportedly stepped down to ease pressure on the currently beleaguered government.
Release of rebels
The Agence France-Presse (AFP) news agency reported that 42 officers who had supported the February coup attempt had been released on April 3, reportedly on the personal request of Pérez.
Following a course of "psychological re-adaption" , they would be allowed to resume their military careers.
An estimated 47 ringleaders, headed by Lt.-Col. Hugo Chávez Frías, remained in custody.
AMERICAS
COLOMBIA
State of emergency
In accordance with powers made available to it under the new Constitution enacted in July 1991 [see p. 38332], the government issued a decree on April 23 placing the entire country under a state of emergency for four days to combat a serious energy shortage.
The official reason for the decision was the persistence of a severe drought, the worst on record.
The government blamed the drought on El Niño, the warm ocean current which, sweeping in near the Pacific coast every few years, caused wide fluctuations in the local weather.
However, other observers attributed the sharp reduction in rainfall to the accelerated destruction of tropical forests.
Critics also blamed energy shortages on mismanagement and corruption in the electricity and generating sector, pointing to the failure to invest in coal generating power when the problems first became evident.
Generating company managers had merely allowed water levels to run down in the hope that the drought would eventually end; only in March 1992 did they admit to a disaster, announcing nationwide rationing which was currently believed to be costing the economy an estimated US$330,000 each week.
AMERICAS
BRAZIL
Major Cabinet reshuffle
President Fernando Collor de Mello completed a major Cabinet reshuffle on April 13, thereby removing from his largely National Reconstruction Party (PRN) government several ministers accused of involvement in corruption scandals.
Several senior officials were also dismissed.
However, he was largely unsuccessful in attempts to broaden the basis of his government's political support.
The centre-left Social Democrat Party of Brazil (PSDB) and other opposition parties resisted Collor's overtures to them to join a coalition government.
With important municipal elections due in October, they were unwilling to be associated with his highly unpopular economic austerity policies.
This left him with no option but to renew the existing parliamentary alliance between the PRN and the right-wing Democratic Social Party (PDS), the Liberal Front Party (PFL) and the Christian Democratic Party (PDC), and to continue without a majority in either house of the Congress, despite the difficulties this would pose for the passage of future legislation particularly on the ambitious and controversial privatization programme.
The reshuffle, seen as the political equivalent of Collor's economic "shock" programme, began with the resignation of the entire Cabinet and presidential staff on March 30.
The move was co-ordinated by the outgoing veteran Justice Minister Jarbas Passarinho, who stated that he hoped that it would "put an end to the wave of accusations of corruption against the government" .
Among those whom Collor retained were the three ministers with responsibility for military portfolios and the Economy Minister Marcílio Marques Moreira, who was identified with the IMF-approved economic austerity programme.
Francisco Gros remained as President of the Central Bank.
Those retained were judged to be free of accusations of corruption, although questions were immediately asked about Ricardo Fiuza, the Social Action Minister who, in violation of the electoral law prohibiting donations to individuals, had admitted receiving US$100,000 from the Brazilian Banking Federation to finance his 1990 re-election campaign to the Chamber of Deputies.
He had also accepted the gift of a jet ski from a construction company seeking public works contracts.
A minor success for Collor was the acceptance of the Science and Technology portfolio by Hélio Jaguaribe, a founder of the PSDB and a member of its national executive, who said that he would now resign from the party.
Afonso Camargo of the centrist Brazilian Workers Party (PTB) accepted the post of Minister of Communications and Transport and Celso Lafer, an independent and former president of the Electoral Commission, was named as the new Foreign Minister.
Chief among those dismissed and allegedly involved in scandals was Pedro Paulo Leoni Ramos, Secretary for Strategic Affairs, who was accused of using his influence to win contracts from the state oil firm PÉTROBRAS for companies run by personal friends.
He was replaced by Elizer Batista.
Three ministers dismissed in a Cabinet reshuffle in January were currently under police investigation, including former Labour Minister Antônio Rogério Magri [see p. 38720].
The Chief of Federal Police, Romeu Tuma, who was under investigation by the military police allegedly for favouring smugglers shipping coffee into Paraguay, announced on April 1 that he intended to resign.
Earlier, he had complained that he lacked the resources to investigate all the allegations of corruption against government officials.
Army unrest
There was widespread relief that the wave of accusations of corruption against the government had not resulted in a military takeover.
On April 14, the Spanish EFE news agency quoted a statement signed by four division generals, 19 colonels and one air force brigadier, describing themselves as the Guararapes group, who warned that the current situation was "identical" with that in Venezuela, subject of an attempted coup in February [see pp. 38759-60]and Peru, where President Fujimori seized power with army support on April 5 [see pp. 38846-47].
It was reported that the government had decided to grant another emergency wage increase in order to defuse the growing unrest in the military [see p. 38526 for August 1991 increase].
Economic measures
In early April it was reported locally that the government, as part of a proposed 15-point economic programme, was seeking to stabilize the economy without "shocks" , and to promote wide-ranging sectoral agreements to curb inflation (still running at over 20 per cent a month) while stimulating production and preserving jobs.
The programme continued to emphasize the need for "fundamental" fiscal adjustment measures, the continued deregulation of the economy and the privatization of state companies.
In late March tripartite talks between the government, car manufacturers and trade unions ended in a historic agreement whereby the price of cars was reduced by 22 per cent on the domestic market and the unions agreed to wage increases tied to monthly rates of inflation in return for pledges of job security.
Debt agreement
Despite failure by the government to reach a debt restructuring agreement with foreign commercial creditors in early April, Moreira announced that an agreement had been reached with the Paris club of major western creditor countries, to reschedule US$11,000 million of government-to-government and multilateral debt over 14 years.
The creditors' approval remained dependent on US$4,100 million of debt being repaid over the following two years.
It was expected that the Congress, which was constitutionally bound to ratify the agreement, would vigorously criticize it, given the excessive social cost implied in the re-payment terms.
Celso Lafer (ind.)
Foreign Affairs Marcilio Marques Moreira (PRN) Economy Célio Borja (PRN) Justice Marcus Vinicius Patrini de Morais (PDS) Mines and Energy Afonso Camargo (PTB) Communications and Transport Joao Melao Neto (PFL) Labour and Federal Administration Reinhold Stephanes (PRN) Social Welfare Angelo Calmon de Sá (PRN) Regional Development Antonio Caberera Filho (PRN) Agriculture and Land Reform Adib Jatene (PRN) Health José Goldemberg (PRN) Education and (acting) Environment Sérgio Rouanet (PRN) Culture Ricardo Fiuza (PRN) Social Action Hélio Jaguaribe (PRN) Science and Technology Eliezer Batista (PRN) Strategic Affairs Gen. Carlos Tinoco Ribeiro Gomes (PRN) Army Adm.
Mario César Flores (PRN) Navy Brig.
Sócrates da Costa Monteiro (PRN) Air Force Jorge Bornhausen (Ind) Secretary to the Government Bernhard Rajman Sport Marcos Coimbra Secretary to the Presidency
New Brazilian government
AMERICAS
CHILE
Arrest of former junta member
Gen. César Mendoza Durán, a former head of the carabinero paramilitary police force and a member of the military junta from 1973 to 1985 under the dictatorship of Gen. Augusto Pinochet Ugarte, was arrested on April 2 by order of a judge investigating the kidnapping of eight people.
The mutilated bodies of three of these eight, including a teachers' union leader and two fellow Communist Party members, had been discovered in March 1985, prompting a judicial inquiry, the arrest of several carabineros (paramilitary police), and the resignation of Mendoza in August 1985 [see p. 33842].
Investigations were then suspended for lack of police evidence, but reopened in 1987 when another judge accused the Dicomcar police intelligence directorate of being responsible.
Also arrested with Mendoza were 15 other retired and serving carabineros and Miguel Estay Reyno, a civilian and former communist turned police collaborator.
None of them, however, had been charged with the murders.
Warning to Pinochet
Pinochet, who was still C.-in-C. of the army, was told by President Patricio Alywin Azócar on April 15 that in future he had to give prior notice to the government of any trips abroad.
This followed an announcement by President Borja Cevallos of Ecuador on March 18 that Pinochet's current presence in that country was "not welcome" .
Although Pinochet reportedly had no official contacts with serving members of the Ecuadorian armed forces, he had visited a military social centre there and met retired officers.
AMERICAS
ARGENTINA
Debt agreements
Finance Minister Domingo Cavallo secured a refinancing agreement on April 7 with the country's 400 creditor banks, led by Citicorp of the USA.
Argentina thus became the fifth country to reach such an agreement as part of the Brady Plan, a mechanism devised by the US Treasury Secretary Nicolas Brady in March 1989 to reduce the debt burdens of developing countries [see pp. 36541-42].
Finalized during the annual meeting of the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB), the agreement affected medium-term debt of US$23,000 million plus $8,000 million in overdue interest.
Argentina was to pay a lump sum of $400 million in cash towards covering the interest arrears (and $70,000,000 per month in interest payments thereafter) and would repay an additional US$300 million via US Treasury bonds which had to be purchased before the end of the year.
The banks were then given the choice of exchanging medium-term debt either for (i) 30-year bonds with the same face value as the debt, with interest rates rising in stages from 4 per cent in the first year to 6 per cent in years seven to 30, and with a 12-month interest guarantee; or for (ii) 30-year bonds with a discounted face value of 35 per cent carrying interest at 13/16 of a percentage point above the London inter-bank offered rate (Libor) and carrying collateral to guarantee 12 months of interest.
In sum, it was estimated that the agreement would reduce the country's overall foreign debt of US$61,000 million by some US$10,000 million.
In anticipation of the agreement with its commercial bank creditors, IMF on March 31 approved a credit under an extended arrangement for Argentina, authorizing drawing of SDR2,149,250,000 (about US$2,948 million) over the next three years, in support of the government's economic and financial reform programme which in 1991 had reduced the annual inflation rate from 1,445 per cent to 84 per cent.
Unification of union federations
At an extraordinary conference held at the end of March, and after 1/2 years of divisions, the pro-government San-Martín wing of the Peronist General Confederation of Labour (CGT) reunited with the radical Azopardo wing.
The CGT was the major union confederation representing some 2,500,000 workers and 90 per cent of the country's unions.
Saúl Ubaldini, secretary-general of the CGT and leader of the Azopardo wing, had opposed the austerity policies of President Carlos Saúl Menem, and had stood for the Congress in September 1991 but was heavily defeated [see p. 38434].
Both wings now agreed on a policy supporting Menem's "transformation" of society but with "social justice" .
AMERICAS
BERMUDA
The former United Kingdom Home Secretary and since 1990 government leader in the House of Lords, Lord Waddington, was announced as the new Governor of Bermuda on April 13 and was due to take up the post in the late summer.
AMERICAS
JAMAICA
Michael Manley, who had resigned as Prime Minister for health reasons in March and had also been replaced as leader of the ruling People's National Party (PNP)[see p. 38808], gave up his parliamentary seat in mid-April.
AMERICAS
ST CHRISTOPHER AND NEVIS
In a Cabinet reshuffle on April 1 Michael Powell was dismissed and was replaced as Deputy Prime Minister by Sydney Morris, the Minister of Education, Youth and Community Affairs, Communications, Works and Public Utilities.
Powell's portfolios of Labour and Tourism were taken on respectively by Constance Mitcham, Minister of Health and Women's Affairs, and by Fitzroy Jones, Minister of Trade and Industry.
Powell's supporters gathered in the capital, Basseterre, to protest against his dismissal, reportedly the result of strained relations between Powell and Prime Minister Kennedy Alphonse Simmonds over several years.
AMERICAS
GRENADA
On April 27, George Brizan, hitherto Finance Minister, was appointed Minster of Agriculture while retaining responsibility for Trade, Industry, Production and Energy; Tillman Thomas became the new Finance Minster and was replaced as Minister of Works, Communications and Public Utilities by the former Agriculture Minister Phinsley St Louis.
Prime Minister Nicholas Brathwaite took over responsibility for Planning from Brizan and passed his own Information portfolio to Carlyle Glean, the Minister of Education, Culture, Youth Affairs and Sport.
ASIA — PACIFIC
CHINA
NPC session
The fifth session of the seventh National People's Congress (NPC — the unicameral legislature) was held in Beijing on March 20-April 3 [see p. 38145 for fourth session held in March-April 1991].
The session took place at a time of intense political debate in China, with Deng Xiaoping, the country's "elder statesman" leader, leading a drive for the implementation of more fundamental economic reforms [see pp. 38813-14; 38764; 38722].
Deng did not attend the congress, nor did his arch-conservative rival Chen Yun.
The NPC received the government work report and the budget report, and also approved the Three Gorges dam project, as well as legislation on trade unions and on women's rights and interests.
Government work report
Premier Li Peng opened the session on March 20 with the delivery of his government work report.
Throughout the session Li's report was subjected to almost unprecedented criticism from delegates.
The Hong Kong newspaper Ta Kung Pao of April 1 reported that the NPC presidium had forced an amendment strengthening the calls for rapid economic growth, and had added a warning about the dangers of "leftism" .
The Independent of April 2 described the amendment as a "humiliating rebuke" for Li.
According to some reports Li's speech had been revised at the last moment to bring it in line with the current Dengist campaign.
However, in its assessment of the speech, the Far Eastern Economic Review of April 2 contended that he had "studiously avoided over-commitment to either side of the communist party's factional split between hardliners and reformists" .
Deng's campaign was given prominent support by a large number of provincial governors attending the session, many of whom promised to press ahead with economic reforms regardless of central policies.
Giving cautious backing to the Dengist campaign, Li nevertheless warned that the maintenance of social and political stability was the "prerequisite for reform" , and that the government had to "be on the watch for any ideological trend towards bourgeois liberalization,…otherwise there will be serious consequences" .
On the economy, Li supported the cautious 6 per cent annual growth target as outlined in the current five-year plan, and thereby failed to endorse Deng's demand for double-digit expansion rates.
Li also pointedly gave support to leftist agricultural policies reportedly opposed by Deng, endorsing collective service networks and ideological education campaigns in rural areas.
For the first time the report referred to human rights.
Li said that China acknowledged human rights as a proper subject for international discussion, but opposed the use of human rights as a pretext for interference in other countries' internal affairs.
Budget report
The budget report given by the Finance Minister, Wang Bingqian, on March 21 revealed an unprecedented deficit for 1991 of 21,100 million yuan, or 8,760 million yuan more than estimated in March 1991.
Calculated by international standards (i.e. to include foreign and domestic borrowing) the deficit was an estimated 58,000 million yuan (US$1.00=5.5053 yuan as at March 23, 1992).
Wang blamed the increased deficit on various factors, including the serious flooding which had afflicted China in mid-1991 [see p. 38339].
Support for loss-making state enterprises had also been a drain on the budget, with over 50,000 million yuan spent on subsidies.
Wang forecast a 9 per cent increase in state revenue in 1992, to 391,000 million yuan, and an 8.6 per cent increase in expenditures to 411,900 million yuan.
He called for financial discipline and for strict expenditure control.
Military expenditure was increased by some 12 per cent to 37,000 million yuan.
Three Gorges dam project
On April 3 the NPC formally approved a proposal to begin construction of the Three Gorges dam on the Yangtze river in central China.
The dam was planned to be the largest of its kind ever built, creating a 600 km-long reservoir, and displacing around 1,000,000 people from their homes; its total cost was estimated at 57,000 million yuan.
It had long been a controversial issue and its approval had been delayed for years because of worries about the environmental consequences and the cost of the project.
The proposal was eventually passed by a vote of 1,767 to 177, with 644 abstentions.
Visit to Japan by Jiang Zemin
Jiang Zemin, the general secretary of the ruling Chinese Communist Party (CCP), visited Japan on April 6-10, meeting Japanese Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa and other leaders.
Jiang's visit was the first to Japan by a CCP general secretary since 1983.
Release of details on political prisoner
On April 7 the government disclosed information about one of China's best-known political prisoners, Wei Jingsheng.
One of the leaders of the Beijing Spring movement in 1978-79 which had created a "Democracy Wall" in the capital, Wei had been arrested in 1979 and sentenced to 15 years in prison [see pp. 30495-96].
According to the information released by the government Wei was being held at a "reform-through-labour" farm near Tangshan in central China, but remained "unclear" about his guilt.
Flooding
The Far Eastern Economic Review of April 16 reported that a number of Chinese provinces, including Jiangxi in the east, Hunan in the centre and Guangdong in the south, had recently suffered from serious floods.
Officials in Jiangxi were reported to have described the floods as the most serious of the century, with over 10,000,000 people in the province affected and 1,000,000 troops and civilian volunteers working to contain the damage.
ASIA — PACIFIC
TAIWAN
Protests over presidential elections issue
The controversial issue of presidential election arrangements dominated events during April.
In March the ruling Kuomintang (KMT) had failed to reach an agreement on a method of implementing a system to elect the President by popular vote, as part of President Lee Teng-hui's constitutional reform programme [see p. 38814].
KMT liberals supported a direct election, but conservatives advocated a complicated proxy system.
The opposition Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) backed direct presidential elections, and on April 19-21 the party organized large demonstrations in Taipei to press their demands.
On April 20 police prevented DPP deputies from entering the presidential offices in Taipei to discuss the reform programme with President Lee.
Human rights review
A KMT spokesman announced on April 14 that President Lee had ordered the government to revise laws restricting human rights and political freedoms.
The proposed changes would affect legislation covering demonstrations and travel, and, according to some reports, would also include a review of the Republic's draconian sedition laws.
ASIA — PACIFIC
HONG KONG
Announcement of new governor
The United Kingdom Prime Minister John Major announced on April 24 that Chris Patten, the current chair of the ruling Conservative Party who had lost his parliamentary seat at the April 9 general election [see p. 38869], would replace Lord Wilson as the Governor of Hong Kong in July 1992.
The first high-ranking British politician ever appointed to the governorship, Patten would have the responsibility of managing Hong Kong's transition to Chinese sovereignty in 1997.
The Financial Times of April 25 reported that administrators and business leaders in Hong Kong had welcomed Patten's appointment, "because of[his]close connections to the UK government leaders" .
Liberal politicians also gave a cautious welcome to the appointment.
Martin Lee, leader of the United Democrats of Hong Kong, said that he hoped that a politician would be more receptive to the will of the people than a diplomat.
However, some pro-Chinese politicians expressed concern that Patten might give preferential treatment to British business interests.
Chen Ziyang, deputy director of the Hong Kong and Macao Affairs Office of the Chinese State Council, said that he hoped that the appointment would be "favourable to Hong Kong's stability and prosperity and favourable to the smooth transfer of power" .
Reports of Chinese "blacklist" 
The UK Sunday Express newspaper of March 29 reported that the Chinese government had compiled a "blacklist" of several hundred Hong Kong residents who had been targeted for arrest by China when it resumed sovereignty of the colony in 1997.
According to the report, details of the "blacklist" had been passed to British intelligence officials by the former first secretary at the Chinese embassy in London, Feng Baosheng, who had defected to the UK in mid-March.
Feng and Chinese officials in Hong Kong denied the allegations.
However, on March 31, Tao Siju, China's Public Security Minister, while denying the existence of a "blacklist" , did admit that information on Hong Kong residents was collected by agents from his ministry and by the New China News Agency, China's de facto embassy in Hong Kong.
According to Tao, China's post-1997 policy would be to deal leniently with Hong Kong residents who had opposed the transfer of sovereignty.
Results of February riot inquiry
Details of an inquiry released on April 10 into the violent riots in a Vietnamese detention centre in February blamed poor police handling.
The riots had erupted in Shek Kong detention centre on Feb. 3 and had resulted in the deaths of 24 Vietnamese "boat people" and the injury of a further 119 [see also p. 38765].
The inquiry, headed by Justice Michael Kempster, found that "the initiative was not swiftly seized or held by the police" .
Kempster made 13 recommendations to improve management of Hong Kong's boat people, including the separation of north and south Vietnamese.
Criticism of UK government in ICJ report
A report by the Geneva-based International Commission of Jurists (ICJ) released on April 28 severely criticized the UK government for denying Hong Kong residents the right of self-determination in the form of a referendum over the terms of the 1984 Sino-British Joint Declaration [for which see pp. 33656-57].
Having failed to consult the residents about their future, the report argued, the UK had a moral obligation to guarantee them the right of abode in the UK or in a third country.
The report, described by the Independent of April 21 as a "damning litany of broken promises and mixed opportunities" , also expressed serious doubts about protection offered to the colony's judiciary, its legislature and people by the Basic Law, the post-1997 constitution promulgated by China in 1990 [see p. 37248].
Approval of budget by Legco
On April 1 the Legislative Council (Legco) approved the 1992 budget by 36 votes to 18 [see p. 38815 for presentation of budget in March], after the Financial Secretary, Hamish Macleod, had promised to alleviate the tax burden on lower and middle-income groups in the 1993 budget.
ASIA — PACIFIC
NORTH KOREA
Celebration of Kim Il Sung's 80th birthday — IAEA accord
Several hundred foreign guests, among them Chinese President Yang Shangkun and Cambodian leader Prince Norodom Sihanouk, attended the 80th birthday celebrations on April 15 President Kim Il Sung, the world's longest-serving head of state.
Hundreds of thousands of people were marshalled in a national celebration designed to reinforce the personality cult constructed around Kim since he came to power in 1946.
As part of the process of opening up to the West, Kim used the occasion to give an interview to the Washington Times in which he called for improved relations with the USA and said that he wished to see a US embassy established in the capital, Pyongyang, "as quickly as possible" .
The US evangelist, the Rev. Billy Graham, granted a personal audience on April 2, delivered a "verbal" message to Kim from US President George Bush.
To mark his birthday, Kim added to his existing titles the designation "Generalissimo" , while on April 21 his son Kim Chong Il, 50, was elevated to the rank of Marshal of the Armed Forces, as was Marshal Oh Jin Wu, 75, the veteran Minister for the People's Armed Forces.
Ratification of IAEA nuclear inspection accord
The Supreme People's Assembly on April 9 ratified nuclear inspection accords signed with the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) at the end of January [see p. 38721].
In an effort to neutralize Western intelligence speculation about the country's alleged nuclear weapons programme, on April 15 North Korean television screened a programme and a video was issued showing three nuclear reactors, the 5,000 kW pilot reactor at Yongbyon, 100 km north of Pyongyang, a 50,000 kW reactor to be completed by the mid-1990s and a 200,000 kW reactor to be commissioned in the late 1990s.
Western intelligence experts, who believed that North Korea had already built or was in the process of constructing a reprocessing facility capable of producing weapons-grade plutonium, were taken by surprise since satellite photographs had previously shown only two reactors.
Choi Chong-Sun, head of the Atomic Energy Industry Ministry's foreign affairs bureau, denied that North Korea possessed a reprocessing plant, but for the first time admitted that the "nuclear reprocessing cycle" was under study.
He also confirmed that plans were proceeding to import four new reactors from the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) for installation in Sinpo, to be sited along the Japan Sea coast.
Under the IAEA agreement, Korea had 30 days to present an inventory of its nuclear materials and 90 days to disclose construction details of its nuclear facilities.
Despite official assurances, there were doubts that this schedule would be met.
Negotiations with South Korea
The second meeting of the Joint Nuclear Control Committee (JNCC), set up in February to facilitate separate bilateral negotiations with South Korea on nuclear inspections [see p. 38819]was held on April 1 but ended in stalemate.
The North accused the South of trying to limit the scope of the JNCC and of breaking the December 1991 joint denuclearization treaty [ibid.]by exempting US military installations from inspection.
1992 budget
The 1992 state budget, approved by the Supreme People's Assembly on April 8, set both income and expenditure at 39,500,920,000 won, a 6.6 per cent increase in income and 7 per cent rise in expenditure compared with the previous year (US$1.00=0.9725 won as at March 30, 1992).
Defence spending, however, fell, being allocated 11.6 per cent of expenditure as compared with 12.1 per cent in 1991.
ASIA — PACIFIC
JAPAN
Continuing economic difficulties
Budget approval — Emergency economic measures
The Japanese Diet (the lower House of Parliament) approved on April 9 a budget for the fiscal year starting April 1, 1992, which envisaged a sharp curtailment of the rate of growth in overall spending.
The Liberal Democrat government of Kiichi Miyazawa had stated in its budget proposal [see p. 38820]that total government outlays were to increase by only 2.7 per cent over fiscal 1991, to 72,220,000 million yen, in response to the general worsening in the economic climate.
However, spending on social security, education, defence and public works was to rise by 4.5 per cent, and the overseas aid budget was increased by 7.8 per cent to 952,000 million yen.
The budget was passed despite the fact that it had been voted down, earlier in the day, by the House of Councillors (Upper House).
This was the third year running that the House of Councillors, which was controlled by opposition parties, had tried and failed to block the approval of the budget.
Having secured the passage of the budget bill, Miyazawa confirmed the implementation of a package of emergency economic measures intended to restore confidence to Japan's seriously demoralized business community.
He announced a major round of government-funded construction expenditure, which was to be funded by special bonds, and a reinforcement of the country's financial structure.
Interest rates, which had already been reduced by 0.5 per cent on April 1, fell by another 0.75 per cent on April 23, with the official discount rate falling to 3.75 per cent.
Stock market slump
The government's moves did little, however, to counter the growing sense of crisis in the Tokyo stock market, and share prices continued to fall during April.
By the end of the month the Nikkei Average index, the most important indicator on the Tokyo exchange, had fallen to 17,500, compared with 22,000 at the start of March and a peak of 40,000 in the autumn of 1989.
Analysts estimated that the total loss in market capitalization during this period had exceeded 300,000,000 million yen, or more than US $2,000,000 million.
The stock market crisis was attributed in large measure to the high level of non-viable corporate debts, which in turn resulted from a steep decline in Japan's high property prices, and the resulting exposure of companies which had over-borrowed in the 1980s.
The slump in stock prices put Japanese creditor banks under an additional pressure because it simultaneously eroded their own capital bases.
Japanese financial institutions had traditionally been allowed to declare their share portfolios as part of the capital reserves which they were obliged to maintain.
As the fall in share prices reduced the effective value of these portfolios, the banks had been obliged in effect to restrict the volume of their new lending.
This in turn had exerted the upward pressure on bank interest rates which the government was now trying to counter.
Sexual harassment ruling
A significant court ruling on the subject of sexual harassment was handed down on April 16, when a judge in Fukuoka ruled that a publishing company had violated the rights of a former female employee who had felt obliged to leave her job after allegations of alcoholism and sexual promiscuity against her.
The move was regarded as significant in Japan because verbal harassment of women was known to be particularly widespread, but previously only actual assaults had been legally construed as comprising acts of harassment.
Stabbing of Yamamura
Shinjuro Yamamura, the chairman of the Diet budget committee, was stabbed to death on April 12 by his own daughter, who had reportedly been receiving treatment for a psychiatric condition.
Progress on territorial dispute with Russia
Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign Minister Michio Watanabe proposed a new compromise solution on April 21 in an attempt to settle with Russia the long-standing territorial dispute over the four islands known by Russia as the southern Kuriles, and by Japan as the Northern Territories, situated to the north-east of Japan's northern island of Hokkaido.
The 18 Kurile islands to the north of the disputed territories were Russian territory, and Soviet troops had occupied what they regarded as the southern part of the chain at the end of the Pacific War in 1945.
In a clear attempt to force the issue, Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa insisted that his government would withhold final approval of an intended US$24,000 million Group of Seven (G-7) loan package to Russia pending a resolution of the problem.
A visit by former Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev in April 1991 had failed to provide a solution [see p. 38148].
The current Russian President Boris Yeltsin was expected to face vigorous local opposition to any acceptance of Japanese sovereignty, from 47,000 Russian citizens (20,000 of whom were military personnel) who lived on the islands, a source of precious metals and with rich fishing grounds.
Watanabe's initiative proposed that Shikoton and the four islets collectively known as Habomai, be returned immediately, and that temporary Japanese administrative rights be granted over the two more populous islands — Etorofu and Kunashiri — prior to their being handed back.
The proposal built on the visit of Russian Foreign Minister Andrei Kozyrev on March 19-22 [see p. 38820]and on a three-day symposium on the issue between Japanese and Russian academics (the 13th of its type) which ended in Moscow on April 2 without consensus.
The Russian side had concluded that a 1956 Soviet offer to return the two smaller islands, rejected at the time by Japan, was a basis for future negotiations.
Watanabe was due in Moscow in late April for further discussions.
On April 10 Japan and Russia agreed to launch a scheme allowing citizens connected with the four disputed islands to make exchange visits without obtaining visas.
ASIA — PACIFIC
CAMBODIA
Continued implementation of UN peace plan
The UN Transitional Authority in Cambodia (UNTAC), which had been formally established in mid-March [see pp. 38816-17]to oversee implementation of the October 1991 peace plan, was further strengthened during April with the arrival of new personnel.
Nevertheless, UNTAC officials continued to express concern over ceasefire violations [see p. 38817 for reports of fighting around Kompong Thom in March].
Officials were particularly critical of the Khmers Rouges organization, which had refused UNTAC officials access to territory under its control.
At a meeting of the all-party Supreme National Council (SNC) on April 6 the nominal leader of the Khmers Rouges, Khieu Samphan, told the chief co-ordinator of the UN peacekeeping operation, Yasushi Akashi, that his forces would not allow access until UN peacekeepers were deployed along the border with Vietnam to ensure that no Vietnamese troops or supplies were crossing into Cambodia.
Khmer Rouge radio repeatedly broadcast reports during April detailing alleged Vietnamese troop and air force activity in Cambodia.
In a statement issued on April 9 Akashi warned that he would not rule out UN Security Council action if the Khmers Rouges did not begin co-operating.
Akashi and other UNTAC officials were concerned that the intransigence of the Khmers Rouges threatened the decisive second phase of the peace process when troops from all four factions were scheduled to assemble in cantonments and surrender their weapons.
In an attempt to facilitate a compromise UNTAC opened three checkpoints on the Cambodian-Vietnamese border on April 15.
On April 20 Khmer Rouge leaders named five areas which UN inspection teams would be welcome to enter.
On April 25 UNTAC officials carried out their first inspection of Khmer Rouge territory — two sites north and south of Khmer Rouge commander Ta Mok's headquarters at Anlong Veng in the north of the country.
Visit by UN Secretary-General — Signing of human rights covenants
The UN Secretary-General, Boutros Boutros-Ghali, visited Cambodia on April 18-20 to monitor implementation of the October 1991 peace agreement.
During his visit Boutros-Ghali urged governments to provide the necessary funding for the UN peace operation, which, he claimed, was threatened by lack of money.
On April 20, Boutros-Ghali presided over the signing by the leaders of all four Cambodian factions of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights.
Under the covenants the factions were bound by international law to uphold human rights, including the rights of self-determination, free association and assembly, and the right to vote.
The UNTAC human rights chief, Dennis McNamara, described the signing of the covenants as a pragmatic as well as a symbolic act.
Visit to China and North Korea by Sihanouk
Prince Norodom Sihanouk, chair of the SNC and Cambodia's head of state, paid a visit to China on April 7-15 and to North Korea on April 15-17.
The Prince was accompanied by other high-ranking SNC members, including Khieu Samphan, Hun Sen, Premier of the State of Cambodia (SOC) or Phnom Penh regime, and Son Sann, leader of the Khmer People's National Liberation Front.
On his return to Cambodia on April 17 Sihanouk announced that China had provided a gift of US$1,800,000 to the SNC.
SOC National Assembly session — Ministerial appointments
The SOC National Assembly convened in extraordinary session on April 5-6.
A number of ministerial appointments were made.
Im Chhunlim, a member of the SNC, replaced Yos Son as Education Minister; Dit Munty, another SOC member of the SNC, was appointed to head the new Ministry of Information and the Press; Hang Chuon, hitherto Minister of Information and Culture, remained in charge of the new Ministry of Culture; and Do Sohan replaced Koy Buntha as Minister of Social Affairs and War Invalids.
According to an Agence France-Presse (AFP) news agency report on April 7 the Assembly adopted a constitutional amendment which effectively relieved Heng Samrin, the former SOC leader, from the last of his remaining state posts, as Chair of the Council of State.
He was replaced by Chea Sim, the National Assembly chair and current effective SOC leader.
However, on April 7 Heng Samrin reportedly announced that he would not resign as Chair.
ASIA — PACIFIC
VIETNAM
Approval of new Constitution
On April 15 Vietnam's National Assembly unanimously approved a new constitution [see p. 38680 for December 1991 publication of draft constitution].
It comprised 148 articles, only 10 of which remained unrevised from the 1980 constitution.
The new document radically altered the state's administrative structure and enshrined the market-orientated economic reforms undertaken since the mid-1980s, while ensuring that the ruling Communist Party of Vietnam (CPV) retained its leading political role.
The new constitution was approved at the close of a National Assembly session which had opened on March 23.
The session, the 11th session of the eighth Assembly, was scheduled to have ended on April 11 but was prolonged by heated debate on the constitution.
The session also approved legislation on "organizing" the National Assembly and electing deputies, as well as an addendum to the 1992 state budget [see p. 38680 for December 1991 passage of budget during the Assembly's 10th session].
Constitutional provisions
Executive and legislature.
The old Council of State (the collective presidency) was replaced by a single President, to be elected from within the National Assembly.
The President would serve as commander of the armed forces and chair of a newly established Council on National Defence and Security.
The Council of Ministers was abolished, to be replaced by a Cabinet headed by a Prime Minister with enhanced powers.
The powers of the National Assembly were also enhanced.
The CPV remained "a leading force of the state and society" and would continue to guide policy, but was prohibited from involvement in the day-to-day running of the government.
Guarantees of economic freedoms included explicit recognition of the right of citizens to engage in private business.
On foreign relations, the new constitution dropped references to Vietnam's wars against China, France and the USA in favour of outlining a new policy which stressed developing relations with all countries.
Relations with USA
Richard Solomon, the US Assistant Secretary of State for East Asia and the Pacific, announced during a visit to Hanoi on March 5 that the USA had pledged to provide humanitarian aid to Vietnam worth some US$3,000,000.
In return, Vietnam would adopt a number of new measures to facilitate the US search for servicemen listed as missing in action (MIA) during the Vietnam War.
During the talks in Hanoi Vietnamese Deputy Foreign Minister Le Mai urged the lifting of the US trade embargo against Vietnam, but Solomon insisted that the USA would not deviate from the four-point path to normalization outlined in April 1991 [see p. 38149].
On April 13 the USA announced the lifting of an embargo on telecommunications links with Vietnam.
The US State Department said that the decision had been taken in response to "positive steps" by Vietnam on the MIA issue as well as Vietnam's continued support for the Cambodian peace plan.
Vietnam and the USA launched their largest joint search for MIAs on April 19.
The search was the 17th since operations started in 1988 and began immediately before a visit to Vietnam by a delegation of US senators.
Other foreign relations
The Malaysian Prime Minister, Mahathir Mohamed, visited Vietnam on April 19-14 for talks with his Vietnamese counterpart, Senior Gen. Vo Van Kiet, and other leaders.
The visit was aimed at promoting increased investment and trade between the two countries.
Agreements were signed on economic, scientific and technical co-operation and on Malaysian technical aid; Malaysia also agreed to assist Vietnam in the management of its rubber industry.
Lee Kuan Yew, Singapore's Senior Minister and former Prime Minister, paid his first visit to Vietnam on April 23-27.
Australia formally resumed aid to Vietnam on April 13, ending a 12-year embargo with a US$100 million package.
Vietnam and China officially re-opened on April 1 the Friendship Pass border crossing between China's Guangxi and Vietnam's Lang Son provinces, which had been closed since the border war in 1979.
Relations between the two countries had been normalized in November 1991 [see p. 38574].
A National Assembly delegation led by its chair Le Quang Dao visited Japan on April 19-25.
During his visit Dao requested Japan to resume economic assistance, frozen following the Vietnamese invasion of Cambodia in late 1978.
A Japanese Foreign Ministry spokesman announced on April 21 that the government would "reassess in May and June whether to resume assistance" .
ASIA — PACIFIC
THAILAND
Appointment of Suchinda as Prime Minister
Gen. Suchinda Kraprayoon, hitherto Army C.-in-C, Supreme Commander of the armed forces and the effective leader of the military junta which had ruled the country since February 1991, was appointed as Prime Minister on April 7.
Following the general election of March 22 (which aimed to return the country to civilian rule) a loose coalition of five pro-military parties headed by the air force-backed Samakkhi Tham had attempted to form a government [see p. 38816].
However, this coalition's proposed premier, the Samakkhi Tham leader Narong Wongwan, had then lost credibility after the publication of US State Department information about his suspected involvement in drug trafficking.
On March 26 the US State Department confirmed that it had in July 1991 denied a visa to Narong because of suspicions over his role in heroin trading.
Initially Narong continued to receive the support of the five coalition members, but by April 3 reports from Bangkok claimed that the military had withdrawn their support.
The leader of the other main coalition member party, Chart Thai, Air Chief Marshal Somboon Rahong, reportedly declined to be nominated for the premiership.
The Far Eastern Economic Review of April 16 suggested that Somboon's reluctance perhaps related to his "former activities as chief of the Thai Airports Authorities" , a body which had been "accused of dubious duty-free business deals" .
With the removal of Narong and Somboon, Suchinda came under intense pressure from the coalition members to accept the premiership.
His initial reluctance stemmed partly from a statement he had made in November 1991 vowing never to accept the post.
However, he formally accepted the appointment on April 7 after resigning his military posts.
Gen. Issarapong Noonpakdi, the Deputy Army C.-in-C, was appointed as acting Army C.-in-C.
Air Chief Marshal Kaset Rojanani, the Air Force C.-in-C., was appointed as Supreme Commander.
Demonstrations against Suchinda
On April 20 more than 50,000 people demonstrated in Bangkok in support of opposition demands that Suchinda, as a non-elected soldier, should turn the premiership over to an elected politician.
Among the opposition figures who addressed the crowd was New Aspiration Party leader Gen. Chaovalit Yongchaiyut who urged the Thai people to "continue fighting until Suchinda resigns, both inside parliament and outside parliament" .
The first session of the House of Representatives on April 15 was cut short after Suchinda was subjected to a barrage of opposition criticism.
Appointment of Cabinet — Dissolution of junta
A new Cabinet was appointed on April 17 and was formally sworn in on April 21.
At the time of the swearing in of the Cabinet the military junta was formally dissolved.
The appointment of the Cabinet had been delayed by intense rivalry for places between Samakkhi Tham and Chart Thai.
The new Cabinet included many former members of the Chatichai Choonhaven government, which Suchinda and his fellow junta members had overthrown in 1991.
Of the 48 Cabinet members, 11 had been investigated for corruption by a military-appointed Asset Verification Committee and three had been found guilty.
Of the new government, 16 ministers and vice-ministers were Samakkhi Tham (ST) members, 16 Chart Thai (CT), six Social Action Party (SAP), two Prachakorn Thai (PT) and one Rassadorn (R).
The remaining members were, like Suchinda, non-party figures.
ASIA — PACIFIC
MYANMA
Replacement of Saw Maung
Gen. Saw Maung resigned as chair of the ruling junta, the State Law and Order Restoration Council (SLORC), on April 23.
He was replaced by Gen. Than Shwe, Defence Minister and hitherto the second-ranking SLORC member.
Saw Maung had relinquished the Foreign Affairs portfolio to U Ohn Gaw in September 1991 and the Defence portfolio in March 1992.
In recent months it had been widely reported that Saw Maung, who had chaired the SLORC since the army assumed power in 1998, had suffered a mental breakdown.
The official declaration removing Saw Maung stated that "specialist doctors" had suggested that his health had deteriorated to a stage "where an inevitable rest is needed for him in order to resume his duties" .
Despite Than Shwe's promotion, many commentators continued to regard Brig. -Gen.
Khin Nyunt, the country's intelligence chief and the SLORC first secretary, as the junta's centre of power.
A report in the Far Eastern Economic Review of April 23 quoted one analyst as saying that there was "no love lost" between Than Shwe and Khin Nyunt.
The report described Than Shwe as one of the "old school" of army commanders and claimed that he resented the "brash, swashbuckling ways of Khin Nyunt and his coterie of younger officers" .
On April 24 it was announced that Than Shwe would serve as Prime Minister, a post hitherto held by Saw Maung, and the following day Than Shwe also replaced Saw Maung as C.-in-C. of the Defence Forces.
Release of political prisoners — Announcement of national convention
In the immediate aftermath of Saw Maung's resignation, the SLORC launched a series of political initiatives apparently aimed at improving its poor international image.
In a declaration issued on April 24, the SLORC announced its intention of releasing all people who had been "detained for political reasons" .
The declaration also announced that a national convention would be held within six months "in order to lay down basic principles to draft a firm constitution" .
On April 24 the authorities lifted a restriction order placed on former Prime Minister U Nu in December 1989 following his refusal to dissolve his "parallel government" set up in 1988 [see pp. 37123-24].
Restriction orders were also lifted from five of U Nu's associates.
During the following week over 30 political prisoners were reportedly released, including a number of bodyguards and assistants to Aung San Suu Kyi, the country's main opposition figure who had been under house arrest since July 1989.
On April 25 the SLORC announced that Aung San Suu Kyi would be allowed visits from her family.
Agreement with Bangladesh on repatriation of Rohingya refugees
U Ohn Gyaw visited Bangladesh in late April for talks with his Bangladeshi counterpart, A. S. M. Mustafizur Rahman, on the Rohingya refugee crisis [see pp. 38725; 38767; 38815-16].
On April 28 the two ministers signed an agreement which provided for the repatriation of an estimated 200,000 Rohingya Moslems who had crossed into Bangladesh from Myanma's Arakan province.
The repatriation operation would begin in mid-May.
The Agence France-Presse (AFP) news agency reported on April 28 that two groups representing the Rohingyas, the Rohingya Solidarity Organization and the Arakan Rohingya Islamic Front, had described the agreement as "not acceptable" , saying that any permanent solution to the problem would have to contain UN guarantees on the safety of returning refugees.
Rohingya Moslems had continued to cross into Bangladesh during April.
An AFP report of April 15 claimed that some 3,000 refugees were crossing into Bangladesh every day, and that the total refugee population was 205,698.
Radio Bangladesh reported on April 2 that a number of the refugees were dying in their camps in Bangladesh as a result of "diarrhoea, acute respiratory problems, gastric and gynaecological diseases" .
Jan Eliasson, UN Under Secretary-General for disaster relief, visited Myanma and the Myanma-Bangladesh border region on April 2-4.
According to Myanma radio reports, villagers meeting with Eliasson all denied stories of persecution from Myanman troops.
However, an AFP report of April 3 said that a letter alleging murder, rape and the destruction of villages had been secretly slipped to one of the diplomats accompanying Eliasson.
A Press Trust of India (PTI) report claimed that Myanman troops had killed up to 36 Rohingyas on April 5 during an attack on Maungdaw, Arakan province.
The report claimed that those killed had been celebrating Id al-Fitr.
End of offensive against Karens
The military announced on April 28 that it had "suspended" its offensive against Karen guerrillas "for the sake of national unity" .
In January the government had launched a major offensive aimed at capturing the Karen headquarters at Manerplaw on the eastern border with Thailand [see pp. 38725; 38767; 38815].
At the time of the campaign's suspension the base remained in Karen hands.
ASIA — PACIFIC
PAKISTAN
1993 aid
The Aid to Pakistan consortium of Western countries and international organizations met in Paris on April 23-24.
Pledges of US$2,300 million in assistance for fiscal year 1992/1993 (just short of Pakistan's requested $2,360 million) were made in support of the government's current two-pronged development strategy, centred around (i) a social action programme intended to alleviate poverty; and (ii) economic reforms emphasizing accelerated growth through privatization and deregulation.
A new environmental strategy was also discussed.
An estimated US$1,500 million of this assistance, however, was expected to be absorbed by foreign debt service payments.
Pakistan's economic growth rate for the 1991/92 fiscal year (ending on June 30, 1992) was estimated at 5.8 per cent, while inflation had dropped from 12.5 to 9.5 per cent , exports were up by 13 per cent and the budget deficit, which had risen to 8.8 per cent of gross domestic product (GDP) in 1990/91 following the Gulf war, was expected to be about 6 per cent , well short of the IMF's target of 4.8 per cent .
The aid consortium had encouraged an increase in spending on the social sector and infrastructure, and urged lower spending on defence (thought to account for one-third of GDP).
According to analysts, the reluctance to cut defence spending in the past, coupled with a shortage of viable development projects, meant that aid in excess of US$9,000 million earmarked for Pakistan remained undisbursed.
According to official figures, of the US$2,480 million in aid pledged for fiscal year 1991/1992, only US$1,700 million had been received.
ASIA — PACIFIC
INDIA
Internal political developments
Congress (I) plenary session
The 79th plenary session of the Congress (I) party was held near Tirupati in the southern state of Andhra Pradesh on April 14-16.
The plenum demonstrated the dominance of the present Prime Minister, P. V. Narasimha Rao, who was elected as party president.
The plenum approved party policies under Rao which had marked a distinct move away from the Nehru model of socialism towards a free-market capitalist mixed economy.
Continuing a process of democratization which began with the election of all 950 members for the Tirupati plenum by the party's rank and file, elections were held for the first time in more than 20 years for party posts including the 10 elective posts in the party's most senior decision-making body, the Congress working committee (CWC).
Rao's supporters were able to limit the influence of his most obvious rivals, Defence Minister Sharad Pawar and Minister of Human Resources Arjun Singh, while supporters of the Gandhi family were nearly all defeated.
Punjab elections to Rajya Sabha
All five Congress (I) candidates stood unopposed in biennial elections to the Rajya Sabha (upper house of parliament) held in the Punjab on April 4.
Congress (I) nevertheless remained short of a majority in the Rajya Sabha in which it now held 115 out of 237 seats (with eight seats vacant).
All-party mediation over Ayodhya dispute
On April 7 a 36-member joint delegation of the standing committee of the National Integration Council (NIC) and members of parliament visited the disputed site of the Ram Janmabhoomi-Babri Masjid (temple-mosque) in Ayodhya in Uttar Pradesh [see pp. 37964; 38391; 38532; 38682].
The delegation subsequently expressed its dissatisfaction with the inability of State ministers and officials to respond fully to various queries raised by its members.
The right-wing Hindu-backed Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) formed the state government in Uttar Pradesh, and BJP Chief Minister Kalyan Singh had invited an all-party delegation to visit the site after coming under criticism from nearly all political parties for allegedly violating court orders regarding the disputed plot.
His government argued that the small temples which it had demolished were on land belonging to the state tourist department.
In reaction to what the BJP described as an "unconstitutional threat to dismiss the UP government" by union Home Minister S. B. Chavan, BJP members of parliament had declined to join the all-party delegation, and instead sent a separate BJP delegation to Ayodhya the following day.
Foreign relations
UN Secretary-General's visit
UN Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali visited Delhi on April 22-24 as part of an official tour of Asia which began on April 14 and also included China, Thailand and Cambodia.
Defence Minister's visit to USA
Pawar began a four-day official visit to the USA on April 8 during which he met key US officials including Defence Secretary Richard Cheney.
Pawar said that co-operation between India and the USA had improved considerably, and confirmed that joint naval exercises would be held in the Indian Ocean later in the year.
Finance Minister's visit to Japan
Finance Minister Manmohan Singh headed a delegation of officials and business leaders to Japan on April 7-10, seeking increased Japanese development assistance for the fiscal year 1992-93.
During his meeting with Japanese Foreign Minister Tsutomu Hata, he was assured that Japan would continue to support India if it decided to seek an extended funding facility from the IMF.
UEA President's visit
The President of the United Arab Emirates, Shaikh Zaid bin Sultan al-Nahayan, on April 28 began a three-day visit which was seen as an important milestone in efforts to strengthen bilateral co-operation.
States developments
Crisis in Nagaland
On April 2, president's rule was imposed in the state of Nagaland.
State Governor M. M. Thomas had dissolved the Nagaland assembly on March 27 [see p. 38813], and Chief Minister Vamuzo subsequently failed to maintain sufficient support for his caretaker government.
Thomas was dismissed on April 11, and replaced as acting governor two days later by the Assam Governor, Loknath Mishra.
Formation of Congress (I) government in Manipur
On April 8 state Governor C. Panigrahi invited the leader of the local Congress (I) to form a government in Manipur, which had been under president's rule since Jan. 7 [see p. 38727].
R. K. Dorendra Singh, sworn in as Chief Minister the same day, said that he would be able to secure a majority in the legislature within the specified time.
On April 25, Congress (I) and the Manipur People's Party (MPP) announced that they had decided to form a coalition government, ending a week-long political crisis.
Violence in states
Bihar.
On April 6 police killed at least six suspected members of the Maoist Communist Centre following a continuation of apparent caste violence in the state.
Assam.
Over 140 activists of the United Liberation Front of Assam (ULFA) surrendered to the authorities on April 11.
On the same day, however, 10 armed forces personnel were killed in an explosion suspected to be the work of the anti-talks faction within the ULFA.
This was the first major incident involving casualties among the armed forces since the ULFA announced a ceasefire in mid-December 1991 [see p. 38683].
Kashmir.
On April 4, Indian security forces killed at least 17 suspected Moslem separatists in two clashes, and on April 8, according to local sources, at least 50 people died in security operations against Moslem militants; official reports placed the number of dead at 20 with the arrest of 22 members of the Ikhwan-e Muslimeen and Hizbul Muslimeen groups.
Punjab.
In several incidents on April 3-4 a total of 21 people were killed.
On April 4 in Amritsar 40 Sikh militants surrendered to the authorities, bringing to 200 the number of surrenders in the Amritsar region since November 1991.
ASIA — PACIFIC
NEPAL
Political unrest
A month of political unrest followed the killing of at least 12 people during a one-day general strike in the capital, Kathmandu, on April 6.
Police fired into a crowd of demonstrators, killing and injuring a number of bystanders, after left-wing activists had reportedly set fire to a Royal Nepal Airlines fuel depot and smashed street lamps, telephone exchange equipment and vehicles in both Kathmandu and the nearby town of Patan.
The strike, which closed down shops, schools and the universities, had been called by the major opposition United Nepal Communist Party (UNCP), supported by other left-wing groups, in protest at price increases which had doubled food costs, trebled electricity rates and, at a time of severe nationwide drought, increased the price of water by 62 per cent.
The opposition also accused the government of being corrupt and of promoting economic policies which benefited neighbouring India more than Nepal [see pp. 38681-82].
A protest demonstration by more than 2,000 people on April 7 demanded the bodies of those killed.
Separate demonstrations called by the UNCP and the Nepal Communist Party (NCP) in Kathmandu on April 9 drew 8,000 and 10,000 activists respectively despite an 11-hour curfew which also covered Patan and the other nearby town of Lalitpur.
Effigies of Prime Minister Girija Prasad Koirala were burned.
A further demonstration of 5,000 communist activists on April 12 called on Koirala either to lower prices and pay adequate compensation to the families of the dead, or to resign by April 27.
During a provincial tour of the south-west, Koirala's motorcade was stoned by demonstrators on April 27 and some of his staff were injured.
His ruling Nepali Congress party had come to power in May 1991 (in the first free elections in 32 years — see p. 38193) promising to raise living standards, but now faced the prospect of defeat in local elections due in May and June.
ASIA — PACIFIC
SRI LANKA
Attacks on villages
A death toll of 115 was recorded on April 28-29 in a Tamil Tiger attack on a Moslem village in the eastern Polonnaruwa district and in the equally bloody reprisal killings of Tamil villagers.
On the same day the Sri Lankan army claimed to have killed 50 guerrillas of the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE), bringing to over 600 the total number of those killed in the latest military offensive under way since mid-March in the north around Mullaittivu and Mannar.
On April 20 the armed forces claimed to have found a deserted LTTE concentration camp near Mullaittivu, and that the rebels routinely tortured those held in five such camps housing over 6,000 prisoners.
In the continuing civil war a series of incidents reported on April 10 coincided with the presence of a delegation of Buddhist monks in the northern Tamil-held town of Jaffna, and effectively underlined the lack of prospects for a Buddhist government-backed "peace initiative" (which the LTTE rejected after a further round of talks on April 24).
The LTTE was held responsible for a car bomb in the capital, Colombo, which killed 11 people, a bus bomb in Ampara which killed 25, and ambushes near Trincomalee and Batticaloa where 20 people were killed.
On April 19 near Mannar, 20 LTTE guerrillas and 10 government forces died in fighting after a rebel ambush.
Incident involving Indian fishing trawlers
The Sri Lankan government on April 1 issued a denial of claims that its navy had shot at two Indian fishing trawlers in the prawn-catching area off the north of the island on March 11 and 16; seven people were still missing after the latter incident.
The navy did acknowledge, however, having returned fire on March 17 at a boat off Point Pedro which, it said, had then exploded — the implication being that it had contained rebel ammunition or explosive supplies.
The programme for the return of refugees from southern India was discussed between Indian Prime Minister P. V. Narasimha Rao and Sri Lankan Minister for Industries Ranil Wickremasingh.
In all 13,116 had returned in January-March.
Reports in early April, covering the Rao-Wickremasingh meeting, noted the Indian government's desire to bring LTTE leader Velupillai Prabhakaran to justice over the May 1991 assassination of Rajiv Gandhi [see p. 38175](although no specific request had been made to Sri Lanka), and the claim that the LTTE planned a further series of assassinations in the southern Indian state of Tamil Nadu to counter the state government's clampdown on its activities there.
ASIA — PACIFIC
INDONESIA
East Timor — Foreign relations
Presentation of final report on East Timor massacre
The final report of Indonesia's official judicial inquiry into the November 1991 massacre of East Timorese demonstrators by Indonesian soldiers [see pp. 38579-80; 38677; 38769-70]was presented on April 14.
Portuguese Radio International reported on April 15 that the inquiry report was identical to the preliminary report issued in December 1991, which concluded that 50 people were killed in the incident and that troops had reacted to the demonstration with excessive force [see p. 38677].
Visit by Australian Prime Minister
Paul Keating, the Prime Minister of Australia, visited Indonesia on April 21-24, his first overseas visit since his appointment in December 1991.
His choice of Indonesia, as opposed to the United Kingdom or the USA, as his first foreign destination was controversial in the light of widespread concern over Indonesia's human rights record.
According to most analysts, the visit underlined Keating's intention to shift Australia's external focus towards greater economic and political co-operation with Asia.
During his visit Keating held talks with President Suharto and other high-ranking officials, including Foreign Minister Ali Alatas and Defence and Security Minister Gen. Benny Murdani.
On April 22 Keating and Suharto signed agreements on double taxation, fisheries, and extradition, and agreed to hold regular, two-yearly ministerial meetings.
During his meeting with Murdani, Keating called for increased defence links between Indonesia and Australia.
Agreement on establishment of new aid forum
The Financial Times of April 10 reported that the World Bank had agreed to an Indonesian request to establish and chair a new aid consultation forum.
Indonesia had dissolved the previous forum, the Inter-Governmental Group on Indonesia (IGGI), in March after accusing the Netherlands (which chaired the IGGI) of using the issue of aid as a tool for interfering in Indonesian internal affairs.
The first meeting of the new forum was scheduled to take place in Paris in mid-July.
ASIA — PACIFIC
AUSTRALIA
Government by-election defeat
The ruling Australian Labor Party (ALP) suffered a humiliating by-election defeat on April 11 in Wills, an inner-city constituency in Melbourne, which had been made vacant by the retirement of former ALP federal leader and Prime Minister Bob Hawke.
Hawke's successor as party leader and Prime Minister, Paul Keating, campaigned hard in Wills, as did the main opposition Liberal Party, but the seat was won by a local Australian Rules football coach, Phil Cleary, running as an independent.
Cleary secured 34 per cent of the first preference vote, compared with 29 per cent for the ALP (down by almost 20 per cent compared with 1990) and 27 per cent for the Liberals (down by 6 per cent).
It was the first time since its creation in 1949 that the Wills constituency had returned a non-ALP member.
Wills had been disproportionately hit by the current recession and had one of the highest levels of unemployment (almost 20,000 out of a total population of 140,000) in the country.
Cleary, a left-wing populist who had formerly been an ALP supporter, campaigned against both of the major parties on the grounds that both were too committed to free-market policies.
He received a partial endorsement from Hawke, much to the chagrin of senior ALP figures, when the former Prime Minister described him as a personable, articulate and presentable candidate "who offered a real alternative for a lot of people" .
Declaration of Bond's bankruptcy
Alan Bond, the flamboyant Australian entrepreneur [see pp. 37250; 37717; 37877; 37920; 38642]was formally declared bankrupt by a Sydney court on April 21.
The court appointed Robert Ramsay, a Western Australian accountant, as trustee, and directed him to recover any assets of the Bond estate.
The move ended a struggle between Bond and a banking syndicate led by the Hong Kong Bank of Australia in which the latter claimed that Bond was liable for a personal loan worth US$194,600,000.
In addition to bankruptcy proceedings, Bond was also due to face criminal charges in Perth and was currently the subject of an investigation by the Australian Securities Commission and by a Royal Commission into alleged corruption in Western Australia.
ASIA — PACIFIC
KIRGIZSTAN
President Askar Akayev's visit to Germany on April 5-9, when he met President Richard von Weizsäcker, Chancellor Helmut Kohl and Foreign Minister Hans-Dietrich Genscher, ended with the signing of a co-operation protocol between Rhineland-Palatinate and Chuy oblast (region), which included developing two German national cultural districts in Chuy.
ASIA — PACIFIC
LAOS
President Kaysone Phomvihane of Laos paid an official goodwill visit to China from April 26 to May 3.
ASIA — PACIFIC
TURKMENISTAN
President Suparmurad Niyazov (who had visited Saudi Arabia on March 31 when he was received by King Fahd) made a three-day visit to India from April 18, signing co-operation agreements in the economic, cultural and scientific fields and establishing diplomatic relations between the two countries.
ASIA — PACIFIC
UZBEKISTAN
President Islam Karimov visited Saudi Arabia on April 11-13, when he held talks with King Fahd, made a pilgrimage to Mecca and also visited Medina.
EUROPE
UNITED KINGDOM
UK general election
*Included the Green Party with 0.51 per cent of the vote in 1992 (0.26 in 1987).
The other seat in 1987 comprised the Speaker; those at dissolution comprised the Speaker, three Deputy Chairmen of Ways and Means and two former Labour MPs who were expelled from the party in December 1991 and who were sitting as independents.
**The number of parliamentary seats was increased by one in 1992 with the division of the Milton Keynes constituency into two.
Regionally, Plaid Cymru got 9.0 per cent of the vote in Wales; the SNP got 21.5 per cent of votes in Scotland; in Northern Ireland the three unionist parties together got 50.2 per cent(52 in 1987); the SDLP 23.5 per cent (21.1); and Sinn Féin 10.0 per cent (11.4).
Source: House of Commons Public Information Office.
Conservative election victory
In a general election on April 9 the Conservative Party, led by John Major as Prime Minister since November 1990, won a fourth consecutive term of office — the first such instance since the early 19th century.
The Conservative overall majority was, however, reduced to 21, having stood at from 88 when parliament was dissolved in March [see p. 38821].
Most opinion polls had predicted a closely balanced parliament, generally giving Labour a lead.
[For 1987 general election see pp. 35256-88.]
Nine members of the outgoing government lost their parliamentary seats, including one with Cabinet rank, the Conservative party chairman Chris Patten, who lost to the Liberal Democrat candidate in Bath (and who was appointed on April 24 as Governor of Hong Kong — see p. 38862).
The Conservative Party chairmanship was assumed by Sir Norman Fowler on May 10.
The turnout was 77.73 per cent(73.21 per cent in 1987); 33,145,074 valid votes were cast.
The newly elected House of Commons included 60 women compared with 44 in the outgoing parliament, and 140 new MPs.
Election campaign
A key issue during the campaign was taxation.
Following the government's budget presented on March 10 [see p. 38821], Labour published its own "shadow budget" on March 16.
The Conservatives attacked Labour tax plans strongly, focusing on the party's proposed additional higher rate of income tax of 50 per cent for taxable incomes over £36,375 and the removal of the current £21,060 ceiling for employees' 9 per cent national insurance contributions, which meant that the effective marginal rate of taxation on higher incomes would be 59 per cent.
The Liberal Democrats pledged to raise the basic rate of income tax from 25 to 26 per cent specifically for investment in education.
Labour made the National Health Service a major issue, and considerable media debate arose after a Labour party political broadcast on March 24 featuring the plight of a young girl needing specialist hospital treatment.
The controversy centred on the accuracy of broadcast's claims, the revelation of the girl's identity (Jennifer Bennett) and the attitudes of her immediate family.
Another key issue was the question of greater powers for Scotland.
The Conservatives opposed independence or large-scale devolution; the Scottish National Party (SNP) favoured "independence in Europe" ; and Labour and Liberal Democrats advocated the establishment of a separately elected Scottish parliament.
There was much media discussion of the possibility of a "hung parliament" in which no party held an overall majority.
Both Conservatives and Labour refused to commit themselves as to how they would act in such an eventuality.
Paddy Ashdown, the Liberal Democrat leader, repeatedly linked any co-operation to his party's demand for the introduction of some form of proportional representation in future parliamentary elections.
New Cabinet
On April 11 Major announced an extensive Cabinet reshuffle.
In the resulting 22-member Cabinet only seven members, including Major, retained unchanged responsibilities.
Five members were newly appointed including two women.
Election of Speaker
For the first time since 1951 there was a contest for the post of Speaker of the House of Commons to succeed Bernard Weatherill (an MP since 1964 and Speaker since 1983).
In a vote on April 27 Peter Brooke (until the election Secretary of State for Northern Ireland) was initially proposed but an amendment favouring Betty Boothroyd (a Labour MP since 1973 and a deputy Speaker since 1987) was approved by 372 votes to 238.
Boothroyd thus became the first woman Speaker.
The election of the Speaker, followed by the election on May 6 of her deputies, left the Conservative and Labour strengths reduced to 334 and 269 respectively, with the overall Conservative majority still 21.
Announcement of Kinnock's resignation
Labour's defeat led Neil Kinnock on April 13 to announce that he would resign as party leader as soon as practicable; Roy Hattersley would also stand down as deputy leader.
Kinnock declared that "the Conservative supporting press has enabled the Tory party to win yet again when the Conservative party could not have secured victory for itself on the basis of its record, its programme or its character" .
The national executive committee agreed the following day that an electoral conference would be held on July 18.
The two contenders for the leadership when nominations closed on April 28 were John P. Smith (shadow Chancellor of the Exchequer) and Bryan Gould (shadow Environment Secretary).
John Major Prime Minister, First Lord of the Treasury and Minister for the Civil Service Lord Mackay of Clashfern Lord Chancellor Douglas Hurd Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs Norman Lamont Chancellor of the Exchequer Kenneth Clarke Home Secretary Michael Heseltine President of the Board of Trade and Secretary of State for Trade and Industry John MacGregor Secretary of State for Transport Malcolm Rifkind Secretary of State for Defence Lord Wakeham Lord Privy Seal and Leader of the House of Lords Tony Newton Lord President of the Council and Leader of the House of Commons John Gummer Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food
UK Cabinet
*Michael Howard Secretary of State for the Environment David Hunt Secretary of State for Wales Peter Lilley Secretary of State for Social Security William Waldegrave Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster Ian Lang Secretary of State for Scotland David Mellor **Secretary of State for National Heritage
**Sir Peter Mayhew Secretary of State for Northern Ireland
**John Patten Secretary of State for Education
**Virginia Bottomley (f), Secretary of State for Health
**Gillian Shephard (f), Secretary of State for Employment
**Michael Portillo Chief Secretary to the Treasury
*Altered responsibilities.
**New member of Cabinet.
EUROPE
NORTHERN IRELAND
City of London bomb
Three people were killed and more than 90 injured in an explosion on April 10 in the City of London, the financial district of the UK capital.
The Irish Republican Army (IRA) later claimed responsibility for the attack, the first to cause civilian deaths on the mainland since February 1991 [see pp. 38019-20].
A 45-kg bomb planted in a van exploded at 9.25 p.m. outside a commercial building in which office staff were celebrating the Conservative Party election victory [see this page].
It caused £1,500 million of structural damage to at least 35 buildings.
The police said that a telephone warning had been received about 30 minutes before the explosion but the caller had been "deliberately misleading" about the location of the bomb.
A man and a woman were charged on April 15 with conspiracy to cause explosions and with possession of explosives and arms.
They had been arrested on April 13 after members of the Anti-Terrorist Squad discovered 45 kg of the high explosive Semtex and six AK-47 Kalashnikov assault rifles during a raid on their home in west London.
EUROPE
ITALY
Inconclusive general election
Some 31,760,000 Italians (67 per cent of the 47,400,000 electorate) voted in a general election on April 5-6 to select the 630 members of the Chamber of Deputies and the 315 elected members of the Senate.
The Christian Democrats (DC) polled under 30 per cent for the first time since 1946, but remained the largest party with 29.7 per cent and 206 seats in the Chamber of Deputies.
The Socialists (still generally referred to as the PSI, despite the party's official redesignation in 1990 as the Socialist Unity Party — PSU) secured only 13.6 per cent of the vote and 92 seats.
The Democratic Party of the Left (PDS), which represented the bulk of the former Communist Party, with 16.1 per cent of the vote and 107 seats, confirmed its position as the leading opposition party and therefore figured prominently in the discussions on the formation of a new governing coalition.
The vote for the neo-Fascist Movimento Sociale Italiano-Destra Nazionale (MSI-DN) slipped back from 5.9 per cent in 1987 to 5.4 per cent— giving it 34 seats in the Chamber of Deputies — in spite of the fact that Alessandra Mussolini, the 28-year-old granddaughter of Benito Mussolini, stood successfully as a candidate for the MSI-DN in its Naples stronghold.
The result suggested an increasingly fragmented political scene, confirming the importance of the regional Lombardy League and providing further evidence — following on from the referendum on electoral reform in June 1991 — of the erosion of support for power-sharing between the DC and the PSI.
It made unlikely the resurrection of the four-party coalition of the outgoing government — the DC, PSI, and the smaller Liberals (PLI) and Social Democrats (PSDI).
Electoral system
This was the first election to take place under the revised electoral law approved in 1991 [see pp. 38299-300].
Applying a complex system of proportional representation, Italy was divided into constituencies returning varying numbers of deputies, from Rome with 54 seats, to the Val d'Aosta with one.
Voters indicated a single preference and had to spell out the name of their chosen candidate, rather than mark a box.
Sixteen parties were represented in the new Chamber of Deputies; about 50 different parties or groupings had put up candidates.
Both the DC and the PSI apparently tolerated dubious electoral methods in the south of Italy, where corruption was rife and the influence of the Sicilian Mafia and other criminal organizations was strong.
The PSI's showing was also said to have been adversely affected by a recent corruption scandal in Milan [see p. 38824].
Lombardy League — Smaller parties
In the more industrialized north of Italy the electorate resisted exhortations from the Catholic Church hierarchy during the latest election campaign for a "united vote" — meaning a vote for the CD.
Many former CD voters apparently voted for the Northern League, which — with the Lombardy League as its core — won 17 per cent in the north of Italy.
The Lombardy League advocated the creation of a federal system which would no longer allow the south access to subsidies which, it held, were largely funded by the north.
[See also November 1991 local elections p. 38591].
Other apparent beneficiaries of a protest vote against the existing system were the Republican Party, the Green Party and the Sicily-based La Rete (the Network), which on an anti-Mafia platform became the leading party in Palermo, Sicily.
Meanwhile the degree of support for the Communist Refoundation Party (PRC), which secured 5.6 per cent of the vote, suggested that in spite of events in eastern Europe loyalty to Communist theory persisted.
New parliamentary session
As the new parliamentary session began on April 23 the leading parties negotiated over who was to fill the posts of president of the Senate and leader of the Chamber of Deputies.
On April 24 the Republican former Prime Minister Giovanni Spadolini was finally re-elected president of the Senate, and in the lower house Nilde Iotti, of the PDS, who had led the house for most of the previous 13 years, was replaced by a Christian Democrat, Oscar Luigi Scalfaro.
Resignation of Andreotti and Cossiga
The Christian Democratic Prime Minister, Giulio Andreotti, 73, on April 24 announced his resignation and that of his coalition government.
On the evening of April 25 President Francesco Cossiga, 63, himself resigned, in a live speech on national television, although his term of office was only due to expire on July 2.
In his 45-minute speech Cossiga spoke disparagingly of the system of informal deals which he said prevailed "over clear politics and concrete programmes" in Italian politics.
He told Italians that his resignation was a response to "your vote, the disastrous financial situation and the Maastrich deadline, the prominence of bad in our society, public disservice and institutional paralysis" .
The formal resignation of Cossiga, a Christian Democrat who had become President in 1985 and whose relations with his party had often been strained, was dated April 28.
According to the Constitution, parliament, together with regional representatives, had 15 days from that date to elect a successor.
Spadolini, as president of the Senate, provisionally assumed presidential powers, while the outgoing government would continue to exercise its functions until a new one could be formed.
The task of appointing a new Prime Minister would fall to Cossiga's successor as President.
Sentencing of De Benedetti
A protracted investigation into fraud at the Banco Ambrosiano came to a close on April 16 when Carlo De Benedetti, president of Olivetti and of the holding company CIR (Compagnie Industriali Riunite), was sentenced to six years and four months in prison.
De Benedetti had been vice-president and a major shareholder of the Banco Ambrosiano from November 1981 to January 1982, before ceding control to Roberto Calvi, who was found hanged in London in April 1982 [see p. 32083].
In April 1989 De Benedetti had been acquitted of extortion, only to face fresh charges in March 1991 [see p. 38114]in connection with the sale of his stake in the bank in January 1982, shortly before its collapse in the following June.
Sentences of up to 19 years were pronounced by the same three-judge court in Milan on 32 other people in connection with the Ambrosiano scandal.
Licio Gelli, former head of the banned P2 masonic lodge, and his assistant Umberto Ortolani received the longest sentences, of 18 years and six months and 19 years respectively.
Others sentenced included Giuseppe Ciarrapico, a close friend of Andreotti, and Anna Bonomi Bolchini, who was head of a leading Milanese industrial family.
Most of the defendants announced that they would appeal.
The trial had opened in May 1990.
Chamber of Deputies Senate 1992 1987 1992 1992 1987 DC 206 234 107 29.7 34.3 PDS* 107 177 64 16.1 26.6 PSU 92 94 49 13.6 14.3 Northern League 55 1 25 8.7 0.5 PRC 35! 20 5.6!
MSI-DN 34 35 16 5.4 5.9 PRI 27 21 10 4.4 3.7 PLI 17 11 4 2.8 2.1 PSDI 16 17 3 2.7 3.0 Lista Verde 16 13 4 2.8 2.5 La Rete 12! 3 1.0!
Others 13 27 10 6.3 7.1
Italian election results Seats Percentage of votes
*PCI in 1987.
EUROPE
FRANCE
French Council of Ministers
(announced April 2)
**Pierre Bérégovoy (PS) Prime Minister
Ministers of State
**Jack Lang (PS) National Education and Culture Roland Dumas (PS) Foreign Affairs
**Michel Delebarre (PS) Public Affairs and Administrative Reform
Ministers
*Michel Vauzelle (PS) Keeper of the Seals; Justice
**Paul Quilès (PS) Interior and Public Security Pierre Joxe (PS) Defence
**Michel Sapin (PS) Economy and Finance
***Michel Charasse (PS) Budget
*Ségolène Royal (PS)(f) Environment
**Jean-Louis Bianco Equipment, Transport and Housing
***Dominique Strauss-Kahn (PS) Industry and Foreign Trade Martine Aubry (f) Labour, Employment and Vocational Training Louis Mermaz (PS) Agriculture and Forestry
*René Teulade Social Affairs and Integration
***Bernard Kouchner Health and Humanitarian Action
*Bernard Tapie Towns Louis Le Pensec (PS) Overseas Departments and Territories
**Hubert Curien (PS) Research and Space
*Emile Zuccarelli (MRG) Posts and Telecommunications Frédérique Bredin (PS)(f) Youth and Sports
*New appointment.
**Altered responsibilities.
***Outgoing Minister-Delegate appointed as =Minister, but with unaltered responsibilities.
Women are indicated by (f).
MRG — Mouvement des radicaux de gauche.
There were in addition six Ministers-Delegate and 15 Secretaries of State.
Replacement of Prime Minister
The poor performance of the Socialist Party (PS) in the March regional and cantonal elections [see pp. 38820-21]led President François Mitterrand on April 2 to appoint Pierre Bérégovoy as Prime Minister in an attempt to reverse the decline in the party's fortunes.
Bérégovoy, hitherto Minister of State for Economy, Finance and Budget, replaced Edith Cresson, whom Mitterrand had appointed 10<P7M =$E1/2 = months earlier.
Bérégovoy was described by Le Monde of April 3 as the "quintessence of political professionalism" and by the Financial Times as "a paragon of gravity, moderation and great experience" .
Born in 1925 of a Ukrainian immigrant father, Bérégovoy was largely self-taught and fought in the resistance during the Second World War.
A long-standing Mitterrand ally, he worked as Secretary-General in the President's office from 1981 and then as Minister for Social Affairs and National Solidarity in 1982-84.
In 1984-86 he was Minister for the Economy, Finance and Budget, a post he resumed when the PS returned to government in 1988.
The appointment of Sapin, 39, was seen as indicating that Bérégovoy would continue to control economic policy.
Tapie, 49, was appointed at Mitterrand's instigation in recognition of his strong performance in the regional elections [see p. 38820].
Overall the position of the PS faction led by Laurent Fabius (a former Prime Minister and current PS first secretary) was strengthened at the expense of the faction led by Lionel Jospin.
Jospin himself, hitherto a Minister of State, left the cabinet, as did five Ministers (four PS members and Brice Lalonde who had been the sole representative of Génération Ecologie).
Government programme
Addressing the National Assembly on April 8 Bérégovoy declared his priority to be the "fight against unemployment" which had reached 9.9 per cent in February.
The policy of economic rigour and monetary stability, which had kept inflation to around 3 per cent, would nevertheless be maintained.
Ratification of the Treaty of Maastricht [signed in February — see pp. 38785]would allow France to "create Europe without undoing France" .
The electoral system would not be changed before the National Assembly elections due in March 1993.
Nuclear tests in the Pacific would be suspended for the rest of 1992 [see also p. 38890].
The top rate of value added tax (22 per cent) would be reduced to a new upper rate of 18.6 per cent from April 13, 1992, rather than Jan. 1, 1993 [see also p. 38297].
On April 16 Joxe announced that the strength of the French army would be cut from 280,000 to 220,000 personnel by 1997.
The first cuts would be made in July 1993 and would affect 16,000 national servicemen, 8,000 professionals and 4,750 civilians; the number of air force combat aircraft would be reduced from 450 to 400 and several bases would be closed, while naval forces would be regrouped in the key ports of Toulon on the Mediterranean and Brest on the Atlantic.
[For earlier cuts see pp. 38365; 37685.]
On April 23 Lang, newly responsible for education, dropped or modified controversial university reform proposals introduced by his predecessor Jospin [see p. 38471].
Students had in particular objected to the introduction of a selection process for university entrance.
(Currently students gaining a baccalauréat were guaranteed a university place; however, 50 per cent of students dropped out in the first two years.)
New proposals were to be worked out with university staff by the autumn of 1992.
Corruption
On April 1 Yves Chalier, chef de cabinet under former Minister for Co-operation and Development Christian Nucci, was sentenced by the assize court in Paris to five years in prison in connection with the Carrefour du développement development aid scandal [see pp. 37684; 36706; 35126].
Chalier was found guilty among other things of misappropriating F<T =26,984,176 worth of public funds, of attempting to appropriate a further F<T =9,928,740, of forgery and of breach of trust.
He was ordered to pay a one franc symbolic fine to Nucci (who had been amnestied in April 1990 — see p. 37684) and to return F21,534,298 of public funds to the state.
(US$1.00=F<T5.602 as at March 30, 1992.)
La Cinq
On April 3 a Paris commercial court placed in judicial liquidation the television channel La Cinq, which had filed for bankruptcy in December 1991.
It became apparent that no rescuers would be found for La Cinq, which by this stage had losses of nearly F<T =4,000 million, after the Italian media magnate Silvio Berlusconi abandoned his attempt on March 24.
The final broadcast by La Cinq was on April 12.
Compensation for infection by HIV-contaminated blood
On March 31 the European Court of Human Rights ruled in favour of a haemophiliac who had died in February 1992, having contracted AIDS from blood supplies infected with the HIV virus [for related scandal see p. 38544].
The Court ruled that the French government had not examined his requests for compensation "within a reasonable space of time" .
It ordered the government to pay F<T =150,000 to his family as well as costs of F<T =30,000.
Paris bomb trials
On April 14 the assize court in Paris sentenced two Tunisians and two Moroccans for involvement in a bombing campaign in Paris between December 1985 and September 1986 in which 13 people were killed and 303 injured [see pp. 34308; 35079; 35524].
Fouard Ali Salah, 34, from Tunisia and described as a pro-Iranian Hezbollah militant, was ordered to serve a life sentence of at least 18 years without parole for masterminding the campaign.
Hassam Aroua, 38, a Tunisian taxi driver, and Omar Agnaou, 30, a Moroccan student, also received life sentences while Abdelhamid Badaoui, 33, a Moroccan, who had turned state's evidence, received a 20-year sentence.
EUROPE
GERMANY
Baden-Württemberg elections
*SSW — South Schleswig Voters' Association, a Danish minority party excluded from the requirement of winning at least 5 per cent of the vote to win representation.
Turnout 71.8 per cent.
Major setbacks for Kohl government
During April Chancellor Helmut Kohl's Christian Democratic Union (CDU), the largest party in the governing federal centre-right coalition, was shaken by losses in two Länd (state) elections, by public-sector strikes in western Germany, where there was increasing resentment over the cost of government measures to fund the restructuring of the economy in the east, and by the resignation of Foreign Minister Hans-Dietrich Genscher of the Free Democratic Party (FDP), after 23 years in the Cabinet.
State elections
In Land elections on April 5 in Baden-Württemberg and Schleswig-Holstein, the two largest parties, the CDU and the opposition Social Democratic Party (SPD) respectively, performed poorly.
Two extreme right parties gained representation for the first time in their respective Länder, the Republicans (led by Franz Schönhuber) in Baden-Württemberg and the neo-Nazi German People's Union (DVU)(led by Gerhard Frey) in Schleswig-Holstein.
[For September 1991 entry of DVU into Bremen parliament see p. 38447.
For 1988 Land elections in Baden-Württemberg and Schleswig-Holstein see pp. 36044-45.]
The campaign was dominated by the question of the influx of asylum seekers, which also impinged upon issues such as housing, unemployment and rising crime.
In 1991 more than 256,000 people had sought asylum as compared with 121,000 in 1989; in March 1992 alone, 35,059 sought asylum.
(There were in addition 222,000 ethnic Germans who came to Germany in 1991 from the former Soviet Union and eastern Europe.)
Federal police reported that in January-March 1992 there had been nearly 600 "criminal acts hostile to foreigners" , representing a fourfold increase as compared with the same period in 1991.
Support for the extreme right-wing parties was strongest among city-dwelling, working-class men under 30.
In what Kohl described as "a terrible defeat" for the CDU in Baden-Württemberg, Germany's richest state, the party lost the absolute majority it had held for 20 years.
It was unclear what kind of coalition would be attempted by the CDU leader Erwin Teufel (who took over from Lothar Späth in January 1991 following allegations of corruption in the allocation of business contracts — see p. 37966).
In Schleswig-Holstein, whose Minister President was the federal SPD candidate for chancellor, Björn Engholm, the SPD narrowly retained an absolute majority.
Public-sector strike
Public-sector workers began industrial action on April 27 — the first such action in the sector since 1974 — after employers rejected a mediating panel's proposal for a 5.4 per cent wage rise on the grounds that it failed "to take account of current economic conditions" .
Unions rejected the employers' "final offer" of 4.8 per cent(equivalent to inflation in March 1992) on April 13 and stuck by their claim for 9.5 per cent .
Balloted workers from six unions (the largest being the ÖTV union led by Monika Wulf-Mathies) voted overwhelmingly in favour of industrial action.
Public transport was initially most affected and by the end of the month postal services, refuse collection and hospital services were disrupted in cities and towns across western Germany.
On April 23, in a bid to defuse the conflict, Kohl proposed a 5 per cent pay cut for all ministers and top civil servants and pledged that there would be no further tax increases during the current legislative period (i.e. until the autumn of 1994).
In the event, however, the Cabinet approved a two-year wage freeze for ministers and civil servants on April 29.
[See p. 38888 for pressure exerted on Germany by US government officials to reduce public spending and borrowing in order to allow interest rates to be lowered across Europe.]
Also on April 29 action spread to the private sector with lightning strikes by 130,000 metal and engineering workers.
IG Metall had opened region-by-region negotiations in this sector on March 4 but employers rejected demands for a 9.5 per cent increase, offering instead 3.3 per cent.
[For February IG Metall steelworkers' pay settlement see p. 38782.]
Banking stoppages begun in February resulted in agreement on April 4 on a 5.4 per cent pay increase, backdated to Feb. 1 and applicable for 13 months, plus a one-off payment of DM<T =350 in May in addition to one already paid in January.
In early March 95,000 coal workers had agreed to rises of 4.7 per cent for 12 months and a one-off payment of DM<T =200 per worker.
Genscher's resignation
On April 27 Genscher announced that he would resign as Foreign Minister on May 17, the 18th anniversary of his appointment as Foreign Minister.
Genscher, 65, who had had heart problems in recent years, described his move as "right and necessary" .
[For March resignation of Defence Minister see p. 38822.]
The party leadership proposed Construction Minister Irmgard Adam-Schwaetzer, 50, as Genscher's successor, but her appointment was rejected on April 28 by FDP parliamentary deputies who voted 63 to 25 in favour of Klaus Kinkel.
Kinkel, 55, had worked under Genscher when the latter was Interior Minister, transferring with him to the Foreign Ministry in 1974 before moving to head the German intelligence service BND in 1979.
He became State Secretary at the Justice Ministry in 1982 and Justice Minister in January 1991, initially as an independent but within months as an FDP member.
Also on April 27 Gerda Hasselfeldt resigned as Health Minister.
A close associate of hers was reported to be under investigation for espionage.
[Details of the resulting reshuffle will be covered in the May News Digest.]
RAF offer to cease attacks
In a letter received by the Agence France-Presse news agency in Bonn on April 13 the extremist Red Army Faction (RAF) announced that it would cease attacks on leading economic and government figures in return for the release of some of the longest-serving RAF prisoners.
In January Kinkel had encouraged the RAF to lay down arms and declared the government to be "prepared for reconciliation" .
The RAF was thought to be responsible for 32 murders over 20 years, the most recent being that in April 1991 of Detlev Rohwedder, head of the Treuhand privatization agency [see p. 38155].
The collapse of communism had led to the arrest of several RAF members in mid-1990 [see p. 38476], and the RAF hard core was thought to number only 20-30 people.
EUROPE
FINLAND
Austerity measures and protests
On April 5, in a move to calm financial markets, to halt an outflow of capital and to avoid a devaluation, the government announced public-sector expenditure cuts of FM10,000 million, equivalent to about 2 per cent of gross domestic product (GDP), to be made in 1993.
The cuts included reductions in state-sector pensions, unemployment payments, child benefits and overseas assistance.
The measures followed the resignation on April 2 of Rolf Kullberg as governor of the Bank of Finland (central bank) after disagreements with the government over economic policy.
Finland's gross domestic product (GDP) had fallen by 6.2 per cent in 1991 in part as a result of the collapse of Finland's traditional Soviet markets, and the government had devalued the markka in November 1991 [see p. 38587].
Kullberg was replaced on April 5 by Sirkka Hämäläinen, 52.
She had been a member of the bank's board of management since November 1991 and had worked at the bank for 30 years.
On April 22 some 200,000 demonstrators protested at the cuts.
On the same day Eeva Kuuskoski resigned as Minister for Social Affairs and Health and was replaced by Jorma Huuhtanen.
EUROPE
SWEDEN
Revised finance bill
The centre-right government in office since October 1991 presented a revised finance bill on April 24, after it had emerged that the budget deficit for 1992/93 was expected to be 101,800 million kronor (representing 6.9 per cent of gross domestic product — GDP), well above the 70,800 million kronor expected when the 1992/93 draft budget was presented in January [see p. 38737].
(US$1.00=5.9581 kronor as at April 30, 1992.)
The bill provided for expenditure cuts of over 30,000 million kronor over the next three years in addition to cuts of 27,000 million kronor already announced in January (the figure of 14,000 million kronor given on p. 38737 representing the net spending cut).
Welfare benefits, local and central government were most affected.
The rate of value added tax (VAT) was to be lowered from 25 to 22 per cent from Jan. 1, 1993; taxes on electricity and fuel for industrial use would be abolished, while the tax on carbon dioxide emissions would be increased to 0.32 kronor per kilogramme of emission except for industry where it would be 0.08 kronor per kilogramme.
EUROPE
BELGIUM
1992 budget
The centre-left government of Jean-Luc Dehaene, sworn in in March [see p. 38821], presented its budget for 1992 at the beginning of April.
This had been delayed because of the November 1991 general election [see p. 38589]and the resulting political uncertainty.
The budget provided for expenditure of BF1,634,000 million and income of BF1,279,000 million (US$1.00=BF33.9878 as at March 30, 1992).
In order to keep the resulting budget deficit roughly equivalent to 5 per cent of gross domestic product (GDP) the government reduced social benefits and increased taxes.
Negotiations on constitutional reform
On April 6 nine political parties began a "dialogue of the communities" on constitutional reform, jointly chaired by Hugo Schiltz of the Flemish Volksunie and Gérard Deprez of the francophone Christian Social Party (PSC).
Scheduled to last for two months, the dialogue was intended to present proposals on the direct election of regional parliaments and on the fiscal competencies of the francophone and Flemish executives.
The two Flemish groups, the separatist Vlaams Bloc and the "ultra-liberal" ROSSEM, which had both performed well in the 1991 elections, were not invited to participate.
EUROPE
NETHERLANDS
Euthanasia debate
During April parliament debated and approved a directive detailing the reporting procedures under which voluntary euthanasia (the termination of another person's life at his or her request) was permissible.
The directive also covered assisting patients to take their own life, and medical intervention to terminate the life of someone unable or no longer able to express his or her wishes.
Euthanasia technically remained a criminal offence subject to a minimum prison sentence of 12 years under Article 293 of the penal code.
It had been practised in the Netherlands, however, since the early 1970s, and such actions had been upheld by the Supreme Court in November 1984 and October 1986; the Royal Dutch Medical Association (KNMG) had issued its own guidelines on euthanasia.
The Remmelink Commission, set up in January 1990, published its conclusions on Sept. 10, 1991, calculating that in the Netherlands there were annually some 2,700 cases of euthanasia or assisting the death of patients, and some 1,000 cases of intervention to terminate the life of patients unable to express their wishes.
EUROPE
SPAIN
Capture of ETA leader
A month after the arrest of three senior commanders of the Basque separatist organization Euzkadi ta Askatasuna (ETA)[see pp. 38823-24], Sabino Euba Zenaruzabeitia, 55, suspected to be ETA's treasurer, was arrested by French police on April 28 at Charles de Gaulle airport, Paris, en route for Mexico.
On April 10, the French government had extradited a former ETA leader Juan Lorenzo Lasa Michelena, known as "Txikierdi" , who had already served seven years in a French prison and faced several murder charges in Spain.
Increased sentences in contaminated cooking oil affair
The Supreme Court on April 28 increased the sentences on 13 people found guilty in May 1989 by the National High Court of marketing adulterated cooking oil which had led to the deaths of 600 people and made over 25,000 ill, many of them seriously [see p. 36668].
Sentences were increased from a total of 72 years to 260 years in prison.
The sentence on Juan Miguel Benegoechea, the importer of the oil, was increased from 20 to 77 years, as was that on the main distributor Ramón Ferrero López, from 12 to 65 years.
Five others who had been eligible for parole following the first trial were now imprisoned.
Opening of Expo
In Seville on April 20 King Juan Carlos, addressing over 2,000 VIPs amidst heavy security, opened the 1992 universal exhibition (Expo).
On April 19 police forcibly broke up a demonstration by members of the Unmask 92 Descenmascaremos el 92 Movement opposed to the cost of Expo and its theme of celebrating the 500th anniversary of Columbus's voyage to the Americas.
EUROPE
ANDORRA
General election
In polling on April 5 and 12, reformist supporters of Oscar Ribas Reig won 17 out of the 28 seats in the General Council of the Valleys (parliament)[for December 1989 general election see pp. 37135; 37198].
In the first round of voting 19 of the 28 seats were decided, with the remainder going to a second round; 82 per cent of the 8,592-strong electorate went to the polls (most of Andorra's population of 60,000 being foreigners and not entitled to vote).
Ribas Reig had resigned as President of the Executive Council (head of government) in January when conservatives blocked his proposed reforms to introduce a constitution which would legalize parties and trade unions and guarantee civil rights.
The new parliament's principal task would be to draft a constitution for approval by the electorate in a referendum.
EUROPE
GREECE
Vote of confidence
Prime Minister Constantine Mitsotakis won a vote of confidence in Parliament on April 17, when all 152 of the New Democracy (ND) deputies supported their leader.
The vote was boycotted by Panhellenic Socialist Movement (Pasok) deputies in protest at the imprisonment of seven company directors on charges arising from the Bank of Crete scandal in which former Pasok Prime Minister Andreas Papandreou had been implicated [see p. 38739].
The vote was made at the request of Mitsotakis after he dismissed Foreign Minister Antonis Samaras and assumed the post himself on April 13.
He accused Samaras of taking an independent line in Greece's objections to the international recognition of the Yugoslav republic of Macedonia [see p. 38779].
However, the Prime Minister appeared to endorse some of Samaras's views.
In particular, he reversed his previous position that Greece would recognize Macedonia if it adopted a prefix to distinguish it from the northern Greek province of Macedonia.
He now insisted that Macedonia should adopt a completely different name.
Other member countries of the European Communities (EC) had pressed for EC recognition of Macedonia since January [see pp. 38703-04].
Pasok by-election victory
Pasok secured a convincing victory in a by-election in the Athens B district on April 5.
While a boycott by the ND, Communist Party (KKE-Exterior) and several left-wing parties meant that the Pasok candidate had no strong challengers, over 70 per cent of the electorate turned out, responding to the Pasok description of the vote as a referendum against the government's austerity measures.
EUROPE
CYPRUS
Security Council resolution
The UN Security Council, in Resolution 750 which was adopted by a unanimous vote on April 10, reaffirmed the independence and territorial integrity of the island as a "bicommunal and bizonal" federation comprising two communities with equal political rights.
On April 3 the UN Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali reported to the Security Council that "it is unlikely that the UN will be able for much longer to maintain a peacekeeping presence in Cyprus on the present scale" .
Sweden had in 1987 withdrawn its contingent from the UN force in Cyprus (UFICYP), which now numbered 2,100 personnel, and Austria, Canada and Denmark hoped to do likewise.
Release of Nicos Sampson
Nicos Sampson, leader of the short-lived right-wing regime of 1974, was conditionally released from imprisonment in Cyprus on April 28; he had been due for release in March 1994 [see also p. 38450].
EUROPE
TURKEY
Kurdish developments — Resignation of Kurdish deputies
On March 30 a group of 14 Kurdish deputies resigned from the Social Democratic Popular Party (SHP), which was junior partner in the governing coalition dominated by the True Path Party (DYP).
The deputies announced that they were resigning because the government "has not been able to keep its promises" with regard to the Kurdish population.
The 14 continued as independent deputies, leaving the SHP with 72 seats, and the two-party coalition with 250, in the 450-seat National Assembly.
Of the 22 Kurdish deputies, formerly members of the People's Labour Party (HEP), who had been elected on the SHP ticket in October 1991, only six remained on government benches.
[For resignation of two Kurdish MPs in January see p. 38739.]
EC criticism — Visits by Mitterrand and Hurd
On April 9 President Turgut Özal reacted to a resolution recently approved by the European Parliament which condemned the "scale and excessive severity" of actions by Turkish forces in the south-east in March.
Özal described the resolution as unacceptable and amounting to support for "terrorism" .
A German Foreign Ministry spokesperson reported that a meeting of EC representatives in Lisbon on April 2 had approved a German proposal for a formal EC protest to the Turkish government over the recent military action against civilians [see pp. 38833-34; for resignation of German Defence Minister over sale of vehicles to Turkey see p. 38822].
Early in the following week Netherlands, Portuguese and United Kingdom envoys lodged the protest.
Özal discussed the Kurdish issue in meetings with French President Mitterrand who visited Turkey on April 13-14.
In press interviews on April 12 and 14 Mitterrand said that he was not among those who agreed with demands for a Kurdish state.
He condemned the "blind" violence of the "terrorists" , and said that a state of law must be respected and "collective repression" avoided.
The French delegation, which included five ministers, also emphasized trade and economic ties with Turkey (which had seen considerable growth since the Mitterrand government re-opened relations with Turkey in 1984) and discussed the conflict in Azerbaijan.
Mitterrand said that Turkish "association" with the Western European Union (WEU) was desirable (in spite of problems raised by Greek-Turkish relations).
Although the Foreign Ministry on April 14 had said that full membership of the EC continued to be one of Turkey's "main foreign policy goals" , the European press noted that the Turkish government now accepted that "purely demographic considerations" precluded Turkey from early passage to full membership.
Turkey had first applied for membership in 1987 [see p. 35137].
UK Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd on a visit to Turkey on April 21-22 said that he believed that Turkey should be included in the Matutes plan (the EC's development programme for the Mediterranean basin).
Both Mitterrand and Hurd also discussed the mandate for the airborne multinational forces (UK, US and French) based in southern Turkey, which was due to expire on June 28 [see p. 38690].
Agreement with Syria — Raids over Iraq
In Damascus on April 17 Interior Minister Ismet Sezgin met with the Syrian President Hafez al-Assad.
They signed two protocols which amounted to an attempt to revive a 1987 security protocol directed against the Kurdish separatist guerrillas of the Kurdish Workers' Party (PKK), which Syria had not implemented.
In the latest agreement both countries condemned "terrorism" and undertook to intervene against any illegal activity which threatened the stability of the other.
Security along the frontier would be strengthened and information likely to lead to the capture of criminals and deserters would be exchanged.
Turkey claimed that of some 10,000 trained guerrillas at the disposal of the PKK, 7,000 were based outside Turkey, whether in the Syrian-controlled Bekaa valley of Lebanon or in northern Iraq.
There were further raids by Turkish aircraft against PKK bases in northern Iraq: on April 13, 20 and 26, camps in the Durji and Hakhurk valleys, some 10-20 km inside Iraq, were bombed by planes based in Diyarbakir and Malatya.
Operation against Dev Sol — Violence in south-east
There were gun battles lasting eight hours on April 16 after Turkish police surrounded seven safe-houses of the extreme-left Dev Sol (Revolutionary Left) group in Istanbul.
Five men and six women were killed.
The governor of Istanbul, Hayri Kozakcioglu, said that those killed included Sinan Kukul, a Dev Sol commander who had escaped from Bayram Pasha prison in 1990.
The police said that the operation followed a tip-off from a rival Dev Sol leader, Dursun Karatas.
According to Le Monde of April 19 some Dev Sol fighters had trained at the PKK camp in the Bekaa [see also p. 38833].
Incidents of continuing violence in the south-east included an operation by the Turkish army on April 16-17 in the province on Mardin, after four government-sponsored village guards and an army officer were kidnapped: 33 PKK fighters were killed.
On the weekend of April 18-19 over 40 deaths, apparently of local people, were reported in the villages of Birik, Kuziriv, Cizre and Tepel near the town of Bismil — prompting thousands of people to rally in protest in Diyarbakir in the following week.
The authorities claimed that PKK guerrillas killed eight civilians in the south-east on April 20.
EUROPE
CIS
Co-ordination agreements
On April 1, an agreement establishing an interparliamentary assembly between seven Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) member states was published.
Heads of parliaments had adopted the agreement at a meeting in Alma Ata (Kazakhstan) on March 27.
Armenia, Byelarus, Kazakhstan, Kirgizstan, Russia, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan agreed to set up the Assembly "as a consultative institution to discuss matters and consider draft documents of common interest" .
It would send proposals from its biannual meetings to the Supreme Soviets of states party to the agreement and to the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) Councils of Heads of State and of Heads of Government.
Nine CIS member states (all except Armenia and Ukraine) had also signed an agreement at the Alma Ata meeting setting up a council to co-ordinate the work of their intelligence services.
It was reported on April 10 that the heads of customs services of nine CIS member states had agreed that no duties would be paid on cargoes within the CIS.
Ukraine's and Moldova's refusal to sign this agreement led to threats from Russia that they would be treated as foreign countries.
The representatives of trades union bodies meeting in Moscow signed an agreement on April 16 reforming the All-Union General Confederation of Trade Unions; ruling bodies were elected.
The new General Confederation would function while guaranteeing independence for its constituent bodies.
Resumption of publication of Pravda
The former Communist Party newspaper Pravda reappeared on April 7 after a brief suspension because of lack of funds [see p. 38825].
It would be published three times weekly.
Resumption of publication was reportedly due partly to aid from the Russian government as part of emergency funds given to the press.
Military affairs
The Collegium of the CIS Joint Armed Forces Command decided on April 4 to ban military units and command bodies from participating in any commercial structures and from selling military property and ordnance through military organizations.
On April 16 a protocol was signed in Baku allocating 25 per cent of the Caspian flotilla to Azerbaijan.
Another quarter of the flotilla's property went to Russia in the shape of the CIS navy.
The remaining half would be divided following talks between Russia, Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan and Turkmenistan.
Central Asian republics
Creation of regional economy structure
Leaders of four Central Asian states and Kazakhstan met in Bishkek (Kirgizstan) on April 22-23.
Documents creating structures for the regional economy were signed by the delegates, excepting Turkmenistan.
They included interstate investment institutions, banking mechanisms and pricing policy.
It was also agreed to co-ordinate the law enforcement bodies, especially in acting against drug dealing and terrorism.
The delegates denied that the meeting was intended to create structures supplanting the CIS, but President Nursultan Nazarbayev of Kazakhstan, one of the strongest proponents of the CIS, said after the meeting that his confidence in the stability of the CIS had decreased because of Ukraine's attitude at the last CIS summit [see p. 38825]and the course of the Russian Congress of People's Deputies [for which see p. 38875].
He also noted that Russia's decision to establish its own armed forces had forced other states to consider setting up armies and concluding a defence pact.
Turkish and Syrian visits
Turkish Prime Minister Suleyman Demirel toured the Moslem republics of the CIS at the end of April.
Beginning his tour in Uzbekistan on April 27 he went on to visit Kirgizstan, Kazakhstan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan and Azerbaijan [for December 1991 Turkish recognition of Central Asian independence see p. 38657].
The visit coincided with the initiation of a Turkish television channel broadcasting Turkish language programmes to these republics.
Turkish officials admitted openly that they hoped to deflect Iranian influence in the region by using television as a propaganda tool for Turkey.
Some broadcasts would have Latin alphabet subtitles.
The Central Asian republics (bar Tajikistan) spoke Turkish, but currently wrote in the Cyrillic alphabet.
Demirel offered export credits and soft loans totalling US$1,100 million to the former Soviet republics, and signed agreements on transport, aviation, energy industrial development, banking and help for small and medium-scale industries.
In Azerbaijan, Demirel was reported as saying that a peaceful solution should be found to Azerbaijan's "just war" in Nagorny Karabakh.
Syrian Foreign Minister Farooq ash-Shar"headed a delegation visiting the five Central Asian republics and Azerbaijan from March 26.
Diplomatic relations were established with all six countries, and discussions were held on the means of future co-operation.
The Syrian delegation also established diplomatic relations with Armenia and Ukraine.
Leaders of four Central Asian states and Kazakhstan met in Bishkek (Kirgizstan) on April 22-23.
Documents creating structures for the regional economy were signed by the delegates, excepting Turkmenistan.
They included interstate investment institutions, banking mechanisms and pricing policy.
It was also agreed to co-ordinate the law enforcement bodies, especially in acting against drug dealing and terrorism.
The delegates denied that the meeting was intended to create structures supplanting the CIS, but President Nursultan Nazarbayev of Kazakhstan, one of the strongest proponents of the CIS, said after the meeting that his confidence in the stability of the CIS had decreased because of Ukraine's attitude at the last CIS summit [see p. 38825]and the course of the Russian Congress of People's Deputies [see p. 38875].
He also noted that Russia's decision to establish its own armed forces had forced other states to consider setting up armies and concluding a defence pact.
EUROPE
RUSSIA
Confrontation between Congress and Yeltsin government
The Sixth Russian Congress of People's Deputies (the supreme legislature) opened in Moscow on April 6.
The Congress had been elected in March 1990 [see p. 37322, where it is misleadingly referred to as the republican Supreme Soviet, this being in fact the name of the standing legislature elected from the Congress].
It was dominated by members of the former Soviet political system, and observers noted that it was out of step with political and economic realities after the demise of the Soviet Union.
In his opening speech, the chair Ruslan Khasbulatov [for whose election see p. 38537]warned the deputies that after the break-up of the Soviet Union the Congress had no longer the excuse of central Union power to influence its deliberations; the Congress now represented, he emphasised, the highest legislative body of a sovereign state.
The main issues facing the Congress were economic reforms and the new Russian constitution.
The Congress challenged the reforms led by the team of young economists in the government of President Boris Yeltsin, despite personnel changes in recent days [see below].
This challenge provoked the government to offer its resignation and to warn that aid offered by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) before the opening of the Congress [see p. 38888]was being jeopardized.
A motion on the opening day to put the work of the government to a vote of no confidence was narrowly defeated.
In an apparent attempt to placate the anti-reform groups in the Congress of People's Deputies before it opened, Yegor Gaidar, responsible for the main thrust of the economic reforms, was dismissed by Yeltsin as Finance Minister on April 2 but retained the post of Deputy Premier.
One of his deputies, Vasily Barchuk, became Finance Minister.
Sergei Shakhrai, State Counsellor and Deputy Premier, resigned on March 31.
Yeltsin's support at the forthcoming Congress, he warned, risked being diminished as a result of a campaign to deprive ministers of their powers as deputies, and he felt that he would be more useful working for Yeltsin at the Congress than in government.
(The Congress in fact voted on April 21 to deprive four deputies, including Industry Minister, Aleksandr Titkin, of their mandate because they occupied government posts.)
Shakhrai's resignation was accepted in a presidential decree of April 20.
Gennady Burbulis, was dismissed as First Deputy Premier by Yeltsin "at his own request" on April 3.
He retained the post of State Secretary and in charge of co-ordinating policy.
Formation of political blocs
An Assembly of Citizens of the Russian Federation, bringing together about 4,000 Yeltsin supporters, met on April 5.
Addressing the Assembly, Yeltsin said that at the forthcoming Congress he expected an attempt to retreat from reforms.
He called for continued support for the government, and also made it clear that in the discussions of a new constitution, his preference was for a presidential republic.
A co-operation protocol was signed between Yeltsin and pro-reform groups in the Supreme Soviet (the standing legislature elected from the Congress of People's Deputies) before the Congress began.
However, Izvestiya of April 22 noted that one of the main results of the Congress itself had been the formation of an organized opposition in the "Russian Unity" bloc, comprising both former communists and nationalist groups.
Yeltsin's April 7 speech to Congress
On April 7, in a speech to Congress lasting over an hour, Yeltsin detailed the progress of Russia's reforms to date.
He praised the conclusion of a political treaty with Russia's regions [see pp. 38825-26]and expressed trust in the government.
However, there had been miscalculations, he said.
The January price rises [see p. 38730-31]had been higher than expected and painful, but he described them as the logical conclusions of the policies of Soviet Prime Ministers Nikolai Ryzhkov and Valentin Pavlov.
Yeltsin announced a softening of economic policy, with extra credits to industries, investments in agriculture and grants to the military conversion project.
Pre-empting an expected attack, Yeltsin praised the decision of the Fifth Congress [see p. 38537]to grant him extra presidential powers, and warned of chaos if they were removed.
In a veiled threat to dissolve the Congress, he called for constructive co-operation, warning that: "your support is the best argument against accusations that the deputies' body has outlived its usefulness" .
Resignation of ministers after critical resolution on economic reforms — Eventual compromise declaration
The main sensation of the Congress was the resignation of the government on April 12, provoked by the resolution of the Congress passed on April 11 "On the course of the economic reforms" .
The Congress resolution criticized the reforms and called for the introduction of higher levels of social protection.
It also demanded a change in the way in which the government was appointed (the Fifth Congress having given the President the power to appoint ministers) and a new Prime Minister in place of Yeltsin, who had taken on the post himself in October 1991 [see p. 38537].
The government's resignation statement warned that to adopt the resolution would ruin the economic reform policy, jeopardize promised assistance from Western countries and financial institutions, deprive the government of power, and make "the figure of the President purely symbolic" .
A motion submitted by Yeltsin allowing him to retain the right to head the government and to decide its composition until December 1992 was defeated.
As a compromise with the tight schedule on changing the government demanded by the Congress, the resolution stated that the Supreme Soviet was to adopt a law on appointing the government within three months.
The members of the government walked out of the evening sitting on April 13 in protest at Khasbulatov's speech in which he warned the "lads" in the government not to blackmail the Congress.
Khasbulatov later appeared on television to apologize for having caused offence.
On April 15, urged by Khasbulatov, the Congress adopted by 578 to 203 (64 abstentions) a more conciliatory "Declaration on support for the economic reforms" .
It was also reported on April 15 that Yeltsin had refused to accept the government's resignation.
The Declaration altered the original resolution of April 11, by supporting the actions taken by the President, the Supreme Soviet and the government "towards radical transformations in the economy" .
A last-minute alteration introduced by Khasbulatov regarding governmental structures would effectively require Yeltsin to give up the premiership within three months, instead of at the end of the year.
Acceptance of "concept of constitutional reforms" — Official state name — CIS membership
A proposal to accept the draft Russian constitution as a basis for the new Constitution was amended to the more general wording of giving "approval of the general concept of constitutional reforms in the Russian Federation laid out in the basis of the draft constitution" .
On April 18 the Congress voted by 664 to 139 (with 72 abstentions) to approve this resolution, which also recommended that further work be done on the document, and that it be published to widen debate and be resubmitted to the next Congress.
On April 16 the Congress approved by 871 votes to 30 with 30 abstentions a proposal to change the official name of the state to "Russia" .
Deputies from the republics within Russia, however, protested that this denied the federal nature of the state.
The following day the decision was superseded by a vote of 759 to 77 with 30 abstentions to adopt Yeltsin's proposal that the name of the state be "Russian Federation — Russia" [for original name change see p. 38656].
The Congress on April 20 voted by 584 votes to 158 with 136 abstentions to affirm Russia's membership of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS).
A proposal on April 17 to debate a refusal to recognize the collapse of the Soviet Union in the light of the referendum on the Union Treaty of March 1991 [see pp. 38078-80]was defeated.
Yeltsin's closing speech — Call for referendum on land ownership
Yeltsin's closing speech on April 21 emphasized that the Congress had not resolved any of the problems of the relationship between executive and legislative authority, nor had it endorsed a new constitution for the state.
He also criticised ill-prepared speeches which, he said, had damaged Russia's relations with other CIS member states.
A major failure of the Congress, as identified by Yeltsin and attributed to its composition in that it was weighted in favour of the conservatives, was the refusal to endorse a clause in the draft constitution allowing the sale and privatization of land.
A survey revealed that the majority of those who had voted against the clause had vested interests as they ran collective or state farms or were in local administration.
During a three-day visit to the north of Russia beginning on April 28, Yeltsin was reported to have said in conversation that the Congress, having failed to resolve the land issue, would have to be dissolved; he reportedly called for a referendum to be held to alter the constitution accordingly.
The Democratic Russia Movement, it was announced on May 2, had decided to support Yeltsin's call for a referendum, and would organize the collection of the 1,000,000 signatures necessary to petition for a referendum.
Economy
Petrol prices in Russia were deregulated to the extent of allowing prices to rise by a factor of about five from April 19.
The governments of Byelarus, Kazakhstan, Kirgizstan, Moldova, Uzbekistan and Ukraine had called on the Russian government on April 2 not to deregulate oil prices before Oct. 1, fearing for their economies if the cheap fuel they received from Russia was instead sold to them at world prices.
Figures released by the State Statistics Committee for the first quarter of 1992 showed that Russian national income fell by 14 per cent as compared with the same period in 1991, it was reported on April 23.
There had been a fall of 15,000,000 tonnes in the volume of oil and gas extraction.
Food prices were reported to have risen on average by 6 per cent during one week.
A report in the Financial Times of April 21, summarizing interviews with economic officials, said that the next stage in the Russian government's economic reform programme would include a relaxation of tight controls on budget spending, in force in the first quarter of 1992.
Increased credits and social security provisions had already been announced by Yeltsin at the Congress of People's Deputies [see above].
There was also expected to be (i) an attempt to reduce inflation to about 3 per cent per month (from an estimated 30-40 per cent);(ii) a budget deficit target of below 5 per cent of gross national product; and (iii) a gradual rise in energy prices to achieve parity with world prices by the end of 1993.
Russian armed forces
On April 4, Yeltsin announced the appointment of two deputy Defence Ministers to the newly-formed Russian Defence Ministry, currently headed by himself.
Gen. Pavel Grachev was a deputy to the CIS C.-in-C.
Marshal Yevgeny Shaposhnikov, while Andrei Kokoshin had worked for the foreign policy "think-tank" , the USA and Canada Institute.
On March 25 the State Committee on Defence had been abolished, and State Counsellor on defence Gen. Konstantin Kobets released from his duties.
A decree issued by Yeltsin on April 4 initiated the regular spring conscription to the armed forces of the CIS, the border troops, and the units under Russian jurisdiction.
It was estimated that some units (railway troops, civil defence and military construction units) would be without recruits, partly because of deferred service and sickness, but also because of the creation of independent armed forces in the former Soviet republics.
Ukraine, Moldova, Byelarus, Georgia, Azerbaijan and Armenia had refused to supply conscripts to forces outside their territory; the Central Asian states, and some republics and regions within Russia, had agreed to submit some conscripts to CIS strategic forces.
Espionage cases
The expulsion was announced on April 11 of four diplomats at the Russian embassy in Brussels, while five Belgians were charged with espionage and nine others detained in connection with a still-active espionage ring providing technological information for military use, which was thought to have operated since 1967.
It was reported on April 23 that a Belgian electronics engineer named Alain Brienne had been charged in France with espionage on behalf of Russia.
He was alleged to have passed information to the Brussels ring.
Also on April 23 the Netherlands Foreign Ministry announced that three journalists and a trade attaché at the Russian embassy in The Hague had been asked to leave the country a month earlier.
Developments in federal republics
Attempted coup in Chechnia
Casualties were reported in Grozny, the capital of the republic of Chechnia within the Russian Federation, on March 31 when forces loyal to President Dzhakhar Dudayev retook the broadcasting centre, which had been briefly captured by the opposition.
The opposition was calling for Dudayev's resignation and for a referendum on Chechnia's remaining part of Russia.
The Dudayev leadership accused the Russian authorities of having manipulated the revolt, and instigated criminal investigation of the "coup" .
On April 1, the government decreed republican jurisdiction over all CIS troops stationed there.
However, reports later in April said that the leadership of Chechnia had urged a common military, economic and information space with Russia, and the news agency Interfax reported on April 30 that Chechnia was ready to resume negotiations with Russia.
On April 17 it was reported that Dudayev and the deputy C.-in-C. of CIS armed forces, Col.-Gen.
Boris Gromov, had agreed that CIS armed forces would vacate Chechnia on a "mutual security basis" .
A report in Nezavisimaya gazeta of April 21 noted that Dudayev appeared to be hoping for support and recognition from the Islamic countries, rather than from the West, which recently had been heavily criticized in his speeches.
On April 29, an amnesty was announced to mark the proclamation of the independence of the Chechen republic.
Referendum in Karachai-Cherkessia
The republic of Karachai-Cherkessia within the Russian Federation held a referendum on March 28 on preserving the unity of the republic "in the full realization of the law" On the rehabilitation of ethnic groups affected by Stalinist purges'".
On average over 78 per cent supported the maintenance of the status quo, although the number of votes in favour varied from 29 to 95 per cent , depending on the nationality of the voters in different areas.
An independent Karachai republic had existed until November 1943, and there were calls from the All-National Council of Karachai People for its restoration.
The Karachai (a Moslem people) were deported from the North Caucasus under Stalin.
Death of Romanov heir
Grand Duke Vladimir Romanov, the head of the exiled Russian royal family, and "heir to the Russian throne" as Izvestiya described him on April 22, died in the USA on April 21.
He was buried in the family vault in St Petersburg, the city authorities having reversed their previous decision to refuse permission for the body to be buried in St. Petersburg.
Born in Finland in 1917, his first visit to Russia had been made in November 1991.
EUROPE
ARMENIA/AZERBAIJAN
Nagorny Karabakh conflict
Fire at weapons depot
On the night of April 8-9 a fire in a weapons depot of the former Soviet army north of Yerevan (Armenia) caused widespread damage as the weaponry stored there exploded.
Russian firefighting aircraft were sent to Armenia.
While the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) army suggested that Armenian extremists could have attacked the depot, others accused the CIS army itself of destroying weaponry which it could not remove, following the Russian decree evacuating CIS troops from the Transcaucasus region [see p. 38827].
President Levon Ter-Petrosyan curtailed a visit to Greece to monitor the situation.
There were reports of casualties but no deaths, and people living nearby were evacuated; it was reported on April 9 that no chemical or nuclear weapons were stored in the depot.
Preliminary estimates valued the losses at up to 50,000,000 roubles.
In a separate incident, 30 armed men from the Azerbaijani Defence Ministry attacked a CIS military fuel depot near Baku on April 8; two people were killed.
Further fighting
There were accusations from both sides of violations of the ceasefire negotiated in March by Iran [see p. 38828].
Stepanakert in the Nagorny Karabakh enclave was reported to have been shelled from Shusha on April 7, and again on April 22.
Other towns in the enclave were reported to have been shelled or stormed by Azerbaijani troops.
Azerbaijani villages came under attack from Armenian forces, and a helicopter was shot down on April 11.
International peace efforts
Shuttle missions by Iranian deputy Foreign Minister Mahmud Va'ezi continued during April, earning praise for Iran's efforts from the UN and from Czechoslovakian Foreign Minister Jiri Dienstbier, the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE) 's envoy, who visited the region in early April [see p. 38828].
Azerbaijani and Armenian officials met under Iranian auspices, but Russian Foreign Minister Andrei Kozyrev was unsuccessful in arranging talks between Azerbaijani, Armenian and Nagorny Karabakh leaders.
On April 7 Azerbaijan and Iran agreed to establish diplomatic relations.
Death of Mkrtchyan
The chair of the Nagorny Karabakh Supreme Soviet, Artur Mkrtchyan [see p. 38733], was shot dead at his home on April 14.
Initial accusations of Azerbaijani involvement were countered by a Nagorny Karabakh Supreme Soviet Presidium statement of April 15 calling his death "an accident" .
Power struggle in Azerbaijan
It was reported on April 7 that acting President Yagub Mamedov had appointed Prime Minister Gasan Gasanov as Azerbaijani ambassador to the UN and made Gasanov's deputy, Feirus Mustafayev, the new Prime Minister.
The whole Cabinet immediately submitted their resignations, but Mamedov reportedly persuaded them to stay in their posts.
A report on Russian radio of April 26 said that there had been clashes in Shusha and Agdam between Azerbaijani government troops and armed units of the Azerbaijani Popular Front.
The disturbances and the ministerial changes were linked to the continuing power struggle in Azerbaijan [see also pp. 38827-28].
Former President Ayaz Mutalibov was reported on April 9 as claiming that the losses sustained at Khojali [see p. 38827]were exaggerated to discredit him.
Parliamentary crisis in Armenia
The Armenian parliament refused after two weeks of debates to adopt the government's economic reform programme, despite threats from President Ter-Petrosyan that not to do so would jeopardize the chances of IMF assistance.
It was reported on April 28 that Ter-Petrosyan had refused to accept the resignation of acting Prime Minister and Vice-President, Gagik Arutyunyan.
Opposition leader Paruyr Ayrykyan, chair of the National Self-Determination union, called in a television broadcast on April 28 for a new constitution to replace the current one, which he described as invalid because it was inherited from the Armenian Soviet republic.
EUROPE
GEORGIA
Foreign relations — Security situation
Hans-Dietrich Genscher, the than German Foreign Minister, visited Georgia on April 12-13, when diplomatic relations were established between the two countries.
Genscher announced a DM10,000,000 aid package and additional humanitarian aid to Georgia, where official statistics, reported on Radio Moscow World Service on April 8, showed that real incomes had fallen by 30 per cent in 1991 and that four-fifths of the population were living below the poverty line.
Georgia established diplomatic relations with Poland on April 28 and with Cuba on April 18.
A trade and co-operation agreement with Romania was initialled on March 26.
It was announced on April 3 that in talks between Foreign Ministers Russia and Georgia had begun preparations for a treaty.
Eduard Shevardnadze, the chair of the State Council set up in March [see pp. 38826-27], said that the treaty would "completely solve" the question of Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) forces stationed in Georgia.
Reverses for Gamsakhurdia supporters
It was announced on April 4 that Georgian government troops repelled supporters of deposed President Zviad Gamsakhurdia from the Black Sea port of Poti and regained control of neighbouring towns including Zugdidi.
Reports spoke of up to 13 deaths.
Troops were also reported to have blocked about 2,000 Gamsakhurdia supporters who were preparing to march on Kutaisi to proclaim it the capital of Georgia.
The curfew in force in Tbilisi was extended on April 1 for a further month [see p. 38827].
It was announced on April 19 that conscription into a Georgian army numbering 20,000 would begin on May 10.
The creation of an army under central command would mean the disbanding of irregular military formations on both sides, including the National Guard and the Mkhedrioni militia [see p. 38731].
South Ossetia
There were reports of shelling of the South Ossetian capital Tskhinvali during April.
Local leaders attributed it to a request made at the Russian Congress of People's Deputies by the Chair of South Ossetia's Supreme Soviet, Torez Kolumbegov, for the autonomous region in Georgia to be reintegrated in the Russian Federation [for January referendum in favour of reintegration see pp. 38731-32].
The situation was exacerbated by the reported withdrawal of Russian (formerly Soviet) Interior Ministry forces, seen as protection against Georgian nationalists.
A state committee on inter-ethnic relations and human rights chaired by Aleksandr Kavsadze was established by Georgia's State Council, it was reported on April 21.
The committee would have special responsibility for South Ossetia.
EUROPE
MOLDOVA
Quadrilateral negotiations over Dnestr Republic
Following the introduction of a state of emergency in Moldova on March 28 [see pp. 38828-29], Moldovan Interior Ministry troops on April 1 made a raid on the town of Bendery in the separatist self-proclaimed ethnic Russian "Dnestr Republic" which was reported to have left up to 18 people dead.
A meeting between the Foreign Ministers of Russia, Moldova, Ukraine and Romania which took place on April 6 in the Moldovan capital, Kishinev, brokered a ceasefire effective from April 7 and made recommendations over its implementation.
Moldova and Russia also established diplomatic relations at the meeting.
The ministers had expressed their concern over the conflict at the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE) meeting in late March [see p. 38841]and a meeting of "experts" from the four Foreign Ministries on March 31 to April 1 had prepared proposals for the Foreign Ministers' meeting.
At a further quadrilateral meeting between Foreign Ministers on April 17, it was decided to establish a commission to monitor the ceasefire.
The 160-strong commission would represent all four states.
Bilateral meetings were also held throughout April, especially between Romania and Moldova.
The fear of Moldovan and Romanian reunification had sparked the conflict in the Dnestr Republic.
Its President, Igor Smirnov [see p. 38657 for his election], said in an interview on March 30 that reunification had effectively already begun, and that the Dnestr Republic favoured a federative structure with Moldova, not complete separatism.
A state of emergency in the Dnestr Republic had been extended for a further two months.
On April 1 Russian President Boris Yeltsin had decreed the transfer of the 14th Army and other military units stationed in Moldova to Russian jurisdiction under the command of Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) C.-in-C., Marshal Yevgeny Shaposhnikov.
The Moldovan Defence Ministry described the decree as unlawful, since earlier accords had transferred the units of the 14th Army stationed on the left bank of the Dnestr (the Dnestr republic) to the CIS (i.e. not to Russia).
The 14th Army issued an ultimatum on April 2 that it would order troops to combat alert if the fighting in the area did not subside.
Moldova protested at "Russian interference" when Russia's Vice-President Aleksandr Rutskoi visited troops in Moldova on April 5.
Later, in the Russian Federation Congress of People's Deputies [for which see p. 38875], Rutskoi made a strongly nationalist speech proposing that Russia recognize the Dnestr republic and that the 14th Army become a "buffer force" between Moldovan and Dnestr forces.
The Supreme Soviets of the two separatist regions in Moldova — Gagauz and Dnestr — had sent appeals to the Congress of People's Deputies for recognition.
By the end of April, skirmishes were still being reported, while the second round of bilateral negotiations between Moldovan and Dnestr republic officials on April 28 ended inconclusively.
EUROPE
UKRAINE
Military issues
Black Sea Fleet and nuclear weapons
Negotiations between Ukraine and Russia over the future of the Black Sea Fleet began in Odessa on April 29, having twice been postponed.
The delegations were headed by the deputy chairs of the republican Supreme Soviets.
Controversy over the Fleet had flared up again when Ukrainian President Leonid Kravchuk's decree transferring to Ukrainian jurisdiction all military formations in the republic, including the Fleet which would form the basis of Ukraine's navy, had been answered by Russian President Boris Yeltsin's decree of April 7 transferring the Black Sea Fleet to Russia.
Unsuccessful talks between naval commanders in Sevastopol on April 8 ended, according to Russia's Radio, with the emergence of serious disagreements.
The presidential decrees were, however, suspended after telephone negotiations on April 9.
The dispute concerned what proportion of the Fleet should become Ukrainian and what should be handed over to the joint Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) strategic forces.
Ukraine claimed that only 10 per cent should become CIS property, as the cost of building and maintaining the fleet had been borne by Ukraine.
Ukrainian public opinion had been angered by the remarks of Russian Vice-President Aleksandr Rutskoi, as reported on April 4, that the Fleet should go to Russia or to the CIS.
Nuclear weapons
It was announced on April 14 that the transfer of tactical nuclear weapons from Ukraine to Russia to be dismantled, which had been suspended in March [see p. 38825], would resume following an agreement between Kravchuk and Yeltsin.
There were, however, reports that the Ukrainian government had denied such an agreement, although the transfer of weapons had been resumed, and the Defence Minister, Col.-Gen.
Konstantin Morozov signed a timetable for its resumption on April 21 on his return from the USA.
The April 6 decree subordinating the Black Sea Fleet to Ukraine also put strategic nuclear forces on Ukrainian territory under the operational command of the CIS strategic forces command until their dismantlement.
On March 25, Kravchuk issued a decree ordering the transfer of all Ukrainian conscripts in Azerbaijan and Armenia to Ukraine to be effected by May 20, 1992, and that of officers by 1993.
Morozov requested Marshal Yevgeny Shaposhnikov, C.-in-C. of the CIS armed forces, to facilitate negotiations with CIS military personnel administrations on the return of troops, it was reported on April 28.
EUROPE
ALBANIA
Berisha's election
Ramiz Alia resigned as President on April 3.
On April 6 the new 140-member People's Assembly elected by 96 votes to 35 (two more than the required minimum two-thirds of the Assembly) Sali Berisha, president of the Democratic Party (DP) as his successor.
There were no other candidates for the post and Berisha took office three days later.
Alia, 66, had been communist Albania's last leader, taking over power upon Enver Hoxha's death in 1985.
After the country's first multiparty elections of April 1991, a People's Assembly still dominated by the Albanian Party of Labour (PLA — later to become the Socialist Party of Albania — SPA) had returned Alia to the renamed post of President of the Republic [see pp. 38160; 38208].
Alia had remained neutral in the March 1992 election campaign.
The DP Information Office on April 3 denied foreign press reports that Berisha had requested Alia's resignation, or that Alia had asked for "immunity" in return.
Alexander Meksi on April 13 became Prime Minister at the head of a new DP-controlled government, which was formally sworn in on April 19.
All except four of the ministers in the new Cabinet were DP members.
The Republican Party (RP) and the Social Democratic Party (SDP) were each allocated one ministry — Transport and Communications and General Secretary to the Cabinet respectively.
The new Ministers of Justice and of Industry, Mining and Energy Resources were described as "independent intellectuals" .
Meksi was by profession a construction engineer and former restorer of medieval architecture.
The Information Office of the DP noted that there were some weak points in the Cabinet: "…
The possibilities of selection have not ended.
It was very difficult to find experienced people…in fields in which everything was destroyed for 50 successive years."
The outgoing Prime Minister, Vilson Ahmeti, had submitted the resignation of his non-party government to President Ramiz Alia on April 2.
Proposals for economic reform
On April 20 the People's Assembly approved the new government's economic reform programme.
Deputies from the SPA, in opposition for the first time, abstained from the vote.
Widespread privatization of farmland, state-owned companies and housing was planned, trade restrictions and controls on retail and wholesale prices would be lifted, and a reformed Bank of Albania would have functions clearly distinguished from the commercial banks.
In presenting the programme to the Assembly, Meksi said that it was hoped that the freeing of food prices would ease scarcities.
A new constitution, yet to be drawn up, would "include the principles of private property and economic private initiative" .
Meksi also outlined the government's foreign policy, plans for legal and educational reform, and measures to tackle inflation and above all the problem of public order.
This problem, he said, now included "foreign private firms and persons of a dubious nature,…pioneers of international speculation and criminality" .
New presidents of parliament and of DP
Pjeter Arbnori, was on April 6 elected president of the Albanian parliament.
A writer and poet, he had spent 25 years in prison camps, being released in 1990.
On April 16 Edouard Selami, a 30-year-old lawyer, was elected by DP delegates to replace Berisha as the party's president.
Visit by German Foreign Minister
German Foreign Affairs Minister Hans-Dietrich Genscher visited Tirana on April 22.
It was his third visit to Albania, and he met with Berisha, Meksi and a number of ministers.
Genscher told a news conference that Germany believed that Albania should be accepted into the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and the Council of Europe and should receive aid from the Group of 24.
Berisha told reporters that he had informed Genscher that Albania's most urgent needs were for aid for agriculture and for help in solving transport problems.
Discussions had included, Berisha said, "the war logic followed by Milosevic and the Serbian leading circles in solving the Yugoslav crisis" .
Deaths on Yugoslav border
A Defence Ministry representative said on April 16 that the recent deaths of "six young people and children" on the Yugoslavian side of the Albanian-Yugoslav border had been the subject of an official investigation.
He described the deaths as "premeditated murders" by the Serbian forces in the region of Tropoje, Kukes, and Pogradec and said that the victims had been unarmed economic migrants.
Ten people had been killed in such incidents since December, he said.
Alexander Meksi Prime Minister Rexhep Uka (DP) Deputy Chairman of the Cabinet and Minister of Agriculture and Food Bashkim Kopliku (DP) Deputy Chairman of the Cabinet and Minister of Public Order Vullnet Ademi (SDP) General Secretary of the Cabinet Genc Ruli (DP) Finance and Economy Alfred Sarreqi (DP) Foreign Affairs Kudred Cela (ind.)
Justice Safet Xhulali (DP) Defence Abdyl Xhaja (ind.)
Industry, Mining and Energy Resources Artan Hoxha (DP) Foreign Trade and Economic Relations Fatos Bitincka (RP) Transport and Communications Ilir Manushi (DP) Construction and Housing Tritan Shehu (DP) Health and Environmental Protection Ylli Vejsiu (DP) Education Dhimiter Anagnosti (DP) Culture, Youth and Sports Osman Shehu (DP) Tourism Dashamir Shehu (DP) Labour, Emigration and Social Assistance Ind. — independent
New Albanian Cabinet
EUROPE
BULGARIA
Budget — Economic measures
On April 9 the National Assembly adopted the 1992 budget presented by the government in March [see p. 38830].
However, a further plank in the government's economic reform policy — freeing prices — came under attack from the trade unions.
The Confederation of Independent Trade Unions in Bulgaria (CITUB) and the Podkrepa ( "Support" ) Labour Confederation walked out of talks with the government on April 14, accusing it of presenting them with a fait accompli over price liberalization.
A staged introduction of free prices was envisaged, including projected maximum prices for necessities and minimum prices for farm produce to prevent monopoly purchasing.
The trades union confederations demanded a forum for dialogue on the issue with the government, whereas the government said that there had already been consultations and that it could not "be expected to cease adopting decisions on crucial and pressing problems because of artificially created procedural obstacles" .
At the end of March 20,000 miners had gone on strike supported by Podkrepa.
However, on April 2, after talks with the government, strike action was called off, becoming "token action" pending the acceptance of a nine-point agreement providing for the immediate payment of overdue wages and negotiations on the future of the industry.
Property restitution — Privatization law
On April 9 the government adopted a decree restoring ownership of land and property nationalized during 1947-62 by acts of the Council of Ministers.
The bill was opposed by the Bulgarian Socialist Party (BSP).
On April 23 the Bulgarian National Assembly adopted the privatization bill which had been under discussion since February [see p. 38776].
A Privatization Agency (which would be appointed by parliament and Cabinet) would supervise the process.
The bill received support from all parties, although with reservations from the BSP.
The bill gave preferential treatment to employees buying shares in their companies, and allowed creditors to take shares on a debt-for-equity basis.
All participants would have to reveal the origin of their funds.
Owners of companies nationalized in 1946-62 which had become part of larger companies would have a prior right to subscribe for shares.
Foreign relations
Czechoslovak President Vaclav Havel made his first visit to Bulgaria on April 6 to sign a 10-year friendship and co-operation treaty.
The treaty contained clauses to promote economic co-operation, including Czechoslovakian access to the Black Sea.
Formation of third Agrarian party
On March 29 there was a further split among the agrarian parties.
Those members of the Nikola Petkov Bulgarian National Agrarian Union (BZNS) who had remained in the Union of Democratic Forces (UDF) after part of the BZNS split off to form a separate party before the October 1991 elections [see p. 38539]now set up their own separate BZNS within the UDF.
Consequently, Bulgaria had three Agrarian Parties: the United Bulgarian Agrarian Party (BZNS-E), the BZNS outside the UDF under Anastasiya Moser [see p. 38776]and the BZNS within the UDF.
CZECHOSLOVAKIA
Havel's decision to seek further term
Vaclav Havel, Czechoslovak President since December 1989, announced on April 14 that he would seek a further term as President "not because I want to be President at any cost…but because I want to contribute towards pushing through certain values" .
He reiterated his belief that it was necessary for Czechoslovakia "to remain a common state for both nations" and for the "rapid and extensive transformation of our economy" to be continued.
On April 15 the federal parliament approved refinements to the presidential election process.
The changes provided for a second poll to be held within 14 days of the first round of voting in the Federal Assembly if no candidate won at least 60 per cent of the vote.
In the second round 50 per cent would be sufficient, but if this were not achieved the process would be repeated with new candidates.
Czech property restitution law
The parliament of the Czech Lands in mid-April approved a new restitution law allowing for the return of property in the Czech Lands confiscated between 1945 and 1948.
It was estimated that 25,000 people would be affected.
Federal legislation had been approved in May 1991 on the restitution of property expropriated after 1948 [see p. 38207].
Tax reforms
During April the Federal Assembly approved a range of tax reforms to come into effect from January 1993.
These provided for the introduction of value added tax (VAT) at 5 per cent on essential goods and services and at 23 per cent on other goods.
Finance Minister and Deputy Premier Vaclav Klaus said that the introduction of VAT would involve average price rises of 7 per cent but was essential for the transformation of the economy.
The legislation also provided for a maximum personal income tax rate of 47 per cent and for corporation tax of 45 per cent.
Real estate taxes, inheritance and gift taxes and environment taxes were also to be introduced in place of the previous system of "profits taxes" — levied on state-owned industry — and turnover taxes.
IMF standby arrangement
On April 3 the International Monetary Fund (IMF) approved a standby credit of 236,000,000 special drawing rights (US$322,000,000) for Czechoslovakia over the next 12 months.
The previous SDR1,250.8 million standby credit had covered the 14 months from January 1991 [see pp. 38468-69].
Czechoslovakia had rejoined the IMF in September 1990.
Foreign relations
On April 1 in Moscow Havel and his Russian counterpart Boris Yeltsin signed a 10-year bilateral treaty of friendship and co-operation [initialled in February — see p. 38777].
Its preamble referred to "the inadmissibility of the use of force against Czechoslovakia in 1968" and "the following 20 years of unjustified presence of Soviet troops on the territory of a sovereign state" .
On the same day an agreement was signed between the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) and Czechoslovakia settling remaining issues concerning the withdrawal of Soviet troops from Czechoslovakia (completed in June 1991).
The first agreement of its kind to be concluded by the CIS with a former Warsaw Pact country, it provided for the sale of real estate belonging to the former Soviet army in Czechoslovakia and for the use of the proceeds to make good the environmental damage done on those sites as well as to pay for the housing of returning soldiers in Russia.
After nearly 10 hours of debate the Federal Assembly on April 22 approved by 144 votes to 33 with 47 abstentions the friendship treaty signed with Germany in February 1992 [see p. 38777].
Havel paid official visits to Japan and South Korea on April 21-28 in a bid to win further trade and investment support for Czechoslovakia.
On April 24, trade and cultural agreements were signed with Japan, and the Japanese government pledged to waive import taxes from May 1 on many Czechoslovak imports (which consisted primarily of hops and glass).
In South Korea, with which Czechoslovakia had established diplomatic relations in 1990, an agreement promoting bilateral economic co-operation was signed on April 27 as were investment and double taxation agreements.
On April 3 and 14 respectively defence co-operation agreements were signed with France and Austria.
These provided for training co-operation and for assistance in modernizing the Czechoslovak army.
Czechoslovak Prime Minister Marian Calfa met US President Bush on April 10 during a visit to the USA.
EUROPE
ESTONIA
New Foreign Minister
Jaan Manitski, a Swedish-born businessman with dual citizenship, was endorsed by the Supreme Council on April 6 as the new Foreign Minister in place of Lennart Meri, whose resignation had been announced on March 23.
Meri had been criticized for his management of the Foreign Ministry, especially for having dismissed two deputies in February without consulting the Prime Minister.
Manitski, a member of the panel of foreign experts advising the Estonian government on its economic reforms, was (like Meri) a member of the Estonian Congress, the parallel "parliament" elected by citizens of pre-war Estonia and their descendants [see p. 38420].
Election law — Citizenship issue
The Supreme Council on April 6 passed a law on elections to the Riigikogu, which was to be Estonia's parliament (replacing the Supreme Council) once a new constitution had been adopted.
However, a resolution on implementation of the new election law was delayed over the issue of whether non-citizens resident in Estonia could vote or not.
The existing law stated that only those who had been granted citizenship would be enfranchised.
There were stringent language qualifications for citizenship applications, and objections to this had been raised by the Russian Democratic Movement in Estonia (RDME).
The government attempted to dispel confusion by allowing from April 6 a certificate of language proficiency to be presented up to nine months after applying for citizenship.
The position of current holders of posts which would require Estonian citizenship was also under discussion.
The Supreme Council decided on April 20 that a referendum would be held in May or June on the draft constitution prepared by the Constitutional Assembly [see p. 38420].
A clause stipulated that only current citizens would be entitled to participate, however.
This could debar over one-third of the population from voting, since, according to the current regulations, only citizens of pre-war Estonia and their descendants were automatically entitled to citizenship, and the long application process for others would not be completed in time.
EUROPE
LATVIA
Citizenship issue
The controversy over criteria for granting Latvian citizenship flared up again at the end of March, when President Anatolijs Gorbunovs proposed that a referendum be held on the issue [for October and November 1991 controversy see p. 38585].
The referendum would decide residence and language qualifications, but only citizens of pre-1940 Latvia and their direct descendants would be allowed to vote in it.
A statement from the Russian Foreign Ministry of March 24 compared the limited franchise in the referendum with the recent referendum on reforms in South Africa [see p. 38798].
The population of the republic was 48.2 per cent non-ethnic Latvian.
Language law
Amendments to the language law were adopted by the Supreme Council on March 31, in the face of opposition from Russian-speaking deputies.
The amendments, although acknowledging the right of minorities to use their mother tongue, guaranteed education only in Latvian, and also stipulated that in institutes of higher education, instruction from the second year would be provided in Latvian only.
Language testing for all employees in both state and private sectors would be introduced from May 5.
EUROPE
LITHUANIA
Government crisis
On April 21, 10 ministers issued a statement to the chair of the Supreme Council, Vytautas Landsbergis, referring to Prime Minister Gediminas Vagnorius's "dictatorial work style" , placing in doubt their future co-operation with him and asking the Supreme Council to examine ministerial and Prime Ministerial functions.
Vagnorius failed to give an explanation for the crisis to the Supreme Council before the end of April.
Deputy Prime Minister Vytautas Pakalniskis and Finance Minister Elvyra Kunceviciene resigned on April 18.
On April 28 Vagnorius issued a "revised" version of a decree of April 7 to replace 30-50 per cent of civil servants.
The new version claimed that this was for reasons of efficiency rather than a political move, although Vagnorius had expressed concern about former communist links and obstruction of policy.
Accusations of links with KGB
It was reported on April 7 that Lithuania's Supreme Council had voted by a majority of 70 to suspend the mandate of Deputy Virgilijus Cepaitis.
On March 25 Cepaitis had been convicted by the Supreme Court of having "deliberately co-operated with the KGB [former Soviet state security committee]" , an accusation first made in November 1991.
The accusations against Cepaitis, who was re-elected as leader of the Independence Party on Jan. 18, 1992, had caused a split in the party.
The Kaunas branch renamed itself the Lithuanian Conservative Union on March 21.
On April 9 a parliamentary inquiry determined that former Lithuanian Prime Minister Kazimiera Prunskiene had "knowingly collaborated with the KGB" .
Prunskiene said that she had merely been forced to give the KGB an account of her foreign visits.
Relations with Byelarus
Lithuania and Byelarus concluded a bilateral trade and economic co-operation agreement on April 2.
Negotiations for the treaty had also touched on border issues, and an official statement had confirmed the existing border.
On a visit to Lithuania on March 25, the chair of Byelarus's Supreme Soviet, Stanislas Shushkevich, had dismissed as "a joke" a statement made in March by Byelarussian Defence Minister Lt.-Gen.
Petr Chaus, reportedly making territorial claims on Lithuania.
EUROPE
HUNGARY
Second Compensation Law
On April 7 the Országgyülés (National Assembly) approved the Second Compensation Law providing for partial compensation for state-caused damage to property between May 1, 1939, and June 8, 1949.
[See pp. 38161; 38304-05; for 1991 First Compensation Law on expropriated property; the amount of compensation under both laws would be calculated as if the total claim were being made on the basis of one law.]
Legislation on civil servants' neutrality
On March 31 the Országgyülés approved legislation on the neutrality of civil servants.
It stipulated that neutrality should be guaranteed by banning them from accepting party political positions or speaking publicly on behalf of political parties.
Opposition demonstration
On April 25 some 15,000-20,000 demonstrators attended a rally outside the Országgyülés building in Budapest organized by Jozsef Torgyan, leader of the rump of the Independent Smallholders' Party (FKgP — see p. 38777 for February split within party).
Torgyan said that the government had betrayed the anti-communist revolution, and called for its resignation, while demonstrators also protested over high unemployment and inflation.
Closure of unprofitable state concerns
On April 1 bankruptcy legislation came into effect obliging all unprofitable concerns to close.
The Guardian of April 18 reported that nearly 2,000 state-controlled companies had been forced to file for bankruptcy after an April 16 deadline for the repayment of their debts.
Among those affected were coal mines in the south around Pécs and the metallurgical works in Ozd, 120 km north-east of Budapest.
Unemployment had risen from 80,000 to 400,000 over the previous 12 months and was expected to exceed 500,000 by the end of 1992.
EUROPE
POLAND
Defence Minister controversy — Walesa's visit to Germany
President Lech Walesa on April 9 called for the dismissal of National Defence Minister Jan Parys, highlighting a controversy over control of the armed forces.
On April 6 Parys had claimed at a televised meeting with army officers that politicians were preparing to use the army for "political intrigues" , offering officers promotion in return for their support.
Parys "put himself at the disposal of" Prime Minister Jan Olszewski, which was interpreted as a resignation offer, but Olszewski gave him leave of absence, appointing Romuald Szeremietiew, Parys's deputy, as acting Defence Minister.
A commission to investigate the circumstances surrounding Parys's remarks was appointed by the Sejm (lower house of the National Assembly) at Walesa's request on April 24 and given access to the Presidential Chancellery.
It replaced an investigative commission appointed by Olszewski immediately after the incident.
The right-wing daily Nowy Swiat on April 9 claimed that contingency plans to introduce martial law in Poland in the case of a threat to security had been elaborated by the President's staff.
Jerzy Milewski, head of the National Security Office at the Presidential Chancellery, said that the plans had only been discussion documents, but on April 13 Walesa admitted that plans existed.
The confrontation was due to the ambiguity in Poland's Constitution about whether supreme responsibility for security lay with the President or with the Cabinet.
Parys, who had become Poland's first civilian National Defence Minister on his appointment in the new government of December 1991, had provoked controversy by forcing the former Defence Minister, Vice-Adml.
Piotr Kolodziejczyk, to retire from military service [see p. 38735]and by making a number of senior appointments without consulting the President.
Walesa said on April 7 that Poland "had still not yet settled the relation between a civilian Minister of Defence and professional military matters" .
Coalition negotiations
Unsuccessful attempts were made in April to broaden Poland's governing coalition, and to give it a stronger majority in parliament which would enable it to push through its budget proposals and economic reforms.
The opposition Democratic Union (UD), Liberal Democratic Congress (KLD) and Polish Economic Programme (PPG) formed a "small coalition" to negotiate the formation of a "10-party coalition" with the minority governing coalition.
Talks broke down on April 22 over the allocation of government posts, although on April 11 it had appeared that a coalition could be formed when all parties agreed that the budget deficit should not exceed 5 per cent gross domestic product (GDP).
Walesa said after the failure of the talks that he would consider forming a non-party government with greater presidential powers along the lines of the French system.
Meanwhile on April 22 the widely read Gazeta Wyborcza newspaper published a scathing attack on Walesa which implied that he was unable to cope with his responsibilities.
At a press conference on April 27, Walesa hinted that he might ask the government to resign, and mentioned possible candidates for Prime Minister.
Artur Balazs, Minister without Portfolio responsible for contacts with political parties, resigned on April 24 because of differences with Olszewski over widening the coalition.
Constitution law
On April 23 the Sejm passed by 313 votes to 47 with 14 abstentions a law on the procedure for adopting a new Polish constitution.
The constitution would be ratified in a national referendum once it had been adopted by the National Assembly.
This accommodated Walesa's demands that the constitution be decided by referendum; the consequences of a negative vote were not spelled out.
Walesa's visit to Germany
Walesa's official visit to Germany from March 29 to April 2 followed the signing of a friendship treaty on June 17, 1991 [see p. 38306].
Walesa was accompanied by Foreign Minister Krzysztof Skubiszewski and Finance Minister Andrzej Olechowski.
In a welcoming speech in Bonn on March 30, German President Richard von Weizsäcker said that Poland's membership of the European Communities (EC) was in Germany's interests.
Walesa suggested to German Defence Minister Gerhard Stoltenberg and to a meeting of the Bundestag foreign affairs Committee that a second EC and a second NATO should be created to aid the transition of central and eastern Europe to a market economy.
The suggestion caused embarrassment, as, according to the Independent of April 24, there had been no prior consultation and Walesa was unable to expand on it.
Walesa also travelled to Bavaria, where he laid a wreath at the Dachau former Nazi concentration camp, and to Berlin, and left via Frankfurt-an-der-Oder where he held talks on the problems of delays at the border crossings.
When meeting German businessmen, Walesa repeatedly stressed the need for foreign investment in Poland.
Germany was Poland's largest economic partner, representing 52 per cent of Poland's trade with EC countries.
However, potential investors, as Chancellor Helmut Kohl noted on March 31, were reluctant to commit funds in the current climate of political and economic instability in Poland.
Prime Minister's visit to USA
Olszewski began a four-day official visit to the USA on April 12, accompanied by Finance Minister Olechowski.
After meetings with President Bush, Secretary of State James Baker and Defence Secretary Richard Cheney, Olszewski said that he was encouraged by assurances of private investments.
However, Bush had told reporters that US aid to Poland was hampered by US commitments to the former Soviet republics.
Debt rescheduling — Polish bank failure
The Ministry of Finance concluded bilateral agreements with individual members of the Paris Club of creditor countries during March and April to reduce Poland's foreign debt, under the general agreement on debt reduction signed in April 1991 [see p. 38107].
On March 31 it was announced that the Katowice Commercial and Credit Bank had become the first Polish bank to go bankrupt.
The bank had taken over the shares of the owners of the Art-B company when they were arrested for fraud in August 1991 [see p. 38399]and was said to owe 6,000,000 million zlotys ($430 million) to the central bank (NBP).
Observers linked the bankruptcy with the new policies of recently appointed NBP chair Hanna Gronkiewicz-Waltz.
EUROPE
ROMANIA
Sentences on former politburo members — Party alignments
On April 20 the Higher Court of Justice overturned the December 1991 rulings of the Higher Military Court of Justice on members of the former Romanian Communist Party politburo; the original sentences on manslaughter charges were cancelled and the charges, in connection with the suppression of the December 1989 uprising in Timisoara, were changed to complicity in or attempted "aggravated murder" ; sentences of up to 16 years in prison were handed down.
[for December 1991 sentences on other officials see p. 38687].
Ion Totu, in charge of propaganda under Ceausescu, hanged himself at his home after learning of his 16-year sentence.
On April 28 the Supreme Court rejected an appeal by former Col.-Gen.
Iulian Vlad, the former head of the Securitate (secret police), instead increasing his prison term from nine to 12 years, at the request of the prosecution.
The charges were amended from "genocide" to "complicity in aggravated murder" .
The Supreme Military Court, meanwhile, on April 23 rejected an appeal to allow Ceausescu's son, Nicu Ceausescu, to leave prison on medical grounds.
The human rights organization Amnesty International was supporting his case, claiming that he was suffering "life-threatening" diseases which could not be treated in prison.
Ceausescu was serving 16 years for "manslaughter" .
An appeal from the Prosecutor General to change the sentence to "complicity in aggravated murder" was postponed until May 11.
Political party alignments
The National Liberal Party (NLP) announced on April 11 that it was leaving the Democratic Convention (DC), the election alliance of 14 opposition parties formed for the February 1992 local elections.
There had been dissent over the issue of whether to contest the forthcoming parliamentary elections on separate party lists.
It was proposed that the NLP might form an electoral alliance with the National Peasant Party and the Social Democratic Party (the two other parties formed, like the NLP, before the Second World War).
The split in the ruling National Salvation Front (NSF) of March 1992 was formalized when the NSF-22 December group (supporting President Ion Iliescu) held its founding conference on April 7, electing as its leadership a 25-strong provisional national council and adopting a programme which described the NSF-22 December as a "social-democratic" party.
Meanwhile, the NSF led by former Prime Minister Petre Roman elected a new executive bureau on April 9 and condemned the NSF-22 December branch, saying that it did not exist as a party, but only "expressed an intention" .
Run-off local elections
In voting held in five counties on April 5 and 11 to complete Romania's first multiparty local elections held in February, the NSF won 88 out of 217 available seats; the Democratic Convention [see above]won 51 and the Agrarian Democratic Party 28.
In Cluj county, out of 45 seats, most seats were won by the nationalist Romanian National Unity party (14 seats); the Hungarian Democratic Union of Romania (HDUR) won 9 seats.
Visit of ex-King
On April 25-27 former King Michael made his first successful visit to Romania since his forced exile in 1945 [for his expulsion in December 1990 see p. 37922].
He had been invited to attend the Easter celebrations by the Orthodox Church.
Opposition leaders hailed the visit, calling for a referendum on the restoration of the constitutional monarchy.
Michael attended Easter Mass in Bucharest, and visited family tombs at the monastery in Curtea de Arges in western Romania.
The King, visiting as a private citizen, was reticent about his political ambitions, saying only that he wanted to help Romania.
His visit was reported on Romanian television.
Foreign relations — Treaty with Germany
On April 21 the Romanian and German Foreign Ministers signed in Bucharest a 10-year bilateral treaty on Friendly Co-operation and Partnership in Europe.
Similar to agreements signed by Poland and Czechoslovakia with Germany, it provided binding protection for the 100,000-strong German ethnic minority in Romania.
During a visit to Bucharest on March 4, Horst Waffenschmidt, German Minister of State at the Interior Ministry had pledged DM20,000,000 in assistance to Romania's German ethnic minority in 1992.
On April 3 a new trade agreement between Romania and the USA was signed.
It included mutual most favoured nation status.
EUROPE
EBRD
Annual meeting — Accession of CIS republics
The European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) held its first annual meeting in Budapest, Hungary, on April 13-14.
In its first year it had provided funding totalling ECU621,000,000 for 20 projects in central and eastern Europe, for which an overall total of ECU2,100 million of investment was made (ECU1=US$1.24065 as at March 30, 1992).
Several east European governments were critical of the EBRD's performance.
The Czechoslovak Finance Minister Vaclav Klaus declared: "So far the role of the EBRD in our part of the world has been no more than marginal." 
The EBRD's founding charter defined its role as providing market-rate loans and equity investments.
It stipulated that at least 60 per cent of lending had to go to the private sector, and no more than 40 per cent to infrastructure projects.
At a meeting with US Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady on April 12, the EBRD's president, Jacques Attali, proposed that the bank be allowed to make loans at concessionary rates for restructuring the region's poorest economies and for the conversion of military factories to civilian use.
Brady, however, rejected the idea.
In a significant change of emphasis the governors' meeting on April 13-14 agreed to abolish the ceiling of 6 per cent of bank lending which could go to the former Soviet Union (corresponding to the Soviet Union's 6 per cent holding in the EBRD), and to allow up to 40 per cent of the EBRD's lending to go to former Soviet republics.
Shortly before the meeting the board of governors had approved EBRD membership for the 11 members of the Commonwealth of Independent States.
Russia would assume two-thirds of the former Soviet Union's 6 per cent shareholding, with smaller amounts held by Armenia, Azerbaijan, Byelarus, Kazakhstan, Kirgizstan, Moldova, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Ukraine and Uzbekistan.
(The three Baltic republics had joined the EBRD in January 1992.)
As of mid-May Uzbekistan and Moldova had completed the relevant formalities (on April 30 and May 5 respectively).
Georgia was in the process of negotiating membership.
The position of Yugoslavia, a founder member, was left unresolved.
EUROPE
EUROPE
Central European Co-operation Committee
The ministers responsible for foreign economic co-operation of Czechoslovakia, Hungary and Poland (known as the Visegrad Three), meeting in Budapest on April 17, announced that they had formed a Central European Co-operation Committee.
It would co-ordinate the economic adjustments needed for the three countries to join the European Communities (EC)[for December 1991 association agreements see p. 38680].
The Three were negotiating a trilateral free-trade zone to be implemented over a 10-year period, which it was hoped could be signed on July 1.
EUROPE
EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
Maastricht ratification timetable
Maastricht ratification process
On April 7 the European Parliament (EP) approved by 226 votes to 62 with 31 abstentions a resolution in effect approving the Maastricht Treaty by calling on member countries of the European Communities (EC) to ratify it as soon as possible.
[For Maastricht Treaty on European Union, agreed in December 1991 and signed in February 1992, see pp. 38657-59; 38785.]
The Belgian, Greek and Italian parliaments had made EP approval of the treaty a precondition of their approval.
In the months since the December Maastricht summit complications had arisen in several EC countries, not least because of uncertainties surrounding general elections in Italy and the United Kingdom; Belgium had formed a government only in March, following its November 1991 election.
In Germany the support of the opposition Social Democrats (SPD) was needed if the required two-thirds majority were to be gained in the Bundestag (lower house of parliament), and if the treaty were to be passed by the Bundesrat (upper house) where the SPD held control.
Despite initial SPD threats to block ratification, SPD leaders said on March 9 that their desire for improvements did not preclude approval of the treaty.
A meeting of the 16 Land (state) governments on March 12 demanded constitutional changes reinforcing their role in EC decision-making as a precondition for their approval.
In France, the Constitutional Court ruled on April 9 that constitutional amendments were required before ratification in order to permit EC regulation of a single EC currency and of visa policy and to allow residents from other EC countries to vote in local elections.
On April 22 the French Council of Ministers accordingly approved draft legislation adding two paragraphs to the 1958 Constitution.
This revision first required approval by a simple majority of both houses of parliament.
Secondly, both houses sitting jointly as a "congress" in Versailles would have to approve the revision by a 60 per cent majority.
Alternatively the revision could be put to a referendum rather than to the "congress" .
In Ireland and Denmark, referendums were due to be held in June.
Portuguese accession to ERM
The Portuguese escudo joined the exchange rate mechanism (ERM) of the European monetary system (EMS) on April 6.
The escudo was fixed at a central rate of 178.735 escudos to the ECU.
This corresponded to its previous notional rate in the ECU currency basket, where the central rate for other currencies thus remained unchanged.
[For table of rates at the last ECU realignment, when sterling joined the ERM in October 1990, see p. 37782.]
The escudo entered the "broad band" of the ERM, and would be allowed to fluctuate by 6 per cent either side of the central rate, like the Spanish peseta and the UK pound sterling.
The currencies of eight other EC countries were in the "narrow band" (maximum fluctuation 2.25 per cent up or down); the Greek drachma remained outside the ERM.
Realignment among EP parties
On April 7 the 32-strong UK Conservative group in the EP joined the Christian Democratic European Popular Party (EPP) group, bringing its numbers to 162 as compared with 180 for the largest group, the Socialists.The Conservatives had asked to join the EPP group after the 1989 European elections but protracted negotiations had resulted from Belgian, Italian and Netherlands Christian Democrats scepticism about the Conservative commitment to Europe.
EUROPE
BALTIC STATES
Co-operation moves
Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania undertook a number of commitments on Baltic co-operation in late March and April.
The Prime Ministers, meeting in Tallinn, the Estonian capital, on March 26, signed (i) a communiqué on Baltic trade relations with member states of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), urging the conclusion of a free-trade agreement and the abolition of import-export tariffs;(ii) a free-trade agreement abolishing practically all trade restrictions from May 1;(ii) an agreement on the immediate introduction of a common visa regime for the three Baltic states; and (iv) an agreement on further economic co-operation within the framework of the Baltic Council.
The Prime Ministers also decided to continue monthly discussions on the introduction of national currencies (to replace the rouble).
The Interior Ministers signed on April 21 in Riga, the Latvian capital, a mutual co-operation treaty covering criminal investigation, terrorism, and the consequences of natural disasters.
They called for separate bilateral agreements with each CIS member state, rather than a common agreement with the CIS Interior Ministries, and also decided to keep Russian as the language for their joint negotiations.
EUROPE
DENMARK
At an extraordinary congress in Vejle, Jutland, on April 11 the Social Democrats, in opposition since 1982, elected Poul Nyrup Rasmussen as party chair; Rasmussen won 359 votes, against 187 cast for Svend Auken, the party chair since 1987.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
LIBYA
Imposition of UN sanctions
Mandatory UN sanctions against Libya came into force on April 15, under UN Security Council Resolution 748 of March 31 [see p. 38839].
The Libyan government had failed to meet the deadline set by Resolution 748 for compliance with Resolution 731 (approved on Jan. 21 — see pp. 38743; 38791).
The three governments directly involved in the dispute with Libya — France, the United Kingdom and the USA — watched with some concern the response of other UN member states as sanctions came into force.
Although air traffic to Libya was halted, land routes, especially through Egypt, remained open.
The crucial issue of commercial relations with Libya, a major oil producer, had not been mentioned directly in Resolution 748.
Both before and after April 15 attempts continued, especially through the mediation of the Arab League, to find a solution to what was increasingly viewed as a political rather than a legal dispute, centring on whether Libya would agree to extradite two men indicted by the UK and US authorities in November 1991 in connection with the December 1988 Lockerbie bombing of a Pan Am airliner [see p. 38599 for this and for separate French efforts to extradite other Libyans].
By the end of April, in spite of various declarations emanating from Libya as to circumstances under which the Lockerbie suspects, Abdel Baset Ali Mohammed al-Megrahi and al-Amin Khalifa Fhimah might agree to face a judicial hearing abroad, the two men remained in Libya.
Arab League mediation efforts
In the Arab League's inconclusive efforts to broker a compromise solution President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt and King Hassan of Morocco played leading roles.
On April 1 the Arab League deplored the passing of Resolution 748 and called on the international community to find a compromise solution which would avoid "dangerous consequences" .
At an emergency Arab League meeting in Cairo on March 22 [see p. 38839]a seven-member committee had been formed to investigate possible solutions to the dispute.
It comprised the Foreign Ministers of Egypt, Syria, Tunisia, the Mauritanian Youth and Sports Minister, and the representatives at the Arab League of Morocco, Algeria and Libya.
Expectations in the following week that the Libyan government might hand the two men over to the Arab League, and thus pre-empt the approval on March 31 of Resolution 748, were disappointed.
The Libyan government instead emphasized in a Foreign Ministry statement of March 26 that it would co-operate in the implementation of Resolution 731, that the UN and the Arab League should work towards a "political solution" to the dispute, based on international law and the UN Charter, and that it would accept the forthcoming verdict by the International Court of Justice in the Hague (ICJ).
The Libyan representative at the ICJ was quoted on the same day as saying that the two suspects would remain in Libya "at the disposal" of the Arab League.
The US White House spokesman Marlin Fitzwater had meanwhile (according to Le Monde of March 26) said that it would not be sufficient for Libya to hand the two men over to the Arab League; Libya had to comply with all the demands that had been referred to in Resolution 731 [see ICJ verdict below].
Demonstrations and expulsions
On April 2 hundreds of protesters in Tripoli succeeded in entering the Venezuelan embassy and burned down part of it (the Venezuelan permanent representative at the UN, Diego Arria, having been president of the Security Council for the month of March).
Stones were thrown at the Russian and Austrian embassies and there were also demonstrations outside the embassies of France, Belgium and Germany.
The USA had had no diplomatic relations with Libya since 1981, and had suspended commercial ties in 1986.
The UK had no direct representation in Tripoli, although two British officials worked at the Italian embassy to represent British interests.
The Libyan government announced that it would take reciprocal action against any countries expelling Libyan diplomats.
By the last week of April more than 10 countries, including Belgium, Czechoslovakia, Germany Hungary, Japan, Spain, and Sweden, had been notified by the Libyan authorities that their presence in Libya had to be reduced within 14 days.
Final UN demands
On April 3 the UK Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd said with reference to the dispute that "the military option is not being excluded but it is not being planned" .
Vladimir Petrovsky, a former Soviet Deputy Foreign Minister, who was UN Under-Secretary-General for political affairs, arrived in Tripoli on April 7, as a UN special envoy.
He was reported to have presented five demands; if Libya acceded to these demands the imposition of sanctions would be forestalled.
According to "diplomatic sources" (as cited in The Independent of April 4), apart from handing over the Lockerbie subjects, Libya was being asked by Petrovsky to (i) provide the UK government with details of its contacts with the Irish Republican Army (IRA);(ii) make a written renunciation of "terrorism" ;(iii) close five training camps used by the Palestinian Abu Nidal and other groups; and (iv) extradite an individual who had allegedly been involved in the 1988 attack on the Greek cruise ship City of Poros.
The seven-member committee of the Arab League met for the first time in Cairo, also on April 7.
In a message to UN Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali the committee according to the Middle East News Agency on April 9 forwarded a message from Libya: the Libyan authorities would not object to the two men placing themselves at the disposal, via the Arab League, of the UN Secretary-General.
This was interpreted by observers as meaning that a trial in a "neutral country" would be acceptable.
[For earlier Libyan proposals concerning a trial in a neutral country see p. 38839.]
The Arab League committee met again in Rabat, Morocco on April 12, under the chairmanship of King Hassan, and recommended that the implementation of Resolution 748 be postponed while alternative solutions were examined.
Verdict of ICJ
On April 14, the day before the UN sanctions came into force, the ICJ delivered its verdict on the case which Libya had presented on March 3 [see p. 38839].
The ICJ declared that it was "not called upon to determine any of the questions" that had been raised by the Libyan submission to the Court, and would therefore not be taking any restraining "provisional measures" , such as had been sought by Libya.
The Libyan submission to the ICJ had claimed that since Libya had complied with the Montreal Convention of 1971 (concerning actions threatening the safety of civil aviation), the UK and the USA were under a legal obligation to desist from the use of "force or threats" against Libya and from "all violations of the sovereignty, territorial integrity and the political independence of Libya" .
The ICJ statement of April 14 cited Resolution 748 (which had been approved after the Libyan submission had first been made to the ICJ) and said that obligations of the various parties with respect to that resolution "prevail over their obligations under any other international agreement" .
The ICJ also sought to clarify the demands made of Libya in Resolution 731 by referring back (as did Resolution 748) to the joint declaration issued on Nov. 27, 1991, by the UK and US governments.
This declaration [see p. 38599]had declared that the Libyan government "must surrender for trial" the two Libyans accused of the Lockerbie bombing, "accept responsibility for the actions of Libyan officials" , "disclose all it knows of this crime" and co-operate in providing access to witnesses, documents and material evidence, and "pay appropriate compensation" .
While the ICJ judges accepted that Libya, along with many other countries, had a law prohibiting the extradition of its nationals, there was majority agreement that the two UN Resolutions were in accordance with Chapter VII of the UN Charter (Articles 39 to 51, covering UN Security Council "action with respect to threats to the peace, breaches of the peace and acts of aggression" ) and should therefore be complied with.
Further developments
The UN Security Council's Libya sanctions committee on April 16 agreed on a mechanism by which any future humanitarian flights to and from Libya might be approved.
On April 17, following the ICJ ruling [see above], Ibrahim Lagwell, the lawyer representing the two Libyans, suggested in an interview with the US television network ABC that if "a just trial could be held with legal guarantees" , the USA or the UK might be acceptable settings for such a hearing.
The Libyan leader, Col. Moamer al Kadhafi, met with President Mubarak of Egypt for three hours of talks at an Egyptian army regional headquarters at Sidi Barrani, 150 km from Marsa Matrouh on Egypt's Mediterranean coast, on April 21.
The Libyan Foreign Affairs and International Co-operation Secretary Ibrahim Bashari claimed on April 27 that the air embargo had led to the deaths of "hundreds of children" who would otherwise have received medical treatment abroad or who had been deprived of vaccines which had to be imported.
After a meeting in Cairo on April 28-29 the council of the Arab League reiterated its previous position, noting with approval that Libya had condemned international terrorism and accepted UN Resolution 731.
The meeting was reported to have seen differences between Syria, Iraq, Sudan and Libya on the one hand, which were pushing for a more intransigent Arab League position, and the Gulf states on the other, which spoke out for "international legitimacy" (according to Radio Monte Carlo on April 30).
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
ALGERIA
Creation of Consultative Council
On April 22 the High Committee of State (HCS) announced the names of the 60 members of a new National Consultative Council.
The new body met for the first time, in the building of the suspended National Assembly, on April 25.
The Consultative Council (majlis al-istishari) had been announced in a HCS decree of Feb. 4.
Composed of individuals equipped to advance opinions on HCS proposals and without formal party political allegiances, it had no legislative powers.
It would meet once a month, and its mandate would extend until December 1993.
The chair of the Consultative Council was Redha Malek (who in 1977 had become Minister of Information and Culture under President Boumedienne).
A National Human Rights Monitoring Centre, with Abderezzak Barra as its president, was inaugurated on April 11 following the dissolution of the Human Rights Ministry in February [see p. 38791].
The Centre was composed of 26 individuals, and was to report to the HCS president and to "initiate actions when contraventions of human rights are noticed or brought to its attention" .
Charges against FIS leadership
On April 12 two leaders of the Islamic Salvation Front (FIS), Abassi Madani and Ali Belhadj, were formally charged by a military court in the town of Blida with inciting armed rebellion and sabotage, and setting up illegal armed militias.
They were both being held at a military prison in the town of Blida, 50 km south of Algiers.
Undisclosed charges were made against five other imprisoned FIS leaders.
On April 15 an FIS leader, Mohammed Said, was sentenced in his absence to 10 years in prison.
He had been charged with the distribution of documents harmful to national interests.
Detained in July 1991, he had been freed on bail in November and had apparently slipped bail.
On April 21 another FIS leader, Abdelkader Hachani, was sentenced by the accusation chamber of the Court of Algiers to remain in preventive detention, having been charged with "incitement…to crimes against state security" .
On April 29 the Supreme Court dismissed the FIS's appeal against its dissolution, which had been decreed in March [see p. 38840].
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
PALESTINIAN AFFAIRS
Violence in Gaza
Four Palestinians were killed and as many as 80 wounded in clashes with Israeli paramilitary border police on April 1 in Rafah refugee camp in the Gaza Strip.
The fighting reportedly began when members of the Red Eagles Palestinian group launched a grenade attack on an army observation post.
The group escaped in a car and the killings occurred as the border police tried to stop it.
The UN Security Council on April 4 unanimously condemned the "acts of violence at Rafah" and called on Israel to abide by the 1949 Geneva Convention on the protection of civilians in time of war.
Three Palestinian "collaborators" were executed by Hamas in Gaza City on April 3.
Announcement of reopening of Bir Zeit university
The Israeli Defence Ministry announced in mid-April that Bir Zeit University, near the town of Ramallah on the West Bank, would be allowed to reopen gradually.
The university had been closed since 1988 because of intifada-related violence and unrest on campus.
All other Palestinian higher-learning institutions had been reopened after having been closed at various times since the intifada started.
Crash of Arafat's aircraft
Yassir Arafat, the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) chair, survived when his private aircraft crash-landed during a sandstorm in southern Libya on April 7.
Of the 15 people on board, three died and five were critically injured.
The aircraft remained undiscovered for 15 hours.
Speculation during that time that Arafat had been killed focused attention on the lack of an obvious replacement for Arafat as PLO chair and Palestinian leader.
With confirmation of his survival thousands of Palestinians in the occupied territories took to the streets, chanting "Arafat is alive" .
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
ISRAEL
Withdrawal of Levi's resignation
A serious crisis within the ruling Likud was narrowly averted by a compromise agreement on April 5 which induced David Levi, the Foreign Minister and Deputy Prime Minister, to withdraw his March 29 threat to resign from the government [see p. 38835].
Although Levi promised to work to unite the party "in order to heal the wound" , commentators claimed that the affair had exposed deep divisions in the party which might have a major impact on the June 23 general election.
Levi, whose support base was within the large Sephardi community, had suffered a humiliating defeat in internal Likud elections held in early March, and accused the Prime Minister and Likud leader, Itzhak Shamir, of promoting ethnic discrimination against his community.
Following the announcement of his resignation the Levi and Shamir camps entered into negotiations, eventually resulting in the April 5 compromise.
This was widely regarded as a triumph for Levi, who received a guarantee that he would retain his present Cabinet position in any future Likud-led government, and a written assurance that his supporters would receive increased representation within Likud institutions, the government, Knesset (parliament) committees and the Jewish Agency.
Elections of Labour candidates — Other pre-election developments
The opposition Labour Party held internal elections on April 1 to select and rank its election candidates.
In sharp contrast with the internal Likud elections of March when only members of the central committee voted, more than 100,000 Labour members cast a vote on April 1.
As was widely expected, Itzhak Rabin, who had been elected as party leader in February, and Shimon Peres, whom Rabin had replaced as leader, emerged as first and second respectively on the party list.
The Guardian of April 3 reported that a large proportion of the candidates selected were "young and doveish" .
In another pre-election development Likud sources announced on March 23 that the party had decided "not to reserve safe slots" in the next Knesset for Finance Minister Itzhak Modai's faction of the party.
On April 7 Modai attended the inaugural conference of his new party, the New Liberals.
The former Soviet Jewish dissident Nathan Sharansky, who emigrated to Israel in 1986 [see pp. 34187-88], announced on April 17 that he would form a political party to contest the June elections.
Robert Golan, chair of the association of Soviet immigrants, announced on March 31 that he had formed a new party, the Movement for Israel's Revival.
Allegations of human rights abuses
The Israeli human rights group B'Tselem issued a report on April 1 which accused the government of allowing security personnel routinely to torture Palestinian political prisoners.
The report alleged that at least 5,000 Palestinian prisoners of the 25,000 imprisoned in 1991 had been tortured.
During April accusations were levelled that the Israeli Defence Forces (IDF) were operating a "shoot-to-kill" policy against Palestinian activists in the occupied territories, with undercover army squads deliberately executing street-level activists.
In mid-April newspapers published interviews with an Israeli couple who had witnessed non-uniformed soldiers shooting Palestinian youths in the West Bank village of Dura.
IMF compensatory financing
The IMF announced on March 27 that it had approved a drawing by Israel equivalent to SDR<T =178,640,000 (about US$243 million) under the compensatory and contingency financing facility.
The drawing related to a shortfall in earnings from exports and services in 1990-91 attributable to the uncertainty created by the Gulf War.
Establishment of diplomatic relations — Visit by Bulgarian Prime Minister
Israel established diplomatic relations with the former Soviet republics of Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan and Armenia during April.
A report on Voice of Israel radio on April 23 stated that Israel had established relations with 12 of the 15 former Soviet republics.
It was announced on March 9 that Israel and Guyana were to restore diplomatic relations.
Israel and Angola formally established diplomatic relations on April 16.
Israel Broadcasting Authority announced on April 22 that Nigeria had decided to re-establish diplomatic relations.
Filip Dimitrov, the Prime Minister of Bulgaria, visited Israel on April 17-20 for talks with Shamir.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
MIDDLE EAST
Fifth round of peace talks
The fifth round of bilateral Middle East peace talks between Israeli, Lebanese, Jordanian, Palestinian and Syrian delegations took place in Washington on April 27-30 [see pp. 38837; 38786 for fourth round of bilateral talks held in Washington in February-March].
Commenting on the progress of the latest round of negotiations, the Middle East Economic Digest of May 8 said that all four sets of talks had finished procedural details and "begun to tackle the real issues" .
Nevertheless, the report went on, "agreement still seems a long way off" .
In the Israeli-Palestinian talks, the Israeli delegation formally tabled a set of proposals for the holding of municipal elections in the West Bank and Gaza Strip and an offer to permit Palestinian control of local health services.
Although the offer was not completely rejected by the Palestinian side, they made it clear that it fell short of Palestinian aspirations for a legislative council to take over control of the occupied territories from Israel [see p. 38837 for Palestinian self-government proposal tabled at the fourth round of talks].
Israel's talks with Syria made little headway on the major dispute between the two countries, centred on Israel's occupation of the Golan Heights.
However, negotiations reportedly took place in a better atmosphere following Syria's announcement on April 27 of its decision to end travel restrictions for the country's Jewish community [see p. 38886].
The talks between Israel and Jordan were held after weeks of renewed speculation about the possible declaration of a Jordanian-Palestinian confederation.
However, the talks were reported to have centred on the issue of water rights over the Jordan and Yarmouk rivers.
Talks between Israel and Lebanon focused on conditions for a possible Israeli withdrawal from southern Lebanon.
The US State Department announced on April 21 that the sixth round of bilateral talks would be held in Rome, although no date had been set.
Israel's acceptance of Italy as a venue was widely regarded as a concession.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
SYRIA
Assad's Gulf tour — Human rights issues
Visit by Assad to GCC countries
The Syrian President, Hafez al-Assad, visited the six countries of the Gulf Co-operation Council (GCC — namely Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates) between April 19 and 22.
Assad rarely made foreign visits and commentators regarded the tour as significant.
A report in the Financial Times of April 23 suggested that while the tour was designed specifically to bolster Arab support for Libya in its confrontation with the UN [see p. 38883], its broader purpose was to press for a united Arab front in future dealings with the West, including the ongoing Middle East peace talks.
Assad's other goal was to provide a fresh impetus to the Damascus Declaration initiative on defence co-operation, signed by Syria, Egypt and the GCC states in March 1991 in the immediate aftermath of the Gulf war [see pp. 38116-17].
Implementation of the agreement had been stalled by hesitancy among the GCC states to allow the stationing of Syrian and Egyptian troops in the Gulf.
Assad was reported to have been disappointed when a meeting of the Damascus Declaration signatories scheduled for March in Qatar had been postponed until May.
Reported imprisonment of human rights activists
The International Herald Tribune of April 4-5 reported that 17 Syrian human rights activists had recently been sentenced to prison terms ranging from three to 10 years.
According to the report, the New York-based Lawyers' Committee for Human Rights had obtained evidence that the 17 had been charged with "vague and broadly worded offences" under a 1965 government decree which outlawed actions "opposing any of the goals of the revolution, or advocating any disorderly acts or publishing false news with the aim of causing disorder" .
The 17 were reported to have been arrested after the Committee for the Defence of Democratic Freedoms and Human Rights in Syria had issued leaflets in December 1991 criticizing the Dec. 2 referendum which gave overwhelming approval to Assad's nomination for a fourth term as President [see p. 38695].
Ending of restrictions on travel for Jews
Syria announced on April 27 that it had ended restrictions on foreign travel for the country's 4,500-strong Jewish community.
The move was widely interpreted as a gesture towards Israel, the announcement coinciding with the start of the fifth round of Middle East peace talks in Washington [see p. 38885].
Jews had previously been unable to travel as complete families, and had to post bonds of US$1,000 per person when going abroad.
The government also announced that restrictions had been lifted on Jews buying and selling property.
However, Syrian Jews were still banned from travelling to Israel.
On April 22 it was reported that two Jewish brothers, Eli Swed and Selim Swed, had been released from prison.
The two had been imprisoned in 1982 after attempting to travel abroad.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
YEMEN
Relations with Saudi Arabia
On April 21 the Yemeni Deputy Information Minister Amakal Alim Susawa confirmed that Yemen had made a written offer to Saudi Arabia for discussions, after the latter had informed at least four foreign oil companies that they were trespassing on Saudi property.
Diplomatic sources in the capital San'aa, cited in the French press on April 19, had claimed that Yemen had recently protested to Saudi Arabia over military movements by Saudi forces north of the border with Yemen — a border which had never been clearly delineated.
In the Treaty of Taif of 1934 Yemen had agreed with the Saudis that the provinces of Assir, Najrane and Jizzane belonged to Saudi Arabia.
The treaty had been renewed for 20 years in 1974 but the Yemeni government had indicated that it would oppose renewal in 1994.
International oil companies had started exploration with the permission of the unified Yemeni government created in 1990.
The Saudi Arabian ambassador to Yemen and an adviser were rescued by security sources on April 20 after being held hostage for 18 hours.
Their armed Yemeni captor had hoped for a US$1,000,000 ransom.
Violence in San'aa
A wave of violence shook San'aa and Aden for two days from March 21 following clashes between rival football supporters assembled in San'aa to watch teams from northern Yemen play teams from the south.
There were two deaths and some 20 people were injured.
Sections of the Yemeni press linked the trouble to agitation by the main Islamic party, the Yemeni Rally for Reforms (YRR).
The Minister of Justice Abdul Wasi Ahmed Sallam was injured on April 26 by gunmen who opened fire on his car in San'aa.
The Yemen Socialist Party (YSP) reported the assassination of two of its cadres, Mohammed Loutf Massoud, killed in Taez on March 17, and Mouslah al-Shahwani, shot in San'aa on March 30.
Polygamy law
A new law on personal status was passed on March 30 which, among other things, legalized polygamy throughout Yemen.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
IRAQ
Destruction of nuclear complex
The Iraqi government on April 7 agreed to UN demands to demolish the Al-Atheer nuclear weapons complex [see p. 38838].
On April 24, International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) officials confirmed that five of the six buildings and 90 per cent of the equipment at Al-Atheer had been destroyed.
The sixth building, an explosives testing bunker, was filled with concrete.
Despite this progress the IAEA team was unable to obtain full details of the Iraqi nuclear weapons programme and thus to assess any potential for its revival.
During their April visit (the 11th inspection) the IAEA inspectors sought information particularly on Iraq's source for supplies of 100 tonnes of maraging steel, an alloy used to build uranium enrichment centrifuges, and 20 carbon fibre rotors, equipment used in enrichment.
The government, however, refused to release a list of the materials and equipment suppliers, or a list of the technicians who helped establish the programme.
Alleged trading of US food aid for weapons
The International Herald Tribune of April 28 reported that the US government had for more than two years had evidence that Iraq had diverted food purchased under a US$5,500 million aid programme and exchanged it for Soviet-made arms in Jordan, Turkey and the Soviet Union, including nuclear technology according to a confidential US document dated Oct. 13, 1989.
In addition aid money from the food programme, which by 1989 was worth $1,300 million per year to Iraq in loan guarantees, was channelled through the Atlanta branch of the Italian-owned Banca Nazionale del Lavoro, officials of which had been indicted for a separate multi-million dollar fraud involving arms for Iraq in 1989 [see pp. 37425-26].
However, the US administration stepped up the food aid programme in spite of the Lavoro scandal and the suspicions of the Department of Agriculture.
Controversy was current in the USA over its aid policy towards Iraq prior to the invasion of Kuwait in August 1990.
An official quoted in a report in the Los Angeles Times of April 26 referred to a secret meeting, at which he was present, only two months before the invasion, when senior administration members decided to continue funnelling assistance, including food aid, intelligence data and advanced weapons technology.
Iraqi rejection of UN border report
On April 16 the government officially rejected the UN proposal to reinstate the 1923 border with Kuwait, giving Kuwait six extra oilfields and dividing the port of Umm Qasr between the two countries [see p. 38788].
On the same day the UN special border commission adopted the proposals which would go into effect once approved by the Security Council.
London-based Iraqi opposition parties appealed in late April to the UN Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali to postpone UN approval since the proposed new border would sow the seeds for future disputes with Kuwait.
Iraqi fighter aircraft deployment — Military moves relating to Kurdish "safe haven" 
The Iraqi government, responding to an incursion by Iranian fighter aircraft against Iranian dissidents in northern Iraq [see p. 38887], on April 5 resumed air patrols along the Iraqi border.
Deploying fighter aircraft for the first time since the 1991 Gulf war, with some flights north of the 36th parallel (i.e. over the Kurdish "safe haven" area), the Iraqis also built up in early April their deployment of ground forces, surface-to-air missiles and radar tracking equipment directed north of the 36th parallel, apparently seeking to capitalize on US inaction over "skirmishes" with the Kurds.
They subsequently pulled back in the face of a strong warning on April 14 from France, the United Kingdom and the USA.
Postponement of Kurdish elections
Elections for a regional assembly in Kurdistan, intended to strengthen the cohesion of the eight-party Kurdistan Front, were postponed twice from April 3 to April 30 and then to May 17.
Reported Iraqi moves against southern Shias
Opposition groups in Tehran and London accused government forces of stepping up attacks on Shia strongholds in the southern marshlands in mid-April.
London-based dissidents said that this was the third offensive since the beginning of March.
The Tehran-based Supreme Assembly of the Islamic Revolution in Iraq (SAIRI) claimed that Shia forces had repulsed attacks on Amara and Nasiriyah.
Fighting also occurred in Basra, the centre of the 1991 Shia revolt [see pp. 38081-82].
SAIRI's head, Ayatollah Seyyed Mohammad Baqr al-Hakim, met Jalal Talabani, the leader of the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan (PUK), in Tehran in mid-April.
Vatican humanitarian mission
Three members of the Vatican's humanitarian aid organization Cor Unum visited Iraq from April 4 to assess the needs of the population.
Deputy Prime Minister Tariq Aziz welcomed the team and stated that the visit called for the raising of the UN-mandated economic sanctions.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
IRAN
First round of elections
The first round of voting to elect a new Majlis ash-shoura ( "consultative council" , or parliament) took place on April 10.
The result represented a victory for the "moderate" current associated with President Hashemi Ali Akbar Rafsanjani, already apparently favoured by the pre-election screening which eliminated about a third of the prospective candidates — most of them reportedly belonging to the more radical faction.
In the first round of voting 133 candidates received a sufficiently large proportion of the vote (at least 30 per cent) to win seats in the 270-member Majlis.
Of these 133 new Majlis members, it was estimated that some 55 were supporters of Rafsanjani and that many of the remainder were reported to be independent candidates likely to align themselves with the President's faction.
Some constituencies were multiparty ones — the Tehran constituency being an extreme example, with voters being asked to name 30 candidates of their choice.
Five constituencies were the preserve of the country's four recognized religious minorities — Zoroastrians, Jews, Assyrian Christians and Armenian Christians — which together had 21 candidates standing for election.
Out of a total of 196 constituencies nationwide, 193 had been able to announce (on April 16) some or all of their winning candidates.
This was the fourth legislative election since the Iranian revolution in 1979, previous ones having been held in March 1980, May 1984 and April 1988.
The authorities reported that almost 19,000,000 people, or 65 per cent of those eligible, had voted.
A second round of voting, in constituencies which had not been able to complete their quota of candidates, was announced for May 8; in this round, the candidates with most votes would be declared elected, even if they received less than the 30 per cent required for election in the first round.
Although there were technically no political parties in Iran, foreign commentators identified two major factions.
The followers of Rafsanjani's policy of economic liberalization and a greater openness towards the exterior were referred to in Farsi as the Rouhanyat (sometimes described to as the Combatant Clergy Association).
Those clerics and politicians remaining closer to the rhetoric of the immediate post-revolutionary years — emphasizing opposition to the USA, the struggle against "Zionism" , the export of the Islamic revolution, centralized control of the economy and consumer subsidies to protect the poorer classes — were referred to as the Rouhanyoun (translated as the Combatant Ulema Association).
This "radical" group had ceased to be the predominant voice in other political institutions — such as the Council of Guardians and the Assembly of Experts — but had continued to command a majority of some 60 per cent in the outgoing Majlis.
There had been four women members in the outgoing Majlis, and in the April 10 vote for the first time a women was elected to represent a constituency outside Tehran (in the holy city of Mashad).
At least 12 other women candidates went through to the second round of voting.
Pre-election screening of candidates
Prospective parliamentary candidates were screened by executive committees made up of local officials and eight selected "trustees" .
These committees had been created on March 12, under the auspices of the Interior Ministry and as laid down in the electoral law.
The Rouhanyoun faction protested as some 1,100 prospective candidates were eliminated by the committees on the grounds that they did not meet minimum educational and other standards.
Official figures were that 2,876 had been approved as candidates by April 2, including 52 women.
Former Prime Minister and leader since 1961 of the Freedom Movement of Iran (FMI), Mehdi Bazargan, on March 30 and April 14 claimed in Tehran that the elections had not been free and that his group had not been allowed to participate.
Eight FMI members who had been arrested in June 1990 were among 108 prisoners who on April 13 were reported to have been freed on April 1.
Bombing of Mojahedin base
As the week-long election campaign got under way, a base of the exiled opposition movement, the Mojahedin-e Khalq ( "People's Combatants" ), at Ashraf, Iraq, was attacked by some 10 Iranian airforce bombers on the morning of April 5.
The Ashraf base was near the town of Al Khalis, some 70 km north-east of Baghdad and 90 km from the Iran-Iraq border.
The military wing of Massoud Rajavi's Mojahadin-e Khalq, the National Liberation Army (NLA), had for some time operated out of the base with the permission of the Iraqi government.
The NLA was reportedly virtually integrated as a unit of the Iraqi army and had 3,000 well-trained troops.
Anti-aircraft artillery shot down one of the Iranian aircraft and captured two crewmen.
The planes were reported to have used cluster bombs and also to have strafed roads and buildings.
Rajavi on April 7 claimed that one person had been killed.
The Iranian authorities said that the raid was in retaliation for a raid on two Iranian villages near the border town of Qasr-e-Shirin on April 4, in which four "Iranian tribesmen" had been killed.
The April 5 raid was the first by Iran against Iraqi territory since the truce which had effectively ended the Iran-Iraq war in August 1988; the border between Iran and Iraq had remained closed since that time.
Iraq made a formal complaint to the UN Security Council and, on April 12, to the Iranian government, about the raids.
Iran on April 6 denounced, in a letter to the Security Council, Iraq's toleration of the operation of "terrorist mercenaries" , and demanded that Iraq should stop supporting them from inside Iraqi territory.
On April 14 a report on the attacks drawn up by the UN offices in Tehran and Baghdad was submitted to UN Security Council.
On April 5, within hours of the bombing, Iranian supporters of the Mojahadin-e Khalq protested outside Iranian embassies in eight west European countries and in Ottawa, Canada, and on April 6 in Canberra, Australia.
Damage to embassies was particularly severe in Bonn and Stockholm, and in New York five Iranians occupied Iran's mission to the UN for several hours.
Take-over of Abu Musa island
On or around April 15, Iranian forces moved from their base on Abu Musa island to take control of its school, police station and desalination plant.
Abu Musa island, at the head of the Gulf almost mid-way between the Iranian coast and the coast of Sharjah, was ruled by the Emir of Sharjah until 1971.
Shortly after the creation of the United Arab Emirates in that year, the Iranian and UAE governments concluded an agreement allowing Iran to station troops there.
Since 1971 it had been administered jointly by Iran and the UAE, with offshore oil revenues shared between Iran and the rulers of the Sharjah emirate.
Iranian Foreign Minister Ali Akbar Vellayati on April 22 denied that Iran planned to expel Arab residents from the island.
Other reports suggested that Iranian and Arab expatriate workers from non-UAE countries had been compelled to leave.
Abu Musa had a population of some 700 UAE citizens.
The UAE was reported to have reacted in a low-key manner to the Iranian takeover, coming as it did at a time when the Gulf states were hoping for improved relations with Iran.
Two other islands covered by the 1971 agreement, Large Tunb and Small Tunb, were believed to be uninhabited.
Execution of Bahai
Representatives of the 300,000-strong Bahai community in Iran notified the UN Human Rights Commission on April 9 of the execution without trial of an Iranian Bahai, Bahman Samandari, a 52-year-old economist.
He had reportedly been executed on March 20, the first Bahai to be executed since December 1988.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
EGYPT
Foreign Minister Amr Moussa returned to Cairo on April 26 after a tour of the Gulf States of Qatar, Oman, the United Arab Emirates and Bahrain, involving discussions over the Damascus Declaration; President Hosni Mubarak had visited both Tunisia and Algeria on April 11 and in Tunis had met with President Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali and Yassir Arafat, the chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO).
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
JORDAN:
King Hussein, who had issued a decree in July 1991 repealing most of the martial law regulations introduced after the 1967 Arab-Israeli war [see p. 38359], formally abolished all martial law provisions on April 1; all security offences, including espionage and treason, would now be dealt with by state security courts.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
KUWAIT
The trial opened in Kuwait City on April 11 of 40 people accused of collaboration with the Iraqi forces during their occupation of Kuwait in 1990-91 [see also p. 38308].
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
MOROCCO
On March 26 Noubir Amaoui, secretary-general of the Democratic Confederation of Labour (CDT)— a trade union grouping close to the opposition Socialist Union of Popular Forces (USFP)— was arrested at the CDT offices in Casablanca in connection with an interview he had given to the Spanish newspaper El País on March 11.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
SAUDI ARABIA
The US State Department on April 20 denied that the US government had approved the transfer by Saudi Arabia in the late 1980s and early 1990s of US-supplied military equipment to Iraq, Syria, and Bangladesh — as a recent report by the Los Angeles Times had alleged.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
WESTERN SAHARA
The former Pakistani Foreign Minister Sahabzada Yaqub Khan was on March 24 appointed director of the UN Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara (Minurso), replacing Johannes Manz, whose resignation had taken effect on Dec. 31, 1991 [see pp. 38692-93].
INTERNATIONAL
IMF — World Bank
Spring meetings — Backing for former Soviet republics
The World Bank and International Monetary Fund (IMF), meeting in Washington on April 26-28, approved massive financial backing for the former Soviet republics on the condition that they took rigorous action to privatize and stabilize their economies.
The funds earmarked included a US$6,000 million stabilization fund for the rouble, part of a multilateral package estimated to total US$24,000 million.
IMF Managing Director Michel Camdessus had said on April 15 that the republics were expected to need more than US$100,000 million over the next four years.
This would include loans, investments and other funding from the IMF, the World Bank, individual countries and private investors.
Membership
The IMF approved on April 27 the principle of membership for the former Soviet republics (except for Azerbaijan, whose status remained pending).
Lithuania was admitted formally to membership of the IMF on April 29, as the 157th member country.
The IMF also announced on April 20-22 that applications had been filed by Croatia, Slovenia and Bosnia-Hercegovina.
The World Bank governors also on April 27 approved membership for 13 of the republics and were to vote on Azerbaijan and Turkmenistan in May.
G-10 activation of General Agreement to Borrow
The Group of Ten, actually comprising 11 leading industrialized nations (the G-7 plus Belgium, Netherlands, Sweden and Switzerland), paved the way for the commitment to the US$6,000 million stabilization fund by agreeing on April 27 to activate the General Arrangements to Borrow (GAB).
This special facility, initially set up effective 1962 and enabling the 11 to lend reserves to the IMF, was designed to meet balance-of-payment problems so serious that they could threaten the stability of the entire international monetary system.
It had not been used since 1978, but became necessary because of the extent of the financial needs of the former Soviet republics, added to other world financial problems.
The stabilization fund would be held in reserve to support rouble parity if Russia agreed to the IMF's reform programme and took effective steps to apply it.
Requirement for transition to market economies in former Soviet Union
Finance ministers and officials taking part in the meetings made it clear that the whole package of financial aid was conditional on the former Soviet republics pressing ahead to establish market economies and taking prescribed measures for stabilization.
The republics would need to create the legal framework and conditions for market economies.
Other measures would have to include reducing budget deficits, curbing monetary growth to get inflation under control, reforming the agricultural sector, limiting the role of government, and establishing stable exchange rates.
IMF officials reacted calmly to a statement by Russian President Boris Yeltsin on April 28 that Russia would not let the IMF dictate to it.
Camdessus said that "President Yeltsin has perfectly understood the methods of the IMF" and that the organization never dictated, but agreed on programmes with the countries concerned.
Russia's First Deputy Prime Minister, Yegor Gaidar, was in Washington for the IMF and World Bank meetings and to brief Group of Seven (G-7 — leading industrialized countries) and other ministers on Russian policies.
Expected World Bank lending to former Soviet republics
World Bank officials said that the Bank expected to be making loan commitments of US$4,500 million to $5,000 million a year by the middle of 1994 to former Soviet republics.
In a first phase, in the 12 months starting in June 1992, loans worth some $2,500 million were expected to be provided for essential imports.
Later funds were expected to go to reshaping oil and agricultural production among other sectors.
About half of the loans were planned for Russia, by far the biggest of the republics.
IMF reports on Baltic republics
The IMF released studies showing what the Financial Times of April 29 called "a grim prognosis" for the economies of the Baltic republics — Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania.
Citing disruption in the three republics' trade with other former Soviet republics, shortages of energy and raw materials, and inflationary problems, the studies predicted sharp falls in output.
IMF report on World Economic Outlook
In its World Economic Outlook report issued on April 22, the IMF scaled back its forecast of world economic recovery in 1992, but predicted stronger growth in 1993.
It projected global economic growth in 1992 at 1.4 per cent.
In forecasts issued in 1991, the IMF had predicted growth of nearly 3 per cent in 1992.
Its new report said that total growth was expected to reach 3.6 per cent in 1993.
Figures for 1991 showed a negative figure, or fall, of 0.3 per cent.
The report pointed to relatively strong growth of over 3 per cent in many developing countries in 1992, but a continuing fall in output in eastern Europe and the former Soviet republics.
G-7 meeting
A statement from the G-7 Finance Ministers after their meeting on April 26 emphasized the need for governments to control fiscal deficits.
Sharp exchanges were reported earlier between US and German officials over German fiscal policy, but the policies of individual countries were not explicitly singled out in the final statement.
US Deputy Treasury Secretary David Mulford was reported to have criticized the deficit run up in financing German unification, in comments rejected by Finance Minister Theo Waigel and other German officials.
US officials urged cuts in both German and Japanese interest rates.
In one of the few specific references to a member country, the G-7 statement said that the decline of the yen "was not contributing to the adjustment process" .
In what was also seen as a reference to Japan, countries with large surpluses and declining growth were urged to consider measures to strengthen domestic demand.
INTERNATIONAL
GATT
Uruguay Round impasse
Top-level meetings between US and European Community (EC) leaders at the end of April failed to resolve the disputes over agricultural exports which were blocking agreement on a "new world trade order" in the protracted Uruguay Round of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT).
US President George Bush and EC Commission President Jacques Delors both expressed hope and commitment, but reported no concrete progress, after meeting in Washington on April 22.
Trade ministers from the EC, Canada, Japan and the USA, at an informal meeting in Urabandai, Japan, on April 25, were said by Japan's International Trade and Industry Minister, Kozo Watanabe, to have agreed on the urgency of resolving the impasse, but also failed to announce any breakthrough.
The GATT Uruguay Round negotiations, begun in 1986, became deadlocked by the US-EC dispute over subsidies and other supports for farm exports.
GATT Director-General Arthur Dunkel had set mid-April 1992 as the latest in a series of target dates for completing the talks.
After more than five years of talks, outstanding difficulties centred on (i) whether it could be acceptable under GATT rules for the EC to make direct payments to farmers to compensate them for cuts in subsidies (a key part of plans to reform the EC's Common Agricultural Policy);(ii) the volume of EC grain exports; and (iii) EC demands for limits on US exports of cereal substitutes to the EC.
Other contentious issues involved US proposals to exempt key service sectors, including shipping and telecommunications, from freer trade rules.
In many fields, however, negotiations were awaiting the outcome of the dispute over farm trade.
The Bush-Delors meeting, one of the regular twice-yearly US-EC summits, also included Prime Minister Anibal Cavaco Silva of Portugal, as current President of the EC.
Both sides said afterward that "new ideas" had been put forward.
Bush said that they were committed to reaching an early agreement and Delors emphasized that there was too much at stake to allow failure.
Before the Washington meeting, US and EC officials had met near London's Heathrow Airport on April 14 for talks, kept secret at the time, to try to narrow the gap between them.
Japanese criticism of USA and EC
The Financial Times of April 16 reported that Japan had sent confidential letters to both the USA and the EC expressing concern about their failure to comply with the Uruguay Round timetable.
Watanabe was reported to have written to US Representative for Trade Negotiations Carla Hills and EC Commission Vice-President Frans Andriessen, expressing disappointment over US and EC proposals for exemptions for trade in services, and over their failure to submit detailed proposals for industrial tariff reductions as they were supposed to by the end of March.
GATT annual report
The annual growth of world trade in 1991 slowed down for the third successive year, according to the annual report of the Director-General of GATT, issued on March 18.
Measured by volume the annual increase was just 3 per cent(the smallest increase since 1983), and measured by value it was 1.5 per cent (the smallest increase since 1985).
Trade was still growing faster than output, however.
The USA overtook Germany as the leading exporter of merchandise, with a 7.5 per cent rise in exports, and the USA was also the world's biggest merchandise importer, with Germany second and Japan third in both categories.
The highest overall trade growth was in Asia, the report said.
Sharp falls in both exports and imports were estimated for eastern and central Europe and the former Soviet Union states.
INTERNATIONAL
OPEC
Oil ministers' meeting
Oil ministers of the 13 member countries of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) met on April 24 in Vienna to discuss output levels and price targets.
Held against a background of unexpectedly firm oil prices in the period since the organization's Feb. 15 quota decision [see p. 38794], the meeting was brief and reportedly uncontroversial, ending with agreement to maintain the overall output quota of 22,982,000 barrels per day (bpd).
The full summer ministerial meeting scheduled for May 21 would review the position and policy for the remainder of the year.
The marker price of Brent light crude had moved to over US$19 per barrel earlier in April, and the OPEC representative basket of crude oils averaged $17.73 per barrel in the period immediately preceding the meeting.
Although this was still well below the OPEC target price of $21, it represented a success for the decision to restrict production since February, Saudi Arabia in particular having accepted a lower quota (of 7,887,000 bpd).
Market conditions were seen as buoyant, and OPEC Secretary-General Subroto said that the member countries were satisfied with the market's response and with the operation of the February agreement.
There had nevertheless been some significant overproduction against individual country quotas, apparently mainly by Iran (an estimated 3,400,000 bpd against a quota of 3,184,000) and Kuwait (whose 812,000 bpd quota reflected artificially low output levels in the aftermath of the destruction of production facilities in the Gulf War).
OPEC's overall average production in March had been 23,200,000 bpd, according to Subroto, although some industry estimates put it nearer 23,500,000 bpd.
In advance of the meeting it had been anticipated that Iran would seek a lower overall quota, in the region of 22,000,000 bpd, to drive prices up to nearer $25 per barrel.
(Industry analysts suggested that prices at this level were likely in the short term only if Libya withdrew supplies in retaliation against Western countries over the current sanctions issue — see p. 38883 — but conceded that the general trend of the market was upwards.)
Saudi Arabia, however, was seen as resistant to further restrictions of its own output.
Meeting with non-OPEC producers
OPEC country representatives met their counterparts from 12 non-OPEC oil producing countries (the so-called NOPEC group) on April 23 in Vienna, when OPEC president Jibril Aminu reportedly urged the adoption of common positions at the forthcoming UN Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED, or the "Earth Summit" ) in Rio de Janeiro in June.
INTERNATIONAL
NATO
East-West Defence Ministers' meeting
The Ministers of Defence of the NATO countries and of the former member States of the Warsaw Pact, including most of the republics of the former Soviet Union, met in Brussels on April 1 and agreed on a wide-ranging programme of co-operation on military and security matters.
The gathering, the first of its kind, paralleled the meetings of the North Atlantic Co-operation Council (NAC) held since December 1991 [see p. 38698].
The NATO Secretary-General, Manfred Wörner, commented that "to see defence ministers who were in a sense at the heart of the Cold War confrontation sitting in a spirit of partnership around the same table is a remarkable and moving event" .
He said that the purpose of the meeting, and similar East-West gatherings, was to "to deepen our relationship, enhance security and contribute to the evolving process of a Europe whole and free" .
A final statement declared that the aim of the joint measures was "to increase mutual understanding and confidence among us" and "to provide practical assistance on defence-related matters at a time of profound transformation and transition" .
The erstwhile East-West adversaries agreed, among other things, to hold discussions on joint defence planning, strategy, training and exercises.
The NATO countries agreed to help the former communist countries to reorganize their armed forces, specifically to advise on the role of armed forces in democracies, practical aspects of defence management and methods for the environmental clean-up of defence installations.
All parties agreed to work towards further reductions in conventional arms and troop levels, to be formalized in a new multilateral agreement (referred to as CFE-1A, the successor to the CFE agreement signed in November 1990 — see p. 37838).
They also agreed on the importance of the "safe, responsible and reliable control" of nuclear arsenals.
Although the four former Soviet republics with nuclear weapons — Russia, Ukraine, Byelarus and Kazakhstan — were still in dispute over the fate of the former Soviet nuclear arsenal, they reiterated their intention to dismantle most of these weapons and to concentrate the remainder in Russia.
[For Ukraine's agreement to resume transfer of tactical nuclear weapons to Russia see p. 38878].
The first of a regular series of meetings of the chiefs of staff of all participating countries was held on April 10.
New supreme commander and other appointments
On April 30 Lt.-Gen.
John Shalikashvili was appointed NATO Supreme Allied Commander Europe in succession to Gen. John Galvin, who had been in post since 1987 and was due to retire in mid-1992.
Shalikashvili was currently senior assistant to the chair of the US joint chiefs of staff (Gen. Colin Powell) and in 1991 had been in charge of the operation to protect the Kurdish population in northern Iraq.
Like his predecessor, Shalikashvili would also become commander of the US forces in Europe.
In other senior appointments, on April 9 Field Marshal Sir Richard Vincent, the British Chief of Defence Staff, was elected chair of NATO's Military Committee, the organization's most senior military body.
He succeeded Gen. Vigleik Eide of Norway.
On April 14 Lt.-Gen.
Sir Jeremy MacKenzie of the UK was appointed commander of the newly-created Rapid Reaction Corps (ARRC — see also pp. 38170-71; 38216; 38313].
Permanent fleet in Mediterranean
The Military Committee of NATO decided on April 9 to establish a permanent fleet in the Mediterranean.
The move was considered necessary to deal with emergencies and crises arising from growing instability in the region since the end of the Cold War.
Hitherto NATO's naval presence in the Mediterranean had only been on an ad hoc basis.
The new fleet, to be based in Naples, Italy, would comprise six vessels (frigates and destroyers) from Greece, Italy and Turkey.
Vessels from the UK, the United States and other member countries would take part in regular exercises.
Accession of Georgia to NAC
Georgia was admitted to the North Atlantic Co-operation Council (NAC) on April 15 as the group's 36th member.
The NAC, comprising NATO member states and former Warsaw Pact members, was set up in December 1991 [see p. 38698].
INTERNATIONAL
DISARMAMENT
CIS disagreement over START treaty
At a conference on April 11 of the four Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) republics with nuclear weapons — Russia, Ukraine, Byelarus and Kazakhstan — Foreign Ministers failed to agree on how to ratify and implement the Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty (START) signed by the Soviet Union and the United States in July 1991 [see p. 38320].
The dispute between the four republics was delaying implementation of the treaty and the start of a new round of negotiations (known as START-II).
At a concluding press conference the Russian Foreign Minister, Andrei Kozyrev, stressed that it was essential that there be only one nuclear successor state to the Soviet Union, since otherwise there would be "a radical geostrategic change in the world" .
He therefore called on the other three republics to accept Russia as the successor state to the Soviet Union in this regard, and to delegate it to represent them over the START treaty and future negotiations.
This suggestion was rejected by Ukraine in particular.
Although its Foreign Affairs Minister, Anatoly Zlenko, reiterated his government's commitment to the Ukraine eventually becoming a nuclear-free state, he said that all four nuclear republics "should have the option of participating in the ratification and implementation of the treaty" .
On April 17 Kozyrev announced that his government would submit the START treaty to the Russian parliament for ratification.
INTERNATIONAL
ARMS TRADE
Russian formation of arms exports commission
Russian President Boris Yeltsin on April 11 issued a decree setting up an arms export commission, the aim of which would be to regulate and prevent the export of material and technology from Russia which might be used abroad in the manufacture of military hardware or weapons, including weapons of mass destruction.
The new commission, Russian Export Control, would co-ordinate the activities of all organizations connected with arms exports.
Yegor Gaidar, the First Deputy Prime Minister, was appointed chairman of the commission.
Allegations of unauthorized US-Israeli arms deals
The US State Department issued a report on April 1 which claimed that a "major recipient" of US military aid had engaged in a "systematic and growing pattern" of unauthorized re-exporting of arms and technology to other countries.
The report, prepared by the department's inspector-general, Sherman Funk, did not name the country concerned, but it was widely recognized and acknowledged in private by officials that the allegations referred to Israel.
The report referred (in a classified annex) to sales of missiles to China, South Africa and other countries.
It recommended disciplinary action against the department's bureau of political-military affairs for failing to stop the violations.
The Israeli government denied categorically that it had sold US arms and technology to third countries without the requisite US approval, and demanded a retraction of the allegations.
In a related development, a US team which visited Israel to investigate intelligence reports that Patriot missile technology had been transferred from Israel to China [see p. 38842]announced on April 2 that the allegations were "not proven" .
INTERNATIONAL
ENVIRONMENT
Divisions over preparations for Earth Summit
The final set of preparatory negotiations for the UN Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED, or "Earth Summit" ), known as Prepcom 4, ended in New York on April 4, with little prospect of success for the summit proper, scheduled to take place in Rio de Janeiro in early June.
The talks failed to produce any clear commitments on proposed treaties to control climate change and to safeguard species diversity, and only a partial agreement by the industrialized countries (the North) to assist sustainable development in the South.
Environment and development groups warned that the summit was likely to be a failure, largely due to the North's refusal to commit itself to firm accords.
Particular criticism was focused on the US administration for failing to agree to a firm schedule of binding cuts in carbon emissions.
At a meeting in Brussels on May 5, European Community (EC) environment and development ministers agreed a joint strategy for the Earth Summit, to include a commitment to reduce carbon emissions to 1990 levels by the year 2000.
They also agreed to a near doubling of aid to the Third World, but failed to reach a common position on the period of time over which the increase would be phased in.
Environment ministers from 54 developing countries held a pre-UNCED meeting on April 26-28 in Kuala Lumpur.
They agreed a 30-point plan calling for industrialized countries to agree to a new fund to support environmental security in the South.
UK carbon emissions reduction date
The UK Environment Secretary, Michael Howard, announced on April 30 that the target for stabilizing carbon dioxide emissions at 1990 levels had been brought forward from 2005 to 2000, thereby bringing it into line with the EC position.
Announcement of moratorium on French nuclear arms tests
The French government announced on April 8 that it was suspending its nuclear weapons testing programme for the remainder of the year as a gesture towards halting the process of nuclear proliferation.
The move, announced by the new French Prime Minister Piere Bérégovoy, was accompanied by a call for other countries which possessed nuclear weapons to make "balanced reductions" in their arsenals.
Since 1966 France had detonated some 200 atmospheric and underground nuclear tests at Fangataufa and Mururoa atolls in French Polynesia.
The programme was estimated to have cost around US$1,000 million per annum, a sum used for the upkeep of the two test atolls and for the funding of a support centre on Tahiti, 1,000 km to the west.
In recent years the programme had attracted fierce criticism both from the governments of Pacific countries and from international environmentalist organizations.
Attempts by Greenpeace to impede the programme had led to the sinking of the organization's flagship Rainbow Warrior in Auckland harbour in 1985 by French secret service agents [see pp. 33852-53].
Vietnamese banning of log exports
The Vietnamese Prime Minister, Vo Van Kiet, on March 26 announced a ban on the export of all raw and sawn timber in an effort to conserve forests.
Export permits currently in force were to be withdrawn.
The country's local government was instructed to encourage industry to use coal as an alternative fuel to wood or charcoal.
Black Sea environment convention — Baltic co-operation agreement
A convention on combating pollution in the Black Sea was signed at a conference in Bucharest, Romania, on April 21-22, by representatives of the littoral states — Romania, Bulgaria, Russia, Georgia, Ukraine and Turkey — along with delegations from Armenia, Azerbaijan, Greece, Moldova and Yugoslavia.
The conference was also attended by a number of international organizations, including the World Bank and several UN bodies.
Baltic co-operation agreement
The Neue Zürcher Zeitung of April 2 reported that Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania and Sweden had signed an environmental co-operation agreement.
Signatories agreed to co-operate in protecting the environment of the eastern Baltic Sea, especially as regards rubbish disposal and storage of nuclear waste.
Amsterdam ban on cars
In a referendum held by the Amsterdam City Council on March 25, a total of 53 per cent of those voting approved a proposal to ban cars and vans from the city centre.
After some hesitation due to the low turnout (28 per cent), the Council announced that it would abide by the vote.
Under the scheme, only vehicles carrying invalids or supporting the emergency services would be allowed into the centre.
A network of subsidized cargo barges and water taxis would be introduced on the city's canals to compensate.
The proposal was designed to alleviate growing problems of congestion and pollution.
INTERNATIONAL
WHO
Annual statistical report
The World Health Organization's 1991 annual statistical report published in April 1992 tracked the trends for major fatal diseases and the progress of immunization programmes, and pointed up some contrasting health trends in South and North countries.
Life expectancy in 1990 averaged 52.6 years in Africa and 72.8 years in Europe.
Japan had the highest figures for longevity (82.5 years for women and 76.2 for men) while the USA rated respectively 16th for women (78.6) and 23rd for men (71.6).
Under-five mortality fell from 13,500,000 in 1985 to 12,900,000 in 1990, principally due to a reduction in measles deaths, from some 2,000,000 to 880,000.
This was attributable to the impact of the worldwide vaccination programme first launched in 1974 against tetanus, measles, diphtheria, whooping cough, polio and tuberculosis.
The highest number of child deaths in 1990 were caused by diaorrhea-related (3,000,000) and by acute respiratory infections (2,800,000).
Among the main tropical diseases leishmaniasis was among the fastest-spreading parasite-inflicted infection, in 1990, affecting 12,000,000 people in 80 countries; there were 200 million people suffering from bilharzia and over 2,000 million exposed to the risk of malaria.
Guinea-worm infestation, however, had been dramatically reduced, with under 3,000,000 current sufferers, and the disease was on the point of being eradicated in several countries including India and Pakistan.
Cardio-vascular disease (responsible for a quarter of all deaths worldwide) threatened to increase dramatically in Latin America and other South countries, although in the developed world (where half of all deaths were attributed to heart attacks and strokes) the trend was generally downward.
AIDS cases reported by end-1991 were up by 42 per cent to 446,681, but were estimated by WHO as actually exceeding 1,500,000.
Cases had been reported by 157 countries.
Uganda had the highest incidence of AIDS cases proportional to its population.
INTERNATIONAL
WAR CRIMES
Dropping of charges against Touvier
The Paris appeals court ruled on April 13 that Paul Touvier, 77, who under the wartime Vichy regime had been intelligence chief of the Milice (pro-Nazi French militia) in Lyon in 1943-44, should not stand trial, on grounds of insufficient evidence, on five charges of crimes against humanity.
The court ruled that there was sufficient evidence for a sixth charge, of complicity in the execution of seven Jewish hostages in 1944, but that this was not a crime against humanity since it was not part of a "methodical extermination plan" , and that it therefore fell under a 20-year statute of limitations for the prosecution of "ordinary" war crimes.
The court's highly controversial decision (against which the Prosecutor-General was to appeal), and its finding that the Vichy regime had "never planned and practised a consistent anti-semitic ideology" and "at no time…had the purpose or the opportunity of imposing any kind of domination or conquering ideology" had important implications for the outstanding Bousquet and Papon cases [see pp. 37019; 37899].
Prime Minister Pierre Bérégovoy, a former resistance fighter, declared in the National Assembly on April 15 that France was "wounded" and that "we will not rehabilitate the Vichy regime on the sly" .
Touvier had been sentenced to death in absentia in 1946 and 1947 but was pardoned in 1971.
New charges for crimes against humanity were brought in November 1989 [see p. 37899]following his arrest in May [see p. 37019].
He was released on bail on health grounds in July 1991 [see p. 38367].
His close associate Klaus Barbie had been sentenced for crimes against humanity in 1987 [see p. 35417]and had died in prison in 1991 [see p. 38459].
Confirmation of Mengele's death
The German state prosecutor's office announced on April 8 that tests conducted on the bones of a man who died in Brazil in 1979 confirmed that the body (discovered in 1985 — see p. 33759) was that of Josef Mengele, the so-called "Angel of Death" held responsible for the deaths of 400,000 prisoners at the Auschwitz concentration camp during the Second World War.
Scientists compared the body's genetic profiles with those of Mengele's son and wife and established "with a very high level of certainty, but without absolute certainty, that these were the remains of Josef Mengele" .
INTERNATIONAL
SPACE
Cosmic ripples
In what was described as one of the major discoveries of science, it was announced on April 23 that the Cosmic Background Explorer (COBE) satellite of the US National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) had discovered huge wispy clouds of matter or "ripples" at a distance of nearly 15,000 million light years, at the edge of the known universe.
These "cosmic ripples" were estimated to stretch as far as 59 billion trillion miles in space and were calculated to have been formed only 300,000 years after the "Big Bang" (the original event which scientists believe had created space and time).
They were interpreted as explaining why radiation had not spread out uniformly to create the newborn universe but had produced impurities, or primeval seeds, whose gravitational forces had attracted increasing amounts of matter to clump together to form galaxies, clusters of galaxies and stars.
Other evidence collected by COBE supported the theory that up to 90 per cent of the universe was made up of "dark matter" , the presence of which scientists had inferred but had never directly detected.
INTERNATIONAL
UNDP
The Human Development Report 1992 released by the UN Development Programme (UNDP) on April 23 showed that the doubling of income disparities over the last 30 years had enabled "the richest 20 per cent of the world's people [to become]…at least 150 times more than the poorest 20 per cent" .
INTERNATIONAL
UNFPA
The State of World Population 1992 report, released on April 29 by the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), projected an annual increase in the world's population of about 97,000,000 over the next ten years.
This would mean 6,000 million people in 1998, and 10,000 million in 2038, compared with 5,480 million in mid-1992.