

AFRICA
SOUTH AFRICA
Bisho massacre — Resumption of constitutional talks
On Sept. 7 at least 29 people were killed and over 200 injured when troops from the nominally independent Ciskei "homeland" (bantustan) opened fire on a crowd of African National Congress (ANC) demonstrators marching towards the Ciskei capital, Bisho.
Background to killings
Brig.
Joshua Oupa Gqozo, the military ruler of Ciskei, had refused permission for ANC marchers to enter Ciskei [see p. 39037 for earlier confrontation], claiming that their proposed demonstration (whose ultimate aim was to force his resignation) was in fact a plan for an armed rebellion.
The ANC, however, declared that it would not be deterred by a government whichit considered illegitimate and which had not been recognized by the rest of the world.
The ANC defended its intention to stage the demonstration, as part of its mass action campaign [see p. 39037], on the grounds that Gqozo's regime had prevented free political activity in Ciskei and had effectively prohibited the ANC organizing within the homeland's population of 850,000.
Commentators noted that the demonstration was part of a wider ANC strategy to weaken the attempts of President F. W. de Klerk to forge an alliance between the ruling National Party and conservative black bantustan leaders.
Sept. 7 march — Shooting — Aftermath
Early on Sept. 7 a local magistrate granted the ANC permission to march to a stadium just inside the Ciskei border.
However, senior ANC officials, including the organization's secretary-general Cyril Ramaphosa, told reporters that they intended leading the march on to Bisho itself, less than 1 km from the stadium.
A crowd estimated at some 70,000 approached the border, where the South African Police (SAP) escort withdrew.
As Ramaphosa was beginning discussions with members of the National Peace Secretariat (who had offered to act as intermediaries in talks with the Ciskei authorities), some marchers broke through the razor-wire border fencing and started moving towards Bisho.
They were apparently led by Ronnie Kasrils, a senior member of both the ANC and South African Communist Party (SACP).
At this point Ciskei troops without warning opened fire on the demonstrators.
Brig.
Gqozo later claimed that his troops had been under attack and had acted in self-defence.
However, independent eye witnesses confirmed the ANC statement that "at no time were the lives of the Ciskei troops endangered" .
The National Party government sought to distance itself from the day's events.
De Klerk said that the massacre had been the result of the ANC's failure to observe the conditions of the march stipulated by the magistrate, and Foreign Minister Roelof "Pik" Botha said that the ANC had known "people would be shot, they wanted people to be shot" ; a statement from the ruling National Party ascribed the violence to "provocative actions" by the ANC.
Law and Order Minister Hernus Kriel claimed that the Ciskei shootings were nothing to do with South Africa.
Despite his government's contention that Ciskei was an independent country, however, late on Sept. 7 de Klerk announced that South African troops were to be deployed there to "protect industrial property" , which was largely owned by white South African citizens.
The ANC defended its actions, repeating its contention that the demonstration had been peaceful and that its members should be free to engage in peaceful political activity.
It declared that ultimate responsibility for the killings lay with the de Klerk government which provided financial, security and political support to Ciskei and which had failed to restrain Gqozo.
This view was echoed in a statement from the United Kingdom Foreign and Commonwealth Secretary Douglas Hurd in which he insisted that the South African government bore full responsibility for keeping the troops in Ciskei and the other bantustans under control.
A similar statement was issued by the US State Department on Sept. 8.
On Sept. 18, when the funeral of many of the victims was held in King William's Town, more than 70,000 angry mourners gathered to hear speeches from leading members of the ANC and the SACP.
Walter Sisulu, ANC deputy president, declared that "no part of South Africa, be it Ciskei, Bophuthatswana or Kwazulu, should be no-go areas for the democratic forces" , singling out three of the bantustans where political activity was restricted and whose leaders were opposed to the ANC.
Chris Hani, secretary-general of the SACP and a leading member of the ANC, called for revenge.
 "Gqozo must pay for [the]massacre," he told mourners,"there was nothing accidental about Bisho.
It was a strategic operation…
I blame the de Klerk regime."
Report by Goldstone Commission
On Sept. 23 the commission of inquiry into township violence headed by Judge Richard Goldstone [see p. 38991]at de Klerk's request began an investigation into the Bisho killings.
Its report, published on Sept. 30, argued that reasonable and negotiated mass demonstrations should be tolerated anywhere in South Africa.
It condemned the actions of members of the Ciskei Defence Force who, it said, had acted "reprehensibly" with the deliberate aim of "causing as many deaths and injuries as possible" .
Goldstone dismissed as improbable Brig.
Gqozo's claim that his troops had been shot at by the demonstrators (ballistics evidence showed that the one dead Ciskei soldier was shot by his fellow soldiers).
It recommended that criminal charges be brought, stating that "indiscriminate and prolonged shooting at innocent demonstrators is morally and legally indefensible and is deserving of the strongest censure" .
The report also criticized Kasrils and other ANC leaders, describing their actions as irresponsible, and called for their public censure by the ANC and SACP.
Resumption of talks
On Sept. 10 the ANC president Nelson Mandela accepted an invitation for urgent talks with de Klerk on political violence.
Ramaphosa said that he was prepared to meet Roelf Meyer, Minister of Constitutional Development, immediately, to prepare for a summit between the two leaders.
He emphasized, however, that ANC attendance at such a meeting was dependent on the government meeting certain conditions [see p. 38948].
The two men, chief negotiators for their respective sides, met on three occasions between Sept. 14 and Sept. 24, discussing three specific ANC preconditions: the surveillance of migrant worker hostels; a ban on the public display of dangerous weapons; and the release of political prisoners.
Sources close to the discussions said that the main stumbling block had been the identification of political prisoners [see below].
In a joint statement issued on Sept. 25 Meyer and Ramaphosa announced that their talks had progressed sufficiently to allow President de Klerk and Mandela to meet the following day.
Record of Understanding
On Sept. 26 de Klerk and Mandela met in Johannesburg to ratify the agreement negotiated between Meyer and Ramaphosa, which was encapsulated in a "Record of Understanding" .
They also agreed to resume constitutional negotiations, suspended since June [see p. 38948], and committed themselves to the election of a constituent assembly and the inauguration of a non-racial transitional government as soon as possible.
Under the terms of the Record of Understanding the government, having already released some 150 prisoners late on Sept. 25 as a gesture of good faith, undertook to complete the phased release of all political prisoners by Nov. 15.
The government also abandoned its attempts to link the release of political prisoners with a general amnesty for members of the security forces and SAP and for other state officials [see p. 39037].
The Record of Understanding identified 24 migrant worker hostels which would be fenced off by Nov. 15.
This compromise — the ANC had demanded that all hostels be subject to restrictions — appeared to be the result of intervention by Judge Goldstone.
In a statement issued on Sept. 25 he argued that "not all hostels are associated with violence and the problem should properly be seen as one of criminality in a limited number of hostels" .
It was also agreed that effective steps would be taken to ban the carrying of dangerous (including "traditional" ) weapons [see p. 38661].
Both sides committed themselves to continuing high-level discussions (expected to be between Meyer and Ramaphosa).
As well as preparing for future constitutional negotiations these talks would focus on further measures to end political violence and to ensure free political activity throughout the country.
Reaction of Buthelezi
On Sept. 27 Chief Mangosuthu Buthelezi announced that as a result of the agreement reached between de Klerk and Mandela, his predominantly Zulu Inkatha Freedom Party had withdrawn from constitutional talks.
Speaking at a rally on "Shaka Day" (celebrating a Zulu hero), and brandishing a number of "traditional" weapons, Buthelezi declared that any attempt by the government to disarm Inkatha would be defied and that fencing around migrant worker hostels, largely Inkatha strongholds, would be destroyed.
He said that any constituent assembly would be "emphatically rejected" and threatened an Inkatha boycott of any elections.
Release of prisoners
Sept. 28 saw the simultaneous release of two of the most notorious prisoners, Robert McBride and Barend Strydom.
McBride, the single most contentious ANC prisoner, received a death sentence after planting a car bomb in 1986 which killed three white women and injured 87 people.
His actions had caused him to be one of the most reviled prisoners among the white community, and the government had hitherto refused to recognize him as a political prisoner.
It was widely thought that discussions over his release had been the main obstacle in the talks between Meyer and Ramaphosa.
Strydom, a white supremacist, shot and killed eight black people in a random attack in 1988 [see pp. 36322; 36647].
The ANC regarded Strydom not as a political prisoner but as a racist psychopath.
Observers believed that his release was an attempt by the government to appease sections of the white community angered by the release of McBride.
AMERICAS
BRAZIL
Vote to impeach Collor
President Fernando Collor de Mello, 43, was stripped of power on Sept. 29 when the Chamber of Deputies, the lower house of the Congress, voted by 434 votes to 34 to impeach him for abusing his authority.
Deputies sang the national anthem when the votes reached the total of 336 required for impeachment.
More than 100,000 people outside the Congress building celebrated, as did millions of people around the country; one street demonstration completely blocked the city of Sao Paulo.
The stock markets showed immediate rises.
Collor, who took office in March 1990 promising to root out corrupt practices in government, was suspended from office for six months, during which time he was to stand trial for impeachment before the Senate, the upper house, on corruption charges.
If found guilty, he would be removed permanently from office and barred from holding an elective position for eight years.
He was also expected to face separate criminal charges currently being drawn up by the Attorney General, Aristides Junqueira.
Government resignations
The Cabinet immediately resigned en masse, joining Jorge Bornhausen, the Secretary to the Government, who had resigned on Sept. 10.
By resigning Bornhausen broke a pact which all ministers had signed on Aug. 25, according to which they undertook not to resign until an impeachment vote was held.
A group of so-called "ethical ministers" , led by Economy Minister Marcilio Marques Moreira and including Justice Minister Célio Borja and Bornhausen, made it known that they had only signed this "pact" in order to ensure the governability of the country, and not out of loyalty to Collor.
Education Minister José Goldemburg had resigned on Aug. 3 over drastic cuts in the education budget, complaining that Collor was more concerned with his own political survival than with the well-being of the population [see also p. 39002].
Marco Maciel, a one-time Collor loyalist, had resigned as the government's leader in the Senate on Sept. 3, when he was replaced by Odacir Soares, the deputy leader of the pro-government Liberal Front Party (PFL).
Appointment of interim President
Vice-President Itamar Franco, 61, a veteran politician but relatively unknown and untouched by the corruption scandal, was set to take over as interim President in early October.
He was expected to name a coalition government with congressional support.
Franco, previously associated with nationalist ideas at odds with the free-market neo-liberal views of Collor, stated that he now accepted economic liberalization in principle.
The process of Collor's impeachment
The impeachment process was formally initiated as a civilian action by the Brazilian Attorneys' Association (OAB) and the Brazilian Press Association (ABI).
On Sept. 1, they presented a petition for Collor's removal to Ibsen Pinheiro, the leader of the Chamber of Deputies.
A 49-member congressional committee began examining the request on Sept. 9 and subsequently authorized the impeachment vote after studying the findings of the report of the Special Commission of Inquiry (CPI).
This had been established by the Congress in May to investigate charges of corruption made by Collor's brother against businessman Paulo César Farias, the President's former election campaign manager [see pp. 38909-10].
The CPI report, published in late August, contained evidence from seized computer files which revealed that Farias, through influence peddling, had diverted an estimated US$6,500,000 into "phantom" bank accounts controlled by Collor and his family.
Receipts from a firm of landscape gardeners alone suggested that Collor had spent US$2,500,000 creating a tropical garden in his house in Brasília.
Farias had also manipulated government funds and contracts to benefit himself and his associates by an estimated US$1,000 million.
Among beneficiaries of the fraud named by the police was former Economy Minister Zelia Cardoso de Mello who received a monthly "salary" of US$10,000 from Farias.
Equally damaging to Collor was the claim to the federal police by an Argentine drug trafficker linked to the Colombian Medellín cartel, that he had used one of Farias's aircraft to supply acetone and ether to Bolivia, Colombia and Paraguay, returning with refined cocaine and coca paste.
The police had asked a judge on Sept. 2 to authorize the arrest of Farias and of Collor's former private secretary Claudio Vieira, alleging that they were obstructing the investigation into government corruption.
Bank documents showed that Vieira controlled a US$2,370,000 fund to cover the president's "household expenses" .
The congressional inquiry had rejected his claim that monies unearthed in their investigations were the residue of a US$5,000,000 campaign fund from Uruguay.
The scandal fuelled popular resentment at time of high unemployment and economic austerity.
The Roman Catholic Church was united with the majority of state governors, the trade unions, the business sector and students in supporting a pro-impeachment campaign which was backed by the press and opinion polls and driven by demonstrations which grew in size and frequency between July and September.
On Sept. 18 alone, 700,000 people marched through Sao Paulo demanding Collor's resignation, as did 300,000 demonstrators in the north-eastern city of Recife on Sept. 23.
Army Minister Gen. Carlos Tinoco Ribeiro Gomes dismissed fears of an intervention by the military (in power in 1964-1985), stating that the armed forces would abide by any decision by the Congress.
Lacking political support, Collor turned to the courts to question the legality of the impeachment process while claiming that he needed more time to prepare his defence against the corruption charges.
The Supreme Court, in a seven to one vote on Sept. 10, declined to suspend the impeachment proceedings but gave Collor until Sept 22 to prepare his defence before the Chamber of Deputies, which had given him until Sept. 15 to address it.
As a consequence, Collor was forced to cancel his planned visit to the UN on Sept. 19-22.
On Sept. 23 the Supreme Court ruled that the impeachment process was legal, and rejected Collor's appeal for a further postponement.
In addition, it ordered that the vote should be open and not by secret ballot.
This was in response to reports that Collor's main political advisers had been using federal funds to solicit the votes of the 168 deputies needed to fend off the impeachment initiative.
EUROPE
EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
European currency crisis — French referendum
During September the development of the European Communities (EC) towards political and economic union as envisaged in the Maastricht Treaty (signed in February 1992 — see p. 38785) was thrown into question.
In a setback to the integration of monetary policy, and despite a realignment on Sept. 13 within the exchange rate mechanism (ERM) of the European Monetary System (EMS), continuing currency speculation led to the suspension of participation in the ERM by sterling and the lira.
The following weekend, the French referendum on Sept. 20 on ratification of the Maastricht Treaty produced a majority in favour, but so narrow that it failed to dispel growing doubts about the integration process.
[For Danish referendum in June, rejecting ratification by a similarly narrow majority, see p. 38942.]
At the beginning of September the United Kingdom currency stood near its effective permitted ERM floor against the deutschmark of £1.00=DM2.778; the Italian lira was likewise at around its ERM floor of L765.4=DM1.00.
In order to protect its position, the UK government announced on Sept. 3 that it intended to borrow an amount equivalent to 10,000 million European currency units (US$1.00=ECU1.434 at that stage) in currencies which would be sold for sterling through the foreign exchange market in addition to any normal market intervention.
The following day (Sept. 4), the Bank of Italy raised its discount rate from 13.25 to 15 per cent and the Lombard rate from 14.75 to 16.50 per cent amidst large-scale support operations.
At a meeting in Bath (UK) on Sept. 5, EC Economy and Finance Ministers and central bank governors reaffirmed their agreement of Aug. 28 that a change in the present structure of central rates "would not be the appropriate response to the current tensions in the EMS" , declared that they stood ready to intervene to counter tensions in the exchange markets, and also welcomed the fact that the Bundesbank (the German central bank) in present circumstances had no intention to increase German interest rates.
European markets were further unsettled in early September by monetary developments in Finland and Sweden, both of which were applicants for EC membership [see pp. 38834; 38353]and both of which — following a similar step by Norway [see p. 37782]— had in 1991 associated their currencies with the ERM [see pp. 38297; 38202].
In Finland, following a huge outflow of funds, the markka was on Sept. 8 allowed to float, whereupon it depreciated by some 13 per cent against the deutschmark.
The Swedish Rijksbank raised its marginal intervention rate for lending to the banking system from 16 to 24 per cent on Sept. 8 and to 75 per cent the following day, when it also arranged a currency loan of ECU16,000 million to support the krona.
Italian devaluation
Despite the joint EC stand, pressure on the lira continued over the following days, and on Sept. 9 the Italian government sought three-year emergency powers to meet the present or future economic crises [see p. 39113], while on Sept. 11 there was massive intervention in the markets by the Bank of Italy and the Bundesbank.
These steps failed, however, to increase confidence, and on Sept. 13 it was announced that the central rate for the lira within the framework of the ERM had been reduced by 3.5 per cent and that those for the currencies of the other participants had been increased by 3.5 per cent, representing an effective 7 per cent devaluation of the lira.
This was the first major realignment within the EMS since the upward revaluation of the (West) German, Netherlands, Belgian and Luxembourg currencies in January 1987 [see p. 34889], although since then the lira had in January 1990 been devalued in conjunction with its entry into the narrow 2.25 per cent fluctuation band [see p. 37196].
UK Chancellor of the Exchequer Norman Lamont reiterated on the same day that the UK government would take whatever action was necessary to maintain the existing DM2.95 central parity of the pound.
On Sept. 14 the Bundesbank announced that its discount rate was being cut from 8.75 to 8.25 per cent and the key Lombard rate from 9.75 to 9.5 per cent.
The German move was accompanied by rate reductions in Belgium, the Netherlands and Austria (discount rates cut in each case from 8.5 to 8.25 per cent) and also in Switzerland as well as Sweden [see below].
There was widespread disappointment in the UK in particular at the small size of the cut in German interest rates, and on Sept. 15 sterling fell to about DM2.78 — just above its permitted floor — while the lira weakened to over DM800 (around its new central rate).
Suspension of UK and Italian participation in ERM — Spanish devaluation
On Sept. 16 pressure on the pound increased sharply despite massive official intervention, and the minimum lending rate (the banks' base rate) was increased from 10 per cent to 12 per cent.
As turbulent conditions continued, it was then announced that base rate would rise further to 15 per cent the following day (equal to its peak in 1989-90), while at the close of business in London the pound stood at DM2.75.
Faced with this situation, Lamont announced that same evening (Sept. 16) that the UK's membership of the ERM was being suspended and that the second interest rate increase was being rescinded.
A meeting of the Monetary Committee (of national and EC officials) was held during the night of Sept. 16-17, at the end of which it was announced (i) that the Italian authorities would "abstain temporarily from intervention in the foreign exchange markets" (i.e. that the lira would likewise float outside the ERM); and (ii) that the Spanish peseta was to be devalued by 5 per cent within the ERM.
It was widely reported that the UK had unsuccessfully argued at the committee meeting for a total suspension of the ERM and also that requests had been made for Germany to reduce its interest rates.
The withdrawal of the pound and the lira from the ERM was followed by a "war of words" between the UK and Germany over the role in particular of the Bundesbank.
In a radio interview on Sept. 18 Lamont appeared to blame Germany for producing many of the tensions within the ERM.
Helmut Kohl, the German Chancellor, said later the same day that such criticisms of Germany were "inappropriate for a minister" .
Also on Sept. 18 UK Prime Minister John Major referred in a television interview to "fault lines in the ERM revealed over the past few days" , and said that there was no imminent prospect of the UK returning to the ERM, which itself needed reform, while Bundesbank president Helmut Schlesinger said in Washington on Sept. 21 that serious negotiations would be needed before sterling could be readmitted to the ERM.
Belgium/Luxembourg 42.4032 42.0639 41.9547 Denmark 7.84195 7.77921 7.75901 France 6.89509 6.83992 6.82216 Germany 2.05586 2.03942 2.03412 Greece* 205.311 251.202 250.550 Ireland 0.767417 0.761276 0.759300 Italy** 1538.24 1636.61 1632.36 Netherlands 2.31643 2.29789 2.29193 Portugal 178.735 177.305 176.844 Spain 133.631 132.562 139.176 United Kingdom** 0.696904 0.691328 0.689533
EC central currency rates against ECU pre-Sept. 14 Sept. 14-17 from Sept. 17
*Non-participant in ERM.
**Withdrew from ERM on Sept. 16-17.
European monetary system; Germany promises not to raise interest rates but refuses to lower them.
Sept. 8: The Finnish markka, pegged to the ECU since June 1991, is obliged to float freely, prompting a run on Nordic currencies.
Sept. 8-9: Sweden raises its marginal intervention rate from 16 to 75 per cent.
Sept. 13: In the first major realignment within the EMS since 1987 the Italian lira is effectively devalued by 7 per cent.
Sept. 14: The Bundesbank cuts the Lombard rate by 0.25 percentage points and the discount rate by 0.5 percentage points.
Rates are also cut in countries where currencies are most closely linked to the deutschmark (Belgium, Netherlands, Austria and Switzerland, as well as Sweden).
However, this does not prevent markets from continuing to sell weaker ERM currencies.
Sept. 16: Sterling, the lira and the peseta are all forced below their ERM floors by speculative selling; central bank interventions have no effect.
In the course of the day the UK government announces increases in base rate from 10 to 12, and then to 15 per cent effective Sept. 17, in unsuccessful efforts to defend the value of sterling, then withdraws sterling from the ERM, allowing its value to "float" (as a result of which it falls some 10 per cent against the deutschmark to below DM2.52 by the end of September), and cuts base rate to 12 per cent.
Sweden raises its marginal intervention rate to 500 per cent(although this is brought down to 50 per cent on Sept. 21 and to 40 per cent on Sept. 28).
Sept. 17: The EC's Monetary Committee agrees to the temporary suspension of the lira from the ERM.
The peseta is devalued by 5 per cent.
The UK cuts base rate to 10 per cent.
Sept. 20: The French referendum produces a vote narrowly in favour of ratification of the Maastricht Treaty.
Major calls an emergency summit on Maastricht and the EMS for mid-October.
Sept. 22: The UK cuts base rate to 9 per cent.
Sept. 23: Both the French and German government intervene heavily on the markets in a successful defence of the French franc.
Spain reintroduces foreign exchange controls.
Sept. 24: Ireland and Portugal introduce new foreign exchange controls.
Sept. 28: EC finance ministers, meeting in Brussels, reaffirm their confidence in the EMS despite UK proposals for a fundamental reform of the ERM.
European currency crisis — September 1992 Sept. 5: EC finance ministers meeting in Bath discuss rising pressure on the
Repercussions of monetary upheaval
The severe disturbances in the financial markets had wide repercussions and were a key preoccupation at discussions surrounding the annual IMF/World Bank meeting in Washington [see p. 39119].
United Kingdom.
Base rate was on Sept. 22 further reduced to 9 per cent(its lowest level since mid-1988 and the first time since 1981 that it stood below the German Lombard rate).
By the end of September sterling stood at just below £1.00=DM2.52.
The UK's withdrawal from the ERM revived divisions within the Conservative Party over EC policy [for UK position on Sept. 21 when EC Foreign Ministers met in New York see below; for Sept. 24 emergency House of Commons debate on the economic situation see p. 39112].
A report by Helmut Schlesinger made public on Sept. 30 indicated that the greater part of the DM44,000 million of "compulsory DM sales" by the Bundesbank in the week when the pound and the lira withdrew from the ERM had been in support of sterling (this figure apparently excluding operations conducted on Sept. 22-23 when the franc was under particular pressure — see below).
Italy.
By the end of September the lira rate against the deutschmark was about 876, representing a further devaluation of some 8.5 per cent compared with the central rate set on Sept. 13.
France.
The franc had already come under pressure immediately prior to the referendum, falling on Sept. 18 to just above its F3.43 ERM floor against the deutschmark.
However, there was some recovery on Sept. 23 in the light of further massive joint French-German intervention and the raising of the Bank of France's key money market interest rates, and by Sept. 25 the franc stood at around F3.38 to the deutschmark.
Spain, Ireland and Portugal.
Spain on Sept. 23 effectively reintroduced a system of exchange controls (abolished as recently as February), involving interest-free deposits to be made by financial institutions as a counterpart to various categories of sales of pesetas for foreign currency, while Ireland and Portugal on Sept. 24 both limited foreign exchange operations (including in the former case a ban on punt swap activities by non-residents), and the Irish Central Bank on Sept. 28 raised its base rate from 10.75 to 13.75 per cent.
Sweden.
The Bank of Sweden on Sept. 14 reduced its marginal rate from 75 to 20 per cent, but in the face of huge renewed outflows the maximum level was on Sept. 16 raised to a draconian 500 per cent although this maximum was cut a week later to 50 per cent and on Sept. 28 to 40 per cent .
Switzerland.
The Swiss National Bank's discount rate was lowered from 7 to 6.5 per cent on Sept. 14 and to 6 per cent on Sept. 25.
At a meeting in Brussels on Sept. 28, EC economy and finance ministers "welcomed the return of calm to the financial markets within the EMS following the joint action of France and Germany" , and reiterated their commitment to the EMS as a key factor of economic stability and prosperity in Europe.
French Maastricht referendum
The question put to the French electorate in a referendum on Sept. 20 was: "Do you approve the law presented to the French people by the President of the Republic authorizing ratification of the Treaty on European Union?" 
Progress of referendum campaign
In June, when French President François Mitterrand called the referendum (which was not constitutionally necessary as part of the French ratification process — see p. 38942), opinion polls indicated a two-thirds majority in favour of ratification.
His announcement was widely seen as an attempt to boost his flagging popularity, to demonstrate French commitment to European integration in the wake of the Danish referendum setback for the Maastricht Treaty, and to expose divisions over Europe within the opposition Gaullist Rassemblement pour la République (RPR) and the centrist Union pour la démocratie française (UDF).
By the end of August, however, opinion polls were indicating an almost equal balance between those in favour and those against.
The campaign had revealed renewed French fears of the power of a (now united) Germany, while uncertainty over its eventual result aggravated the monetary crisis within the EMS.
The Financial Times of Sept. 21 reported that the campaign had "exposed deep divisions over Europe in France, hitherto one of the main driving forces of European integration" .
The "yes" campaign was co-ordinated by Jack Lang, Minister of State for National Education and Culture.
Prominent advocates of ratification included EC Commission President Jacques Delors (who declared on Aug. 28 that he "would not stay on for another mandate if the" no "vote won" ) and also both the RPR leader Jacques Chirac and the UDF leader Valéry Giscard d'Estaing, although many RPR and UDF members were opposed to ratification.
The "no" campaign was led by Philippe Séguin, Minister for Social Affairs and Employment in 1986-88, mayor of Epinal since 1983 and an RPR National Assembly deputy, and Charles Pasqua, Interior Minister in 1986-88 and president of the RPR in the Senate.
Among its supporters were Philippe de Villiers of the UDF, Jean-Pierre Chevènement, socialist Defence Minister until 1991, Georges Marchais, secretary-general of the Parti communiste français, and Jean-Marie Le Pen, leader of the Front National.
On Sept. 2 the Constitutional Council (i.e. court) ruled that the law promulgated on June 24 to allow ratification [see p. 38942]was constitutional despite a case brought in mid-August by Pasqua and 69 other senators alleging unconstitutionality on various counts including that of the Danish referendum result rendering the whole process invalid.
A key television debate was held on Sept. 3 between Mitterrand (who was generally deemed to have been more successful) and Séguin.
Mitterrand argued that the Treaty diminished the power of the Commission in Brussels (largely by increasing the areas under inter-governmental control, although there were some increased powers for the European Parliament).
Séguin, whose eloquence throughout the campaign was widely reported, stressed his fear that Maastricht would result in a loss of French sovereignty, especially over monetary policy.
There was speculation during the campaign that 75-year-old Mitterrand might resign before the end of his presidential term.
Surgery carried out on Sept. 11 revealed that he had prostate cancer, but when he left hospital on Sept. 16 he declared that he saw no reason to retire early.
French referendum results
According to official results, announced on Sept. 23 by the Constitutional Council (and differing marginally from figures published earlier by the Interior Ministry), there were 13,162,992 votes (or 51.04 per cent of valid votes cast) in favour of ratification and 12,623,582 (or 48.95 per cent) against, a difference of 539,410 votes.
The turnout was 69.7 per cent of the electorate of 38,305,534.
There were 909,377 null or void votes.
The result showed the strongest support for Maastricht in Paris, where 62.5 per cent favoured ratification, and on the border with Germany and Switzerland (with 66 per cent in favour in Alsace).
The largest homogeneous group voting in favour was the urban middle class and that against was the rural poor.
Mitterrand declared that the result had "shown that [France]is still capable of inspiring Europe, which is now in a position to equal the world's biggest powers" .
Pasqua said that "one Frenchman out of every two rejected a Europe which does not take people into account" .
Previous French referendums had been held (i) to approve the Constitution of the Fifth Republic (September 1958);(ii) to approve a policy of self-determination for Algeria (January 1961);(iii) to approve the Evian accords on Algerian independence (April 1962);(iv) on the election of the President by universal suffrage (October 1962);(v) on regionalization and reform of the Senate (April 1969);(vi) on enlargement of the EC (April 1972); and (vii) on New Caledonia (November 1988).
Reactions to referendum result
Late on Sept. 20 UK Prime Minister John Major (whose country held the presidency of the EC Council of Ministers for the second half of 1992) announced that he would call an emergency summit to discuss ratification of the Treaty and to "deal with the particular problems in the foreign exchange markets in recent days, that have revealed shortcomings in the exchange rate mechanism system" .
(The summit was later fixed for Oct. 16 in Birmingham.)
EC Finance Ministers met in Washington late on Sept. 20 (where they were attending the IMF annual meeting) and expressed the hope that the result would ease tensions within the EMS.
EC Foreign Ministers, meeting on Sept. 21 at the UN General Assembly building in New York, confirmed their commitment to the "speedy and successful conclusion" of the ratification process without renegotiation of the Treaty.
Although other countries had wanted to specify the end of 1992 as the deadline, the UK persuaded them to refer instead to the schedule outlined in the Treaty which provided that the Treaty could come into effect later than Jan. 1, 1993, if the ratification process were not completed by then in all states.
AFRICA
ANGOLA
New national army — General election
The peace process which began in May 1991 with the signing of the Bicesse Peace Accord by President José Eduardo dos Santos and Jonas Savimbi of the rebel National Union for the Total Independence of Angola (UNITA)[see p. 38180]culminated in September with the formation of a new national army and the country's first multiparty general election.
The government's People's Armed Forces for the Liberation of Angola (FAPLA) and UNITA's military wing, the Armed Forces for the Liberation of Angola (FALA), were formally disbanded on Sept. 27.
On Sept. 28 a new national army, the Angolan Armed Forces (FAA), was established under the joint command of Gen. Antonio dos Santos França Ndalu and Gen. Arlindo Chenda Pena Ben-Ben who were sworn in as the Chiefs of General Staff on the same day.
Under the terms of the peace agreement, 50,000 troops made up of members of FAPLA and FALA were to be trained and incorporated into the FAA.
However, the process had been set back by delays in the assembly programme [see p. 38706].
In spite of efforts to speed up the operation — the planned four-week courses run by Portuguese and British training officers for soldiers in the new army were, for example, cut to two weeks — by Sept. 28 only 8,800 soldiers had received training and were ready to be sworn in as members of the new force.
Those soldiers not incorporated into the FAA were meant to be disarmed and demobilized by the time the new army was established.
However, according to one diplomatic source only 38 per cent of FAPLA troops had been officially demobilized.
Although a significant number were deployed in Cabinda [see below], the rest were in theory confined to assembly points.
By early September several thousand of these soldiers had mutinied over the non-payment of wages and the poor conditions in the confinement areas.
They were reported to have fled the camps and were said to be attempting to return to their homes.
The same diplomatic source also said that only 10 per cent of FALA soldiers had been demobilized and that UNITA retained an effective force of 47,000 with heavy equipment intact.
Multiparty elections
On Sept. 29-30, in Angola's first multiparty elections, 11 candidates contested the presidency and 18 parties sought representation in the 223-seat National Assembly.
The main electoral contestants were, however, President dos Santos and the ruling Popular Movement for Liberation of Angola-Workers' Party (MPLA-PT) on the one hand, and Savimbi and UNITA on the other.
The UN provided extensive logistical and technical support for the elections.
This included the most extensive civilian airlift of people in the organization's history, using 40 MI-8 20-passenger helicopters and nine fixed-wing aircraft to transport to the voting stations the 1,000,000 voters (of an electorate of 4,800,000) living in areas inaccessible by road.
The UN also provided half the 800 foreign observers who monitored voting at nearly 6,000 polling stations.
All observers noted that the elections had been free and fair and that conduct had exceeded all expectations.
Observers had feared that violence would seriously disrupt the electoral process.
At least 40 people had been killed in the campaign period in a series of incidents which revealed the potential for conflict in the transition programme.
For On Sept. 20 UNITA forces, claiming that MPLA-PT members were plotting to assassinate Savimbi, seized 11 anti-riot police officers, burned three cars and took control of the airport in Cuito.
On the same day government soldiers opened fire on two UNITA supporters who were disrupting an MPLA-PT rally in Huambo.
On Sept. 21 at least eight people were killed in Luena in clashes between UNITA activists and the police.
On Sept. 22 Kundi Paihama, the MPLA-PT campaign manager and a former minister, was the subject of an assassination attempt — the second since the start of the campaign at the end of August.
There were also several reports of violence in the Cabinda enclave, where FAPLA soldiers were deployed to counter increased guerrilla activity from the separatist Front for the Liberation of the Cabinda Enclave (FLEC) which had declared an election boycott at the end of August.
Before the elections dos Santos and Savimbi each announced that, if elected, he was prepared to offer a role in the government to individuals from the defeated side.
On Sept. 8 they agreed that the victor would form a government which would "guarantee national reconciliation and reconstruction" but specifically excluded the possibility of a formal coalition between their parties.
Although President dos Santos had long expressed his willingness to form such a government, the agreement marked a significant policy change for Savimbi who had hitherto ruled out political co-operation with the MPLA-PT.
First results indicated an early lead for President dos Santos and the MPLA-PT.
Despite an earlier commitment to abide by the result, Savimbi indicated on Sept. 30 that he would not accept defeat as the outcome of the elections.
[Full results of the elections will be given in the October News Digest.]
AFRICA
ZAIRE
Adoption of draft constitution
Delegates to the national conference agreed on Sept. 19 to put to a referendum a 71-article draft constitution with a multiparty political framework and spelling out the country's fundamental principles.
In a further move designed to reassert its sovereign status [see p. 38852], the conference also reiterated its decision to restore the country's name before 1971, the Republic of Congo, and to adopt its former flag, motto and national anthem [see p. 39039].
Chiluba, Kikongo, Lingola and Swahili were designated official languages in addition to French, and the franc chosen to replace the zaïre as the new currency.
Approval of the draft constitution came amid renewed political initiatives by the government.
A ban on political demonstrations was lifted on Sept. 4, and on Sept. 5 President Mobutu Sese Seko gave an assurance that elections would be held "in three or six months" .
On Sept. 6 Mobutu announced his intention to submit to a popular referendum an alternative draft constitution based on "a semi-presidential regime" embodying the "inviolability of the President" — a reference to the April 1990 transitional charter freeing the President from political and legislative control [see p. 37366].
Appointment of Nguza to government post
The appointment of Jean Nguza Karl-I-Bond as Minister of State in the Office of the President was announced on national television on Sept. 2.
Nguza, who resigned as Prime Minister in August following the election by the national conference of Etienne Tshisekedi as his successor [see p. 39039], assumed his new post through a presidential ordinance issued on Aug. 31.
Clashes in Shaba
At least 20 people were killed in Likasi, Shaba province, during clashes between residents of Shaba and neighbouring Kasai province on Sept. 11-14.
In August Nguza had warned that Shaba, his home province, would not accept Tshisekedi's authority [see p. 39039].
On Sept. 17 the head of the armed forces, Lt.-Gen.
Mahele Liyeko, cautioned politicians against "behaviour likely to oblige the forces to intervene" .
Relations with Belgium
On Sept. 24 in Brussels Belgian Foreign Affairs Minister Willy Claes agreed with his Zäirean counterpart, Pierre Lumbi, to resume Belgian bilateral assistance; this had been frozen in May 1990 in protest at the government's handling of student demonstrations, when some 50 students died [see p. 37553].
Discriminatory measures imposed against Belgium in retaliation in June 1990, including the expulsion of 700 Belgian development workers, had been lifted on Sept 9.
AFRICA
CONGO
New Prime Minister and Cabinet
On Sept. 1 the newly elected President Pascal Lissouba [see p. 39040]appointed Stephane Bongho-Nouarra, a minister in a number of administrations in the 1960s, as Prime Minister.
A new Cabinet was named on Sept. 7.
Members of seven parties making up the Union for Democratic Renewal (URD), a newly formed opposition alliance, refused to join the government.
Several other parties were nevertheless represented in the new Cabinet, although party affiliations were not detailed in the official list.
The new Prime Minister described his team as a "war cabinet" which would launch an "all-out assault" on the country's economic and social problems.
He emphasized that he had chosen ministers on grounds of expertise — only three members of the Cabinet had previous ministerial experience.
On Sept. 18 Isidore Mvouba was dismissed as Minister of Trade and Commerce after he failed to attend the first meeting of the Cabinet, attending instead a meeting of his own party, the (formerly ruling) Congolese Labour Party (PCT).
French aid
On Sept. 9 an official from the French Ministry of Economy and Finance announced that France would help Congo to pay off debt arrears owed to international financial institutions in order to enable the resumption of co-operation between Congo and these bodies.
Stephane Bongho-Nouarra Prime Minister, Chairman of the Committee for Priorities and Planning Martin M'beri Minister of State for Interior and Security in charge of Regional Development and Relations with Parliament Gen. Raymond Damase Ngollo Minister of State for National Defence and Military Condition Benjamin Bounkoulou Foreign Affairs, Co-operation and Hydrocarbons Clement Mouamba Economy, Finance and Planning in charge of Forecast and Economic Reforms Jean-François Tchibinda Kouangou Justice and Keeper of the Seals André-Georges Mouyabi Civil Service and Administrative Reforms
Principal members of new Congo Cabinet
AFRICA
NIGERIA
Party primaries
Groups of primary elections were held in Nigeria on Sept. 12, 19 and 26, and were contested by candidates seeking the presidential nominations of the country's two military-backed political parties — the National Republican Convention (NRC) and the Social Democratic Party (SDP).
The primary process had been aborted on Aug. 7 [see p. 39041]because of widespread abuses including vote-buying, double counting and the use of "flying" voters from neighbouring states.
Following the suspension of the electoral process President Ibrahim Babangida sought to reduce the level of corruption by promulgating on Sept. 3 a decree which impose severe penalties on anyone found guilty of electoral corruption.
Under the new law electors found guilty of malpractice faced fines of up to 5,000 naira (US$1=18.45 naira as at Sept. 7, 1992) and two years' imprisonment, while anyone who was banned from participating in the political process but who was found guilty of supporting or sponsoring a candidate was liable to a 10,000 naira fine and five years' imprisonment.
Candidates found guilty of malpractice were liable to be disenfranchised and banned from holding elective office for 10 years.
Despite the new decree the primaries were bedeviled with allegations of corruption.
The final round on Sept. 26 was boycotted by several SDP candidates because of alleged bias by the party's leadership.
Provisional results suggested that a former Chief of Staff, Maj.-Gen.
Shehu Musa Yar'Adua, had won most votes in the SDP primaries.
Run-off elections to decide finally on the presidential nominees, originally planned for Oct. 3, were rescheduled to Oct. 10.
AFRICA
TOGO
Continuing problems of transition
Following the extension until Dec. 31 of the period of transition to multiparty democracy which was to have been completed by Aug. 28 [see p. 39041], Prime Minister Joseph Kokou Koffigoh officially dissolved his government on Sept. 1, but asked its members to continue in a caretaker role.
Koffigoh held talks with President Gnasssingbe Eyadema on Sept. 2, when it was agreed that the delayed constitutional referendum would take place on Sept. 27, with local elections on Oct. 11 and two-stage legislative elections on Oct. 31 and Nov. 14 and the presidential poll, also in two stages, on Dec. 6 and 20.
Political tension remained high.
On the night of Aug. 28-29, the home of Raphael Houyenga, Director of the Prime Minister's Cabinet, was bombed.
Radio Lomé said on Sept. 5 that the home of Nguessan Ouattara, chairman of the opposition Democratic Convention of African Peoples, had been damaged by a bomb.
On Sept. 4 a member of the High Council of the Republic (HCR), Madeleine Adayoma, was flogged by security personnel as she left the Lomé radio studios after taking part in a programme.
Equipment and Mines Minister Joseph Yao Amefia, a close associate of Koffigoh, was reported on Sept. 8 as having narrowly escaped an assassination attempt.
On the morning of Sept. 13 Radio Togo broadcast a communiqué read by a member of the armed forces attacking Koffigoh's transitional government as "a complete failure" , and threatening to appoint a new government unless Koffigoh had done so by 11 a.m.
GMT that day.
At noon the radio broadcast a joint statement from Koffigoh and Eyadema, calling for discipline.
On Sept. 14, Radio Lomé announced the composition of a government of 18 ministers in addition to Koffigoh, the key appointments being Inoussa Traore Bouraima (Defence); Ouatara Fambare Natachaba (Foreign Affairs and Cooperation); Aregba Polo (Justice); Komlan Mensah Benjamin Agbeka (Communications and Culture), and Yandja Yentchabre (Planning and Territorial Administration); Elias Kwassivi Kpetigo remained as Economy and Finance Minister.
Amefia was replaced by Yao Tete Samuel Atikpo.
Radio France Internationale reported the same day that it had received a communication from the leaders of three Togolese opposition parties protesting that (the above) key portfolios had gone to members of Eyadema's party, the Togolese People's Rally (RPT), and calling on the HCR not to ratify the list.
Constitutional referendum
On Sept. 28 Security Minister Mensan Agbeyome Kodjo announced the results of the referendum held the previous day, stating that 99.09 per cent of votes cast had been in favour of constitutional change.
AFRICA
GHANA
Decision by Rawlings to stand in presidential elections
Ghana's leader, Flt. -Lt.
Jerry Rawlings, retired from the armed forces on Sept. 14, although he remained commander-in-chief of the military through his position as Chairman of the Provisional National Defence Council (PNDC) and as head of state.
His retirement made Rawlings constitutionally eligible to stand for election, and on Sept. 19, while addressing a large rally in Cape Coast, he announced that he had accepted an invitation by the National Democratic Congress (NDC) to stand as the party's candidate in the presidential elections scheduled for November 1992.
It was announced on Sept. 23 that the Eagle Party had agreed to subsume itself within the NDC in support of the candidacy of Rawlings (the national congress of the Eagle Party having itself asked Rawlings on Sept. 13 to be its presidential candidate).
There had been intense speculation over whether or not Rawlings would compete in the first free presidential contest since his return to power in a military coup in December 1981 (having previously chaired the Armed Forces Revolutionary Council which had ruled Ghana from June to September 1979 — see pp. 30437-51; 31477-86).
Having prohibited party politics on the grounds that it fostered corruption, patronage and tribalism, Rawlings had finally given in to domestic and international pressure for a return to multiparty politics.
In accepting the NDC's nomination, however, he stressed that he was "not seeking power for its own sake but to provide social and economic justice for our people" .
A major source of opposition to the return of Rawlings to power was expected to come from the Nkrumahist parties.
Reports over the previous four months that unity negotiations were under way among the various political heirs of Kwame Nkrumah were confirmed by an announcement on Sept. 10 that three Nkrumahist parties, the National Independence Party (NIP), the People's Heritage Party (PHP), and the unregistered Popular Party for Democracy and Development (PPDD), had agreed to an electoral alliance, pledging themselves to support a single presidential candidate and one parliamentary candidate in each of the country's 200 constituencies.
AFRICA
LIBERIA
Obstacles to peacekeeping efforts
Relations between peacekeeping forces of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) Monitoring Group (ECOMOG), and rebel leader Charles Taylor's National Patriotic Front of Liberia (NPFL), deteriorated sharply during September.
On Sept. 6 the NPFL's radio station at Taylor's headquarters at Gbarnga repeated the Front's call [see p. 39041]for UN intervention in the conflict, and accused Nigeria of "using Liberia as a test case" to prove that it was "an African superpower" .
The NPFL accused ECOMOG of supporting its rival, the allegedly Sierra Leone-based United Liberation Movement for Democracy (Ulimo)[see pp. 39041-42].
Next day the ECOMOG field commander, Maj.-Gen.
Ishaya Bakut, announced that he was withdrawing ECOMOG forces from NPFL areas.
On Sept. 9 ECOMOG accused the NPFL of forcibly disarming peacekeeping troops.
The same day Liberia's caretaker President, Amos Sawyer, announced in Monrovia, the capital, that NPFL guerrillas had taken more than 400 ECOMOG soldiers hostage.
Freed three days later, 236 of the men had returned to Monrovia by Sept. 13.
On Sept. 17 President Babangida of Nigeria called for the imposition of sanctions against Liberian parties which had failed to comply with the Yamoussoukro lV peace agreement [see p. 38993].
On Sept. 30 Radio Nigeria announced that Maj.-Gen.
Bakut had been replaced as ECOMOG field commander by Maj.-Gen.
Adetunji Olurin, also a Nigerian.
On Sept. 24, thousands of civilians were reported to be fleeing Bomi and Grand Cape Mount Counties in north-western Liberia, where battles were raging between NPFL and Ulimo forces.
News agencies cited NPFL reports that 1,500-2,000 people had been killed, and said that numbers of refugees had died of exhaustion and hunger trying to reach Monrovia.
On Sept. 30 Radio ELBC (Monrovia) said that the interim government was concerned at persistent reports of massacres by the NPFL of hundreds of civilians in the north-west.
AFRICA
SENEGAL
Renewed separatist violence in Casamance
Separatist guerrillas of the Movement of Democratic Forces of Casamance (Mouvement des forces démocratiques de Casamance — MFDC) on Sept. 1 clashed with government troops at Kaguitt village in Senegal's southern province of Casamance, near the Guinea-Bissau border, leaving 50 guerrillas and two soldiers dead, according to army reports.
Sixty-nine people were said to have been wounded.
An army spokesman quoted by Agence France-Presse news agency said that soldiers had been attacked while pitching camp at Kaguitt.
Reinforcements had been called in from Ziguinchor, the provincial capital, and an army search operation was reported throughout the province in the succeeding days.
The attack was described as the bloodiest in the troubled post-independence history of Casamance, and was the first major outbreak of violence since the government signed a peace agreement with the MFDC in May 1991.
On Sept. 5 it was reported that the army had imposed a virtual blockade on Casamance, and the following day, Le Monde said that officials of the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) in Geneva were concerned by the authorities' refusal to allow Red Cross personnel into the area.
Marcel Bassene, chairman of the Casamance Peace Management Committee [see p. 38711], attributed the renewed violence to a split within the MFDC.
AFRICA
NIGER
Army's unauthorized action against Tuareg rebels
Lower ranks of the army in the troubled Tuareg areas of northern Niger were reported in the four days to Aug. 31 to have imposed martial law, ordered a curfew, and carried out in Agades, Arlit and Tchirozerine, a wave of arrests of alleged members or sympathizers of the Liberation Front of Air and Azawad (FLAA).
Mohammed Ewangai, introduced on Radio France Internationale on Sept. 1 as a leader of the FLAA, said that the rebels' response was "clear and simple; it is war" .
The FLAA had continued to harass northern areas in the face of previous government threats of force [see p. 38708].
The soldiers in the north were reported to be taking orders from a de facto "joint high command" of members of the gendarmerie, republican guard and police, headed by a Capt. Baraje and based in Agades.
On Aug. 28, the Interior Minister, Daouda Rabiou, made a statement on national television apparently going along with the men's action, and the government subsequently seemed powerless to do otherwise.
The powerful Federation of Niger Trade Unions (USTN) was reported on Sept. 4 to be supporting the soldiers' action.
On Sept. 1 it was reported that those arrested included the Minister of Commerce, Transport and Tourism, Mohammed Moussa, himself a Tuareg, and two members of the transitional national legislature, the High Council of the Republic (HCR).
On Sept 6 it was reported that soldiers had refused access to their prisoners by International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) personnel, and that those arrested included a former minister, Khamed Abdoulaye, an aide of Prime Minister Cheiffou Amadou, and several other prominent personalities.
On Sept. 7 the army announced that a total of 186 people were under arrest.
Soldiers in Agades rioted on Sept. 22, threatening that 110 Tuareg civilians would be executed unless the rebels freed 40 police and army hostages within 48 hours, but by Sept. 24, officers had reportedly restored order.
AFRICA
ETHIOPIA
Proclamation on central and regional government powers
The Council of Representatives on Sept. 7 adopted a draft proclamation on the respective authority and responsibilities of central and regional governments.
Voice of Ethiopia radio said on Sept. 8 that the draft proclamation was in keeping with the provisions of Ethiopia's National Charter [see p. 38322], and that each of 20 ministries would have an office in every region, answerable to regional councils.
Eritrean referendum plans
Voice of the Broad Masses of Eritrea radio announced from Asmara on Sept. 26 that the Organization of African Unity (OAU) was to send observers to Eritrea for the planned referendum on independence in April 1993 [see p. 38855].
Hijacking
Two men and a woman armed with grenades hijacked an Ethiopian Airlines Boeing 727 airliner on a flight from Dire Dawa in eastern Ethiopia to Addis Ababa, the capital, on Sept. 4 and forced the pilot to land in Djibouti [for Aug. 28 hijacking see p. 39042].
The 50 passengers were released, but the hijackers held four crew members hostage for several hours during negotiations with the Djibouti authorities and Ethiopian embassy officials.
The hijackers gave themselves up after receiving assurances that they could seek asylum elsewhere.
AFRICA
DJIBOUTI
Adoption of multiparty constitution
A new draft constitution submitted to referendum by President Hassan Gouled Aptidon was overwhelmingly approved on Sept. 4.
The turnout was given as 75.16 per cent of some 120,000 eligible voters, and provisional figures showed 96.84 per cent as approving the draft, according to the Interior Ministry on Sept. 5; 96.79 per cent approving a second proposition to restrict the number of political parties to four.
A general election was scheduled for Nov. 20, according to an announcement by Radio Djibouti on Sept. 8.
AFRICA
SOMALIA
Arrival of UN troops
The first group of 66 Pakistani soldiers, members of a 500-strong armed UN contingent being dispatched to protect emergency food distribution in Mogadishu, arrived from Islamabad on Sept. 14 and 15, aboard six US military C-130 transport planes.
The rest were scheduled to arrive before the end of September.
At Mogadishu port, rival gangs of gunmen continued throughout the month to obstruct the transport of food to Somalia's famine victims.
Abdulkarim Ahmed Ali, secretary-general of the United Somali Congress (USC), greeted the troops at Mogadishu airport.
This was seen as an important gesture of approval since the Somali National Alliance (SNA — led by Gen. Farah Aydid), of which a USC faction was one of four member groups, had earlier opposed UN plans to deploy a total of 3,500 troops in the country, although the USC had agreed to the 500 Pakistanis [see p. 39034].
On Sept. 16 the US administration ordered four US navy warships with 2,400 marines aboard from the Gulf to the Somali coast.
On Sept. 19 Aydid called on the USA to withdraw the marines, and also ruled out the proposed deployment of a further 3,000 UN troops, saying that their presence would not solve Somalia's problems.
Evidence of worsening famine
Mohamed Sahnoun, the UN Secretary-General's special representative, was quoted on Sept. 4 as saying that the famine, in which relief agencies had estimated that 1,500,000 people faced death, was in fact far worse than had been realised.
The same day the USA was reported to have extended its food airlift to the town of Baidoa, where hundreds were said to be dying from starvation each day.
On Sept. 8, Associated Press reported that a UN delegation had met Gen. Aydid and proposed an intensive 100-day effort to move food through "corridors of tranquillity" to starving people in southern areas, but that the general had not agreed.
On Aug. 31 the World Food Programme, the main co-ordinator of the UN relief effort in Somalia, had announced that it was to double the volume of UN food aid from the original 68,000 tonnes to 140,000 tonnes.
Visit of EC ministers
United Kingdom Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd, Danish Foreign Minister Uffe Ellemann-Jensen and Dura Barroso, the Portuguese State Secretary, representing the European Communities (EC), visited Mogadishu on Sept. 5, the most senior foreign delegation to go to Somalia for 20 months.
Hurd criticized the slowness of the international effort, and pledged that the EC would increase humanitarian aid.
Le Monde of Sept. 15 reported that EC food aid to Somalia in 1992 had totalled 185,000 tonnes.
AFRICA
KENYA
Rivalry over election of presidential candidate
An estimated 3,000 delegates from one faction claiming to represent the opposition Forum for the Restoration of Democracy (FORD) gathered in Nairobi on Sept. 4 and unanimously elected Jaramogi Oginga Odinga as FORD chairman and designated him the party's presidential candidate.
The vote was boycotted by a rival faction led by Kenneth Matiba and Martin Shikuku, who had differed with Odinga over methods of selecting FORD's presidential candidate [see p. 39040].
On Sept. 6 the Matiba faction issued a press statement declaring Odinga's election "irregular, illegal, null and void" , and on Sept. 13 held separate elections at which Matiba was elected unopposed as FORD chairman.
A series of bomb explosions on Sept. 3 near the venue of the Odinga faction's congress and the outbreak of sporadic fighting between supporters of the two groups sparked fears of tribal violence between the Luo (followers of Odinga), and the Kikuyu and Luhya (supporters of Matiba and Shikuku respectively).
It was also reported that the Odinga faction met legal difficulties when attempting to have the results of its internal elections validated, the Matiba group having lodged a complaint with the registrar of political parties questioning the legitimacy of the Odinga congress.
A section within the Matiba faction, led by Charles Rubia, on Sept. 30 launched the Kenya National Congress (KNC).
On Sept. 16 Rubia had explained the move to establish a new party "as a strategy that could help bring together the two factions of [FORD]" .
AFRICA
RWANDA
Inconclusive peace talks
The transitional government and the rebel Rwandan Patriotic Front (FPR) held a third round of discussions on Sept. 7-17 in Arusha, northern Tanzania, chaired by the Tanzanian Foreign Affairs and International Relations Minister, Hassan Ahmed Diria.
Peace talks had begun in Arusha on July 10, following a preparatory meeting in Paris a month earlier, in an attempt to end the rebellion which had begun in October 1990 [see pp. 37765-66; 38950; 38996].
As the third round opened Rwanda's Foreign Affairs Minister, Boniface Ngulinzaira, accused the FPR of having violated the ceasefire signed by the two sides on July 12.
The FPR's Radio Muhabura, on the other hand, carried the allegation on Sept. 6 that the Front's positions had been attacked by government troops, and the FPR denied that its own forces had been on the offensive.
The talks appeared to end unsatisfactorily, after becoming bogged down in disagreement over power-sharing proposals.
Radio Tanzania on Sept. 18 cited Diria as saying that both sides were being given the opportunity to go home and clarify their positions.
The Zimbabwean Defence Minister, Moven Mahachi, reportedly announced in Harare on Sept. 7 that Zimbabwe would be sending a small number of military officers to Rwanda to join peace monitors invited by the UN and the Organization of African Unity (OAU).
An OAU Military Observer Group (GOM) was provided for under the July ceasefire agreement.
AFRICA
TANZANIA
Freeing of opposition leader
The Tanzanian High Court quashed prison sentences against Christopher Mtikila, the leader of the unregistered opposition Democratic Party, and three of his colleagues on Sept. 14.
The court ruled that there had been a "failure of justice" in the original trial in a lower court, when the accused were not allowed to include a full range of documentation in their defence submissions.
The four men had been convicted in August of illegal assembly while holding a public meeting in Dodoma, the designated administrative capital 400 km west of Dar es Salaam, as part of a recruitment drive for the Democratic Party.
Although a new law allowing multiparty politics had come into effect in July 1992, rallies remained subject to government control and were permissible only for registered parties.
Rescheduling of debt by Japan
Japan and Tanzania agreed on Sept. 11 to reschedule the latter's debts, totalling some US$40,000,000.
AFRICA
MALAWI
Formation of opposition group
The formation of an opposition Alliance for Democracy (Aford), headed by a 13-member interim committee chaired by the prominent trade unionist Chakufwa Chihana, was announced on Sept. 21.
The new group represented the country's first organized internal opposition for 30 years.
In a statement coinciding with its formation, Aford said that "the alliance is not a political party, but a pressure group formed to campaign openly through peaceful and lawful means for democratic reform" .
Stressing that members "who have come out in the open face a serious risk of arrest and detention" , Aford urged the international community "to sustain diplomatic and moral pressure on the Malawian government to respect human rights" .
On Sept. 27 President Hastings Kamuzu Banda accused "foreign groups" of backing "dissidents" who were trying "to disturb the country economically and politically" .
The trial of Chihana, released on bail on Sept. 8 [for his arrest in April see p. 38851; for his release and subsequent rearrest in July see pp. 38995-96], was deferred until Oct. 12 after his counsel argued that irregularities on the part of the authorities threatened a miscarriage of justice.
AFRICA
COMOROS
Attempted coup
A group of soldiers seized the radio station and airport at Moroni, the capital, on Sept. 26, while President Said Mohammed Djohar was on a private visit to Paris.
The rebels gave themselves up to loyal officers later that day.
The Indian Ocean Newsletter of Sept. 12 suggested that Djohar had infuriated representatives of many of the country's 24 political parties the previous week, by setting unilaterally Oct. 25 as the date for the first round of elections to the Federal Assembly and by imposing new conditions for parties' participation.
According to the report the majority of parties had indicated that they would boycott the election.
According to Radio Française d'Outre-Mer on the nearby French-administered island of Mayotte, about 30 officers were involved in the coup attempt, led by Lt. Abderamane Abdallah and Lt. Cheikh Abdallah, sons of the former President, Ahmed Abdallah Abderrahman, who was assassinated on Nov. 27, 1989, in the coup which brought Djohar to power [see pp. 37033-34].
Le Monde of Sept. 29 quoted Djohar as alleging that Mohamed Taki Abdoulkarim, whom he had dismissed as head of government on July 4 [see p. 38996; for his appointment in January 1992 see pp. 38706-07], was behind the Sept. 26 coup attempt.
According to Le Monde, a third ringleader, known as "Captain Combo" , had escaped.
The newspaper described "Captain Combo" as a former member of the Presidential Guard and "very close" to Bob Denard, the French mercenary who had been in charge of President Abdallah's Presidential Guard at the time of the November 1989 coup, and who had lived since then in South Africa.
AFRICA
BENIN
Mohammed Amadou Cissé, for many years Minister of State in charge of security and former President Mathieu Kérékou's personal adviser and soothsayer, was on Sept. 7 sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment and fined 3,000,000 francs CFA after having been found guilty of embezzling 3,500 million francs CFA of public funds (US$1=238.522 francs CFA as at Sept. 7, 1992); his nine co-defendants received prison terms ranging from three to eight years.
AFRICA
GUINEA-BISSAU
On Sept. 3 Minister of Defence Samba Lamine Mane disclosed that large numbers of soldiers had deserted because of appalling living standards; every armed forces unit had been affected by desertions (he did not specify the exact number), and 80 army and naval officers were threatening to strike if there were no improvement in food and accommodation.
AFRICA
MALI
It was reported on Sept. 9 that following repeated requests by the opposition, 45 senior officers in the armed forces were dismissed; the changes included the replacement of Col. Souleymane Bate by Col. Toumani Cissoko as Chief of Staff.
AMERICAS
UNITED STATES
Presidential election campaign
Formal opening of campaign
The traditional Labor Day start of the presidential election campaign, on Sept. 7, saw an intensification of the efforts of Democratic Party nominee Bill Clinton and his Republican rival and incumbent President, George Bush.
Clinton, who the opinion polls consistently suggested enjoyed a significant lead, continued his relentless attack on the economic record of the Bush-Reagan years and repeated the underlying message of his campaign that it was time for change.
Amid signs of increasing desperation, Bush appeared to adopt a two-pronged strategy, using his powers as President to take actions calculated to improve his popularity, while his campaign staff increased the negative content of the campaign by intensifying their attacks on the character of Clinton, particularly in regard to his attempts as a student to avoid being drafted to Vietnam.
With newly appointed White House Chief of Staff James Baker firmly in charge of Bush's re-election bid, the campaign shifted away from the religious right-wing agenda (particularly the issues of "family values" and implacable opposition to abortion) which had been so pronounced in past months, and which had been shown consistently to be out of alignment with the views of the mainstream of the electorate.
In a speech in Detroit, on Sept. 10, Bush presented a new economic package which included a proposal for large tax cuts and a promise not to raise taxes again "ever, ever" .
On the following day, while visiting the McDonnell Douglas plant near St Louis, Missouri, he announced his intention to proceed with the sale of 72 F-15 fighter aircraft to Saudi Arabia which would guarantee thousands of jobs at the plant.
This pattern was repeated in numerous states on the campaign trail, including southern Florida where he promised to rebuild the Homestead air base shattered by Hurricane Andrew, and South Dakota where he offered $1,000 million in new subsidies to boost grain exports.
The intensification of attacks on the character of Clinton included fresh revelations that an uncle of his might have attempted to use his influence to prevent him from being drafted for service in Vietnam.
Although the details of Clinton's draft record were tortuously complex and, by common consent, of limited relevance to the presidential campaign, Republicans made some effective political capital from the repeated suggestion that he had been evasive over admitting the truth of the matter.
It was this alleged inability to set the record straight which increasingly became the central focus of Republican attacks on the degree to which Clinton's character was suitable for the highest office in the country.
Although initially Bush remained largely aloof from this negative campaign against Clinton, he made an emotional speech to a convention of the National Guard in Salt Lake City, Utah, on Sept. 15 in which he obliquely touched on the draft record of his opponent by questioning Clinton's credentials as a future commander-in-chief of the US military.
In New York City on Sept. 21 Bush said that the Democratic nominee had "not told the full truth" over the draft issue.
Preparations by Ross Perot to re-enter campaign
At the end of September the picture was complicated by increasing evidence that the billionaire Ross Perot, who had campaigned as an undeclared candidate in the early stages of the race but then withdrawn [see pp. 38997-98], was set to make a formal declaration of his candidacy.
Despite his withdrawal, Perot had spent some $500,000 per month maintaining a skeleton campaign structure which included 64 offices across the country, and his supporters had filed petitions ensuring that his name had been included on the ballot in every state.
Perot informed the Los Angeles Times on Sept. 15, that if the two main candidates continued to ignore the importance of reducing the federal deficit, then he would be forced to re-enter the campaign in order to return the issue of fiscal propriety to the forefront of the electoral agenda.
Primary elections
In primary elections held on Sept. 22, Steven Solarz, a New York member of the House of Representatives and former leading member of the House foreign affairs committee, who was deeply involved in the House "rubbergate" scandal [see p. 38807], failed to secure his party's nomination.
The defeat of Solarz and of Chester G. Atkins, a Democrat representing Massachusetts, brought the total of incumbents in the House who had been defeated in primaries to 19, the highest number since 1945.
Geraldine Ferraro, who had been the Democratic vice-presidential candidate in 1984, once again suffered because of her husband's alleged connections with the Mafia and failed to win the Democratic nomination for a Senate seat for New York.
Also on Sept. 22 the former mayor of Washington DC, Marion Barry, took a first step towards resuming his political career by winning the Democratic nomination for a safe seat on the city council.
Barry had been forced from office in 1990, and had served six months in prison, after being secretly videotaped in the act of smoking crack cocaine.
Despite further negative publicity while in prison Barry had emerged from his period of incarceration claiming that he had undergone a religious rebirth.
Presidential veto of Family Leave bill
President Bush cast the 32nd veto of his presidency when, on Sept. 22, he vetoed the Family Leave bill.
Bush, who had vetoed a similar measure in June 1990 [see p. 37605], condemned the bill on the grounds that it would place an intolerable and unnecessary financial and regulatory burden on businesses.
The bill was designed to permit workers in companies with more than 50 employees to take up to 12 weeks of unpaid leave annually to care for a sick or new child, receive medical treatment or tend to a seriously ill spouse or parent.
Bush had recently proposed an alternative which would provide tax credits to all but the largest businesses if they voluntarily adopted a similar leave policy.
On Sept. 24 the Senate voted by 68 votes to 31 to override the veto.
When the bill was reconsidered by the House of Representatives on Sept 30, however, the lower chamber voted by only 258 votes to 169 to override.
By falling 27 votes short of the necessary two-thirds majority the House ensured that Bush maintained his record of never having had a veto overturned.
Furthermore, as Congress approached its October adjournment, several other pieces of legislation threatened to precipitate veto confrontations between Bush and the legislature.
[For Bush's Sept. 29 veto on linking China's trade preference status with human rights, see p. 39095.]
Iran-contra investigation
Independent Counsel Lawrence E. Walsh announced on Sept. 17 that his investigation into the Iran-contra scandal was nearing its end, and that "in the absence of some new development" he did not expect any further indictments in connection with the affair.
The investigation — into how illegal arms sales were made to Iran and the profits clandestinely diverted to support the contra rebels in Nicaragua — had begun in December 1986.
It cost an estimated total of $32,500,000, and resulted in guilty pleas or convictions against eight people, including former White House aide Oliver North.
In late 1991 the investigation was reinvigorated by the discovery of notes made by former Secretary of Defence Caspar Weinberger, which led to his indictment [see p. 38955].
The forthcoming trials of Weinberger and of retired Central Intelligence Agency official Duane R. Clarridge were not directly affected by the decision to end the inquiry, nor was the retrial of CIA official Clair E. George, whose first trial had ended in August with the jury unable to agree on a verdict [see p. 39043].
Despite the winding down of the investigation, the Iran-contra inquiry continued to pose severe difficulties for George Bush, the incumbent President and the Republican Party candidate for the November 1992 presidential elections.
Bush had consistently claimed that, as Vice-President in the Reagan administration, he was "out of the loop" and knew very little of the Iran-contra operation until it became public.
An increasing amount of documentary material, however, particularly among the evidence which led to the indictment of Weinberger, suggested that Bush had not merely known of, but also encouraged pursuit of the deal against the objections of Weinberger and the then Secretary of State George Shultz.
The allegation of Bush's support for the operation was supported by an interview given on Sept. 24 by Richard V. Secord, the chief logistical officer for the Iran-contra affair, to support the publication of his memoirs.
According to Secord, Bush was a powerful advocate of the illegal arms sale and knew of the operation from an early stage.
This view was reinforced by a television interview given on Sept. 24 by Howard Teicher, a former member of staff of the National Security Council, who insisted that he had personally "briefed the then Vice-President several times" about the Iran-contra initiative.
As the Republicans continued their attacks upon the character and judgment of Democratic presidential candidate Bill Clinton, many Democrats, including Clinton, used the fresh Iran-contra revelations to question the conduct and honesty of Bush.
Continuing ramifications of Tailhook scandal
The Defence Department Inspector General, Derek J. Vander Schaaf, released on Sept. 24 his report into the Tailhook affair, the most serious sexual scandal to have broken in the US military for decades.
The report accused the Navy of failing to pursue reports of sexual harassment and assault at a convention of the Tailhook Association of Navy and Marine aviators, held in Las Vegas in September 1991.
The incident had led to the dismissal of Navy Secretary H. Lawrence Garrett III in June, after one of the victims of the affair, Navy Lt. Paula Coughlin, had publicly described the ordeal experienced by herself and at least 25 of her female colleagues at the hands of drunken male aviators.
Prior to his dismissal Garrett had commissioned Vander Schaaf to investigate allegations that the Navy's own investigation of the matter had been less than thorough.
Vander Schaaf's report stated that senior officials in charge of the inquiry had "allowed their concern for the Navy to obscure the need to determine accountability for the misconduct" .
Those singled out for criticism included Rear Adml.
Duvall "Mac" Williams, commander of the Naval Investigative Service Command (which handled criminal inquiries); Rear Adml.
John E. Gordon, Navy Judge and Advocate General (the service's chief legal officer); Rear Adml.
George W. Davis, the Navy Inspector General; and J. Daniel Howard, Under-Secretary of the Navy.
Acting Navy Secretary Sean C. O'Keefe, Garrett's successor, announced at a press conference on Sept. 24 that Williams and Gordon had been granted requests for early retirement, while Davis had been reassigned to another post.
Although O'Keefe announced that he was taking no action against Howard, he emphasized a variety of measures which were being adopted in order to improve naval attitudes towards women and to facilitate future investigations of such incidents.
Indictment of former manager of House Post Office
A federal grand jury on Sept. 10 determined that employees at the Post Office of the House of Representatives had engaged in a conspiracy to defraud the government, and had used public funds to benefit members of Congress.
The three-count indictment named only one defendant, Joanna G. O'Rourke, the former manager of the House Post Office.
O'Rourke appeared in court on Sept. 17 and pleaded guilty to misdemeanour charges of embezzlement and misuse of public funds which carried a possible prison sentence of up to one year; under the terms of a plea bargain arrangement, the federal prosecutors agreed to drop the third and more serious felony charge.
O'Rourke was the second House postal supervisor to co-operate with the investigation.
Her immediate subordinate, James C. Smith, had been granted immunity from prosecution.
Californian budget crisis
The Republican Governor of California, Pete Wilson, ended a financial crisis in the USA's largest state by signing a $56,600 million budget on Sept. 2.
The move brought to an end an intense struggle between Wilson and the Democrat-controlled state legislature over how to deal with the state's $10,700 million budget deficit.
The impasse had resulted in California having no budget for 65 days, during which time the state's authorities had been forced to issue more than $3,000 million-worth of "warrants" (IOUs) in order to meet payroll and other contractual obligations.
In the final days of the crisis, financial institutions had begun to refuse to honour the warrants, thereby threatening to precipitate a widespread closure of state offices.
The underlying cause of the problem was a 1978 initiative, Proposition 13, which had more than halved local property taxes, thereby impoverishing local government.
The state government had been forced to intervene and support services such as welfare programmes and county hospitals which might otherwise have collapsed.
During the Reagan-Bush years, however, the level of federal aid to California fell sharply and, with the state's budget deficit spiralling upwards, Wilson had been elected Governor with a commitment to balance the budget without recourse to increased taxation.
According to Wilson, welfare payments were the "prime engine" powering the state's budget deficit, and the number of welfare recipients was rising four times faster than the population at large.
Wilson, who was not due to face a gubernatorial election until 1994, but whose position as a possible future Republican presidential candidate was already damaged by his decision to raise taxes in 1991, had been adamant that the deficit should be rectified through public expenditure cuts rather than by further tax increases.
A majority of Democrats, however, having accepted budget cuts of $7,000 million in 1991, were unprepared to make another round of even deeper cuts within a few weeks of state elections.
Eventually, in late August, the state legislature approved a budget similar to that which it had rejected on June 30.
The package contained deep spending cuts including cuts of $1,700 million from health and welfare programmes and $1,300 million from aid to local government.
It also designated $1,0000 million of the education budget as a loan which would have to be repaid from future allocations.
Even then Wilson refused to sign the budget bill until congress had passed enabling legislation which provided for a suspension of the minimum school financing requirement (which, under the terms of a 1988 initiative, had been set at 40 per cent of the state's general fund) should the education loan be ruled unconstitutional in court.
Congress reluctantly capitulated to this final demand on Sept. 1, thereby opening the way for Wilson to end the impasse by signing the budget bill in the early hours of Sept. 2.
Abortion
The US Court of Appeals for the 5th Circuit on Sept. 22 struck down a Louisiana statute which prohibited abortion in most instances and which provided draconian penalties for doctors who performed illegal abortions.
The judgment was the first major decision on the issue since the Supreme Court's June 29 decision, in Planned Parenthood of Southeastern Pennsylvania v. Casey, upholding the constitutional right to abortion but accepting a state's right to restrict access to abortion as long as it did not place an "undue burden" on those seeking a termination [see pp. 38954-55].
The Louisiana law criminalized abortion in all instances apart from where the life of the mother was deemed to be in danger or where pregnancy had resulted from rape or incest.
(The rape and incest clauses applied only until the 13th week of gestation.)
Doctors performing illegal abortion were liable to prison sentences of up to 10 years and fines of up to $100,000.
The three-judge panel of the 5th Circuit found the law "clearly unconstitutional" under the terms of the Supreme Court's June 29 decision, although the judgment did little to clarify the outstanding question of how lower courts would interpret the Supreme Court's ruling on "undue burden" .
Success of child's bid to obtain legal separation from mother
A state circuit court judge in Orlando, Florida, on Sept. 25 ruled in favour of a 12-year-old boy's request to end the parental rights of his natural mother.
The boy, Gregory Kingsley, gave evidence that his biological mother, with whom he had lived for only seven months in the eight years prior to the case, had neglected and abandoned him.
He had initiated the case in April 1992, and in July a Florida juvenile court had ruled that, under the state's constitution, he was entitled to sue his mother for neglect and to seek adoption by his foster parents.
He was assisted in bringing the case by George H. Russ, his foster father since October 1991, who was a local lawyer.
Within the context of a presidential election campaign where the issue of "family values" was high on the agenda, the case aroused strong public feeling.
While some described it as an important strengthening of the rights of children, others saw it as a willingness to overturn natural family links in order to pander to a child's desire to acquire richer parents.
A further complication arose from the fact that Kingsley's natural mother was a Roman Catholic who objected to the prospect of her son being brought up by the Russ family, who were Mormons.
Following the conclusion of the trial, lawyers for Kingsley's mother announced their intention to appeal against the ruling to the 5th District Court of Appeals in Florida.
If upheld in appellate court the case could form an important precedent in family law.
Hurricane Iniki — Progress of relief operation following Hurricane Andrew
The US state of Hawaii suffered severe damage on Sept. 11 when it was struck by Hurricane Iniki, the strongest to have hit the Hawaiian islands during the 20th century.
Most of the state was declared a federal disaster area and, on Sept. 12, military transports began a massive airlift of food, medical supplies and search and rescue teams.
The island of Kauai bore the brunt of the storm, experiencing wind gusts of up to 250 kph and six-metre waves which left at least 8,000 of the island's 51,000 inhabitants homeless.
The infrastructure associated with the island's tourist and sugar industries — the main pillars of Kauai's economy — suffered severe damage.
Iniki was only fractionally weaker than Hurricane Andrew, which had caused severe damage in the Bahamas, Florida and Louisiana in late August [see p. 39044].
Even after it subsided, Hurricane Andrew continued to cause problems through the fierce political controversy generated by the widespread criticism concerning the speed and efficiency of relief operations.
At the beginning of September the first official estimates suggested that insurance companies would have to pay up to $7,300 million in damage claims arising from Andrew, making it the most costly natural catastrophe in US history.
It was also estimated that some 275,000 of the hurricane's victims remained without electricity and that 150,000 were homeless.
President George Bush, who had visited the affected region in the immediate aftermath of the hurricane, made a second visit to Florida and Louisiana on Sept. 1, and pledged that the federal government would continue with the relief operation "until the job is done" .
In what was widely interpreted as a bid for electoral advantage — securing Florida's 25 electoral college votes was seen as essential if Bush was to win re-election to the White House — the President also announced that the government would provide 100 per cent federal reimbursement to local authorities for recovery operations, rather than the 75 per cent customary in such cases.
On Sept. 19 Congress approved a record $11,100 million disaster relief package for the victims of Hurricanes Andrew and Iniki.
Negotiators from the House of Representatives and the Senate agreed to use deficit financing to provide $6,300 million in direct assistance to the stricken states and $4,800 million in loans.
In brief Yahweh Ben Yahweh, the founder of the Miami-based Nation of Yahweh — a large black religious sect and multi-faceted business empire — was sentenced on Sept. 4 to 18 years in prison for ordering the murder of 14 "white devils" and wayward disciples; Yahweh and six followers had been convicted in May of federal conspiracy charges.
Willie Leroy Jones was executed on the evening of Sept. 15 having been convicted of the murder of an elderly couple in 1983; Jones was the third Virginia prisoner to be executed in 1992 and the 16th in the state since the re-instatement of the death penalty in 1976.
In an unprecedented ruling, a federal judge on Sept. 17 overturned the Senate's 1989 impeachment of former federal judge Alcee L. Hastings on the grounds that the procedure used by the Senate to determine Hastings's guilt had been defective.
AMERICAS
CANADA
Calling of referendum on constitutional package — Resignation of Alberta Premier
Brian Mulroney, federal Prime Minister and national leader of the Progressive Conservative Party (PCP), announced on Sept. 3 that a referendum would be held on Oct. 26 on the issue of constitutional reform.
The referendum, only the third in Canada's history, would enable the electorate to endorse or reject the constitutional package agreed in late August which sought to meet demands for greater autonomy for French-speaking Quebec and for the native Indians and Inuit populations, and offered increased representation within the federal legislature for the western provinces [see pp. 39044-45].
The national referendum absorbed a separate vote on the deal which had already been arranged in Quebec for Oct. 26.
The reform package, which had been agreed at a constitutional conference which had included federal, provincial and native leaders, was a successor to the Meech Lake Accord which had collapsed in 1990.
Like its predecessor, in order to be adopted the new package — known initially as the Pearson Accord and latterly as the Charlottetown Agreement — required ratification by the federal parliament and by individual provincial legislatures.
Although the deal was supported by the federal leadership of all three of the country's major political parties and by Quebec's Liberal Premier Robert Bourassa, many supporters of the separatist Parti Québecois opposed the package.
While not binding, the national referendum was seen as an attempt to increase the likelihood of unanimous provincial ratification and, thereby, to prevent the deal from suffering a fate similar to that of its Meech Lake predecessor.
Having recalled the federal parliament in early September in order to authorize the referendum, Mulroney joined federal Liberal Party leader Jean Chrétien and New Democratic Party (NDP) leader Audrey McLaughlin in an unofficial truce whereby issues of partisan politics were put aside in order to maximize the impact of the campaign in favour of the new constitutional package.
Advocates of the deal stressed the dire economic consequences which would arise from the plan's rejection.
In this they were supported by a report from the Royal Bank of Canada which suggested that, if Canada fragmented, its annual economic growth rate would average only 1 per cent over the next decade (rather than the projected 3 per cent if the country remained intact) and that by the end of the century its unemployment level would have increased to 10-15 per cent(rather than 7-11 per cent ).
Resignation of Getty
Don Getty announced on Sept. 9 that he was resigning as Premier of Alberta and as leader of the province's governing PCP.
Getty, 59, had been Premier since 1985 and had been re-elected in 1989.
He cited "personal reasons" for his decision to stand down which was to take effect following the selection of his successor at a special party convention, expected in November.
AMERICAS
MEXICO
Protests over Michoacán election
More than 15,000 supporters of the Party of the Democratic Revolution (PRD) gathered on Sept. 15 in the central square of Morelia, the capital of the state of Michoacán, to demonstrate against alleged electoral fraud and corruption.
The demonstration coincided with the official inauguration of Eduardo Villaseñor of the ruling Institutional Revolutionary Party (PRI) as state governor, in a ceremony attended by President Carlos Salinas de Gortari and protected by 2,000 police and federal troops.
The PRD, whose supporters proclaimed their candidate Cristóbal Arias as the rightful new state governor, produced copies of every PRD ballot paper in an attempt to prove that Arias had been cheated of victory by the PRI in the July 12 state elections in Michoacán, home state of the PRD's founder, Cuauhtémoc Cárdenas Solórzano [see pp. 39000-01].
PRD leaders stated that they would maintain a picket of the governor's palace, which had begun on Aug. 7, to prevent Villaseñor from carrying out his duties.
Relations with Vatican
Diplomatic relations were formally restored with the Vatican on Sept. 20.
A controversial amendment to the 1917 Constitution, to legalize religious organizations and thereby end 75 years of official antagonism towards the Roman Catholic Church, had been proposed by Salinas in November 1991 and endorsed by the Congress the following month [see pp. 38569; 38671].
Sentencing of union leader
Joaquín Hernández Galicia, 69, who for 25 years was the president of the Union of Oil Workers of the Mexican Republic (STPRM), was on Sept. 10 sentenced to 35 years' imprisonment on charges of murder and illegal possession of arms.
Galicia, in custody since January 1989 [see p. 36392], was charged with ordering the murder of a union official in 1983.
The Salinas government had hailed his arrest as a blow against corruption, but there was widespread speculation that Galicia was in fact being targeted because he had broken with the PRI during the 1988 elections.
AMERICAS
CUBA
Demotion of Aldana
It was announced through local media sources on Sept. 24 that Carlos Aldana, 50, generally recognized as the country's third most important leader, had been stripped of his overall responsibility for ideology, foreign policy and culture.
The demotion of Aldana (who retained his position on the politburo of the ruling Communist Party — PCC), was later officially confirmed and put down to "serious personal errors and deficiencies in the execution of his responsibilities" .
Roberto Robaina, a politburo member and leader of the young Communists, stated that Aldana had engaged in a "lifestyle above those of the population" .
Rumours persisted that he had received US$20,000 — to secure a sales contract — from a representative of the Sony Corporation in Cuba who was subsequently imprisoned as a spy for the US Central Intelligence Agency.
Aldana's rapid rise within the PCC since 1986 had reflected the growing importance of a reformist trend in the party, and his demotion suggested the increasing concentration of power in the hands of President Fidel Castro Ruz, in response to the current deep economic crisis [for July changes to Constitution see p. 39000].
Overall responsibility for ideology and foreign policy was to pass to José Ramón Balaguer, who had served as Cuba's ambassador to the former Soviet Union, while responsibility for culture went to politburo member María de los Angeles García.
Castro's anniversary speech
Castro delayed his traditional July 26 speech marking the anniversary of the 1953 attack on the Moncada Barracks, a pivotal event in the Cuban revolution, and combined it with a speech on the 35th anniversary of the Cienfuegos uprising.
In this address, delivered in the south-central city of Cienfuegos on Sept. 5 and broadcast nationwide, he provided statistics to illustrate what he described as the "extraordinary damage" to the economy caused by the severing of preferential trading links with the former Soviet Union.
Comparing 1992 with 1989, he stated that US$4,734 million was being lost annually through lower export prices, and a further US$1,000 million indirectly because of the destabilization of supplies, problems involving export production, and for other, financial, reasons.
According to government calculations, he added, purchasing power had fallen from US$8,139 million in 1989 to an expected US$2,200 million in 1992.
Castro described as an "unbelievable" achievement the harvesting of 7,000,000 tonnes of sugar in the current "special period" of extreme rationing of fuel, food and transport.
Only 30 per cent of the usual resources had been used to achieve this, and the entire harvest had been sold, he said.
An estimated 1,000,000 tonnes would go to Russia in return for oil, but would buy only about 1,500,000 tonnes, whereas, Castro stated, under previous Soviet agreements one tonne of sugar had bought 7.5 tonnes of oil.
The economic crisis was expected to deepen following the passage through the US Senate on Sept. 20 of the Cuban Democracy Act to tighten the US 30-year economic embargo.
The measure, building on an executive order announced by President George Bush in April [see pp. 38858-59], awaited approval by the US House of Representatives.
Halting of work on nuclear power plant
During the Cienfuegos speech Castro confirmed that work on the Juraga nuclear power plant in Cienfuegos, the construction work on which was begun in 1972 and which was now 90 per cent complete at an estimated cost of US$1,000 million, had been halted indefinitely for lack of funds.
He claimed that a Russian financial offer in April to finish the project had been insufficient and that stopping work on the Soviet-designed plant would save 200,000 tonnes of oil.
Agreement on Russian troop withdrawals
Following talks on Sept. 9-14 between a Cuban government delegation and the ambassador for special affairs at the Russian Foreign Ministry, Viacheslav Aleksandr Ustinov, and Gen. Andrei Nicolayev, commander of the 3,000-strong former Soviet military training brigade stationed in Cuba, it was announced on Sept. 16 that both sides had agreed to the withdrawal of the troops (now part of Russian forces) in stages, to be completed by the end of June 1993.
An electronic intelligence-gathering station, staffed by former Soviet personnel, would remain.
Cuba had reportedly dropped its previous demand, put to the former Soviet government of President Mikhail Gorbachev in September 1991, when his government had announced the troop withdrawal, that any such withdrawal should be simultaneous with that of US forces from the Guantánamo naval base on the south-east tip of Cuba [see pp. 38430-31; see also p. 38669].
AMERICAS
HAITI
Arrival of OAS mission
A six-member advance team from the Organization of American States (OAS) arrived in the Haitian capital Port-au-Prince on Sept. 17.
It was part of an 18-strong OAS civilian mission whose presence was nominally designed to help deter violence, to reinforce respect for human rights and to monitor the distribution of humanitarian aid.
It was also intended to advise on the possible modification of the current economic embargo and to evaluate progress made towards a resolution of the political crisis caused by the military coup in September 1991 which overthrew the elected President, Fr Jean-Bertrand Aristide [see pp. 38430; 38522-23].
Three pro-government parties, the Assembly of National Democrats (RDN), the Mobilization for National Development (MDN) and the Democratic Thought and Action Group (GRAD), on Sept. 14 condemned Prime Minister Marc Bazin for agreeing to the mission, and described the visit as a form of "foreign occupation" .
The readiness of Bazin's army-backed government to accept the deployment of the mission was interpreted by the opposition, on the other hand, as proof that it could not be effective.
Analysts were also agreed that its modest size reflected OAS willingness to work with the Bazin regime for a negotiated settlement, since economic sanctions had thus far not been effective in securing the reinstatement of Aristide [see p. 38905].
The US position, with President Bush facing elections in November, was apparently influenced by growing domestic opposition to its policy of forcibly repatriating Haitian refugees [see pp. 38905; 39046], and US pressure was now expected to be increased on Aristide to recognize Bazin as Prime Minister [see p. 38957].
A meeting held on Sept. 4 in Santo Domingo, the capital of the Dominican Republic, between Bazin and President Joaquín Balaguer (who was known to be eager to mediate a solution to the Haitian crisis), was also attended by the US ambassador to the Dominican Republic, Robert Pastorino.
The Bazin government's Foreign Minister, Francois Benoit, was invited to Washington on Sept. 1-4 to participate in OAS-mediated talks with Aristide's representative, Fr Antoine Adrien [for August OAS initiative see p. 39046].
No formal agreement was signed but Bazin said in a letter to OAS Secretary-General Joao Baena Soares on Sept. 3 that a meeting with Aristide was an "unavoidable solution" to the constitutional crisis.
AMERICAS
BAHAMAS
Government programme
The Free National Movement (FNM) government of Prime Minister Hubert Ingraham, elected on Aug. 19 [see p. 39046], presented its programme to the opening session of the House of Assembly on Sept. 3.
Ingraham promised openness and morality in government, the accountability of ministers, and the ending of the state's monopoly in broadcasting.
The government also undertook to privatize state-owned hotels and to tax casinos, and would offer tax concessions and access to funds from the Bahamas Development Bank to encourage investment and boost manufacturing and the small-business sector.
An independent Public Utilities Commission would review electricity and other rates.
New employment laws regarding dismissal, redundancy and sick leave would be introduced, and the church would have an increased role in education.
Ingraham's Cabinet had been sworn in on Aug. 24 in which Ingraham himself held the Finance and Planning portfolios and Orville Alton Turnquest was appointed Attorney General and also held the Justice and Foreign Affairs portfolios.
AMERICAS
HONDURAS
Border agreement with El Salvador
A protracted and bitter border dispute between Honduras and El Salvador, dating back to 1839 and the cause of the so-called "football war" of 1969 [see pp. 23526-27], was settled by a ruling delivered on Sept. 11 by the International Court of Justice (ICJ) in The Hague (Netherlands).
Both sides accepted the ruling, which dealt with six pockets of mainland and three islands.
Honduras would receive roughly two-thirds (approximately 290 sq km) of the mainland under dispute, including full control of the delta of the Goascorán river and two other segments along the Negro-Quiagara and Sazalapa rivers.
El Salvador's one-third (approximately 150 sq km) included most of the disputed pocket near where the Honduras-El Salvador border met with that of Guatemala.
Two remaining segments, along the Sumpul and Torola rivers, were apportioned between the two countries.
El Salvador was awarded the islands of Meanguera and Meanguerita, and Honduras the island of El Tigre in the Gulf of Fonseca.
The Gulf itself had now to shared with neighbouring Nicaragua.
The dispute had been referred to the ICJ in 1986 [see p. 34415].
Kidnap drama and airport siege
The Costa Rican Interior and Security Minster Luis Fishman Zonzinski, the Honduran Bishop of Santa Rosa de Copán, Mgr Luis Alfonso Santos, Mexico's ambassador to Costa Rica, Jesús Cabrera Muñoz Ledo, and a Honduran police colonel, were seized on Sept. 23 in the Costa Rican capital, San José, by a member of the Honduran left-wing Cinchonero Popular Liberation Movement (MPLC or Cinchoneros) with whom they were apparently holding a meeting.
In the course of a 24-hour drama the kidnapper, Orlando Ordoñez Betancourt, successfully demanded that they be flown with him to Honduras, where after an airport siege he was granted safe passage to Mexico.
Reports alleged that Ordoñez, 33, was wanted on rape, assault and murder charges.
His meeting with those he eventually took hostage in San José was reported as being part of his negotiation with the Honduran government, mediated by Fishman, over the return of two Hondurans who had "disappeared" eight years previously.
AMERICAS
NICARAGUA
Decrees on property rights
President Violeta Barrios de Chamorro signed three decrees and a presidential agreement on property rights on Sept. 9 in an attempt to defuse the most contentious issue facing her government — the estimated 4,600 claims for redress from owners of property and land expropriated under the former Sandinista (FSLN) regime between 1979 and 1990.
To decide on matters of compensation or the return of property, the decrees (i) established a Property Ombudsman's office within and subordinate to the office of the Attorney General;(ii) re-established a three-member National Review Commission under the Property Ombudsman's office; and (iii) expanded the duties of the Office of Territorial Reorganization (OOT) to review assignments of state property to Sandinista officials between the Sandinista defeat in the February 1990 elections and Chamorro's inauguration in April.
The presidential agreement specified that properties unjustly confiscated be returned to their rightful owners, or the owners be compensated if this was no longer possible.
In an attempt to avoid rural unrest, Chamorro confirmed that it would be impossible to return land confiscated and distributed among peasants who now held legal title or that which had been confiscated for important public purposes.
Property owned by the former Somoza dictatorship and its private army, the National Guard, would not be returned, although even here, any anomalies would be examined.
US visit
John Maisto, US Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Central American Affairs, met with Nicaraguan government officials in Managua on Sept. 4, reportedly to discuss a basis for continued US assistance.
In July the US Congress, on the initiative of conservative Republican Senator Jesse Helms, had blocked the disbursement of some US$100,000,000 in aid, accusing Chamorro of sharing power with the Sandinistas, who, it claimed, still controlled the army, police, the — courts, the intelligence service and other government offices [see p. 38957].
New police chief
Fernando Augusto Caldera Azmitia, 37, a Sandinista, was named as the new Director-General of the national police on Sept. 5.
The choice of Caldera to replace another Sandinista, René Vivas, enraged Chamorro's right-wing opponents in the ruling National Opposition Union (UNO) coalition, despite the appointment of Ronald Antonio Aviles, a cattleman, businessman and former "contra" , to the specially created post of Vice-Minister for Public Security, with direct authority over the police.
Eleven other senior police officials were removed at the same time.
Tidal wave disaster
Tidal waves up to 15 metres high, triggered by an earthquake beneath the Pacific Ocean, crashed along 227 km of Nicaragua's low-lying Pacific coast on Sept. 1, killing more than 200 people, many of them children.
More than 100 people were reported missing, 300 were injured, 4,200 people were left homeless and 16,000 evacuated.
The fishing and tourism industries on which the whole region depended were devastated.
Registering 7 on the Richter scale, the earthquake was centred 120 km south-west of Managua.
Surrounding countries and Venezuela supplied disaster relief aid, to which the USA also contributed US$5,000,000.
AMERICAS
COLOMBIA
Guerrilla attacks
In an immediate response to the latest left-wing guerrilla offensive, the government on Sept. 5 ruled out the renewal of peace talks which had broken down in March [see p. 38809]and were suspended indefinitely in May.
In two separate attacks attributed to the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) and the National Liberation Army (ELN) near the towns of Villavicencio, 75 km south-east of Bogotá, and Santander, some 300 km south-west, 14 police officers were killed and five more wounded.
The dynamiting of a pipeline between the north-western towns of Segovia and Zaragoza on the same day, reportedly by the ELN, killed three children and wounded eight other people.
Murder of judge — Surrender of leading drug trafficker — Conditions for Escobar's surrender
Evidence that the drug cartels had infiltrated the latest judicial security system came with the murder of Myriam Rocío Vélez, 38, a district court judge in the city of Medellín, who was shot dead by unidentified gunmen on Sept. 18.
Vélez was on a list of judges (jueces sin rostro) whose identity had been kept hidden in order to protect them from such attacks and to encourage their independence.
Jorge Eduardo Avendaño Arango, one of nine who escaped from prison in July with Pablo Escobar Gaviria, leader of the Medellín drug cartel [see p. 39001], and who was one of Escobar's most "trusted men" , surrendered to the authorities on Sept. 15.
There was speculation that Escobar would follow suit.
A taped message from Escobar had been printed in the newspaper El Nuevo Siglo earlier in the month, saying that he would consider surrendering if the government ensured his safety and placed him in a prison in his home province of Antioquía.
He was currently being hunted by 5,000 members of the armed forces, supported by 17 helicopters and three aircraft of the US Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA).
The Prosecutor-General, Gustavo Greiff, stated on Sept. 8 that Escobar's conditions were "completely legal and acceptable" .
AMERICAS
ECUADOR
Austerity measures — Protests and strikes
The government of recently elected President Sixto Durán Ballén [see pp. 39001-02]announced a controversial package of austerity measures on Sept. 3.
Following violent street demonstrations, looting and bomb attacks in the capital Quito and the major Pacific port of Guayaquil, the government ordered a national mobilization of the army on Sept. 7.
The austerity measures were designed to combat 50 per cent inflation and a burgeoning public deficit, estimated at US$800 million (7 per cent of gross domestic product — GDP).
They involved (i) the privatization of 20 state-owned enterprises, including the national airline EEA;(ii) the reduction of public spending across the board by an estimated US$35,000,000 or 4 per cent;(iii) a freeze on public-sector employment;(iv) the devaluation of the sucre (initially by 27.6 per cent — as at Sept. 14, 1992, US$1.00=1,789.24 sucres at the official rate);(v) price increases of 125-165 per cent for higher grade petrol and of 25-125 per cent for electricity; and (vi) curbs on the use of official cars and on free air travel.
The package was accompanied by a 10,000 sucre cost-of-living adjustment grant for all workers.
The government subsequently announced, on Sept. 18, a 20 per cent reduction in the price of bottled gas, used by most households.
A further promise, however, of an extra bonus payment in 1993 equivalent to one month's pay, was reportedly rejected in late September in the National Assembly, where the government had no majority.)
A general strike called by the United Workers' Front (FUT) brought Ecuador to a standstill on Sept. 23, the culmination of three weeks of protests against the austerity measures.
The Confederation of Indian Nationalities of Ecuador (Conaie) had announced on Sept. 11 a campaign of civil disobedience, and the Conaie leader, Luis Macas, said that he did not rule out an "Indian rebellion" .
In immediate response to Conaie, the Minister Secretary-General of the Administration, José Vicente Maldonado, had said that all illegal strikes would be suppressed.
AMERICAS
PERU
Capture of Sendero leader
Abimael Guzmán Renoso, 57, founder and leader of the Maoist Shining Path (Sendero Luminoso) guerrillas, was captured on Sept. 12 in the capital, Lima.
Guzmán, or "Chairman Gonzalo" , a former philosophy professor in Ayacucho, was regarded by his followers in Sendero Luminoso as the fourth sword of the world revolution after Marx, Lenin and Mao Zedong.
The authorities sought to break down the mystique surrounding him, and to present him as a common criminal, parading him before 300 journalists on Sept. 24 in an iron cage erected on the patio of the Lima police headquarters.
Dressed in a striped prison suit bearing his prison number, Guzmán remained defiant, however; he ignored all questions and instead launched into a seven-minute address, insisting that his arrest was "simply a bend in the road" and that Sendero's 12-year "people's war" would finally end in triumph.
President Alberto Keinya Fujimori presented Guzmán's capture as justifying his assumption of dictatorial powers in April [see pp. 38846-47].
Fujimori had promised at that time that he would wipe out Sendero by the end of his mandate in 1995.
His public standing rose by 18 points in public opinion polls immediately after Guzmán's capture, and analysts believed that government-sponsored candidates now stood a good chance of commanding a majority in the Democratic Constituent Congress (CCD) to be elected on Nov. 22 [see p. 39048].
Guzmán's capture — Impact on Sendero war
Guzmán was seized in rooms above a ballet school in the comfortable middle class suburb of Surco in Lima.
Also captured with him was Sendero's presumed number two Elena Reboredo Iparaquirre, its chief co-ordinator Germán Cipian Tavara and 18 other prominent political members.
More than 200 other Sendero suspects were arrested in succeeding days after a nationwide security operation.
The swoop by forces of the Counter-terrorism National Directorate (Dincote) followed five months of surveillance.
Local analysts regarded the arrests as a serious blow to Sendero, but warned that its military command remained untouched, and cited Sendero's complex cell structure and proven ability to regroup.
Guzmán would remain potentially highly dangerous, even in prison, because his followers could be expected to use all possible means to try to force his release.
The war with Sendero was already responsible for some 23,000 deaths and US$22,000 million in economic damage.
Sendero's immediate retaliation following the arrests was not as great as feared, but a policeman was shot dead in Lima on Sept. 14 and five civilians were wounded in two explosions.
Prospects for trial
On Sept. 27 Guzmán was moved to the La Punta naval base in the port of Callao near Lima to await trial on charges of treason.
Fujimori stated on Sept. 14 that he favoured the death penalty for Gúzman.
In the absence of a new constitution, however, this was still not permitted, and Fujimori subsequently made it known that Gúzman would be sentenced to perpetual imprisonment on Oct. 17 by a military court; this sentence, he said, would be confirmed by the Supreme Military Justice Council on Oct. 27.
Following modifications to the penal code in the wake of Sendero's July offensive in Lima [see p. 39002], those arrested for terrorism were now considered "traitors to the fatherland" and had to stand trial before a military court.
Military appointment
Gen. Arnaldo Velarde was unexpectedly removed from his post as Air Force Commander on Sept. 14 and replaced by Gen. José Nadal Payva.
AMERICAS
BOLIVIA
Allegations of corruption in privatization process
Opposition politicians on Sept. 5 alleged that senior officials were involved in corruption and influence peddling in relation to the privatization of state assets.
Such criticisms forced President Jaime Paz Zamora to cancel the sale of two state-owned hotels in La Paz, the capital, when irregularities were discovered on the opening of sealed tenders.
One of the accusations concerned Aldo Fortí, appointed to adjudicate on the bids for the La Paz Hotel (formerly the Sheraton), who had allegedly made a present of a hacienda (large farm) to Zamora.
The privatization programme, first announced in April 1990 and facing strong trade union opposition [see p. 38718], was to cover over 100 state-run enterprises, including 14 hotels and 25 military-run corporations.
The take-up on many options was poor, however.
In particular, the government failed to attract foreign airlines to take a stake in the national carrier Lloyd Aéreo Boliviano (LAB), having refused as "inadequate" a bid by Iberia, the Spanish state airline.
Planning and Co-ordination Minister Samuel Doria Medina admitted in late September that final decisions on companies to be sold in the defence area would not be made until the very end of Zamora's mandate; presidential and congressional elections were scheduled for June 6, 1993.
Allegation of police corruption
The leadership of the National Police was to be investigated following the testimony of Police Capt. Waldo Panozo, on Aug. 31-Sept. 1 to a Chamber of Deputies Commission on the Constitution.
Panozo claimed that the police was "run by the Mafia" and that various leading police chiefs were involved in drug trafficking and in protecting this traffic.
AMERICAS
CHILE
Army mobilization
Gen. Augusto Pinochet Ugarte, the C.-in-C. of the Army and former military dictator, ordered the Army to step down from a state of full alert on Sept. 24 in response to a telephone call from President Patricio Aylwin Azócar.
It was reported locally, however, that the Army remained fully mobilized.
The alert had been called by Lt.-Gen.
Jorge Lucar, the acting Army C.-in-C. in Pinochet's absence abroad on holiday in Argentina.
The crisis arose following a demonstration in the capital, Santiago, outside a car repair shop, which had been identified on television as the disguised headquarters of the Army Intelligence Battalion (BIE).
The source of the leak was an unidentified member of the Army Intelligence Directorate (DINA, to which BIE was tied).
BIE was described as employing 600 agents in tapping the telephones of politicians, the clergy, business people, trade unionists and other "relevant" personalities.
Coup anniversary demonstrations
The anniversary of Pinochet's coup which overthrew President Salvador Allende in 1973, still commemorated as a public holiday on Sept. 11 (the Senate having for the third consecutive year rejected a bill to abolish this holiday), was marked by a 21-gun salute by the military.
Thousands of left-wing counter-demonstrators marched through Santiago to Allende's grave.
On the eve of the anniversary three police officers and a gunman had been killed in an attack by an unnamed left-wing organization on the home of the metropolitan area mayor, Luis Pareto.
Cabinet changes
The resignations of four government ministers in late September were believed to be related to forthcoming elections, with Education Minister Ricardo Lagos Escobar in particular stepping down in order to stand for the presidency in 1993, and Carlos Ominami Pascual (Economy) to organize his campaign.
The new appointees were: Jorge Arrate (Education); Jorge Marshall (Economy); Germán Molina (Transport and Communications, replacing Germán Correa Diaz); and Alejandro Hales (Mines, replacing Juan Hamilton Depassier).
AMERICAS
ARGENTINA
Dismissal of Justice Minister
Justice Minister León Carlos Arslanián was dismissed on Sept. 8, after he objected to interference by President Carlos Saúl Menem in the appointment of 235 judges to work in penal appeals courts.
Arslanián was immediately replaced by Jorge Maiorano, Menem's legal and technical affairs secretary.
The courts had been set up to administer a new penal code, unveiled on Sept. 7, in which traditional written trials were to be replaced by public oral trials for criminal cases.
Arslanián had reportedly accepted nine presidential recommendations but refused to confirm a further four judges, claiming that they had no merit other than Menem's support.
The leadership of the Radical Civic Union (UCR), the main opposition party, announced on Sept. 24 that it was ending all co-operation with the government.
The UCR regarded Arslanián's dismissal as the latest of Menem's "authoritarian excesses" affecting the independence of the judiciary, claiming also that in April 1990 he had forced a law through the Congress increasing the number of Supreme Court judges from five to nine, and had packed the court with his supporters [see p. 37608].
The party said that it would warn political, business and labour leaders of the grave problems posed by juridical insecurity and would seek their support in a vigorous campaign against a government "ruling by decree" .
In the absence of the UCR's 85 deputies, the government was still accused of resorting to bribes and political favours to guarantee the support of all 119 of its own deputies, when securing the passage through the lower chamber of the Congress on Sept. 24 of reforms to the hydrocarbons law.
The changes paved the way for the privatization of the state oil company Yacimientos Petrolíferos Fiscales Sociedad del Estado (YPF).
ASIA — PACIFIC
THAILAND
New Thai Cabinet
Thai election results
The numbers of seats won in March 1992 election are given in parenthesis.
*Chart Patthana and Seritham, led by the former speaker of the House of Representatives Arthit Urairat, were formed after March 1992.
General election
A fresh general election to the House of Representatives was held on Sept. 13.
The victory by a pro-military coalition at the March 1992 general election, and the subsequent appointment of the leader of the outgoing military junta, Gen. Suchinda Kraprayoon, as Prime Minister, had led to a serious confrontation in Bangkok in May.
At least 50 civilian demonstrators were killed by the military in a confrontation which ultimately forced Suchinda to resign in June, when the House of Representatives was dissolved and a new interim government appointed ahead of a fresh general election [see pp. 38816; 38865; 38894-95; 38966].
Conduct of election
The election was widely characterized as a contest between "angel" or pro-democracy parties which had opposed the Suchinda government (the Democrat Party, New Aspiration Party, Palang Dharma and Ekkaparb) and "devil" or pro-military parties.
The principal "devil" parties were Chart Thai and Chart Patthana.
The latter formation had been created since the March election under the leadership of former Prime Minister Maj.-Gen.
Chatichai Choonhaven [see p. 39007], drawing its support largely from Chart Thai (Chatichai's old party) and from Sammakkhi Tham, the air force's protégé party which had won the largest number of seats (79) in the March election, but disintegrated with the collapse of the Suchinda government.
Nationwide turnout was high, averaging 62.05 per cent.
Poll Watch, an independent monitoring group established prior to the March election, reported that the election campaign had been marred by widespread corruption and violence.
At least seven canvassers were reportedly shot dead by political rivals during the campaign.
Politicians were alleged to have paid out "a huge sum of money" to buy votes in the poorer rural areas.
Election results
As in previous general elections, no party won an overall majority of seats; 12 parties in all took part, of which only one (Palang Prachachon) failed to win any seats.
The Democrat Party emerged as the largest single grouping with 79 seats, including 36 of the 45 seats in its traditional heartlands in southern Thailand.
The Democratic Party won nine of 35 seats in Bangkok (where it had won only one seat in March) capturing eight from Palang Dharma, which still managed to win 23 seats in the city.
Chart Thai and Chart Patthana performed well in the Isarn, the country's poor northeastern region.
Formation of Democrat-led coalition — Appointment of Prime Minister
Following the election, the Democrat Party entered into negotiation with the other "angel" parties with the aim of forming a coalition government.
However, the four parties together mustered only 185 seats, barely a majority.
A coalition was eventually formed on Sept. 20 when the conservative Social Action Party (SAP) was brought in, increasing the number of seats to 207.
While these negotiations were under way, Chart Thai and Chart Patthana had made a move to form a coalition with the New Aspiration Party, whose leader Gen. Chaovalit Yongchaiyut publicly rejected the offer.
King Bhumibol Adulyadej opened the new session of the House of Representatives on Sept. 21.
In elections on Sept. 22 Marut Bunnak, the deputy leader of the Democrat Party, was elected as House President.
The House formally approved the Democrat Party leader, Chuan Leekpai, as Prime Minister on Sept. 23.
His nomination was supported by 216 members.
He was the first Prime Minister with no military background since the mid-1970s.
Chuan, who had experience as a Cabinet minister in the mid-1970s, was widely regarded as a moderate and a "clean" politician.
Speaking on Sept. 24, Chuan called on the Thai people to "join hands to help perfect" the democratic system.
He declared that his new government would not "create another condition that could be used as a pretext to overthrow it" .
Formation of new Cabinet
Chuan appointed a new Cabinet on Sept. 29 to replace the interim Cabinet of Anand Panyarachun.
The Cabinet included a number of unelected technocrats, including Finance Minister Tharin Nimmanhemin, a former president of the Siam Commercial Bank; Deputy Prime Minister Amnuai Wirawan, a former chair of the Bangkok Bank; and Deputy Prime Minister Suphachai Phanitchaphak, a former president of the Thai Military Bank.
The new Defence Minister, Gen. Wichit Sukmak, a respected soldier and a protégé of former Prime Minister and current privy councillor Gen. Prem Tinsulanonda, was also unelected.
Chuan had been under considerable pressure to appoint the Democrat Party secretary-general, Maj.-Gen.
Sanan Khachonprasat, as Defence Minister, but instead appointed him as Industry Minister.
The new Foreign Minister, Squadron Ldr.
Prasong Sonsiri, was a member of Palang Dharma and a former secretary-general of the National Security Council.
The de facto leader of Palang Dharma, Maj.-Gen.
Chamlong Srimaung, had refused to accept a Cabinet place because of his party's performance in the election (the party had, in fact, increased its representation from 41 to 47).
Chamlong's second-in-command, Col. Winai Somphong, was appointed as Minister of Communications, a portfolio long tainted by accusations of corruption.
Gen. Chaovalit, the NAP leader, was appointed as Minister of the Interior.
The SAP leader, Montri Pongpanich, was not appointed to the Cabinet, after the other coalition members had all expressed their opposition to his membership.
He was one of a number of high-ranking politicians ruled "unusually rich" by the previous military junta.
Military reshuffle
A major military reshuffle was carried out on Sept. 9 involving 557 senior officers down to the level of colonel.
A number of generals directly involved in the May violence in Bangkok were shifted to inactive posts.
The reshuffle followed the replacement of three top military figures in August [see p. 39052].
The Far Eastern Economic Review of Sept. 24 stated that the main feature of the reshuffle was the replacement of three graduates of Chulachomklao Military Academy's Class 5, the powerful graduating group of 1958 led by Suchinda and former army commander Gen. Issarapong Noonpakdi.
ASIA — PACIFIC
MYANMA
Lifting of martial law provisions and curfew
On Sept. 26 the ruling military junta, the State Law and Order Restoration Council (SLORC), revoked two martial law orders, in force since July 1989, which had allowed regional military commanders to "carry out administrative and judicial functions" in their respective military regions.
Other martial law decrees, including a ban on public gatherings, remained in effect.
A night curfew imposed in September 1988 was lifted on Sept. 10.
Appointment of Vice-Prime Ministers
Two leading SLORC members, Vice-Adml.
Maung Maung Khin and Lt.-Gen.
Tin Tun, were promoted to the post of Vice-Prime Minister on Sept. 24.
They had previously held the posts of Minister of Mines and Minister of Transport and Labour respectively.
A number of military commanders from the southern, central and northern regions were appointed as ministers on Sept. 24.
The new ministers (with portfolios in parenthesis) were as follows: Rear Adml.
Than Nyunt (Health); Maj.-Gen.
Thein Win (Transport); Maj.-Gen.
Tun Kyi (Trade); Maj.-Gen Kyaw Ba (Hotels and Tourism); Maj.-Gen.
Maung Thint (Development of Border Areas and National Races); Maj.-Gen.
Aye Thaung (Labour); Maj.-Gen.
Kyaw Min (Mines); Brig. -Gen.
Lun Maung (Prime Minister's Office).
ASIA — PACIFIC
CAMBODIA
Continued impasse over peace plan
In a report to the UN Security Council on Sept. 21, UN Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali said that the "persistent failure" of the Khmers Rouges to abide by the Paris peace agreement of October 1991 was obstructing full implementation of the UN peace plan.
Boutros-Ghali proposed that France and Indonesia (co-chairs of the Paris conference), in co-operation with Yasushi Akashi, chief co-ordinator of the UN Transitional Authority in Cambodia (UNTAC), undertake consultations with the aim of "finding a way out of the present impasse" .
In other respects, however, the implementation of the peace plan was proceeding well, according to the report.
Elections were still scheduled to take place no later than May 1993, and more than 115,000 refugees had been repatriated to Cambodia.
In early September the Khmers Rouges had called on Akashi to resign as UNTAC chief, accusing him of wanting to "sacrifice the Cambodian people to the economic interests of Japan, which wants to have the markets of the Vietnamese expansionists" .
In a positive development, senior Khmer Rouge officers on Sept. 17 rejoined the Mixed Military Working Group (MMWG) talks chaired by Gen. John Sanderson, the UNTAC military commander.
The Khmers Rouges had boycotted the MMWG for three months.
Arrival of first Japanese troops in Cambodia
The first Japanese troops to be deployed overseas since the Second World War arrived in Cambodia on Sept. 20 to join the UN peacekeeping force.
The eight-officer group was the first of several hundred Japanese soldiers expected to arrive in Cambodia during September and October [see also p. 39097].
Foreign visitors
Paul Keating, the Prime Minister of Australia, visited Cambodia in late September.
Xu Dunxin, a Chinese Vice-Minister of Foreign Affairs, also visited in September.
During his visit Xu met with the nominal leader of the Khmers Rouges, Khieu Samphan, but apparently failed in his attempt to persuade the Chinese-backed faction to rejoin the peace process.
Other visitors included: Gen. Benny Murdani, the Indonesian Defence Minister; Pierre Joxe, the French Defence Minister; and Alastair Goodlad, a Minister of State at the United Kingdom Foreign and Commonwealth Office.
ASIA — PACIFIC
VIETNAM
Internal and foreign affairs
National Assembly session — Election of President
The first session of the ninth National Assembly opened in Hanoi on Sept. 19 [see p. 39007 for election of Assembly in July 1992; see pp. 38864-65 for 11th session of eighth Assembly].
On Sept. 23 the Assembly elected Senior Gen. Le Duc Anh to the new post of President.
Under the country's new Constitution introduced in April 1992, a single President replaced the old Council of State which had served as a collective presidency.
Gen. Anh was the second-ranking member of the ruling Communist Party of Vietnam (CPV) politburo and a former Minister of National Defence.
As a member of the politburo's military faction he was widely regarded as a conservative.
Elections were held for a number of other posts on Sept. 23-24.
Vo Van Kiet was re-elected as Prime Minister and Nguyen Thi Binh was elected as Vice-President.
Nong Duc Manh was elected as Chair of the Assembly, replacing Le Quang Dao.
Manh, first elected to the politburo at the party's seventh congress in June 1991 [see pp. 38271-72], was a member of the Tay ethnic group and the country's highest-ranking minority leader.
Hijacking — Report on Fulro rebels
Ly Tong, a former South Vietnamese air force pilot who had lived in the USA since the end of the Vietnam War, hijacked an aircraft flying from Bangkok to Ho Chi Minh City on Sept. 4.
Tong ordered the pilot to circle Ho Chi Minh City to allow him to unload anti-communist leaflets over the city.
He eventually parachuted out of the aircraft and was arrested.
A report in the Sept. 10 edition of the Far Eastern Economic Review described the activities of the United Front for the Liberation of Oppressed Races (Fulro), the Montagnard guerrilla army which had been fighting for autonomy in the Central Highlands since the 1960s.
The Fulro leadership was based in the Cambodian province of Mondolkiri and, until early 1992, had enjoyed close links with the Khmers Rouges; some 1,500 Fulro fighters were based in the Central Highlands.
Oil exploration dispute with China
Vietnam issued protest notes in early September to the Chinese government demanding that it halt "illegal" oil exploration in Vietnamese territorial waters in the Gulf of Tonkin.
Rejecting this accusation, China claimed that it was drilling on the Chinese side of a north-south boundary line in the Gulf of Tonkin agreed in 1887 by China and France, Vietnam's then colonial ruler.
Although Vietnam and China had restored normal diplomatic relations in November 1991, relations remained strained because of a large number of outstanding territorial disputes on land and at sea.
Xu Dunxin, a Chinese Vice-Foreign Minister, visited Vietnam on Sept. 18-21.
During his visit it was announced that talks on border and territorial disputes would be held in Beijing in November.
Visit by Do Muoi to India
A delegation led by CPV secretary general Do Muoi visited India on Sept. 8-13.
During his visit Muoi met a number of Indian leaders, including Prime Minister P. V. Narasimha Rao.
A report on All-India Radio on Sept. 9 stated that among topics discussed by the two sides was co-operation in the fields of nuclear energy and oil exploration.
ASIA — PACIFIC
SINGAPORE
Nomination of MPs
A parliamentary committee appointed six "non-elected MPs" to Parliament which convened on Sept. 14.
There were two nominated members in the previous Parliament.
Controversial legislation introduced in 1990 empowered the government to nominate a maximum of six non-elected members to the 81-member parliament [see p. 37574].
The nominated MPs had full voting rights on all issues except amendments to the constitution, confidence motions, and money and supply bills.
According to the Far Eastern Economic Review of Sept. 24, the new MPs included "some articulate and long-time critics of the government" .
ASIA — PACIFIC
CHINA
Price liberalization — Appointments — Arrest of dissident
On Sept. 1 the government lifted price controls for 593 items and materials, in what the Financial Times of Sept. 3 described as "an important step towards liberalizing the economy" .
The move allowed producers, mostly state-owned, to determine the prices for goods such as petroleum, asphalt, lead, aluminium, lubricating oils and grease, some steel products and most machinery and electronic goods.
Only 89 commodities remained directly priced by the government.
New Finance and Railways Ministers
On Sept. 4 Liu Zhongli was appointed as the new Finance Minister.
He replaced Wang Bingqian, who remained a State Councillor.
Liu, a former Vice-Minister of Finance, had served as Deputy Secretary-General of the State Council since 1990.
Also on Sept. 4 Han Zhubin replaced Li Senmao as Minister of Railways.
Arrest of leading dissident
The Chinese authorities arrested Shen Tong, a leader of the 1989 pro-democracy movement, in Beijing on Sept. 1.
On the morning of his arrest Shen had scheduled a press conference to announce his application to establish a Beijing office for a US-based dissident group, the Democracy for China Fund.
Shen had returned from exile in the USA in early August, the first prominent student leader to do so.
Two young Chinese students, Qi Dafang and Chen Liyun, were arrested with Shen.
Two French journalists accompanying Shen at the time of his arrest were expelled from China.
Also expelled on Sept. 2 because of his alleged involvement with Shen was Ross Terrill, a US academic.
Surge in foreign trade
Official figures released on Sept. 8 showed that exports had risen by 21.6 per cent to US$7,880 million in August, a new monthly record.
Imports had also risen by 18 per cent to US$6,610 million.
From January to August, China's trade surplus totalled US$4,700 million, with exports of US$50,630 million and imports of US$45,930 million.
Trade dispute with USA
China reacted angrily to the US announcement on Sept. 2 that it had agreed to sell 150 F-16 fighter planes to Taiwan [see this page].
A Chinese Vice-Foreign Minister, Liu Huaqiu, summoned the US ambassador in Beijing, Stapleton Roy, on Sept. 3 and told him that the US decision "grossly interferes in China's internal affairs, seriously jeopardizes Sino-US relations and obstructs and undermines the great cause of China's peaceful reunification" .
The sale appeared to undermine a US-China communiqué signed in 1982 which committed the USA to reduce and eventually phase out arms sales to Taiwan [see also pp. 31621-22].
On Sept. 10 China threatened to stop importing US wheat if the Bush administration did not reverse its decision to sell arms to Taiwan.
China had been the largest single purchaser of US wheat for several years, buying up to 10 per cent of total US wheat production in some years.
This development was part of a looming trade dispute, the Bush administration having announced on Aug. 21 that unless China removed barriers to the entry of US products into the Chinese market by Oct. 10, it would impose punitive tariffs of up to 100 per cent of value on Chinese-made imports worth US$3,900 million [see p. 39051; see also p. 38530 for opening in October 1991 of US investigations into China's trade barriers under Section 301 of the 1988 Trade Act].
China responded in kind on Sept. 8, threatening to impose punitive tariffs on imports from the USA worth US$4,000 million if the US tariffs were introduced.
Talks between trade officials in Beijing on Sept. 14-16 failed to achieve a breakthrough; a last round of talks was scheduled for the week before the Oct. 10 deadline.
On Sept. 29 Bush vetoed a bill which sought to link China's most-favoured-nation (MFN) trade status with improvements in China's human rights record and with other conditions.
Justifying his veto, Bush, who vetoed a similar bill in March 1992 [see p. 38814], said that placing "broad conditions to China's MFN renewal would not lead to faster progress in advancing our goals" .
A subsequent vote in the Senate failed to achieve the two-thirds majority necessary to overturn a presidential veto.
Other foreign relations
Zou Jiahua, a Vice-Premier and the Minister in charge of the State Planning Commission, visited Italy, Spain and the Netherlands on Sept. 8-26.
The tour was aimed at promoting economic co-operation and trade links.
ASIA — PACIFIC
MACAO
Legislative Assembly elections
Elections were held on Sept. 20 for Macao's Legislative Assembly [see p. 36765 for last Assembly elections in October 1988].
There were 23 seats in all: eight were elected by business associations and a further eight by direct universal suffrage, while seven were appointed by the Governor, Gen. Vasco Rocha Vieira.
The Financial Times of Sept. 22 reported that pro-Chinese associations had won 12 of the 16 elective seats.
ASIA — PACIFIC
MONGOLIA
New Cabinet
Puntsagiyn Jasray, who had been elected as Prime Minister in July [see p. 39010], appointed a new Cabinet on Aug. 21.
Choyjilsurengiyn Purevdorg (Deputy Prime Minister), Maj.-Gen.
Shagalyn Jadambaa (Defence), and Tserenpilyn Gombosuren (Foreign Relations) had all held the same or similar posts in the outgoing Cabinet; Dalrain Davaasambuu (Finance), Namsraijavyn Luvsabjav (Justice) and Tsevenjavyn Oold (Food and Agriculture) were among new appointments.
ASIA — PACIFIC
TAIWAN
Major US arms deal
US President George Bush announced on Sept. 2 that he had approved the sale of up to 150 F-16 fighter aircraft to Taiwan.
The deal was worth an estimated US$6,000 million, and the purchase would substantially upgrade Taiwan's ageing air force, which consisted mainly of 30-year-old F-5Es and 40-year-old F-5 fighters.
Bush's announcement effectively lifted a 10-year ban on US arms sales to Taiwan, in place since the signing of a 1982 Sino-US communiqué stating that US arms sales to Taiwan"will not exceed either in qualitative or quantitative terms the level of those supplied in recent years…
[The USA]intends gradually to reduce its sales of arms to Taiwan"[see also p. 31621-22].
The USA justified the sale by referring to a need to maintain a balance of power between Taiwan and China after recent Russian sales of advanced Su 27 fighters to China.
Some press reports claimed that Taiwan was also negotiating with Russia over the purchase of Su 27s.
Many commentators claimed that Bush's decision to reverse US policy on arms sales to Taiwan was largely motivated by his poor domestic standing in the run-up to the US presidential election in November.
The deal apparently safeguarded some 6,000 jobs at the Texas plant of General Dynamics, the manufacturer of the F-16 [see this page for Chinese reaction to US decision].
In late September the USA also announced a planned deal worth US$161,000,000 to sell to Taiwan 12 SH-2F helicopters built by Kamen Corp. of Connecticut and designed to detect and attack submarines.
Reported French arms deal
On Sept. 10 the French government was reported to have approved the sale of 60 Mirage 2000-5 fighter aircraft to Taiwan for some US$2,600 million.
In a statement issued on Sept. 10 Dominique Strauss-Kahn, the French Minister of Industry and Foreign Trade, said that the government could not formally announce its approval until a commercial agreement was finalized between Taiwan and the manufacturer of the Mirage, Dassault Aviation, but that "such a decision…would not be considered as an act of aggression against the People's Republic of China" .
Proposed improvement of financial links with China
The Mainland Affairs Council (MAC), the body overseeing Taiwan's relations with China, approved a series of measures aimed at increasing links with the mainland during a conference held on Sept. 19-20.
However, the measures stopped short of establishing direct trade, transport and postal links, as demanded by many Taiwanese businesses.
Under the proposals, which were placed before the Executive Yuan for approval, rules on imports from the mainland were relaxed.
Taiwanese and Chinese banks would be permitted to deal with each other, through overseas offices.
Taiwanese financial institutions would also be allowed to conduct transactions with foreign bank branches in China.
In addition, Taiwanese businesses would be allowed to remit money from China to Taiwan.
Relations with Russia
Taiwan announced on Sept. 8 that it had reached an accord with Russia to exchange unofficial representative offices, on the lines of the model used by Japan and the USA for unofficial representation in Taiwan.
The agreement had been signed in June, but approved only in early September by Russian President Boris Yeltsin.
Under the agreement, two nominally private organizations were established to issue visas and represent the interests of the two governments.
Taiwan would establish offices in Moscow, St Petersburg and Vladivostok, and Russia in Taipei and Kaohsiung.
Oleg Lobov, head of the Russian mission, visited Taiwan on Sept. 16-21, when memorandums of understanding on aviation and tourism were signed as well as a letter of intent to enhance co-operation in trade, investment, culture and scientific research.
Visit by Latvian Prime Minister
The Prime Minister of Latvia, Ivars Godmanis, visited Taiwan in mid-September.
In early 1992 Latvia had signed an agreement with Taiwan for the upgrading of its representative office in Riga to consulate status under its official name, the Republic of China.
ASIA — PACIFIC
NORTH-SOUTH KOREA
Eighth round of Premiers' talks
The eighth Premiers' meeting between North and South Korea was held in Pyongyang on Sept. 16-17.
A ninth round was scheduled for Dec. 21-24 in Seoul.
North Korean Prime Minister Yon Hyong Muk and his South Korean counterpart Chung Won Shik signed three agreements — on non-aggression, reconciliation and exchange — which were designed to facilitate the implementation of the inter-Korean reconciliation pact signed in late 1991 [see pp. 38659-60].
They also signed an accord on the formation of a North-South Joint Reconciliation Committee.
Chung described the agreements as "another giant step towards opening an era of reconciliation and co-operation" between the two countries.
While reiterating the spirit of the 1991 accord, however, the auxiliary agreements did not include many of the more burdensome measures proposed in the original accord.
Neither was progress made on the intractable issue of nuclear inspections, with the South Korean government continuing to insist on the adoption of a bilateral system of unscheduled and reciprocal nuclear inspections, in addition to inspections conducted by the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), which had already begun making regular visits to North Korean nuclear facilities.
The North Korean government restated its position that such an agreement could be arrived at only if US military bases in South Korea were opened to North Korean inspection.
There was also no progress on the issue of reunions for families divided by the Korean War.
The North Korean government outlined three preconditions for progress on this question:(i) the abandonment of the South's policy of linking the nuclear issue with inter-Korean economic exchange;(ii) the scrapping of the joint US-South Korean military exercises; and (iii) the repatriation of Li In Mo, a North Korean army officer captured by the South during the Korean War.
ASIA — PACIFIC
NORTH KOREA
Reports of popular unrest
There were reports throughout September of violent anti-government protests in North Korea, apparently ignited by the government's decision in July to reduce the amount of money in circulation and to devalue the won by around 70 per cent.
In some areas it was reported that large numbers of troops had ben deployed to restore order.
The devaluation was contained within the decision to exchange old banknotes for new ones, with a strict limit on the amount each citizen could exchange.
The move was thought to have caused severe food shortages by reducing the purchasing power of most households and thereby limiting the quantity of black market provisions which could be obtained.
The reports, which apparently originated from Western diplomats in North Korea, were widely circulated by Japanese and South Korean news agencies but totally repudiated by the North Korean authorities.
ASIA — PACIFIC
SOUTH KOREA
Presidential resignation from ruling party
President Roh Tae Woo announced on Sept. 18 that he was resigning from the Democratic Liberal Party (DLP), the ruling political grouping which he had led until August 1992 [see p. 39050], and within which he currently held the post of honorary president.
He also announced his intention to form a neutral Cabinet, and instructed all ministers and vice-ministers in his administration to leave the party by Sept. 30.
In doing so he conceded to a key opposition demand and thereby appeared to have ended an opposition boycott of the legislature which had been called to protest against the government's decision in early 1992 to postpone local elections.
Although progress on the issue of the local elections had been made in August, it became increasingly clear that opposition demands for them to be held prior to the presidential poll were unrealistic.
The issue of their timing was seen by the opposition as of crucial importance in determining the fairness of the presidential contest because of the role of local administrators in the electoral process.
The postponement meant that such functions would be discharged by local officials who held office by virtue of their appointment by the government, and it was widely feared by the opposition that many would use their powers to manipulate the vote in an attempt to secure the return of the DLP.
These fears were given credence by the revelation that in at least one case in the March 1992 legislative elections local officials bribed voters to support an unsuccessful DLP candidate.
There were also widespread allegations that intelligence agency and military officials had engaged in illegal practices in support of DLP candidates.
The removal of party influence from government, particularly in the offices of Home Affairs and the Agency for National Security Planning would, in theory at least, reduce the ability to which these offices could be used to favour the DLP.
Kim Dae Jung and Chung Ju Yung, respectively the leaders of the Democratic Party and the United People's Party, the two main opposition forces, both welcomed the development.
They announced their willingness to co-operate with Roh in the formation of a truly neutral administration and gave notice of their intention to end the legislative boycott.
Roh's decision was also seen as marking a clear break in the increasingly tense relationship between himself and his designated heir, Kim Young Sam.
Without the benefit of Roh's authority and support, Kim's chances of winning the presidential elections appeared to have been weakened.
Furthermore, Kim was reported to be deeply unpopular within two of the three factions of the DLP.
Whereas Roh's authority had been sufficient to forge and maintain the DLP as a coalition of three diverse parties, without him there appeared every chance that the party might break into its constituent elements.
By the end of the month it was reported that at local level anti-Kim members of the DLP had begun leaving the party.
The stability of the former ruling party was also threatened by the announcement on Sept. 21 that Lee Jong Chan, a former member of the DLP who had unsuccessfully challenged Kim Young Sam for the party's presidential nomination [see p. 38911], had launched a new political organization called the National Alliance for New Politics.
Although Lee stated that he did not intend to stand as a candidate in the presidential elections, the new party announced that it would contest the election and that it planned to choose a candidate by the end of October.
Its founding members were drawn heavily from former members and supporters of the DLP, and there was speculation that its intervention in the presidential contest was likely to damage further the chances of Kim Young Sam securing victory.
Roh's visit to China
Following South Korea's establishment of diplomatic relations with China in August [see p. 39050], President Roh made the first visit by a South Korean head of state to China on Sept. 27-30.
The trip was conducted in a cordial atmosphere, and Roh expressed satisfaction that the Chinese government had signalled its willingness to assist with the process of Korean reunification by assuming the role of "honest broker" .
On the final day of his visit Roh and his Chinese counterpart, Yang Shangkun, attended a signing ceremony covering a range of agreements on trade, investment, scientific and technological co-operation.
ASIA — PACIFIC
JAPAN
Foreign relations
Deterioration of relations with Russia following postponement of Yeltsin visit
Russo-Japanese relations worsened in September following a late night telephone conversation on Sept. 9, in which Russian President Boris Yeltsin informed Miyazawa that he was postponing his planned four-day state visit to Japan due to have begun on Sept. 13.
According to a statement issued by the Japanese government, Yeltsin had cited compelling domestic problems as the reason for his action.
No new date was agreed for the visit.
Notwithstanding the official explanations, most observers interpreted the move as a display of Russian displeasure over Japan's relentless pursuit of its territorial dispute with Russia over the Northern Territories.
The islands, known by the Russians as the southern Kuriles, were occupied by Soviet forces in 1945 and, since then, had been a source of dispute significant enough to have prevented Japan and the Soviet Union from concluding a formal treaty to end the Pacific War.
The collapse of the Soviet Union and the emergence of an independent Russian state had kindled strong expectations that the dispute would be settled, particularly as the Japanese government had made it clear that it was unwilling to provide the significant economic aid required by the Russians while the dispute remained outstanding.
Under pressure from Russian nationalists, however, Yeltsin had made increasingly overt statements in the weeks preceding his visit suggesting that the time was not right for any major alteration in the status of the disputed territory, and calling for greater Japanese flexibility on the issue of the sovereignty of the islands.
With no likelihood of progress in the dispute, it was widely believed that Yeltsin had cancelled his visit in order to avoid a failure to achieve progress on the issue similar to that which had accompanied the visit by the then Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev in April 1991.
The widespread feeling that the cancellation amounted to a humiliation for Japan was underlined by reports from Russia's ITAR-Tass news agency on Sept. 13, which stated that Yeltsin would visit South Korea on Nov. 12-13 and would make a trip to China in mid-December.
The Russian President had been scheduled to visit Seoul while returning from Japan, and was reported to have informed the South Korean government of the postponement of his trip prior to informing Miyazawa.
The strained relations between Russia and Japan deteriorated further when it was reported that the Sakhalin provincial authorities had decided to grant a contract to a Hong Kong company for a development project on Shikotan, one of the disputed islands.
The contract involved the company receiving a 50-year lease on 278 hectares of land.
The Japanese government confirmed on Sept. 16 that it had lodged a formal diplomatic protest over this decision.
Towards the end of the month, however, there were signs of a mutual desire to begin repairing the damage to bilateral relations caused by the events of September.
The Japanese Foreign Minister Michio Watanabe and his Russian counterpart, Andrei Kozyrev, held cordial discussions in New York City on Sept. 23 in which they agreed that their deputies should resume talks over the disputed territories at the earliest possible opportunity, as a means of paving the way for a rescheduling of the Yeltsin visit.
Dispatch of Japanese troops to Cambodia
The Japanese Cabinet on Sept. 8 approved the dispatch of some 1,800 Self-Defence Force personnel to Cambodia to assist with UN peacekeeping operations over the coming year, and to send a handful of observers to help monitor the general election in Angola.
The move came four months after the Diet had approved a law permitting Japanese forces to serve overseas for the first time since the end of the Pacific War [see pp. 38962-63], and followed a request from UN Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali.
The first units left Japan on Sept. 17 [see also p. 39094].
Dismissal of Communist Party leader
Sanzo Nosaka, 100, the most renowned and respected member of the Japan Communist Party (JCP), was dismissed from his post as honorary chairman of the party on Sept. 20.
The move followed the revelation that Nosaka, a founder member of the JCP, had falsely accused another leading party member, Kenzo Yamamoto, of spying for the Japanese government.
The accusation, made in Moscow in 1939 but only recently revealed in the newly opened archives of the former Soviet Communist Party, had resulted in Yamamoto's immediate execution by Stalin's security forces.
ASIA — PACIFIC
TAJIKISTAN
Ousting of President Nabiyev
The political confrontation in Tajikistan, reflecting the serious regional divisions within the republic, led to the forced resignation on Sept. 7 of President Rakhmon Nabiyev (elected in November 1991 — see p. 38582).
The new leadership, however, failed to prevent an escalation in fighting, centred in the southern Kurgan Tyube region.
Several attempts to force Nabiyev's resignation had already failed before he was eventually ousted.
On Aug. 11 the Supreme Soviet in emergency session had deprived him of the additional powers granted on April 30 [see p. 38916], and, in a resolution passed on Aug. 14 on extricating the country from crisis, censured him for "indecisive and at times incompetent policy" and demanded that he and the government take all measures to implement the July peace agreement [for which see p. 39010].
The opposition had imposed a deadline of Aug. 31 for Nabiyev to restore stability or resign.
On Aug. 24 the state prosecutor, Nurullo Khuvaidullayev, had been murdered by unknown persons in Dushanbe.
In the south, fighting between supporters and opponents of Nabiyev in Kurgan Tyube escalated.
Casualties were put in the thousands by Kurgan Tyube officials, although figures were impossible to verify.
Nabiyev's supporters had reportedly killed five members of Kurgan Tyube city soviet belonging to the opposition Democratic Party which controlled the city's government.
Deputy Premier Djamshed Karimov took on the role of acting Premier after the resignation of Prime Minister Akbar Mirzoyev on Aug. 30.
On Sept. 4, 5 and 7, because of the absence of deputies from Khodjent, there was no quorum to confirm a Sept. 2 resolution by the Supreme Soviet Presidium on removing Nabiyev from power, Nabiyev having gone into hiding at the end of August after demonstrators invaded the Presidential Palace, demanding his resignation.
On Sept. 7, as hundreds of armed supporters of the Moslem- dominated opposition surrounded Dushanbe airport terminal, members of the coalition government formed in May [see p. 38916]and parliamentary opposition leaders prevented Nabiyev from leaving for his northern home region of Khodzhent, and after several hours of talks forced him to resign.
Constitutionally, presidential powers passed to the Chair of the Supreme Soviet, Akbarsho Iskandrov, who on Sept. 24 appointed Abdumalik Abdullojanov as acting Prime Minister.
On Sept. 18 Iskandrov had established a new Defence Ministry, although no minister was appointed.
Concern in Russia and neighbouring republics
Russia and central Asian states were alarmed by the possibility of Islamic forces gaining the upper hand in the current conflict.
Uzbekistan, which had a 24 per cent Tajik minority, was especially concerned, despite attempts by the new Tajik authorities to allay fears that Tajikistan would become an Islamic state.
On Sept. 4, the Russian, Kazakh, Kirgiz, and Uzbek presidents, expressing concern at violations of Tajikistan's southern border with Afghanistan, decided to send reinforcements.
Russia had already put under its jurisdiction border troops in Tajikistan, and Tajik rebel forces were known to be receiving weaponry via this route.
Military observers, including the C.-in-C. of Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) armed forces, Marshal Yevgeny Shaposhnikov, had gone to Tajikistan on Aug. 27-28 in response to a request from Nabiyev to assess the possibilities of deploying CIS peacekeeping forces.
Iskandrov was reported on Sept. 17 to have handed control of major industrial installations in the south and strategic points separating the two warring sides to Tajikistan's Russian garrison.
However, part of the Tajik opposition remained fiercely opposed to outside intervention.
On Sept. 30, Russian troops stationed in Tajikistan, reinforced by an extra 800 troops ordered in on Sept. 28, took control of Dushanbe airport.
In Uzbekistan, President Islam Karimov stepped up pressure on the democratic and Islamic opposition and tightened border controls with Tajikistan.
Iskandrov had visited Uzbekistan on Sept. 12, amid reports that Uzbeks were being driven out of southern Tajikistan.
ASIA — PACIFIC
AFGHANISTAN
Security situation
After three weeks of heavy fighting in Kabul between pro-government forces and the forces of Gulbuddin Hekmatyar, leader of the Hezb-i-Islami fundamentalist mujaheddin faction [see p. 39054], a ceasefire began on Aug. 29.
Hekmatyar threatened to resume the bombardment of the city unless the powerful Uzbek (and former communist) militia led by Gen. Abdul Rashid Dostam withdrew from Kabul.
However, the government claimed that no militias remained in Kabul, as they had all been absorbed into the regime's regular army.
In early September the neutral mujaheddin elements who had brokered the ceasefire created a buffer zone between Hekmatyar's forces and those of the government.
The neutral factions created a 1,000-strong force drawn from the provinces of Kabul, Logar, Wardak, Nangarhar and Parwan to police the truce in Kabul's southern and eastern suburbs.
With the ceasefire in operation, government troops attempted to restore order in Kabul by disarming mujaheddin fighters roaming the city.
The city of Jalalabad banned unauthorized firearms from its streets on Sept. 15, extending to the provinces the government clean-up being enforced in Kabul.
The Voice of the Islamic Republic of Iran reported on Sept. 19 that Hekmatyar and President Burhanuddin Rabbani had that day signed a peace pact.
The ceasefire in the city held until Sept. 18, when fighting erupted in the streets of Kushal Mena suburb between the Iranian-backed (Shia) Hezb-i-Wahdat faction and the Saudi-backed (Sunni) Ittehad-i-Islami.
By Sept. 21 eight people had died and more than 200 had been injured in this fighting.
Report on whereabouts of Najibullah — Arrest of Rafi
A report on (Hekmatyar's) Radio Message of Freedom on Sept. 24 said that former President Najibullah had been moved from the UN offices in Kabul (where he fled at the outset of the fall of his regime) to Mazar-i-Sharif "where he now lives under the intimidation and torture of leaders of the unholy coalition of the north" .
Lt.-Gen.
Mohammad Rafi, Vice-President inthe former Najibullah regime, was reportedly arrested on Sept. 21 at Kabul airport while trying to flee the country in disguise.
Public executions
Three criminals were hanged in front of a large cheering crowd in Kabul on Sept. 7 in the government's most dramatic implementation of its recently introduced Islamic code of laws (sharia).
The three, tried before a special court, had confessed to murder, looting and robbery.
The Afghan Islamic Press Agency reported on Sept. 15 that a public execution had taken place in Jalalabad that day.
Government appointments
A number of new ministers were appointed to the Cabinet on Sept. 25: Abdol Wahed Sorabi (Commerce); Mohammad Yaqub Lali (Mines and Industries); Mawlawi Ahmed Nazar Balkhi (Social Affairs); Sayd Eshaq Gowhari (Revival and Rural Development); and Yaqub Barakzai (Public Health).
Visit by Rabbani to Pakistan and Iran
President Rabbani visited Pakistan on Sept. 26-27 for talks with Prime Minister Mohammad Nawaz Sharif and other leaders.
Rabbani visited Iran on Sept. 27-29, where he held talks with President Hashemi Rafsanjani.
During Rabbani's visit, Iran offered up to US$50,000,000 in credits for "supplying the needs of the Afghans" .
Flooding
Flash floods in the Afghan Hindu Kush mountains north of Kabul in early September killed at least 800 people, according to government officials and aid workers [for floods in Pakistan see this page].
The Halo Trust, a British charity working in the region, estimated that the death toll could reach 3,000.
ASIA — PACIFIC
PAKISTAN
Flood devastation
Between 2,000 and 3,000 people were reported killed and at least 3,000,000 rendered homeless in mid-September in the country's worst floods of the century.
Preliminary government estimates put the cost of the damage at around US$400,000,000, but other estimates were as high as US$2,000 million.
The floods were brought on by three days of continuous torrential rains in the north which had begun on Sept. 8, and spread quickly through parts of the Punjab and Sind, threatening sites of historic interest, engulfing thousands of villages and inundating vast acres of cropland.
In Punjab, the worst affected province, more than 1,700,000 hectares of agricultural land were reportedly affected and 20-50 per cent of the country's partially harvested cotton crop, its main foreign exchange earner, was destroyed.
By the end of September more than US$3,000,000 had been received in emergency aid, despite the government's refusal to launch an appeal for international donations in keeping with its professed policy of self-sufficiency.
The government's handling of the disaster, notably its alleged failure to issue warnings prior to the opening of the sluice-gates of the Mangla Dam to prevent flooding the Indus basin in the south, prompted charges of criminal negligence and incompetence by its political critics and sections of the army.
The opening of the sluice-gates had directly caused the deaths of more than 400 people.
Foreign relations
Visit by Rafsanjani
Iran's President Hashemi Ali Akbar Rafsanjani held talks with government leaders during a visit on Sept. 6-9.
Speaking in Lahore on Sept. 8 Rafsanjani said that the two sides had agreed to oppose all moves to partition Afghanistan, and to take action to persuade international bodies to assist the Moslems of Bosnia-Herzegovina.
Rafsanjani denied reports of co-operation between Iran and Pakistan on the production of nuclear arms, and refused to indicate whether Iran had sought to mediate in the recent outbreak of sectarian violence between Shias and Sunnis [see pp. 38968; 39009], saying that "Pakistani Shiites decide for themselves" .
Defence talks with France and USA
French Defence Minister Pierre Joxe held talks with Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif and President Ghulam Ishaq Khan during a visit on Sept. 24 to discuss bilateral economic and defence co-operation.
A military agreement with France involving the sale of fighter aircraft had been officially announced in January [see p. 38726; 38812], and a further bilateral defence pact had been reported in June [see p. 38968].
The US Assistant Secretary of Defence for International Security Affairs, James Lilley, held talks on regional security with President Ishaq Khan and senior defence officials during a visit on Sept. 24.
Bilateral military and security negotiations had resumed in November 1991 [see pp. 38577; 38762]after months of deteriorating relations triggered by the suspension in October 1990 of US military aid to Pakistan [see p. 37764].
ASIA — PACIFIC
INDIA
Supreme Court ruling on Bofors
The New Delhi High Court on Sept. 2 intervened to quash an application by the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI), which was seeking powers to pursue information on alleged pay-offs related to the 1986 Bofors armaments deal [see pp. 35336; 35382].
The Supreme Court on Sept. 17, however, passed an interim order staying the High Court order (having already overruled in August a similar judgment by the same court).
The Supreme Court's ruling would facilitate the CBI's investigation into the scandal, including its efforts to gain access to several numbered Swiss bank accounts frozen by Swiss authorities since January 1990.
The High Court's Sept. 2 judgment (following a petition filed by Win Chadha, one of those named by the CBI as centrally involved in the scandal) had intervened as a cantonal court in Geneva was due to deliver its verdict in response to the CBI's request for assistance.
Interest in the Bofors case had been rekindled when Madhavsinh Solanki resigned as External Affairs Minister in March, having admitted asking the Swiss government to slow down its investigations into Bofors-related pay-offs [see p. 38813].
Economy
Liberalization of capital market
The government on Sept. 24 granted foreign institutions permission to invest directly in all stock market operations.
The new guidelines, extending the programme of economic liberalization, also authorized foreign pension and mutual funds, subject to approval by the Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI), to acquire up to 24 per cent of any company's equity.
Foreign individual holdings were limited to 5 per cent.
Reserve Bank of India report
The Reserve Bank of India (the central bank), in its annual report published in early September, forecast that economic recovery would be weaker than expected.
Real economic growth rates, the report said, had fallen from 5.6 per cent in 1990-91 to 2.5 per cent in 1991-92 (the year to June), and would rise only to 3.5 per cent in 1992-93.
On Sept. 15 the government raised petroleum prices by 18 per cent in an attempt to reduce the fiscal deficit.
The net loss to the Indian banking system from the Bombay securities scandal [see pp. 38913; 38967; 39008; 39053]was estimated by the governor of the Reserve Bank of India, S. Venkitaraman, on Sept. 28, to be about Rs5,000 million (US$177,200,000).
Venkitaraman had warned foreign and local commercial banks, in a circular issued on Sept. 10, that they faced "severe penal action" if they flouted RBI regulations.
Harshad Mehta, the broker at the centre of the securities scandal, was granted bail of Rs1,000,000 (US$39,000) on Sept. 22 after spending 110 days in detention.
Foreign relations
Rao's visit to France
Prime Minister Narasimha Rao held talks with his French counterpart Pierre Bérégovoy in Paris during a visit on Sept. 28-30.
The discussions focused on bilateral co-operation in defence and space technology.
A French government spokesman was quoted on Sept. 30 as saying that France would not agree to supply any rocket technology unless India signed the Missile Technology Control Regime (MTCR); in May the USA had accused India of violating the MCTR agreement [see pp. 38914; 39053].
In a separate development, related to US accusations centring on Indian chemical arms sales to Syria, the government announced on Sept. 24 that it would prosecute the Bombay-based Shroff chemical company responsible for the sale.
Defence talks with Russia
Defence Minister Sharad Pawar met senior defence officials during a visit to Russia on Sept. 6-12.
The visit, the first by an Indian minister since the break-up of the former Soviet Union, reportedly aimed to finalize details of a defence co-operation agreement between the two countries ahead of Russian President Boris Yeltsin's scheduled visit to India in January 1993.
On Sept. 24 Pawar denied reports of the planned purchase by India of Russian MiG-27 fighter aircraft.
Relations with UK and Israel
Agreements with the United Kingdom covering anti-terrorist measures first reported in January [see p. 38727], including using the sanction of confiscating assets, were signed in London on Sept. 22.
An industrial co-operation agreement with Israel, the first of its kind since the establishment of diplomatic relations [see pp. 38727; 38741], was signed on Sept. 20.
States developments
The Jharkand People's Party (JPP) on Sept. 24 called off its 15-day economic blockade imposed on Sept 15, in support of a separate state of Jharkand in Bihar.
Widespread flooding in Kashmir was reported on Sept. 12 to have killed 220 people [see p. 39098 for Pakistan flood disaster].
The founder-president of the Democratic Labour Party (DLP) of Nagaland, Charlie Kabichoosa, was shot dead by unknown gunmen on Sept. 23.
The ruling Congress (I) party won control of 70 of the 95 municipal committees in municipal elections held in Punjab on Sept. 6.
The (CPI-M) government of West Bengal called a 24-hour industrial strike on Sept. 23 in protest against the Union government's economic reforms.
ASIA — PACIFIC
SRI LANKA
Renewed Tamil attacks
The separatist Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) in September launched renewed attacks against military personnel and civilians in the north and east of the country.
At least 22 people died when a bomb attached to a bicycle exploded on Sept. 1 in a crowded marketplace in Sainthamarathu, a village in the east populated mainly by Moslems.
On Sept. 9 Tamil rebels ambushed and killed 20 soldiers in the north-east.
A bomb explosion aboard a ferry south of Trincomalee on Sept. 10 killed 24 soldiers and 15 civilians.
Another 30 soldiers died during two Tamil ambushes in the east on Sept. 21.
Supreme Court rejection of Bandaranaike petition
The Supreme Court on Sept. 1 unanimously rejected a petition brought by Sirimavo Bandaranaike, leader of the Sri Lanka Freedom Party (SLFP), challenging Premadasa's election in December 1988.
ASIA — PACIFIC
BANGLADESH
Introduction of anti-terrorist measures
Escalating violence led to the promulgation in mid-September of new emergency laws aimed at curbing terrorism.
Special tribunals would try crimes extending from the wilful destruction of vehicles and property to murder, and judges were empowered to pass sentences within 30 days of conviction, ranging from five years to life imprisonment and death.
The recent wave of lawlessness, in which more than 150 people were reportedly murdered, had been fuelled by fierce fighting between rival student groups competing for scarce dormitory spaces at Dhaka University.
On Sept. 6 Sheikh Hasina Wajed, head of the opposition Awami League, temporarily suspended the activities of the party's student front after the murder of two Dhaka University students.
On Sept. 7 Prime Minister Khaleda Zia reciprocated by ordering the dissolution of the central committee of the Jatiyabadi Chattra Dal (JCD, or Nationalist Student Party), allied to the ruling Bangladesh Nationalist Party (BNP).
Opposition parties, which in August had unsuccessfully tabled a motion of no confidence against the government's handling of the law and order situation [see p. 39053], criticized the emergency measures as undemocratic.
On Sept. 22 the Awami League claimed that the government had acted in "blatant disregard of the country's Constitution and parliamentary norms" .
Re-election of Sheikh Hasina as Awami League leader
The Awami League Council on Sept. 20 re-elected Sheikh Hasina as party president and approved a privatization programme, signalling a change in the party's economic policy.
IMF loan
The International Monetary Fund (IMF) announced on Sept. 15 its approval of a loan equivalent to 57,500,000 special drawing rights (about US$85,000,000), the third tranche of a three-year enhanced structural adjustment facility [see pp. 38533-34].
Establishment of Development Bank
The conversion of the Bangladesh Shilpa Rin Sangstha, one of two state-owned development finance institutions, into a commercial bank, the Development Bank, was reported by the Far Eastern Economic Review on Sept. 24.
Relations with China and India
Military and parliamentary delegations held talks with Chinese leaders in Beijing on Sept. 19-21 and 20-21, respectively.
Finance Minister Saifur Rahman held talks in New Delhi on Sept. 1-4 with his Indian counterpart, Manmohan Singh on reducing trade barriers.
Scientists from Bangladesh and India on Sept. 19 in Dhaka concluded a scientific co-operation agreement for 1993-94.
ASIA — PACIFIC
PHILIPPINES
Improved relations with communist insurgents
Legalization of Communist Party — Agreement to begin peace negotiations
The Senate and the House of Representatives on Sept. 1 simultaneously approved separate bills which legalized the Communist Party of the Philippines-Marxist Leninist (CPP) by repealing the 1957 anti-subversion statute under which the party had been outlawed.
A joint congressional committee drew up a common version of the two bills which was duly approved by the two chambers, and was signed into law on Sept. 22 by President Fidel Ramos.
In a conciliatory speech, relayed live from the Malacanang Palace in the capital, Manila, on the day of the signing, Ramos characterized the change as an expression of confidence in "our national stability" and in the "resilience of our democracy" .
He stated that the reform would challenge the insurgents to "compete under our constitutional system and free market of ideas which are guaranteed by the rule of law," and called upon young insurgents, whose "courage" he specifically acknowledged, to "accept a peace with honour and justice" which would enable them to "rejoin the mainstream of Philippine society" .
The 23-year insurgency campaign by the military wing of the CPP, the New People's Army (NPA), had cost an estimated 21,000 lives.
The change in the law and the tone of the President's speech, together with the release of several senior members of the CPP (in accordance with an order issued by Ramos in August — see p. 39055), appeared to mark a significantly fresh approach by the new government towards its communist opponents.
There was further evidence of this in the government's role in negotiating an agreement, signed on Sept. 2, to begin formal peace talks with the insurgents in the Netherlands.
The National Democratic Front (NDF), a front organization for both the CPP and the NPA, had offices in the Netherlands, and had insisted on an overseas venue, rather than meeting on Philippine soil, partly out of concern for the security of its negotiators.
It was also a strategic move towards the long-term goal of gaining international recognition for its struggle, and as such it had been resisted steadfastly by Ramos's predecessors.
The conciliatory approach of the Ramos administration was in part based on the pragmatic need to increase political stability in order to bolster investor confidence.
It was also a consequence of the declining level of US military support resulting from the closure of US military bases in the Philippines.
The incentive for the NPA to participate in the negotiations was thought to be the possibility of gaining the release of some of the many hundreds of its members and supporters currently in prison.
From its peak combat strength of around 20,000 at the end of the Marcos era in 1985, the guerrillas were thought to have been reduced to some 13,000 fighters by mid-1992.
The movement's much-feared "sparrow" units, urban guerrillas specializing in assassinations, were also thought to have been weakened significantly through arrests and the degeneration of some units into criminality.
Rejection of amnesty by Moslem insurgents
It was reported on Sept. 9 that the Moro National Liberation Front (MNLF) had rejected a government offer of an amnesty.
Leaders of the Moslem organization — the NPA's main rival as a source of armed insurgency against the Philippine state — rejected the offer on the grounds that the government could end the conflict in Mindanao simply by implementing the terms of the 1976 Tripoli Accord [see p. 28440].
Renunciation of territorial claim on Sabah
Foreign Secretary Roberto Romulo held talks with his Malaysian counterpart, Abdullah Ahmad Badawi, in Kuala Lumpur on Sept. 14, during which he was reported to have stated that the Ramos government would abandon its territorial claim on the Malaysian state of Sabah.
Although Romulo denied that he had given such an unequivocal pledge, Ramos stated on Sept. 15 that he would not pursue the Philippine claim to sovereignty.
Ramos further stated that the policy was based on a desire on the part of his administration to contribute to solidarity within the Association of South East Asian States (ASEAN) and to peace and stability within the region.
He stressed that the decision did not affect the proprietary rights of the heirs of the Sultan of Sulu, and emphasized that if a change in law was required to make the policy effective, this would need the full approval of the legislature.
Closure of US naval base
On Sept. 30 the US Navy decommissioned its Subic Bay base, hitherto the major supply and repair centre for the US Seventh Fleet.
The move was in accordance with the decision by the Philippine Senate in September 1991 not to renew US military leases.
The remaining 1,000 staff at Subic, once the largest US naval facility outside north America, were transferred to Cubi Point naval air station, which was itself due to be returned to Philippine control on Nov. 24.
The manner in which the 25,000 hectare Subic site would redeveloped remained uncertain.
Widespread flooding
It was reported on Sept. 6 that flooding in the city of Baguio, north of Manila, and the provinces of Pangasinan, La Union, Benguet and Nueva Vizcaya was so severe that Ramos had declared a "state of calamity" in the area.
ASIA — PACIFIC
PAPUA NEW GUINEA
Commando raid on Solomon Islands
The government of the Solomon Islands on Sept. 15 lodged a strong diplomatic protest with the government of Papua New Guinea in response to a seaborne raid by Papuan commandos on Sept. 12 which left two people dead.
The note demanded an apology for the incident, compensation for the relatives of those killed, and the immediate release of a man abducted by the raiders.
The Papuan forces destroyed a fuel depot at Kamaleai bay, in Shortland Island.
During the attack they shot dead the depot's owner and his sister, wounded a child and abducted the dead woman's husband.
The incident followed two other raids by Papuan forces in March 1992 [see p. 38818].
Relations between the two countries had been severely strained because of persistent allegations of support by the Solomons for the secessionist rebellion on the island of Bougainville which, although formally a part of Papua New Guinea, was geographically and ethnically closer to the Solomon Islands.
Like the earlier incidents the raid was thought to have been motivated by a desire within the Papuan military to cut fuel supplies to the Bougainville rebels.
The Prime Minister of Papua New Guinea, Paias Wingti, described the raid as an "atrocious act" and promised that those responsible would be subject to disciplinary action.
Wingti also promised to provide compensation for those killed and, on Sept. 20, it was reported that the abducted man had been returned to Honiara.
Following the incident the government of the Solomon Islands deployed additional troops in the Shortland Islands.
It was reported on Sept. 24 that the government had approached Japan and Taiwan for assistance in constructing a permanent military base in the area to help deter further incursions by Papuan forces.
ASIA — PACIFIC
AUSTRALIA
Resignation of Premier of South Australia
John Bannon, the Australian Labor Party (ALP) Premier of South Australia since 1982, resigned on Sept. 1 in acknowledgment of responsibility for huge losses by the State Bank of South Australia.
At the time of Bannon's resignation it was admitted that the cost to taxpayers resulting from the bank's property and investment losses was A$3,500 million [US$1.00=A$1.3928 as at Sept. 7, 1992].
Bannon was succeeded as Premier by Lynn Arnold.
Bannon's resignation was also seen as increasing the difficulties of federal Prime Minister Paul Keating whose ALP government was recording poor popularity ratings and was due to face a federal election not later than May 1993.
Bannon was the last of a group of ALP leaders — including Bob Hawke, federal Prime Minister from 1983 to 1991, and former state premiers Neville Wran, John Cain and Brian Burke — who had revitalized the party in the wake of its 1975 ejection from office.
Adopting a laissez faire economic approach which involved working closely with entrepreneurs, the group had transformed the ALP into the natural party of government at state and federal level throughout most of the 1980s.
Bannon was the seventh state premier to resign in disgrace since 1982.
His departure also meant that only two of the country's six state leaders — Wayne Goss in Queensland and Ray Groom in Tasmania — had achieved office as a result of state elections.
The others had all been chosen by party colleagues in order to replace leaders who had been forced to resign over issues of mismanagement.
State elections in Queensland
Only in Queensland, where the ALP had come to power in 1989 after more than 30 years of corrupt National Party rule, was the party free of scandal and able to record healthy public opinion ratings.
ALP state Premier Wayne Goss, having called state elections for Sept. 19, sought no assistance from his colleagues in Canberra or the other states, and in his campaign speeches even denounced their behaviour.
Restrained public spending under the Goss government, confounding his conservative opponents, had ensured that Queensland remained the country's least indebted state.
Despite the nationwide economic recession, at the time of the election Queensland's tourism-driven economy was growing at a rate second only to that of mineral-rich Western Australia, with economic growth for the current fiscal year estimated at 4 per cent compared with 3 per cent for Australia as a whole.
Although official results were not available at the end of September, unofficial returns indicated that the Goss administration had been returned to office with an almost unchanged overall majority.
ASIA — PACIFIC
NEW ZEALAND
Referendum on electoral change
In a referendum held on Sept. 19 the New Zealand electorate voted decisively to change the country's electoral system.
Some 85 per cent voted to reject the simple plurality single member system (first-past-the-post) currently in use, and 70 per cent expressed a preference for its replacement by a mixed member proportional (MMP) system based on that used in Germany.
The two-part referendum asked voters to choose whether or not to retain the existing electoral system, and to express a preference for one of four alternative systems.
(The second vote was to be of significance only if a majority expressed a desire for change in the first.)
Under the favoured MMP system 60 legislators would be elected from single-member constituencies on a basis of simple plurality.
A further 60 seats would be filled by a second vote in which electors would express their preference for political parties rather than individual candidates, with the seats being distributed in accordance with the proportion of the vote achieved by each party.
The leaders of the governing National Party and the opposition Labour Party, the two political groupings which had dominated the country's political system since 1935, both opposed any change in the existing electoral arrangements.
Prior to its election in 1990, however, the National Party had committed itself to holding a referendum on the issue.
While conceding that the simple plurality method did not accurately reflect the preference of the electorate (at the 1990 election the National Party had won 69 per cent of the seats with 48 per cent of the vote), its advocates argued that, by producing decisive legislative majorities, it was a key factor in accomplishing stable government.
The Alliance, an opposition grouping of five minor parties which had achieved 14 per cent of the vote in the 1990 election but secured only one of the 97 seats, campaigned strongly for change on the grounds that the current system made it almost impossible for minor parties to gain significant parliamentary representation.
Under the terms of the referendum the government was committed to devise a detailed proposal based on MMP.
A second referendum would then be held to coincide with the next general election, due by November 1993, when voters would be asked to make a straight choice between the MMP proposal and the existing system.
ASIA — PACIFIC
APEC
APEC: Intra-regional trade (1991)
Ministerial meeting
Ministers from all 15 member countries, attending the fourth Asia-Pacific Economic Co-operation (APEC) conference in Bangkok on Sept. 10-11, made the first significant move towards formalizing the loose APEC forum by approving the establishment of a permanent secretariat in Singapore [see p. 38580 for third ministerial meeting in Seoul in November 1991].
The secretariat, with a budget of US$2,000,000 for 1993, would co-ordinate APEC activities, including research projects and work programmes.
A working group was established to prepare a plan for trade and investment co-operation in the Asia-Pacific region to the year 2000.
Many Asian countries attending the meeting expressed concern that the North American Free Trade Area (NAFTA — see pp. 39045-46), linking Canada, the USA and Mexico, might divert investment away from Asia.
US and Canadian delegations at the conference gave assurances that Asian interests would not be harmed.
ASIA — PACIFIC
BRUNEI
Sultan Sir Hassanal Bolkiah of Brunei visited India and Pakistan on Sept. 15-21; during the visit India and Brunei agreed to establish full diplomatic relations.
ASIA — PACIFIC
FIJI
It was announced on Sept. 1, during a visit to Canberra by the newly elected Fijian Prime Minister Sitiveni Rabuka, that Fiji and Australia had agreed to normalize diplomatic relations.
ASIA — PACIFIC
KAZAKHSTAN
President Nursultan Nazarbayev visited Germany on Sept. 21-23 and France on Sept 23-25.
In Germany, discussing the issue of ethnic Germans in Kazakhstan, he emphasised that they were being encouraged not to emigrate [see p. 38764].
In France he signed the CSCE Paris Charter, and he and French President François Mitterrand signed a treaty of friendship and co-operation.
ASIA — PACIFIC
TURKMENISTAN
The resumption of trade with Ukraine, suspended since March 1 [see p. 38828]in a dispute over the price of Turkmen gas, was announced on Sept. 26 following a meeting between Ukrainian Deputy Prime Minister Konstyantin Masik and Turkmenistan's President Saparmurad Niyazov; Ukrainian radio reported that Ukraine would pay transport costs for the gas in addition to the price of 3,000 roubles per cubic metre.
ASIA — PACIFIC
UZBEKISTAN
In an open letter on Sept. 7 to the Uzbek Supreme Soviet, Shakurulla Mirsaidov, who had formerly served as Uzbek Prime Minister and had been Vice-President until November 1991, announced his resignation as Deputy Chair of the Uzbek Supreme Soviet and as a people's deputy, because of "the replacement of democracy and openness by an authoritarian regime" ; increased repression of the opposition had been noted in Uzbekistan in preceding months [see p. 39010].
EUROPE
FORMER YUGOSLAVIA
During September, as the fighting continued in Bosnia-Hercegovina despite the efforts of the Geneva conference [see below], the UN moved towards a more interventionist policy, including more military support for relief convoys.
There were initial discussions on imposing an air exclusion zone or "no-fly zone" over Bosnia-Hercegovina.
The decision of the UN General Assembly not to accept the delegation of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (FRY — the entity created in April as a "rump" federation of Serbia and Montenegro — see p. 38848) as the natural successor to the UN seat formerly held by Yugoslavia [see p. 39121], compounded an internal power struggle between Serbian and FRY leaders inclined towards compromise and those advocating a military policy.
Meanwhile, there were moves towards a political union between Serb enclaves in non-Serb republics of the former Yugoslavia.
There were also indications at the end of the month of a new situation emerging in relations between the FRY and Croatia, with their respective Presidents, Dobrica Cosic and Franjo Tudjman, issuing a communiqué on Sept. 30 after talks in Geneva calling for "normalizing relations" [developments on this issue will be covered in a subsequent report].
Permanent conference on Yugoslavia in Geneva
The permanent conference on Yugoslavia opened in Geneva on Sept. 3, co-chaired by Lord Owen for the EC and Cyrus Vance for the UN.
Negotiations were attended by the leaders of the three ethnic communities in Bosnia-Hercegovina on Sept. 18-21, although they refused to meet jointly.
The Finnish diplomat Martti Ahtisaari, who as UN special representative had been closely involved with Namibia's transition to independence in 1990, was appointed as chair of the session by Boutros-Ghali in place of José Cutilheiro, the European Communities (EC) chief negotiator who had resigned in August.
Vance and Owen, who made several visits to the region during September, held talks in Belgrade on Sept. 11 at which FRY President Dobrica Cosic and Prime Minister Milan Panic signed a document outlining peace measures largely based on the London accords [see p. 39036].
The measures addressed (i) restoring peace in the region of Sarajevo;(ii) re-opening the Belgrade-Zagreb motorway;(iii) the security of humanitarian convoys;(iv) the situation of "pink zones" in Croatia (Serb-populated areas in Croatia not covered by the UN peace plan, but still patrolled by the UN Protection Force in Yugoslavia — UNPROFOR); and (v) placing Croatia's Prelavka peninsula under UN forces.
A communiqué issued by the Geneva conference on Sept. 6 (but in the event only partially observed — see below) announced that the warring parties in Bosnia-Hercegovina were by Sept. 12 to place under UN supervision their heavy weaponry (artillery over 100mm calibre, 82mm mortars, tanks and rocket launchers) deployed around Sarajevo, Gorazde, Bihac and Jajce.
Increased UN presence
On Sept. 14 the UN Security Council accepted the recommendation from Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali to expand the UN Protection Force (UNPROFOR) by up to 6,000 (in addition to the 1,500 already in Bosnia-Hercegovina and 15,000 in Croatia) to protect aid destined for civilians.
UNPROFOR members were to be allowed to use force for self-defence, including when prevented from carrying out their mandate.
The UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and UNPROFOR were to designate more protection zones.
China, India and Zimbabwe abstained from voting because the text referred to Resolution 770 of Aug. 13, on which they had also abstained [see p. 39035].
The extra contingents would come mainly from France, the United Kingdom and Canada, and their cost would not be borne by the UN budget.
The North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and the Western European Union (WEU) had in early September offered 6,000 and 5,000 troops respectively for UN forces protecting humanitarian convoys.
The killing of two French UN soldiers, in an attack on a relief convoy travelling from Belgrade to Sarajevo on Sept. 8, lent fresh impetus to calls for military escorts for relief convoys.
Initially, Bosnian Moslem troops were blamed, but a later UN report said that the convoy had been caught in crossfire between Serb and Bosnian forces.
16 UNPROFOR members had been killed since deployment, it was reported on Sept. 14.
The war in Bosnia-Hercegovina
Suspension of relief flights
Relief flights to Sarajevo [see p. 38970]were suspended as of Sept. 4, following the death of all four people on board an Italian aid flight from Split to Sarajevo.
Official UN reports supported Italian government findings that the plane was brought down by a missile, but responsibility could not be attributed.
Despite efforts to ensure the safety of future aid flights, the UN announced on Sept. 25 that they remained suspended.
The UN High Commissioner for Refugees, Sadako Ogata, presenting a UN appeal launched on Sept. 4 for an additional $434,000,000 in aid, warned of potential large-scale starvation in the approaching winter.
Casualty figures
Figures on Sept. 11 from medical authorities in Sarajevo, for the five months of war in Bosnia-Hercegovina to date, estimated that there had been more than 10,000 deaths; 2,037 people had died and 12,293 had been seriously wounded in Sarajevo.
53,200 people were missing or "eliminated" .
CSCE report on detention camps
On Sept. 16, the Committee of Senior Officials of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE) in Prague adopted the report of a CSCE mission to Bosnia-Hercegovina on Aug. 29-Sept. 4 to investigate 21 detention camps.
Conditions in camps run by Croats, Moslems, and Serbs were described as equally deplorable; Serbs were found to be running the majority of such camps.
Detainees included women and children, and were virtually all civilians, tending to confirm the numerous reports of shooting of prisoners of war [for UN report by Tadeusz Mazowiecki see p. 39035; for statements by Non-Aligned Movement on Yugoslavia issue see pp. 38937; 39122].
The CSCE crisis committee on Yugoslavia decided on Sept. 18 to extend its monitoring missions to cover other areas of ethnic tension, in Vojvodina and in Kosovo and Sandzak (Moslem-inhabited areas spanning Serbia and Montenegro — see below).
Continuing fighting
Despite the Geneva conference requirement that heavy weapons in the area be placed under UN supervision from Sept. 12 [see above], renewed artillery attacks were reported as early as Sept. 14 in Sarajevo (which was suffering severe water and electricity shortages as supply lines were interrupted).
On Sept. 15 Vance and Owen wrote to the Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic deploring the bombing of the Bosnian towns of Bihac, Cazin, Sokolac and Dobronica.
(The Bosnian Serbs were the only forces which commanded aircraft in Bosnia, left behind when the JNA withdrew from Bosnia-Hercegovina.
Visegrad and Tomislavgrad were also bombed.)
Karadzic accused the "enemy" of profiting from the London agreements to lift the siege of certain towns and to retake territory; Moslem forces did indeed advance in Gorazde on Sept. 18.
Appeal for aid from Islamic countries
Bosnian President Alija Izetbegovic visited Pakistan on Sept. 27-28, calling for aid and international support.
He subsequently made a brief stop in Turkey en route to Geneva.
[For attitudes of Islamic countries as expressed at Non-Aligned Movement summit see p. 39122.]
Defence agreement with Croatia
By the Sept. 23 annex to their June friendship and co-operation agreement [see p. 38971], Croatia and Bosnia-Hercegovina established a Joint Defence Committee.
They claimed that to date diplomatic, political and humanitarian efforts by the international community had failed to stop the aggression against them and had done little to alleviate the suffering of the civilian population.
Tudjman and Izetbegovic invoked Chapter VII of the UN Charter and requested that the UN arms embargo against former Yugoslavia be revoked.
The Croatian Defence Council (HVO) in the self-proclaimed Croatian Community of Herceg-Bosna welcomed the agreement as helping to "overcome some misunderstandings" .
The Croatian Community of Herceg-Bosna had, however, been proclaimed illegal by the Constitutional Court of Bosnia-Hercegovina on Sept. 14.
FRY internal power struggle
The more moderate FRY opinion appeared to be prevailing in an internal political power struggle in September, as Panic replaced some ministers and defeated a no confidence vote in the Federal Assembly on Sept. 4 by 66 votes to 30 with seven abstentions.
The motion was proposed on Aug. 31 by the extreme Serbian Radical Party (SRS) led by Vojislav Seselj and the Serbian Socialist Party (SPS) led by Borisav Jovic, but on Sept. 2 the SPS recommended that its deputies vote against the motion, following criticism by Federal President Cosic.
The motion followed a debate on the conduct of the Yugoslav delegation at the London conference, during which nationalist and ex-communist deputies had accused Panic's delegation of betraying Serbia at the conference.
Resignation of Jovanovic — other Cabinet changes
On Sept. 10, the FRY Foreign Minister, Vladislav Jovanovic resigned, claiming that the government was carrying out a policy "against the interests of Serbia and the Serbian people" .
He was replaced by Ilija Djukic, hitherto Yugoslavia's ambassador to China.
Panic appointed four new ministers in addition to Djukic on Sept. 11: Dragan Jovanovic (Finance), Branko Maricic (Trade), Milan Vujicic (Transport and Communications) and Ratko Lazarevic (Agriculture).
Panic assumed the Defence portfolio and gave Minister without Portfolio Ljubisa Rakic responsibility for co-ordinating the government's international activities.
On Sept. 17, Panic faced renewed criticism from Serbian and some Montenegrin deputies over his suggestion that the FRY make a new application for UN membership.
This contradicted their view that the FRY was the constitutional successor to the former Yugoslavia.
Panic had paid an unsuccessful three-day visit to China and Russia from Sept. 13 to gain support against the FRY's expulsion from the UN.
At a press conference on Sept. 15, however, Panic confirmed that China intended to supply oil to Belgrade which was suffering severe fuel shortages from UN sanctions.
Panic visited the USA on a public relations tour on Sept. 21-30.
Provision for early elections
On Sept. 29, the Serbian Assembly adopted by 169 votes to 13 (with 20 abstentions) a constitutional amendment, to be confirmed by referendum on Oct. 11, allowing early elections in the republic.
A Social Democratic Party (SDP), formed as a splinter group of the Socialist Party of Serbia (SPS), was registered with the Serbian Justice Ministry on Sept. 4.
The Serbian opposition coalition, DEPOS (the democratic movement of Serbia), was registered on Sept. 8.
Proposed union of Serbian republics
The parliament of the self-proclaimed Serbian Republic of Bosnia-Hercegovina (SRBH), which claimed to cover 63.5 per cent of Bosnian territory, on Sept. 16 declared itself in favour of union with the FRY.
The Assembly of the Republic of Serbian Krajina (RSK — Serb areas in Croatia) adopted a motion on Sept. 28 on co-operation between the RSK and the SRBH.
A protocol between the RSK and the SRBH, signed by respective Prime Ministers Zdravko Zecevic and Branko Djeric on Sept. 24, envisaged bilateral co-operation to the extent of harmonising their political systems and economies.
Kosovo
The President of the self-proclaimed "Republic of Kosovo" , Ibrahim Rugova [for election see p. 38919], held talks in Geneva with Owen and Vance on Sept. 16, during which he reiterated his fundamental position that Kosovo was to be treated as part of the former Yugoslavia, and not as a province of Serbia.
This was the key factor also in the Kosovo Albanians' response to a FRY draft programme, revealed on Sept. 17, to resolve the problem of teaching in Albanian in Kosovo schools.
Sandzak
The Moslem National Council of Sandzak (an area spanning southern Serbia and north-east Montenegro, home to some 200,000 Moslems) sent a letter to the Geneva conference, as reported on Sept. 8, saying that 70,000 Moslems had left the region because of military "terror" .
The President of the Council, Sulejman Ugljanin, visited Egypt on Sept. 17 seeking support.
Macedonia
New government
On Sept. 4, the Macedonian Assembly elected a new government, proposed on Aug. 26 [see p. 39036], and led by Branko Crvenkovski, leader of the Social Democratic Alliance of Macedonia (SDSM).
Prominent new government members were Stevo Crvenkovski as First Deputy Prime Minister and Vlado Popovski as Defence Minister.
Five ministers retained their posts, including Deputy Prime Ministers Becir Zuta and Jovan Andonov, Interior Minister Ljubomir Frckoski, and Foreign Minister Denko Malevski, who had offered his resignation in June over the issue of international recognition of Macedonia.
CSCE position on Macedonia
Although the CSCE committee meeting on Sept. 16 decided not to accept Macedonia as a regular member of the CSCE, on Sept. 18 in Prague the CSCE crisis committee on Yugoslavia decided to strengthen its permanent mission in the republic.
EUROPE
CROATIA
New government
Following the August legislative and presidential elections [see p. 39064], the new Croatian government was sworn in on Sept. 8; seven ministers and one deputy prime minister retained the posts they had held in the previous government.
At the constituent session of the Chamber of Deputies, Stipe Mesic was elected its President and thus President of the Croatian Assembly, since no law governing elections to the second chamber, the Chamber of Districts, had yet been passed.
Constitutionally, the President of the Assembly would assume the functions of the Croatian President should the latter be incapacitated.
Elections to the Chamber of Districts and local elections were to be held by Feb. 7, 1993.
With effect from Sept. 11, two new state bodies were created: a 32-member Presidential Council and a 14-member National Defence Council, which would act as advisory bodies to President Franjo Tudjman.
Their membership included key ministers, the President of the Assembly, Tudjman's personal advisers and senior military figures.
Hrvoje Sarinic Prime Minister Vladimir Sek Deputy Prime Minister
Key ministers in Croatian government
*Mate Granic Deputy Prime Minister Darko Cargonja Deputy Prime Minister
*Gojko Susak Defence
*Ivan Jarnjak Interior
*Zdenko Skrabalo Foreign Affairs Zoran Jasic Finance Ivica Crnic Justice and Administration
*Franjo Kajfez Energy and Industry
*Served in previous government.
EUROPE
ALBANIA
Arrest of former President
Albania's last communist leader Ramiz Alia, who had resigned as President in April after his election defeat by Sali Berisha [see p. 38878], was placed under house arrest on Sept. 12 and was held under armed guard at his daughter's house in Tirana, the capital.
He was said to have been charged with misusing state funds and with abuse of power.
Arrest of Attorney General
The People's Assembly (parliament), sitting on Sept. 17, voted to dismiss the Attorney General, Maksim Haxhia, after hearing allegations that he had failed to carry out his duties properly and had falsified state documents.
Albanian Radio reported on Sept. 23 that Haxhia had been arrested at Tirana airport while attempting to board a plane for France.
Party changes
It was reported on Sept. 3 that the Albanian Popular League party had held its first assembly and that its secretary-general, Xhemal Borova, had called for a reorganization.
Subsequently, the party paper Dielli reported, the League's name was changed to the People's Party.
Bashkim Driza was elected as party chairman.
Also on Sept. 3 it was reported that a deputy of the ruling Democratic Party, Teodor Keco, was resigning from the party group in the Assembly and would serve as an independent.
Protests over ecclesiastical appointment
Deputies of the Democratic, Social Democratic and Socialist parties in the Assembly were reported on Sept. 10 to have protested at the appointment of Greek Orthodox Exarch Januallatos as Patriarch of the Albanian Autocephalic Orthodox Church, and to have called for his departure from Albania.
ROMANIA
Romanian legislative elections
*Formerly the Democratic Convention (DC), renamed following the departure of the National Liberal Party from the alliance in April [see p. 38881].
Candidate Votes Ion Iliescu (DNSF) 5,633,456 Emil Constantinescu (DCR) 3,717,006 Gheorghe Funar (RNUP) 1,294,388 Caius Dragomir (NSF) 564,655 Ion Manzatu (RP) 362,485 Mircea Druc (independent) 326,866 
Presidential elections, first round
Parliamentary and presidential elections
The second general election since the overthrow of the Ceausescu regime in December 1989 were held on Sept. 27 [for May 1990 elections see pp. 37441-37442].
The Democratic Convention of Romania (DCR), a centre-right 18-party coalition, performed well in urban areas, while in rural areas there was strong support for the incumbent President, ex-communist Ion Iliescu, and for the Democratic National Salvation Front (DNSF) which nominated him.
No presidential candidate received an overall majority, and a second round run-off on Oct. 11 would be contested by Iliescu and the DCR presidential candidate, Emil Constantinescu.
Campaigning was largely around the qualities of presidential candidates; economic reform and the position of Romania's ethnic minorities were the substantive issues.
Assessing the results, Constantinescu said that they showed "fear of change and an alarming trend towards the left" .
Legislative elections
Some changes to the electoral law had redefined numbers of seats in each of Romania's 42 counties according to population.
There were 328 (rather than 387) elected seats in the Chamber of Deputies, plus seats reserved for the smaller national minorities (i.e. not the Hungarians) whose candidates got an aggregate of at least 1,327 votes.
One representatives of each of 13 minorities was named as a deputy under this provision, as announced on Oct. 10.
There were 143 (rather than 119) seats in the new Senate.
Election was by proportional representation and on party lists.
A 3 per cent threshold was in force, but alliances had to gain an additional 1 per cent for each constituent party, with the maximum threshold necessary being 8 per cent.
Presidential elections
The first round of the presidential elections was notable for the fact that both main candidates attracted substantially more votes than their parties had received in the parliamentary elections, even though in the case of Constantinescu, the rector of Bucharest University, he had only been named as a compromise choice at the July 27 DCR Congress (the NLP having left the alliance after its unsuccessful bid to persuade ex-King Mihai (Michael) to stand as a presidential candidate).
Of the other candidates, Funar was mayor of Cluj-Napoca where he was known for anti-Hungarian measures [see p. 38922]; Dragomir had been chosen as NSF candidate on July 25 after Petre Roman, former Prime Minister and leader of the reformist NSF [see p. 38881]had refused to stand for the presidency; Manzatu, a professor and founder of the Republican Party (RP), was formerly connected with the Ceausescu leadership; and Druc, formerly Prime Minister of Moldova, campaigned solely on the unification issue.
Bishop Tokes's hunger strike
Bishop Laszlo Tokes on Sept. 2 began a hunger strike in Timisoara to "demand justice in the name of the victims of post-communism" , i.e. the identification of the people responsible for 1,033 deaths in the 1989 uprising and for subsequent violence.
Tokes suspended his hunger strike on Sept. 11 to avoid pre-electoral controversy, but threatened to resume it after the second round of presidential elections.
In an open letter to Tokes on Sept. 3, Iliescu rejected accusations of repression and discrimination against the Hungarian minority.
On Sept. 9 it was announced that the only Romanian Cabinet official of Hungarian nationality, Deputy Minister of Culture Andro Horvath, had been dismissed as part of an efficiency drive.
Suspension of food subsidies
The government decided on Aug. 28 to go ahead with further cuts in state subsidies for basic goods and fuel from Sept. 1, as part of its International Monetary Fund (IMF) -backed economic reforms.
In compensation for the subsidy cuts, which had been negotiated in consultation with trades unions, and in an attempt to minimize their effect before the elections, it was announced that minimum pay would rise by 16 per cent to 12,920 lei per month (US$1.00=391.55 lei as at Sept. 7, 1992).
EUROPE
BULGARIA
Sentencing of Zhivkov
Todor Zhivkov, 81, Bulgaria's communist leader from 1954 until November 1989, was convicted of misappropriation of state property and embezzlement on Sept. 4 and sentenced to seven years' imprisonment.
He was also ordered to repay 21,000,000 leva to the state (US$1.00=20.1204 leva as at Sept. 7, 1992].
Zhivkov, whose trial opened in February 1991 [see p. 38017], was the first of eastern Europe's disgraced communist leaders to be sentenced to imprisonment.
Zhivkov was convicted by a panel of judges on a 4-to-3 vote.
Both the defence and the prosecution said that they would appeal against the sentence; prosecutors had sought a 10-year prison term.
Zhivkov also faced further charges of sponsoring terrorism, establishing labour camps, and inciting ethnic hatred through the forced assimilation of Bulgaria's ethnic Turk minority.
Also on Sept. 4 Milko Balev, deputy communist party leader under Zhivkov, was found guilty of illegal currency transactions and sentenced to two years' imprisonment.
Mounting criticism of UDF government
At a news conference held on Aug. 30 President Zhelyu Zhelev called on the Union of Democratic Forces (UDF) government to end its "war against everyone" and instead adopt a policy of national consensus.
The UDF, he claimed, had pursued "a basically erroneous policy" of confrontation with the trade unions, the press, the entire extra-parliamentary opposition and the Bulgarian Orthodox Church.
Prime Minister Filip Dimitrov defended his government against Zhelev's criticisms the next day.
However, Ahmed Dogan, leader of the ethnic Turks' Movement for Rights and Freedoms (MRF — whose support gave the UDF a working majority in parliament) said that Zhelev's statement was "objective" .
Krustyu Petkov, chair of the powerful Confederation of Independent Trade Unions in Bulgaria (CITUB), also praised Zhelev's statement in an interview on Sept. 2.
With the impact of Zhelev's attack still reverberating, the 21-member UDF coalition held a national conference in Sofia on Sept. 18-20 and agreed to establish working groups to conduct talks with the President and the MRF.
A political declaration stated that "the Cabinet's policy needs updating, not changing" , confirmed the UDF's support for Dimitrov, and reiterated the coalition's positive attitude towards the MRF, "in spite of the unexpected turn in the conduct of the MRF's leaders" .
At a large UDF rally in Sofia on Sept. 22 calls were made for Zhelev's resignation.
A group of MRF and Bulgarian Socialist Party (BSP) National Assembly members submitted on Sept. 17 a proposal of no confidence in the Assembly chair Stefan Savov, who was leader of the UDF-affiliated Democratic Party.
Speaking in the Assembly the next day, Dimitrov warned that "democracy is in danger" and that the target of the MNF-BSP attack was not Savov, but the whole reform process.
The demand for Savov's resignation was, he said, a rehearsal for an assault on the government.
Despite Dimitrov's staunch defence, Savov resigned on Sept. 24.
He was replaced, on an interim basis, by Snezhana Botusharova.
EUROPE
CZECHOSLOVAKIA
Slovakia's adoption of republican constitution
Following agreement in August on the separation of Czechoslovakia into two states with effect from Jan. 1, 1993 [see pp. 39061-62], the Slovak National Council (SNC) voted on Sept. 1 by 114 to 16 (with four abstentions) to adopt the draft constitution of a Slovak Republic.
All 16 opponents were members of the Christian Democrat Movement led by former Slovak Premier Jan Carnogursky.
The 14 ethnic Hungarian deputies walked out, protesting against last-minute alterations to the wording.
On Sept. 2, leaders of both ethnic minority parties in the SNC, Miklos Duraj of Coexistence and Bela Bugar of the Hungarian Christian Democratic Movement, were reported to have condemned the constitution.
The constitution was signed on Sept. 3 at a televised ceremony in Bratislava Castle by SNC chairman Ivan Gasparovic and Vladimir Meciar, the Slovak Premier and leader of the Movement for a Democratic Slovakia (HZDS), who later appeared on a balcony before cheering crowds.
Carnogursky boycotted the celebrations.
In his speech at the signing, Gasparovic appealed specifically for co-operation by "our fellow countrymen of Hungarian, Ukrainian, Polish and German origin, and to our Romany population" , drawing attention to constitutionally enshrined minority rights.
Constitutional provisions for the rights of Romanies, the subject of a recent Helsinki Watch report alleging discrimination and said to be Slovakia's second-largest minority after Hungarians, were welcomed by Alojz Pompa, chairman of the League of Romany Unity, in a radio interview on Sept. 4.
Problems of partition
At a joint emergency session of the Federal Assembly in Prague which began on Sept. 11, Czech leftist and Slovak Christian Democrat deputies spoke out strongly against the proposed liquidation of the Federation.
A vote on the bill to divide Czechoslovakia was expected to go before the Assembly on Oct. 1.
On Sept. 23 the federal government adopted a draft law laying down the modalities of partition and providing for the reallocation of the federal state's property, institutions, debts and obligations between the two republics before Jan. 1, 1993.
Division of assets would be on the basis of the size of each republic's population, Slovakia having approximately half the population of Bohemia-Moravia; it was reported that no financial compensation would be paid by either republic to the other.
At a press conference on Sept. 17 federal Defence Minster Imrich Andrejcak said that it would not be possible to divide the armed forces by Jan. 1, 1993.
Under the old Warsaw Pact policy of distributing military infrastructure, there were major imbalances; most air force installations and planes were in the Czech Lands, for example, while training centres and tank depots were mainly in Slovakia.
Returning on Sept. 21 from a five-day visit to the USA which included talks in Washington with International Monetary Fund (IMF) Managing Director Michel Camdessus, Czech Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus spoke positively in a television interview of the Fund's and the World Bank's attitudes towards the creation of two separate republics.
Dismissal of press agency chief
The federal government on Sept. 9 dismissed Peter Uhl, director-general of the Czechoslovak press agency CSTK and known for leftist views; his replacement, Tomas Kopriva, was a deputy in Klaus's Civic Democratic Party (ODS).
Problems in Slovak relations with Hungary
Meciar, on his first visit abroad as Slovak Prime Minister, met Hungarian Prime Minister Jozsef Antall in Budapest on Sept. 9, and agreed that the main issues causing friction between Slovakia and Hungary should be examined by joint parliamentary committees.
On minority rights, with approximately 600,000 ethnic Hungarians in Slovakia and approximately 100,000 Slovaks in Hungary, Meciar had categorically rejected a call by Hungarian Foreign Affairs Minister Geza Jeszenszky, who visited Bratislava on Sept. 2, for legislation on collective rights.
On the Gabcikovo-Nagymaros dam and hydroelectric power station project on the Danube, Hungary had on May 25 renounced the 1977 agreement on environmental grounds [see pp. 38843; 38939], but work on the Slovak side had gone ahead, and the facility was to begin partial operations in early November, according to a CSTK report on Sept. 10, with construction due for completion by the end of 1992.
In the face of continuing Hungarian objections, Meciar was reported to have agreed to consultations involving the European Communities, but only on ecological aspects; the findings would be referred to the International Court of Justice at The Hague.
EUROPE
HUNGARY
Anti-right march
Several thousand supporters of prominent right-wing ideologist Isatvan Csurka gathered outside the National Assembly in Budapest on Sept. 19 to demand the resignation of President Arpád Göncz and the heads of Hungarian radio and television, and the removal of "former communists" from the media.
A major counter-demonstration, organized on Sept. 24 by the Democratic Charter Movement, involved a march by some 50,000 people to the National Assembly, and other marches in provincial towns, the largest protest to date against the recent rise of the far right and the related increase in racist attacks.
Democratic Charter, set up in 1991, criticized the government's perceived failure to distance itself from Csurka's views.
A leading novelist and vice-president of the ruling Hungarian Democratic Forum (MDF), Csurka, exploiting a strong historical vein of extreme nationalism and anti-Semitism, had published an article on Aug. 20 demanding an end to moderation and compromise.
He argued that Jews, the former communist elite, liberals and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and bankers were linked in a conspiracy to destroy the government and smother the country's national revival.
Bill of rights
A bill of rights to protect national and ethnic minorities was introduced in the National Assembly by the government on Sept. 29.
Warning against forced assimilation into the dominant culture, it advocated the right to national and ethnic self-identity and the fostering of mother tongues, the right to maintain relations with mother countries and the right to create to local and national self-government.
Political parties
The Supreme Court ruled on Sept. 16 against a challenge by a dissident faction of the Social Democratic Party of Hungary to the legality of the party's spring 1991 congress and the election of its leader Endre Borbely.
The centrist National Democratic Federation (NDSz), formed by former leading reform communist Imre Pozsgay, Zoltan Biro and Istavan Kukorelli, became a political party on Sept. 19.
Zoltan Kiraly, an independent MP, founded the left-wing Social Democratic People's Party the previous week.
The Pensioners' Party was reported on Sept. 25 to have gained a National Assembly seat when independent deputy Imre Barcza joined the party.
EUROPE
POLAND
Constitutional amendments — Plan for state enterprises
Against the recommendation of its constitutional commission, the Senate, the upper house of the Polish parliament, passed on Sept. 10 the "small constitution" adopted by the Sejm (lower house) on Aug. 1 [see p. 39063].
The motion to reject the small constitution failed by 18 votes to 63 with three abstentions.
The bill was returned to the Sejm with some 40 amendments, mostly aimed at retaining the Senate's powers, but not broadening presidential powers.
A plan for the restructuring of state enterprises was unveiled by the government on Sept. 9, and would be submitted to parliament after consideration by trades unions.
The "enterprise pact" would allow workers and managers in Poland's state enterprises three months in which to choose a privatization scheme for their enterprise, from among five models.
Partial debt remission would reward enterprises which agreed on a restructuring programme with their creditors.
Proposals for tax adjustments included the replacement of the taxation of assets by a profits tax.
Negotiated wage controls would replace the tax on wage increases (popiwek).
Privatization Minister Janusz Lewandowski narrowly survived a vote of no confidence in the Sejm on Sept. 18.
Opposition parties failed to gain the necessary 201 votes to dismiss him, although they won the motion by 189 to 174 votes.
The Ursus tractor factory returned to work on Sept. 3 and the seven-week strike at the Tychy car plant [see p. 39063]ended on Sept. 15, providing evidence of government successes in labour policy.
Martial law trial
Gen. Wojciech Jaruzelski, Poland's last communist leader (from 1981, and Lech Walesa's predecessor as President, stepping down in December 1990), appeared on Sept. 22 before the Constitutional Accountability Committee, together with 13 communist ex-leaders, on criminal charges over the imposition of martial law in 1981.
The Confederation for an Independent Poland (KPN) had submitted that there were no constitutional grounds for introducing martial law.
Jaruzelski took responsibility for the act, but repeated his assertion that martial law had prevented the greater evil of an invasion by the Soviet Union.
Party developments
A report on Sept. 20 announced the formation of a right-wing Coalition for the Republic (KdR) led by former Prime Minister Jan Olszewski, former Defence Ministers Jan Parys and Romuald Szeremietiew, and former Interior Minister Antoni Macierewicz, members of the previous government which had fallen amid scandal over the exposure of alleged communist collaborators [see p. 38972].
In a speech marking the party's inception, Olszewski warned of the dangers inherent in delays to "the process of cleansing" .
The Democratic Union (UD), part of the governing coalition, lost its place as the largest parliamentary party when on Sept. 20 six deputies, supporters of the right-wing Forum of the Democratic Right group, left the UD.
The opposition Democratic Left Alliance (SLD) thus became the largest parliamentary bloc [for table of distribution of seats in the Sejm see p. 39016].
EUROPE
CIS
Postponement of summit
The Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) heads of state and heads of government summit meeting scheduled for Sept. 25 in Bishkek (Kirgizstan) was postponed until Oct. 9, to allow more time for finalizing the working documents for discussion at the meeting.
The postponement, decided on Sept. 16 by the presidents of Byelarus, Kazakhstan, Kirgizstan, Russia and Ukraine, apparently stemmed from disagreements between Russia and Ukraine over control of the nuclear weapons stationed in Ukraine.
A Foreign Ministers' meeting had been held, in preparation for the Bishkek summit, in Minsk (Byelarus) on Sept. 8.
The question of the control of nuclear weapons stationed in the former Soviet Union had been removed from the agenda of the previous summit in July [see p. 39018, where the month is wrongly given as June], for fear of a deadlock in the negotiations.
The CIS Defence Ministers, meeting on Sept. 3-4 in Moscow, failed to reach a satisfactory preliminary agreement to put to the Bishkek summit, and passed the issue to the four nuclear states (Byelarus, Russia, Kazakhstan, Ukraine) for further discussion.
The Sept. 3-4 meeting did successfully negotiate, however, an agreement on the transfer of servicemen from the former Soviet armed forces to the armed forces of individual CIS member states, and agreements on other defence-related issues.
An ITAR-TASS news agency report on Aug. 31 stated that the High Command of the CIS joint armed forces would take up its duties as of Sept. 1 "for the period of transition" , as agreed at the July summit.
The High Command would manage ex-Soviet strategic forces, co-ordinate CIS collective security and oversee peacemaking efforts in internal CIS conflicts.
Other CIS agreements
The ex-Soviet Turkestan Military District, encompassing the five Central Asian republics, had been abolished as of June 30; states in the area were establishing national armies [see pp. 38825; 38916; 39010; 39012].
The Transcaucasus Military District was transformed into a Group of Forces by decree of Russian President Boris Yeltsin, it was reported on Aug. 29, in line with reductions of Russian forces in the region.
In peripheral meetings to the Sept. 8 Foreign Ministers' meeting, Russia, Kazakhstan, Kirgizstan and Tajikistan agreed to form a joint commission for talks with China on the border regime between the CIS states and China.
Interparliamentary assembly
The first interparliamentary assembly of CIS member states was held in Bishkek on Sept. 16.
Participating were delegations from Armenia, Byelarus, Kazakhstan, Kirgizstan, Russia and Tajikistan — six of the seven states which had agreed to an interparliamentary assembly in April [see p. 38874]; Uzbekistan sent no delegation.
Ruslan Khasbulatov, Chairman of the Russian Supreme Soviet, was elected for a one-year term as Chairman of the Assembly, whose seat would be St Petersburg (Russia).
Khasbulatov spoke strongly in favour of increased co-operation between CIS member states, going so far as to mention a "supranational parliament" and common citizenship.
EUROPE
RUSSIA
Supreme Soviet session — Economy
On Sept. 22 Russia's Supreme Soviet resumed after its summer recess.
Controversial legislation to be presented during the session included the draft Russian Constitution, and a bankruptcy law to enforce the presidential decree issued in June [see p. 38974].
On Sept. 24 a Law on Defence, which President Boris Yeltsin had returned to the Supreme Soviet on Aug. 10, was accepted with the inclusion of the President's amendments.
Its adoption, however, was to be delayed until the new Constitution came into effect.
The Supreme Soviet accepted the amendment that higher military appointments (including that of Defence Minister) be made by the President without endorsement by the Supreme Soviet.
This conformed to current constitutional provisions for ministerial appointments.
However, the Supreme Soviet was to decide the strength and composition of armed forces and Interior Ministry troops, while the President was given the right to take decisions on the use of Interior Ministry troops in emergency situations.
Gaidar's report
Acting Prime Minister Yegor Gaidar presented his government's report to the Supreme Soviet on Sept. 22.
In it he warned that the relaxation of financial and credit policy in force since May had to be reversed to "prevent the collapse of the credit and monetary system" .
Gaidar's speech was followed by calls for his resignation, but on Sept. 23 the Supreme Soviet refused to endorse a no confidence motion, encouraged to reject it by Supreme Soviet Chairman Ruslan Khasbulatov, usually a critic of the government, who asked deputies not to make such a "strategic mistake" .
Key economic indicators which Gaidar cited in his speech illustrated the depth of the economic crisis.
The month-on-month inflation rate was currently over 20 per cent.
Industrial production in 1992 was expected to be 20 per cent down, and capital investment 50-55 per cent down, compared with 1991.
There were an estimated 13,000,000 people living below the poverty line (1,200 roubles per month) by the end of June 1992.
The budget deficit in the first half of 1992 had reached 7.5 per cent of gross national product (GNP), rising sharply in July and August; "substantial tightening of the budget policy" was to be expected.
The rouble fell in trading on Sept. 22 from US$1.00=205.50 roubles to US$1.00=241 roubles.
It fell further at the end of the month to US$1.00=309 roubles.
[For July exchange rates and economic statistics see p. 39021.]
In an interview with the Financial Times of Sept. 24, Gaidar said that in order to tighten monetary policy the government needed to carry out (i) a negotiated exit from the rouble zone by countries creating their own currencies [see below for Russia's suspension of financial transactions with Ukraine];(ii) a reduction of Russian central bank credits to state enterprises; and (iii) a swift privatization of large state enterprises.
On Sept. 24, Anatoly Chubais, Chair of the State Committee for the Management of State Property, answered deputies' questions on the privatization scheme which had been announced in August [see p. 39057].
The scheme was debated in the Supreme Soviet, where a proposal that it be put under a moratorium for several months was defeated.
1992 budget expenditure resolution
The Russian government's resolution of Sept. 4 on the detailed expenditure in the 1992 budget (approved by the Supreme Soviet on July 17 — see p. 39020) was published in full in Rossiiskaya gazeta of Sept. 15.
Expenditure was put at 3,319,333.8 million roubles with additional expenditure of 334,200 million roubles.
Certain protected expenses were to be financed in full from the budget, and submitted to the Supreme Soviet for approval.
These included wages, pensions and grants, subsidies to the agricultural sector and for heating and rent, the implementation of arms limitation treaties, and clean-up operations in areas affected by nuclear tests and accidents.
On Sept. 7 the government had announced expenditure of an additional 13,600 million roubles from the budget to subsidize the defence industry, for scientific and technical expenses in the development and purchasing of arms.
A government meeting on Sept. 24 agreed to introduce a unified wage structure by the end of the year for state employees, with the aim of rationalizing the system according to qualifications.
Large wage increases were thus envisaged for doctors and teachers, currently among the lowest paid [for May medical workers' strike see p. 38923].
The Russian Central Bank (RCB) said on Sept. 25 that budgeted revenue was only 40 per cent of that forecast for 1992.
On Sept. 27, Economics Minister Andrei Nechayev, in an interview with Interfax, said that the RCB had agreed to cut credit to industry to 500,000 million roubles for the remainder of the year.
This was one-third of the level demanded by industry.
Easy credit to unprofitable industries was undermining the government's economic policy, and there were calls from members of the government for the RCB to be freed from the control of the Supreme Soviet, as its unaccountability to government was hindering economic policy.
Suspension of financial transactions with Ukraine — Debt agreements with Byelarus, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan
The Russian Central Bank (RCB) from Sept. 22 suspended indefinitely financial transactions between Russia and Ukraine, on orders from the Russian government.
Transactions would resume when the two governments settled mutual payments for goods supplied.
The move revoked an agreement on trade settlements between the chairmen of the Russian and Ukrainian central banks signed on Sept. 10, and again demonstrated the conflict between RCB chairman Viktor Gerashchenko and reformers in the Russian government.
Russia contended that Ukraine was exporting inflation to Russia when Ukrainian enterprises purchased Russian goods with credits issued by Ukraine, for although Russia had the monopoly on printing money, all former Soviet republics could issue credits to their industries.
Talks between Russia and Ukraine on Ukraine's withdrawal from the rouble zone had been in progress since June (for RCB-government conflict see p. 39057).
The ITAR-TASS news agency reported on Sept. 8 that Russia had concluded agreements with Byelarus, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan, according to which Russia would assume these republics' share of the former Soviet Union's foreign debt in return for their portion of the Soviet Union's assets [for CIS March agreement on payment of ex-Soviet Union's foreign debt p. 38824].
Oil price rise
On Sept. 17, Yeltsin signed a decree on the state regulation of energy prices, intended to regulate the transition of Russia's most important export from fixed to floating prices.
[For April and May fuel price rises see pp. 38876; 38923.]
The price of oil was to be allowed to rise to 4,000 roubles per tonne, with a limit on profits at this level of 50 per cent on production costs.
These prices excluded additional excise duties.
Prices had already been raised sharply in May but were still well below world levels.
The measure was necessary partly to halt the fall in output due to exhausted and outdated equipment.
Extraction levels had fallen to about 86 per cent of 1991 quantities according to government calculations.
The world price of oil at current rouble exchange rates, according to Nezavisimaya Gazeta of July 9, stood at 15,000 roubles per tonne; the pre-September 1992 prices for Russian oil were 1,800-2,000 roubles per tonne.
The sudden liberalization of fuel prices would, according to government economists, damage other sectors of the frail Russian economy.
In 1993, Russia expected to reduce oil exports to Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) countries, while keeping exports to the West at 1992 levels.
Prices for consumers would rise by 50 per cent, but subsidies would be introduced on a regional basis for disadvantaged sections of the population.
Subsidies would also be provided for agricultural enterprises in order to limit the extent to which oil price rises would be passed on to the consumer in higher costs.
Economics Minister Andrei Nechayev, commenting on the measure, said that it was a new means of regulating fuel prices, applicable only to oil so far, which was based on profitability and would contribute resources to a fund for compensatory payments.
Much of Russia's oil revenue was being lost through illegal sales and theft.
The government was planning to tighten and recentralize the licensing system for sales of fuel.
The lack of a stable legal framework, the low fixed price of oil and insecure borders with other former Soviet republics encouraged illegal exports for resale at free market prices.
There were reports in September that the government's Commission for Financial and Legal Control and for Combating Corruption, chaired by Mikhail Gurtovoi, was investigating massive illegal exports of oil by Russian commercial businesses which, by bribing producers, were able to buy oil cheaply in order to resell it at profit.
A Western consultancy attempting to track down the money lost in this way said that much of it was being deposited in foreign banks.
Government reorganization
A government meeting on Sept. 29 agreed on the reorganization of Russian government bodies for greater efficiency in the context of the development of a market economy.
Izvestiya of Oct. 1 reported that Yeltsin had signed the relevant decrees to implement the measures.
The number of central executive bodies would be reduced from 131 to 73.
Among the ministries to be abolished were those of trade and industry, corresponding to the transition from a command-administrative system, in which these ministries had directed supplies and production, to a market-led economy.
The new structure as outlined by First Deputy Prime Minister with responsibility for management of the economy, Vladimir Shumeiko, who was in charge of the reorganization, comprised a three-tier system.
Ministries and state committees headed by Cabinet members came above co-ordinating committees and departments not headed by Cabinet ministers, which in turn would be above federal agencies and services.
Some bodies would be downgraded or even abolished, and personnel levels would be cut, from 3,500 to 2,500.
From Oct. 1, the Ministry of Trade and Material Resources was abolished, to be replaced initially by two federal contract corporations organized as joint-stock companies, all of whose capital belonged to the state, which would regulate supplies between producers.
In addition to their government work, they would be allowed to set up commercial supply links.
The Industry Ministry was scheduled for abolition, to be replaced by a State Committee directed towards drafting industrial strategy and privatization.
Moscow radio reported on Sept. 4 that an independent Council of Experts — a "voluntary body" — was to be established, attached to the Office of the President, with the aim that the "mistakes and blunders" in decisions on "major economic and industrial projects" should be avoided.
Political developments
A "political declaration of the left-wing and right-wing opposition" was published in Sovietskaya Rossiya of Sept. 22.
Signed by leaders of patriotic movements and communist and socialist parties, the declaration said that the opposition had "united in the name of national-state salvation" .
Yeltsin, it said, bore responsibility for "ruining Russia" ; the division of the Soviet Union by the "coup d'etat of August — December 1991" was initiated by the Russian Federation "ruling clique" and had been unconstitutional.
The opposition's economic proposals involved the reversal of current reform policies and the implementation of "emergency anti-crisis measures" .
The Russian Christian Democratic Movement, which left the Democratic Russia movement in 1991 to go over to the opposition, did not participate in this "united opposition" declaration.
At its congress on Sept. 25-26 the Constitutional Democratic Party (Kadets), also a former member of the Democratic Russia movement in 1991, demanded the resignation of the government and the convening of the Constitutional Assembly, elected in 1917 and dissolved by the Bolsheviks.
Democratic Russia itself, at a press conference on Sept. 10, warned that it would go over to the opposition if economic reform programmes were watered down and the former nomenklatura were once more put in command.
The pro-government Republican Party, until June a member of the Russian Movement for Democratic Reforms, also announced that it was intending to put pressure on the government and President in support of reforms.
Both Democratic Russia and the Republican Party were planning to start a petition for a referendum on land privatization (for formation of pro-government bloc see p. 39020).
Civic Union (CU), a centrist opposition bloc formed in June [see pp. 38974; 39058], held a press conference on Sept. 23 to introduce its anti-crisis programme which would be submitted to Yeltsin and the Supreme Soviet.
Arkady Volsky, leader of the Union of Industrialists and Entrepreneurs, a part of Civic Union, advocated a closer study of China's economy which had preserved a parallel state and private sector.
The motto of the CU bloc was "liberal reforms — strong authority" .
Vice-President Aleksandr Rutskoi, one of CU's leaders, said that CU did not intend to act as an opposition to the current authorities, but to "propose reasonable action and actively participate in the reforms" .
Rutskoi also declared on Sept. 28 that while there was no cause to change Yegor Gaidar as Prime Minister, "the more radical ministers in his Cabinet should be changed as soon as possible" .
Gaidar's response to the Civic Union programme was that its fundamental concept of increasing cash supply to stimulate production would "in the context of a high proportion of monopoly production bring about…an upsurge in prices" .
 "All-Russia" conference
A meeting between Yeltsin, Khasbulatov and the heads of the Russian Federation's republics and regions was held in Cheboksary (Chuvash) on Sept. 11.
Yeltsin said that the motivation for the "all-Russia conference" was to eliminate the "lack of co-ordination in the localities" between the executive, which reported to the President, and the legislature, which reported to Khasbulatov.
He called for greater co-operation between executive and legislature at both federal and local level.
While criticising the "too tenacious traditions of a unitarian state" , he also singled out for criticism individual regional leaders whom he accused of adopting laws at variance with those of the Russian Federation (RF).
In what observers saw as a trade-off, Yeltsin announced that legislative bodies would serve the remaining 2@1/2 years of their full term (having been elected in March 1990) and that more than 80 directly appointed heads of administration responsible to the President would continue in office (a moratorium on local elections was due to be lifted on Dec. 1).
The threat to dismiss the Congress of People's Deputies prematurely was thus averted, but direct presidential control also remained in place.
However, Yeltsin proposed that the heads of executive power at local level would in future be elected by the localities and not appointed by the President [for threats to dissolve the Congress of People's Deputies see p. 38875].
Chechnia and Tatarstan, constituent republics of the RF demanding independent status, continued their talks with RF representatives during September.
Tatarstan's neighbouring republic, Bashkortostan (formerly Bashkiria), was in the process of drafting a supplementary treaty to the March Russian Federation Treaty [see pp. 38825-26].
The leaders of Bashkortostan and Tatarstan had on Aug. 20 held negotiations with Kazakh President Nazarbayev on "preserving a single economic space" .
RF officials were also worried by moves in Yakutia, where Russia's major diamond producing region lay, to establish its own diamond business, bypassing central government.
(The diamond consortium, De Beers, opened its Moscow office on Sept. 8.)
Kabardino-Balkaria
A 60-day state of emergency was imposed in Nalchik, capital of the Russian Federation North Caucasus republic of Kabardino-Balkaria, on Sept. 27, following demonstrations by protesters demanding the release of the leader of the Confederation of Caucasus Mountain Peoples, Musa Shanibov, detained earlier in September for forming armed units to fight with the Abkhazian separatists in their conflict with Georgia [see p. 39110].
They also demanded the resignation of Kabardino-Balkaria's President, Valery Kokov, who had introduced the state of emergency.
The demonstrations were reportedly violent, requiring the intervention of Russian Interior Ministry Troops.
EUROPE
ARMENIA
New minister for defence issues
The creation of a new post of Minister of State for Defence Issues, higher in rank than that of Minister of Defence (currently held by Vazgen Sargsyan), was reported on Sept. 13.
Vazgen Manukyan, appointed to the new post on an acting basis by presidential decree, had been Prime Minister from August 1990 until his resignation in September 1991 [see pp. 37664; 38418].
Armenia had not created its own armed forces, and all those fighting in the Nagorny Karabakh conflict were volunteers.
In August, Armenia had unsuccessfully appealed to Russia for military support, invoking the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) security treaty [see pp. 38922; 39059].
EUROPE
AZERBAIJAN/ARMENIA
Ceasefires and ceasefire violations
The ceasefire mediated by Kazakhstan on Aug. 28 between Azerbaijan and Armenia over the disputed region of Nagorny Karabkah [see p. 39059]produced little respite in the fighting.
A further ceasefire, this time brokered by Russia on Sept. 19, came into effect on Sept. 25, accompanied by protocols on the withdrawal of arms and on prisoner exchange, as well as on stationing observers from Byelarus, Georgia, Kazakhstan, Russia and other countries of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE).
However, by the end of the month, each side was accusing the other of breaking this new ceasefire.
The Kazakh-brokered agreement had called for a ceasefire along the border between the two former Soviet republics.
In a protocol of Sept. 3, plenipotentiary representatives of the Armenian and Azerbaijani Presidents committed both sides "not to undertake actions which violate the state border" .
However, subsequent days saw mutual accusations of firing on the border region.
Further Kazakh-brokered negotiations in Alma Ata failed on Sept. 15.
Talks in the other forum for negotiations — the CSCE talks in Rome preparatory to a peace conference in Minsk — also collapsed in September.
The talks failed on Sept. 10, according to the Independent because of "Azeri intransigence" over accepting a ceasefire.
Azerbaijan launched two offensives on Sept. 18, one centred on the Lachin corridor which linked Armenia with Nagorny Karabakh through Azerbaijani territory and the other in the north of the enclave around Mardakert (Agdere) and Agdam [for map see p. 38925].
Up to 300 people were thought to have died.
Armenian request for Turkish grain
It was reported on Sept. 4 that Armenia had requested 100,000 tonnes of grain from Turkey, a country perceived as allied with Azerbaijan.
The unstable situation in Georgia, the main transport route to Armenia since Azerbaijan's economic blockade of Armenia in November 1991, was given as the reason for the appeal, which was also seen as a veiled challenge to Turkey to prove its neutrality in the conflict.
New Azeri chief of general staff
A presidential decree of Sept. 4 appointed Col. Nureddin Sadykhov to the post of Chief of General Staff and First Deputy Defence Minister, and promoted him to the rank of major-general.
President Abulfez Elchibey, elected in June [see p. 38976], was said to be reorganizing the Azerbaijani army.
EUROPE
MOLDOVA
Relations with Bulgaria and Romania
The Presidents of Moldova and Bulgaria, Mircea Snegur and Zhelyu Zhelev, signed a 10-year friendship and co-operation treaty in Sofia on Sept. 7.
A special clause guaranteed the rights of ethnic Bulgarians in Moldova, of whom there were 89,000 according to Moldova and 150,000-170,000 according to Bulgaria.
Bulgaria and Moldova had established diplomatic relations in February 1992.
It was announced on Sept. 2 that the Moldovan government had established a council to co-ordinate economic relations with Romania, presided over by Bulgarian First Deputy Prime Minister Nicolae Andronaci and including ministers and directors of enterprises and banking institutions.
Dnestr republic
The Supreme Soviet of the Dnestr region within Moldova on Sept. 8 approved a new government structure and a law on languages.
The new government would include 13 ministries and 12 committees and directorates.
The law on languages recognized Moldovan (Romanian), Russian and Ukrainian as official languages of equal status.
Moldovan would continue to be written in the Cyrillic alphabet.
In a related development, President Snegur in his address marking the anniversary of the 1989 legislation making Moldovan (Romanian) the official language and returning it to the Latin script, regretted the slow implementation of the legislation.
The Chair of the Moldovan parliament, Aleksandru Moshanu, reiterated Snegur's views, and urged that Moldova should identify itself with Romania, dropping the term "Moldovan people" which was "dogma imposed by the [Soviet]colonizers to separate us from the Romanians" .
Withdrawal of troops
The second, inconclusive, round of talks on the withdrawal from Moldova of the Russian 14th Army was held in Kishinev on Sept. 16-17, but Dnestr representatives and the military were excluded from the negotiations.
President Snegur stated that Russian officers living in the Dnestr region would be allowed to serve in the Moldovan national armed forces, and that units of these armed forces would be stationed in eastern Moldova (i.e. the Dnestr republic).
Critical statements made about the 14th Army's withdrawal by its commander, Gen. Aleksandr Lebed, drew a rebuke from Russian Defence Minister Marshal Pavel Grachev, to the effect that the military should not become involved in politics.
Gen. Lebed had made controversial statements in July on the role of Russia's armed forces outside the Russian Federation [see p. 39019].
The Russian Information Agency (RIA) reported on Sept. 18 that Gen. Lebed had been promoted to the rank of lieutenant-general.
Nezavisimaya gazeta of Sept. 18 reported that the withdrawal of the Russian regiment stationed in Kishinev [see p. 39060]had been halted due to Moldovan Defence Ministry protests over the removal of military equipment which it claimed should be transferred to the republic.
The commander of the regiment, Col. Aleksei Lebed (brother of Lt.-Gen.
Lebed), rejected these claims.
EUROPE
UKRAINE
Economic reform — Resignation of Prime Minister
President Leonid Kravchuk, in a speech reported on Sept. 10, called for swift economic reform, criticizing the increasingly bitter arguments between the Supreme Soviet (Supreme Rada) and the government, and apparently siding with opposition parties against Prime Minister Vitold Fokin.
On Sept. 11 Kravchuk met leaders of opposition groups, when topics under discussion included a transitional government and a new constitution.
Under the slogan "New Parliament for an Independent Ukraine" , opposition movements and parties, including Rukh and the Congress of National Democratic Forces of Ukraine [see p. 39060]had started a campaign for a 3,000,000-signature petition in favour of a referendum on fresh elections to the Supreme Soviet.
Kravchuk had sent his greetings to the Congress formed in August.
The sixth session of the Supreme Soviet opened on Sept. 15 amid uncertainty over the course of Ukraine's economic reform and fears that its slow pace would jeopardize IMF credits [for Ukraine's entry to the IMF see p. 39120], and also amid opposition calls for the replacement of the government.
On Sept. 25 the government announced a new economic reform programme, but on Sept. 30 Kravchuk announced that he had accepted Fokin's resignation, which was motivated by a wish "to avoid further exacerbation of the social and political situation in the republic." 
Fokin agreed to continue to serve until a replacement could be appointed.
Assessed by the Financial Times as "a patchwork combination of reformist and reactionary measures" , and described by some in government as "a return to command-administrative methods" , the economic programme detailed a mass privatization scheme, but also reintroduced central control over wages and prices.
It was intended that with effect from Sept. 1 a "privatization account" worth 30,000 kupony (coupons) would be opened in savings banks for each citizen.
The European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) on Sept. 24 announced an ECU2,000,000 (about US$2,700,000) programme to help Ukrainian privatization.
Industrial action
Transport workers and some miners went on strike on Sept. 2, affecting most airports, major railway junctions (reportedly causing difficulties on Russia's railways) and 39 coal mines.
The workers were members of the Federation of Free Trade Unions, and were carrying out their July strike threat [see p. 39021], demanding rights and recognition equal to those enjoyed by former communist trade unions, in addition to improvements in pay and conditions.
When talks with government and presidential staff broke down, the strike was declared illegal.
However, industrial action was called off on Sept. 3, as reportedly the government had acceded to all the Federation's demands and revoked criminal charges against strikers.
Amendments to Crimean constitution
At the Crimean Republic's Supreme Soviet sitting on Sept. 25, amendments were adopted to rectify the "defects" in the Constitution as adopted in May [see p. 38924].
The first article confirmed that the Crimean Republic was "a legal, democratic, secular state within the structure of Ukraine" whose jurisdiction "is determined by its Constitution and the law of Ukraine on the delimitation of powers between the bodies of power of Ukraine and the Crimean Republic" .
The Crimean Supreme Soviet had voted on July 9 not to hold the referendum on independence planned for Aug. 2.
Relations with Romania
Foreign Affairs Minister Anatoly Zlenko arrived in Romania on Sept. 3 for a two-day official visit.
Minor agreements were signed on cultural and scientific co-operation and a consular convention in preparation for a full-scale treaty.
The issue of the Romanian and Ukrainian ethnic minorities in each country was also discussed.
Zlenko rejected as "political speculation exploited by party leaders for electoral purposes" any territorial claims on formerly Romanian parts of Ukraine.
EUROPE
GEORGIA
Conflict in Abkhazia
Fighting which had begun in August between Georgian troops and Abkhazian separatists in the autonomous region of Abkhazia threatened in September to draw Russia into conflict with Georgia.
Negotiations between Abkhazia, Georgia and Russia on Sept. 3 in Moscow resulted in a ceasefire effective from Sept. 5, the establishment of a tripartite monitoring and inspection committee and agreement that Georgian troops would remain in Abkhazia.
The agreement also included a clause binding the North Caucasian republics and regions in the Russian Federation (RF) to stop troops from entering the conflict; volunteers from this region were supporting the Abkhazian separatists.
North Caucasus representatives, with the exception of Chechnia, had also participated in the negotiations.
Although frequent high-level negotiations were subsequently, held, skirmishing continued.
The Abkhaz Health Minister reported that casualties in the conflict between Aug. 14 and Sept. 24 stood at 189 dead and 823 wounded.
The situation was further confused by a split in the Abkhaz leadership along ethnic lines, with the leader of the Georgians in the Abkhaz parliament or Supreme Soviet, deputy chair Tamaz Nadareyshvili, calling for the resignation of the Supreme Soviet chair Vladislav Ardzinba.
Georgian Justice Minister Dzhoni Khetsuriani had called on Aug. 31 for the dissolution of the parliament, describing it as elected on a "discriminatory electoral law" of July 1991, which gave 28 of the 65 seats to the Abkhazians, actually a minority in Abkhazia [see p. 39058], while the Georgians had 26 and others 11.
The Russian Supreme Soviet on Sept. 25 passed a resolution "denouncing the policy of the Georgian leadership, which tries with the use of violence to solve complicated problems of inter-ethnic relations" .
A second resolution suspended the transfer of Russian arms and equipment to Georgia including those already contracted for transfer.
Georgia responded by accusing Russia of interference.
Russia was reported to have sent about 10 motorized battalions of Interior Ministry troops to the North Caucasus republics within the RF, in an attempt to protect RF borders and maintain order.
EUROPE
BALTIC STATES
Agreement on troop withdrawal from Lithuania
On Sept. 8, following an apparent reversal of Russian policy, Russian and Lithuanian Defence Ministers signed an agreement on the withdrawal of former Soviet troops, now Russian troops, from Lithuanian territory by Aug. 31, 1993 [for Lithuanian referendum on status of ex-Soviet troops see p. 38972].
The estimated number of troops in Lithuania varied from 20,500 to 38,000.
Russia had previously insisted that its troops could not be withdrawn from the Baltic states before 1997-99 because of the difficulties of housing returning servicemen.
The Presidents of Russia and Lithuania postponed until October the actual signature of a treaty on troop withdrawal, due to "technical" difficulties.
Lithuania agreed as part of the agreement to construct housing for servicemen in Kaliningrad (Russian territory separated from Russia proper by Lithuania) in exchange for receiving hardware from the Baltic Fleet as a basis on which to form a Lithuanian navy.
A routine Baltic Council meeting in Tallinn on Sept. 16, attended by the heads of state, praised the Lithuanian-Russian agreement and appealed to the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE) to encourage similar agreements with Latvia and Estonia.
Russia's position, which had come under pressure in the CSCE summit in July [see p. 39031], appeared to be softening when at a meeting with his Baltic counterparts on Aug. 6 Russian Foreign Minister Andrei Kozyrev proposed a 1994 withdrawal date.
However, the Baltic states rejected the conditions which Russia sought to impose, in particular Russia's retention of strategic bases in the region, financial contributions from the Baltic states to their upkeep, and measures to stop discrimination against the Russian-speaking population of the Baltic countries.
In an interview with the Kuranty newspaper on Sept. 8, Russian Deputy Foreign Minister Vitaly Churkin explained that withdrawing the troops from Latvia and Estonia presented other problems.
He specified certain military installations "which Russia cannot give up so easily" , and the legislation affecting the Russian-speaking population of Latvia and Estonia, specifically the citizenship laws [see p. 38880].
Churkin referred to the forthcoming elections in Estonia [see this page]for which the non-Estonian population was disenfranchised.
Of the three Baltic states, Lithuania had proportionally the smallest Russian-speaking minority; according to 1989 census figures, Lithuanians formed 79.9 per cent of the Lithuanian population, as against the 53.7 per cent of titular nationality in Latvia and 64.8 per cent in Estonia.
EUROPE
LITHUANIA
Ruling in Prunskiene case
On Sept. 14 the Lithuanian Supreme Court ruled that former Prime Minister Kazimiera Prunskiene, on trial since June 4, was guilty of conscious collaboration with the KGB (the ex-Soviet State Security Committee).
Prunskiene, who had resigned as Prime Minister on Jan. 8, 1991 [see p. 37944], consistently denied the accusations (made in April — see p. 38880), claiming that a document bearing her signature in which she agreed to work for the KGB was a forgery and that the trial was politically motivated.
Other politicians who had been investigated for alleged collaboration with the Soviet KGB included deputy Virgilius Cepaitis [ibid.].
A de-Sovietization law, banning former KGB or Communist Party employees from holding state posts, had passed its first reading on Feb. 5, 1992.
Fuel price increases — Warnings of need for rationing
Increases of up to fivefold in the price of electricity and petrol to consumers, from Sept. 1, were accompanied by warnings of energy rationing.
Supplies of crude oil from Russia had been sharply reduced since Aug. 30, so that reliance on the Ignalia nuclear power station near Vilnius (whose reactor design was similar to that at Chernobyl) increased, despite safety fears.
The power station underwent a brief emergency shut-down on Sept. 5.
EUROPE
ESTONIA
Elections
On Sept. 20, in Estonia's first post-independence elections, the right-wing nationalist Fatherland group (Isamaa) and other right-wing parties won a strong position in the Parliament (Riigikogu); there were 633 candidates for 101 seats, elected by a complex system of proportional representation.
In the presidential elections no candidate gained an overall majority; the choice between the two leading candidates thus passed to the parliament at its first session on Oct. 5.
The franchise was limited to Estonian citizens, leaving the total number of eligible voters at about 690,000.
Turnout was some 67 per cent.
The barring of non-Estonian citizens, mostly Russians, Ukrainians and Byelarussians, drew protests from the Russian leadership and appeared to fuel tension over the issue of Russian troop withdrawal from Estonia [see this page].
The outgoing parliament or Supreme Council (Ulemnoukogu — until independence in 1991 called the Supreme Soviet) held its last session on Sept. 14.
It was elected in March 1990 [see p. 37322], when it began Estonia's move to full independence.
Free trade agreement with Russia
Estonia's Prime Minister, Tiit Vahi, and Russia's acting Prime Minister, Yegor Gaidar, signed a free trade agreement on Sept. 7 in Moscow.
Gaidar noted that difficulties remained in relations between the two countries, referring specifically to the rights of Estonia's ethnic minorities.
Party Seats won Fatherland group (Isamaa) 29 Safe Home (Kindel kogu) 17 Estonian Popular Front 15 Moderates 12 Estonian National Independence Party 10 Estonian Citizens 8 Independent Royalists 8 Greens 1 Entrepreneurs' party 1 Candidate Votes Percentage Arnold Ruutel 195,743 42.2 Lennart Meri 138,317 29.8 Rein Taagepera 109,631 23.7 Lagle Parek (f) 19.837 4.3 Ruutel, the candidate of Kindel Kogu, was the former Estonian Communist Party leader who had chaired the Supreme Soviet presidium from 1983 and had been de facto head of state since March 1990 [see p. 37322].
He and Taagepera, a lecturer and US citizen supported by the Popular Front, were regarded as moderate candidates.
Meri, Foreign Minister until March and subsequently ambassador to Finland [see pp. 38879-80], was the principal Estonian nationalist candidate, supported by the Isamaa coalition; Parek was chair of the Estonian National Independence Party and a former political prisoner.
Estonian parliamentary elections
Presidential elections
EUROPE
GERMANY
Crisis over financing the east
An unprecedented crisis developed in Germany's ruling coalition over the financing of unification as it became clear that further tax increases would be unavoidable.
[For European monetary crisis see pp. 39080-81.]
An emergency meeting of the three coalition partners on Sept. 6 failed to agree on means of stimulating a recovery in the east.
Wolfgang Schäuble, parliamentary leader of the Christian Democratic Union (CDU), had on Aug. 31 suggested that financing for the east should be raised by the introduction of a compulsory 5 per cent interest-free investment bond, repayable after 1996,(i) for those earning over DM5,000 per month gross who had not bought special eastern solidarity bonds; or (ii) for businesses with more than 20 employees which had not invested in the east.
An alternative idea put forward by Finance Minister Theo Waigel on Sept. 1 was a voluntary "Germany bond" offering low interest but tax-free.
Federal Chancellor Helmut Kohl's address to the Bundestag on Sept.8, reviewing his 10 years in office, acknowledged that mistakes had been made in the unification process and warned that western Germany would need to transfer DM150,000 million annually to the east "for a long time to come" .
He reiterated his call, made the previous day, for government, opposition, regional, industrial and trade union leaders to hold talks on a "solidarity pact" to finance the growing cost of unification.
Kohl also quashed rumours that Schäuble and CDU Defence Minister Volker Rühe were planning a "grand coalition of national unity" with the opposition Social Democratic Party (SPD).
The SPD, whose leader Björn Engholm had offered to co-operate with the government on "specific issues" , countered Kohl's proposal by insisting that a clear strategy and firm proposals were necessary before such talks could be worthwhile, and called notably for an extension of the temporary 7.5 per cent surcharge on income tax [see p. 38109; pp. 38297-98].
1993 budget
Waigel presented to the Bundestag on Sept. 8 his federal budget for 1993 accompanied by medium-term targets up to 1996.
The budget was widely criticized as being unrealistic and irrelevant to the real needs of the eastern economy.
Waigel forecast a public-sector deficit of DM38,000 million in 1993 and of DM22,000 million in 1994.
His stated goal was to reduce the deficit from 4.3 per cent of gross national product (GNP) in 1991 to between 2 and 2.5 per cent by 1996.
Waigel gave details of proposed cuts in corporate taxation to improve the competitiveness of industry, which would be financed by reductions in depreciation allowances on movable assets and on fixed property.
He criticized leading German banks for encouraging clients to deposit their capital in Luxembourg subsidiaries to avoid new taxation on savings accounts entering into force on Jan. 1, 1993.
Industrial support scheme
The Cabinet on Sept. 23 approved an emergency plan to support east German industry and protect 400,000 jobs, through subsidised financing of foreign construction contracts and the extension of export credit guarantees to barter deals with the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) until 1995.
Administered by the Treuhand and financed out of existing resources, the programme also established a fund at the Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau to support east European trade at below-market interest rates.
Right-wing gains in Bavaria
In municipal elections in Passau (Bavaria) on Sept. 21 the extreme right Republicans Party doubled its vote, winning five seats and 11 per cent of the vote to become the third-largest party on the town council.
Health service reforms
Reforms designed to reduce federal contributions to the health service by DM11,400 million a year over the next two years were approved by the Cabinet on Aug. 12 and tabled in the Bundestag on Sept. 11.
The measures initially provided for increased charges to patients totalling DM3,200 million a year and savings on fees, hospital charges and drugs amounting to another DM8,200 million.
However, a compromise reached on Oct. 4 after negotiations reduced the amount borne by the patients to DM1,000 million and increased the medical and pharmaceutical contribution to DM10,000 million.
Limits were placed on the numbers of doctors registered with the system and drug companies were required to lower prices by 5 per cent from Jan. 1, 1993, and to impose a two-year price freeze.
Continuing anti-foreigner violence — Sentences on participants
As right-wing violence against foreigners continued on an almost daily basis, mainly in the east but with some incidents in the west, the Brandenburg Interior Minister Alwin Ziel called on Sept. 8 for the banning of neo-Nazi organizations which he believed were masterminding the attacks, particularly the Cottbus-based German Alternative (DA).
The federal public prosecutor's office began an investigation into the right-wing Nationalist Front, based in Detmold (western Germany), and the Ku Klux Klan, which was thought to have set up a chapter in North Rhine-Westphalia.
Following the violence in Rostock on Aug. 22-26 [see p. 39065]and attacks on a hostel in Cottbus and two other Brandenburg towns on Aug. 29-30, a hostel for asylum seekers was attacked in Eisenhüttenstadt during the nights of Sept. 4-5 and 5-6, and 200 police and border troops were called in.
A hostel in Quedlinburg, south of Magdeburg (Saxony-Anhalt), was besieged for four nights on Sept. 8-11 and 71 arrests were made; in this instance local politicians and sympathisers with the residents stood guard against the assailants.
The stabbing of a German by a Romanian on Sept. 14 in Wismar sparked off a week of attacks against a hostel in the town.
Several arson attacks occurred, with 10 people including six Vietnamese being injured in their homes in Halle in fires started by skinheads on Sept. 7 and two Yugoslavian children being badly burned in Hemsbach (Baden-Wurttemberg) on Sept. 11.
Three skinheads were each sentenced in Frankfurt-an-der Oder on Sept. 14 to four years' imprisonment for beating up three African immigrants, one of whom subsequently died, in Eberswalde in November 1991.
Two others received respectively three years and a two-year suspended sentence.
In Rostock where 32 arrests had been made in connexion with the August violence, one man was sentenced on Sept.10 to nine months' imprisonment, while on Sept.15 one youth was put on probation for a year and another was sentenced to two weeks' juvenile detention.
Agreement on deportation of Romanians
Under an agreement signed on Sept. 24 Romania agreed to accept back all Romanians who were living illegally in Germany in return for DM30,000,000 in reintegration aid.
The deportations of at least 43,000 people, some 60 per cent of whom were gypsies (one of the main targets of right-wing violence in Germany), were due to begin in November.
Anti-Semitic attacks
Following an arson attack on the Jewish barracks of the former Sachsenhausen concentration camp, north of Berlin, on Sept. 27, Foreign Minister Klaus Kinkel laid a wreath at the site on Sept. 29 and the Education Minister of Brandenburg state, Heinrich Enderlein, issued a statement apologising to all Jewish people.
It was widely felt that Kohl should have visited both this site and other scenes where anti-foreigner and anti-Semitic attacks had taken place.
In Berlin the Jewish cemetery was damaged on Sept. 16, and on Sept. 25 three men were arrested for the bombing on Aug. 31 of a memorial in Berlin dedicated to victims of the holocaust.
Discovery of mass grave
The mass graves of about 12,500 people who died from 1945 to 1950 in a Soviet prison camp located at the former Sachsenhausen concentration camp were discovered near the site in September.
The skeletons of a further 12,000-16,000 victims of the Soviet secret police were feared to be in Bautzen where preliminary excavations began in September.
Charges against Wolf
Markus Wolf, the former head of East German intelligence from 1958 to 1987 who gave himself up in 1991 [see p. 38447], was charged on Sept. 24 with treason, espionage and corruption.
Helmut Voigt, a former officer of the East German state security police (Stasi), was sentenced in Athens on Sept. 10 to 10 months' imprisonment for entering the country on a false passport.
The German authorities announced that they would request his extradition in connection with his alleged collaboration with international terrorists and in particular the 1983 bombing of the French consulate in Berlin [see p. 33039].
Klaus Croissant, a former defence lawyer for Red Army Faction (RAF) members, was arrested in Berlin on Sept. 14 on charges of providing the Stasi with political information between 1981 and 1987.
Opening of Main-Danube canal
A 171-km canal link between the Main and the Danube in south-east Germany was opened on Sept. 25; it helped to create a 3,500-km continuous navigable waterway from the Netherlands North Sea port of Rotterdam to Constanza on Romania's Black Sea coast.
EUROPE
NORWAY
Cabinet reorganization
On Sept. 4 Prime Minister Gro Harlem Brundtland replaced six ministers and reorganized several ministries in a Cabinet reshuffle designed primarily to provide a stronger focus on tackling the problem of unemployment.
The Ministry of Labour and Government Administration, previously held by Tove Strand Gerhardsen, was split into two, with Gunnar Berge taking over the new Ministry of Local Government and Labour and Oddny Alexandersen the Ministry of Government Administration.
The Ministry of Health and Social Affairs was also divided, Werner Christie taking the Health portfolio and Grete Knudsen Social Affairs.
Kari Nordheim Larsen took over as Minister of Development Co-operation from Grete Faremo, who became Minister of Justice and Police.
Finn Kristensen assumed additional responsibility for Industry within his existing portfolio of Petroleum and Energy.
Jan Henry T. Olsen, an opponent (like Strand Gerhardsen) of Norwegian entry into the EC, became Minister of Fisheries.
EUROPE
SWEDEN
Government-opposition pact
Conservative Prime Minister Carl Bildt and opposition Social Democratic Labour Party (SAP) leader Ingvar Carlsson agreed unprecedentedly on Sept.17 to work together to overcome Sweden's worst economic crisis since the 1920s [for European currency crisis see pp. 39080-81].
Agreement was subsequently reached on Sept. 20 on public spending cuts and tax increases to save 40,600 million kronor (2.5 per cent of GDP) over five years on a 1992-93 budget deficit estimated at 102,000 million kronor (7 per cent of GDP).
One of the major changes was in the financing of the welfare state, with the burden of health benefits and health insurance to be transferred gradually to employers and workers, yielding long-term savings of 45,000 million kronor.
The pact had the support of most sectors including the parliamentary parties, the trade unions and employers.
Under the agreement, which was supplemented by measures worth 10,000 million kronor to support employment, pensions were frozen and the pensionable age would be raised from 65 to 66 over four years.
Sickness benefits, housing construction subsidies, defence spending and development aid were cut, and child benefit increases and the proposed introduction of a family allowance were postponed as were the abolition of capital gains tax and the privatization of state industries.
The cost of petrol and cigarettes was increased.
In a further austerity package announced by the two parties on Sept. 30, value added tax (VAT) on food, transport and tourism was increased from 18 to 21 per cent and general VAT cuts were deferred.
The statutory minimum annual holiday of five weeks was cut by two days to boost production.
Employers' social security contributions were reduced by 4.3 per cent from Jan. 1, 1993, and income tax allowances were reduced.
Foreign submarine incursions
The navy on Sept. 16 fired grenades and depth charges at a suspected foreign submarine near Oxelösund off the southern coast.
After a second incident on Sept. 21 when depth charges were fired at an intruder in the Stockholm archipelago, Bildt claimed on Sept. 22 that Russian submarines had violated Sweden's territorial waters and had been pursued, but this was denied by Russia on Sept. 23.
EUROPE
FINLAND
Settlement of Öresund bridge dispute with Denmark
Finland's objection to the Danish plan for a road and rail bridge across the Great Belt (Öresund), linking Copenhagen with Malmö in southern Sweden [see p. 38402], was lifted on Sept. 3.
Proceedings initiated by Finland in July 1991 at the International Court of Justice were formally discontinued on Sept. 10, removing what had been seen as an irritant in Nordic co-operation.
The settlement involved a Danish compensation payment of DKr90,000,000 (US$16,600,000).
This money would go to the Finnish construction company Rauma-Repola Offshore, whose large oil drilling rigs would be unable to go to the North Sea in a fully assembled condition when the bridge was finished.
The Finnish government had hitherto been pressing for a change in the plans, to incorporate a special section allowing passage for rigs over 65 metres high.
EUROPE
UNITED KINGDOM
Resignation of Mellor
The National Heritage Secretary David Mellor, 43, resigned on Sept. 24, the first Cabinet minister to resign since the formation of the new Conservative government in April [see p. 38869]; he was succeeded in his post by the former Northern Ireland Secretary Peter Brooke, 58.
Mellor claimed that he had been driven out of office by the tabloid press, which had pursued him since the discovery in July of his extramarital affair with an actress, Antonia de Sancha.
In early September he denied charges of impropriety after fresh allegations that he had accepted favours from a wealthy property developer.
His eventual resignation followed disclosures that he and his family had, in 1990, accepted an offer by Mona Bauwens, daughter of a prominent official in the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), of a free and lavish holiday in the Spanish resort of Marbella.
Mellor insisted throughout that he had done nothing improper in accepting this hospitality.
The Labour MP Bryan Gould resigned from the Shadow Cabinet as the Labour Party's National Heritage spokesman on Sept. 27 following differences over the party's policy on Europe.
Commons debate on economy
MPs gathered in the House of Common on Sept. 24 for an emergency debate on the government's handling of the currency crisis, and voted by 322 to 296 in favour of a motion expressing support for the government's economic policy.
Prime Minister John Major had defended the government's decision to take sterling out of the European exchange rate mechanism (ERM), saying that "there was no choice" , while Chancellor of the Exchequer Norman Lamont blamed the UK's European partners, especially Germany, for the speculative turmoil in currency markets which had derailed sterling [see pp. 39080-81].
The new leader of the opposition Labour Party, John Smith, described Major as "the devalued prime minister of a devalued government" .
Maxwell bankruptcy case
Kevin Maxwell, son of Robert Maxwell who died in November 1991 [see pp. 38588; 38688; 38977], was declared bankrupt by a High Court in London on Sept. 3.
Maxwell, the UK's biggest bankrupt with debts totalling more than £405,000,000, called the ruling "a very public humbling" .
EUROPE
NORTHERN IRELAND
Temporary withdrawal of DUP from round-table talks
In Belfast on Sept. 9 the Rev. Ian Paisley, the leader of the Democratic Unionist Party (DUP), walked out of a session of the so-called "strand two" of the inter-party round-table talks on the future of Northern Ireland.
The Financial Times of Sept. 11 commented that the DUP's withdrawal had "cast a shadow over the entire talks process" .
After his walkout Paisley stated that the DUP would not rejoin the talks until discussion of Articles 2 and 3 of the Irish Republic's Constitution, which established a territorial claim to Northern Ireland, was given priority, and he claimed that the two Articles had been placed "at the bottom of the agenda" .
The DUP demanded that the Irish government give a commitment to sponsoring a referendum to amend the Articles, but the Irish government continued to insist that it would only provide such a guarantee within the context of an overall settlement.
Paisley rejoined the Stormont Castle talks on Sept. 18 for a specific discussion on the Articles.
Dublin round of talks
The talks moved to Dublin on Sept. 21-23.
The DUP boycotted this round, although the other main unionist party, the Official Ulster Unionists, attended.
The meeting extended the deadline for the completion of "strand two" , adding further talks in Belfast.
Ken Maginnis, deputy leader of the Official Unionists, described the Dublin round as "satisfactory" .
The round table talks resumed in Belfast on Sept. 29 and the following day the DUP resumed its place at the negotiating table.
Major-Reynolds meeting — Anglo-Irish Conference date set
The UK Prime Minister John Major met his Irish counterpart Albert Reynolds in London on Sept. 25.
The two managed to solve a dispute between the two governments over the timing of the next Anglo-Irish intergovernmental conference, which, originally scheduled for late September, would now be held on Nov. 16.
Unionists insisted that the conference would mark the cut-off point for the round table talks.
EUROPE
BELGIUM
Agreement on 1993 budget and constitutional reform
The government on Sept. 29 approved an amended budget for 1993 which provided for a further BF21,800 million to cover the budgetary shortfall, including BF5,200 million in social security cuts.
Agreement was also reached on constitutional changes devolving further powers to the regions, although these required a two-thirds majority (which the ruling coalition did not command) to pass through parliament.
[For controversy over these issues which brought the ruling coalition to the brink of collapse in the summer see pp. 39066; 39023.]
Under the constitutional reforms the Chamber of Deputies would be reduced in size from 212 to 150 members and the Senate from 182 to 71.
The Constitution would begin with a statement that the kingdom was a "federal state" .
The three regions of Flanders, Wallonia and Brussels would increase their responsibilities in the areas of agriculture, research, foreign trade and environmental matters.
Both Flanders and Wallonia would have their own directly elected parliaments and governments (as opposed to the existing legislative councils and executives).
The resulting redrawing of constituency boundaries meant that French-speakers living in the suburbs of Brussels would become part of the Flemish province of Brabant surrounding Brussels and would thus lose the right to vote French speakers into the regional parliaments.
Walloon Socialists reluctantly conceded that French-speakers living in Flanders (including the controversial José Happart) should not be allowed to hold political office in Wallonia.
The Flemish parties agreed to allocate more national revenues to regional budgets.
EUROPE
FRANCE
Corruption charges against Emmanuelli
The president of the National Assembly (lower house of parliament) and former treasurer of the Socialist Party (PS), Henri Emmanuelli, was charged on Sept. 14 with complicity in illicit party financing involving funds raised by construction businesses seeking preference in public tenders.
The charges, predicted in July and August [see pp. 39023-24; 39066], were brought by Renaud Van Ruymbeke, an examining magistrate in Rennes.
Emmanuelli, who was not suspected of personal enrichment, denied the charges, describing them as "artificial" and politically motivated.
Defending Emmanuelli in a radio interview prior to his indictment, Prime Minister Pierre Bérégovoy said that Emmanuelli had been obliged to receive donations in his role as party treasurer and that his personal honesty was not in doubt.
In a gesture of "solidarity" with Emmanuelli, the PS Council adopted a motion on Sept. 23 agreeing that the PS executive committee should be collectively indicted on charges relating to alleged illegal funding of the party's 1988 election campaign [see pp. 38591; 38197].
Floods
More than 80 people were feared dead after flash floods, the worst in 34 years, swept through the south-eastern regions of the Ardèche, Drôme and Vaucluse on Sept. 23-24.
Three people were killed in further storms which lashed the departments of Aude and Pyrénées-Orientales on Sept. 27.
Many of the dead were residents or tourists in the town of Vaison-la-Romaine, about 40 km north of Avignon.
The government declared the flood regions a disaster area, and earmarked F5,000,000 (US$1,000,000) to help victims and to repair the extensive damage.
Ecologists blamed the high death toll on widespread deforestation and the construction of flimsily built prefabricated homes and caravan sites close to the river.
EUROPE
SWITZERLAND
Referendums
In a referendum held on Sept. 27 voters approved by 1,304,365 votes (63.6 per cent) to 747,304 (36.4 per cent ) the construction of two new trans-Alpine rail tunnels through the St Gotthard (50 km) and the Lötschberg (30 km), costing at least SFr14,900 million.
In simultaneous referendums voters accepted (i) by 1,230,262 votes (61.5 per cent) to 771,162 (38.5 per cent ) a proposal to abolish stamp duties on securities transactions; and (ii) by 1,057,833 votes (53.6 per cent ) to 915,979 (46.4 per cent ) a new agricultural land law.
Parliamentary reform proposals on increasing remuneration and other personal allowances for parliamentarians were rejected by substantial majorities, while a proposal for increasing parliamentary participation in foreign policy was accepted by 58.1 per cent to 41.9 per cent.
The turnout in the referendums was 45.1 per cent.
EUROPE
ITALY
Presidential veto of proposed emergency economic powers
Despite a foreign exchange crisis which later resulted in the devaluation of the lira and its suspension from the ERM [see p. 39080], President Oscar Scalfaro vetoed a government request, announced on Sept. 9, for emergency economic powers for a period of three years which would allow it to act rapidly by decree if the Bank of Italy decided that the national economy was endangered.
Also on Sept. 9 the government announced the privatization of Credito Italiano, the country's sixth-largest bank, and of Nuovo Pignone, the heavy engineering subsidiary of ENI, the state-owned energy corporation, together with a new system of income assessment to halt tax evasion.
Following emergency measures announced in July [see p. 39025], a drastic budget for 1993 was approved by the Council of Ministers on Sept. 30 after an all-night session.
The budget involved public spending cuts, together with proposals to raise L93,000,000 million through new taxes, in an affort to reduce the huge public-sector deficit from L160,000,000 million to L150,000,000 million, over 10.5 per cent of gross domestic product (GDP).
The eligibility age for state pensions would be raised over the next decade from 60 to 65 for men and from 55 to 60 for women.
An increase in state pensions, due in November, was frozen.
Most public-sector salaries were frozen at 1992 levels and "13th month" wage payments were reduced.
A minimum tax of 0.75 per cent on all businesses came into effect immediately and a one-off tax on all registered companies of 7.5 per cent of their net worth was introduced by decree.
Taxes were extended to more luxury items and certain public health concessions were restricted for those earning over L40,000,000 a year.
The trade union confederations staged a series of four-hour regional general strikes on Sept. 22-29 in protest at the budget.
Massive anti-government protests were held in Milan and Bologna on Sept. 23 and trade union leaders were attacked with stones and other missiles.
The communist CGIL trade union confederation on Sept. 4 reconfirmed as its leader Bruno Trentin who had resigned at the end of July [see p. 39025].
Formation of constitutional commission
A commission to draw up proposals for changes to the 1947 Constitution was established on Sept. 9.
Consisting of 40 deputies and 20 senators and chaired by Ciriaco de Mita of the Christian Democratic Party, its brief was to examine the electoral system (including the election of the President and local officials), the competences of parliament, the nature of the presidency, and the role of the regions.
Drugs operation — Mafia arrests
Twenty-nine people including members of the Camorra (Neapolitan Mafia) and of the dominant Corleonese clan of the Sicilian Mafia were arrested in Italy on Sept. 28 as part of a massive international drugs operation aimed at the Colombian drug cartels and the US and Italian Mafia.
The operation, which spanned nine countries, resulted in 200 arrests (112 of them in the USA) and the seizure of large amounts of cash and drugs.
Among those arrested in "Operation Green Ice" were José ( "The Pope" ) Durán, a Colombian drug cartel chief, and his linkman with the Mafia, Pedro Felipe Villaquirán.
Key Mafia figures arrested independently of the operation in September were Giuseppe Madonia, the Sicilian Mafia's second in command, on Sept. 6; Pasquale, Paolo and Gaspare Cuntrera, powerful Sicilian Mafia "bankers" and drug traffickers who were extradited from Venezuela on Sept.11 after years of delays; Carmine Alfieri, the Camorra chief described as Italy's major gangster, on Sept. 11; and Domenico Libri, the supposed head of the Calabrian Mafia or N'Drangheta, in Marseille on Sept.16.
Challenge to Craxi's leadership — Milan and Reggio corruption affairs
Bettino Craxi's leadership of the Socialist Unity Party (usually still referred to as the PSI), came under serious challenge in September following his verbal attacks on the Milan magistrate, Antonio Di Pietro, who was leading the inquiry into the Milan local government corruption scandal [see pp. 39025].
His main challenger, Justice Minister Claudio Martelli (PSI former deputy secretary-general), was joined by a number of senior party colleagues including Rino Formica, the former Finance Minister, and 22 PSI deputies.
Sergio Moroni, a Socialist deputy for Milan and a close associate of Craxi, committed suicide on Sept. 2, the third and most prominent person under investigation in the Milan scandal to do so.
In Reggio Calabria, where a government commissioner had taken over the city council following the arrest in July of 25 of its 50 members on corruption charges, a further 22 people including three parliamentary deputies were arrested on Sept. 7.
EUROPE
GREECE
General strikes over social security reforms
Three general strikes paralysed the public and private sectors on Sept. 3, Sept. 9-10 and Sept. 16 in protest at social security reforms which were under debate in parliament.
The preceding weeks had also been punctuated by strikes.
The reforms entailed an increase in employees' contributions from 3 to 11 per cent of gross wage; the raising of the pensionable age from 63 to 65 for men and from 58 to 60 for women; the abolition of special allowances for particular categories of employees; and the merger of pension funds.
Cabinet changes
In the Cabinet changes carried out in August [see p. 39067]Prime Minister Constantine Mitsotakis took on responsibility for the Aegean and Andreas Andrianopoulos (hitherto Minister of Industry and Commerce) became Minister of State, alternating as Government Spokesman with Vassilis Magginas.
EUROPE
TURKEY
Defection of coalition MPs
In September the survival of the governing coalition was endangered by the defection of 21 deputies from the Social Democratic Populist Party (SHP), who temporarily formed a new "Integration Party" which on Sept. 28 announced its merger with the newly revived Republican People's Party (CHP).
This left the coalition with only 229 of the 450 seats in parliament (16 Kurdish MPs having resigned from the SHP earlier in the year — see pp. 38873; 38739).
One MP also defected from the Motherland Party (ANAP) and two from the Democratic Left Party (DSP).
The CHP (the party of Kemal Atatürk) was officially reconstituted at a congress on Sept. 9 and Deniz Baykal was elected as its new leader.
The Kurdish Parliamentary Party (HEP), closely linked to the Kurdish workers' Party (PKK), elected Ahmet Turk as its new leader at a congress on Sept. 19-20.
Serious clashes in south-east
Following the wrecking of the town of Sirnak in August [see pp. 39067-68], the normally pro-government Turkish Daily News called for an investigation into claims that the army had run amok.
Journalists were refused entry to the towns of Curkurca and Dargecit where the pro-Kurdish newspaper Yeni Ulke accused the army of carrying out similar operations.
Turkish forces mounted a large-scale security operation in the south-eastern Cudi mountain region from Aug. 31 to Sept. 4, after 500 PKK guerrillas attacked a border post on Aug. 30 near Semdinli close to the Turkish borders with Iran and Iraq.
At least 53 people, including 43 guerrillas and six soldiers, were killed in this attack.
On Sept. 29, 174 guerrillas and 29 soldierswere killed in a 12-hour battle in the Semdinli area, one of the bloodiest clashes in the eight-year conflict.
During a tour of the south-east on Sept. 12 President Turgut Özal told Kurds in Uludere near Sirnak, that "many problems would be solved" if 500,000 Kurds left the area and resettled in other parts of Turkey.
The PKK claimed responsibility for two incidents in Istanbul on Aug. 28 in which a ferry was set on fire, damaging a bridge, and a bomb exploded at the British consulate-general.
Between February and September at least nine journalists were murdered in the south-east.
Four of the dead worked for the pro-Kurdish Özgür Gündem and included Musa Anter, 74, a veteran Kurd journalist, author and founder-member of the HEP, who was shot dead in Diyarbakir on Sept. 20 by the Goz-Ok (Grey Arrow) nationalist group.
Defence contracts
Prime Minister Suleyman Demirel announced on Sept. 21 that the US United Technologies Corporation had won a contract worth US$855,000,000 to supply Turkey with 75 Sikorsky S-70A Black Hawk military helicopters.
Also in September GIAT Industries of France was awarded a $116,000,000 contract for the supply of guns and turrets for armoured vehicles.
Relations with Iran
During a visit to Iran on Sept. 12-15 Interior Minister Ismet Sezgin and his Iranian counterpart Abdollah Nouri signed an agreement on border security and drug trafficking.
A 10-member committee would be set up, chiefly to discourage the activities of the PKK in Iran and of the People's Mujaheddin in Turkey.
EUROPE
COUNCIL OF EUROPE
Extraordinary meeting
Ministers from the 27 member states of the Council of Europe on Sept. 10-11 held an extraordinary meeting under the presidency of Turkey in Istanbul with representatives from Georgia and the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS).
At the meeting, convened to discuss closer ties, the ministers were reported to have agreed to extend membership as rapidly as possible to other states of eastern Europe (Bulgaria had been admitted in May — see p. 38930 — while Hungary had joined in 1990 and Czechoslovakia and Poland in 1991) and to applicant countries which were formerly part of the Soviet Union.
The Council was reported on Sept. 20 to have granted Ukraine guest status.
A communiqué issued on behalf of the Council's 27 members on Sept. 11 ignored a reported Turkish demand for a reference to armed intervention against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (FRY), opting instead to press the UN Security Council to take "necessary measures" to stop Serbian "aggression against the sovereign state of Bosnia-Hercegovina" .
EUROPE
VISEGRAD THREE
Defence Ministers of the Visegrad Three countries (Czechoslovakia, Hungary and Poland) met at Zruby in Slovakia on Sept. 25, when Imrich Andrejcak of Czechoslovakia was quoted as saying that there were no plans for the three countries to sign a military pact or form a military union.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
IRAQ
Tacit compliance with air exclusion zone
The Iraqi government on Sept. 1 reinforced its orders directing the air force to keep away from the air exclusion zone enforced by the Western allies south of the 32nd parallel [see p. 39069], and instructed ground forces not to fire at Western aircraft.
On Sept. 8 the governor of Basra province reassured French, UK and US pilots enforcing the air exclusion or "no-fly zone" that they had nothing to fear if forced to bail out due to mechanical failure.
The latest guidelines were reportedly issued with the approval of President Saddam Hussein, who on Aug. 30 had counselled patience.
Western forces meanwhile strengthened their military presence, with the addition of four French Mirage jets and the announcement on Sept. 1 of the despatch of two Russian warships.
On Sept. 17, US President George Bush declared that allied enforcement of the air exclusion ban had effectively halted Iraqi military operations against Shia rebels south of the 32nd parallel.
The Iraqi government however, simultaneously stepped up its public denunciation of alleged Western and Iranian plans to dismember Iraq.
Saddam claimed on Sept. 2 that Iraq had repelled an Iranian attempt to infiltrate the southern marshes, and on Sept 8 he warned that Iraq would "inflict losses on anyone trying to tamper with its unity" .
Defence Minister Ali Hasan al-Majid had called for mass mobilization on Sept. 1 "to foil enemy schemes" , and there were unconfirmed reports that Majid had established headquarters in Basra after being ordered by Saddam to take over control of all military operations against Shia rebels in the south.
Reports in early September said that the government had also urged southern tribal leaders to take up arms against Shia dissidents.
Iran-based opposition groups were quoted on Sept. 7 as claiming that up to 2,000 people in the south had recently been arrested for "anti-government activities" .
The UK-based Organization for Human Rights in Iraq was reported on Sept. 9 to have evidence about the recent arrest, on charges of "negligence" , of several senior Iraqi military officers involved in operations in the south.
Iranian reports alleging arson attacks by Iraqi forces on Shia villages north of Basra were, however, denied by a government spokesman on Sept. 9.
Arab reactions
King Hassan of Morocco on Sept. 5 issued the strongest public warning yet by a pro-Western Arab leader about the hazards of Western policy towards Iraq.
Escalation of Western military pressure, he said, "risks turning this exclusion zone into an explosion zone…harmful to the interests of the West and the Arab world" .
Foreign Ministers from the predominantly pro-Western Gulf Co-Operation Council (GCC), however, meeting in Jeddah on Sept. 8-9, endorsed the enforcement of the air exclusion zone [see p. 39116].
Opposition meeting of 33 parties
More than 70 delegates from 33 opposition parties meeting in Salahuddin and Shaqlawah, near Arbil, in Kurdish-controlled northern Iraq on Sept. 23-27, proclaimed their unity and agreed to form a federal government.
The conference, the first of its kind openly held in Iraq, brought together all major opposition parties including several based in Iran, Saudi Arabia and Syria which had boycotted the last major opposition conference held in Vienna in June [see p. 38985].
Critics of the Vienna conference, notably the Tehran-based Supreme Assembly of the Islamic Revolution in Iraq (SAIRI), had said at that time that the conference should have been held in the region to make it more accessible for the bulk of the exiled opposition.
Reports indicated, however, that the decision to convene the latest meeting, which followed talks in Tehran between SAIRI and the Iraqi National Congress (INC — sponsor of the Vienna conference), had been prompted by SAIRI's growing concern over the INC's high profile among Western governments.
A statement on Sept. 27 referred to "broad agreement" on the creation of an executive committee "of between 21 and 25 people" ; a three-man presidency comprising a Kurd, a Shia and a Sunni; and a 174-member assembly equally divided between parties represented at the Vienna opposition and those which had boycotted it.
The state-run daily al-Jumhuriya had carried on Sept. 8 a statement signed by Kurdish, Sunni and Shia intellectuals appealing for the liberalization of Iraq's single-party political system.
Merger of Kurdish parties
Three Kurdish parties, the People's Democratic Party of Kurdistan (PDPK), the Kurdish Socialist Party (KSP) and the Kurdistan Democratic Independence Party (KDIP — also known as PASOK), merged on Sept. 7 to form the Kurdistan Unity Party (KUP).
The Kurdistan Democratic Party (KDP) and the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan (PUK) announced on Sept. 16 that they had placed their guerrilla forces under a single command.
UN report on Kurds — Prospects for agreement on relief supplies and oil sales
A confidential UN report, made public by The Guardian on Sept. 28, warned that Iraqi Kurds faced a winter of "unbearable hardness" unless the economic blockade of northern Iraq (including an embargo on fuel supplies) imposed by Saddam in October 1991 [see pp. 38548; 38598; 38743; 38789]was lifted and co-operation resumed with international aid agencies.
The Iraqi government meanwhile offered to re-open talks on a new agreement to enable UN relief workers to supply essential food and medicines to northern Iraq (having refused in August to renew the existing memorandum governing UN humanitarian supplies — see p. 39069).
On Sept. 30 the government offered to resume negotiations on UN-supervised oil sales, stalemated since mid-July [see p. 39026].
Reports suggested that this represented an attempt to pre-empt fresh moves by the UN Security Council to seize frozen Iraqi assets for use in compensating Gulf war victims and providing humanitarian relief to Kurdish and Shia dissidents.
UN chemical and nuclear weapons inspections
The Vienna-based International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) said on Sept. 2 that it did not intend to issue "a clean bill of health for Iraq in the nuclear sphere" .
The "clarification" followed a statement by Maurizio Zifferero, deputy Director-General of the IAEA and leader of the 14th nuclear inspection team [for 13th nuclear inspection team see p. 39026], who was quoted in Baghdad on Sept. 2 as saying that Iraq's nuclear programme stood at "zero" following repeated UN inspections and allied bombing during the Gulf war.
On Sept. 7 Zifferero stressed that Iraq's refusal to give details of its foreign arms suppliers stood in the way of full compliance with Gulf ceasefire resolutions.
The destruction within two weeks of Iraq's stockpiles of nerve and mustard gas was announced on Sept. 12 by Ron Manley, head of a team of UN chemical experts which arrived in Iraq on Sept. 5.
Progress on the destruction of chemical weapons at Muthanna, 130 kms north-west of Baghdad, was confirmed on Sept. 29 by Bernhard Brunner, leader of a second chemical weapons team which arrived on Sept. 21.
Economy
The government announced on Sept. 3 that it would distribute a month's supply of food rations to all citizens.
In July, 42 food merchants had been executed after being accused of profiteering [see pp. 39026; 39069], and unconfirmed reports in late September said that 26 Iraqis had been executed on unspecified charges of black market currency trading.
An international study, published on Sept. 17 in the US New England Journal of Medicine, showed that the death rate among Iraqi children under the age of five had tripled after the Gulf war owing to a dramatic increase in disease and malnutrition and reduced access to health care.
The increased risk was lowest in Baghdad and highest in the north and south.
Sentencing of Western nationals
The UK government lodged a strong protest on Sept. 2 after a UK national, Martin Wainwright, was sentenced on Aug. 31 to 10 years' imprisonment on charges of illegally entering Iraq from Turkey.
Earlier in August another UK national had been sentenced to seven years' imprisonment on similar charges, in that case of entering from Kuwait [see p. 39069].
Three Swedish engineers who had been working in Kuwait received seven-year sentences on Sept. 20 after also being accused of illegal entry.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
SAUDI ARABIA
US sale of F-15 fighters
US President George Bush announced on Sept. 11 that he intended to proceed with the sale to Saudi Arabia of 72 McDonnell Douglas F-15 fighter aircraft worth a total of US$9,000 million.
The security of an estimated 40,000 US jobs was reported to depend on the contract, which was opposed by Israel.
The contract value was reported to include US$5,000 million for the 72 F-15s and US$2,100 million for support and spare parts, US$800 million for construction of infrastructure, US$400 million for munitions and US$120 million for training.
Of the aircraft to be supplied 48 were reported to be the most advanced version, the F-15E Strike Eagle — never before exported — although with slightly downgraded navigational and weapons systems.
Nomination of Speaker for Consultative Council
King Fahd on Sept. 16 appointed Muhammad ibn Ibrahim ibn Jubair, the Justice Minister, to be Chairman (with Cabinet rank) of the 60-member Consultative Council (majlis ash-shoura) whose creation he had announced on March 1 together with other political reforms [see p. 38839].
Abdullah bin Muhammed bin Ibrahim al-Shaikh was appointed Justice Minister.
Shaikh Nasir bin Hamad al-Rashid was appointed Chairman of the Board of Grievances, with Cabinet rank.
Shaikh Salih Bin Muhammad al-Lihaydan was appointed Chairman of the Supreme Judicial Council, also with Cabinet rank.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
UNITED ARAB EMIRATES
Tension over Iranian claim to Gulf islands
Iran on Sept. 10 repeated its claim of sovereignty over the Gulf islands of Abu Musa, Tunb al-Kubra and Tunb al-Sughra, and rejected a Sept. 9 statement by the six-nation Gulf Co-operation Council (GCC) supporting the UAE's sovereignty [see below].
Iranian troops garrisoned on Abu Musa (under a 1971 joint adminstration agreement with Sharjah, a member emirate of the UAE) had seized installations there in mid-April [see p. 38887].
Iran had seized the two smaller islands in 1971.
On Sept. 14, the Middle East News Agency reported that the Arab League Council, meeting in Cairo, had passed a resolution condemning Iran's "aggression" , and deciding to forward the case to the UN.
The same day, an Iranian Foreign Ministry spokesman was quoted as saying that the UAE's supposed historical claims had been rejected by the international community following the Iran-Iraq war.
Following Syrian mediation and visits by the UAE President, Shaikh Zaid bin Sultan al-Nahayan, to Egypt, Syria and Saudi Arabia, UAE and Iranian delegations met in Abu Dhabi on Sept. 27.
It was reported the following day, however, that the UAE delegation had broken off the talks.
Statement by GCC Ministerial Council
The Ministerial Council of the Gulf Co-operation Council (GCC) states (Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates) took place in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, on Sept. 8 and 9, beginning with a closed session.
The Council issued a statement on Sept. 9 expressing support for the air exclusion zone imposed over southern Iraq, for the Moslems in Bosnia, the Somali people, and the UAE in its current dispute with Iran — rejecting Iran's "continued occupation" of the disputed islands and affirming that the GCC would support any measures that the UAE might take to "affirm its sovereignty" .
A spokesman of the Iranian Foreign Ministry was later quoted as reaffirming that the disputed islands belonged to Iran, and as referring to the GCC's use of "inappropriate words" .
Support of Damascus Declaration states
The GCC foreign ministers were joined in Doha on Sept. 9 by their Syrian and Egyptian counterparts for the sixth meeting of the Damascus Declaration states [see pp. 38116-17; 38885].
A final statement on Sept. 10 expressed support for joint Arab action under the aegis of the Arab League, and for the Middle East peace process, for nuclear and chemical weapons non-proliferation treaties, for Iraq's territorial integrity (while criticizing Iraq for noncompliance with UN resolutions), and for the UAE in its territorial dispute with Iran.
It did not adopt a controversial Egyptian proposal for the creation of a chain of rapid deployment forces which could respond to a request from any of the eight states.
The statement also expressed concern over the suffering of the Somali people, and condemned Serbian action against the people of Bosnia-Hercegovina.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
IRAN
Rafsanjani's visit to Pakistan and China
President Hashemi Ali Akbar Rafsanjani arrived in Islamabad on Sept. 6 on a state visit to Pakistan where it was reported that protocols were signed providing for increased political, economic and defence co-operation.
On Sept. 9 Rafsanjani arrived in China on a four-day visit as the guest of President Yang Shangkun, accompanied by Defence and Logistics Minister Akbar Torkan.
A nuclear co-operation agreement was signed under which it was reported that China would supply a 300-MW nuclear reactor.
[For delay in sale of Russian submarines and Iran's alleged acquisition of nuclear weapons see p. 39122.]
Violent incidents in Tehran and Berlin
According to the Iraq-based opposition Mujahedin-e-Khalq, Iranian Revolutionary Guards intervened on Sept. 8 to stop fighting in north Tehran between soldiers and armed police in which "a large number" on both sides were killed.
A bomb had exploded in southern Tehran on Aug. 27 had also reportedly caused deaths and injuries.
Four members of the Democratic Party of Iranian Kurdistan, or Kordestan Democratic Party (KDPI), including the secretary-general, Sadeq Sharafbandi, were killed by unknown men with sub-machine-guns as they sat in a restaurant in Berlin on Sept. 17.
The party's previous secretary-general, Abdel Rahman Qasemlu and two other officials had been assassinated in July 1989 in Vienna [see p. 36833].
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
ISRAEL
Improving foreign relations
Prime Minister Itzhak Rabin visited Germany on Sept. 14-16.
After his talks with German Chancellor Helmut Kohl, an official communiqué said that the two leaders had decided to expand economic and technological co-operation.
At the Sachsenhausen concentration camp site outside Berlin (the first time an Israeli Prime Minister had visited a Nazi concentration camp site in former East Germany), Rabin urged Germans to fight against neo-Nazism.
Rabin also attended the Socialist International meeting in Berlin on Sept. 15-16.
Foreign Minister Shimon Peres visited the United Kingdom and France on Sept. 7-10, discussing European involvement in the Middle East peace talks [see p. 39119]and Israeli ties with the European Communities.
On Sept. 15-16 the Foreign Minister ofChina, Qian Qichen visited Israel, the most senior Chinese official ever to do so.
The two countries had established diplomatic relations in January 1992 [see p. 38741].
Voice of Israel radio reported on Sept. 16 that Qian had assured Peres that China "would do nothing to complicate the situation" in the Middle East, adding that Israel's relations with China "have made headway" .
Sergei Tereshchenko, Prime Minister of Kazakhstan, visited Israel in early September, the first prime minister of an Islamic Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) republic to do so.
The President of Hungary, Arpád Göncz, visited Israel in late September, the first such visit by a Hungarian head of state.
The Gambia resumed diplomatic ties with Israel in mid-September.
Formation of right-wing grouping — Resignation of Tehiya leader
The Israel Broadcasting Authority reported on Sept. 20 the formation of a right-wing "One Israel" group to oppose the Labour government.
Led by hardline former Housing Minister Ariel Sharon of Likud, the group was composed of activists from the right-wing parties, representatives from the "Council of Jewish Settlements in Judea, Samaria and the Gaza Strip" (the West Bank and Gaza), and representatives of settlements in the Golan Heights.
Yuval Ne'eman resigned on Sept. 24 as joint leader of the right-wing ultra-nationalist Tehiya Party, which had failed to win a seat in the June 1992 general election.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
PALESTINIAN AFFAIRS
Hunger strike by Palestinian prisoners
Some 5,000 Palestinian political prisoners in Israeli jails started a hunger strike on Sept. 27 in protest over harsh prison conditions.
The prisoners issued a list of demands, including the ending of solitary confinement in the Nitsan section of the Ramleh prison and at Beersheva in the Negev.
Other demands included improved recreation facilities, an end to overcrowding, fewer restrictions on visiting and "an end to the policy of physical violence and body searches which aims to humiliate us" .
Demonstrations in solidarity with the hunger strikers took place in the Gaza Strip and West Bank in late September.
On Oct. 1 clashes erupted in Gaza as demonstrators and police confronted each other outside offices of the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC).
Fatah-Hamas violence
On Sept. 30 clashes broke out in Khan Yunis in the Gaza Strip between supporters of Al-Fatah, which constituted the mainstream of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), and Hamas (the Islamic Resistance Movement).
Up to 70 people were reported injured in fighting after Hamas cadres firebombed a house and opened fire on people who tried to stop them.
In July Al-Fatah and Hamas had signed a peace agreement to stop the violence in Gaza [see p. 39028].
Fatah success in Janin chamber of commerce elections
Al-Fatah won a sweeping victory in elections for the Janin chamber of commerce held on Sept. 24.
Al-Fatah won all nine seats in the chamber, easily defeating Hamas candidates.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
LEBANON
Final round of general election
The third and final round of voting in Lebanon's first general election since 1972 went ahead on Sept. 6 in the south.
The first two rounds of voting had been held in north Lebanon and the Bekaa on Aug. 23 and in Beirut and Mount Lebanon on Aug. 30 [see p. 39071].
The Maronite Christian parties boycotted the third round, as they had the previous two rounds.
The "Liberation List" , headed by Nabi Berri, leader of the (Shia) Amal movement and a Minister of State, won 22 of the 23 seats at stake in the third round.
Amal and its allies had also performed strongly in east Lebanon and Beirut (with Amal's former Shia rival Hezbollah winning eight seats in all), and thus emerged with the largest bloc of deputies in the new 128-member National Assembly.
After the third round, all but five seats had been filled.
The five vacant seats were in the mainly Maronite Christian area of Kesrouan where the boycott had been complete.
Fresh elections here would be contested on Oct. 11, and the Middle East Economic Digest of Oct. 9 reported that 26 candidates had come forward, including Faris Buwayz, who had resigned as Minister of Foreign and Expatriate Affairs in late August in protest at the elections.
Negotiations on Syrian troop withdrawal
Syria came under considerable US pressure to redeploy its troops from Beirut and into the Bekaa immediately upon completion of the third round of the elections.
Christian Maronite leaders, strongly supported by the French government, had questioned the legitimacy of any election held while the Syrian army remained in the country.
President Elias Hrawi of Lebanon and President Hafez al-Assad of Syria discussed the issue in Latakia (Syria) on Sept. 12-13.
After the meeting it was announced that the Lebanese-Syrian Supreme Council would convene after the formation of a new Lebanese government in October to draw up a comprehensive timetable for a Syrian withdrawal.
Cabinet changes
Samir Geagea, leader of the (Phalangist) Lebanese Forces, and Brig. -Gen.
Ahmad Sami Minqarah, a representative of Sunni Moslems from Tripoli, were both formally removed from the Cabinet on Sept. 17.
Geagea and Minqarah had been appointed as Minister of State and Minister for Tourism, respectively, in the new Cabinet in May 1992 [see p. 38933].
Both had immediately boycotted Cabinet meetings.
The August resignations of Buwayz [see above]and of Georges Saadeh (Telecommunications and Posts) were also formally approved [see p. 39071].
The Information Minister, Michel Samaha, took on additional responsibility for Tourism; Justice Minister Nasri al-Maalouf took on Foreign and Expatriate Affairs; and Deputy Prime Minister and National Defence Minister Michel al-Murr took on Telecommunications and Posts.
Abduction of leading Phalangist politician
Butros Khwand, a senior member of the Al-Kata'eb (Phalangist Party) and close associate of Geagea, was abducted by unidentified gunmen on Sept. 15 from his home in the Sin el-Fil district of Beirut.
Resignation of Communist Party leader
Georges Hawi resigned as secretary-general of the Lebanese Communist Party (LCP) on Sept. 27.
He was replaced on an interim basis by his deputy, Faruq Dahruj, and the LCP central committee called for an extraordinary conference to discuss the party's political plan and organizational structure, change the party's name and elect a new leadership.
Lebanese statement on Israeli airman
The Lebanese delegation at the Middle East peace talks in Washington [see p. 39119]informed their Israeli counterparts on Sept. 22 that Israeli airman Ron Arad was definitely alive, but that they did not know where he was being held.
Arad, shot down over Sidon in 1986, was thought to have been held by pro-Iranian guerrillas in eastern Lebanon.
Israel had sought his release as part of negotiations for the freedom of Western hostages held in Lebanon.
Fighting in southern Lebanon
Serious fighting broke out in late September between fighters from Hezbollah and the Israeli-backed South Lebanon Army (SLA).
After five days of clashes Hezbollah launched a major assault on an SLA position within Israel's self-declared "security zone" , killing two SLA militiamen and losing four of their own.
Following the attack Hezbollah guerrillas clashed with a Unifil contingent north of the Zone; one Irish peacekeeper died in the clash.
Meanwhile, the Israelis and SLA launched a heavy artillery barrage against Hezbollah controlled villages north of the Zone, killing two civilians.
The following day Israeli jets attacked targets at Deir Kanoun and Ain Abu Souar.
Closure of Kurdish training base
On Sept. 22 the Lebanese army peacefully took control of the main training base in the Bekaa valley for Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK) guerrillas who were fighting for autonomy from Turkey.
The Syrian government had informed Turkey in May that the PKK would be ejected from the Bekaa.
The Lebanese army did not enter a nearby camp used by Dev Sol, the Turkish urban guerrilla group, but were expected to do so at a later date.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
JORDAN
Arrest of deputies
Two members of the House of Representatives, Laith Shbeilat and Yaqoub Qarrash, both independent Islamists, were arrested in late August and subsequently charged, along with two other people, with plotting to overthrow the government and having links with foreign powers.
The four were accused of membership of the banned Shabab al-Nafeer al-Islami (Islamic Vanguard Youth) and of possessing weapons.
Their trial opened in Amman on Sept. 29 
Royal decree approving parties law
A royal decree was issued on Aug. 31 approving legislation passed in July which lifted a ban on the formation of political parties [see p. 39027].
King Hussein's return
King Hussein returned to Jordan on Sept. 24 after a five-week absence in the United States, where he had undergone kidney and ureter surgery.
According to Jordan radio "over one million" people gathered in the streets of Amman to greet the King on his arrival.
A Reuters report on the King's homecoming described it as "an explosion of nationalism unprecedented in the young nation's history" .
Relations with Iraq
During September there were signs that Jordan was attempting to distance itself from Iraq in order to restore relations with its former allies in the Gulf.
King Hussein (who had made remarks while in the USA about being unable to understand why some leaders clung to power despite the suffering this caused to their people) reportedly met with Jalal Talabani, leader of the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan, in London in mid-September.
Taha Yassin Ramadan, an Iraqi Vice-President, visited Jordan on Sept. 29 for talks with King Hussein.
Produce ban by Saudi Arabia
Saudi Arabia barred imports of Jordanian fruit and vegetables in late August, claiming that recent shipments had been contaminated with sewage and pesticides.
The new ban came less than a year after Saudi Arabia had lifted a ban imposed during the Gulf crisis on all Jordanian imports.
Analysts expected the imposition of this new ban to have a serious impact on Jordan's debt-ridden farmers.
Until the Gulf crisis Saudi Arabia had imported 70 per cent of Jordan's agricultural exports, one of the country's main foreign exchange earners.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
SYRIA
Relations with Egypt and Turkey
President Hafez al-Assad visited Egypt on Sept. 16 for a round of "closed" talks with President Hosni Mubarak [for Assad's visit in March 1992 see p. 38837].
According to a report on Arab Republic of Egypt Radio, the two presidents reviewed the Middle East peace talks and other "Arab issues and events" .
Interior Minister Mohammad Harbah visited Turkey on Sept. 16 for talks with his Turkish counterpart, Ismet Sezgin [for April Sezgin-Assad meeting see p. 38874].
Syrian Arab Republic Radio reported that the two sides agreed to establish joint security and administrative committees.
Harbah described the talks as "productive" .
Reported release of Atasi
Radio Monte Carlo reported on Aug. 29 that Syria had released Nureddin al-Atasi, President from February 1966 until his overthrow by the 1970 bloodless coup which brought Assad to power, after 22 years' imprisonment.
The radio also cited "press sources" as saying that Mohammad Rabah al-Tawil, who had served as Interior Minister under Atasi, had also been released.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
MOROCCO
Constitutional referendum
In the face of opposition calls for a boycott, and reports of widespread apathy among the electorate, the Interior Ministry announced on Sept. 5 that a 99.96 per cent "yes" vote had been achieved in the previous day's referendum on proposed constitutional changes.
The Ministry said that 97.25 per cent of the electorate of approximately 11,000,000 had voted, and reported that in some areas, including in the disputed Western Sahara, there were 100 per cent "yes" votes.
The four opposition parties which had formed the Democratic Bloc in May [see p. 38982]voiced opposition to the constitutional proposals.
Istiqlal and the Socialist Union of Popular Forces (USFP) expressed disappointment with the proposals, while the two smaller parties, the Organization for Democratic Popular Action (OADP) and the Union Nationale des Forces Populaires (UNFP) called for a boycott.
In an address on national television on Sept. 3, King Hassan had called on voters to support the changes, which included modifications to his own powers.
He would retain the right to appoint the Prime Minister, but with the proviso that he choose someone reflecting the majority in parliament.
The Prime Minister would be able to appoint his own Cabinet.
The parliament would have new powers to conduct investigations, to call for votes of no confidence, and to enact laws, which the monarch would be required to act upon within 30 days.
Observers commented that the modifications would make only a token difference to the King's real power.
Much foreign press comment, most of which was highly sceptical both of the referendum results and of the motives behind it, focussed on the issue of Western Sahara, suggesting that the inclusion of the territory's people in the voting, and their apparently ready participation, could be shown as a further proof of their supposed attachment to Morocco.
It was also seen as an attempt to undermine the UN's plans for a referendum in Western Sahara [see p. 38982].
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
ALGERIA
Increasing violence
Attacks against security personnel and civilians continued throughout September.
According to a gendarmerie report of Sept. 15, a hard core of 19-24 terrorists was backed by 200 Islamic radicals.
On Sept. 20 the President of the High Committee of State (HCS), Ali Kafi, said in a television broadcast that the government was determined to stamp out the "vicious disease" of terrorism.
The death toll in the Algiers airport bombing on Aug. 26 [see p. 39072]had risen to 10 by Sept. 1, with 128 people wounded.
Rabah Kebir, a senior figure in the Islamic Salvation Front (FIS) who had reportedly escaped from house arrest in August and was said to be attempting to form an Islamist government in exile, said in an interview with Le Monde of Sept. 18 that the FIS wanted a dialogue with the government, and denied that the party had been responsible for the Algiers airport bombing, or for the assassination in June of the former HCS President, Mohamed Boudiaf [see p. 38981].
On Sept. 4 a government source was quoted as announcing that two members of the presidential guard had been charged with Boudiaf's assassination.
The two, named as Commander Abdelwahab Madjber and Captain Sadek Sayah, joined 21 others implicated in the killing including the presumed assassin, Lembarek Boumaraaf [see pp. 38981; 39029-30].
Government attempts at national reconciliation
On Sept. 3 Interior Minister Mohammed Hardi said in an interview with the daily El Watan that most detainees would be freed soon, and that the electoral process interrupted in January would be resumed if those who demanded an Islamic state would give up terrorism.
On Sept. 27 the National Human Rights Monitoring Group was cited as saying that 1,200 detainees had been freed, in accordance with a High Committee of State (HCS) decision of Aug. 8, but that 4,000 people were still held.
On Sept. 21 the HCS began promised consultations with political parties by meeting representatives of the National Liberation Front (FLN).
Economic austerity measures
The government unveiled an austerity programme on Sept. 20, introducing strict import controls and higher taxes.
At the same time, incentives including tax breaks were offered for innovative import-substitution industries.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
MIDDLE EAST
Washington bilateral negotiations
The sixth round of bilateral negotiations in the ongoing Middle East peace process closed in Washington in late September [see p. 39070 for opening of sixth round on Aug. 24].
Despite generally optimistic assessments of the sixth round by commentators, particularly regarding the Syrian-Israeli negotiations, no concrete progress was reported.
The sixth round was the longest to date and the first since the election of a new Labour government in Israel in June [see p. 38945-47].
Negotiations went into recess on Sept. 3, but resumed on Sept. 14 before finally ending on Sept. 24.
All sides agreed to return to Washington on Oct. 21 for a seventh round.
Israel-Syria
During the recess (Sept. 3-13), the Israeli side expressed optimism over the progress of talks with Syria.
In an interview on Sept. 10 Prime Minister Itzhak Rabin indicated that Israel was ready to accept territorial compromise over the Golan Heights in exchange for peace with Syria.
Rabin said: "In exchange for a peace treaty which promises an end to war and opens the borders between Syria and Israel, diplomatic relations and normalization, Israel is ready to implement [UN Resolutions]242 and 338…
This implies, of course, some sort of territorial compromise."
Rabin faced angry criticism from settlers in the Golan who condemned his apparent willingness to trade the territory for a peace treaty.
Israel presented Syria with a fresh draft discussion document when the talks resumed on Sept. 14.
However, the Syrian delegation said that the document failed to address the question of an Israeli withdrawal from the Golan and was therefore not serious.
French Foreign Affairs Minister Roland Dumas held a secret round of talks with Syrian President Hafez al-Assad in Latakia on Sept. 15, following a meeting in Paris on Sept. 11 with Israeli Foreign Minister Shimon Peres.
On Sept. 17 the Syrian delegation broke off discussions with Israel, claiming that the talks were useless while Israel continued to refuse to discuss a full withdrawal from the Golan.
US diplomats persuaded Syria to return to the negotiating table on Sept. 21, but the talks ended three days later.
Israel-Palestinians
The Palestinian delegation presented Israel with a new 10-point framework for talks on self rule in the occupied territories on Sept. 1.
Topics included the nature and jurisdiction of the proposed interim authority, the withdrawal of Israeli forces, Jerusalem, Israeli settlements and security.
Although the Israeli delegation said that it was prepared to discuss issues raised by the Palestinians, the two sides remained deeply divided over the organization of the talks.
The Israeli delegation wanted to concentrate on detailed discussion of the proposed Palestinian governing body; the Palestinians insisted on discussion of overall concepts, rather than details.
In a joint statement issued on Sept. 13, two radical PLO factions, the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (PFLP) and one faction of the divided Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine (DFLP), called on the Palestinian delegation to withdraw from the talks.
On Sept. 21 the two factions announced that they were forming a joint leadership council to oppose the talks, and called on all Palestinians to observe a general strike on Sept. 23 in protest at the talks.
Talks, reported as cordial, were also held between Israel and Jordan and Israel and Lebanon.
Delegations at sixth round of peace talks
(heads of delegation in parenthesis) Israeli delegation (Itmar Rabinovitch) Syrian delegation (Muwaffaq al-Allaf) Palestinian delegation (Haider Abdel-Shafi) Jordanian delegation (Abdul Salam Majali) Lebanese delegation (Suhayl Shammas)
ASIA — PACIFIC
KUWAIT
UK Defence Secretary Malcolm Rifkind signed a "statement of joint intention" with the Kuwaiti government on Sept. 22 for the supply of British military equipment, possibly including Vickers Challenger 2 tanks, British Aerospace Hawk fighter aircraft, and naval vessels; Rifkind left Kuwait on Sept. 23 at the end of a three-day visit.
ASIA — PACIFIC
LIBYA
The General People's Congress (GPC — Parliament) promulgated on Sept. 2 its "Law Number Nine of the Year 1992" authorizing the privatization of enterprises and permitting "individuals or groups to exercise the liberal professions and to invest freely in the private sectors" .
INTERNATIONAL
IMF — WORLD BANK
Autumn meetings — Action on currency turmoil
Finance Ministers and heads of central banks representing member states of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank met in Washington for their 47th annual meeting on Sept. 22-25.
Opening the session, the IMF's Managing Director Michel Camdessus urged stricter fiscal control and called upon Germany, Italy and the USA to take immediate steps to cut their budget deficits, emphasising that manipulating interest rates would not heal the underlying causes of slow growth and currency fluctuations.
In a sharply contrasting assessment, US Treasury Nicholas Brady argued on Sept. 22 that lower interest rates encouraged increases in investment, productivity and living standards, adding that "when interest rates remain high for whatever reason, the returns on investment stay sterile in the banking system" .
On Sept. 21 the head of the IMF's Interim Committee, Spanish Finance Minister Carlos Solchaga Catálan, had urged an increase in US interest rates, saying that "the financial markets of the industrial countries in Europe cannot accept the benign neglect of the United States nor the monetarism of the [German]Bundesbank" .
G-7 ministers meeting separately on Sept. 19 had pledged to restore "stable" exchange rates but recommended no concrete measures amid reports that Germany had refused to lower its interest rates to ease pressure on European currencies.
On Sept. 23 the USA proposed a study of global capital flows by the Group of Ten (G-10) industrialized countries to deal with the crisis in world currency markets [for European currency crisis see pp. 39080-81].
The IMF's own financial problems were highlighted by its Interim Committee which, after a meeting on Sept. 20-21, expressed concern over delays in US contributions worth US$12,000 million.
Russian debt rescheduling
Russia was assured by the G-7 that expeditious action by the Paris Club of creditor nations would ease the debt burden of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), presently estimated at between US$65,000 million and US$70,000 million.
The head of the Russian delegation, Deputy Prime Minister Alexsandr Shokhin, had told G-7 finance ministers on Sept. 20 that Russia could pay no more than US$2,500 million in debt service for 1993, a small part of the US$19,900 million due.
The G-7 had reportedly been divided over rescheduling, with Germany (by far the largest creditor) opposing the five-year delay which was requested by Russia and backed by the USA.
Russia's debt problems were highlighted in a World Bank study released in late September which indicated that the country would need some US$20,000 million of external financial resources annually for the next few years to sustain economic reforms.
The IMF's Interim Committee urged Russia to press on with reforms, particularly in establishing a rouble currency area, in order to qualify for future loans from the IMF and the World Bank.
So far Russia, with an IMF quota of SDR2,876 million (about $$, 150 million), had negotiated a standby arrangment of SDR719 million (about US$1,040 million).
On Sept. 29 a committee of Western banks, meeting in Frankfurt, agreed to roll over, for the fourth time since December 1991, the bank debt of the former Soviet Union for another three months.
Expansion of Executive Board — IMF membership
The Board of Governors approved on Sept. 22 the expansion of the Executive Board from 22 to 24 members (19 elected executive directors, and one each appointed by the governments of the USA, the UK, Germany, France and Japan).
Executive directors elected on Sept. 23, for a two-year term commencing Nov. 1, included representatives of Switzerland and Russia, which had joined the IMF in May and June [see pp. 38937; 38987].
By the end of the meeting IMF membership had risen to 173.
Countries joining since June (dates in brackets denote signature of Articles of Agreement) were Byelarus (July 10), Kazakhstan (July 15), Moldova (Aug. 12), Ukraine (Sept. 3), Azerbaijan (Sept. 18), Uzbekistan (Sept. 21), Turkmenistan (Sept. 22), and San Marino (Sept. 23).
G-24 meeting
Finance Ministers of the Group of 24 (G-24) developing countries met on Sept. 19, urging the West "to provide adequate financial flows…to improve their prospects of sustainable growth" , and reportedly expressing concern that the preoccupation of the richer nations with the currency crisis would affect future aid flows.
IMF World Economic Outlook
The IMF's World Economic Outlook, due for publication in October, trimmed its expectations of growth in world output in 1992 from 1.4 percent in May [see p. 38888]to 1.1 percent, and in 1993 from 3.5 per cent in May [ibid.]to 3.1 per cent.
Output in the developing world was projected to grow by 6.2 per cent in 1992 and 1993, compared with 3.2 per cent in 1991.
World Bank annual report
 "Sustainable economic growth and the reduction in poverty" were defined as the World Bank's main priorities in 1993, according to its annual report released on Sept. 16.
World Bank lending in its 1992 fiscal year, ending June 30, fell from US$16,400 million to US$15,200 million, mainly due to reduced lending to Eastern Europe.
Lending by the International Development Association (IDA), the Bank's affiliate in charge of soft loans to the poorest countries, was US$6,600 million in fiscal 1992 and was expected to reach US$7,400 million in the year to June 1993.
On Sept. 22 the President of the World Bank, Lewis Preston, called on donor nations to increase aid to developing countries, saying that "the international community must not turn its back on the poor" .
INTERNATIONAL
UNCTAD
Trade and Development Report
In its Trade and Development Report 1992 released on Sept. 14 the UN Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) called on industrialized countries to boost government investment and to reduce interest rates to stimulate global economic recovery.
Anticipating claims that industrialized countries could not afford the higher costs involved, the report stressed that higher government spending would raise incomes and actually reduce budget deficits.
The report drew particular attention to the need for a reduction in German interest rates to Japanese and US levels to permit a general cut in rates throughout Europe, and to ease tensions within the European exchange rate mechanism (ERM).
At the same time it urged the US Federal Reserve Board to revert to pre-1979 policies, concentrating on management of interest rates rather than of the money supply.
The report noted that "if the 1980s were dominated by the debt crisis in the developing world, the 1990s have started under the shadow of one in the developed" .
It warned that without the adoption of "Keynesian economic policies" , the "debt deflation" afflicting the world's leading economies could ensure another "lost decade" .
Acknowledging the downward spiral caused by the most severe global recession since the Second World War, the report predicted that world economic growth would rise from 1.5 per cent in 1992 to a mere 3 per cent in 1993.
World commodity prices were set to rise about 7 per cent in 1993, with fuel prices alone climbing 9 per cent.
INTERNATIONAL
OPEC
Ministerial meeting
The 92nd ministerial meeting of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), held in Geneva on Sept. 16-17, was marked by (i) the withdrawal of Ecuador (a full member since 1973), the first member state to leave OPEC in the organization's 32-year history; and (ii) Iran's rejection of the final communiqué.
Iran's stance reflected opposition to the decision to increase OPEC's "market share" , i.e. its aggregate production ceiling, from 22,982,000 to 24,200,000 barrels per day (bpd) in the fourth quarter of 1992.
Withdrawal of Ecuador
Ecuador's intention to leave OPEC, conveyed to members on Sept. 16, was reportedly in protest against the high annual US$2,000,000 membership fee, and against OPEC's refusal to raise Ecuador's production quota from 320,000 bpd — about 1.4 per cent of total OPEC output.
Ecuador remained as an "associate" member.
OPEC officials sought to minimise the importance of Ecuador's decision, whereas press reports indicated growing concern over divisions between larger oil exporting member countries, notably Iran and Saudi Arabia.
Dispute over output and prices — Iranian criticism of communiqué
OPEC Secretary-General Subroto told the meeting that prices for OPEC crude had fallen 15 per cent in real terms in the past two years, and that the weakness of the US dollar had pushed real prices down by more than 6 percentage points since the last OPEC meeting in May [see p. 38938].
Iran's Oil Minister Gholamreza Agazadeh urged on Sept. 16 that OPEC should "seriously consider" taking action to raise prices towards the current reference price of US$21 a barrel.
Strong support for the Iranian position came from Algeria, Indonesia, Libya and Venezuela.
Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates (UAE), however, had both expressed satisfaction with present prices.
[For Saudi backing for UAE in its dispute with Iran over control of the Gulf island of Abu Musa see p. 39116.]
Iran subsequently rejected the outcome of the meeting as detrimental to higher oil prices.
Agazadeh raised in his Sept. 16 speech the possibility that Iran would respond by increasing output, rather than continue to lose revenue because of low prices.
At a press conference on Sept. 17 he hinted further at this, saying that the right to increase output within OPEC's new aggregate ceiling "belongs to those who have the additional production capacity to meet this" .
INTERNATIONAL
UNITED NATIONS
Opening of 47th General Assembly session — Exclusion of FRY
The 47th session of the UN General Assembly opened in New York on Sept. 15 under the presidency of the Bulgarian Foreign Affairs Minister Stoyan Ganev.
Attended by representatives from 179 member states, it was marked by the exclusion from the General Assembly of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (FRY)— the first time a member state had been removed from its seat, although South Africa had been suspended from the General Assembly in 1974.
Costs of peacekeeping — Financial crisis over contribution arrears
On Sept. 16, in his first report as UN Secretary-General, Boutros Boutros-Ghali defined the UN's mission as one of "transforming a period of hope into an era of completed tasks" .
Drawing attention to the cost of UN peacekeeping operations in the last 12 months, estimated to total US$3,000 million, Boutros-Ghali urged members to reflect on the organization's financial crisis, prompted by outstanding dues totalling US$908,000,000 in regular contributions with a further US$845,000,000 due in peacekeeping contributions.
On Sept. 21, US President George Bush promised that the USA, the UN's biggest debtor owing an estimated US$700,000,000-US$800,000,000 in regular and peacekeeping dues, would in future ensure adequate financial support to provide for UN peacekeeping and humanitarian work.
Speaking on behalf of the European Communities (EC), the UK Foreign and Commonwealth Secretary Douglas Hurd said on Sept. 22 that the EC would support Boutros-Ghali's proposal for a peacekeeping reserve fund, adding that at end-August EC member countries had provided 40 per cent of contributions collected for various peacekeeping operations since the end of the last General Assembly.
Exclusion of FRY
The General Assembly on Sept. 22 voted by 127 votes to six (Kenya, Swaziland, Tanzania, Yugoslavia, Zambia and Zimbabwe) with 26 abstentions, to exclude the FRY from its proceedings and to ask it to apply for UN membership, rather than accepting its claim to succeed automatically to the General Assembly seat formerly held by the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (SFRY).
On Sept. 23 the FRY formally applied for UN membership.
FRY Prime Minister Milan Panic claimed that the Security Council resolution [see below]had set a dangerous precedent, and warned that while "the matter pertains to Yugoslavia today, tomorrow it could be any other country" .
The SFRY had comprised six republics, namely Serbia and Montenegro (which together formed the FRY in April 1992 — see p. 38848), Bosnia-Hercegovina, Croatia and Slovenia (all three of which obtained independent membership of the UN in May — see p. 39033), and Macedonia (see pp. 39036-37).
The Security Council had adopted Resolution 777 on Sept. 19 by 12 votes to none with three abstentions (China, India and Zimbabwe), recommending that the FRY be asked to reapply to join the UN.
This had reportedly been watered down after Russia threatened to veto a proposal to suspend the FRY from all UN bodies, demanding instead that it be merely excluded from the General Assembly.
On Sept. 26 a Russian Foreign Ministry spokesman denounced press distortions of the Security Council's decisions on Yugoslavia, saying that "Yugoslavia's mission with the UN continues its work and represents former Yugoslavia in other UN bodies with the exception of the General Assembly" .
Russian Foreign Minister Andrei Kozyrev was quoted on Sept. 29 as saying that while "the West and a number of other countries insisted on the exclusion of Yugoslavia from the UN, we did not share this view" .
On Sept. 30 Panic told a press conference in Belgrade that the eventual outcome, the exclusion of the FRY from the General Assembly, represented a victory for the FRY because "we are still members of the UN" .
INTERNATIONAL
DISARMAMENT
US-Russian agreement on uranium supply
An agreement involving the purchase by the USA of weapons-grade uranium from Russia's dismantled warheads for conversion into fuel for commercial nuclear plants was initialled in late August.
Under the deal, the implementing contract for which was to be negotiated over the following 12 months, enriched uranium reportedly totalling 500 tonnes would be sold by Russia for hard currency needed to complete urgent repairs to its nuclear power plants.
The USA would benefit by acquiring low-cost nuclear fuel while ensuring that the Russian material was no longer used to manufacture weapons.
Confirming details of the agreement in Washington on Aug. 31, US President George Bush said that it "will help ensure that nuclear weapons grade material does not fall into the wrong hands, while providing funds to promote economic reforms and the transition to a market-based economy" in Russia.
Anticipating concern about the depressed state of the US uranium industry, which had shrunk to one-fifth of its 1980 output owing to a surge in low-cost imports of commercial-grade fuel from the former Soviet Union, Bush emphasised that the deal would have "no adverse impact on American jobs" .
Agreement on Russian germ warfare inspection
Senior Russian, UK and US officials meeting in Moscow on Sept. 10-11 adopted a joint statement on biological weapons, providing for mutual inspections at relevant non-military sites, including unlimited access to samples and personnel at these sites.
The first such inspection was due to take place at a civilian chemical enterprise in St Petersburg, which Western military experts suspected was used as a cover for illicit military work.
The accord also authorized the creation of a mechanism to monitor the observance of conventions banning biological weapons.
Russian Deputy Foreign Minister Grigory Berdennikov said on Sept. 14 that the Soviet Union and later Russia had been violating a 1972 treaty banning germ warfare, at least until March 1992.
On Sept. 18 a senior Russian Defence Ministry official denied US reports alleging the testing in January of a new type of Russian nerve gas.
US-Russian talks on global defence system
US-Russian negotiations on a joint global defence system (GDS) resumed in Moscow on Sept. 21-22 [see pp. 38744-45; 39031].
During the meetings, described by the ITAR-TASS news agency as "extremely positive" , both sides agreed to "continue discussing the GDS with other states, in order to lay the foundations for extensive international participation in it" .
The US co-chair of the Russian-American Bilateral Commission on prisoners-of-war (POWs), Malcolm Toon, said in Moscow on Sept. 21 that the US public was "getting awfully impatient" with the lack of progress in the search for US POWs allegedly missing in the former Soviet Union.
Toon had been quoted in July as saying that he had found no evidence to substantiate claims that US POWs were still being held in the former Soviet Union [see p. 39031].
US Senate vote on nuclear testing
The US Senate formally approved on Sept. 18 an immediate nine-month moratorium on underground nuclear test explosions, and a total ban by October 1996.
Preliminary Senate approval had already been given in August [see p. 39073].
The Sept. 18 vote, by 55 to 40, involved the rejection of an alternative proposal backed by the Bush administration, for a 90-day moratorium in 1993 followed by limited testing until 1998.
The government of Australia on Sept. 23 expressed disappointment that the USA was continuing nuclear tests while other "forward-looking" countries had suspended them.
The USA had confirmed that an explosion had taken place in mid-September at a US test site in Nevada.
Approval of draft treaty on chemical weapons ban
The 39-nation Conference on Disarmament meeting in Geneva on Sept. 3 adopted a draft treaty banning the use, production or stock-piling of chemical weapons, and agreed to pass it on for approval by the UN General Assembly.
Iran expressed strong reservations about some aspects of the draft, and a number of other governments, among them China, Pakistan and several Arab countries, also hinted that they might not sign the treaty, the product of 24 years of protracted negotiations which had often been deadlocked by Cold War rivalry.
Argentine-French accord on nuclear energy co-operation
The Argentine news agency Telam on Sept. 28 reported the signing of a nuclear energy co-operation programme between Argentina and France "with exclusively peaceful and not military terms" .
INTERNATIONAL
ARMS TRADE
Chinese withdrawal from arms control talks
Confirmation of China's withdrawal from the unscheduled second round of Middle East arms control talks between the five permanent members of the UN Security Council (China, France, Russia, the United Kingdom and the United States) was reported on Sept. 16 [for first round in July 1991 see pp. 38365-66].
The decision was made in protest against the sale by the USA of 150 F-16 aircraft, worth US$4,000 million, to Taiwan.
China regarded the sale as in breach of a 1982 Sino-US agreement.
China's action did not, however, affect its participation in separate multilateral talks on Middle East arms control which opened in Moscow on Sept. 15.
Controversial arms trade issues involving Iran and Iraq
Iran.
Russia's intended sale of diesel submarines to Iran, which had aroused strong US opposition, was delayed as a result of a dispute over trade payments, according to a Russian announcement on Sept. 25.
Other reports claimed that Iran had acquired four nuclear weapons from former Soviet Moslem republics.
Iraq.
Three German nationals were given suspended sentences by a court in Bochum, Germany, on Sept. 21 for illegally exporting rocket engine parts to Iraq.
The Bulgarian authorities admitted on Sept. 8 that a Bulgarian state arms trading company, Kintex, had been involved in arms deals with Iraq despite the UN embargo.
INTERNATIONAL
NON-ALIGNED MOVEMENT
10th summit meeting
Fifty-nine heads of state and UN Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali were among those attending the 10th summit of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) on Sept. 1-6 in Jakarta, presided over by Indonesian President Gen. Suharto.
The meeting approved the admission to full membership of Brunei, Myanma, the Philippines and the Republic of Uzbekistan, thereby bringing total membership to 108.
Armenia, China, Croatia and Thailand were granted observer status.
Bosnia-Hercegovina and Slovenia attended as "guests" ; the status of Yugoslavia's membership was highly controversial, with the delegation of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (FRY — the new federal entity formed by Serbia and Montenegro) representing it as a full member.
Some NAM members, including Egypt, Iran, Malaysia and Pakistan, tried unsuccessfully to secure the expulsion of the FRY delegation on the grounds that it could not claim to be the rightful successor of the former Yugoslav state.
Delegates agreed only to postpone action until after a decision by the UN General Assembly [see p. 39121].
While the treatment of Bosnian Moslems elicited almost universal condemnation, some African countries reportedly expressed reservations about using the NAM summit as a forum for inter-religious confrontation, claiming that Moslem nations (forming about 40 per cent of the NAM membership) were waging a jihad or "holy war" against the former Yugoslavia.
Urgent questions about the role of the NAM in the post-Cold War era were sharply delineated by President Suharto who, in his opening address to the summit on Sept. 1, called for a "realistic re-ordering" of NAM's priorities to tackle the increasing polarization between North and South, which, he said, loomed as "the central unresolved issue of our time" .
Suharto appealed for the "restructuring and democratization" of the UN to allow developing countries to play a more effective role.
Other NAM members, notably Zimbabwe, also called for an end to the monopoly of power by the five permanent members of the UN Security Council.
Boutros-Ghali told delegates that "the voice of the Third World…must be represented" , adding that although the end of the Cold War had brought "concord and unity" the "temptation to dominate, either worldwide or regionally, remains" .
Malaysia's Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamed expressed the prevailing discontent with the post-Cold War "new world order" , describing it as "the revival of the old Western colonialism" .
He denounced Western complacency "towards the daily killings of the Bosnians" and claimed that it stood "in stark contrast to the response to the alleged killings of the Kurds in Iraq" .
Specific attacks on US policy came from Cuba and Iraq.
On Sept. 4 Cuba's representative, Juan Almeida Bosque, said that the US trade embargo against his country had become "more aggressive, more ignominious, more brutal" , forcing it into poverty and hunger.
Iraq's representative, Vice-President Taha Yassin Ramadan, told delegates on Sept. 4 that the imposition of the air exclusion zone in southern Iraq [see p. 39068]was "an aggressive decision which violates the sovereignty of Iraq" .
Communiqué
In its final statement, dubbed the "Jakarta Message" , adopted on Sept. 6, the summit "strongly condemned the obnoxious policy of ethnic cleansing by Serbs in Bosnia-Hercegovina" .
Representatives of the FRY objected to the wording of the declaration, saying that the specific naming of Serbs as responsible for "ethnic cleansing" had been inserted after the official adoption of the document.
The FRY delegation stressed that while it too condemned "ethnic cleansing" , paramilitary groups "of all three sides to the conflict, namely also Croats and Moslems in Bosnia-Hercegovina, are involved in such practices" .
The final document reaffirmed the NAM's intention to remain "an independent political force despite the changes in the world" , but noted that there was an "urgent need to accord high priority to the issues of development and equitable international economic relations" .
In what was construed by observers as a blow to Iraq, the communiqué welcomed the restoration of Kuwait's sovereignty and omitted any mention of the Western air exclusion zone over southern Iraq.
The USA was singled out for criticism over "its unneighbourly actions against Cuba" and urged to lift its economic embargo.
While refraining from citing the brutality of warring factions in Somalia, the document called on the NAM "to play a leadership role in…response to the ongoing tragedy" and to take immediate measures "for the purpose of co-ordinating emergency humanitarian assistance for Somalia" .
In his speech earlier Suharto had confirmed that the NAM had agreed immediately to donate US$250,000 in humanitarian aid to Somalia.
INTERNATIONAL
INTERNATIONAL PARTY ORGANIZATIONS
Meeting of Socialist International
More than 800 delegates from socialist and social democratic parties in 132 countries attended the 19th congress of the Socialist International (SI) held in Berlin on Sept. 15-17.
The congress was marked by the entry into full membership of the former Italian Communist Party (PCI), renamed the Democratic Party of the Left (PDS).
Other new members included Haiti's Congress of Democratic Movements (Konakom), and the Social Democratic Party of Slovakia (SDPS) whose membership was announced on Sept. 21.
The Socialist Forces Front (FFS) of Algeria and the Ivorian People's Front (FPI) of Côte d'Ivoire became associate members.
Two hitherto revolutionary parties, M-19 from Colombia and the Sandinista National Liberation Front (FSLN) from Nicaragua, were granted observer status following their conversion to social democracy.
Delegates also approved observer status for the Hungarian Socialist Party (MSzP), the first such decision in favour of a former communist party from eastern Europe.
On Sept. 16 delegates elected former French Prime Minister Pierre Mauroy as president to succeed the former German Chancellor Willy Brandt whose absence due to illness (hw died on Oct. 9) had overshadowed the proceedings.
ENVIRONMENT
Formation of pro-whaling body
The Faroe Islands, Greenland, Iceland and Norway, announced on Sept. 11 the establishment of a new North Atlantic Marine Mammals Commission, to be based in Tromsö, Norway.
A spokesman for the new organization declared that traditional whale-hunting countries could no longer stand by and watch as the system for international management of whale stocks crumbled under the pressure of environmental extremists.
At the meeting of the International Whaling Commission (IWC) in June-July [see pp. 39032-33]both Norway and Iceland had strongly resisted the agreement to uphold a ban on commercial whaling for a further year.
Paris Convention on marine pollution
A Convention on Marine Pollution, aimed at controlling the dumping of waste into the Atlantic Ocean, was signed in Paris on Sept. 22 by 13 European countries.
Agreement was only reached following a fierce debate over the question of radioactive waste.
At the heart of the Paris Convention, as it was known, was the principle that nothing harmful to human or marine health should be dumped.
In particular, the convention committed signatory states to (i) adopting the best available techniques for controlling marine pollution;(ii) reducing discharges of toxic waste to harmless levels by the end of the century; and (iii) observing a 15-year moratorium on the dumping of radioactive waste.
This last point represented a compromise between Scandinavian countries, which favoured a permanent ban, and France and the UK, which were keen to retain the option of using the sea as a dumping ground for large radioactive components from nuclear submarines and power stations.
They agreed to observe the moratorium, and to resume dumping after 2007 only in consultation with other signatory states.
In the interim, they agreed to carry out further research into land-based disposal.
French ban on Australian industrial waste
The French Environment Minister, Ségolène Royal, announced on Sept. 5 a ban on imports of potentially harmful industrial waste from Australia.
The decision, taken after the arrival of a shipment of electric transformers for decontamination at a factory in Saint-Vulbas, was taken against a background of growing concern over imports of hospital waste from Germany [see p. 39073].
Somali waste dumping controversy
The head of the UN Environment Programme, Mostafa Tolba, announced on Sept. 5 that two European companies, planning to store and dispose of industrial and hospital waste in Somalia, had signed an agreement to this effect with a representative of one of the warring factions there.
The Swiss company Acher Partners admitted its involvement, but claimed that it had simply arranged the contract on behalf of Progresso of Italy, while the latter denied any involvement in illegal activities.
The controversial agreement was signed by Nur Ilmi Uthman, Minister of Health in Ali Mahdi Mohammed's interim government.
It covered the disposal of up to 550,000 tonnes a year of waste, and specified that this could include toxic elements.
The concession was granted for a 20-year period, ending in 2011.
Subsequent investigations showed that no toxic waste shipments had actually been made, and UN officials announced on Oct. 6 that any dumping plans had been aborted.
INTERNATIONAL
AVIATION
Air crashes in Nepal and Nigeria
A Pakistan International Airlines Airbus A-300 crashed near the Nepalese capital, Kathmandu, on a flight from Karachi, Pakistan, on Sept. 28, killing all 167 passengers and crew.
The accident was the second recent major air disaster in the Himalayas [for Thai Airways Airbus A-310 crash in July see pp. 39033; 39073].
Nepalese accident investigators blamed pilot error, saying that the aircraft, which crashed in poor weather, had approached Katmandu's Tribhuvan airport below the minimum height.
According to aviation officials the A-300 should have been 1,500 feet higher at the point where it crashed into a jagged mountain face.
Observers stressed, however, that the absence of radar facilities at Katmandu airport (where aircraft were guided by radio beacons) increased the risk of such accidents.
Unconfirmed reports also indicated that the aircraft had a history of neglected technical problems including the malfunction of both of its weather radars, first identified in August.
Nigerian air crash
A Nigerian air force Hercules C-130 transport aircraft heading for Kaduna crashed on Sept. 26 soon after take-off from Lagos, the capital, killing all 163 passengers on board, many of them military personnel and their families.
Subsequent reports said that rescuers had recovered up to 180 bodies from the wreckage.
The cause of the crash, Nigeria's worst air force accident, was not immediately known.
Nigerian military officials were quoted as saying, however, that the latest crash had "taken a big lump out of the middle of the armed forces" .
US-Netherlands "open skies" agreement
The USA and the Netherlands concluded an "open skies" accord in Washington on Sept. 4 giving KLM Royal Dutch Airlines and other Netherlands carriers unrestricted access to the aviation market in the USA.
US carriers were permitted to widen the already liberal rights they had enjoyed in the Netherlands for several years.
Airlines would be allowed to enter into open code-sharing arrangements with other carriers and benefit from non-discriminatory operation of, and access to, computer reservation systems.
The bilateral agreement, the first under the US "open skies" initiative, came as the European Communities (EC) prepared for the implementation in 1993 of a common European aviation policy requiring EC members to negotiate as a block.
INTERNATIONAL
SPACE RESEARCH
Mars launch
The US National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) launched the US$511,000,000 Mars Observer probe on Sept. 25.
The probe would be the first US craft to visit Mars since 1976.
It primary mission was to map at low resolution the entire planet, to give new insights into the global climate, and at high resolution to study geology and small-scale changes.
US Senate vote on space station
The US Senate on Sept. 9 voted by 63 to 34 to continue with the development of the Freedom space station, expected to be constructed by the end of the century at a currently predicted cost of US$40,000 million.
The US$2,100 million earmarked for the station in the 1993 budget was US$840,000,000 less than the Bush administration had requested but US$400,000,000 more than the House of Representatives had approved in late July.
Shuttle flight
The US Space Shuttle Endeavour ended an eight-day mission on Sept. 20.
Its crew of seven included Mae Jemison, the first black woman in space; the first married couple in space; and Mamoru Mohri, the first Japanese astronaut to fly on a US space craft.
In preparation for the Freedom space station, an array of experiments were performed in Space Lab, the laboratory module carried in the shuttle's cargo bay, on two fish, four frogs, 180 hornets, 7,600 flies and 30 fertilized chicken eggs.
INTERNATIONAL
CSCE
A Forum for Security and Co-operation, whose creation was endorsed by leaders representing member states of the Conference for Security and Co-Operation in Europe (CSCE) in July [see pp. 39030-31], was formally inaugurated in Vienna on Sept. 22.
INTERNATIONAL
GATT
Mozambique and Namibia acceded as the 104th and 105th contracting parties of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) on July 27 and Sept. 15 respectively.
Taiwan was granted observer status on Sept. 29.
INTERNATIONAL
WHO
The Republics of Kazakhstan and Bosnia-Hercegovina joined the World Health Organization (WHO) as its 180th and 181st members on Aug. 19 and Sept. 10, respectively.