

AFRICA
ANGOLA
Election aftermath — Continuing violence
Following the declaration of the September election results [see pp. 39128-29], fighting continued between members of the National Union for the Total Independence of Angola (UNITA) and supporters of the ruling Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola-Workers' Party (MPLA-PT).
With communications seriously disrupted, reports from parts of the country were sketchy, but it appeared that UNITA had launched a new offensive in response to its electoral defeat.
By early November the rebel movement was reported to be in control of one-third of the country, and by the end of the month UNITA was thought to have at least nominal control of two-thirds of the country and thus to be in a stronger position than before the May 1991 Bicesse Peace Accord between the government and UNITA [see p. 38180].
Although a UN-brokered ceasefire agreement had supposedly come into force on Nov. 1, there was serious fighting between Nov. 1 and 5 in Luanda and the central and southern towns of Benguela, Huambo, Lobita and Lubango, in which at least 1,000 people were killed.
Jeremias Chitunda, deputy leader of UNITA, and Elias Salupeto Pena, a senior member of UNITA and nephew of UNITA leader Jonas Savimbi, were reportedly among those killed in Luanda and other high-ranking UNITA figures were said to have sustained serious injuries.
On Nov. 6 Marrack Goulding, the UN Under-Secretary-General for Peace-Keeping Operations, was despatched to Angola in an effort to resolve the crisis and restore peace.
Goulding reiterated the UN view that any solution to the conflict would have to be linked to the mandatory acceptance of the election results and full adherence to the Bicesse Accord.
He indicated that the UN was prepared to extend beyond Nov. 30 the mandate of the UN Angola Verification Mission, which had supervised the demobilization process, and he also suggested the possible deployment of UN peace-keeping troops.
The UN position was supported by the government in a statement issued on Nov. 12.
On Nov. 17, following discussions with Goulding and Margaret Anstee, the UN special representative in Angola, Savimbi finally accepted the election results, although he continued to maintain that they had been rigged.
He also declared his willingness to participate in the second round of the presidential poll and said that UNITA would attend forthcoming multiparty talks convened by the MPLA-PT.
Multiparty talks without UNITA
Despite Savimbi's Nov. 17 commitment, UNITA failed to attend the multiparty talks on Nov. 21, describing the meeting as a "circus" and citing fears for the security of its officials as the reason for its absence.
The talks were attended by all the other parties which had secured representation in the National Assembly [see p. 39129].
Discussions focused on the restoration of peace and preparations for the second round of the presidential elections.
In the communiqué issued at the end of the meeting, the parties endorsed the position of the UN and the government, demanding the complete implementation of the Bicesse Accord and acceptance of the election results.
They recommended an enhanced role for the UN and the Organization of African Unity (OAU) in the "pacification process" .
The parties also called on the governments of South Africa and Zaïre to desist from interfering in Angola's internal affairs.
This was prompted by reports that the two governments had been providing logistic support for UNITA — South African Foreign Minister Roelof "Pik" Botha, hitherto a negotiator in the conflict [see p. 39129], had been declared persona non grata on Nov. 6, apparently in response to these reports.
Convening of parliament — Appointment of transitional Prime Minister
Parliament was convened on Nov. 26 (as agreed at the Nov. 21 meeting) and Fernando José França Van-Dúnem, hitherto Prime Minister, was elected chair of the National Assembly.
The 70 elected UNITA representatives did not take their seats, arguing that it was unlawful to convene parliament in the absence of an elected president.
UNITA officials also made unsubstantiated claims that many of their MPs had been killed or arrested since the elections.
On Nov. 27 President José Eduardo dos Santos announced the appointment of Marcolino Moco, secretary-general of the MPLA-PT, as Prime Minister to head a transitional government which was expected to be named on Dec. 1.
It was not clear whether any portfolios would be offered to UNITA.
Namibie Delaration by dos Santos and Savimbi
On Nov. 27, following direct talks brokered by the UN, dos Santos and Savimbi issued the "Namibie Declaration" in which they committed themselves to accepting the Bicesse Peace Accord and implementing a ceasefire, and to a continuing UN presence in the country.
UN representative Anstee hailed the agreement as a "considerable breakthrough" which could avert civil war.
Her optimism, however, proved to be shortlived as UNITA launched an offensive in northern Angola on Nov. 29, capturing Uige and the nearby strategic air base at Negage.
AFRICA
MOZAMBIQUE
Failure to meet peace process schedule
Progress towards a secure peace between the Front for the Liberation of Mozambique (Frelimo) government and the Mozambique National Resistance (MNR or Renamo) appeared to be losing momentum as the -timetable agreed under the terms of the October General Peace Accord [see p. 39129]proved too ambitious.
By Nov. 9 the UN Secretary-General's special representative, Aldo Ajello, was already working on a new timetable which he declared would be "more realistic and more viable" .
Ajello returned to New York in mid-November to report to the Secretary-General and seek financial support from the Security Council, but as of early December funding for the operation had not been approved.
The lack of progress was attributed partly to a delay of two weeks in setting up the joint working commissions whose task was to implement the Accord under UN auspices.
The first of these, the Supervision and Control Commission (CSC), held its first meeting on Nov. 4, after which membership of the others (the Commission for the Formation of the Mozambique Defence Armed Forces, the Ceasefire Commission and the Reintegration Commission) was announced.
The MNR had until this time boycotted the CSC because of a dispute over the provision of accommodation in Maputo for MNR delegates.
The lack of a UN monitoring team adequate to the scale of the task, in conjunction with a failure to implement the plan by which all troops were to disengage and gather at demobilization assembly points by the agreed date, meant that the security situation remained unstable.
Both sides reported ceasefire violations to the UN observers.
On Nov. 24 government forces recaptured Lugela, in central Zambezia, the last of four towns occupied by the MNR in mid-October which the government now claimed to have retaken.
The 3,500 Zimbabwean troops guarding strategic trade routes remained in position and did not withdraw by Nov. 15 as originally envisaged, on the grounds that their departure would leave unprotected the corridors which were essential for the transport of drought relief aid to Zimbabwe, Zambia and Malawi.
AFRICA
CONGO
Government crisis
The minority government formed in September under Prime Minister Stéphane Maurice Bongho-Nouarra [see p. 39083]lost on Oct. 31 a vote of no confidence proposed in the National Assembly by the opposition Union of Democratic Renewal (URD) -Congolese Workers' Party (PCT) alliance.
The resignation of the Cabinet was not confirmed until Nov. 13, when President Pascal Lissouba met senior officers of the armed forces and said that new parliamentary elections would be held.
On Nov. 17, Lissouba announced the assembly's dissolution, a move described by the URD chairman, Bernard Kolelas, as illegal.
On Nov. 12, URD-PCT supporters had erected barricades in central Brazzaville, blocking the capital's two main avenues, as the two parties called on Lissouba to accept the government's resignation and to appoint a new prime minister from the parliamentary majority (the URD-PCT alliance).
Demonstrations were reported in various places.
Kolelas and Lissouba were reported to have failed to reach agreement on forming a new government at a meeting on Nov. 15.
Radio nationale congolaise announced on Nov. 23 that the first round of new legislative elections would take place on Dec. 30 and that Nov. 29 was the last date for candidacies to be filed.
AFRICA
CAMEROON
Post-election protests and repression
President Paul Biya took office on Nov. 3 for a third term, following a disputed victory in the Oct. 11 presidential elections [see p. 39130], declaring in his inauguration address to the National Assembly that he intended to undertake a major revision of the Constitution.
Le Monde, citing agency reports, said that Biya's speech had been an attempt to appease the opposition, which continued to allege massive electoral fraud and to claim that the Social Democratic Front (SDF) leader, John Fru Ndi, was the real winner.
Following violent protest riots in the mainly English-speaking North-West Province, centred on Fru Ndi's home town of Bamenda, about 150 gendarmes were said to have surrounded the opposition leader's house, where he was held with over 100 relatives and followers.
Reuter on Oct. 30 quoted the Minister of Communications, Augustin Kontchou Kouomegni, as having confirmed that Fru Ndi was under house arrest.
A second opposition figure, Victorin Hameni Bieuleu, chairman of the Union of Democratic Forces of Cameroon (UFDC), was reported to have been arrested on Nov. 3.
Rioting was reported in the ensuing days in Yaoundé, Douala and Bafoussam, and news agency reports quoted an official of the SDF as saying on Nov. 1 that 500 people had been arrested in Bamenda, and that many had been subjected to beatings.
Two Cameroonian journalists claimed they had been tortured at an army barracks and made to promise "not to write anything against President Biya" .
Also on Nov. 1, two journalists were reported to have had their passports seized as they attempted to board flights at Douala.
Lawyers went on strike from Nov. 9 to protest at what the bar association said were the arbitrary arrests of four of its members in North-West Province.
The European Communities (EC) expressed concern on Nov. 4 at "irregularities" surrounding the elections and called for peaceful dialogue.
AFRICA
NIGERIA
Extension of transition period
Adjustments to the timetable for the transfer of power to an elected civilian government were announced by President Ibrahim Babangida on Nov. 16.
The presidential elections were now to be held on June 12, 1993, and not as scheduled on Dec. 5, 1992.
The National Assembly (elected in July — see p. 38994) was to be inaugurated on the latter date as planned.
On Jan. 2, 1993 (the date on which the civilian administration was to have been inaugurated) the Armed Forces Ruling Council (AFRC) would be dissolved and replaced by a National Defence and Security Council; the present Council of Ministers would also cease to exist, giving way to a civilian Transitional Council with the responsibility of overseeing the final stages of the transition.
A new civilian government would be sworn in on Aug. 27, 1993.
The changes, effectively extending military rule for a further eight months, were not unexpected in the wake of the annulment of presidential primary elections on the grounds of widespread electoral malpractice, and the subsequent dissolution of the leadership of the two political parties [p. 39130].
Earlier, a report of the National Electoral Commission (NEC) on the conduct of the primaries had proposed alternative methods of selecting presidential candidates; the method finally adopted by the AFRC required prospective candidates to seek endorsement at ward, regional, state and national congresses and thus was a lengthier selection process than originally envisaged.
The NEC report also recommended abandoning the controversial "open ballot system" , whereby voters queued behind a picture of the candidate of their choice.
The 23 prospective presidential candidates who had contested the discredited primaries would not be allowed to run for president the next time, and all were banned from political activity for the remainder of the transitional period.
Meanwhile newly established caretaker committees for each party were to start electing new leaderships and organizing national conventions.
Opposition reactions
The postponement of the return to civilian rule — initially promised for 1990 and later deferred to 1992 — had been anticipated by opposition groups, which restated their belief in the existence of a "hidden agenda" , and cast doubt on Babangida's expressed commitment to relinquishing power.
On Nov. 12 the outspoken chair of the Campaign for Democracy Beko Ransome Kuti called on Nigerians to "make the country ungovernable" by acts of civil disobedience if Babangida did not leave office on Jan. 2 as promised.
Gen. Olusegun Obasanjo, head of state in 1976-79, in a message to President Babangida, argued that "any extension of the transition programme will…bring the armed forces into utter disrepute" .
AFRICA
TOGO
Crisis over dismissal of ministers
The political struggle between President Gnassingbe Eyadema and the transitional government of Prime Minister Joseph Kokou Koffigoh threatened to develop into a full-blown constitutional crisis in November.
Koffigoh on Nov. 9 dismissed two ministers, Mensan Agbeyome Kodjo (Territorial Administration and Security) and Komlan Mensah Benjamin Agbeka (Communications and Culture), but they refused to leave their posts and won the backing of Eyadema, who blocked their removal, saying that it was unconstitutional.
On Nov. 11 thousands of people in Lomé demonstrated in favour of Koffigoh, who said that he would appeal to the Supreme Court.
The two ministers, who had been leading members of the defunct Rassemblement du peuple togolais (RPT), were accused by Koffigoh of failing to show solidarity with the government.
Kodjo, a presidential confidant, had publicly threatened to arrest Koffigoh for having held Eyadema responsible for the recent storming of the National Assembly building [see pp. 39130-31].
On Nov. 18 Koffigoh justified the "legal punitive measures" taken against the ministers, saying that they had acted "not in the supreme interest of the nation, but with…partisan considerations" .
General strike
Three people were reported killed during a shoot-out in Lomé on Nov. 27 between police and demonstrators who responded to a general strike call launched on Nov. 16 by the Collectif des syndicats indépendants and the Collective of the Democratic Opposition-2 (COD-2)[for May general strike see p. 38901].
On Nov. 22 more than 150,000 people in Lomé had held a mass rally in support of the strike.
They called for the removal of Eyadema, political neutrality by the army, and the creation of a special peacekeeping force.
Thousands of Togolese refugees were reported on Nov. 19 to have crossed the border into Ghana amid fears of growing political tension provoked by the general strike.
Suspension of US aid programme
The USA on Nov. 13 suspended a US$19,000,000 aid programme, demanding progress on democratization.
US military aid had been cut in November 1991 after Koffigoh's abduction by the army [see pp. 38664-64].
In October 1992 France had suspended military aid reportedly in protest against the seizure of the National Assembly building [see pp. 39130-31].
AFRICA
GHANA
Disputed election victory of Rawlings
The outgoing head of state, Flt. -Lt. (retd) Jerry Rawlings, won 58.3 per cent of votes cast on Nov. 3, in the first presidential elections since he seized power in a military coup in 1981, according to official results announced in Accra on Nov. 6.
The outcome, giving Rawlings outright victory without the need for a second round of voting on Nov. 24, was immediately disputed by the four opposition parties which entered candidates in the election, the New Patriotic Party (NPP — Adu Boahen), the People's National Convention (PNC)— Hilla Limann — a candidate in the 1979 elections), the National Independence Party (NIP — Kwabena Darko) and the People's Heritage Party (PHP — Lt.-Gen.
Emmanuel Erskine).
Rawlings, who had retired from the air force on Sept. 14 in order to comply with electoral rules excluding serving members of the armed forces from candidacy, stood for the National Democratic Congress (NDC)[see p. 39084].
The four unsuccessful parties alleged fraud, serious flaws in the voters' register, intimidation of voters by NDC supporters and incidents of ballot-stuffing.
Official figures from the Interim National Electoral Commission (INEC), chaired by Mr Justice Ofori-Boateng, showed that Ghana's electorate totalled an estimated 8,255,056, of whom 3,090,020 had cast votes in the 200 constituencies of Ghana's 10 regions.
Rawlings secured 2,327,600 votes, Boahen 1,213,073 (30.4 per cent), Limann 266,728, Darko 113,615, and Lt.-Gen.
Erskine 68,099.
Ghana Broadcasting Corporation reported that voting was "calm and orderly" .
A representative of the 15-member Commonwealth observer group said that the elections had been free and fair, although the process had not been without incident and there were imperfections in the electoral lists.
The head of an observer team from the US Carter Center, Richard Joseph, was quoted as saying that "real instances of malfeasance are really just a handful" , and this view was echoed by observers from the Organization of African Unity.
One report, however, said that after observing the voter-registration process in April, the US-based International Foundation for Electoral Systems had concluded that the list was grossly inflated.
Rioting and tension — Postponement of legislative elections
On Nov. 4, Ghana Broadcasting Corporation reported that a dusk-to-dawn curfew had been imposed on Kumasi, capital of Ashanti region, which was regarded as Boahen's principal power base, after NPP supporters rioted "in violent reaction to the results of the presidential election so far declared" .
The radio said that shops and schools had been closed early, and that security forces were patrolling the town centre.
The curfew was lifted on Nov. 9.
Incidents of violence in different places and four small bomb explosions at locations in Tema and Accra were reported in the ensuing days, and an obscure note sent to the Ghana News Agency indicated that the bombings were part of a campaign to overthrow Rawlings and his ruling Provisional National Defence Council (PNDC).
On Nov. 10 a police statement said that "all sensitive install-ations" in the country had been put under 24-hour guard.
The four opposition parties announced on Nov. 13 that they were withdrawing from the parliamentary elections set for Dec. 8 in protest at the failure of their demand for a new voters' register.
On Nov. 20, Ghana Broadcasting Corporation reported that the parliamentary elections had been postponed until Dec. 22; the report quoted Mr Justice Ofori-Boateng as saying that as a result of the withdrawal of the four parties, 38 constituencies had been left with only one candidate each.
The extension was to allow time for fresh nominations.
AFRICA
LIBERIA
Intense fighting around Monrovia
As rebel fighters of Charles Taylor's National Patriotic Front of Liberia (NPFL) tightened their grip on Monrovia, the city's Spriggs Payne airport was temporarily closed by mortar fire on Oct. 31, increasing the isolation of the 700,000 inhabitants of the capital, already completely cut off by land [see p. 39131].
NPFL gunners attacked just as a Nigerian air force Okada aircraft was about to land with 100 peacekeeping troops on board, reinforcements for the 9,000-strong Nigerian-led Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) Monitoring Group (ECOMOG).
Fighting around Monrovia intensified between the NPFL and ECOMOG in the ensuing 48 hours.
Support for ECOMOG forces came from the remnants of Liberia's former national army, militias loyal to interim President Amos Sawyer, guerrillas of the Sierra Leone-based United Liberation Movement for Democracy (ULIMO)[see pp. 39041-42]and tribal supporters of the murdered President, Samuel Doe.
Further Nigerian reinforcements and 500 Ghanaian soldiers had arrived by Nov. 3.
Three weeks of fighting around Monrovia since the start of the latest rebel attacks [see p. 39131]had killed 3,000 people and wounded 8,000, a World Health Organization (WHO) official was quoted as saying on Nov. 3.
The Office of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) was reported to see little hope of repatriating some 95,000 Sierra Leonean refugees trapped in northern Liberia by the latest intensification of the war.
Five American nuns were reported on Nov. 1 to have been shot dead after disappearing between Oct. 20 and 22 in areas of Monrovia then controlled by Taylor's forces.
On Nov. 7 it was widely reported that Nigerian Alpha jets had bombed NPFL positions in the Monrovia suburbs of Gardnersville, Mount Barclay and Stockton Creek the previous day, and had also attacked areas close to the rebel headquarters at Gbarnga, 160 km north of Monrovia on Nov. 5.
Troops of the 1,500-strong Senegalese ECOMOG contingent were said to be holding off NPFL guerrillas attacking a strategic bridge 7 km north of central Monrovia.
Violation of ceasefire — Flight of Taylor
Seven ECOWAS heads of state — of Benin, Burkina, Côte d'Ivoire, Ghana, Guinea, Nigeria and Togo — meeting in Abuja, Nigeria, on Nov. 7, called for a ceasefire from midnight on Nov. 10, giving ECOMOG carte blanche to impose it by force.
The determining factor in rallying some francophone countries' previously hesitant support for this hardline Nigerian approach, according to observers, had been the US State Department's decision to withdraw the US ambassador to Burkina after a strong protest at that country's alleged military aid to Taylor.
Taylor was reported to have ordered his forces to begin a ceasefire unilaterally from noon on Nov. 10, 12 hours before the ECOWAS ceasefire was to come into force.
However, reports said that NPFL fighters had only intensified their fire, and by the following day full-scale fighting was going on, with Nigerian jets, artillery and warships attacking rebel positions.
An all-out attack on NPFL positions was reported as imminent.
On Nov. 17, Reuters news agency reported that Taylor had fled Liberia, fearing imminent attack.
ELBC radio (Monrovia) said that he had been seen at Man in Côte d'Ivoire, landing aboard a Cessna light aircraft with relatives, en route for Burkina.
The same day, Burkina denied that its forces were fighting alongside the NPFL.
On Nov. 20 the UN Security Council passed a unanimous resolution imposing a mandatory arms embargo on Liberia, giving broad support to the ECOWAS action, and authorizing the UN Secretary-General to send a special representative to the country.
AFRICA
CHAD
Developments in peace process
The rebel Movement for Democracy and Development (MDD) announced on Oct. 30 that it was repudiating reconciliation agreements which it had signed with the government in Libreville, Gabon, on June 24 [see pp. 38952; 39132].
The MDD accused President Idriss Déby of obtaining arms and ammunition from Libya so as to pursue a military solution and to delay holding the promised sovereign National Conference, set for Jan. 15, 1993.
On Nov. 18 it was reported that Chadian National Front (FNT) fighters had handed over their weapons to the Sudanese authorities on the border under a reconciliation agreement with the Déby government.
AFRICA
SUDAN
Confusion over situation in south
Reports of fighting in the strategic southern town of Malakal, the capital of Upper Nile province, which had been reported in late October as clashes between the rebel Sudan People's Liberation Army (SPLA) and government forces [see p. 39132], were confused by conflicting accounts during November.
According to earlier reports Malakal had fallen to the SPLA's Nasir faction loyal to Riek Nachar and a rival of the SPLA's Torit faction loyal to Col. John Garang, displacing an estimated 180,000 people.
Observers said that if the Nasir faction had indeed taken Malakal, this was a major setback for the government in its campaign to hold the south, since the town had contained a substantial arsenal of weapons.
As of late November the Nasir group still claimed to control Malakal, whereas the government account stated that the town had been attacked abortively by a group led by a local religious leader, and Garang's wing of the SPLA was said to be claiming that the town had been captured by "southern nationalists" within the army, aided by the southern rebel faction calling itself Anyanya II.
On Nov. 7 a government spokesman in Khartoum complained that splits in the SPLA would make it difficult to resume the Nigerian-mediated Abuja peace negotiations which were due to take place in December [see pp. 38901; 38952 for previous peace talks].
Killing of UN employees — Resumption of flights
A Sudanese senior local official of the UN Development Programme (UNDP) in Juba and a UNDP driver, reported missing during October [see p. 39132], were apparently judged and executed by the Khartoum authorities, according to an Agence France-Presse report on Nov. 6.
It was reported on Nov. 13 that the UN was to resume relief flights to Juba where hundreds of thousands of people remained trapped by fighting.
AFRICA
ETHIOPIA
Reports of widespread anti-government activity
Government forces had arrested 734 "bandits" operating in the Gojjam area of north-western Ethiopia and a further 112 in the Wollo area in the north, according to Voice of Ethiopia on Nov. 14.
On Nov. 22 the radio station said that people in the Bale administrative area of south-eastern Ethiopia had declared their readiness to join pro-government forces in fighting "anti-peace forces" there.
A barrage of anti-government broadcasts in the Amharic language on Voice of Ethiopian Patriotism radio throughout November asserted that the combined Ethiopian People's Revolutionary Democratic Front (EPRDF) and Tigray People's Liberation Front (TPLF) government forces were suffering reverses in several areas.
The radio claimed losses by government forces in the north-west, and said that fighting was now going on in five areas, mainly in Amharic-speaking central, north and north-west Ethiopia, as well as in the south and in the Ogaden area of the south-east.
Announcement of Eritrean referendum date
Voice of the Broad Masses of Eritrea radio announced from Asmara on Nov. 4 that a planned referendum on independence for the northern Ethiopian province of Eritrea would take place over three days from April 23 to 25, 1993 [see pp. 38855; 39085].
AFRICA
DJIBOUTI
Postponement of elections
The multiparty general election scheduled for Nov. 20 was postponed until Dec. 18 by a presidential decree of Oct. 17.
Only two of the five parties which applied for registration had been accepted — the ruling Popular Rally for Progress (RPP), and the Democratic Renewal Party (PRD).
The rebel Front for the Restoration of Unity and Democracy (FRUD) and other parties grouped in the United Opposition Front (FUO)[see p. 39042], were not registered.
Returning from Paris on Nov. 5 after talks with President François Mitterrand, President Hassan Gouled Aptidon proposed peace talks with the FRUD on Nov. 20, but these were then cancelled, the government demanding that the Front release prisoners first.
AFRICA
SOMALIA
US offer of military intervention
As the suffering of Somalia's famine victims continued, the US administration was reported on Nov. 27 to have offered 30,000 troops to a proposed UN military intervention force to protect food aid from gangs of gunmen.
The unexpected US offer was reported to have been approved by President George Bush at a National Security Council meeting and presented to the UN Secretary-General, Boutros Boutros-Ghali, by the acting US Secretary of State, Lawrence Eagleburger, late on Nov. 25.
The UN Security Council had previously approved the sending of 3,500 troops, of whom only 500 had arrived, and some reports had suggested that the Council intended to raise the number to 4,200 [see pp. 39132-33].
The UN Security Council was reported at a closed session on Nov. 25 to have accepted the conclusions of a report by Boutros-Ghali which described existing UN policy in Somalia as untenable in view of the looting of up to 80 per cent of aid and attacks on relief workers, as well as the shelling by armed groups on Nov. 24 of a UN-chartered grain ship approaching Mogadishu harbour.
On Nov. 27 it was reported that the US State Department had expressed US willingness to airlift 3,000 UN troops from Belgium, Canada and Egypt once the UN gave approval for their deployment.
UN officials had reportedly been negotiating with Somali clan leaders to obtain approval for the troops' dispatch.
Reactions in Somalia
In Mogadishu on Nov. 27 Gen. Mohammed Farah Aydid, leader of the Somali National Alliance (SNA) which claimed control of two-thirds of the capital and most of southern Somalia, was said to have welcomed the US offer.
 "We believe the American move will solve our political, economic and social problems," he was quoted as saying.
Aid workers in Somalia, including those with UN agencies, were widely reported to have been dismayed by the prospect of a US-led military intervention.
Relief organizations were reported to have said that they would pull out of Somalia while any such deployment took place.
Continuing security problems
Amid continuing reports of gunfights and general insecurity in the capital, UN troops were reported on Nov. 10 to have secured Mogadishu airport and main runway, by agreement with the clan which had been controlling it.
Aydid's office criticized the UN move which, it was asserted, had been made without the permission of the SNA or of the allied United Somali Congress (USC).
On Nov. 15 Radio Mogadishu reported that a large crowd of pro-Aydid demonstrators had marched on the UN office to denounce "foreign interference" .
The airport was again reported closed on Nov. 22, with gunmen demanding payment to allow relief flights to land.
A spokeswoman for the US relief agency Care said on Nov. 12 that as many as 40 people might have died in a gunfight between guards and gunmen who ambushed a convoy of trucks heading for Baidoa north-west of Mogadishu laden with grain for starving people, forcing all but one truck to turn back.
A French warship was reported to have provided food and water to an estimated 2,500-3,000 desperate Somali refugees aboard a cargo vessel which had entered the Yemeni port of Mukalla on Nov. 16 after completing a five-day 2,000-km journey without food or water.
The vessel was reported to have travelled on to Aden where, according to a UNHCR official, some 62,000 Somali refugees were housed in camps.
Gunmen were reported to have boarded a UN relief plane at Kismayu, southern Somalia, on Nov. 23 and robbed the passengers and crew.
New UN envoy
The UN Secretary-General's newly appointed special representative in Somalia, Ismat Kittani of Iraq, arrived in Mogadishu on Nov 8, replacing Mohamed Sahnoun who had resigned amid controversy on Oct. 27 [see p 39133].
AFRICA
KENYA
Announcement of elections
President Daniel arap Moi ended weeks of speculation on Nov. 3 by setting Dec. 7 as the date for Kenya's first multiparty legislative elections for 26 years.
The chairman of the National Electoral Commission (NEC), Mr Justice Zakayo Chesoni, said that parliamentary and presidential nominations would have to be made by Nov. 14.
On Nov. 12 however, the High Court in Nairobi granted a request by a faction of the opposition Forum for the Restoration of Democracy (FORD), FORD-Kenya [see p. 39133], for more time in which to nominate parliamentary candidates, criticizing the government for attempting to shorten the statutory 21-day nomination period, and on Nov. 16 the NEC announced a new election date of Dec. 29.
Attorney General Amos Wako announced the same day that political parties would not be required to obtain licences to hold rallies during the election campaign, and that all parties would be allocated equal air time on national radio and television.
Before the High Court ruling, opposition parties had been reported as considering a boycott, amid allegations that Moi's Kenya African National Union (KANU) was attempting to rig the elections.
Jaramogi Oginga Odinga, FORD-Kenya's presidential candidate, was quoted as saying that the High Court decision had exposed "mischief" by the government.
Observers were said to be surprised at the decision to hold elections during the Christmas holiday period, when most Kenyans with jobs in cities would have returned to their rural homes in areas where they had not necessarily registered to vote.
It was announced on Nov. 17 that Kenneth Matiba had been elected by the FORD-Asili faction as its presidential candidate.
Dismissal of minister
The dismissal of the Lands and Housing Minister, Darius Mbela, with immediate effect, was reported on Nov. 18.
AFRICA
MALAWI
Banning of Aford
The opposition pressure group Alliance for Democracy (Aford) founded in September [see p. 39086]said on Nov. 7 that it had been banned by the government.
Citing a statement issued by the Health Minister Pitakuti Ntaba which declared membership of the organization illegal, Aford demanded that "Ntaba clearly state the circumstances under which Aford had been outlawed" .
Controversy over Chirwa death
The government on Nov. 9 released details of a post-mortem attributing the death in custody of former prominent politician Orton Chirwa [see p. 39133], to "extensive cancer of the prostate glands and chronic infection of the kidneys" , and repudiating opposition claims that he had been strangled.
Earlier that day exiled members of Chirwa's family had announced in Lusaka, Zambia, that they would sue the government over his death.
Deaths outside Chihana trial court
Two people were beaten to death, allegedly by members of the ruling Malawi Congress Party's Young Pioneers, outside a court in Blantyre hearing sedition charges against the trade unionist Chakufwa Chihana on Nov. 11 [see p. 39133].
A total of seven people were reported so far to have been killed in similar circumstances.
AFRICA
MADAGASCAR
Presidential elections
A first round of presidential elections on Nov. 25 left Albert Zafy just short of an overall majority, according to the almost complete results available by early December.
Zafy, standing as candidate for the Comité des forces vives against the incumbent President Didier Ratsiraka, took 45.77 per cent of the votes, while 29 per cent went to Ratsiraka, 10.04 per cent to Manandafy Rakotonirina of the Movement for Proletarian Power (MFM) and between 2 and 4 per cent each to five other candidates.
The election was the first to be called under the new Constitution, ratified by a popular referendum in August [see p. 39042], which reduced the power of the president.
Up to the time of voting Ratsiraka had not accepted the new conditions of the Constitution; his federalist supporters nevertheless agreed to participate in the elections.
The conduct of the polls was peaceful, but the first round failed to resolve the political and constitutional crisis or to revive confidence in the economy.
Ratsiraka's support was strongest in the town of Toamasina while Zafy took more than 60 per cent of the votes in both Antananarivo, the capital, and Antsiranana.
Commentators noted that some of the unsuccessful presidential candidates in the first round were likely to lend support to Ratsiraka in the second round, due to take place in January.
The candidate who took third place in the first round, however, Manandafy Rakotonirina, was expected to stand down in favour of Zafy.
Much interest focused on the attitude of interim Prime Minister Guy Razanamasy, who in the first round had supported the veteran nationalist Jacques Rabemananjara rather than Zafy.
AFRICA
COMOROS
Legislative elections
The first multiparty general election since independence in 1975 took place on Nov. 22, with a second round on Nov. 29 in 34 constituencies where no candidates were elected in the first round.
Violence and disruption occurred during both rounds.
The republic's 245,000 registered voters were to elect deputies to the 42-seat Federal Assembly from 320 candidates representing 21 parties.
The opposition Udzima (Union for Progress) and the National Union for Democracy in the Comoros (UNDC) had called on other opposition parties to join a boycott, protesting at the government's failure to update voting lists, as well as the detention of some opposition figures, "the terror exercised by the army and the financial scandal involving President Said Mohammed Djohar" .
During the first round, Agence France-Presse reported, bands of youths set fire to ballot boxes and wrecked polling stations, with the worst incidents reported in Moroni, the capital, and Mbeni on the east coast of Grande Comore island.
Results were cancelled by the electoral commission in both places, where new elections were expected to be organized during December.
AFRICA
SEYCHELLES
Rejection of draft constitution
A draft constitution, prepared by a commission consisting of a majority of members drawn from the ruling Seychelles People's Progressive Front (SPPF), failed to win approval by the necessary 60 per cent majority in a referendum held on Nov. 15.
Results showed 53.7 per cent of votes in favour and 44.6 per cent against.
Turnout was lower than for general election held in July [see p. 38996].
Opposition groups led by the Democratic Party, which had boycotted the final sessions of the constitutional commission, had called for a "no" vote, saying that the constitution would perpetuate one-party rule by the SPPF.
The influential Roman Catholic Church also opposed the draft constitution on the grounds that it permitted abortion.
Subsequent reports indicated that opposition parties had questioned the draft constitution's stipulation that national assembly seats allocated by proportional representation (half of the total, the rest being elected on a constituency basis by majority vote) should be based on presidential election results, thus effectively guaranteeing the president a favourable majority in the assembly.
AFRICA
CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC
Following the cancellation of the October elections, President André Kolingba on Nov. 28 announced that fresh legislative and presidential elections would be held respectively on Feb. 14 and Feb. 25, 1993.
AFRICA
GUINEA-BISSAU
President Joao Bernardo Vieira on Nov. 4 announced the postponement until March 1993 of legislative and presidential elect-ions which had originally been scheduled for Nov. 15 and Dec. 13 respectively.
AFRICA
NAMIBIA
On Nov. 6 Justice Minister Ngarikutuke Tjiriange signed an agreement with his South African counterpart, Kobie Coetsee, providing for the secondment of South African judges to Namibia to serve on the Namibian bench; the agreement was hailed as a step towards increased co-operation among the judiciaries of southern African states.
AFRICA
NIGER
On Nov. 13 the government postponed the constitutional referendum (due on Nov. 28) to Dec. 26; the move was made at the request of all political parties following complaints that electoral lists were incomplete.
AMERICAS
UNITED STATES
Presidential veto of tax and urban aid bill
On Nov. 4 President George Bush vetoed a tax and urban aid bill which sought to raise US$27,000 million to finance aid to urban areas.
He signed the veto aboard Air Force One as he flew from Houston to Washington following his defeat in the presidential elections held on Nov. 3 [see pp. 39174-76].
The legislation, originally proposed as a long-term response to the May 1992 Los Angeles riots [see p. 38894]and the wider urban crisis, aimed to create 50 urban and rural enterprise zones.
Congress had given final approval to the bill on Oct. 8 [see p. 39136], but the fact that the package also included some three dozen minor tax increases made it highly unlikely that Bush would approve it during the election campaign.
House of Representatives and Senate Democratic leaders intentionally delayed sending the bill to the White House prior to the election after some Democrats and special-interest groups became convinced that Bush might sign the bill once free of campaign pressures.
Dan Rostenkowski, the Democrat chair of the House ways and means committee and a chief architect of the tax and urban aid package, described Bush's veto as "a sin" .
 "There are so many good things in that bill that the President recommended," Rostenkowski said, "but the grains of politics infiltrated the process." 
In a "memorandum of disapproval" , Bush defended his veto, claiming that "the original focus of the bill — to help revitalize America's inner cities — has been lost in a blizzard of special-interest pleadings" .
He went on to argue that the bill violated fiscal discipline and would have destroyed jobs and undermined small businesses.
Supreme Court ruling on medical malpractice awards in Missouri
The Supreme Court on Nov. 16 ruled to allow Missouri state to limit the amount of money paid to victims of medical malpractice.
The votes of four justices were required to grant a review of the case, but in the event only Justice Byron R. White voted to hear arguments.
The Supreme Court had previously left intact legislation aimed at limiting medical malpractice awards in California and Idaho.
The limit imposed by the state of Missouri on malpractice lawsuit awards had been challenged on behalf of a 13-year-old girl, Nicole Adams, who at the age of eight had been left blind and brain-damaged by an anaesthesia error during a skin graft operation.
In compensation, a jury had awarded Nicole US$2,200,000 in damages and a further US$5,300,000 in non-economic damages.
However, legislation introduced in Missouri in 1991 had limited non-economic damages in malpractice cases to US$430,000.
The Supreme Court ruled that the limit on non-economic damages did not violate either the US Constitution's guarantee of equal protection or the due-process requirement of the Missouri constitution.
Reinstatement of homosexual sailor
A naval officer, discharged in 1991 after publicly admitting that he was homosexual, was reinstated in mid-November.
The case increased pressure on President-elect Bill Clinton to rescind the ban on homosexual service members.
He had undertaken during his campaign to take this step, but was also believed to be under intense pressure from senior military personnel to reconsider this commitment.
On Nov. 16 Clinton declared that he would "firmly proceed…after consulting with military leaders" , but that he had no timetable.
Keith Meinhold, a 30-year old petty officer, had been honourably discharged from the navy in August 1991 after he had declared his homosexuality on ABC's World News Tonight in May.
Meinhold filed suit against the navy for reinstatement and on Nov. 6 a federal judge in California granted a preliminary injunction against Meinhold's discharge, ordering the navy to reinstate him.
Meinhold returned to his former base at Moffett Field Naval Air Station near San José on Nov. 9 but was refused entry.
In a ruling on Nov. 10 the federal judge threatened to hold the navy in contempt for refusing his earlier order to reinstate Meinhold, who was formally sworn back into service on Nov. 12.
The New York Times of Nov. 19 reported that the Naval Reserve Officers Training Corps had recently issued a new ruling requiring all its graduates to sign an affidavit saying that they were liable to be discharged and forced to pay back their scholarship if they were discovered to be homosexual.
In brief A curfew imposed in parts of Florida in late August in the aftermath of Hurricane Andrew [see pp. 39044; 39088]was finally lifted on Nov. 16; two days earlier the National Guard had shut down post-hurricane operations in the state.
At least 24 people died and 300 were injured after a series of tornadoes and storms ripped across Texas, Louisiana, Mississippi, Alabama, Georgia, Tennessee and Kentucky on Nov. 21-22.
AMERICAS
CANADA
Referendum approval for creation of Nunavut
A referendum was held on Nov. 3-5 among the Inuit people in northern Canada on the proposed establishment of Nunavut, a huge semi-autonomous Inuit territory to be carved from the eastern reaches of the Northwest Territories.
The result of the poll, released on Nov. 12, indicated that 69 per cent of the 8,000 who voted had endorsed the Nunavut political accord.
The proposed creation of Nunavut, the largest aboriginal land settlement in Canadian history, followed an agreement reached in principle in 1991 [see pp. 38221-22; 38669].
The final details were negotiated in 1992, and the Nunavut political accord was eventually signed by the federal Minister of Indian Affairs and Northern Development, Thomas Siddon, the Minister for Inter-governmental and Aboriginal Affairs in the government of the Northwest Territories, Stephen Kakfui, and the acting president of the Tungavik Federation of Nunavut (TFN), James Eetooklook.
Under the terms of the accord, the referendum was the first step in a process of transition which would lead to the establishment of the semi-autonomous Nunavut government and territory by April 1999.
Legislation approving the move was expected to be presented to the Federal Parliament in 1993, and a 10-member implementation commission, to be appointed by the three signatories of the accord, was due to be created in order to oversee the transition process.
The total land area affected by the accord was estimated at up to 2,000,000 sq km, some 20 per cent of Canada's total land mass, stretching from the borders of Manitoba to the North Pole.
Within this region up to 350,000 sq km would be owned outright by its Inuit inhabitants, thereby making them the largest private landlords in the world.
Erratum: Results of Charlottetown referendum
In the table on p. 39126 figures from two columns of data were inadvertently run together; the table should have read as follows.
Province Area (sq.
miles) Pop.
(1991) Ag. % For % Alberta 255,285 2,545,553 60.0 40.0 British Columbia 365,946 3,282,061 68.0 32.0 Manitoba 250,946 1,091,942 62.0 38.0 New Brunswick 28,355 723,900 38.0 61.0 Newfoundland 156,648 568,474 37.0 63.0 Nova Scotia 21,425 899,942 51.0 49.0 Ontario 412,579 10,084,885 49.6 49.8 Prince Edward Island 2,185 129,765 26.0 74.0 Quebec 594,857 6,895,963 55.0 42.0 Saskatchewan Territory 251,865 988,928 55.0 45.0 Northwest Territories 1,322,902 57,649 39.0 60.0 Yukon Territory 186,660 27,797 56.0 43.0
AMERICAS
MEXICO
Prospects of electoral reform
President Carlos Salinas de Gortari, in his fourth state of the nation address broadcast on Nov. 1, made several indirect references to opposition party claims that state elections held during the year had been tainted by fraud, allegedly perpetrated by the ruling Institutional Revolutionary Party (PRI).
He went on to propose that sources of party financing should in future be made public, that limits should be placed on electoral expenses and that procedures should be agreed to guarantee the impartiality of the media.
The speech was seen by critics as designed principally for its impact on the incoming United States administration of President-elect Bill Clinton and the new US Congress.
By emphasising its commitment to political reform, the Mexican government hoped to avert US criticisms which might delay the ratification of the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA — see pp. 39045-46)."
State elections
With a round of state elections taking place on Nov. 8, Salinas's apparent acknowledgement of the electoral fraud issue stimulated rather than placated opposition protests (as had been the case on those recent occasions when Salinas had been seen to intervene to remove victorious PRI candidates accused of gross electoral fraud — see pp. 38385; 38524; 38716; 38905; 39136).
PRI victories in the gubernatorial elections held in the northern states of Tamaulipas and Sinaloa and the central state of Puebla were fiercely disputed.
In concurrent municipal elections in the state of Oaxaca, the State Electoral Institute suspended polling in four towns following violent clashes between PRI supporters and those of the opposition Party of the Democratic Revolution (PDR).
AMERICAS
CUBA
Agreement with Russia
Top-level talks in Moscow on Nov. 3-4 produced the most important agreement between Cuba and Russia since the break-up of the former Soviet Union.
The agreement was signed by a Cuban Vice-President of the Council of Ministers, Lionel Soto Prieto, and Russia's Deputy Prime Minister with responsibility for Foreign Economic Relations and Social Policy Aleksandr Shokhin.
It provided for (i) the barter, on the basis of world prices, of 1,000,000 tonnes of Cuban raw sugar for 1,600,000 tonnes of Russian oil in 1993;(ii) the preservation of Russia's radio-electronic centre in Cuba, primarily to facilitate diplomatic traffic to North America and with its intelligence functions "minimized" ;(iii) the supply of Russian components and spare parts for existing Cuban weapons but an end to the export of new types of Russian weapons; and (iv) the resumption of the construction of the Cuban Juraga nuclear power plant halted in September [see p. 39090], on the condition that the involvement of a third partner (possibly France) be agreed by Feb. 1, 1993.
The issues of the future of the Russian submarine base at Cienfuegos and of Cuban debts to Russia (variously calculated at between US$16,000 million and US$20,000 million) were reportedly not discussed.
UN vote condemning US trade embargo
The UN General Assembly on Nov. 25 approved a resolution condemning the US trade embargo against Cuba, tightened in October [see pp. 39136-37], which, it stated, was totally counterproductive, ran counter to the spirit of international co-operation and was an affront to human rights.
AMERICAS
GUATEMALA
Ratification of Belize accord
The Supreme Court on Nov. 10 ruled by four votes to three in favour of the constitutionality of President Jorge Serrano Elias's September 1991 decision to recognize and establish diplomatic relations with neighbouring Belize [see p. 38432].
Congress voted on Nov. 26 by 78 votes to 24 to ratify the decision.
In a television address on Nov. 14 Serrano stated that recognition was not a "definitive agreement" and that Guatemala would maintain its 130-year territorial claim over Belize until the matter was finally resolved by the International Court of Justice (ICJ) at The Hague or was put to an arbiter.
He pledged that any final agreement would be subject to a referendum.
The issue, which had allowed successive governments to mobilize national sentiment, had surfaced at a time when Serrano's popularity ratings were at an all-time low.
His government was accused of failure to ease chronic poverty or to prevent human rights abuses by the army and army-backed paramilitaries.
Serrano and his family were also accused of corruption — accusations backed by former close colleagues, the former Health Minister Miguel Angel Montepeque Contreras and the former governor of the province of Izabal, Lilian Váquez.
Attacks on Indian activists
The Madrid daily El País of Nov. 30 reported that in the previous week gunmen forced the wife of Indian leader Almílcar Méndez to participate in a demonstration against her husband.
They also attacked the headquarters of the National Federation of Widows of Guatemala, closely linked to the 1992 Nobel Peace Prize winner Rigoberta Menchu [see p. 39140], stealing documents connecting the military to attacks on Indian villages.
AMERICAS
EL SALVADOR
Coup rumours — Restored timetable for demobilization
Claiming to have uncovered details of plans for an imminent military coup, the left-wing Farabundo Martí National Liberation Front (FMLN) stated on Nov. 27 that it had placed its remaining guerrilla forces (an estimated 3,000 not yet demobilized) on full alert.
President Alfredo Cristiani Burkard, however, dismissed the FMLN's claim, reaffirming that the army supported the UN peace process initiated in January 1992 to end the 12-year civil war [see p. 38716].
Earlier in the month there had been official denials of allegations of a coup plan which had been reportedly made on Nov. 5 in Washington by Eduardo Molina Olivares, a member of the independent Truth Commission charged under the peace process with ascertaining responsibility for human rights abuses.
Cristiani had come under pressure in late October from right-wing elements in his own Nationalist Republican Alliance (Arena) party and the military to slow down the peace process [see p. 39137], but his government also came under intense diplomatic pressure at the UN to keep to Dec. 15 as the date for the formal cessation of hostilities.
In discussions with the FMLN on Nov. 7-8, the government gave a commitment to continue with a purge of 110 military officers accused of human rights abuses [ibid.], and to dismantle three elite military battalions — the Atlacatl on Dec. 8 and the Atonal and Arce on Jan. 7 — in return for the FMLN beginning to destroy its weapons, under UN supervision, on Dec. 1 [for evolution of peace process see pp. 38569-70; 38672; 38716; 38759; 38906; 39137].
AMERICAS
PANAMA
Referendum defeat for Endara
President Guillermo Endara Gallimany suffered a humiliating defeat in a referendum on Nov. 15 which had been intended to strengthen his government's credibility.
The referendum was monitored by 12,000 members of the security forces, 490 delegates from the Catholic Church, 50 international observers and 300 foreign journalists, and was considered the cleanest and most peaceful poll ever held in Panama, but was marked by a high abstention rate (the turnout was only slightly over 40 per cent).
The results, as given in the Central American Report of Nov. 20, were a 64 per cent vote against the government and 31 per cent in favour.
Voters thus rejected 58 assorted reforms, principal among which were the constitutional abolition of the armed forces and the elimination of all references to the military's role in the life of the nation, an increase from six to 11 in the number of years of compulsory education, the creation of the office of ombudsman, and a curtailment of the auditing department's powers to review government spending.
Opposition parties repeated their call for the election of a national constituent assembly to draw up a new constitution.
The no vote and mass abstentions, they claimed, represented a rejection of the government on the grounds that the proposed reforms offered no solution to Panama's critical economic and social problems.
The opposition also emphasized that the referendum failed to address the issue of the 10,000 US troops stationed in the Panama canal zone and the need to provide for the future security of the canal when it came under complete Panamanian control at the turn of the century.
In December 1991 the Legislative Assembly had sanctioned constitutional changes allowing for the abolition of the army [see p. 38672].
It remained unclear to many analysts, however, whether the "no" vote was a rejection of demilitarization, or the expression of general uncertainty about the preservation of national sovereignty, given that Endara owed his installation in office to the December 1989 US military invasion of the country [see pp. 37112-13]and that his government was widely considered to be subservient to US interests in the region.
AMERICAS
SURINAM
Resignation of Bouterse
Lt.-Col. Désiré "Desi" Bouterse on Nov. 20 resigned as C.-in-C. of the Army, Early reports suggested that he had opposed a government decision to commemorate the deaths of 15 people murdered by the army in December 1982 [see pp. 31950-51].
The author of two military coups in 1980 and 1990 [see pp. 30506-07; 37912-13], Bouterse was long suspected of deep involvement in drug trafficking.
In September and November 1991 the new coalition New Front for Democracy and Development (NF) government had announced plans to reform the constitution to bar the army from involvement in party politics, and had stated that it would assist international efforts to investigate the army's involvement in drug production and trafficking, money laundering and gun running [see p. 38432].
AMERICAS
VENEZUELA
Coup attempt
In the second coup attempt of the year, dissident members of the military on Nov. 27 seized important air force bases — the Libertador base in Maracay, west of the capital, Caracas, and the Francisco de Miranda base in eastern Caracas — as well as La Carlota military and commuter airfield.
Rebel jets bombed the Miraflores presidential palace, police stations, and other key installations.
Reportedly involved in the coup attempt were elements of the air force, navy, National Guard and, to a small extent, the army.
From captured government-owned television and radio stations in the capital, the rebels appealed to Venezuelans to join the rebellion against what they claimed was a corrupt government which had benefited a narrow elite at the expense of growing poverty among the population.
They also broadcast a video-recorded speech by Lt.-Col. Hugo Chávez Frías, leader of the Feb. 4 rebellion [see pp. 38759-60], who had previously made renewed coup threats in media interviews from prison while awaiting trial [see p. 39048].
According to reports most Venezuelans did not heed their call, although hundreds of civilians, some armed and hooded, marched towards the Miraflores palace to be driven back by tear gas.
Others took to the streets or banged saucepans from their balconies in support of the uprising.
The secretary-general of the opposition Social Christian party, COPEI, Eduardo Fernández, condemned the coup attempt, although he expressed dissatisfaction with the government and the current limitations in the operation of democracy.
In televised speeches to the country, President Carlos Andrés Pérez said that the coup attempt had been instigated by rebel officers from the Bolivarian Revolutionary Movement (MBR-200) supporting Lt.-Col. Chávez, and by a number of small left-wing groups, including Bandera Roja ( "Red Flag" ) and Tercer Camino ( "Third Way" ), headed by Douglas Bravo, who had been active as a guerrilla in the 1960s.
Fighting continued into a second day, with the presidential palace again coming under fire from the air and from snipers, despite presidential assurances to the country that the situation was under control.
Forces loyal to the government finally recaptured the bases, however, and by Nov. 29, with a state of emergency in force and the Constitution suspended, order had been restored as heavily armed troops and police patrolled the streets.
A curfew was imposed and news broadcasts by Radio Rumbos, the largest network, were suspended.
On Nov. 29 the Defence Minister, Gen. Iván Jiménez Sánchez, reported that 142 civilians and 27 members of the armed forces had been killed.
He identified 10 senior members of the armed forces as being behind the coup attempt, including two rear admirals — Hernán Gruber Odreman and Luis Cabrera Aguirre
— and Brig. -Gen.
Francisco Visconti of the Air Force.
Some 1,300 participants in the uprising had been arrested.
The Governor of Caracas, Antonio Ledezma, reported that 100 prisoners had been killed and 200 injured at the Catia prison in western Caracas, after troops quashed a mass escape attempt sparked by the coup.
In a national address on Nov. 29 Pérez, while acknowledging that government mistakes had been made, claimed that the process of economic austerity and reform had been necessary.
He rejected calls by opposition politicians and the press for him to step down, and insisted that state and local elections scheduled for Dec. 6 would go ahead as planned, without a provision for voting on a reduction of his presidential term.
(On Nov. 4 the Senate had approved, against the opposition of the ruling Democratic Action (AD) party, the inclusion of such a referendum in the regional polls.)
Pérez also announced that he would not be attending the summit of the Rio Group of Latin American countries in Buenos Aires due to begin on Dec. 1.
The Rio Group, along with a special meeting of the Organization of American States, had condemned the coup attempt in a statement issued on Nov 27.
On Nov. 30 a diplomatic disagreement loomed with Peru when President Alberto Fujimori granted political asylum to 93 Venezuelan soldiers, including Brig. -Gen.
Visconti, who had taken part in the Venezuelan coup attempt.
AMERICAS
COLOMBIA
State of emergency
Under growing pressure from Congress and the business community, President César Gaviria Trujillo declared a 90-day nationwide state of emergency on Nov. 8, allegedly to curb a wave of violence by left-wing guerrillas and drug traffickers.
On Nov. 7 guerrillas from the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) had killed 26 policeman protecting an installation belonging the state oil company Ecopetrol in the southern intendency of Putumayo.
The attack formed part of an intensifying offensive by the forces grouped in the Simón Bolívar National Guerrilla Co-ordinating Board (CNGSB), following government refusal to resume stalled peace talks [see pp. 38809; 39138].
A total of 33 attacks took place throughout Colombia on that day.
On Nov. 6 insurgents had also bombed the Caño Limón-Covenas oil pipeline in the Norte de Santander department and attacked 12 banks and two police stations in Bogotá, the capital.
Drug traffickers had also killed more than 20 police officers in separate incidents over the previous 10 days, in retaliation for the October death of Brance Muñoz Mosquera, believed to be the Medellín drug cartel's military commander [see p. 39138].
According to reports, the cartel's escaped leader, Pablo Escobar, was paying a bounty for each policeman killed.
As part of the emergency measures the government decreed a ban on all contact with the guerrillas by local and provincial government officials.
Similarly, a ban was imposed on media coverage of statements by guerrillas or drug traffickers, with the threat of suspension or the cancellation of licences in cases of violation.
Television stations would be expected to broadcast photographs of guerrilla leaders with offers of rewards for information.
Also prohibited was payment of ransom or protection money to the guerrillas by farmers and businesspeople; companies proved to have paid such money would lose their operating licences.
Properties and bank accounts used for laundering guerrilla funds would be confiscated, with bank secrecy laws lifted in order to facilitate investigation.
The first targets would reportedly be six coal mines, a gold mine and several agricultural enterprises controlled by the National Liberation Army (ELN).
Oil royalties in the Arauca, Putumayo and Casanare intendencies would be directly administered by the government, in order to prevent them from falling into rebel hands.
At the same time the formation of new anti-guerrilla units and increased spending on security institutions were announced.
Despite the emergency measures bombs exploded in the cities of Medellín and Cali on Nov. 11, killing one person and wounding 35.
In a letter published in the Bogotá daily El Tiempo on Nov. 22, some 50 prominent academics, artists and journalists, including the famous writer Gabriel García Márquez, called on the CNGSB to search for political solutions to the country's problems.
The CNGSB's armed action, the appeal said, had created a "climate of political and ideological confusion" .
Military reshuffle
On Nov. 12 the government announced that it had accepted the resignation of the three most senior commanders of the armed forces, while insisting that the reshuffle was part of routine annual promotions and that there was no question of disagreement with the military over the handling of the anti-guerrilla crackdown.
Resigning were Gen. Jaime Forero Quiñonez, commander of the air force and acting commander of the armed forces, Gen. Manuel Alberto Murillo González, commander of the army, and Adml.
Gustavo Angel Mejía, commander of the navy.
The deputy army and navy commanders also tendered their posts.
Appointed were Maj.-Gen.
Ramón Emilio Gil Bermúdez (commander of the armed forces), Maj.-Gen.
Hernán José Guzmán Rodríguez (commander of the army), Vice-Adml.
Hernando García Ramírez (commander of the navy), and Brig. -Gen.
Alfonso Abondano Alzamora (commander of the air force).
Maj.-Gen.
Luis Alberto Rodríguez Rodríguez replaced Gen. Farouk Yanine Díaz as chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
Withdrawal of M-19 from government
On Nov. 24 the April 19 Movement (M-19), the former guerrilla movement, withdrew from the Gaviria government.
The move, involving the resignation of Health Minister Gustavo Roux and 350 less senior officials, came after President Gaviria rejected M-19's plea for a ceasefire with the guerrillas.
Protesting at the hardening of the government's position, the M-19 called for UN intervention to stop further bloodshed in the country.
New Health Minister
Juan Luis Londono was appointed new Health Minister on Nov. 28.
AMERICAS
PERU
Legislative elections
In elections on Nov. 22, parties supporting President Alberto Keinya Fujimori won some 38 per cent of the vote, thus achieving well below Fujimori's 70 per cent personal support rating in opinion polls following the capture of Sendero Luminoso leader Abimael Guzmán [for which see p. 39138], but nevertheless securing an absolute majority in the new Democratic Constituent Congress (CCD).
The CCD, with only 80 members, replaced the two-chamber Congress dissolved after Fujimori's military-backed presidential coup on April 5 which suspended the Constitution [see p. 38846].
It was charged with writing a new charter and would meanwhile perform legislative and monitoring functions.
Unofficial figures published by the Lima opinion research organization Apoyo recorded that 44 seats would go to the election coalition of Fujimori's Cambio 90 (Change 90) party and New Majority, a group of independents including former Cabinet ministers.
This pro-government list was headed by Jaime Yoshiyama Tanaka, Minister for Energy and Mines until September and head of the government's privatization office, and, like Fujimori, of Japanese origin.
The centre-left American Popular Revolutionary Alliance (APRA — whose leader, former President Alan García, was in exile in Colombia), despite internal divisions over the stance which it should take on the poll, called on its supporters to spoil their papers.
Some 22 per cent of those actually voting cast blank or deliberately spoiled ballot papers, a slightly higher figure than usual (voting was compulsory until the age of 60).
All the other main opposition parties except the conservative Popular Christian Party (PPC) boycotted the elections, arguing that the CCD would be an insubstantial body which would merely rubber-stamp presidential decisions.
The PPC won eight seats and 7.7 per cent of the vote; the Independent Moralising Front (FIM) won seven seats and 6.2 per cent; Renovation, led by Rafael Rey Rey, a member of the previous congress, won six seats and 5.5 per cent ; the Democratic Left Movement (MDI) won five seats and 4.8 per cent ; Democratic Co-ordination, led by José Barba Caballero, an APRA member of the previous congress, won four seats and 4.1 per cent ; and Solidarity and Democracy, the Popular Agricultural Front, the National Workers' and Peasants' Front (Frenatraca) and the Popular Agricultural Front each won two seats.
Voting for the 11,000,000 electorate was legally compulsory up to the age of 60.
The conduct of the elections met with the overall satisfaction of the Organization of American States (OAS), which had sent a mission at Fujimori's invitation to observe the poll [see p. 38908; 39804].
The US ambassador to the OAS hinted that foreign aid might be restored, while Japan signed an agreement in Lima immediately after the elections to unfreeze a US$100 million loan suspended after the April coup.
A further US$220 million loan from the Inter-American Development Bank, involving Japan, would also go ahead, pending publication of the final OAS report on the elections.
Tension before the elections was heightened by a wave of Sendero Luminoso bombings in Lima.
A 200-kg. car bomb-attack on Nov. 18 killed two people and wounded 10 in the Miraflores district, scene of a major bomb explosion in July [see p. 39002].
Sendero Luminoso also called for an "armed strike" on Nov. 18-20, but this reportedly caused little disruption and the elections proceeded in an atmosphere of relative calm, despite some bomb explosions as voting began.
Coup attempt prior to elections
In the run-up to the elections Fujimori sought to present himself to the public as the defender of democracy, claiming that opposition politicians had been behind a coup attempt on Nov. 13 aimed at preventing the CCD elections from taking place and restoring the 1979 Constitution.
Fujimori alleged that the plotters had intended to assassinate him, but the coup attempt fizzled out after widespread support failed to materialise and after senior officers apparently loyal to Fujimori sent armoured units to defend the presidential palace.
According to some press reports, Fujimori had taken refuge in the Japanese embassy.
According to official accounts of the events of Nov. 13, the conspiracy was organized by three retired army generals — Jaime Salinas Sedo, José Pastor Vives and Luis Palomino Rodríguez, who had served as heads of the military household during the previous García government.
Fujimori accused Gen. Salinas of having attempted to organize an unpublicised coup in July 1990 to prevent him from coming to office.
According to a statement received by the weekly Oiga, Salinas accepted responsibility for the coup attempt and declared that its aim had been to hand over the presidency to Máximo San Román Cáceres, Fujimori's dismissed First Vice-President named "constitutional president" by the dissolved Congress [see p. 38846].
According to a government communiqué after the coup attempt, Gen. Marcos Zarate Rota, the commander of the army, had also been involved in the conspiracy and was under investigation for drug trafficking.
In an interview on Nov. 18, Fujimori said that Gen. Palomino apparently had no direct responsibility in the events, but would nevertheless face proceedings in the military courts along with the other alleged conspirators.
The Chief of the Armed Forces' General Staff, Gen. José Valdivia Dueñas, had not been implicated, according to Fujimori, and would be reinstated in his post.
Some reports attributed the coup attempt to (i) Fujimori's announcement that the government would investigate US intelligence reports of military involvement in drug trafficking;(ii) grievances over low wages in the armed forces, and (iii) alleged interference in promotions by Fujimori and his security adviser, Vladimiro Montesinos.
The Defence Ministry had published a decree on Nov. 13 allowing senior officers to be retired "for reasons of renewal according to the needs of each institute" .
Montesinos, along with the commander of the armed forces, Gen. Nicolás de Bari Hermoza, was reportedly a target for abduction by the plotters.
AMERICAS
BOLIVIA
Resignation of Finance Minister
Finance Minister Jorge Quiroga Ramírez resigned on Nov. 10 to run the 1993 presidential campaign of Gen. (retd) Hugo Bánzer Suárez, leader of the Democratic Nationalist Action (ADN), a partner in the ruling coalition government.
President Jaime Paz Zamora, claiming that he did not want any confusion between "electoral campaigning and government work" , accepted the resignations of three other ADN ministers and one from the Left Revolutionary Front (FRI).
On Nov. 12 the following new ministers were appointed: Pablo Zegarra Arana (Finance); Olga Saavedra (Education and Culture); José Luis Lupo Flores (Information); Eusebio Girondo Cabrera (Labour and Labour Development); and Roberto Pena (Minister without Portfolio).
AMERICAS
CHILE
Letelier trial
After a 14-month investigation, two former heads of the DINA secret police under the previous military regime, Gen. (retd) Manuel Contreras and Col. Pedro Espinoza, were charged on Nov. 10 with the murder in 1976 of Orlando Letelier, a former Foreign and Defence Minister and ambassador to the United States under the 1970-1973 regime of Salvador Allende, and his associate Ronni Moffit.
Letelier and Moffit had been the victims of a car bomb in Washington, but Chile's Supreme Court had twice refused requests from the US government for the extradition of Contreras and Espinoza, and military courts had repeatedly refused to re-open proceedings against them.
Both now faced trial before a civilian court, the first trial for offences committed under the military regime since Chile's return to democracy in 1990 [for full background to the Letelier case see pp. 28273-74; 34989; 36097; 37709; 37914; 38719].
The remains of Letelier were returned on Nov. 4 from Venezuela to the Chilean capital, Santiago, where they were buried in the central cemetery following a state funeral attended by President Patricio Aylwin Azócar and his entire Cabinet.
Dropping of charges against former junta member — Closure of Church human rights centre
In the wake of the Letelier decision there were hopes that celebrated cases of human rights abuse would soon be brought to justice.
On Nov. 12, however, the Supreme Court decided to drop criminal charges against Gen. (retd) César Mendoza Durán, a former police chief and a member in 1973-85 of the military junta of Gen. Augusto Pinochet Ugarte.
Mendoza had been accused of covering up the 1985 kidnapping and murder, allegedly by a police intelligence unit, of three members of the Chilean Communist party [for April 1992 arrest of Mendoza see pp. 38860-61].
The Catholic Church announced on Nov. 27 the closure of its Solidarity Vicariate, the recipient of the Nobel Peace Prize in 1978, which had devoted 18 years to defending the victims of political repression.
The Vicariate's last head, Mgr Sergio Valech, stated that although the task was not finished, the church believed that it was now the duty of civilian society "to safeguard the basic principles of human rights" .
Dismissal of military intelligence head
Following a meeting between Aylwin and Pinochet, the retirement was reported on Nov. 25 of Brig.
Gen. Ricardo Contreras, head of the Army Intelligence Battalion (BIE) which in September had been exposed for tapping civilian telephones [see p. 39092].
An army communiqué stated that its telecommunications regulations had been breached and that all ranks involved would be "sanctioned" , and that the army would co-operate with any civilian trials to do with the affair.
Appointment of Health Minister
Julio Montt Momberg was appointed as the new Health Minister on Nov. 2 replacing the acting minister, Patricio Silva Rojas [see also p. 39140].
AMERICAS
ARGENTINA
General strike
A one-day general strike called on Nov. 9 by the umbrella General Confederation of Labour (CGT), the first since President Carlos Saúl Menem took office in 1989, provided a focus for union opposition to the government's current economic austerity policies.
The key demands of the protest were a monthly minimum wage of the equivalent of US$536, a three-fold increase in the basic pension to US$450, reform of legislation linking pay to productivity and a new collective wage bargaining law.
The strike received strongest support in the provinces, where up to 90 per cent of workers were reported to have stayed away.
In the capital, Buenos Aires, urban transport was seriously hit but essential services were maintained.
Domestic air flights were suspended on the receipt of bomb threats, four buses were fire-bombed and a small explosive device was set off in front of the CGT headquarters in Buenos Aires.
Although the CGT had broadly endorsed a package of protectionist economic measures announced on Oct. 28 [see below], there had been an angry reaction in early November when Economy Minister Domingo Cavallo announced that senior government officials were to receive 200 per cent salary increases.
Cavallo also revealed that he needed a minimum of US$10,000 a month to maintain his personal life style, the majority of his income coming from his involvement in a private thinktank, the Mediterranean Foundation, which was supported by large companies.
The mayor of Buenos Aires, Carlos Grosso, was forced to resign on Oct. 26, having been accused by the opposition and members of his own party, the ruling Justicialist Party (PJ — the Peronists), of mismanaging the city's US$2,500 million budget.
Menem immediately appointed Saúl Bouer, the city's finance secretary, as his replacement.
Economic package
The economic package announced by Cavallo on Oct. 28 was designed to promote the export sector and to increase protection from im-ports.
A recent surge in imports, most notably subsidized products from Brazil, and the stagnation of foreign sales had led to projections that the 1992 trade balance would show a deficit of US$1,000 million, the first deficit since 1981.
Measures included (i) the elimination of taxes on fuel and gas oils and on kerosene;(ii) extended tax rebates for exporters, calculated to be worth between US$670,000,000 and US$1,100 million per annum;(iii) the reduction of the highest import tariff from 35 per cent to 20 per cent ;(iv) tariff increases for many intermediate industrial products, but the maintenance at zero of the minimum import tariff, which applied to fuels and capital goods not domestically produced; and (v) a "temporary" increase, from 3 to 10 per cent , in a statistics tax levied on nearly all imports.
Analysts interpreted the measures as amounting to an indirect 5-10 per cent devaluation of the peso, forced on the government despite its policy, first implemented in March 1991 [see pp. 38095-96], of free convertibility of the peso against the US dollar.
Critics accused the government of giving way to pressure from industrialists and exporters and of reneging on its formal commitment to allow the full discipline of the market to make domestic companies more efficient and competitive.
The use of the statistical levy on all imports produced a sharp reaction from Paraguay and Brazil, both members of the nascent South American Common Market (Mercosur), which involved a commitment by members to phase out trade barriers [see p. 38096 for the March 1991 Treaty establishing Mercosur].
Uruguay was exempt from the statistics tax under the 1985 Argentine-Uruguayan Agreement on Economic Co-operation (CAUCE).
AMERICAS
PARAGUAY
Resignations of senior personnel
Under a decree signed by President Andrés Rodríguez and the Interior Minister, Gen. Orlando Machuca Vargas, on Nov. 4, the Defence Minister, Brig. -Gen.
Angel Juan Souto Hernández, was replaced by Gen. Eumelio Bernal, hitherto Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces.
Rodríguez asked the Congress to approve Souto's appointment as ambassador to Spain.
According to analysts, Souto had been forced to take responsibility for recent revelations that several high-ranking officers were deeply implicated in a vast network dealing in stolen cars from Brazil and Argentina, most of which were being passed on for sale in Bolivia.
Gen. Humberto Garcete, C.-in-C. of the Army, had on Oct. 9 requested indefinite leave of absence so that he could face charges "on a equal footing with any citizen" .
He was replaced on Oct. 27 by Gen. Pedro de la Cruz Concepción.
Garcete also faced charges of involvement in the Sept. 29 attempt on the life of Hermes Saquier, a leading member of the main opposition Authentic Radical Liberal Party (PLRA), and was to be questioned on the military's alleged involvement in drug trafficking.
News of the car smuggling scandal only came to light when Col. Luis Catalino González Rojas, commander of the fourth infantry division, defied orders and leaked evidence of the affair to the press.
He was placed under military arrest in early September and was retained in army custody, despite a civilian judge's order for his immediate release.
Two civilian judges then separately issued arrest warrants on Oct. 2 against Garcete and Gen. Emilio Balbuena, commander of the third army corps, who had also been implicated by González Rojas in the car smuggling scandal.
Also facing court proceedings were Gen. (retd) Lorenzo Carillo Melo, a former commander of the fourth infantry division, and Gen. Aldino Enciso, commander of the third infantry division.
González Rojas, currently enjoying national hero status, was represented by some commentators as an isolated figure, whereas others saw him as acting effectively on behalf of Gen. Lino Oviedo, who was generally recognized as the country's "strong man" .
Oviedo was currently commander of the Army's first corps, the position held by Rodríguez when he staged his successful February 1989 coup overthrowing Gen. Alfredo Stroessner [see p. 36458].
New chief of police
Gen. Francisco Sánchez González, the Chief of Police, was named as Bernal's replacement but was forced to step down when it was revealed shortly afterwards that the police payroll had been inflated by the inclusion of "phantom" policemen.
Breaking with precedent, Rodríguez named a senior police officer, Commissioner-General Germán Franco Vargas, rather than a member of the military, as the new Chief of Police.
AMERICAS
BRAZIL
Criminal charges against Collor
The Procurator General, Aristides Junqueira, on Nov. 12 filed criminal charges of "passive corruption and illegal association" against suspended President Fernando Collor de Mello, in connection with a multi-million dollar corruption scandal involving federal funds.
Collor was currently facing an impeachment trial before the Senate [for background see pp. 38909-10; 39079], and on Nov. 27 the Senate impeachment committee approved by 16 votes to one a report for submission to the full Senate recommending his definitive dismissal.
Junqueira later stated that he had been offered a US$50,000,000 bribe to drop the charges, through a colleague who had been approached by a businessman in the capital, Brasilia, on Nov. 17.
Withdrawal of witness in Collor impeachment
In an unexpected development Paulo César Farias (known nationally as PC), a businessman and Collor's former election manager, who allegedly masterminded schemes to defraud the federal government of a sum estimated at between US$150,000,000 and US$200,000,0000, was on Nov. 4 withdrawn by the prosecution as a witness in Collor's impeachment trial.
Evandro Linse Silva, for the prosecution, stated that the country wished for the speedy completion of the proceedings and would not benefit from "more spectacular allegations" or from giving credence to "the chief of a crime racket" .
Collor's defence lawyers also confirmed that they would not call Farias (who had been widely expected to turn on Collor, since Collor's defence evidence was expected to centre around directing all the blame at him).
Fiscal reform
The national unity government of interim President Itamar Franco announced a controversial US$15,000 million fiscal reform package on Nov. 6, involving constitutional amendments which would need congressional approval.
According to Planning Minister Paulo Haddad and Economy and Finance Minister Gustavo Krause, the programme was more than an adjustment exercise and represented Itamar's "entire" programme.
They stated that the government would spend half the revenues raised to pay debts and would cut expenditure in 1993, including axing projects which did not generate jobs.
The main points were (i) a tax of 0.3 per cent on financial transactions (ITMF), in force until 1994, but not applying to wage cheques, pension payments and popular savings accounts;(ii) to fight tax evasion an instruction to banks to report in specific cases and at the Finance Minister's request all movements of individuals' and companies' accounts;(iii) the simplification of the tax system with the elimination of three social contributions and their replacement by valued added tax (VAT) of between 7 and 10 per cent;(iv) the elimination of taxes on manufactured products, fuel sales and additional income, and their replacement by a selective tax (the rate of which had yet to be specified) on cars, alcoholic drinks, fuels, electricity and telecommunications;(v) the elimination of the separate collection of taxes by state and municipal governments and another by municipal government, so that all taxes (except the ITMF) would be collected by the federal government and shared with the states and municipalities, expected to produce a real increase in their revenues of 9 and 17 per cent respectively; and (vi) a ban on the contracting of fresh debts by the Federal District, states and the municipalities until the year 2000.
Negotiations over resettlement of peasant farmers
Following negotiations with Justice Minister Mauricio Correa Lima on Nov. 10, Guajajara Indians on the Canabrava reserve in the north-eastern state of Maranhao agreed to release 400 peasant farmers whom they were holding as hostages in return for a government pledge to remove 2,400 settlers and to relocate their village, Sao Pedro de Cacetes, off the reserve.
A series of reciprocal attacks by both sides had escalated since May, and tension had increased further in June when a federal commission of inquiry refused the villagers' request to expropriate the land from the tribe.
Peasant farmers on Nov. 1 murdered Augusto Pereira Guajajara, son of the local chief.
Local elections
Results of nationwide municipal elections on Nov. 15 showed a considerable shift to the left, interpreted as a reaction to the revelations of extensive corruption in the Collor government.
The Workers' Party (PT), whose leader Luís Inácio da Silva ( "Lula" ) had come second to Collor in the December 1989 run-off presidential elections [see pp. 37117-18], made significant gains, but lost control of the local government of Sao Paulo and failed to win the mayoralty in Rio de Janeiro.
Despite the PT's successes, the centrist Brazilian Democratic Movement Party (PMDB) continued to control more than half of the country's municipal governments.
The PT won the major state capitals of Belo Horizonte (Minas Gerais), Porto Alegre (Rio Grande do Sul) and Goiânia (Goiás) and the important industrial city of Ribeirao Preto.
However, the post of mayor of Sao Paulo, the largest and most powerful municipal government in the country, went to Paulo Maluf, a right-wing populist politician of the Social Democratic Party (PDS) with presidential ambitions, who was not only a personal friend of Collor but a former associate of Farias.
In the mayoral elections in Rio de Janeiro, César Maia of the PMDB defeated Benedia da Silva of the PT, who in 1987 had become the first black woman member of the Congress.
AMERICAS
BAHAMAS
Sir Lynden Pindling, Prime Minister for 25 years until an election defeat in August [see p. 39046], resigned as the leader of the opposition Progressive Liberal Party (PLP) in late November.
AMERICAS
BARBADOS
In a late November Cabinet reshuffle, Community Development and Culture Minister David Bowen was moved to Agriculture, Food and Fisheries, replacing Harcourt Lewis who was appointed Minister of State in the Prime Minister's Office.
Evelyn Greaves, the current Housing and Lands Minister, had the Community Development and Culture portfolios added to her responsibilities.
AMERICAS
GUYANA
Shree Chand was on Nov. 17 appointed as Trade, Industry and Tourism Minister [for list see p. 39137].
ASIA — PACIFIC
CHINA
Military reshuffle
A major reshuffle in the armed forces appeared to be under way in November in the aftermath of the 14th congress of the ruling Chinese Communist Party (CCP) held in October [see pp. 39126-27].
The reshuffle reflected the diminution of the power of the Yang brothers, hitherto the country's military "strongmen" , at the congress.
In an unexpected development President Yang Shangkun and his younger half-brother Yang Baibing were both removed from the party's Central Military Commission (CMC).
Ming Pao, the Hong Kong (independent) daily newspaper, ran a series of articles during November on the demotion of the Yang brothers.
The newspaper claimed that China's paramount leader Deng Xiaoping had personally ordered the changes after he discovered that Yang Baibing had convened a secret and unauthorized meeting of high-ranking military personnel prior to the congress.
At the meeting, described by Ming Pao as an "abortive minor military coup" , Yang reportedly discussed emergency military measures to be adopted in the event of Deng's death.
According to the reports, President Yang Shangkun had been unaware of the gathering.
The military reshuffle carried out in October and November was largely aimed at removing officers who had close links with the Yangs.
According to the Far Eastern Economic Review of Dec. 3 the appointments were approved at an "unannounced and enlarged" CMC meeting held shortly after the conclusion of the congress.
Gen. Yang Baibing was replaced as director of the People's Liberation Army (PLA) general political department (GPD) by Lt.-Gen.
Yu Yongbo.
Yu, who had served as deputy director of the GDP since 1989, had reportedly distanced himself from Yang prior to the congress.
The Far Eastern Economic Review of Dec. 3 reported that Gen. Wang Ruilin, Deng's chief military secretary and head of the CMC's discipline inspection commission, was believed to have been appointed as senior deputy director of the GDP.
Lt.-Gen.
Zhang Wannian, hitherto commander of the Jinan military region (MR), was appointed as the new chief of general staff and Vice-Adml.
Li Jing, hitherto deputy commander of the navy, was appointed as his deputy.
Zhang was replaced in Jinan by Lt.-Gen.
Zhang Taiheng, who had been dismissed by Yang Baibing as Chengdu MR commander in late 1991.
Lt.-Gen.
Fu Quanyou was promoted from Lanzhou MR commander to director of the general logistics department.
No replacement Lanzhou MR commander was announced.
Yang loyalist Lt.-Gen.
Zhang Zhongxian was dismissed as political commissar of -Guangzhou MR and was replaced by his deputy, Lt.-Gen.
Gao Tianzheng.
The Guangzhou MR commander Lt.-Gen.
Zhu Dunfa was replaced by Lt.-Gen.
Li Xilin.
Li Jijun, another Yang loyalist, was removed as director of the CMC's powerful general office.
Gen. Wang Hai was replaced as air force commander by Lt.-Gen.
Cao Shuangming, hitherto deputy commander of the Shenyang MR.
Both Li Jijun and Wang Hai had attended Yang Baibing's "unauthorized" meeting which preceded the congress.
Release of leading dissident — Official pronouncement on number of "counter-revolutionaries" held in prison
Chinese authorities announced on Nov. 25 that Bao Zunxin, a prominent Chinese dissident, had been released from prison 19 months before completion of a five-year prison sentence.
Bao, a philosopher, alongside a number of other activists involved in the pro-democracy demonstrations which ended in the government crackdown in Tiananmen Square in June 1989, had been sentenced in early 1991 [see p. 37959].
In October Bao had been hospitalized due to heart disease.
The official news agency, Xinhua, stated that he had been released because he had shown repentance.
Radio Australia reported on Nov. 12 that a director of China's Public Security Bureau had informed a visiting Australian human rights delegation that there were 4,000 prisoners currently in prison in China for crimes of subversion and counter-revolution.
This was the first occasion on which such a figure had been published by the Chinese authorities.
Foreign relations
Visit by Qian Qichen to CIS — Talks on Sino-Russian military co-operation
Qian Qichen, the Chinese Foreign Affairs Minister, visited Uzbekistan, Kirgizstan, Kazakhstan and Russia between Nov. 17 and 26.
On his arrival in Russia on Nov. 24, it was formally announced that Russian President Boris Yeltsin would visit China on Dec. 17-19.
During his meeting with Qian, Yeltsin hailed the beginning of a "new historic era" between Russia and China.
Talks on Sino-Russian military co-operation took place in Beijing on Nov. 21 between Aleksandr Shokhin, a Russian Deputy Premier and Minister for Foreign Economic Relations and Social Policy, and Liu Huaqing, Vice-Chair of the Central Military Commission and newly elected member of the standing committee of the CCP politburo.
Tour of Europe by Zhu Rongji — Other relations with European countries
Zhu Rongji, a Vice-Premier and newly elected member of the standing committee of the CCP politburo, visited the United Kingdom, Finland, Denmark, Sweden and Norway between Nov. 15 and Dec. 3 [for Zhu's discussions on Hong Kong during his visit to London see this page].
Klaus Kinkel, the German Foreign Minister, visited China in early November.
It was the first visit to China by a German foreign minister since the reunification of Germany in October 1990.
Mircea Snegur, the President of Moldova, paid his first visit to China on Nov. 6-10.
ASIA — PACIFIC
HONG KONG
Escalating dispute with China over Patten's reform package
In view of the hostile Chinese reaction to Hong Kong Governor Chris Patten's blueprint for political reform outlined in early October [see p. 39143], there was during November a serious deterioration in relations between the Chinese government on the one hand and the United Kingdom and Hong Kong governments on the other.
Legco approval for Patten's reform package
At the end of intense debate on Nov. 11 the Legislative Council (Legco) voted by 32 to 21 in favour of a motion to give Patten "general support" for his reform plan.
Legislation to implement the reforms was to be presented to Legco in early 1993.
Support for the reform programme came from a loose coalition of liberal and independent deputies which, in the past, had been highly critical of British policy towards Hong Kong.
Representatives of the traditional conservative business community, on the other hand, sought to thwart the reform proposal by insisting that it could go ahead only with full Chinese support.
On Nov. 9 the influential Business and Professional Federation of Hong Kong had urged Patten to drop his proposals for democratic reform and to negotiate fresh plans with the Chinese government.
This was the first time that a powerful Hong Kong organization had openly backed the Chinese side in the dispute.
The Hong Kong office of the official Chinese news agency Xinhua — China's de facto embassy in the colony — attacked the Legco vote on Nov. 12.
Xinhua said that Legco was only a "consultative body" and therefore had no right to approve a resolution which ran counter to agreements and understanding reached between the UK and China.
The next day, the vice-director of Xinhua's Hong Kong office, Zhang Junsheng, launched a personal attack on Patten, describing him as "irrational" .
Visit to UK by Zhu Rongji — Talks on Hong Kong
Zhu Rongji, a Chinese Vice-Premier and newly elected member of the standing committee of the politburo of the Chinese Communist Party, visited the UK on Nov. 15-20 for trade talks [for Zhu's European tour see p. 39189-90].
Zhu used the visit to advance Chinese opposition to Patten's reform package.
In a speech delivered on Nov. 16 Zhu indicated that China was fully prepared to link its dispute with the UK over Hong Kong with the two countries' future economic relations.
Patten's proposals, Zhu said, not only contravened the 1984 Sino-British Joint Declaration on Hong Kong's future, but also an agreement on "convergence" of Hong Kong's political system with the Basic Law, the colony's Constitution.
The so-called "convergence" agreement referred to recently published correspondence between China and the UK, which, China claimed, constituted a secret agreement.
UK Prime Minister John Major and Foreign and Commonwealth Secretary Douglas Hurd both emphasized their support for Patten's reform package during meetings with Zhu on Nov. 17.
Both Major and Hurd had met with Patten in London on Nov. 14 to assure him of their backing.
Chinese threat to cancel commercial contracts
China seriously escalated the dispute on Nov. 30 when it threatened to cancel, on Hong Kong's reversion to Chinese sovereignty in 1997, all commercial contracts, leases and agreements between the Hong Kong government and the private sector signed without full Chinese approval.
The UK Foreign and Commonwealth Office rejected the threat, saying that it was contrary to the Basic Law.
The Chinese threat was made in response to earlier decisions taken in Hong Kong on the controversial US$24,000 million new airport project.
The Hong Kong government had announced on Nov. 19 that it was pressing ahead with the next stage of construction of the airport, despite a lack of agreement with China.
Proposals for the funding of the largest single construction contract were therefore placed before the Legco finance committee, which on Nov. 27 voted by 27 to 25 in favour of funding the contract (provisionally awarded to a Japanese-led consortium in July).
Just prior to the vote, Guo Fengmin, head of the Chinese side on the Sino-British Joint Liaison Group (JLG), suddenly and publicly raised the separate question of a planned new container terminal for the port of Hong Kong.
He said that the matter had not been raised in the JLG, and threatened that China would not honour the contract.
The next day Guo criticized the finance committee decision.
Nevertheless, the contract was signed on Nov. 30.
Postponement of British military exercises
British officials announced on Nov. 5 that a military exercise scheduled to take place in Hong Kong had been cancelled.
The exercise was to have been based on a scenario involving a breakdown in Sino-British relations and an incursion by Chinese troops.
The Financial Times of Nov. 6 commentated that the manoeuvre "would have been certain to cause a further rift" in Sino-British relations.
ASIA — PACIFIC
TAIWAN
Return of leading dissident from exile — Arms deal with France
On Nov. 1 Peng Ming-min, one of Taiwan's leading dissidents, returned to the island after 22 years of exile in the USA.
Peng, the father of Taiwan's independence movement, said that he had returned to monitor elections to the Legislative Yuan scheduled for Dec. 19.
Lifting of martial law on Matsu and Chinmen
Martial law on Taiwan's offshore islands of Matsu and Chinmen (Quemoy) was formally lifted on Nov. 7 [see p. 38190 for May 1991 decision by Executive Yuan].
The heavily fortified islands were both close to the Chinese mainland and had been under martial law since the Chinese Nationalists fled to Taiwan in 1949.
Confirmation of arms deal with France
Taiwanese newspapers reported on Nov. 19 that Taiwan had obtained a long-awaited agreement from the French government to purchase 60 Mirage 2000-5 jet fighter aircraft and 1,000 short- and medium-range missiles from French companies for an estimated US$3,800 million [see p. 39095 for reported French approval of deal in September].
The agreement was strongly criticized by the Chinese government.
Relations with Japan and Germany
On Nov. 12 Taiwan and Japan held their first open Cabinet-level meeting since Japan restored relations with China in 1972.
Analysts regarded the Tokyo meeting between Shirley Kuo, the Director-General of Taiwan's Council for Economic Planning and Development, and Koichi Kato, Japan's Chief Cabinet Secretary, as significant.
A German delegation headed by Economics Minister (and Vice-Chancellor) Jürgen Möllemann visited Taiwan in mid-November.
Möllemann's visit to Taiwan was the first by a German federal minister.
ASIA — PACIFIC
NORTH-SOUTH KOREA
Threat to suspend all talks
It was reported on Nov. 19 that North Korea had threatened to suspend all channels of negotiation with South Korea, following the latter's decision to resume in early 1993 the "Team Spirit" annual joint military exercises with the USA.
Team Spirit 92 had been cancelled due to the improving relations between the two Korean states, but in recent months relations had deteriorated as a result of the North's refusal to accept unscheduled inspection of its nuclear facilities, and the alleged discovery within South Korea of a huge Northern spy network [see p. 39141].
Among the meetings which were threatened by the dispute over Team Spirit was the next session of premiers' talks scheduled for December.
ASIA — PACIFIC
NORTH KOREA
Collapse of normalization talks with Japan
The North Korean delegation walked out of the eighth round of normalization talks with Japan, held on Nov. 5 in the Chinese capital Beijing.
The walkout was sparked by a Japanese demand for information concerning a Japanese woman allegedly kidnapped 13 years previously in order to train North Korean spies.
After the failure of attempts to salvage the talks — the first between the two countries since May and originally scheduled for July — they were abandoned on Nov. 6.
ASIA — PACIFIC
SOUTH KOREA
Election developments — Visit by Russian President
It was announced on Nov. 20 that Dec. 18 had been chosen as the date for South Korea's presidential elections, with the winning candidate due to take office at the end of Roh Tae Woo's current term on Feb. 25, 1993.
The Democratic Liberal Party (DLP), which had been racked by the defection of those who disapproved of the choice of Kim Young Sam as presidential candidate, continued to show signs of internal division.
It was announced in mid-November that the United People's Party (UPP), the grouping formed by Hyundai conglomerate founder Chung Ju Yung, was to merge with the New Korea Party (NKP) which had been formed in October [see p. 39142]by defectors from the political mainstream, most of whom had been DLP members who were opposed to the succession of Kim Young Sam.
Although the NKP had been short of funds and lacking a credible presidential candidate, there were reports that some of the party's legislators were unwilling to accept the merger.
On Nov. 17 the UPP announced that it was to receive a major defector from the DLP on the following day.
Later that evening, President Roh's brother-in-law, Kim Bok Dong, was abducted from his car by police and taken to the presidential Blue House for a meeting with Roh and other family members.
On the following day Kim announced that he would honour his family's wishes and remain within the DLP.
On Nov. 20, however, he resigned from the party and, on the following day, joined the UPP.
The main party of opposition, the Democratic Party, also sought to widen its base prior to the election with the announcement on Nov. 26 that it had compacted an alliance with the National Congress, an umbrella organization of dissident groups.
The Democratic Party's presidential candidate, veteran dissident Kim Dae Jung, was widely thought to pose the greatest threat to Kim Young Sam's chances of victory.
Relations with Russia and Japan
On Nov. 18-20 the President of Russia, Boris Yeltsin, made his first official visit to South Korea.
The visit, postponed from September, included an address by Yeltsin to the South Korean National Assembly on Nov. 19.
During the course of his visit Yeltsin made clear his desire to improve relations with South Korea and indicated that Russian forces in the Far East would be reduced sharply, and that military aid to North Korea would be suspended.
As a gesture of friendship Yeltsin returned the "black box" flight data recorder of the Korean airliner KAL-007, shot down by the Soviet Union in 1983 with the loss of all 269 passengers and crew [see also p. 39171].
Several accords were signed during the visit, including one covering military co-operation and one which established regular bilateral contact.
Earlier in the month, on Nov. 8, Roh had attended a one-day meeting with Japanese Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa in Kyoto, in what was described as the first of a planned series of regular bilateral discussions.
ASIA — PACIFIC
JAPAN
Fresh allegations in Sagawa Kyubin scandal
An extraordinary session of the Diet, convened to provide approval for a supplementary budget which formed the heart of a 10,700,000 million yen (about US$85,900 million) economic stimulation package unveiled in August [see p. 39049], remained stalled throughout November by the effects of the Sagawa Kyubin scandal.
Discussion of the budget package was obstructed by the opposition in an attempt to compel the Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) government to force key LDP figures to testify concerning their role in the scandal.
Another dimension of the scandal (which in late August had forced Shin Kanemaru to resign as vice-president of the LDP — see pp. 39049-50) emerged in November with the revelation of links between the LDP and the yakuza, the country's organized crime syndicates.
This related particularly to the role played by organized crime in Noburo Takeshita's successful 1987 campaign, orchestrated by Kanemaru, for the leadership of the LDP.
The allegations emerged in connection with criminal charges against Hiroyasu Watanabe, former president of Tokyo Sagawa Kyubin.
Kanemaru, it was said, had asked Watanabe to seek the assistance of Susumu Ishii, the late leader of the Inagawa-kai crime syndicate, in putting an end to a harassment campaign against Takeshita by an obscure right-wing group, Nihon Kominto.
The current leader of Nihon Kominto, Ryumin Oshima, made a sworn deposition that he had been offered a total of some 5,000 million yen by several senior LDP figures — including 3,000 million on Kanemaru's behalf — to stop his group's loud-speaker barracking campaign against Takeshita.
In total Oshima named seven senior members of the LDP who had been involved in efforts to force his party to desist.
When the money was refused Ishii was called upon to use his influence to prevail upon Kominto to call off its harassment campaign.
The campaign was halted in October.
The question of exactly what Ishii had offered — or threatened — in order to achieve this end remained unclear.
Later that month, Takeshita was elected as LDP leader, a post which he held until 1989 when he was forced to resign in the face of the Recruit shares-for-favours scandal.
The yakuza revelations were released by the Tokyo District Prosecutor's Office on Nov. 5, and several of the seven LDP members named immediately denied having had any contacts with the Nihon Kominto.
The LDP denounced the decision to make public the allegations, and threatened to begin libel proceedings against both Oshima and the prosecutors in the Watanabe case.
Public outcry over what was widely seen as an attempt to intervene in the judicial process, however, caused the party to withdraw this threat almost immediately.
Testimony of Takeshita and Kanemaru
The failure of the scandal to subside, and the continuing expression of public disgust over lenient treatment of Kanemaru by the prosecuting authorities, was demonstrated by a protest march in central Tokyo on Nov. 10.
The marchers demanded a full investigation of the scandal and a fundamental reform of the country's political system.
Growing pressure both within the Diet and outside led the government to abandon its earlier attempt to bring the investigation to a close.
The LDP also, on Nov. 20, acceded to the opposition demand that Takeshita, Kanemaru and Watanabe testify before the Diet concerning their knowledge of the affair.
This decision cleared the way for the budget committee to begin proceeding with the proposed supplementary budget.
As the prospect of testifying approached, on Nov. 16 Kanemaru followed what was becoming a well-established modern Japanese custom by admitting himself to hospital.
A medical spokesman explained that he needed an urgent operation to treat glaucoma caused by diabetes.
It was also stated that he would have to remain in hospital for around a month, and would thus be unable to attend the special session of the Diet which was scheduled to end on Dec. 8.
Undeterred, the opposition demanded that he be questioned at the hospital.
Takeshita appeared before the budget committee on Nov. 26 and gave two hours of sworn testimony to the effect that he had not had any dealings with organized crime.
He acknowledged asking Watanabe to help silence Nihon Kominto, but suggested that he had "no recollection of anything having to do with that problem" .
Pressed by the opposition to resign, Takeshita stated: "If I quit, it will be taken to prove that…the Prime Minister of Japan had been made by gangsters.
I cannot do this."
On the same day Watanabe was interviewed as a sworn witness at the Tokyo Detention Centre by seven budget committee members.
He refused to answer questions, however, on the grounds that they were related to the criminal charges upon which he was currently facing trial.
On Nov. 27 Kanemaru gave sworn testimony at the Odawara Municipal Hospital in Kanagawa Prefecture, during which he was reported to have acknowledged that his links with Ishii had been instrumental in halting the Nihon Kominto's campaign against Takeshita.
Kanemaru reportedly said, however, that he had first learned of the involvement of Inagawa-kai on Dec. 23, 1987, whereas Watanabe had already stated that Kanemaru had called on him in September 1987 to ask Ishii to suppress the Nihon Kiminto campaign.
When questioned about a meeting to discuss the problem on Oct. 5, at which Takeshita had been present, he claimed to have been too drunk to remember anything about it.
As for the 500 million yen in illicit political donations which he acknowledged having received from Watanabe, he claimed not to remember to whom it was distributed, and suggested that his secretary, Masahisa Haibara, who had directly received the money from Watanabe, should be questioned on the matter.
Opposition Diet members denounced the testimony of both Takeshita and Kanemaru as completely inadequate.
An LDP member of the Upper House, Masaru Urata, on Nov. 27 also accused Takeshita of having perjured himself and there were threats to begin legal proceedings against him.
By the end of the month the opposition was united in calling for testimony from Haibara and Urata and seemed determined to force Takeshita to retire from public life.
Intensification of divisions within Takeshita faction
A further effect of the scandal was on the stability of the Takeshita faction, the largest internal grouping within the LDP and a vital component of the support within the party for Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa.
Following Kanemaru's resignation as party vice-president and his enforced retirement from politics, during November there was a steady increase in the antagonism and animosity between his successor, Keizo Obuchi, and leading faction member Ichiro Ozawa.
Suggestions that the split was in part a generational conflict were reinforced by figures which indicated that, of the Takeshita faction's total legislative strength of 109 members, Obuchi was supported by only 19 members in the House of Representatives (the lower chamber, where members tended to be younger than in the upper chamber) but by all 42 members in the House of Councillors.
A "study group" — effectively a faction within the Takeshita faction — created in late October by Ozawa and his mentor, Finance Minister Tsutomu Hata, had the support of 36 of the faction's members in the House of Representatives.
This level of support, in the face of a stipulation by Obuchi that no member of the faction was permitted to participate in the new group, fuelled rumours that Hata intended to form either a separate LDP faction or even, in conjunction with members of the opposition, a new centre-right political party.
ASIA — PACIFIC
TURKIC STATES
Ankara summit
Leaders of the four Turkic central Asian states — Kazakhstan, Kirgizstan, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan — and of Azerbaijan met in Ankara on Oct. 30 for a summit hosted by Turkish President Turgut Özal.
According to President Özal, the aim of the meeting was to move beyond existing bilateral agreements "towards multilateral co-operation" .
On Oct. 31 the leaders signed a declaration pledging closer co-operation and agreed to meet annually in future.
Turkey had hoped for agreement on a range of economic issues, including the lifting of customs barriers, the creation of the infrastructure necessary for the free movement of goods and labour and the establishment of a regional development and investment bank.
It also sought agreement on the possible construction of pipelines to deliver central Asian oil and gas to Europe via Turkey, but ultimately only a declaration of intent was signed.
According to Le Monde, the former Soviet states were unwilling to commit themselves to what would amount to a "Turkish version of the Arab League" , with Kazakhstan particularly reluctant to jeopardize possible future relations with other Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) countries and with the rest of Europe.
Kazakh President Nursultan Nazarbayev claimed that he was opposed to "groupings based on ethnic or religious foundations" .
ASIA — PACIFIC
TAJIKISTAN
New government — Ceasefire agreement
Acting President Akbarsho Iskandarov and his coalition government resigned on Nov. 10, calling for a ceasefire as pro-communist militias laid siege to Dushanbe and occupied much of Tajikistan.
Iskandarov's Islamic coalition had survived an attempted coup in October by supporters of the former communist President Rakhmon Nabiyev, whose removal from power in September sparked off a smouldering civil war [see pp. 39097-98; 39147].
In a statement on Nov. 10, however, the Iskandarov government said that it was resigning to save the country from destruction.
Maj.-Gen.
Mukhriddin Ashurov, commander of the force in Tajikistan, had already resigned from the State Council.
More than 100,000 refugees had fled to Dushanbe from fighting in southern Tajikistan, according to the Red Cross, and were causing serious shortages of basic food.
Blockades of the city by pro-communist forces prevented food supplies from getting through for much of November.
Local militias, many backing the former communist leadership, were reported to control most of the south, including towns only 40 km from the capital.
On Nov. 18 the Tajik Supreme Soviet, meeting in Khojand, away from the turmoil in Dushanbe, accepted the Iskandarov government's resignation.
On Nov. 19 the deputies, elected during communist rule, elected Imoli Rakhmanov, a former communist and chairman of the executive committee in the southern Kulyab region, as Speaker of Parliament (the de facto president).
Rakhmanov immediately pledged to end the fighting.
The Supreme Soviet session, which had begun on Nov. 16 in chaos as deputies were unable to agree an agenda, continued until the end of the November.
On Nov. 20 Abdulmalik Abdullodzhanov, an influential figure from Tajikistan's industrial north, was elected acting Prime Minister.
Rakhmanov appealed on Nov. 21 to leaders of armed factions in the country to come to the Supreme Soviet.
A ceasefire had been agreed for the duration of the Supreme Soviet session, but reports emerged on Nov. 21 of a massacre in a refugee camp in the Tursunzadevsky region, near Dushanbe.
Most of the refugees had come from the Kurgan-Tyube region, the scene of bitter fighting between pro- and anti-government forces.
Tajik Radio also reported a tank attack in the Yavansky region, and unconfirmed reports suggested that thousands of refugees were stranded near the border with Afghanistan.
On Nov. 25, leaders of a number of armed groups reached agreement in the Supreme Soviet to end the fighting.
On Nov. 26 the parliament also resolved to exempt people involved in the conflict from prosecution and to mark Nov. 26 as an annual Day of Peace.
Communist militias lifted the blockade of Dushanbe and opened the road between the capital and the Kurgan-Tyube region.
On Nov. 27 parliament appealed for an end to the civil war, defended a temporary ban on strikes and rallies, and called for the voluntary surrender of weapons.
The Interior Ministry reported new tensions in Dushanbe on Nov. 30.
Murder of security official
Jurabek Aminov, the deputy chairman of Tajik National Security and reportedly one of the country's most effective and articulate leaders, was killed on Nov. 18 when his car was subject to an attack using a grenade launcher and assault rifles.
ASIA — PACIFIC
AFGHANISTAN
Continued fighting
Fighting between rival mujaheddin factions continued in Afghanistan during November.
Throughout the month there were reports of serious clashes between the forces of Gulbuddin Hekmatyar, leader of the fundamentalist Hezb-i-Islami faction, and those of Gen. Abdul Rashid Dostam, the Uzbek "warlord" and effective leader of northern Afghanistan.
In early November it was reported that fighters affiliated with the Iranian-backed (Shia) Hezb-i-Wahdat faction were engaged in bloody clashes with government forces loyal to Defence Minister Ahmed Shah Masud.
According to some reports, both sides sustained heavy casualties.
Gen. Khan Aqa, deputy head of state security, was killed by a car bomb in Kabul on Nov. 3.
Hectic political and diplomatic activity was reported ahead of the mid-December deadline for the establishment of a new government [see p. 39146].
Pakistan and Saudi Arabia both played important roles in secret negotiations, with Gen. Dostam visiting both countries in late November and reportedly holding talks with Prince Turki al-Faisal, head of Saudi intelligence.
Visit by Iranian Foreign Minister
Ali Akbar Vellayati, the Iranian Foreign Minister, visited Afghanistan on Nov. 9.
During ministerial-level talks the two sides agreed to establish a joint co-operation commission.
A planeeload of Iranian humanitarian aid accompanied Vellayati to Afghanistan — the 93rd since April.
The Afghan government announced on Nov. 23 that it was seriously short of food and fuel.
Admission to ECO
Afghanistan was one of seven new states admitted to the Economic Co-operation Organization (ECO) at an extraordinary meeting held in Islamabad on Nov. 28.
ASIA — PACIFIC
PAKISTAN
Opposition protest march
A confrontation came to a head on Nov. 18 between Benazir Bhutto, the former Prime Minister and leader of the opposition Pakistan People's Party (PPP) and of the People's Democratic Alliance (PDA) coalition, and the government of Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif.
Bhutto, who was tear-gassed as she led a march from Rawalpindi to Islamabad demanding fresh elections, was banned from Islamabad for defying an order preventing her from staging a demonstration in Parliament Square.
In late November, after the lifting of a government order restricting her to the southern city of Karachi, Bhutto vowed to resume what she described as her "Long March" to Islamabad — a declaration which revived fears of further widespread political unrest.
Bhutto claimed that the Sharif government was "illegal" and the product of rigged elections in October 1990 [see pp. 37763; 38102; 38393].
Her claims were backed by prominent politicians from the newly formed National Democratic Alliance (NDA)[see p. 39054]including Ghulam Mustapha Jatoi who had been appointed interim Prime Minister in August 1990 on Bhutto's dismissal [see pp. 37652].
During a week of violent clashes between police and protestors centring on the events of Nov. 18, thousands of activists were arrested across the country.
There were reports of serious disturbances in Punjab and the North West Frontier Province.
The number of those arrested was put by the government at 1,900; by the PPP at 27,000, and by the local press at about 15,000.
In Lahore Bhutto's mother Nusrat Bhutto was tear-gassed and detained incommunicado until Nov. 20.
Many PDA leaders were also arrested, and at least one PPP official, Salman Taseer, was reported to have been tortured.
Prime Minister Sharif, condemning Bhutto's protest march as "open rebellion" , had ordered a strict security cordon around Islamabad.
Bridges were reported to have been blown up and roads to the capital blocked in an effort to halt the march.
State-controlled television claimed on Nov. 18 that the opposition protest "had fizzled out as people dissociated themselves from the politics of disruption and violence" , although it acknowledged that stoning and tear-gassing in Lahore had "caused inconvenience" .
On Nov. 23 Sharif, reportedly encouraged by flagging popular support for Bhutto's march, hinted at a compromise whereby she would be allowed to board a train in Karachi bound for Rawalpindi, and to engage in political activities "as long as they are peaceful" .
According to unconfirmed reports the government had offered talks with Bhutto in return for an agreement to end the agitation.
In an unprecedented intervention, Libya's leader, Col. Moamer al Kadhafi, on Nov. 24 criticized the "savage practices" of the Pakistani police in breaking up opposition demonstrations.
Mass executions
Eleven convicted murderers were hanged on Nov. 15 in what was claimed by human rights activists as the biggest mass execution in the country's history.
The hangings, which took place in Punjab province, followed sentences handed down by "special speedy courts" created in July 1991 after the murder of two wealthy families [see p. 38338].
Passing of death sentence for blasphemy
The Pakistan Human Rights Commission filed a suit in the Lahore High Court on Nov. 5 appealing against the death sentence passed on Gil Masih, a Christian accused of defiling the name of the Prophet Mohammed.
The sentence was the first of its kind under an August 1991 law making the death penalty mandatory for blasphemy [see p. 38393].
On Oct. 29 a court in Multan, Punjab, had thrown out a case brought by militant Islamic groups against a Moslem social activist Akhtar Hameed Khan who was accused of blasphemy.
Indo-Pakistan talks
The sixth round of talks at defence secretary level aimed at reducing tension on the 72-km Siachen Glacier in the north resumed in New Delhi on Nov. 2-4 [see pp. 36736; 38153].
Hopes of a breakthrough, fuelled by reports that the two sides had reached agreement in "certain fields" , proved, however, to be premature.
A Pakistan government spokesman confirmed on Nov. 11 that the talks had ended "with no forward movement" , saying that "the Indian side had introduced preconditions…[that]went beyond what was agreed between the two countries in June 1989 [see p. 36736]" .
According to Indian reports Pakistan had objected to India's demand that the Saltoro Range, running from NJ 9842 to the Shaksgam region of Pakistan-occupied Kashmir ceded to China, be recognized as the actual line of control.
Pakistan was said to have insisted that both sides should revert to positions held in December 1971 as agreed in the Simla Accord [see pp. 25432-33].
Senior officials from India and Pakistan met in New Delhi on Nov. 5-6 for the fifth round of talks on the Sir Creek border dispute relating to the demarcation of maritime boundaries in the Great Rann of Kutch [see pp. 38153; 38533].
A joint statement described the discussions as "detailed and useful" .
Indian officials said that the lack of greater progress had stemmed from the technical complexity of the problem.
Trade agreement with China
A protocol promoting border trade with China was concluded during talks in Beijing between the Pakistan Finance and Economic Affairs Minister Sartaj Aziz and senior Chinese trade officials on Nov. 15-19.
ASIA — PACIFIC
INDIA
All-party mediation over Ayodhya dispute — Supreme Court ruling on job reservations
Leaders of major political parties and organizations met in New Delhi on Nov. 23 under the auspices of the National Integration Council [see p. 38866]and gave their backing to the government's attempts to implement court orders barring construction at the disputed Babri mosque site in Ayodhya, Uttar Pradesh, where Hindu militants planned to build a Hindu temple [see pp. 38532; 38682; 39008].
The conference called on all parties to resume negotiations; however, it was boycotted by the right-wing opposition Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) and the Vishwa Hindu Parishad (VHP).
Tripartite talks involving the government, the VHP and Moslem representatives from the All-India Babri Masjid Action Committee (AIBMAC) had been held in New Delhi on Nov. 8-10 but had broken down, apparently acrimoniously, after which VHP leaders had reaffirmed their "unilateral" call to resume building work on a temple at the disputed Ayodhya site.
On Nov. 9 the BJP's national executive, meeting in Bhubaneswar, Orissa, backed the VHP's call, saying that it was prepared to risk the dismissal of the BJP state government in Uttar Pradesh.
(In July both parties had defied court orders preventing construction at the disputed site — see p. 39008.)
On Nov. 28 the Uttar Pradesh government gave an assurance to the Supreme Court that the proposed kar seva (voluntary service to build a temple) at Ayodhya scheduled for Dec. 6 would be a symbolic gesture entailing no construction activity.
Ruling on job reservation
The Supreme Court on Nov. 16 upheld a decision by the government of former Prime Minister V. P. Singh reserving 27 per cent of public-sector jobs for members of the lower castes but ruled that the total reservation should not exceed 50 per cent[see pp. 37653; 37710-11; 37774].
(Lower castes already had guaranteed access to 22 per cent of all government jobs.)
The court extended job reservation to underprivileged sections of religious minorities, but refused to sanction a proposal by the present government setting aside 10 per cent of posts for poorer members of the upper castes.
Former Prime Minister Singh, whose government had been forced to resign largely over its job reservation policy [see p. 37854], described the ruling as an "overwhelming victory for those who have been suppressed and humiliated for thousands of years" .
Union Carbide hearing
The Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) on Dec. 11 told a court hearing criminal charges against the United States company, Union Carbide, implicated in the Bhopal gas disaster of December 1984 [see pp. 33647-48; 39008], that the company and its Indian subsidiary had failed "to maintain proper control and adopt adequate safety measures" .
Banking scandal developments
The Attorney General G. Ramaswamy resigned on Nov. 10 following allegations that he was granted a Rs150,000 unsecured overdraft facility by Standard Chartered, the United Kingdom bank implicated in the Bombay securities scandal [see p. 39145].
Ramaswamy, the third public figure to resign over the affair since April [see pp. 39008; 39053], was replaced on Nov. 24 by Milon Kumar Banerjee.
The Australian bank ANZ Grindlays which in October admitted to having breached banking regulations [ibid.], agreed on Nov. 4 to pay more than Rs5,000 million to the National Housing Bank (NHB), a central bank subsidiary, to cover disputed transactions involved in the securities scandal.
NHB undertook to return the funds to ANZ if an arbitration panel ruled in the latter's favour.
New party
The newly formed Samajwadi Party elected Mulayam Singh Yadav as president at its first convention in Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, on Nov. 4.
Economy
General strikes
More than 250,000 workers protested on Nov. 25 against government incentives to boost foreign investment [see pp. 39099; 39145].
The strike was the latest in a series opposing the government's economic reforms [see pp. 38682; 38727; 38967; 39008].
On Nov. 19 the government had rushed through new capital market reforms banning insider trading in stocks and shares amid indications that foreign investors, granted permission to invest directly in stock market operations [see p. 39099], had been deterred by the absence of regulatory mechanisms.
Earlier the government had approved amendments codifying foreign exchange regulations to enable foreign companies to repatriate profits.
A general strike call by the BJP in protest against rising prices and cuts in subsidies for petrol and fertilizers had evoked a patchy response on Nov. 3 except in two states, Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan, where the BJP formed the government.
Official figures showed that increases in petroleum prices [see p. 39099]had pushed inflation to an annual rate of 10.03 per cent in the week ending Oct. 24, up from a low of 8.8 per cent in mid-September [see p. 39145].
India's trade deficit in the six months to September was US$2,620 million compared with US$1,020 million for the same period in 1991.
Exports were US$8,550 million against US$8,110 million while imports rose to US$11,170 million from US$9,130 million.
Decision on Narmada River project
The World Bank announced on Nov. 15 that it would continue funding the Narmada River project [see p. 38967].
In early November the Bank had temporarily suspended funding after protests by environmental groups.
Foreign relations
Defence talks with Russia
Senior air force and naval officers held talks on defence co-operation with their Russian counterparts in Moscow on Oct. 29 and Nov. 12 respectively.
Unconfirmed reports in late November said that Russia had agreed to sell 20 MiG-29 fighter aircraft to help India install a fourth squadron on its northern border with Pakistan.
Relations with China, France and Iran
An agreement with China on co-operation in education was signed in Beijing during a visit by the Human Resources Development Minister Arjun Singh on Nov. 7.
A protocol setting up a telecommunications network for high speed software data transmission was signed with France on Nov. 5.
Transport agreements were concluded with Iran during a visit by the Iranian Foreign Minister Ali Akbar Vellayati on Nov. 9-11.
States developments
The Congress (I) Chief Minister of Karnataka, S. Bangarappa, resigned on Nov. 11 following allegations of corruption over several months; he was replaced on Nov. 20 by the former state Education Minister Veerappa Moily.
Seven people were reported killed after police fired on protesters in West Bengal calling for the arrest of illegal immigrants from Bangladesh officially estimated to total 100,000.
The Minister of State for Human Resources Development Mamta Banerjee announced her resignation from the government on Nov. 25 in protest against the killings.
More than 175 people were reported killed on Nov. 15 after torrential rainstorms hit the southern states of Kerala and Madhya Pradesh.
The outlawed Bodo Security Force (BSF — see pp. 36694; 36851; 37348) campaigning for a separate homeland for the Bodo tribe, was blamed for two bomb explosions which killed 40 people in Guwahati, Assam, on Nov. 21.
ASIA — PACIFIC
SRI LANKA
Killing of navy chief
The naval Commander-in-Chief, Vice-Adml.
Clancy Fernando was killed in Colombo on Nov. 16 when a suicide bomber, believed to be a member of the separatist Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE), activated a bomb by crashing his motorcycle into the admiral's car.
Three of the admiral's aides, along with the bomber, also died in the attack.
Fernando, 52, who had led the sea war against Tamil flotillas running arms supplies from India, was the highest-ranking officer to be assassinated during a series of recent assaults against senior military personnel.
In August, 10 senior officers were killed after being ambushed by LTTE rebels [see p. 39053]; the Minister of State for Defence Ranjan Wijeratne died in a bomb attack in March 1991 [see p. 38103].
Among 43 people reported killed during an LTTE ambush in the eastern district of Amparai on Nov. 3 were 23 servicemen.
On Nov. 23 the government responded to the deteriorating situation by invoking new emergency measures requiring all householders and their guests to register with the police.
IMF loan
The International Monetary Fund (IMF) Survey of Nov. 9 published details of an IMF loan approved on Oct. 13, equivalent to SDR112,000,000 (about US$164,000,000), the second tranche of a three-year SDR336,000,000 enhanced structural adjustment facility (ESAF) approved in September 1991 in support of Sri Lanka's medium-term economic reform programme.
ASIA — PACIFIC
BANGLADESH
National strike — Agreement on CHT autonomy
Opposition parties led by the Awami League called a nationwide general strike on Nov. 8 demanding the trial of Gholam Azam, leader of the Jamaat-i-Islami Bangladesh.
In June opposition parties had boycotted parliament in protest against the government's decision not to appoint a special tribunal to try Azam for war crimes allegedly committed during the 1971 war of independence [see pp. 38967; 39007].
Hundreds of riot police on Nov. 2 clashed with students in Dhaka protesting against recent legislation to curb cheating in final exams.
Under a law approved by the government on Oct. 29, schoolchildren as young as 14 caught cheating faced 5 to 10 years in prison.
Any teacher found guilty of leaking examination questions faced the same penalty.
Agreement on CHT autonomy
A formal agreement between government officials and representatives of the outlawed Shanti Bahini seeking greater autonomy for the Chittagong Hill Tracts (CHT) was reported by the Economist of Nov. 14.
The deal, understood to have been agreed in talks on Nov. 5, offered a political solution after 19 years of guerrilla violence in the south-east of the country, which was inhabited by tribal people (mainly practising the Buddhist, Christian or Hindu religions).
Limited autonomy was granted to the CHT in June 1991 [see p. 38289]; earlier peace efforts in the 1980s had led to the creation in March 1989 of three elected CHT district councils with restricted powers [see p. 36524].
Foreign relations
A protocol establishing diplomatic relations with Armenia was signed in the Armenian capital, Yerevan, on Nov. 14.
China offered to mediate on the issue of the repatriation of thousands of Moslem refugees to Myanma [see pp. 38815-16]during talks in Dhaka between Foreign Minister Mustafizur Rahman and Chinese Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs Xu Dunxin on Nov. 3-5.
The first meeting of the Joint Committee of Experts of Bangladesh and India agreed in New Delhi on Nov. 20 to resume negotiations on sharing river waters between the two countries [see also p. 38913].
ASIA — PACIFIC
THAILAND
Upholding of amnesty
On Nov. 9 the Constitutional Tribunal upheld a controversial amnesty decree protecting military personnel involved in the bloody suppression of anti-government demonstrations in Bangkok in May [see pp. 38894-95].
The tribunal, convened after the House of Representatives had in early October voted unanimously to revoke the amnesty [see p. 39145], ruled that the government had no authority to order trials of those involved in the military crackdown.
The Interior Ministry announced on Nov. 12 that 44 people had been killed during the crackdown and a further 180 people remained missing.
Pro-democracy groups claimed that hundreds of demonstrators had been killed and secretly buried by the army.
New curbs on powers of armed forces
The Cabinet agreed on Nov. 3 to annul the 1976 Internal Peacekeeping Act which provided the military with enormous powers to end internal unrest.
At the same time the Cabinet approved legislation which would require the armed forces to seek government approval before acting against any disturbance.
The Defence Ministry confirmed on Nov. 5 that the military's "secret fund" had been reduced by between 10 and 15 per cent.
Following the reduction, the "secret fund" constituted less than 1 per cent of the total defence budget.
Return of Manoon Rupkachorn
Manoon Rupkachorn,, a controversial former major-general who led two abortive coup attempts in the 1980s, returned to Thailand on Nov. 17 after spending almost 21 months in exile.
Manoon immediately surrendered himself to the authorities and was later charged with, among other crimes, conspiracy to assassinate Queen Sirikit in 1982.
The alleged plot by Manoon had been cited as a justification by the military for staging the February 1991 coup [see p. 38004], shortly after which Manoon had fled the country.
Moves to end child prostitution
Prime Minister Chuan Leekpai called on Nov. 2 for the elimination of child prostitution in Thailand.
He made his call at a meeting of high-level civil servants, police and military officers on Nov. 2, three days before a House of Representatives debate on prostitution at which demands were made for the closure of all brothels nationwide.
The House approved the creation of a special panel to find ways to tackle child prostitution and forced adult prostitution.
ASIA — PACIFIC
LAOS
Death of Kaysone Phomvihane
Kaysone Phomvihane, the leader of Laos since the communist victory in 1975, died on Nov. 21 at the age of 72.
At the time of his death Kaysone was state President and president of the ruling Lao People's Revolutionary Party (LPRP), and thereby held the two most powerful posts in Laos.
Born in the southern Lao province of Savannakhet in 1922, Kaysone was sent by his Vietnamese father in the 1940s to study in Vietnam, where he became involved in the anti-French struggle.
Ho Chi Minh's Viet Minh sent him back to Laos in 1945 to liaise with Lao nationalist groups.
He was appointed as Defence Minister (and subsequently as commander-in-chief) of Prince Souphanouvong's Pathet Lao resistance government in 1950.
Five years later the (communist) Lao People's Party (the forerunner of the LPRP) was founded with Kaysone as its general secretary.
He visited Vientiane (the capital of Laos) in the late 1950s, but subsequently returned to Pathet Lao territory until the final stages of Communist victory in 1975.
He served as Premier from 1975 until August 1991, when he was appointed as state President, a post endowed with new powers under the country's recently promulgated Constitution [see pp. 38390-91].
He had been promoted from general secretary to "president" of the LPRP at the party's fifth congress the previous April [see p. 38150].
Election of new party chair and state President
Gen. Khamtay Siphandon, the Premier, was elected as chair of the LPRP at a special meeting of the party's central committee held on Nov. 24.
Nouhak Phoumsavan, who after Kaysone's death became the highest-ranking member of the LPRP politburo, was elected as state President at a special session of the Supreme People's Assembly held on Nov. 25.
ASIA — PACIFIC
CAMBODIA
Imposition of sanctions on Khmers Rouges
On Nov. 30 the UN Security Council announced the imposition of trade sanctions from Dec. 31, 1992, on Cambodian regions controlled by the Khmers Rouges.
The resolution, passed 14-0 (with China abstaining), was adopted after the failure of all efforts to persuade the Khmers Rouges to co-operate fully with the 1991 UN peace plan.
In October the UN Security Council had established Nov. 15 as a deadline for Khmer Rouge compliance with the plan [see p. 39143].
The resolution called on UN member states to cut oil supplies to, and timber exports from, territories controlled by the Khmers Rouges.
It threatened to embargo exploitation of Cambodia's gems and minerals from Khmer Rouge areas and to freeze Khmer Rouge assets abroad.
The resolution also threatened to exclude the Khmers Rouges from the general election scheduled for May 1993, if voter registration had not been allowed to go ahead in Khmer Rouge areas by Jan. 31, 1993.
It called on the UN Transitional Authority in Cambodia (UNTAC) to continue preparing for elections in May 1993, with or without Khmer Rouge participation.
In a new development, the resolution called for the holding of presidential elections in May.
Failure of Beijing peace talks
The four Cambodian factions represented on the all-party Supreme National Council (SNC) had met in Beijing, the Chinese capital, on Nov. 7-8 in what was widely regarded as a last-ditch attempt to save the UN plan from virtual collapse.
The talks ended on Nov. 8 without any agreement having been reached.
The Beijing talks were attended by the chief co-ordinator of UNTAC, Yasushi Akashi, representatives from Indonesia and France (co-chairs of the Paris International Conference on Cambodia), China, Russia, the USA and the UK (as permanent members of the UN Security Council) and Australia, Germany, Japan and Thailand.
Formation of Khmer Rouge party
On Nov. 29 the Khmers Rouges announced the establishment of a new political party, the Cambodian National Unity Party (CNUP), to contest the May 1993 elections.
The Khmers Rouges had previously designated themselves as the Party of Democratic Kampuchea.
Khieu Samphan and Son Sen (the Khmer Rouge representatives on the SNC) were appointed as chair and vice-chair respectively of the CNUP, which on Dec. 1 issued a "fundamental political programme" in which it pledged "to respect and abide by a parliamentary regime" and to implement "a liberal economic system" .
It would work for national reconciliation "including those Cambodians who used to work with all categories of the Vietnamese aggressors" .
ASIA — PACIFIC
VIETNAM
Resumption of Japanese lending
The Japanese government announced on Nov. 6 the details of a large concessional loan to Vietnam which marked the end of the 14-year freeze on official development assistance imposed following Vietnam's 1978 intervention in Cambodia.
The decision to resume lending had been announced in early October [see p. 39144].
The loan, worth 45,500 million yen (US$380 million) and repayable over 30 years at an interest rate of 1 per cent, would be used to fund capital development projects.
Vietnam had on Nov. 4 repaid arrears on official Japanese loans extended prior to 1979.
According to a report by the Kyodo news service on Nov. 6, Japanese commercial banks had provided a total of 23,500 million yen in short-term bridging loans to service the arrears.
Prior to Japan's loan announcement Vietnam had anticipated bilateral aid of less than US$200 million in 1992, much of it from Australia, France and the United Kingdom.
Until 1991 Vietnam had received an estimated US$1,000 million annually from the Soviet Union in credits and grants.
Relations with USA
A US delegation led by Senator John Kerry visited Vietnam on Nov. 16-21 for detailed talks on the progress of efforts to resolve the issue of US servicemen listed as missing in action (MIA) during the Vietnam War.
Kerry delivered a letter from US President George Bush to President Le Duc Anh of Vietnam which, he said, set out a "road map" for normalizing US-Vietnamese relations and "expressed very directly that the co-operation from Vietnam will be met by reciprocal action by the United States" .
ASIA — PACIFIC
PHILIPPINES
Final US militarywithdrawal
The last US military personnel based in the Philippines were withdrawn on Nov. 24, thereby ending a presence which had existed since 1898 (broken only by a three-year period of Japanese occupation during the Pacific War).
The last US foothold, Cubi Point naval air station (an airfield attached to the Subic Bay naval base), was evacuated, and formal control over the vast Subic Bay site — once the largest US base outside north America — was formally transferred to the government of the Philippines.
In 1991 the Philippines' Senate had refused to ratify a renegotiated bases treaty, and the US military had been given until the end of 1992 to effect a complete withdrawal.
While celebrating the first occasion since the Spanish occupation of 1571 on which foreign troops had not been based in the Philippines, the country's President, Fidel Ramos, expressed the hope that his country could develop "even stronger ties with the USA" following the withdrawal.
However, the precise relationship between the USA and its former colony, which continued to be bound together by the 1951 Philippines-US Mutual Defence Treaty, remained unclear.
In early November the Ramos administration denied media reports and accusations in the Congress that it had agreed to grant to the US military preferential terms of access to Philippine waters and bases, beginning in January 1993.
The controversy apparently arose from a communiqué issued by the Philippines-US Mutual Defence Board after its meeting in Manila on Nov. 5-6, chaired jointly by the Philippine Armed Forces Chief of Staff Gen. Lisandro Abadia and Adml.
Charles Larson, C.-in-C. of the US Pacific Command.
The communiqué stated that bilateral military co-operation would continue to take place under the terms of the 1951 Treaty, and that this would involve "customary ship visits, aircraft transits, and the rendering of assistance by US forces during natural disasters" .
Abadia emphasized, however, that port calls and repairs by US warships would be conducted on a commercial basis and would be available on the same terms to vessels from other countries.
Also unclear was the future of the bases themselves.
On Nov. 6 Ramos had named Arsenio Bartolome as chairman of the Bases Conversion Development Authority (BCDA), an agency created to oversee the conversion of the former US sites to profitable civilian use.
ASIA — PACIFIC
MALAYSIA
Annual UMNO assembly
The annual assembly of the United Malays National Organization (UMNO — the dominant partner in the ruling Barisan Nasional coalition) was held on Nov. 5-8.
Although there were no elections at the assembly, the gathering was dominated by the issue of who would succeed Mahathir Mohamed as UMNO president and thereby as Prime Minister.
Mahathir, 66, issued a call for party unity and hinted strongly that he might stand for another two-year term as UMNO leader in the party's 1993 elections.
According to a report in the Far Eastern Economic Review of Nov. 19, Mahathir's position was not being directly challenged, but many senior UMNO leaders were nevertheless positioning themselves for a future succession battle.
The report claimed that UMNO vice-president and Finance Minister Anwar Ibrahim currently had "the edge" in the leadership race.
The other three main contenders (Ghafar Baba, UMNO deputy president and Deputy Prime Minister, Sanusi Junid, UMNO vice-president and Agriculture Minister, and Abdullah Ahmad Badawi, UMNO vice-president and Foreign Minister) had reportedly "teamed up" in a bid to undermine Anwar's campaign.
ASIA — PACIFIC
INDONESIA
Capture of Fretilin leader
José Xanana Gusmao, the military commander of the Front for an Independent East Timor (Fretilin), was captured by Indonesian soldiers on the outskirts of Dili, the capital of East Timor, on Nov. 20.
Gusmao had long been regarded as a symbol of the resistance to Indonesian rule in East Timor and his capture was a massive blow to Fretilin.
Portugal (which ruled East Timor until the Indonesian annexation in 1975) called for Gusmao's release and offered him asylum.
Gusmao, who was moved to Bali for interrogation, was shown briefly on Indonesian television on Nov. 23.
The C.-in-C. of the Indonesian armed forces, Gen. Try Sutrisno, was quoted as saying on Nov. 23 that Gusmao would be "accused of engaging in subversive acts, murder and theft, accusations which may mean the death penalty" .
However, an aide of Suharto, the Indonesian President, indicated in a statement also issued on Nov. 23 that Gusmao would not be executed.
Anniversary of Dili massacre — Alleged statement by governor on Dili massacre
The first anniversary of the massacre of at least 50 East Timorese civilians at Dili's Santa Cruz cemetery on Nov. 12, 1991 [see pp. 38579-80], took place without incident.
The human rights organization Amnesty International claimed on Nov. 9 that the Indonesian authorities had arrested hundreds of suspected Fretilin sympathizers to prevent the outbreak of demonstrations on the anniversary.
In early November Abilio José Osorio Soares, the (Timorese) governor of East Timor, reportedly told the Indonesian legal magazine Forum Keadilan that Indonesian troops should have killed more people at the Santa Cruz cemetery in November 1991.
Soares subsequently claimed that his remarks had been misinterpreted.
ASIA — PACIFIC
AUSTRALIA
Acquittal of Bond
On Nov. 19 a Perth jury found bankrupt Australian entrepreneur Alan Bond not guilty of dishonestly inducing a businessman to take part in a corporate rescue.
Bond had in May 1992 been sentenced to 2 years' imprisonment [see p. 38917]after being convicted on the same charge, but was released in August after the Western Australian Court of Criminal Appeal quashed the conviction and ordered a retrial [see p. 39056].
Lifting of ban on homosexual military personnel
After months of debate the Australian government announced on Nov. 23 that it had lifted a ban on homosexuals in the armed forces.
The issue had pitted Defence Minister Robert Ray, who had backed service senior personnel opposed to the lifting of the ban against Attorney General Michael Duffy, who had advocated lifting the ban on human rights grounds.
Prime Minister Paul Keating said that the decision reflected "broad support in the Australian community for the removal of employment discrimination of any kind" .
ASIA — PACIFIC
BELAU
Elections — Referendum on constitutional change
Presidential and legislative elections were held in Belau (also known as Palau), the last remaining remnant of the UN Trust Territory of the Pacific, on Nov. 4.
In the presidential contest the incumbent Vice-President, Kuniwo Nakamura, polled 50.7 per cent of the votes cast to defeat Johnson Toribiong who polled 49.3 per cent.
The vice-presidency was won by Senator Tommy Remengesau who polled 51.7 per cent compared with the 48.3 per cent of the vote won by Sandra Pierantozzi.
Under the terms of Belau's new electoral system the number of candidates for the presidency and vice-presidency had been narrowed to two through the holding of a first round elections on Sept. 22, when incumbent President Ngiratkel Etpison was eliminated after finishing third with 24.8 per cent, behind Nakamura with 37.2 per cent and Toribiong with 37.9 per cent .
In the vice-presidential primary Remengesau topped a field of four candidates with 33.9 per cent of the vote followed by Pierantozzi with 24.3 per cent.
The primary system was adopted in 1992, in place of a system of simple plurality (first-past-the-post), in order to prevent a candidate from winning executive office with less than 50 per cent of the vote (Etpison having been elected in 1988, against six rival candidates, with only 26 per cent of the total vote).
On Nov. 4 voters also chose 14 senators from among 46 candidates and 16 members of the House of Representatives from among 37 candidates.
Referendum on constitutional change
A referendum on Nov. 4 attempted to break the impasse over the status of Belau's relations with the USA by reducing the majority necessary to amend its constitution.
As one of the four original components of the US-administered UN Trust Territory of the Pacific, Belau had negotiated a Compact of Free Association with the USA, but this compact had never become operative, as the rights which it granted to the USA to determine defence and foreign policy issues conflicted with the clauses of Belau's Constitution which forbade the entry, storage or disposal of nuclear, chemical or biological weapons.
Repeated attempts to amend the Constitution in order to accommodate the Compact had been approved by referendum but had failed to achieve the requisite 75 per cent majority.
Two of the other three components of the Pacific Trust Territory, the Marshall Islands and the Federated States of Micronesia (FSM), had achieved independence in "free association" with the USA, while the Northern Mariana Islands had opted for US Commonwealth status.
Resolution of Belau's position would allow the final dissolution of the UN trusteeship.
The Nov. 4 referendum proposed that a simple majority should in future be sufficient to pass constitutional amendments.
Originally scheduled for July 13 but postponed in the face of legal challenges, it was held on the basis that a simple majority in 75 per cent of the country's 16 states would be sufficient for approval of the proposition.
The referendum result was reported as approving the proposal by a margin of 62 per cent to 33 per cent(5 per cent spoiled votes), and the proposal was carried in 14 of the 16 states.
Unless overturned by the courts, the result appeared to open the way for a further referendum on constitutional reform which was likely to be held in early 1993.
If this produced a majority for the removal of those elements of the Constitution stipulating Belau's nuclear-free status there would be no further obstacle to the implementation of the Compact.
ASIA — PACIFIC
NAURU
Re-election of President
It was reported on Nov. 18 that, following a general election, Nauru's new parliament had re-elected Bernard Dowiyogo as the country's President by 10 votes to seven.
Dowiyogo, who had first been elected President in 1989 [see p. 37126], announced a new six-member Cabinet on the following day.
New Nauru Cabinet
*Bernard Dowiyogo President; External Affairs; Island Development and Industry
*Vincent Detenamo Works and Community Services; Internal Affairs; Minister assisting the President
*Vinci Clodumar Finance
**Pres Nimes Ekwona Education
**Ludwig Scotti Health
**Derog Gioura Justice
*Altered portfolio.
**New appointment.
ASIA — PACIFIC
ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK
Annual ADB forecast
In its annual forecast released in early November the Asian Development Bank (ADB) predicted an upswing in economic growth in south-east Asia during 1993, following a year of slower growth in 1992.
The region's gross domestic product (GDP) had shown a growth rate of 6 per cent in 1991 but the figure for 1992 was expected to be only 5.7 per cent.
The ADB blamed the slowdown on high inflation rates and interest rates, while the region had also been affected by reduced foreign investment, mainly due to Japan's financial difficulties.
EUROPE
FORMER YUGOSLAVIA
UN, NATO and WEU measures on flight ban and sanctions
The UN Security Council adopted a resolution on Nov. 10 increasing the strength of the UN Protection Force in Yugoslavia (UNPROFOR) by 75 military observers in order to implement the ban on military flights over Bosnia-Hercegovina, agreed on Oct. 9 [see p. 39149], which had been repeatedly violated.
A Security Council resolution, passed on Nov. 16 by 13 votes to none with China and Zimbabwe abstaining, called upon states to stop and search vessels in the Adriatic sea and on the river Danube to ensure strict implementation of UN sanctions against the former Yugoslavia.
It also called for observers to be deployed on the borders of Bosnia-Hercegovina.
The North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and the Western European Union (WEU) agreed on Nov. 20 to support the UN resolution by adopting powers to stop and search any ships entering or leaving Yugoslav waters, with warships being allowed if necessary to fire across the bows of vessels to force them to stop.
The UN special rapporteur on human rights, Tadeusz Mazowiecki [for whose August appointment and report see p. 39035], told the Security Council on Nov. 16 that immediate action was necessary to close detention camps, set up security zones for humanitarian purposes in Bosnia-Hercegovina and establish corridors for humanitarian supplies.
He also noted systematic human rights violations of the minority populations within the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (FRY"the remaining rump federation of Serbia and Montenegro) in Kosovo, Vojvodina and Sandzak.
Bosnia-Hercegovina
Fighting continued throughout Bosnia-Hercegovina in November.
Sarajevo remained under siege, although relief convoys supplying about 50 per cent of the city's needs reached the city by road and relief flights continued sporadically.
After delays when Bosnian forces refused to allow refugees to leave Sarajevo, 1,500 Moslems and Croats left the city on Nov. 15 in a convoy of Red Cross buses.
UNPROFOR convoys trying to reach other towns came under fire several times (and on Nov. 6 returned fire) but on Nov. 19 broke the seven-month siege of Tuzla and on Nov. 28 the eight-month siege of Srebrenica (the biggest Moslem enclave in eastern Bosnia); both towns were full of refugees.
Croat offensive in Bosnia
As part of a separate offensive around Mostar involving Croatian regular forces, a supply route linking Serb-held territory in Bosnia and Croatia with Belgrade was cut on Nov. 9.
FRY President Dobrica Cosic warned in a message to UN Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali on Nov. 12 that he would dispatch the federal army to Bosnia to protect Serbs unless Croatia halted its offensive.
Despite an agreement reached on Nov. 26, between military commanders of the Croat and Serb armed forces in Bosnia and the UNPROFOR commander, Maj.-Gen.
Philippe Morillon, for Croatian regular forces to begin withdrawing from the self-proclaimed Serbian Republic of Bosnia-Hercegovina as from Nov. 30, there was no sign of a decrease in fighting.
An earlier ceasefire arranged on Nov. 11 had broken down after five days.
Agreement on joint commands in Croat area
Talks held on Nov. 3 between President Franjo Tudjman of Croatia, President Alija Izetbegovic of Bosnia-Hercegovina and Mate Boban, effectively the Croatian leader in Bosnia, resulted in an agreement to set up joint commands in the self-proclaimed Croatian Community of Herceg-Bosna [see p. 39103].
Bosnian Serb constitutional proposals
The constitutional proposals for Bosnia-Hercegovina presented by the Geneva Conference negotiators on Oct. 28 [see p. 39150]were rejected by Radovan Karadzic, the Bosnian Serb leader.
Alternative Bosnian Serb constitutional proposals based on the three-way subdivision of Bosnia-Hercegovina, as laid down in the March 1992 Lisbon agreement [see p. 38832]with provision for joint foreign, defence and other policies, were presented to the Geneva conference on Nov. 19.
Measures to unify Serb-held Bosnia with other Serb areas
Representatives of the Serbian Republic of Bosnia-Hercegovina and of the self-proclaimed Serbian Republic of Krajina (RSK) in Croatia met on Nov. 1 in the north Bosnian town of Prijedor to unite their territories politically, establishing a joint army, legal system and citizenship as the first step towards the unification of the whole Serbian nation [see p. 39103].
A joint commission of representatives of Croatia, the RSK, the EC and UNPROFOR set up in June suspended its negotiations on Nov. 9 due to lack of progress over demilitarization and other issues.
New Prime Minister — Diplomatic relations
Prime Minister Jure Pelivan resigned on Nov. 9 and was replaced by Mile Akmadzic.
France and Germany established diplomatic relations with Bosnia-Hercegovina on Nov. 12-13 on the basis of the republic's borders as they had existed within the former Yugoslavia.
CEI meeting
Foreign Ministers of the member countries of the Central European Initiative (CEI) met in Graz, Austria, on Nov. 21, to discuss the war in Bosnia-Hercegovina.
At the suggestion of the Slovenian Foreign Minister, Dmitrij Rupel, they agreed to begin preparations for a special ministerial conference on the war to be held in Sarajevo, the Bosnian capital, at a future date.
The meeting was attended by ministers from CEI member countries Austria, Croatia, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Italy, Poland and Slovenia, and by observers from Bulgaria, Byelarus, Romania and Ukraine.
Istanbul meeting — Concern to prevent spread of conflict
The Foreign Ministers of Albania, Austria, Bulgaria, Croatia, Hungary, Italy, Macedonia, Romania, Slovenia and Turkey met in Istanbul on Nov. 25 to discuss ways to prevent the conflict in Bosnia-Hercegovina from spreading; the Bosnian, Greek and Yugoslav ministers did not attend.
Those present called for the deployment of UN troops on Bosnia's borders and possibly also in threatened areas such as Kosovo, Vojvodina, Macedonia and Sandzak.
One Albanian had been killed and two Serb soldiers wounded when ethnic Albanians apparently attacked Serbian headquarters in Pristina, the capital of Kosovo, on Nov. 11.
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
Panic's survival of confidence vote
On Nov. 2 Prime Minister Milan Panic lost a vote of confidence in the Socialist Party-dominated lower house of the Federal Assembly by 93 votes to 24.
However, the motion was defeated in the 40-member upper house on Nov. 3 by 17 votes to 18, thanks to the votes of most of the 20 Montenegrin deputies.
Government resignations
Claiming that Panic was sacrificing Serbian interests, the Minister without Portfolio, Radmila Milentijevic, resigned on Nov. 28, followed by Economy Minister Nikola Sainovic on Nov. 29 and by a Deputy Prime Minister, Oskar Kovac, on Nov. 30.
Macedonia
Three ethnic Albanians and a Macedonian were shot dead by police and 23 were injured in riots in Skopje on Nov. 6.
The trouble was sparked off by rumours that the police had killed an Albanian youth during a raid on black-marketeers.
The Security Council on Nov. 25 authorized the dispatch of a dozen UN monitors to Macedonia to assess the situation there.
In separate declarations on Nov. 12 Serbia, Albania and Bulgaria expressed support for a Greek initiative to guarantee the existing borders of Macedonia, apparently designed to allay international concern about Greece's intentions towards the former Yugoslav republic.
Refugee issue
The Office of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees estimated in November that 581,000 refugees from former Yugoslavia were scattered throughout Europe.
In Croatia 369,300 were officially registered up to the closure of its borders in July, while Germany had accepted 235,000.
The situation of refugees worsened as Croatia refused to allow in those fleeing from Jacje and Travnik, leaving some 6,000 in camps at the frontier; Germany agreed to take 1,000 on Nov. 11 and others were accepted by Spain and Austria.
The United Kingdom imposed visa restrictions from Nov. 8 on former Yugoslavs except holders of Croatian and Slovenian passports and agreed to take only 150 refugees plus their dependants; on Nov. 30 it increased this number to 1,000 plus dependants for temporary asylum.
EUROPE
SLOVENIA
Foreign relations
South Africa on Nov. 9 established diplomatic relations with Slovenia (and also with Croatia).
Austrian Chancellor Franz Vranitsky paid an official visit to Slovenia on Nov. 5-6.
Hungarian Foreign Minister Geza Jeszensky also visited Slovenia on Nov. 6 where the two sides signed a minority protection agreement covering the 10,000 Hungarians in Slovenia.
China and Slovenia signed a trade agreement on Nov. 9 in Beijing.
EUROPE
ALBANIA
Split in ruling party
The ruling Democratic Party (DP) split on Nov. 3 when six of its deputies formed a new Democratic Alliance.
Gramoz Pashko, Deputy Prime Minister in June-December 1991, who had been a founder member of the DP, accused his old party of diluting and altering the reform programme especially as regards privatization, and described the new party as a liberal formation of the centre-right committed to institutional, economic and cultural reforms.
Relations with Greece, Turkey, and former Yugoslav republics
A military delegation headed by Defence Minister Safet Xhulali visited Greece on Nov. 6-7, when the two countries signed a defence co-operation agreement.
A military co-operation agreement between Albania and Turkey was signed on Nov. 19.
President Sali Berisha visited Slovenia on Nov. 9-10 for talks with President Milan Kucan and government members.
From Ljubljana he called on ethnic Albanians in Kosovo to boycott the forthcoming elections in the Serbian-dominated new Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (FRY), and also advocated the independence of Montenegro from the FRY.
A Croatian delegation led by Foreign Affairs Minister Zdenko Skrabalo visited Albania for talks on bilateral relations on Oct. 29-Nov. 1.
EUROPE
BULGARIA
Continued government crisis
No resolution was found during November to the crisis brought about by the resignation of the Union of Democratic Forces (UDF) government in late October [see p. 39151].
As of late November the UDF government remained in office in a caretaker capacity.
As stipulated in the Constitution, President Zhelyu Zhelev on Nov. 12 invited caretaker Prime Minister and UDF leader Filip Dimitrov, as leader of the grouping holding the largest number of seats in the National Assembly, to form a new government within seven days.
UDF leaders entered into negotiations with leaders of the ethnic Turks' Movement for Rights and Freedoms (MRF), whose withdrawal of support for the government had forced its resignation in October.
However, in a vote in the Assembly on Nov. 20 the MRF voted alongside the (former communist) Bulgarian Socialist Party (BSP) to reject Dimitrov's nomination as Prime Minister.
After this vote the BSP began meetings and consultations with the UDF and the MRF on the possibility of forming a project government of national consensus.
New Assembly Speaker
Aleksandar Yordanov, a UDF deputy, was elected as chair of the National Assembly on Nov. 5.
Yordanov replaced Stefan Savov, also of the UDF, who had been forced out of office by the MNF and the BSP in September [see p. 39105].
Sentencing of Atanasov
Georgi Atanasov, Prime Minister in 1986-90, and Stoyan Ovcharov, Minister of the Economy and Planning in 1987-89, were given prison sentences of 10 and nine years respectively on Nov. 3 after being found guilty of embezzlement [see p. 39151 for opening of trial in October].
Privatization plan
On Oct. 26 the government released details of a plan to begin privatization of at least 92 companies before the end of 1992.
Companies involved in industry and agriculture would be given priority under the plan, but other sectors included construction, trade, services, transport and communications.
Military agreement with Turkey
On Nov. 12 Bulgaria and Turkey signed an agreement on military co-operation.
The so-called Edirne Document dealt with three issues:(i) confidence and security-building in the areas adjacent to their common border;(ii) increased sharing of military information; and (iii) promotion of military contacts.
An earlier military agreement (the Sofia Document), also aimed at strengthening confidence and security, had been signed in December 1991.
EUROPE
CZECHOSLOVAKIA
Federal Assembly decision on dissolution of federation
The Federal Assembly on Nov. 25 adopted, at the third attempt, a constitutional amendment which provided the legal basis for the dissolution of the federation of the Czech and Slovak republics on Jan. 1.
The resolution was adopted with 183 votes for, 30 against and 55 abstentions; it thus achieved the required three-fifth majority (180 votes) by a margin of three votes.
[For related developments in October see pp. 39151-52.]
In an attempt to force the issue the respective republican parliaments on Nov. 17 had passed by large majorities similarly worded resolutions authorizing the split and declaring that they would "assume full responsibility for the continuity of state power" on the territory of their republics after Jan. 1.
Throughout November the two republican governments continued to reach agreements on general issues and technical details concerning the dissolution.
Further to the agreement on a temporary joint currency [see p. 39152], each side decided to set up its own central bank.
At meetings on Nov. 10 and 29 the two Prime Ministers, Vaclav Klaus and Vladimir Meciar, signed accords on financial, telecommunications, transport, agricultural and other issues.
Specific agreements dealt with double taxation, protection of investments (also in relation to the vouchers issued to the public as part of the privatization programme — see p. 39062) and joint introduction of value added tax in 1993.
Treaties on good-neighbourly relations and on co-operation and mutual assistance between government ministries were also finalized.
It was also agreed to divide the armed forces, military assets and equipment, foreign reserves and foreign debt in the ratio 2:1, reflecting the populations of the Czech and Slovak republics.
After a heated debate and several inconclusive votes the Federal Assembly on Nov. 13 approved a bill on the division of federal assets, one of the main outstanding issues.
Property was essentially to be divided territorially, that is, the location of property would be decisive for its allocation.
In a small number of cases the division would be in the proportion 2:1.
There would also be compensation for either republic in cases where most of the property of a federal institution was located in the other (which would apply mainly to Slovakia).
Vaclav Havel, who had been federal President from June 1989 until July 1992 [see p. 39015], on Nov. 17 confirmed his candidacy for the post of president of the Czech Republic.
The parliament of the Slovak Republic, the National Council, on Nov. 19 approved the holding of a referendum on the dissolution of the federation.
Disbanding of Charter 77 and ODU
Charter 77, the human rights organization which played a prominent role as a focus for anti-communist dissent in the 1980s, decided to disband itself on Nov. 3 since it had "completed its historical role" .
The movement had been founded in January 1977 by prominent dissidents, including Havel.
The congress of the Civic Democratic Union (ODU), the successor to Public Against Violence (VPN), the main vehicle of the anti-communist movement in Slovakia during and after the 1989 revolution, decided to dissolve the party on Nov. 14.
The party, which had failed to gain any seats in the June federal and republican elections, had been riven by policy disagreements for some time and was reputedly heavily indebted.
Conviction of former communist officials
Frantisek Kincl, Interior Minister at the time of the 1989 revolution, his deputy Alojz Lorenc, and Karel Vykypel, the former chief of the counterintelligence service, were convicted by a military court on Oct. 30 of abusing the authority of a public official and sentenced to three, four and 3½ years' imprisonment respectively.
They had ordered the unlawful arrest of many demonstrators during anti-communist demonstrations in 1988 and 1989.
Death of Dubcek
Alexander Dubcek, the Communist Party leader during the reform movement in 1968 which became known as the Prague Spring, died on Nov. 7 from serious internal injuries sustained in a car accident in September.
Born in 1921 in eastern Slovakia, Dubcek became party first secretary in January 1968 [see p. 22528]as part of a wholesale removal of the previous stalinist leadership.
He presided over far-reaching changes, including the abolition of censorship, in a programme which he described as aiming for "socialism with a human face" and which came to be known as the "Prague Spring" .
He was forced from power when the Soviet-led invasion in August ended the experiment [see pp. 22909-17].
After a brief spell as ambassador to Turkey, he was expelled from the party and then worked for the Slovak forestry commission.
He returned to public life in 1989 during the "velvet revolution" and was elected Speaker of the federal parliament in December 1989, a post which he held until the June 1992 elections, which he contested as the leading candidate of the small Social Democratic Party in Slovakia [see p. 38944].
Many thousands paid their last respects to Dubcek at his funeral in Bratislava on Nov. 15.
The ceremonies were overshadowed by disagreements between the federal and Slovak authorities, reflecting tension surrounding the imminent dissolution of the federation"a development which Dubcek had strongly opposed.
EUROPE
HUNGARY
Agreement with Russia on Soviet troop claims
Hungary and Russia settled a number of claims outstanding between the two countries during an official visit by President Boris Yeltsin to Hungary on Nov. 10-11.
Hungary dropped demands for compensation for environmental damage caused by Soviet troops stationed in the country from 1956 until 1991.
Russia in turn dropped its demands for compensation for its investments in military bases.
Hungary also promised humanitarian aid to the Russian army in the form of medical supplies and undertook to give help, "commensurate with its means" , for the construction of housing for Soviet troops previously stationed in Hungary.
The two governments failed to reach agreement on another financial issue, the settlement of Russia's trade debt to Hungary, estimated at around US$1,700 million.
Hungary did agree, however, to buy military equipment and spares worth $800 million in part-settlement of the debt.
Officials said that they hoped to work out a schedule of repayments by the end of the year.
In a speech to Hungary's National Assembly, Yeltsin expressed the hope that the two countries could put their mutual bitter past behind them and relaunch bilateral relations on a fresh sheet.
He condemned the Soviet invasion of Hungary in 1956 and visited the grave of Imre Nagy, the leader of the revolutionary government during the uprising who was subsequently executed.
New SzDSz leader
The Alliance of Free Democrats (SzDSz), the main opposition party, elected Ivan Petö as its leader at a congress on Nov. 15.
The election of Petö, to succeed Péter Tölgyessy, was considered by observers as indicating the party's move to the centre.
At the legislative elections in 1990 it had advocated a strongly right-wing economic programme.
Devaluation of forint
The forint was devalued by 1 per cent on Nov. 11; the accumulated depreciation of the currency in 1992 thus reached 8.3 per cent.
EUROPE
POLAND
Walesa's approval of small constitution
President Lech Walesa on Nov. 17 signed the interim "small constitution" , the Constitutional Tribunal having ruled valid the procedure by which the Sejm (lower house of the National Assembly) had passed the measure.
The Sejm had voted on Oct. 16 to reject most of the changes to the small constitution proposed by the Senate (upper house), but in doing so had altered its rules of procedure, leading to a call for the Constitutional Tribunal to rule on the legality of the changed procedure.
The small constitution defined the powers and relationship between parliament, the President and the government.
It was intended to ensure that the supreme bodies of state worked more efficiently, and to guarantee that no conflicts arose among them.
Under the small constitution the government would be able to expedite the Sejm's examination of urgent legislation and seek special powers to issue decrees.
The President would lose the right to put down a motion for the government's dismissal.
The National Assembly's constitutional commission, charged with drawing up a full new (large) constitution, began work on Nov. 17.
Walesa, who attended this session, said afterwards that in order to prove that the new constitution had not been tailor-made for him he would resign as soon as it came into force.
Approval of adjustment to 1992 budget
The Sejm on Nov. 6 voted by a majority of 43 to accept amendments to the 1992 budget put forward by the government.
The budget was seen as essential to any agreement with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) on new loan arrangments.
The amendments authorized higher sales taxes and deeper spending cuts, but also widened the permitted budget deficit, to 81,840,000 million zloty (US$1.00=14,199.4 zloty as at Oct. 5, 1992), nearly 7.5 per cent of gross domestic product (GDP), as against 5 per cent as previously agreed with the IMF.
However, without the budget changes the deficit would reportedly have been 20,000,000 million zloty greater.
Despite the increased deficit, IMF officials holding talks in Warsaw with the Polish government expressed satisfaction with the vote by the Sejm, seeing it as a sign that the government could push its programme through parliament.
The government on Nov. 19 approved the draft budget for 1993, envisaging a deficit of 81,000,000 million zloty, or 5.1 per cent of projected GDP.
Agreement with IMF on standby loan
The Polish government and the IMF on Nov. 24 agreed in principle terms for a substantial new loan covering the period to end-1993; approval of the loan by the IMF board and the Sejm still remained.
Once finalized, the new accord was expected to open the way to resumption of debt reduction talks with Western commercial banks which had been suspended since June 1991.
The IMF had frozen co-operation with Poland during 1991 because the government had exceeded the agreed limits on inflation and the budget deficit [see p.
R116-17].
Approval by Sejm committee of draft law on abortion
A special Sejm committee on Nov. 12 accepted a draft law to criminalize abortion (available on demand under 1956 legislation — but see p. 39822 for subsequent restrictions), introducing a two-year prison sentence for doctors carrying out abortions and for women having them.
Opponents of this proposed legislation set up on Nov. 13 a committee headed by Zbigniew Bujak, the Solidarity veteran and Union of Labour deputy to the Sejm, to campaign for a national referendum on the issue.
Both Walesa and Prime Minister Hanna Suchocka opposed a referendum.
Suchocka, whose Democratic Union (UD) favoured a referendum, was concerned that it might destabilize the government coalition, which included the Christian National Union (ZChN), the main force behind the draft anti-abortion law.
However, on Nov. 27 parliamentary leaders of the UD and ZChN agreed that differences over abortion should not lead to the government's downfall.
Approval of new defence policy
The National Defence Committee (a body chaired by Walesa and including the Prime Minister and other ministers) on Nov. 2 adopted a new defence doctrine for Poland.
The doctrine rested on the assumption that the country had no natural enemies and advanced no territorial claims on its neighbours.
Poland's long-term security was seen as lying in the creation of a Euro-Atlantic security system, and future membership of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) was confirmed as an aim.
The defence doctrine pointed out the risks to the country posed by regional conflicts in the former Soviet Union.
Suchocka's visit to Germany
Suchocka paid a working visit to Bonn on Nov. 5-6, holding talks with Chancellor Helmut Kohl and Foreign Minister Klaus Kinkel.
During the talks she emphasized the need for the European Communities (EC) to open up to Poland and the other countries of the Visegrad Three "Poland, Hungary and Czechoslovakia" and reiterated that a loan of ECU1,000 million to finance the Polish budget deficit would greatly help the country's economy.
Kohl gave assurances that he would seek Poland's integration with the rest of Europe.
The activities of neo-fascist groups in Silesia (where most of Poland's German minority lived) were also discussed.
EUROPE
ROMANIA
New government
Nicolae Vacaroiu was appointed Prime Minister by President Ion Iliescu on Nov. 4.
A 49-year-old economist with no party political affiliation, he had been a junior minister in the Finance Ministry (dealing with taxation issues) in the outgoing government of Theodor Stolojan.
He was relatively unknown, but was praised by Iliescu for his grasp of the country's economic problems.
The list of Cabinet members submitted by Vacaroiu to parliament on Nov. 13 was dominated by members of the Democratic National Salvation Front (DNSF) and also included several non-party technocrats.
The DNSF, the party of President Iliescu, had become the largest parliamentary party in the September elections [see pp. 39104; 39150-51].
It had called for a slowing down of market-oriented economic reforms.
Vacaroiu promised a "receptive and open" government and said that the continuation of reform was his absolute priority, but that the government would "assume special care for the social costs of that process" .
This was widely interpreted by opposition parties as indicating a switch to economic conservatism.
Several opposition leaders described the programme as a major step backwards for Romanian democracy and reforms.
The absence of specific privatization measures was strongly criticized, as was the inclusion in the Cabinet of former junior ministers and other leading figures from the communist era (in particular the Industry Minister, Dumitru Popescu, and the Health Minister, Iulian Mincu).
The minority DNSF administration was accepted by the Assembly of Deputies by 260 votes to 203.
During the parliamentary debates it had become clear that the government would be able to count on external support from the Socialist Party of Labour on the far left, the Greater Romania Party on the far right and several other nationalist groups.
The outgoing Foreign Minister, Adrian Nastase, was elected president of the Assembly of Deputies.
Stolojan took up a senior post at the World Bank.
Party political developments
Emil Constantinescu, who had come second in the presidential elections in September [see p. 39104], was elected president of the main opposition alliance, the Democratic Convention (DCR), on Nov. 27.
He succeeded Corneliu Coposu, who had previously announced his decision to resign from the post.
Mircea Druc, who had stood in the presidential elections as an independent candidate campaigning for the unification of Romania, Bessarabia (now Moldova and parts of Ukraine) and Bukovina (also part of Ukraine), was elected leader of the newly formed National Reunification Party on Nov. 4.
Release of Nicu Ceausescu
Nicu Ceausescu, the son of the late dictator Nicolae Ceausescu, was released from prison on Nov. 24 on health grounds; he was said to be suffering from cirrhosis of the liver.
A regional Communist Party leader before the 1989 revolution which overthrew his father, he had been sentenced to long prison sentences for murder (later overturned) and other crimes [see pp. 37725; 38306].
Nicolae Vacaroiu Prime Minister Theodor Viorel Melescanu Foreign Affairs
New Romanian Council of Ministers
*Lt-Gen.
Nicolae Spiroiu Defence Gheorghe Ion Danescu Interior Petre Ninosu Justice Dumitru Popescu Industry Ioan Oancea Agriculture and Food Industry Paul Theodoru Transport
*Andrei Chirica Communications Constantin Teculescu Trade Matei Agathon Dan Tourism Florin Gheorghescu Finance
*Dan Mircea Popescu Labour and Social Protection Marin Cristea Public Works and Land Improvement Aurel Constantin Ilie Waters, Forestry and Environmental Protection Liviu Maior Education Doru Dumitru Palade Research and Technology Iulian Mincu Health
**Mihai Golu Culture Gheorghe Angelescu Youth Affairs and Sports Vasile Mois Relations with Parliament Misu Negritoiu Chair of the Council for Economic Co-ordination, Strategy and Reform
*No change.
**Altered responsibilities.
EUROPE
CIS
Defence Ministers' meeting
The Council of Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) Defence Ministers met in Moscow on Nov. 4 where agreement was reached on a number of issues, including the protection of victims of armed conflict and the composition of CIS strategic forces.
Under pressure from Ukraine, all countries agreed to limit the definition of CIS strategic forces to "strategic nuclear forces and those military units which are essential to the day-to-day functioning of such forces" .
According to C.-in-C. of CIS Armed Forces Marshal Yevgeny Shaposhnikov, it now remained for Ukraine to recognize Russia's jurisdiction over nuclear weapons located on its territory, and he called for a Russian-Ukrainian summit to discuss the issue.
A session of the Committee of the Chiefs of Staff of CIS Armed Forces which met on Nov. 18 was, however, unable to reach agreement on a specific list of units which should comprise CIS strategic forces under the new definition.
Foreign Ministers and Heads of Government meetings
CIS Foreign Ministers met on Nov. 12 to agree an agenda for a Heads of Government meeting the following day.
An 18-point agenda was drawn up, focusing principally on the CIS charter, due to be signed in Minsk at the CIS summit of Dec. 4.
At a press conference following the meeting, Russian Deputy Foreign Minister Adamishin reacted to Ukrainian and Turkmen hesitation over the terms of the charter by saying "let those that are ready for closer integration integrate" , and that the others "have every right not to join" .
Heads of CIS Governments met in Moscow on Nov. 13 and signed 12 of the 18 draft documents.
No agreement was reached on the commonwealth charter, with Ukrainian Prime Minister Leonid Kuchma declaring his government unwilling to sign the document in its present form.
EUROPE
RUSSIA
Pre-Congress political manoeuvres
Political tension between reformers in the Russian government and centrists represented by the Civic Union opposition movement subsided in mid-November as the two groups appeared to reach a compromise [see p. 39153 for earlier moves towards such a compromise in October].
However, shortly before the opening on Dec. 1 of the conservative-dominated Congress of People's Deputies, the truce collapsed amid fears that the Congress would attempt to force the government's resignation.
In preparation for the Congress, the standing parliament, the Supreme Soviet, demanded that constitutional changes be made by the Congress to allow the legislature more control over the government, since President Boris Yeltsin's emergency powers, granted by the fifth (extraordinary) Congress in October 1991 [see p. 38537], which gave him the right to appoint the government, were due to expire.
At a meeting with Yeltsin on Nov. 3, Civic Union's representatives presented its "anti-crisis" economic programme [see p. 39108]which included demands for the resignation of several prominent reformist ministers.
Although Yeltsin dismissed the idea of substantial personnel changes, he said that he held common views with the industrial managers in Civic Union on economic policy.
Talks between the two sides continued during November and reached agreement on Nov. 24, forming what the Financial Times of Nov. 30 called "a viable corporatism" .
However, Civic Union withdrew support for the government when acting Prime Minister Yegor Gaidar, presenting "a programme of urgent measures to lead the Russian economy out of crisis" to a joint sitting of the Supreme Soviet on Nov. 26, ruled out compromise on four key points demanded by Civic Union:(i) return to the state distribution system;(ii) large increases in the money supply;(iii) freezing wages and prices; and (iv) fixing an exchange rate below that of the market.
The government plan's provisions, said Gaidar, coincided with some suggestions made in the many alternative economic reform programmes currently in circulation, including that of Civic Union.
Its main aims were to slow inflation and the fall in production over the next four months, and to maximise industrial potential by offering selective support to viable industries.
On Nov. 27 the Supreme Soviet voted for a draft resolution demanding corrections in the government's anti-crisis programme and requesting the President to present to the Congress his candidate for the post of Prime Minister.
The Supreme Soviet had on Nov. 13 passed a bill strengthening the legislature's role at the expense of that of the President in making ministerial appointments.
Izvestiya criticized this bill as anti-constitutional and Yeltsin refused to endorse it.
In addition irregularities were reported in the voting, as deputies cast votes for their absent colleagues as well as for themselves.
The battle for political supremacy was thus carried over to the Congress itself.
Personnel changes
Galina Starovoitova, presidential adviser on nationalities policy and a prominent democratic figure, was dismissed by presidential decree on Nov. 4.
Interfax news agency later released remarks made by Starovoitova shortly before her dismissal, and possibly connected with it, in which she accused the authorities of a pro-Ossetian bias in their response to the emerging conflict in the North Caucasus [see below].
The post of Chair of the State Committee on Nationalities Policy, vacated by Valery Tishkov in October [see p. 39155], was given to Sergei Shakhrai, who was also made a Deputy Prime Minister.
On Nov. 24 Shakhrai's appointment as a full member of the Security Council was confirmed by the Supreme Soviet.
Shakhrai had criticized the Council for conservative bias, and his appointment strengthened reformist representation on this powerful body [see also p. 39019].
Two key figures in the Russian leadership lost their posts on Nov. 25-26, namely the State Secretary to the President, Gennady Burbulis, and the Deputy Prime Minister and Press and Information Minister, Mikhail Poltoranin.
Burbulis, one of Yeltsin's closest aides, was immediately appointed head of a group of presidential advisors.
Poltoranin claimed that his resignation was motivated by the need to protect Yeltsin from opposition attacks, but also referred to "a series of reasons" concerning the media, thought to refer to the dismissal of the Ostankino broadcasting company chairman [see below].
Resignation of broadcasting chairman
The chair of the Ostankino Russian State Television and Radio Company, Yegor Yakovlev, was dismissed by Yeltsin on Nov. 25, following criticism by Akhsarbak Galazov, the Chairman of North Ossetia's Supreme Soviet, at a meeting of the Council of Heads of Republics [see p. 39203], of a documentary broadcast by Ostankino on Nov. 23 about the North Ossetia-Ingush conflict [see below].
Galazov claimed that the programme had been pro-Ingush, although Russian liberal opinion and Western observers noted a pro-Ossetian bias in the Russian leadership.
The decision to dismiss Yakovlev caused strong criticism in the liberal press, which warned that it showed an increasing reluctance to brook opposition on the part of the Russian leadership and could be interpreted as a sacrifice to conservative forces prior to the forthcoming Congress of People's Deputies.
Izvestiya on Nov. 25 called Yakovlev one of the foremost media figures who has proved over many years his devotion to democratic principles.
Yakovlev had been editor of Moskovskiye novosti, a newspaper which had extended the boundaries of freedom of speech during the perestroika period, and had taken over the chairmanship of All-Union Television and Radio (which became Ostankino in December 1991"see p. 38655) in August 1991 after the failed coup [see p. 38372].
His deputy, Igor Malashenko, was made acting chair of Ostankino.
Arrest of scientist for "divulging state secrets" on chemical weapons
A scientist working for a Moscow chemical research institute was arrested on Oct. 22 under article 75 of the RSFSR Criminal Code, which encompassed revealing state secrets.
(With the Russian law on state secrets still in draft form, a presidential decree of Jan. 14, 1992, had reintroduced Soviet criteria to define what constituted a state secret.)
Vil Mirzayanov had co-authored an article entitled "Poisoned Policy" in Moskovskiye novosti of Sept. 20, which claimed that Russia was continuing development and testing of chemical weapons, despite signing the draft treaty banning chemical weapons adopted in Geneva in September [see p. 39121].
Moskovskiye novosti of Nov. 1, in a front-page comment, warned that the leadership's stated intention to end chemical weapons contradicts actual internal practice and revealing this practice is regarded as a crime.
Mirzayanov was released on Nov. 3 pending trial.
Regional developments
Ethnic conflict in Russian republics
Minor incidents in the Prigorodny region of North Ossetia, inhabited mainly by Ingush, ignited the tense situation in the North Caucasian republics into violent conflict at the end of October.
A swift response to the violence from the Russian leadership led to approval by an emergency sitting of the Security Council on Oct. 31 of the deployment of 3,000 elite troops in North Ossetia and a presidential decree to introduce a month-long state of emergency in North Ossetia and Ingushetia from Nov. 2 and to impose a temporary administration under Deputy Prime Minister, Georgy Khizha.
The Supreme Soviet immediately approved the decree, in contrast to its response in October 1991 when it had overturned the state of emergency imposed by the Russian administration in an attempt to subdue a rebellion in Chechnia [see p. 38582-83].
The Ingush nation (mainly Moslem) had been deported by Stalin in 1944, and, although they were allowed to return to their homeland in 1957, the Prigorodny region, previously part of Ingushetia, had remained in North Ossetia (whose population was mostly Christian).
Ingushetia, merged with the Chechen republic since 1934, had again become a separate region in June 1992, having responded to Chechnia's independence demands in March 1992 with a demand to remain in the Russian Federation [see p. 38826].
On Oct. 10, Tishkov, then Chair of the Russian State Committee on Nationalities Policy, visiting the region to monitor progress in forming an Ingush republic out of Chechen-Ingushetia, had confirmed that there would be no changes in the current borders of the North Caucasian republics.
An article in Izvestiya of Nov. 2, however, noted that according to the 1991 Russian Federation law on the rehabilitation of repressed peoples, deported peoples had the right to the land on which they had lived before their deportation.
Sergei Shakhrai, newly appointed to replace Tishkov [see above], replaced Khizha as head of the temporary administration of North Ossetia and Ingushetia on Nov. 9.
In addition Shakhrai was given co-ordinating powers over neighbouring regions: the republics of Kabardino-Balkaria, Karachai-Circassia, Adygey; Stavropol krai, Krasnodar krai and Rostov oblast.
Shakhrai, critical of the delay in establishing administrative structures in the Ingush republic, appointed Gen. Ruslan Aushev, an Afghanistan veteran previously advisor to Russian Vice-President Aleksandr Rutskoi, to head a temporary administration prior to republican elections.
The Ingushetia conflict had caused more than 300 deaths, according to the Guardian of Nov. 20, and over 50,000 Ingush had been forced to flee their homes in North Ossetia.
Both sides reported atrocities.
The resignation of the Commander of Russian Internal Troops, Col.-Gen.
Vasily Savvin, reported on Nov. 10, was described by the ITAR-TASS news agency as directly related to the North Ossetia-Ingushetia conflict and followed his visit to the region.
Russian Federation troops deployed in Ingushetia were withdrawn from the border with Chechnia after a protest from Chechnia, which claimed part of the area, and a threat of retaliation by Chechen President Dzhakhar Dudayev.
The Confederation of Peoples of the Caucasus [see p. 39155]on Nov. 11 ordered partial mobilization in all of its republics, instructing commanders to go to the Chechen capital, Grozny.
Although Russia and Chechnia agreed on Nov. 15 to withdraw their troops stationed along the Chechen-Ingush border after negotiations co-ordinated by Shakhrai, the situation remained tense.
Local government conference — Establishment of Union of Russian Governors
A conference of chairmen of local soviets was held in Moscow on Nov. 14-15.
Addressing the conference, Ruslan Khasbulatov, Supreme Soviet Chairman, attacked recent government criticism of both central and local legislatures, accusing the government of "constant provocative actions…perhaps to try and avoid responsibility for the existing failures in the economic reforms" .
Acting Prime Minister Gaidar presented an economic report to the conference.
On Nov. 16-17, the heads of local administrations (ie. the executive branch) convened in Moscow for talks with Yeltsin and government leaders.
The participants established a representative body, the Union of Russian Governors, which, however, would not be a constitutional body unlike the Council of Heads of Republics established on Oct. 15 [see p. 39154].
Izvestiya of Nov. 17 pointed out that the leaders of local administrations often had "more real power than the heads of Russian Federation constituent republics" and that they acted as a support base for Yeltsin.
Gaidar, in a visit to the industrial Urals region on Nov. 18-19 and at a pre-Congress meeting of deputies from Russia's southern region on Nov. 23, spoke of preparations to give more economic and political autonomy to the regions in the 1993 draft budget.
Meeting of Council of Heads of Republics
The Council of Heads of Republics held a pre-Congress meeting on Nov. 24, chaired by Yeltsin.
Izvestiya of Nov. 24 noted that the Council had "practically attained the status of a parallel structure, capable of becoming a specific political counterbalance to the parliament" .
The Council voted to include the chairman of the new Union of Russian Governors in its membership.
It confirmed support for the Federal Treaty [see p. 38825]as "a constituent part of the [future]Russian Constitution" and the basis of nationalities policy.
It also supported Yeltsin's proposal to involve regional leaders in policy development.
Tatarstan Constitution
The Republic of Tatarstan adopted its own Constitution on Nov. 6.
The most hotly debated point concerning Tatarstan's relationship with Russia described Tatarstan as a sovereign state, a subject of international law, associated with the Russian Federation — Russia — on the basis of a treaty on the mutual delegation of powers.
Tatarstan also introduced its own citizenship, while preserving dual citizenship with the Russian Federation.
Tatarstan had been one of the two Russian Federation constituent republics to refuse to sign the Federation Treaty in March 1992, holding instead a referendum on self-government [see p. 38825-26].
Since early April, the Tatarstan and Russian leadership had been negotiating a bilateral treaty which was still incomplete.
The Russian side accused Tatarstan of forcing the issue by promulgating its own Constitution, and criticized the provisions on the status of the republic.
Tatarstan's leaders, however, denied that the Constitution signified an attempt to leave the Russian Federation altogether.
Foreign relations
On an official two-day visit to the United Kingdom on Nov. 9-10, Yeltsin addressed both houses of Parliament, an occasion formerly reserved for the heads of Western countries.
In his speech he spoke of the forces interested in a revanchist coup in Russia.
The first bilateral treaty between Russia and the UK since 1766 was signed, in addition to five other agreements.
Before returning to Moscow, Yeltsin made an official visit to Hungary [see p. 39200].
Russian Foreign Minister Andrei Kozyrev, visiting France on Nov. 12-14 for talks, said that Franco-Russian relations should become the basis of stability on the continent.
On Nov. 4, the Russian Supreme Soviet had ratified the February Russo-French treaty [see p. 38772].
EUROPE
ARMENIA
Appointment of acting Foreign Minister
Arman Kirakosyan was appointed acting Foreign Minister on Nov. 10, following the resignation on Oct. 16 of Raffi Hovhannesyan.
Kirakosyan, 36, a historian, had been First Deputy Foreign Minister since December 1991.
His father John Kirakosyan, a prominent politician and diplomat, had headed the Armenian Foreign Ministry for 10 years.
Hovhannesyan, a US national, resigned at the request of President Levon Ter-Petrosyan over "apparent policy disagreement" .
He had made an allegedly anti-Turkish speech on Sept. 21 and had reportedly criticized US President George Bush for US neutrality over Nagorny-Karabakh, an attitude which the Armenian leadership feared could jeopardise Western aid.
EUROPE
AZERBAIJAN
Coup charges against former president
Criminal charges were filed against former President Ayaz Mutalibov, alleging that he organized a coup in May 1992.
On Nov. 3 Azerbaijan's Procurator General Ikhtiyar Shirinov asked parliament to annul a decision which guaranteed Mutalibov's security.
Mutalibov told Izvestiya, from his hiding place in Russia, that the charges were political persecution.
On Nov. 8 Azerbaijan called on Russia to extradite him to face trial.
Mutalibov, President of Azerbaijan from May 1990, resigned in March 1992 but was returned to office briefly in May after his successor Yagub Mamedov was held responsible for Azeri defeats in the disputed Armenian enclave of Nagorny-Karahakh.
His imposition of a state of emergency and cancellation of forthcoming presidential elections led to demonstrations and he was forced out of office after only a few hours [see pp. 38925-26].
Tension in Nakhichevan
There was a confrontation on Oct. 24 over the Azerbaijani authorities' decision to appoint Siavush Mustafayev as the new Interior Minister of the autonomous republic of Nakhichevan.
Some 200 Azerbaijan Popular Front fighters occupied the Interior Ministry and the television centre after the republic's parliament refused to endorse the appointment.
Gaidar Aliyev, chairman of the Nakhichevan Supreme Majlis (Council), denounced the action of the fighters as an attempted coup.
Local police ended the occupation, amid pro-Aliyev rallies in the capital.
On Oct. 27, Popular Front leaders in Nakhichevan accused the local authorities of conducting a propaganda war against Azerbaijan, and demanded new, democratic elections.
Azerbaijan's Minister of the Interior, Iskender Khamidov, left for Nakhichevan to hold talks over the issue, denying that there had been a conflict.
On Oct. 28, Azerbaijan's President Abulfaz Elchibey agreed to look for a compromise candidate for interior minister.
The Russian news agency ITAR-TASS reported on Nov. 23 that Aliyev had accepted election as leader of a newly formed political party, Yeni Azerbaijan (New Azerbaijan), set up as a constructive opposition.
EUROPE
BYELARUS
Suspension of privatization
Byelarus's privatization programme was halted on Nov. 12 amid allegations of corruption involving the illegal sell-off of state property.
Parliament ordered an immediate investigation into sales of state property over the previous two years, after hearing reports from the state procurator and the chairman of the Byelarus State Security Committee (KGB), Eduard Shirkovsky, on organized crime, corruption and theft.
Supreme Soviet chair Stanislav Shushkevich told deputies that a new law was being prepared which would bar state employees from working in the private sector.
On Nov. 18 in a crackdown on corruption the government banned the heads of state structures from commercial activities.
Introduction of coupon currency
The government introduced coupons for food, alcohol and tobacco on Nov. 10 to protect the Byelarus economy from a flood of roubles from neighbouring Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) states which had introduced their own currencies.
The introduction of special money orders, known as zaichiki (hares), was prompted by large-scale exports of produce, bought for roubles, to republics where prices were higher, including the Baltic states and Ukraine.
Defeat for referendum campaign
An attempt to hold a referendum calling for the resignation of parliament and elections in December was defeated by parliament on Oct. 29.
The opposition Byelarussian Popular Front had claimed that both government and parliament were under the control of former communists.
Supporters of a no-confidence referendum had gathered 440,000 signatures to support their demand.
According to the ITAR-TASS news agency the referendum call was voted down because of alleged breaches in the law during the collection of signatures.
However, deputies ordered elections to be held for the Supreme Soviet in March 1994, a year early.
EUROPE
GEORGIA
Decree on state power
Following his victory in the Oct. 11 parliamentary elections, Georgian State Council chair Eduard Shevardnadze was confirmed as parliamentary chairman and head of state by the new Georgian parliament, meeting on Nov. 6.
Parliament also passed a decree on state power giving him ultimate executive power, in conjunction with the Cabinet of ministers, with parliament as the republic's supreme executive body.
The decree on state power would remain in force until the implementation of a new Georgian constitution.
It envisaged that the head of state (also C.-in-C. of the armed forces) would be elected by parliament, and could be removed by a two-thirds majority vote of the parliament.
The head of state would have no powers to dissolve parliament or to appoint state officials without parliamentary approval.
New government
Tengiz Sigua was re-elected as Prime Minister by parliament on Nov. 8.
Sigua, head of the eight-month provisional government and a former Premier under ousted President Zviad Gamsakhurdia, had resigned on Nov. 5 to allow parliament to appoint a new administration.
The new Speaker of parliament was Vakhtang Goguadze.
Conflict in Abkhazia
Fighting continued during November between Georgian National Guard troops and separatists in Abkhazia, where the death toll in three months of fighting reached over 400.
Shevardnadze visited the Abkhaz capital Sukhumi on Nov. 11 and assured local reporters that the new Georgian parliament was committed to ending the conflict as soon as possible.
Allegations of Russian involvement
Relations with Russia worsened after Georgian forces seized a Russian arms depot in southern Georgia on Nov. 2.
Shevardnadze condemned the incident but Russian army officials accused Georgia of pursuing a deliberate anti-Russian policy after the then Georgian Defence Minister Tengiz Kitovani announced that he had personally ordered the seizure.
Russian Defence Minister Marshal Pavel Grachev warned that Russia would be prepared to use force to ensure the return of the depot, Reuters reported on Nov. 3.
On Nov. 6, the Georgian Ministry for Abkhazia accused the Russians of bombing Georgian positions in Sukhumi, ITAR-TASS reported.
Such allegations were repeated on Nov. 18, but they were met by Russian accusations of Georgian involvement in the murder of three Russian troops in Abkhazia.
On Nov. 19, ITAR-TASS reported that Georgian and Abkhaz forces had reached a 10-day ceasefire agreement to allow Russian troops to leave Sukhumi.
South Ossetia
The South Ossetian parliament voted to leave Georgia and apply to join Russia, ITAR-TASS reported on Nov. 19.
Russian and Georgian troops had maintained a ceasefire in South Ossetia since June, following fighting between Georgian troops and Ossete rebels after the region declared independence in 1990.
Tengiz Sigua Prime Minister Temuraz Khachiashvili Interior Vazha Gudzhabidze Social Welfare, Labour and Employment Murtaz Zankaliani Trade and Material Supplies Teimuraz Mamatsashvili Chair of Foreign Economic Relations Committee Konstantin Salia Chair of Tourism Committee Leri Gigineishvili Chair of Committee for Social and Economic Information
Georgian Cabinet of Ministers
EUROPE
UKRAINE
Replacement of rouble by coupon
Ukraine replaced the rouble with the karbovanets currency coupon on Nov. 12 as the republic's currency and economic crises continued.
The coupons, originally introduced in January as a temporary solution to a severe shortage of rouble banknotes, accounted for 97 per cent of official cash transactions by the autumn.
However, the growing budget deficit and lax credit policies led to its devaluation from parity with the rouble and caused a near breakdown in trade between Ukraine and Russia.
The status of the quasi-currency had provoked sharp disagreement between the Ukraine National Bank and the government.
In August the bank chairman, Vadim Hetman, demanded a tactical retreat from the coupon and a return to the rouble.
He was rebuked by Leonid Kravchuk, the Ukrainian President, who then announced that Ukraine would leave the rouble zone on Oct. 1.
The Interfax news agency reported on Nov. 24 that Hetman, whose resignation because of "illness" had been confirmed by parliament the day before, had gone because of differences with the government over currency policy.
Economic reform package
Ukraine's new Prime Minister Leonid Kuchma [see p. 39155]announced on Nov. 18 a reform package to rescue the country from an acute economic crisis.
He called for Ukraine's budget deficit — some 44 per cent of gross domestic product (GDP)— to be curbed, and demanded the "forced" privatization of enterprises.
The Kuchma reform plan also embraced exchange control over all foreign currencies, an overhaul of the tax system, a salary freeze, the cutting of subsidies to loss-making industries, high interest rates and new incentives for agricultural development.
Kuchma won additional powers from parliament until May 1, 1993, to push his reform programme through, and called for a joint commission to be set up to fight organized crime in the Ukraine.
His package received support from opposition leaders, including Volodymir Shcherbyna, chairman of Nova Ukraina (New Ukraine), and Vyacheslav Chornovil, the co-chairman of Rukh, who called the proposals "well timed." 
Kuchma told parliament that Ukraine's economy was in a worse state than that of any other former Soviet republic.
Warning that his reforms would cause business failures and unemployment, he announced plans for a scheme to put unemployed people to work on government construction projects for a minimum wage.
Figures for the first nine months of 1992 showed an 18 per cent fall in gross national product.
Inflation in the 12 months to August 1992 stood at 1,014 per cent.
Production had fallen during 1992 in almost all sectors, privatization had been slow and the performance of the new companies showed little improvement.
Exports had fallen by 19 per cent, and wholesale prices had risen 22-fold.
 "Alternative" economy proposals
The government set up a high-level council for alternative economics on Nov. 6, under the chairmanship of Liberal Party leader Igor Merkulov, to work out a strategy for building a market economy, including measures to strengthen the currency coupon and, later, Ukraine's new currency against the US dollar.
Merkulov, one of Kuchma's close advisers, said that the council would create a currency market and stock exchange, planned to increase the proportion of property in private ownership from 3 up to 50 per cent, and would, in particular , assist private motor manufacturers; the government was negotiating with the US-based Chrysler Corporation on plans to build new factories in Ukraine.
Government re-organization
Kravchuk reshuffled his administration on Oct. 30, after the new government had been approved by parliament, dissolving the president's advisory council and the co-ordinating council on economic reforms.
He announced the formation of a socio-economic council, a commission for relations with the international financial community, and a legal policy commission.
EUROPE
LITHUANIA
Second round of legislative elections — Election of Brazauskas as acting President
The second round of the legislative elections on Nov. 15 confirmed the victory of the Democratic Labour Party (DLP), the former Communist Party led by Algirdas Brazauskas, over the ruling Sajudis alliance [for the results of the first round in October and background information see p. 39157].
The second round was contested in the 58 constituencies where no candidate had gained an absolute majority in the first round.
The final election results, combining the results from the 71 constituency seats and the 70 seats allocated by proportional representation, gave the DLP 73 seats in the 141-member Seimas or parliament, the Sajudis alliance 30 seats, the Lithuanian Christian Democratic Party 18 and the Social Democratic Party eight.
The remaining 12 seats went to smaller parties, independents and representatives of the Polish community.
Brazauskas was elected president of the Seimas and thereby acting state President on Nov. 25.
He gained the support of 81 deputies, his only challenger being Aloizas Sakalas, leader of the Social Democratic Party, who received seven votes.
In his inauguration speech Brazauskas declared that upholding the independence of the state was his primary aim.
He said that the new government would continue with economic reforms but would also seek a relaxation of the austerity measures insisted on by the International Monetary Fund (IMF), which had forced the government to cut spending and freeze public-sector wages.
Earlier the Sajudis leader and outgoing President, Vytautas Landsbergis, had warned that the DLP-led government could "sell out Lithuania's independence" and that focusing on relations with "close neighbours" would lead to "political provincialism" .
A direct election for the newly created post of president of the republic [see p. 39157]was due to be held before the end of March 1993.
EUROPE
VISEGRAD THREE
Free-trade agreement
Czechoslovakia, Hungary and Poland, co-operating on economic and other issues within the Visegrad Three group, agreed at a meeting in Budapest on Nov. 2 to establish a free-trade zone from Jan. 1, 1993.
It was expected that, as a first step, tariffs on industrial goods would be reduced by one-third to 30 per cent.
A full liberalization of trade between the Visegrad Three countries (due to become four in number after the split of Czechoslovakia) would probably take another seven or eight years, according to government officials.
Other countries would be free to join the free-trade zone.
At a meeting in Prague on Nov. 20, chiefs of staff agreed to work together on defence research and the development and production of military equipment.
EUROPE
EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
UK vote on Maastricht Treaty
In a debate in the United Kingdom House of Commons (lower house of parliament) on Nov. 4 the Conservative government led by John Major narrowly won approval of a motion to resume parliamentary consideration of the bill to ratify the Maastricht Treaty on European Union (signed by member governments of the European Communities (EC) in February 1992 — see p. 38785).
The bill to ratify the Maastricht Treaty had been given a second reading on May 21 [see p. 38931]but its further consideration had been suspended on June 3 in the light of the negative Danish referendum vote on ratification [see p. 38942].
The motion to continue proceedings on the bill was passed by 319 votes to 316 with seven deliberate Conservative abstentions.
Those voting against included Labour Party MPs and 26 Conservative MPs.
Those in favour included 19 Liberal Democrats, without whose votes the Conservative government (which commanded a 21-seat overall majority in the House) would have lost the vote.
The opposition by back-bench Conservative MPs was supported by former Prime Minister Lady Thatcher, who warned in an article in the European of Oct. 8 that Maastricht will hand over more power to unelected bureaucrats and erode the freedoms of ordinary men and women.
The following day Major told his party's conference non-ratification would mean breaking Britain's future in Europe.
Towards the end of October Major, whose government faced criticism for its handling of the recession [see p. 39159], had threatened to call an early general election if rebel Conservative MPs did not support the motion.
Despite the positive Commons vote, Major announced on Nov. 5 that completion of the ratification process would be delayed until after a second Danish referendum to be held in May 1993.
French President François Mitterrand described this delay as "unacceptable" , while the Danish Prime Minister Poul Schlüter said that a date for a second referendum had not yet been fixed.
By contrast, after talks with Major on Nov. 11, German Chancellor Helmut Kohl expressed understanding for Major's domestic problems and said that "what is decisive for us is that the Treaty should remain unchanged and should be ratified as such by all states within the EC so that it can come into force in 1993" .
Ratification process in other countries
Four European Community (EC) member countries carried out various stages of the ratification process in late October and November.
In Belgium on Nov. 5 the Senate (upper house of parliament) approved ratification of the Treaty by 115 votes to 26 [for lower house approval in July see p. 39021].
In the Netherlands on Nov. 12 the Second Chamber (lower house) approved by 137 votes to 13 a bill to ratify the Treaty on condition that parliament be consulted in advance of the introduction of a single European currency (a precondition also imposed by the German Bundestag — see p. 39158).
In Spain the Senate (upper house) approved ratification on Nov. 25 by 222 votes in favour with three abstentions and no votes against, following approval by the lower house in October [see p. 39159].
In Denmark seven of the eight parliamentary parties had reached a national compromise on Oct. 27 on additions to the Treaty on the basis of which they would support a second referendum in 1993 [see also p. 39158].
The four major components of this compromise were opt-out clauses on the introduction of a single European currency and on a common defence policy, non-participation in EC-wide police and legal co-operation on such issues as immigration, and no introduction of citizenship of the European Union.
Commission Opinion on Finnish membership application
On Nov. 4 the Commission gave a favourable Opinion on Finland's application for EC membership which had been presented in March 1992 [see p. 38834].
The Commission did not foresee a problem with Finland's neutrality which was recognized in effect as non-participation in a military alliance.
Much of the harmonization of economic conditions had been secured with the agreement between the EC and the European Free Trade Association (EFTA), of which Finland was a member, on a European Economic Area (EEA — see p. 38931).
Areas requiring negotiation included Finland's heavily subsidized agricultural sector and regional aid for northern Arctic regions.
Norwegian membership application
On Nov. 25 Norway, which had narrowly rejected EC membership in a referendum in 1972 [see pp. 25525-26], re-applied for EC membership, becoming the fifth EFTA country to apply, following Austria in July 1989 [see pp. 36822; 38353], Sweden in July 1991 [see pp. 38353; 39064], Finland in March 1992 [see above]and Switzerland in May 1992 [see p. 38930].
Delegates at a congress of the ruling Labour Party on Nov. 8 had voted by 183 votes to 106 in favour of re-applying.
Prime Minister Gro Harlem Brundtland warned at the congress that Norway risked isolation from its Nordic neighbours if it failed to re-apply (earlier applications having been made in 1962, 1967 and 1970).
She hoped that negotiations could be carried out along with those with Sweden and Finland and that a second referendum could be held by 1995.
The Storting (parliament) approved the application on Nov. 19 by 104 votes to 55 with six abstentions.
Opinion polls indicated, however, that a majority of the electorate opposed EC membership.
EC Immigration Ministers' meeting
At a meeting on Nov. 30-Dec. 1, EC Immigration Ministers, meeting in the context of the Trevi Group, agreed on measures to co-ordinate and speed up the processing of asylum seekers' applications.
The Independent of Dec. 2 described the agreement as effectively "throwing a ring-fence around the Community" which would "condemn" eastern Europe to bear the greater burden for taking in victims of the war in former Yugoslavia.
Under the agreement "manifestly unfounded applications for asylum" would be processed within one month of arrival and rights of appeal would be reduced.
Applicants would also have to exhaust legal remedies at home before applications would be considered.
Asylum seekers who had passed through a safe third country to reach the EC could be returned to that "third host country" .
Ministers rejected a German proposal to establish a list of countries in which there is generally no serious risk of persecution and from which asylum applications would not in principle be accepted.
Ministers failed to agree on implementing measures which would allow the free movement of people within the EC to come into force on Jan. 1, 1993, at the same time as the single market in goods and services.
Opposition came primarily from the UK, but also from Denmark and Ireland (the only EC countries not to have signed the Schengen Agreement on the abolition of mutual border controls — see p. 38505), Greece having signed it on Nov. 6.
There was also no agreement on where to site the headquarters of the nascent Europol organization, which would co-ordinate law enforcement intelligence.
ERM realignment
On Nov. 22 there was a realignment within the exchange rate mechanism (ERM) in which the Spanish peseta and Portuguese escudo were devalued by 6 per cent against other currencies [for currency crisis and realignments in September see pp. 39080-81].
Capital controls introduced in Spain in September were also lifted.
The realignment was precipitated by speculation on the currency markets and in particular by the decision of the Riksbank, the Swedish central bank, on Nov. 19 to let the krona (which had been pegged to the ECU since May 1991 — see p. 38202) float freely on the exchange markets [see also p. 39207].
Over the preceding week the Riksbank had spent 158,000 million kronor defending the currency (as compared with 80,000 million kronor spent over the three-week September crisis), which represented virtually all Sweden's foreign reserves.
The marginal interest rate had early on Nov. 19 been raised from 11.5 to 20 per cent, in an attempt to defend the krona, but cut again to 12.5 per cent by the end of the day, by which time the krona had lost around 9 per cent of its value against the deutschmark.
The Financial Times of Nov. 23 commented: "The renewed upheaval emphasises how the system of European exchange rates has been split into a" hard "nucleus built around the deutschmark, and outer layers of" softer"currencies.
It has confirmed a central precept: European monetary union (EMU), if it comes about, will take place at two (or several) speeds."
Central banks in Denmark, Ireland, Portugal and Spain all raised short-term money market rates on Nov. 23 to stem speculative selling of their currencies.
Outside the ERM, Greece and Norway raised borrowing rates, while Iceland, whose fishing industry had been rendered less competitive by the Spanish devaluation, devalued the Icelandic krona by 6 per cent on Nov. 23, and Malta, which depended on the UK for 60 per cent of its tourism earnings, devalued its lira by 10 per cent against the dollar and sterling on Nov. 24.
(By contrast on Nov. 2 the Bank of France had lowered the intervention rate, the traditional bench-mark rate for French lending which had not been adjusted since Oct. 17, 1991, by 0.25 percentage points to 9.35 per cent.
The Bank of France had by the end of October recovered 90 per cent of the F160,000 million it had spent on supporting the franc on currency markets in September.
A further 0.25 percentage point reduction in the intervention rate, to 9.1 per cent, was made on Nov. 12 when UK base rates were also lowered from 8 to 7 per cent and in Italy the discount rate was reduced from 14 to 13 per cent [see p. 39159 for October reductions in UK and Italy].)
Belgium/Luxembourg (BF) 40.6304 41.9547 Denmark (DK) 7.51410 7.75901 France (FF) 6.60683 6.82216 Germany (DM) 1.96992 2.03412 Greece (Dr) * 254.254 250.550 Ireland (IR£) 0.735334 0.759300 Italy (IL) * 1690.76 1632.36 Netherlands (Fl) 2.21958 2.29193 Portugal (Esc) 182.194 176.844 Spain (Pta) 143.386 139.176 United Kingdom (£) * 0.805748 0.689533
EC central currency rates against ECU from Nov. 22 from Sept. 17
*Not participating in ERM; notional rate based on market values on Nov. 20.
EUROPE
COUNCIL OF EUROPE
Minority languages convention
A Council of Europe convention on minority languages in Europe was opened for signature on Nov. 5, when it was signed by 11 of the 27 member states.
Designed to preserve regional languages and to promote their use in education, government, administration, the courts, the media and cultural activities, the convention defined a minority language as one "traditionally spoken" by a group of people "numerically inferior" within the population of any state.
Among specific measures provided for in the convention were the launch of at least one radio station and a television network broadcasting in minority languages.
The convention also covered languages such as Yiddish and Romany, not spoken in one particular European region.
It excluded dialects of official languages and the languages of non-European immigrants.
It was estimated that there were around 50,000,000 Europeans who spoke one of the 40-60 regional or minority languages as defined by the convention.
The convention would take effect after ratification by five states.
EUROPE
WEU
Broadening of membership
As part of its growing role as the forum of western European defence co-operation, and in line with the strengthening of its links with the European Communities (EC), the Western European Union (WEU) decided at a meeting in Rome on Nov. 20 to enlarge its membership by extending extend full membership to Greece, a member of both the EC and of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO).
Observer status was granted to Denmark and Ireland, both also EC members but unwilling to contemplate full membership, and associate membership was granted to Iceland, Norway and Turkey, which were members of NATO but not of the EC.
The WEU thus comprised 10 EC countries as full members (Belgium, France, Germany, Greece, Luxembourg, Italy, Netherlands, Portugal, Spain and the United Kingdom), the other two as observer members, and three associate members.
In a statement the WEU declared that the transfer in January 1993 of the WEU Council and Secretariat from Paris and London respectively to Brussels would contribute to the development of WEU's specific relations with the European Union on the one hand and with NATO on the other.
EUROPE
SWEDEN
Austerity measures
Early on Nov. 19 the government announced austerity measures designed to improve internal competitiveness and to calm the currency markets [for September measures see p. 39112]; interest rates were also raised.
The opposition Social Democrats refused to support the package, however, and the Riksbank (the central bank) was obliged to float the krona on the exchange markets, resulting in an effective 9 per cent devaluation [see also p. 39206].
The package was designed to reduce expenditure by 30,000 million kronor in the financial year to June 30, 1993, to cut a deficit which was otherwise expected to reach 160,000 million kronor (US$1.00=5.9855 as at Nov. 16, 1992).
Individuals' social security insurance contributions were to be increased, while those of employers were to be reduced by 7 per cent.
Unemployment benefit would be reduced, and savings made on pensions and housing support.
The events of Nov. 19 were described by Bengt Dennis, governor of the Riksbank, as a defeat for Sweden's economic policy, while the Social Democrat leader and former Prime Minister Ingvar Carlsson called on Nov. 25 for an early general election.
Violence involving right-wing nationalists — Racist attacks
On Nov. 30, the anniversary of the death in battle of King Charles XII in 1718, several hundred neo-Nazis and skinheads mounted a nationalist march in Stockholm which left-wingers sought to disrupt.
There were violent confrontations with some 900 police, who kept the two groups apart; about 50 arrests were made.
Similar protests took place in the southern town of Lund.
In the previous week Jewish graves in three cemeteries in Stockholm had been desecrated on three successive nights.
EUROPE
UNITED KINGDOM
Iraq arms supplies — Royal finances
Matrix Churchill case
The government on Nov. 10 established an inquiry into the operation of UK export licensing policy in relation to the export to Iraq, by a previously Iraqi-controlled engineering firm, of machine tools and computer software which had a potential dual civilian/military capability.
Detailed terms of reference of the inquiry — wider in scope than the specific case in question — were announced by the Prime Minister, John Major, on Nov. 16.
[For "super-gun" and other cases see pp. 38308; 38838.]
On Oct. 12 three former Matrix Churchill executives had come to trial charged with breaching export regulations over a period of more than two years prior to Iraq's invasion of Kuwait in August 1990, in particular by falsely describing the equipment as for civilian use.
During the trial one of the defendants claimed to have acted as an agent for the Secret Intelligence Service MI6, and allegations were made that officials had encouraged dissimulation in order to maintain intelligence contacts and also to promote British exports.
The export promotion aspect was in effect admitted in court by Alan Clark, Minister of Trade in 1986-89 and Minister of State for Defence Procurement in 1989-92.
In the light of the inconsistency of Clark's evidence with previous statements by him, the prosecution on Nov. 9 stated that it would be improper to proceed, and the judge directed the jury to acquit all three defendants.
The same day it transpired that an additional factor had been the judge's decision to dismiss "public interest immunity" certificates which had been signed by four senior ministers and which would have prevented the disclosure of certain information about the case.
In the days following announcement of the inquiry, accusations were made against ministers, including in particular John Major, of attempting to cover up modifications made as late as July 1990 to the original 1985 policy towards exports to Iraq [for which see p. 34515], and of misleading the House of Commons in this respect.
Royal finances
The Prime Minister announced on Nov. 26 that some months earlier the Queen had asked him to consider the basis on which she might voluntarily pay tax on her personal income and also take responsibility for certain payments to additional members of the royal family; the Prince of Wales had made a similar request with regard to the Duchy of Cornwall.
A further statement would be made early in 1993.
The question of royal finances had been particularly in the public eye following the confirmation by Peter Brooke, the National Heritage Secretary, on Nov. 23 that the government would meet the costs of restoration of substantial portions of Windsor Castle which had been partly destroyed by fire on Nov. 20.
The role of the royal family had also been the subject of wide press attention during earlier months of the year in the light of the divorce of Princess Anne (whose imminent remarriage was announced in early December), the separation of the Duke and Duchess of York and alleged difficulties in the marriage of the Prince and Princess of Wales (whose separation was announced in early December).
Church of England vote on ordination of women priests
The General Synod of the Church of England on Nov. 11 approved, with the necessary two-thirds majority in each of its three houses, a measure to permit the ordination of women priests.
Subject to approval by both Houses of the UK Parliament, the measure was expected to come before the 1994 General Synod for formal declaration.
There were already women deacons in the Church of England, while various other provinces of the Anglican communion not only ordained women priests but also consecrated women bishops.
British Rail redundancies
Following the spate of job losses suffered by the manufacturing sector in October [see p. 39159], British Rail (which was one of the government's key candidates for privatization but which was suffering a massive decline in revenue as a result of the continuing recession) announced on Nov. 19 that it was declaring 5,000 voluntary or compulsory redundancies over the next four months.
EUROPE
NORTHERN IRELAND
Failure of talks on future status
Talks on the future of Northern Ireland involving the leaders of the four constitutional parties in Northern Ireland and representatives of the Irish and United Kingdom governments [the so-called "Brooke initiative" — see p. 39022]ended in failure in Belfast on Nov. 10.
A joint statement said that there had been no "comprehensive accommodation in relation to the deep-seated and longstanding problems" .
Informal consultations would continue between the four Northern Ireland parties (Democratic Unionist Party, Social and Democratic and Labour Party, Official Ulster Unionist Party and Alliance Party).
The UK Northern Ireland Secretary Sir Patrick Mayhew and the Irish Foreign Minister David Andrews agreed on Nov. 16 that progress had been made in the talks when round-table and committee stages gave way to bilateral contacts during the past four weeks, although there had been no bilateral meeting between the Irish government and the Democratic Unionist Party.
Talks centred mainly on a new devolved administration in Northern Ireland and a replacement of the Anglo-Irish Agreement of 1985 [see pp. 34070-71].
The UK and Irish governments meanwhile recommenced regular ministerial meetings as provided for under the Anglo-Irish Agreement.
A meeting on Nov. 16 was the first under the agreement since April 1992, when bilateral Anglo-Irish talks had been adjourned because Unionist parties refused to participate in the "Brooke initiative" talks while they continued.
Both governments agreed to try to restart the political talks on Northern Ireland early in 1993.
EUROPE
IRELAND
General election
The Fianna Fáil-Progressive Democrat coalition government led by Prime Minister Albert Reynolds collapsed on Nov. 5 following its defeat in a no confidence motion in the Dáil by 88 votes to 77.
The Progressive Democrats (PD), the junior coalition partner with six members of parliament, had announced on Nov. 2 that it would vote against the government on the motion, tabled by the Labour Party.
On Nov. 4 the two Progressive Democrats in the Cabinet, Industry and Commerce Minister Desmond O'Malley and Energy Minister Bobby Molloy, resigned together with a junior minister, Mary Harney.
The crisis within the coalition had arisen during the previous week when Reynolds on Oct. 27 accused O'Malley of "dishonest" testimony to a parliamentary inquiry into fraud in the beef export industry as regards Reynolds's handling of export credits for Iraq while Industry and Commerce Minister in 1987-88.
The general election
In the general election the Labour Party made sweeping gains, more than doubling its share of the seats in the Dáil at the expense of Fianna Fáil, which won its lowest number of votes since the 1920s, and Fine Gael, which suffered its worst result since 1948.
Counting was slow due to the complex voting system and to the fact that separate voting papers for the three abortion referendums [see below]were placed in the same ballot boxes.
No party won an absolute majority and the outgoing government remained in office in a caretaker capacity as inter-party negotiations took place.
After several recounts in one Dublin seat, the distribution of seats among the major parties in the Dáil at the end of November was Fianna Fail 67 (previously 77), Fine Gael 45 (55), Labour Party 33 (15), Progressive Democrats 10 (6), Democratic Left 5 (6).
Abortion referendums
Three controversial referendums on abortion which had been due to take place on Dec. 3 [see p. 39160]were brought forward to Nov. 25 to coincide with the general election.
Preliminary results showed that two of the three proposals, on (i) the right to receive information about abortion services and (ii) the right to travel to other EC states to seek abortions, had been approved by about 64 per cent and 67 per cent respectively.
However the third proposal, known as the "right to life" or "substantive issue" proposal, was rejected by about 66 per cent of voters.
Its complex wording asked whether abortion should be available where "termination is necessary to save the life, as distinct from the health, of the mother where there is an illness or disorder of the mother giving rise to a real or substantial risk to her life, not being a risk of self-destruction" .
The word "abortion" did not appear in any of the three proposals.
The referendums had been called after it became clear during the campaign leading up to the June Maastricht referendum that the Irish Constitution's restrictive abortion provisions could clash with EC rights to freedom of movement and information [see p. 38942].
These constitutional provisions had previously been called into question during a highly controversial case in February 1992 when the High Court in Dublin prevented a 14-year-old girl and her family from procuring an abortion or from leaving Ireland for nine months, even though she had repeatedly threatened to commit suicide; the order preventing her from leaving the country was subsequently lifted after an appeal based on recognition of the equal rights of mother and child and the right to freedom of movement within the EC [see p. 38780].
The referendum campaign had been fiercely fought by opposing factions.
Fianna Fáil campaigned for a "yes" vote to all three proposals, whereas the opposition parties favoured a "no" vote to the "substantive issue" proposal.
Prominent clergymen maintained that no clear choice was offered between "abortion and no abortion" , and emphatically opposed all three proposals, led by the Archbishop of Dublin Desmond Connell who preached a sermon against abortion on Nov. 22.
Pro-choice groups were in favour of a liberalization of abortion but felt that the distinction being made between the mother's health and her life was invidious.
EUROPE
GERMANY
Killing of Turkish woman and two girls
A racist arson attack on two houses occupied mainly by families of Turkish origin, on the night of Nov. 22-23, killed two girls aged 10 and 14, Yeliz Arslan and Ayse Yilmaz, and Yeliz's 51-year-old grandmother, Bahide Arslan.
These killings, in Mölln, Schleswig-Holstein, brought to 17 the number of people who had died in extremist attacks during 1992.
The killings prompted spontaneous protests in several German cities.
On Nov. 25 Kohl condemned the attacks and reminded Germans that "without these foreigners, the affluence of this country would not have been possible at all" .
On Nov. 29 he declared: "We must do everything to put the right-wing rabble in its place and hit the culprits with the full force of the law." 
Of the three Mölln victims two had lived in Germany for many years and the youngest had been born in Mölln.
Nine of the 40 others who lived in the houses were injured.
Responsibility was claimed by someone who ended his call with the words "Heil Hitler!" .
On Nov. 27 the government banned the neo-Nazi Nationalist Front, an organization with 130 members, founded in 1985 and led by Meinholf Schönborn, 36.
House searches were carried out in 40 locations throughout Germany, and firearms, ammunition and neo-Nazi propaganda seized.
On Nov. 29 a 19-year-old skinhead was arrested under suspicion of arson in connection with the Mölln attack.
Michael Peters, 25, had been arrested earlier on suspicion of leading a right-wing terrorist group.
At the beginning of the month it was announced that of 1,760 extremist attacks in the period from the beginning of January to Nov. 8, 1992, 1,000 had been carried out over the previous two months.
Attacks on asylum hostels and cemeteries, the majority in western Germany, continued during November, while on Nov. 11 the German Defence Ministry disclosed that investigations were being made into 24 cases of alleged involvement of soldiers in extreme right-wing violence — including three cases of manslaughter.
Anti-racist rallies
On Nov. 8 in Berlin some 300,000 people expressed their solidarity with foreigners, at a rally attended by Federal Chancellor Helmut Kohl, President Richard von Weizsäcker, and all the Land (state) heads of government (except Max Streibl of Bavaria).
Media coverage of the Berlin rally was coloured by an incident involving anarchist Autonomen demonstrators, who threw eggs at von Weizsäcker as he sought to address the crowd.
Other marches against racism were organized in many cities in the course of November, notably in Bonn on Nov. 14 when demonstrators came out to oppose any change of the Basic w'sgenerous asylum provisions and to urge stronger action to protect refugees.
On Nov. 9 there were ceremonies throughout Germany to mark the anniversary of the Kristallnacht anti-Jewish pogrom of 1938.
SPD congress on asylum policy
At an extraordinary congress on Nov. 16-17 the opposition Social Democratic Party (SPD) voted overwhelmingly in favour of amending provisions of the Basic Law (constitution) on asylum to refer to the 1951 Geneva Convention on Refugees, and in favour of allowing speedier consideration of asylum seekers' applications and immediate deportation of those whose applications were rejected.
[For August SPD change of policy on asylum see p. 39066.]
The congress also voted in favour of amending the Basic Law to allow the German armed forces to participate in UN "blue beret" humanitarian and peacekeeping operations.
Participation in such operations as "Desert Storm" in the Gulf in 1991, however, were not favoured and the SPD wanted Germany to continue to confine military operations to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) area.
Compensation for Jewish victims of Nazi oppression
On Nov. 6 it was announced that the government had signed an agreement the previous week to pay compensation to Jews living in eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union who had been persecuted by the Nazi regime and had thus far been unable to claim compensation under a West German agreement dating from 1952.
The World Jewish Congress estimated that 50,000 people might benefit from the US$630,000,000 allocated by the German government for payments between 1992 and the end of the century.
[For 1990 East German acceptance of guilt for holocaust and readiness to pay compensation see pp. 37379; 37829; 37899; the new agreement had been worked out since unification in October 1990.]
Opening of Honecker trial
On Nov. 12 Erich Honecker, 80, the former East German leader who had returned to Germany in July 1992 [see p. 39023], and five of his colleagues went on trial in a Berlin state court.
They faced charges of manslaughter in connection with the killing on their orders of 13 people who were trying to flee East Germany after the building of the Wall in 1961.
Also accused were the former head of the state security police (the Stasi), Erich Mielke, 84, former Prime Minister Willi Stoph, 78, former Defence Minister Heinz Kessler, 72, his deputy Fritz Streletz, 66, and the former regional party leader in Suhl, Hans Albrecht, 72.
[For sentencing in early 1992 of border guards in connection with killings at the Wall see pp. 38736-37; 38782.]
On Nov. 13 and 17 respectively the court ruled that Stoph, who had not been well enough to attend the previous day and had heart problems, and Mielke were too ill stand trial.
The case was expected to last two years; Honecker, who had terminal liver cancer, was considered to have only 18 months to live.
EUROPE
AUSTRIA
Referendum initiative against foreigners
On Nov. 21 the right-wing Freedom Party of Austria (FPÖ) led by the populist Jörg Haider approved a 12-point popular initiative, "Austria first" , for a halt to immigration.
Haider hoped that the initiative would gain the 100,000 signatures necessary to oblige parliament to consider the issue, and that a referendum could be held in January 1993.
The inititive declared that Austrians should have the right to enjoy their homeland in "perpetual security" , and that an article should be inserted in the Constitution stating that "Austria is not a country of immigration" .
It stated that the "vision of a multi-cultural society in Austria should be brought to an end" .
It demanded that new immigration be stopped until there were sufficient housing and work to accommodate immigrants, that immigrants with criminal records be deported, that all foreigners be obliged to carry identity cards at work (to reduce the number of illegal workers), and that the number of foreigners in school classes be limited to a maximum of 30 per cent.
According to official figures there were 542,300 foreigners living in Austria, representing under 7 per cent of the population, a low figure by the standards of neighbouring countries.
In 1991 there were 2,300 asylum requests.
There were currently 50,000 refugees from former Yugoslavia in Austria.
On Oct. 30-31 about 80 Jewish graves were daubed with swastikas and anti-Semitic graffiti in Eisenstadt, near the Hungarian border.
New Environment Minister
On Nov. 25 Maria Rauch-Kallat, 43, was sworn in as Minister of the Environment, Youth and Family Affairs.
She replaced Ruth Feldgrill-Zankel who had resigned to become deputy mayor of Graz.
Hofburg fire
On Nov. 27 part of Vienna's Hofburg palace, where the Ausrian Hapsburg monarchs had lived, was burnt down in a fire which destroyed the 18th century Redoutensaal where the 1979 SALT treaty was signed.
EUROPE
FRANCE
No confidence motion
The minority centre-left government led by the Socialist Party survived a motion of no confidence on Nov. 23 — the second in a month [see p. 39161]— when the three centre-right and right-wing parliamentary groups gained only 257 of the required 286 votes in the National Assembly.
The motion, tabled when the government invoked a technical measure to pass the first reading of the 1993 budget without a division, failed when the Communist Party (PCF) deputies once again refused to back it, saying that they would not vote with the right.
Mitterrand's proposals for constitutional change
In a wide-ranging television interview on Nov. 9 President François Mitterrand proposed a number of changes to the Constitution, including a reduction in the president's term from seven "at least" to six years, a reduction of presidential powers and a corresponding increase in the powers of the Prime Minister and the National Assembly, a strengthening of the independence of the judiciary (including ending ministerial immunity from prosecution in ordinary courts), and greater scope for the use of referendums.
He put the proposals forward formally in a letter to the two houses of parliament and the Constitutional Court on Nov. 30.
He gave no indication of a timetable for the approval of the changes or whether the reduction of the presidential term would apply to himself.
The proposals were given a cautious welcome by politicians on the left, but the right-wing parties decried them as an attempt to distract from the President's and the government's current unpopularity.
Relocation of Malian immigrants
Police on Oct. 29 dismantled a makeshift camp in the Paris suburb of Vincennes occupied by 200 homeless families from Mali, rehousing them in nearby empty schools and worksite cabins.
The operation, officially described as a humanitarian act to protect the health of the women and children in the camp, was criticized by immigrants' groups and human rights organizations.
The 1,500 Malians in the camp were legal immigrants who had been refused housing by local councils.
EUROPE
SPAIN
Raid on PSOE headquarters
The headquarters of the ruling Socialist Party (PSOE) was searched by court officials and police on Nov. 19; papers were taken away on the orders of a judge investigating allegations that the PSOE had received illegal funds.
The Attorney General, Eligio Hernández, appealed to the High Court against the search warrant, and said in a statement on Nov. 19 that he had applied for a Constitutional Court ruling on the legality of Judge Marino Barbero's actions.
Agreement on strike legislation
The government and the trade unions on Nov. 9 agreed on a new draft of legislation, originally put forward in May 1992, defining illegal strikes.
The agreement also provided that the two sides would within 12 months negotiate to establish a list of 17 sectors in which minimum services had to be maintained during strikes.
Agreement was reached only after the government withdrew a clause providing for the automatic dismissal of workers who did not comply.
Murder of immigrants
An immigrant from the Dominican Republic, Lucrecia Pérez Martos, was shot dead in Madrid on Nov. 13 and one man was wounded in an attack by hooded gunmen which was attributed to the extreme right.
The Congress of Deputies on Nov. 16 approved an all-party declaration deploring the murder and calling on the public to reject racism, while politicians of both the left and the right and trade union leaders joined in a protest march against racism in the capital on Nov. 21.
Four men were arrested on Nov. 28 in connection with the previously unreported murder of a young Moroccan in Madrid on Nov. 17.
Equal status for religions
Under regulations which entered into force on Nov. 13, the Protestant, Jewish and Moslem faiths were granted equal status with Roman Catholicism in every respect including religious instruction in schools, church marriages and tax rights and benefits.
EUROPE
PORTUGAL
New Foreign Minister
José Manuel Durao Barroso, hitherto secretary of state for foreign relations and co-operation, was appointed Foreign Minister on Nov. 6, replacing Joao de Deus Pinheiro who took up his post as a European Commissioner.
Resignation of AIDS commission members
The head of the National AIDS Prevention Commission, Joaquim Machado Caetano, and several of the commission's members resigned in mid-November, asserting that public health spending cuts were hampering the prevention of AIDS.
Odete Ferreira, a commission member, succeeded Caetano as head.
Passage of budget
The 1993 budget, announced on Oct. 14 [see pp. 39161-62], was adopted in parliament at the end of November.
EUROPE
ITALY
Internal developments
Craxi's proposed resignation as PSI leader
Bettino Craxi, whose leadership of the Socialist Unity Party was under serious challenge [see p. 39114], announced on Nov. 7 that he proposed to resign at an unspecified date and suggested Prime Minister Giuliano Amato as his successor.
On Nov. 25-26 Craxi convened the 500-member national assembly of the party (still generally referred to as the Socialist Party — PSI), at which he announced that a full congress would take place in April 1993.
Final passage of budget
The government on Nov. 12 won by 157 to 70 a vote of confidence in the Senate on the main features of the 1993 budget, with many senators showing their opposition to the procedure by their absence.
Privatization programme
On Nov. 14 Amato submitted to parliament an ambitious programme of privatization to raise L 27,000,000 million for the Treasury over the next three years, leaving the state with only "significant" minority holdings in many sectors.
The residual stakes would eventually be placed in a new public company 51 per cent owned by the Treasury.
Divestments included majority stakes in the Istituto Nazionale delle Assicurazioni (INA — a Treasury-owned insurance company) and interests in the state petrochemicals holding company ENI and its subsidiaries; a large minority stake in the national electricity utility ENEL; and a 50 per cent stake in the Istituto Mobiliare Italiano (IMI) financial services group.
In addition companies belonging to the state holding company IRI, mainly banking interests (in the Banca Commerciale Italiano and the Banco di Roma) and shipbuilding interests, would be sold off to reduce IRI's debt.
External funding would be sought to recapitalize the Treasury-owned Banco Nazionale del Lavoro whose subsidiary Efibanca would be sold, and some loss-making industrial sectors would be restructured before privatization.
Jewish retaliation against extreme right
A group of Jewish people on Nov. 5 ransacked the headquarters in Rome of a neo-Nazi/skinhead group, the Western Political Movement, and fought with the skinheads, in retaliation for the defacement of Jewish property with slogans and the profanation of Jewish graves on Nov. 2-3.
On Nov. 9, the 54th anniversary of Kristallnacht (when the Nazis began a nationwide pogrom against Jewish people in Germany in 1938), over 100,000 people, some wearing the yellow Star of David, marched peacefully through Rome in protest against anti-Semitic and racist attacks; protests and commemorations took place in many other cities.
Mafia arrests
Over 200 arrest warrants for suspected members of the Mafia, some of whom were already in prison, were issued in Sicily and other parts of the country on Nov. 17; a further 69 warrants were issued on Nov. 27.
The issuing of the warrants were directly due to the testimony of key Mafia informers such as Tommaso Buscetta, who flew in from the USA to give testimony to a parliamentary anti-Mafia commission.
Among the 100 people immediately arrested were three members of parliament and the Mafia chief of Catania.
Developments in South Tyrol
The leader of the South Tyrol People's Party (SVP), Roland Riz, stood down on Nov. 21 and was replaced by Siegfried Brugger.
Five members of the One Tyrol group were sentenced on Nov. 10, four of them in their absence, to terms of between two and 15 years' imprisonment on Nov. 10 for 41 attacks on railway lines, banks and electricity installations in the South Tyrol in 1986-88.
EUROPE
TURKEY
Judicial reform bill
A judicial reform passed by parliament on Nov. 19 reduced the period for which suspects could be held in custody before being brought to trial and allowed them access to a lawyer during questioning.
However, due to changes made at the insistence of President Turgut Özal, the law did not apply to those accused of terrorism or crimes against the state, nor was it effective in those provinces under a state of emergency.
The human rights organization Amnesty International reported on Nov. 12 that in 1992 there had so far been at least 100 murders of unarmed civilians, many of whom had first been threatened, detained or tortured, in south-eastern Turkey and that political killings were continuing "virtually daily" .
A policeman was shot dead on Nov. 22 on the university campus in Istanbul, apparently by the urban guerrilla group Revolutionary Left (Dev Sol).
Continuing offensive in northern Iraq
As Turkish operations against the Kurdish Workers' Party (PKK) continued in northern Iraq [see p. 39163]Turkish troops gained control of the Hakurk triangle at the end of October, while in early November, according to Turkish reports, about 1,000 rebels were killed when troops also took the Haftanin area.
About 1,000 of the PKK forces gave themselves up to Iraqi Kurds who moved them to camps south of the Turkish border.
The Turkish Chief of General Staff, Gen. Dogan Gures, claimed on Nov. 4 that 2,000 guerrillas had been killed in the October offensive, which would be completed within two weeks, and that the next task would be to intensify operations in south-eastern Turkey.
Istanbul elections
At the end of October the Islamic fundamentalist Welfare Party (RP) won 28 per cent of the vote in Istanbul and 25 per cent overall, and the True Path party some 17 per cent overall, in municipal elections for newly created city district councils involving about 800,000 voters in Istanbul and a further 200,000 in other provinces.
Accidental killings during NATO exercise in Aegean
Five Turkish sailors were killed and 18 were injured on Oct. 1 when a US aircraft carrier, the Saratoga, accidentally fired two missiles during a North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) exercise in the Aegean, one of which hit a Turkish destroyer, the Muavenet.
An investigation concluded that the US captain and crew, given a midnight practice drill, had thought that they were genuinely under attack.
EUROPE
CYPRUS
Adjournment of talks
A third round of direct talks between UN Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali, the President of Cyprus Georgios Vassiliou, and the President of the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus Rauf Denktash, began in New York on Oct. 28 but became deadlocked on Nov. 11 and was adjourned until March 1993.
A total of 59 meetings had been held between Boutros-Ghali and the two leaders since the first round of talks began in July based on a "Set of Ideas" put forward by Boutros-Ghali [see p. 39067].
A UN Security Council resolution adopted unanimously on Nov. 25 noted that the meetings had not achieved their goal "in particular because certain positions adopted by the Turkish Cypriot side were fundamentally at variance with the Set of Ideas" , and urged the parties to adopt a series of confidence-building measures recommended by the Secretary-General.
Denktash had been rebuked by Boutros-Ghali on Nov. 6 for being "in total opposition to all UN resolutions, to the society of nations and to the Security Council" , refusing to accept the return of refugees, insisting on two separate states and separate sovereignty, rejecting the proposed map and refusing to hand over Varosh, the Greek suburb of Famagusta, to UN administration.
EUROPE
GREECE
After talks in Moscow on Nov. 7 the Greek and Russian Foreign Ministers, Michalis Papaconstantinou and Andrei Kozyrev respectively, initialled a bilateral agreement on friendship and co-operation which had been signed between Greece and the former Soviet Union but had not been ratified by Russia.
EUROPE
LATVIA
Following the resignation of Foreign Minister Janis Jurkans on Oct. 27 [see p. 39157], the Latvian Supreme Council on Nov. 10 approved by 93 votes to 11 (with nine abstentions) the nomination of Georgs Andrejevs, an ethnic Russian, to the post.
Andrejevs, who hitherto had headed Latvia's observer delegation to the Council of Europe, spoke of the need to "restore the independence of Latvia and the rights of the indigenous population, while…maintaining the rights of people of other nationalities" .
EUROPE
NORWAY
Prime Minister Gro Harlem Brundtland unexpectedly resigned as leader of the Labour Party at a congress on Nov. 5-8, following the suicide of her youngest son a month earlier; she was replaced by party secretary-general Thorbjörn Jagland, 42.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
MIDDLE EAST
Seventh round of bilateral negotiations
The seventh round of bilateral negotiations in the ongoing Middle East peace process resumed in Washington on Nov. 9, after a 12-day adjournment for the US presidential elections [see p. 39167 for opening of seventh round on Oct. 21; see pp. 39119; 39070 for sixth round held in Washington in August-September].
The seventh round ended on Nov. 19 and assessments of it were generally pessimistic.
All parties to the talks except the Palestinians had agreed by the end of November to attend an eighth round of talks scheduled to open in Washington on Dec. 7.
Bill Clinton's defeat of George Bush in the US presidential elections cast an air of uncertainty over the talks.
President Bush and his former Secretary of State James Baker were widely credited with having brought Israel and its Arab neighbours together at the negotiating table and with having maintained the momentum of the process.
Bush was widely perceived as the most pro-Arab of post-war US presidents.
Clinton, meanwhile, was regarded as pro-Israeli and his victory was greeted with some alarm by the Arab countries, which feared a return to a policy of unconditional US support for Israel.
According to some commentators the peace process would effectively be placed on hold at least until January 1993 when Clinton took office.
Negotiations between Israel and Syria, about which there had been some optimism during the sixth and the first part of the seventh round, were largely unproductive.
Syria continued to demand a complete Israeli withdrawal from the Golan Heights which Israel flatly rejected.
In an interview with the Washington Post of Nov. 14, Israeli Prime Minister Itzhak Rabin accused Syria of undermining the talks by authorizing Hezbollah attacks against Israeli forces in southern Lebanon [see p. 39212].
Muwaffaq al-Allaf, head of the Syrian delegation, accused Rabin of attempting to destroy the whole peace process with his accusations.
Negotiations between Israel and the Palestinian delegation failed to progress during the seventh round.
A general feeling of pessimism over the future of the talks emerged from a meeting in Tunis on Nov. 21-23 between Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) leaders and members of the Palestinian negotiating team.
PLO chair Yassir Arafat said on Nov. 25 that the talks were at a "dead-end" and that a Palestinian delegation might not attend the eighth round.
Hopes that Israel and Jordan would finalize a full agenda [see p. 39167]during the seventh round proved groundless.
The Lebanese delegation rejected an Israeli proposal calling for the formation of a joint military committee to discuss the situation in southern Lebanon.
The bilateral negotiations in Washington were accompanied by the usual round of "off-stage" diplomacy.
French President François Mitterrand's visit to Israel and Jordan in late November demonstrated the French government's desire to increase its involvement in the peace process.
In Israel Mitterrand made his expected call for the establishment of an independent Palestinian state [see p. 39212].
Prior to his visit to the Middle East, Mitterrand had held a round of talks with Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak in Paris, and Mubarak had also held talks with visiting Israeli Foreign Minister Shimon Peres on Nov. 15.
In late November the Syrian Foreign Affairs Minister, Farooq ash-Shar", visited Japan for talks on the peace process.
The Arab participants in the negotiations attended the Islamic Conference Organization Foreign Ministers' meeting in Jeddah in late November where they discussed strategy for the eighth round.
Multilateral talks on refugees
Multilateral negotiations on refugees were held in Ottawa, Canada, on Nov. 11-12 [see p. 38932 for details of the first round of refugee talks in Ottawa in May 1992].
The talks were attended by some 35 countries; they were boycotted by Syria and Lebanon.
Israel had announced in October that it would attend the Ottawa talks, thereby ending its boycott of the multilateral refugee negotiations [see p. 39167 for Israeli participation in multilateral regional economic co-operation talks in Paris in late October].
In the event, Israel walked out of the talks on the first day in protest at the presence of the head of the Palestinian delegation, Mohammed Hallaj, director of the Washington-based Centre for Policy Analysis on Palestine and a former member of the Palestine National Council (PNC — the Palestinian "parliament-in-exile" ).
The Israeli delegation claimed that they had been assured by Egypt that members of the PNC, which it claimed was directly related to and controlled by the PLO, would not be present in the negotiating room.
The Israeli delegation rejoined the talks on Nov. 12 after it had received written US assurances that Hallaj's membership of the PNC had lapsed in 1991.
The principal issue on the agenda was the issue of family reunification, but no progress was reported.
The talks ended with little more than an agreement to hold a third round in Norway in early 1993.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
PALESTINIAN AFFAIRS
Continued violence in the occupied territories
Clashes between Palestinians and Israeli soldiers continued during November in the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip.
On Nov. 11 Israeli troops shot and killed three Palestinians in the Gaza Strip and one near Beit Omar in the West Bank.
Figures published in the Independent of Nov. 28 stated that 13 Palestinians had been killed by the Israeli forces during November (compared with six in November 1991), one Israeli had been killed by Palestinians (as in November 1991) and four "collaborators" had been killed by Palestinians (compared with six).
The figures brought the total number of Palestinians killed by Israeli forces since the start of the intifada in 1987 to 959.
A total of 543 Palestinian "collaborators" and 103 Israelis had been killed during the same period.
Bir Zeit student elections
The first student council elections for six years at Bir Zeit University in the West Bank took place on Nov. 12.
Bir Zeit was the largest university in the West Bank and the election results were regarded as a good indicator of general Palestinian support for the two main competing groups, the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) and the Islamic Resistance Movement (Hamas).
The results — 66 per cent for the PLO, 33 per cent for Hamas and 1 per cent for Islamic Jihad — were regarded as an important signal of the depth of support for the PLO mainstream and its policy of negotiation with Israel.
Hamas had campaigned on a "rejectionist" ticket, but the PLO-affiliated "rejectionist" groups had presented a united front with al-Fatah in opposition to Hamas.
Formal alliance between Hamas and Iran
Hamas announced in mid-November that it had entered into a formal alliance with Iran which had promised to provide financial and political backing for "the war to liberate Palestine" .
Ibrahim Ghosheh, the leading Hamas figure in Jordan, announced on Nov. 16 that the alliance resulted from meetings in Iran in early October.
He said that Hamas intended to strengthen its ties with the Iranian-backed Hezbollah movement in Lebanon.
On Nov. 15 the PLO chair Yassir Arafat held talks in Sudan with Hamas leaders.
Reports indicated that the meeting did little to further the prospects of reconciliation between the two groups.
Award of damages to Palestinian family by Israeli court
The Guardian of Nov. 6 reported that the Israeli government had recently been ordered to pay a total of the equivalent of US$62,000 in damages to the family of an unarmed Palestinian killed by Israeli special forces in 1988.
The court also awarded damages equivalent to US$20,000 to another Palestinian injured in the same incident.
The ruling, by a Nazareth district court, was hailed as a landmark by human rights activists.
They claimed that the ruling nullified the government's argument that it had no liability for the death of the Palestinian because it was an act of war, and that it effectively restored the government's response to the intifada to the status of a police operation.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
ISRAEL
Foreign relations — Internal political and economic affairs
Visit by French President
President François Mitterrand of France visited Israel on Nov. 25-27, accompanied by a 150-member French delegation which included five ministers.
During his visit Mitterrand met Prime Minister Itzhak Rabin and Foreign Minister Shimon Peres, and Palestinian leaders including Faisal al-Husseini and Hanan Ashrawi.
He reaffirmed his support for a Palestinian state and called on the Israeli government to enter into direct negotiations with the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), but also denounced the Arab economic boycott of Israel and said that he would press the European Communities (EC) to pass measures opposing it.
The two sides signed co-operation agreements including a joint US$19,000,000 research and development fund and a memorandum of understanding covering French involvement in improving Israel's rail network.
Defeat of no confidence motions
On Nov. 2 the government survived four no-confidence motions by a vote of 59-51, with no abstentions.
The defeat of the motions brought to a close a crisis within the ruling coalition provoked by the ultra-orthodox Shas faction's threat to leave the government in protest over statements issued by Shulamit Aloni, the Minister for Education.
Aloni, a member of the Meretz grouping, had angered Shas and other religious groups and factions by vigorously supporting major secularist reforms to the educational system.
A compromise agreement on future educational policy was agreed by Shas and Meretz prior to the Nov. 2 vote.
1993 budget — Economic package to bolster growth
The Knesset in early November approved the 1993 state budget on its first reading by a margin of 55 to 43 votes, with one abstention.
The package presented by Finance Minister Avraham Shocat proposed a reduction in the budget deficit from 6.2 per cent of gross domestic product (GDP) in 1992 to 3.2 per cent of GDP in 1993.
During the budget debate many deputies argued for heavier spending on public works projects to cut unemployment, rather than the introduction of measures to reduce the budget deficit.
The government announced on Nov. 8 that it would allow the value of the shekel to fall by 11 per cent over the next year in an attempt to bolster growth.
The prior announcement of the devaluation continued the "diagonal crawling peg" policy introduced in late 1992 which aimed to provide exporters with stable exchange rates and to halt damaging speculative runs on the shekel.
The government also announced a package of tax cuts and incentives.
These included a reduction in value added tax from 18 to 17 per cent at the start of 1993 and a 4 percentage point cut in the corporate tax rate to 36 per cent spread over the 1993-97 period.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
LEBANON
Continued fighting in southern Lebanon
Fighting continued in southern Lebanon during November between Hezbollah and Israel and its proxy militia, the South Lebanon Army (SLA)[see p. 39166 for details of fighting in October].
Israeli military aircraft attacked Hezbollah positions in Ayn al-Tinah in the western Bekaa Valley on Nov. 8.
Lebanese Forces' Radio Free Lebanon reported that seven Hezbollah fighters were killed in the attack and another seven wounded.
Hezbollah responded by firing Katyusha rockets across Israel's self-declared "security zone" into the Galilee panhandle and western Galilee.
Israeli civilians in the area were evacuated to shelters.
The two sides exchanged artillery fire on Nov. 8-10 and a number of Lebanese civilians were wounded.
It was reported on Nov. 10 that regular Lebanese army units stationed in the Bekaa had launched artillery attacks into Israel.
On Nov. 11 Israeli fighter aircraft attacked a Hezbollah target south-east of Tyre.
Muhsin Dallul, the Lebanese Minister of National Defence, met with a Hezbollah delegation on Nov. 11.
According to a report on Radio Free Lebanon on Nov. 12 Dallul asked Hezbollah to exercise self-restraint in the south.
A Nepalese member of the UN Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) and a Hezbollah fighter were killed during a clash on Nov. 12 near the villages of Kafra and Yatar, on the northern edge of the "security zone" ; three other UNIFIL members were wounded.
Later that day an Israeli soldier was killed and two others wounded during a clash with Hezbollah near Rashaf, a village also located on the northern edge of the "security zone" .
Voice of Lebanon radio reported on Nov. 12 that "Israeli military preparedness in the south reached a peak today and the area became the scene of the largest Israeli reinforcements since 1985" .
By Nov. 13 there were reports of a "guarded calm" in the south.
Government policy statement — Vote of confidence
Rafiq al-Hariri, the new Lebanese Prime Minister [see pp. 39165-66 for Hariri's appointment in October], delivered his government's policy statement to the National Assembly on Nov. 9.
Hariri announced that his government had set itself objectives of "liberation, reform and development" .
The government would work to end the Israeli occupation of southern Lebanon and to "beef up the steadfastness of our kinsfolk in the south and western Bekaa" .
It would abide by the text and spirit of the (1989) Taif Accord [see p. 36896]and would endeavour to implement the (1991) Treaty of Co-operation and Co-ordination with Syria [see p. 38214].
Administrative reforms would include the creation of a number of new ministries and councils and the temporary lifting of immunity for state employers in an attempt to stem corruption.
The government also aimed to improve the country's financial situation and to consolidate a free-enterprise system.
The government won a vote of confidence in the Assembly on Nov. 12, with 104 votes against 12 representing Hezbollah and the Islamic Group; three deputies abstained.
On Nov. 11 Hezbollah radio, the Voice of the Oppressed, had broadcast an attack on the government policy statement, which, it claimed, contained nothing to distinguish it from previous policy statements.
Meeting of Lebanese and Syrian leaders
Hariri paid his first visit to Syria as Lebanon's Prime Minister on Nov. 5 for talks with President Hafez al-Assad and other Syrian leaders.
Hariri, accompanied by Lebanese President Elias Hrawi and National Assembly Speaker Nabi Berri, visited Syria again on Nov. 26.
The Lebanese delegation held talks with President Assad and other high-ranking officials.
Voice of Lebanon radio reported on Nov. 27 that the two sides had discussed several issues relating to domestic Lebanese affairs, bilateral ties, the future of the Syrian military presence in Lebanon, and the situation in the south.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
SYRIA
Talks on Soviet military debt — Report of fresh Russian arms deal
According to the Financial Times of Nov. 6 a Russian trade delegation visited Syria in early November for talks on the issue of Syria's US$15,000 million military debt to the former Soviet Union, resulting in "little progress" .
The Middle East Economic Digest of Nov. 13, citing Western military analysts, reported that Syria had recently signed a "major military supply agreement" with the Russian Republic.
The supplies were reported to include MiG-29 and Sukhoi-24 aircraft, T-72 tanks and SAM-11 and SAM-13 missiles.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
JORDAN
Imprisonment and subsequent release of Islamist deputies
On Nov. 10 Laith Shbeilat and Yaqoub Qarrash, both members of the House of Representatives, were sentenced to 20 years' imprisonment with hard labour after being found guilty by the State Security Court of membership of the banned Shabab al-Nafeer al-Islami (Islamic Vanguard Youth) and of possessing illegal weapons [see pp. 39118; 39166].
However, Shbeilat and Qarrash were both released on Nov. 15 as part of a general amnesty to mark King Hussein's birthday.
Others prisoners released included members of other Islamic groups such as The Prophet Mohammad's Army and the Palestinian Hamas organization.
The trial of Shbeilat and Qarrash had been highly controversial.
Shbeilat was one of Jordan's most popular politicians who had achieved prominence by exposing high-level corruption.
His supporters claimed that the charges against him and Qarrash were politically motivated.
The conduct of the trial itself had also been the subject of much speculation when it became evident that most of the prosecution witnesses were detainees.
One "secret witness" , subsequently identified as a German of Iraqi origin, recanted his testimony during the trial and claimed that he had been forced to make a false testimony under duress.
King Hussein's speeches to the nation
King Hussein delivered a televised speech to the nation on Nov. 5 in which he spoke publicly for the first time about his recent cancer surgery in the United States [see p. 39118], announcing that he would have to undergo further tests in the USA.
In what was widely regarded as an attempt to deflate the extraordinary personality cult which had grown up around him since his cancer was publicized, the King referred indirectly to his own mortality.
King Hussein also issued an oblique attack on the Iraqi President Saddam Hussein.
This was in line with general Jordanian policy to distance itself from Iraq.
However, in another speech, broadcast on Nov. 23, the King defended his support for Iraq during the Gulf war and strongly criticized the leaders of the Gulf states.
The King's criticism was believed to be in response to recent Saudi demands that he publicly apologize for Jordan's position in the Gulf war.
He called for an Arab order "far removed from the stains of oil, consumerism and tyranny" and attacked "those Arabs" who were "motivated by tribal affiliation and arrogance" and who had "flooded the nation with their oil and bragged about their seats which were restored at the hands of the foreigner and with its lances stained with the blood of their brothers" .
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
IRAQ
UN decision to maintain sanctions
The UN Security Council on Nov. 24 unanimously refused to lift economic sanctions against Iraq, on the grounds that "Iraq had not yet complied fully and unconditionally with its obligations" under Gulf ceasefire resolutions [see pp. 38116; 38164-65].
Iraq had made a formal request (as it had in July — see p. 39026) for the easing of the embargo which, it claimed, had caused numerous civilian deaths owing to the lack of essential food and medical supplies.
In a statement issued on Nov. 23, during a meeting with a high-level Iraqi delegation headed by Deputy Prime Minister Tariq Aziz and Foreign Minister Muhammad Said Kazim al-Sahhaf, the Security Council had maintained that "Iraq has up to now only selectively and partially complied with the obligations placed upon it" .
Among the shortcomings cited were Iraq's harassment of UN weapons inspectors; continuing human rights abuses against Kurds and Shias; and Iraq's failure to honour its border with Kuwait.
On Nov. 26 Iraq's permanent mission at the UN accused the Security Council of delivering an "unfair judgment" .
In a riposte to the Council Aziz told a press conference in New York on Nov. 24 that "no matter what Iraq does in fulfilment of obligations imposed upon it, the unjust sentence passed by the Council to starve the people of Iraq will remain in place because this is the will of certain influential governments" .
On Nov. 28 Aziz named France, the United Kingdom and the USA as primarily responsible for the blockade against Iraq.
In Amman on Nov. 30 he again alleged that while many Security Council members had shown a "tangible degree of understanding" , he had been privately assured that "the real issue [of lifting the blockade]hinged on the positions of the United States, Britain and France" .
On Nov. 15 the French Foreign Minister Roland Dumas said in Bahrain that sanctions against Iraq, necessary to curb its war-making potential, should be lifted as soon as possible because of the hardship imposed on the Iraqi people.
A call for an end to sanctions came also from Sergei Baburin, head of a Russian parliamentary delegation which visited Iraq on Nov. 9-15.
Destruction of chemical weapons
UN chemical weapons inspectors who returned to Manama, Bahrain, following a week-long mission in Iraq said on Nov. 9 that Iraq had begun the incineration of its mustard gas arsenal at the former chemical weapons production complex at Muthanna, 130 km from Baghdad [see also p. 39116].
UN nuclear weapons inspectors who visited Iraq on Nov. 8-18 were reported on Nov. 15 to have destroyed 100 tonnes of high-strength steel used for the uranium-enriching process.
The team's leader Dimitri Perricos accused Iraq on his return to Manama on Nov. 18 of continuing to violate UN resolutions by refusing to provide a list of foreign companies alleged to have helped build Iraq's nuclear weapons programme [see pp. 38984; 39116; 39164].
Iraq held its second military exercise since the Gulf war on Nov. 18; the first military exercise was reported on Oct. 30.
Resumption of UN humanitarian aid
The first part of a consignment of UN-purchased fuel authorized under the recently concluded memorandum of understanding [see p. 39163]reached Kurdish areas in the north on Nov. 18.
Earlier the UN Children's Fund (UNICEF) had confirmed the arrival on Nov. 5 of medical supplies for distribution throughout the country.
On Nov. 13 the UN World Food Programme (WFP) announced a massive humanitarian food plan for Iraq, the first consignment of which involved the despatch of 15,000 tonnes of wheat and cooking oil for the Kurdish population.
The aid agency Care, the main distribution agency for all UN relief operations in the north, was reported on Nov. 18 to have been granted official permission to distribute food in southern and central parts of the country.
Attitude of regional states on Kurdish question
The Foreign Ministers of Iran, Syria and Turkey, meeting in Ankara on Nov. 14 on the initiative of Turkey's Prime Minister Suleyman Demirel, made clear their concern about the possible Kurdish nationalist ambitions of Iraqi Kurd leaders.
Describing the Iraqi Kurdish government as "chaotic" , the tripartite meeting warned Kurds against any attempt to divide Iraq.
In a veiled reference to a recent Kurdish motion endorsing the creation of a de facto Kurdish state in northern Iraq [see p. 39164], they pledged to co-operate in maintaining Iraq's territorial integrity but stressed that they would not interfere in the internal affairs of Iraq's Kurdish, Sunni and Shia populations.
A spokesman for the Iraqi Kurdish government on Nov. 20 described the outcome of the tripartite meeting as "a blatant attempt to interfere in Iraq's domestic affairs" .
Iraqi Turkoman groups meeting in Istanbul on Nov. 9 called for a "unitary Iraqi state" but indicated that "if, in a free referendum to be held in Iraq under the supervision of neighbouring countries, including Turkey" , it was agreed to opt for a solution "based on ethnic structure" , Iraqi Turkomans would "exercise their right of self-determination within this structure" .
Release of prisoners-of-war by Iran
Two hundred Iraqi prisoners-of-war were said by Iran to have been released on Oct. 29; according to the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) more than 20,000 Iraqis were still held in Iran.
Currency crisis
A government order banning the sale of luxury items was extended on Nov. 18.
The ban, whose violation entailed the death penalty, had been introduced in October to curb the slide of the dinar, which lost nearly 34 per cent of its value following the seizure of Iraqi oil assets [see p. 39163].
Unconfirmed reports said that the government had been forced to use 25-30 tonnes of gold from state reserves to finance the purchase of essential supplies since the confiscation of its assets.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
IRAN
US suspicions of arms build-up
The US administration was reported on Nov. 10 to have begun a diplomatic campaign to discourage major industrial countries from exporting militarily useful technologies to Iran.
The Washington Post said that policy differences between the USA and its Western allies, and a recent loosening of US export controls, had released a flood of high-technology sales comparable with the flow of arms and technology to Iraq during the 1980s.
On Oct. 23 the US Congress had approved the Iran-Iraq Non-Proliferation Act 1992, placing a comprehensive ban on technology exports.
On Nov. 3 it had been reported that a US nuclear-powered submarine, the Topeka, had entered the Gulf in a move intended to underline US concern over the imminent delivery of the first of two Kilo class Russian diesel submarines to the Iranian port of Banda Abbas [see p. 39122], with a third said to be on option.
Iran was reported to have paid US$600 million for the submarine which, Tehran radio reported on Nov. 23, had joined the Iranian fleet in the Gulf.
On Nov. 4, the 13th anniversary of Iranian revolutionaries' takeover of the US embassy in Tehran [see p. 30150], the authorities announced the arrest of a US resident, Milton Meier, a travel agent, who was said to have confessed to spying.
A crowd estimated at several thousands gathered outside the former embassy chanting "Death to America" .
Addressing the demonstrators, the Speaker of the Majlis (parliament), Ali Akbar Nateq Nouri, was reported to have said that between the USA and Iran "there is an infinite distance" .
Anti-US demonstrations were reported throughout Iran.
A French resident was reported to have been arrested on Nov. 17, no reason being made public.
At a secret meeting of defence officials representing the Group of Seven (G-7) industrialized countries near Bonn, Germany, on Nov. 20, European and Japanese officials were reported to have resisted US demands for a far-reaching ban on all potentially militarily useful equipment to Iran.
US intelligence analysts were said to have been divided on the purpose and implications of Iran's reported US$2,000 million annual military spending.
Denial of fundamentalist incitement
Allegations by both Egypt and Algeria of Iranian involvement in Islamic fundamentalist activism [see this page; p. 39215]were strongly denied by Iran's spiritual leader, Ayatollah Seyed Ali Khamenei, who, in a speech on Nov. 18, blamed "enemy propaganda" for misrepresenting Iran.
Iranian media attacked President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt during November, accusing him of serving Western interests, and also criticized the Gulf Co-operation Council for "defending UAE allegations" [see this page].
Rushdie affair
The United Kingdom government protested to Iran on Nov. 12 over renewed calls attributed to several senior Iranian officials for the British writer Salman Rushdie to be killed in fulfilment of the fatwa pronounced by the late Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini in February 1989 [see pp. 36450-51; 38984; 39026-27].
Ayatollah Hassan Sanei, who had already offered US$2,000,000 for Rushdie's death, was reported on Nov. 11 to have offered to increase the reward, by an unspecified amount.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
UNITED ARAB EMIRATES
Islands dispute with Iran
Iran was reported on Nov. 13 to have permitted foreign residents to return to the island of Abu Musa, possession of which had been in dispute since mid-April when Iranian troops took over civilian installations [see pp. 38887; 39116; 39165].
Twelve teachers and an Indian doctor and his wife were allowed back, in what Reuters news agency reported was a move by Iran to resolve a major dispute with Arab states.
According to an Egyptian report on Nov. 30 citing the Kuwaiti daily al-Anba and "Gulf military sources" , Iran had installed launch pads for Silkworm surface-to-surface missiles on Abu Musa.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
GULF CO-OPERATION COUNCIL
Ministerial meetings
Defence Ministers of the Gulf Co-operation Council (GCC) states (Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates) met in Kuwait on Nov. 14 and 15 in the first of four ministerial meetings ahead of the planned summit in Abu Dhabi on Dec. 21.
A communiqué on Nov. 15 reaffirmed that "any threat to any member state shall be considered as a threat to all GCC nations" .
The communiqué also condemned Iran's actions over the disputed island of Abu Musa and reaffirmed the Emirates' right to the two Tunb islands [see this page].
The communiqué was criticized by the Iranian ambassador to Kuwait, Hoseyn Sadeqi, and was attacked in the Iranian press and radio broadcasts.
GCC Interior Ministers met in Kuwait on Nov. 21 and 22, and Finance Ministers met on Nov. 22 but apparently failed to make progress on proposals for a customs union — a step towards creation of a common market by the year 2000 which had been set as an objective earlier in the year [see p. 38985].
The Foreign Affairs Ministers met on Nov. 24 and 25 in Abu Dhabi to prepare for the planned summit, but reports said that the session was overshadowed by the absence of Qatar, marking its continuing displeasure with Saudi Arabia following a border incident in October [see p. 39165].
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
EGYPT
Attacks on tourists — Arrests
In a renewed upsurge of attacks on tourists by presumed Islamic activists, eight people were hit by automatic weapons fire as a sightseeing bus passed through Qena 400 km south of Cairo en route from Luxor to the Red Sea on Nov. 12.
Police were reported on Nov. 13 to have arrested 270 people, including one of four gunmen alleged to have carried out the attack.
At least 250 more people were reported to have been arrested on Nov. 14 and 15 in the coastal city of Alexandria.
Security officials were cited on Nov. 17 as saying that documents seized suggested a campaign against the lucrative tourist industry [see p. 39168]involving personalities linked to the assassination in 1981 of President Anwar Sadat.
The officials reportedly accused Sudan of providing bases in which Egyptian Moslem militants were being trained by Iranians.
As of mid-November more than 70 people were reported to have been killed in violence associated with Islamic militants during 1992.
In a move against the activities of fundamentalist preachers, the government was reported on Nov. 11 to be putting privately run mosques under the control of the Ministry of Waqfs (Religious Endowments).
According to reports mosques in and around Asyut and Dairut in Upper Egypt were suspected of being centres of sedition.
Professors at Asyut university had demonstrated on Nov. 8 against increased security on the campus.
Interior Minister Mohammed Abdel-Halim Moussa said in the People's National Assembly on Nov. 23 that people arrested in Alexandria had admitted receiving military training in Iran and Peshawar, Pakistan.
On Nov. 19, amid a developing ministerial and media war of words between Egypt and Iran, President Hosni Mubarak rejected "scurrilous" criticisms of Egypt attributed to the Iranian spiritual leader Ayatollah Seyed Ali Khamenei.
Rehousing programme for earthquake victims
Prime Minister Atef Sidki said on Oct. 31 that all who had lost their homes in the Cairo earthquake [see pp. 39167-68]would be rehoused by the end of November.
The government was reported to estimate the cost of urgent rebuilding at E£1,500 million (about US$450 million).
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
LIBYA
New government
Following the reorganization of the General People's Committees on Oct. 8 [see p. 39168], a reshuffle was announced on Nov. 18 in which Abu Zaid Omar Dourda was re-appointed Secretary-General of the General People's Committee, a post which he had held since October 1990 [see p. 37795].
The most significant appointment, according to observers, was that of the moderate Umar Mustafa al-Muntasir, hitherto Secretary for Planning and Economy, as Secretary for Foreign Liaison and International Co-operation inplace of Ibrahim Mohammad Bashari.
This was seen as a move to improve relations with Western countries and to end the impasse over the Lockerbie affair [see pp. 38883; 39072; 39168].
At the opening of the session of the General People's Congress (parliament) on Nov. 15 at which the new government was announced, Maj. Abdel Salem Jalloud, "Libyan number two" , appealed to US President-elect Bill Clinton to "turn a new page" in relations between Libya and the USA.
Jalloud also invited a French examining magistrate, Jean-Louis Bruguière, to return, "but not aboard a warship" .
France protested to Libya on Oct. 28 after Bruguière was turned back on arrival at Tripoli [see p. 39168].
Libya described his arrival aboard a heavily armed French naval vessel as a provocation.
The judge was to carry out an agreed investigation into the bombing of a French UTA airliner over Niger in September 1989 in which 170 people died [see p. 36910].
It had been reported in September 1992 that a Libyan intelligence defector was under US protection after providing information on two of four Libyans wanted for trial in Scotland and the USA in connection with the Lockerbie bombing.
France, the United Kingdom and the USA issued a joint statement on Nov. 27 warning that international sanctions would be made "even more effective" unless Libya complied with UN Security Council demands to hand over suspects in the UTA and Lockerbie cases [see p. 38839].
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
TUNISIA
Limited reforms
President Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali, in a speech marking the fifth anniversary of his assumption of power on Nov. 7, 1987, announced reforms of the civil service, but failed to announce a timetable for multiparty democracy.
Instead, he announced the appointment of an ombudsman to mediate between the public and the civil service, promised that proposals for democracy would be considered soon, and said that the opposition would be permitted to run in legislative elections expected in April 1994.
Sentencing of President's brother
In what had become known as "the couscous connection" , the President's brother, Moncef Ben Ali, was sentenced in absentia by a French court on Nov. 17 to 10 years' imprisonment for laundering drugs money after being caught at Orly airport in Paris with a suitcase full of banknotes.
Moncef was thought to be at a secret location in Tunisia.
HIV-infected blood
Public Health Minister Hedi Mhenni announced on Nov. 18 that Tunisia would press for compensation from France on behalf of 12 haemophiliacs who might have developed AIDS as a result of using transfusions of blood, imported from France, which carried the HIV virus.
Nine of the patients had developed the virus, and three had died [see p. 39161 for HIV-tainted blood scandal in France].
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
ALGERIA
Warning to fundamentalists
Violence attributed to Islamic fundamentalist groups continued throughout November, and on Nov. 29 Prime Minister Belaid Abdesselam announced "total war" on extremists.
Official press reports quoted the Prime Minister as saying that normal freedoms might be curbed with effect from Dec. 4, and further stated that he had ordered the dissolution of a "spider's web" of bodies alleged to support the outlawed Islamic Salvation Front (FIS)[see pp. 38790-91 for Feb. 1992 introduction of state of emergency].
The measures would come into force on the expiry of the two-month amnesty to suspected activists who gave themselves up [see p. 39168].
Associated Press reported on Nov. 29 that only 100 people had accepted the amnesty offer, while 150 more people had been arrested the previous week, adding to thousands of FIS supporters detained without trial.
More than 160 members of the security forces were said to have been killed since February.
A large bomb had exploded in central Algiers on Oct. 31, injuring four people but causing no deaths.
There were further reports of killings of police officers during November.
The Algerian League for Defence of Human Rights (LADDH) was quoted on Nov. 7 as alleging that the security forces were using torture against detainees.
A Foreign Ministry statement of Nov. 16 blamed Iran for waging a "campaign of interference" by supporting fundamentalists, and on Nov. 20 Algeria recalled most of its diplomats from Tehran.
Dismissal of Justice Minister
Justice Minister Abdehamid Mahi-Bahi was reported to have been dismissed on Nov. 14 by the President of the High Committee of State, Ali Kafi, and replaced by Mohamed Teguia, President of the Supreme Court.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
MOROCCO
General election date
Interior and Information Minister Driss Basri announced on Nov. 25 that a general election would take place on April 30, 1993.
Local elections had been held on Oct. 16 [see pp. 39168-69].
New Agriculture Minister
Abdelaziz Meziane, hitherto Secretary-General of the Public Works Department, was appointed Agriculture and Land Reform Minister on Nov. 17, replacing Osman Demnati, who had reportedly asked to stand down.
Mediation by King Hassan — Relations with France
King Hassan II undertook a discreet five-country Middle Eastern tour during October, reportedly mediating in several regional conflicts and disputes.
He was said to have visited Saudi Arabia, Jordan, Qatar, Syria and Egypt, in his most extensive foreign tour in 31 years on the throne.
Pierre Bérégovoy, the French Prime Minister, arrived in Rabat on Nov. 2 on a two-day visit, meeting King Hassan.
In a statement before he left on Nov. 3, Bérégovoy was quoted as saying that the two countries had overcome a period of strain and had agreed to give a new impetus to their partnership.
French Industry and Foreign Trade Minister Dominique Strauss-Kahn visited on Nov. 12 and 13, announcing that French financial assistance for 1992 was being increased by 50 per cent to F1,200 million (about US$230 million).
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
WESTERN SAHARA
Postponement of talks
The UN special envoy to the territory, Yakoub Khan, was reported to have submitted a pessimistic report to the Security Council on Oct. 28, emphasizing the difficulty of ascertaining who should vote in a referendum on self-determination in Western Sahara.
Western countries led by France were said in some reports to be fearful of the destabilization of Morocco should a UN-organized vote go against King Hassan II's claim to Western Sahara.
France's Maghreb policy was criticized on Nov. 16 by the Polisario Front, which had waged a long struggle for independence in Western Sahara.
A UN-sponsored meeting of Saharan notables in Geneva on Nov. 30 was called off after Polisario objected to the presence of Moroccan-sponsored personalities in one delegation.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
ARAB MAGHREB UNION
Fifth summit conference
The five-country Arab Maghreb Union (AMU) held its fifth Supreme Council meeting, in Nouakchott, the Mauritanian capital, on Nov. 10 and 11.
The meeting was chaired by Mauritania's President Moaouia Ould Sidi Mohamed Taya, and attended by Ali Kafi, President of Algeria's High Committee of State, President Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali of Tunisia, Morocco's Prime Minister Mohammed Karim Lamrani and the Libyan ambassador to Morocco.
The summit was preceded by a meeting of Foreign Ministers, which had opened on Nov. 8.
The final communiqué condemned terrorism and said that the rise of religious fundamentalism constituted a threat to society and democracy.
The AMU called on the UN Security Council "to reconsider its decision on an embargo against Libya" [see p. 39072].
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
YEMEN
Eight opposition partiescalled a general strike on Nov. 22 to protest against the government's announcement on Nov. 5 that the country's first democratic elections, originally set for the end of November, were being postponed until April 27, 1993
INTERNATIONAL
DISARMAMENT
Russian ratification of START — Franco-Russian agreement on nuclear weapons destruction
The Russian Supreme Soviet on Nov. 4 voted, by 157 votes to one with 26 abstentions, to ratify the Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty (START) signed in Moscow in July 1991 [see p. 38320].
The action came despite bitter opposition from hardline conservatives who said that the treaty favoured the USA and amounted to a present on "a silver platter" for the US president-elect Bill Clinton.
In October the US Senate had voted overwhelmingly to approve the treaty [see p. 39169].
The Russian vote followed a last-minute effort by Russian President Boris Yeltsin to secure the approval of the powerful centre-right industrial lobby, Civic Union, in the hope of avoiding a clash with the conservative-dominated Congress of People's Deputies due to meet on Dec. 1.
Anxieties about the START treaty and Russia's financial capacity to meet its provisions, and also those of a more radical accord concluded with the USA in June [see pp. 38985-86], were compounded after the Russian Deputy Defence Minister Boris Gomov acknowledged that the government had thus far found only part of the funds needed to implement the 30 per cent cut in nuclear arsenals required under START.
In a move underlining the prevailing mood of uncertainty, the Supreme Soviet voted to delay the actual exchange of ratification documents with the USA until agreement had been reached with other nuclear republics of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), namely Byelarus, Kazakhstan and Ukraine, on the status of all former Soviet nuclear forces [see p. 38890], and until they had given their formal endorsement under the START Lisbon protocol [see p. 38937].
On Nov. 10 the Ukrainian President Leonid Kravchuk called for additional "guarantees" for Ukraine in the START treaty to help facilitate the treaty's approval by parliament.
Anticipating Kravchuk's remarks at a press conference on Nov. 4 shortly after the Russian ratification of START, Ukraine's Prime Minister Leonid Kuchma had warned that unless the West offered further inducements he would have difficulty in persuading parliament to approve the treaty.
Kuchma stressed that while "Ukraine is giving up its nuclear umbrella, in exchange we are receiving only advice, not real aid" .
The treaty's economic implications had been underlined by Kuchma on Oct. 31 when he claimed that Ukraine's budget did not permit "the multi-billion dollar expense" involved in removing strategic missiles.
In a blunt appraisal of Ukraine's financial interests, Deputy Prime Minister Igor Yukhnovsky said on Nov. 9 that "Ukraine had no reason to disarm itself free of charge" as "missiles could reasonably be sold to those countries which will pay most for them" .
Franco-Russia agreement on nuclear weapons destruction
An agreement signed in Paris on Nov. 12 and worth several hundred million French francs (the first F30,000,000 of which were to be spent in 1992) provided for French technical assistance to help Russia dismantle its nuclear weapons.
The accord, expected to take effect over three to four years, was the third of its kind concluded by Russia with major Western powers, following those with the USA in October [see p. 39169]and with the United Kingdom on Nov. 10.
Whereas the US and UK agreements focused on specific arrangements for, respectively, the transportation and the safe storage of Russian nuclear weapons, the French accord, in addition to providing for storage and transportation, also undertook to furnish radiological equipment in the event of nuclear accidents, and machine tools (not subject to restrictions imposed by the Co-ordinating Committee for Multilateral Export Controls (COCOM)) designed to disassemble nuclear weapons.
A French proposal to launch discussions with China, Russia, the UK and the USA on future policies for weapons testing was reported on Nov. 4.
In April France had announced the suspension of its nuclear testing programme [see p. 38890], a move followed by Russia [see pp. 38553; 39169]and the USA [see pp. 39073; 39121].
Reports in late October confirmed that France had arrested key members of a Paris-based Russian espionage ring which had gained access to highly classified information on nuclear experiments.
CFE implementation problem
The Conventional Forces in Europe (CFE) treaty signed in Paris in November 1990 [see p. 37838]and in "provisional application" since July 17, 1992 [see p. 39031], was due to come formally into effect on Nov. 9, 10 days after the last two signatory states (Byelarus and Kazakhstan) deposited their instruments of ratification.
Germany's representative to the disarmament conference in Vienna, Rüdiger Hartmann, said, however, on Nov. 13 that difficulties had emerged after disagreement over sites and military equipment subject to inspection under the provisions of the treaty.
Earlier, press reports citing Western diplomats had indicated that Russia's interpretation of the complex mechanism for inspections had prevented access to sites which Western officials said should be opened to scrutiny.
INTERNATIONAL
CSCE
Report on former Yugoslav republics
The Committee of Senior Officials (CSO) of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE), meeting in Prague on Nov. 5-6, made public a specially commissioned report recommending the creation of an international tribunal to try war crimes alleged to have been committed in the former Yugoslav republics of Croatia and Bosnia-Hercegovina.
The report detailed numerous cases of atrocities against the civilian population, including summary executions and mass killings, and confirmed the systematic displacement of people within the broad policy of "ethnic cleansing" .
The CSO agreed to reinforce its monitoring missions to other areas of ethnic tension in the former Yugoslavia, including Kosovo, Sandzak and Vojvodina [see p. 39102], and to extend the suspension of Yugoslavia's membership [see p. 39030]until the next meeting of CSCE foreign ministers in Stockholm on Dec. 14.
Macedonia's application for membership of the CSCE was not accepted, reportedly because of European Community (EC) policy reflecting Greece's insistence that Macedonia change its name [see p. 39103].
INTERNATIONAL
UNITED NATIONS
Controversy over peacekeeping budget
Reports emerged during November of differences between the USA and the European Communities (EC) over the financing of UN peacekeeping operations, specifically over a US plan to divert its back dues owed to current UN peacekeeping operations to a proposed UN fund intended to cover start-up costs of new peacekeeping operations.
According to unconfirmed reports Germany and the Netherlands had insisted that the USA, having precipitated the UN's financial crisis through its arrears [see p. 39121], should not be allowed to specify how its hitherto delinquent payments were spent.
A UN report published on Nov. 3 showed that the USA remained the UN's largest debtor, owing US$295,000,000 of the outstanding US$576,000,000 in contributions to the UN regular budget (excluding peacekeeping assessments, which were financed out of separate voluntary contributions).
On Oct. 29 the UN Security Council had endorsed recommendations submitted by UN Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali urging member states voluntarily to earmark troops for rapid deployment in international emergencies.
In January a Security Council summit had invited the Secretary-General to propose ways of strengthening the UN's peacemaking role [see p. 38744].
INTERNATIONAL
ARMS TRADE
Russian arms sale to Turkey — French fighter aircraft sale to Taiwan
An agreement involving the sale of Russian military equipment to Turkey, worth an estimated US$80,000,000, was signed in Istanbul on Nov. 6.
The sale, the first to a member of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), included the delivery of Mi-17 helicopters, armoured personnel carriers, and equipment for special use by Turkish security forces.
French aircraft sale to Taiwan
China on Nov. 26 lodged the "strongest protest" with France over the sale to Taiwan of 60 Mirage 2000 fighter bombers, worth a reported US$2,500 million, saying that the deal "was a grave step taken by the French side to worsen bilateral relations" .
The contract, signed on Nov. 18, was the second for arms by Taiwan, following an agreement with the USA for the supply of 150 F-16 aircraft [see p. 39122].
Reports of the sale to China of a Ukrainian aircraft carrier were denied in Beijing by Ukraine's President Leonid Kravchuk on Oct. 30.
Kravchuk acknowledged, however, that Ukraine was "ready to start co-operation with China in the military field" .
The free delivery by Germany of military spare parts to Hungary was confirmed by Germany's Defence Ministry on Nov. 21.
The deal, which came against the background of rising tension between Hungary and neighbouring Romania, Serbia and Czechoslovakia, followed a recent agreement for the supply of Russian military spares and air-defence equipment to Hungary [see p. 39200].
Russian submarine sale to Iran
The first of three Russian submarines purchased by Iran [see pp. 39122; 39170; 39214]docked at the Iranian port of Bandar Abbas on Nov. 23.
Iran's purchase of the submarines had caused concern to its Gulf neighbours and to the USA, which deployed a nuclear-powered submarine in the Gulf to await the arrival of the Russian naval craft.
Further reports of uranium smuggling
The disappearance of 100 kg of weapons-grade uranium was confirmed by the Russian authorities in mid-November.
The theft, which was believed to have taken place in May or June, fuelled alarm about the marked incidence of uranium smuggling from eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union [see pp. 38987; 39170].
On Nov. 1 Bulgarian police said that they had seized a quantity of plutonium-239 said to be Russian in origin.
On Nov. 10 Byelarus said that it had uncovered a smuggling ring engaged in carrying Russian uranium to Poland.
Simultaneous Polish reports said that two Polish farmers had been charged with obtaining radioactive caesium from Russian soldiers.
INTERNATIONAL
NUCLEAR ENERGY
Japanese plutonium shipment
A shipment of 1.7 tonnes of plutonium bound for Japan left the French port of Cherbourg on Nov. 7 amid widespread international protest and close surveillance by environmental groups [see pp. 38987; 39170].
The plutonium, the first of an estimated 30-40 tonnes processed in Europe from spent Japanese uranium fuel, had been officially designated for commercial use to fire a new generation of Japanese fast-breeder reactors.
Classified by Japanese officials as "reactor grade" not "weapons grade" , the shipments had nevertheless triggered concern among critics of nuclear proliferation who warned that some countries had fabricated crude nuclear devices from plutonium of the kind Japan was shipping.
On Nov. 9 the International Maritime Organization (IMO) was reported to have indicated that it would consider halting the shipment if it was found to be unsafe or shown to be vulnerable to accidents and piracy, as claimed by some IMO member states.
The cargo was aboard the Japanese freighter Akatsuki Maru, whose precise route was kept secret by the Japanese government.
The shipment was escorted by armed Japanese patrol boats and was also monitored by US submarines and reconnaissance satellites, although on Nov. 12 Japan denied reports of an agreement with the USA to provide surveillance or protect the cargo.
Japan's Maritime Agency justified as "necessary" an incident on Nov. 8 in which one of its patrol boats had reportedly "rammed" a tracking vessel belonging to the environmental group Greenpeace International, some 65 km west of the Brittany coast of France.
There were no casualties.
Reports emerged of serious divisions within the Japanese government over the merits of future plutonium imports from Europe.
On Nov. 12 Japanese Foreign Ministry officials said to be concerned about alienating international opinion were quoted in Tokyo as saying that they would press the government "to think carefully about our future plans" to transport more plutonium to Japan over the next decade.
However, prospects of an imminent review of Japan's nuclear policy were firmly dismissed by a government spokesman who said on Nov. 16 that there were no immediate plans to halt plutonium shipments from Europe.
Japan was reported on Nov. 24 to have refused a Russian offer to sell low-grade uranium from dismantled nuclear weapons for use in Japanese nuclear reactors.
INTERNATIONAL
COCOM
Participation by former Soviet republics
Participants from the former Soviet republics attended for the first time on Nov. 23-24 a meeting in Paris of the 17-member Co-ordinating Committee on Multilateral Export Controls (COCOM — once primarily a forum for controlling the acquisition of sensitive Western technology by the Soviet Union and its allies).
Their participation, approved in June [see p. 38987], had been prompted by Western concern to enlist co-operation in preventing sensitive technology reaching countries regarded as a threat to global security.
US officials denied reports that Iran's recent acquisition of military hardware from Russia [see pp. 39122; 39170; 39214]had been raised specifically at the Paris meeting.
INTERNATIONAL
OPEC
Ministerial meeting
Oil Ministers from the member states of the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) who had gathered in Vienna for their 93rd meeting on Nov. 25-27, reached agreement on a cut in output which would involve restricting global OPEC oil production to 24,580,000 barrels per day (bpd) in the first quarter of 1993.
The deal came against the background of a 10 per cent decline in world prices since mid-October.
Iran and Saudi Arabia had both previously refused to implement cuts [see p. 39120].
The agreement required Iran to reduce its output from the current level estimated at around 3,800,000 bpd to 3,490,000 bpd, and Saudi Arabia to trim production slightly from 8,400,000 bpd to 8,390,000 bpd.
Kuwait, which had insisted on a quota of 1,750,000 bpd, agreed to limit output to 1,500,000 bpd on the understanding that it would increase production when market conditions and prices permitted.
Analysts noted that the agreement did little more than reinforce the status quo, since production was already running at around 25,000,000 bpd.
Without Ecuador, whose September decision to quit OPEC [see p. 39120]was formally approved at this meeting, output had been reduced to around 24,700,000 bpd.
The agreement implied an overall reduction, therefore, of little over 100,000 bpd.
The chances of an agreement had appeared slim after indications that the talks were deadlocked over competing demands by various member countries to sell more oil, within an overall output ceiling low enough to push prices higher.
On Nov. 26, following reports that Iran had renewed pressure to control output in an attempt to stem falling prices, the Algerian Energy Minister Hacene Mefti had cast doubt on the likelihood of an early agreement.
(Iran had dissented from the final OPEC agreement in September on grounds that it did not impose strict enough controls on output — see p. 39120 — but had also demanded a larger proportional share for itself.
Saudi Arabia, the largest producer, had indicated that it was reluctant to cede any of its share — about one-third of the current total — and was said adamantly to have refused to lower current production levels.)
Speculation about the prospect of further divisions, and the future of the OPEC cartel as a whole, had resurfaced after Gabon's Mines, Petroleum, Energy and Hydraulic Resources Minister Jean Ping hinted on the eve of the meeting that his country might soon follow Ecuador's example and leave OPEC, adding that "Gabon has problems similar to Ecuador" .
INTERNATIONAL
DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
G-15 summit
Leaders from the Group of 15 (G-15) developing countries held their third summit in the Senegalese capital, Dakar, on Nov. 21-22.
[For second summit see p. 38603.]
Chile was formally admitted as a new member, and it was reported that China and Iran had also expressed a wish to join the organization.
The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (FRY), whose membership as the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (SFRY) remained unclear, was not represented.
Endorsing a document entitled the "Dakar Declaration" , G-15 leaders called for the issue of human rights violations to be discussed with greater awareness of the "close inter-relationship between democracy, human rights and development" .
Regretting attempts by "some countries in the North to fashion the new world order only on the basis of their priorities" , the document suggested that military and political objectives be given the same importance as "economic and social dimensions" .
G-15 leaders also urged the revival of the North-South dialogue but stressed that "the problems of development transcend the single issue of economic growth" .
INTERNATIONAL
COMMODITIES
Postponement of cocoa agreement
UN-sponsored talks involving 45 cocoa producing and consumer nations ended inconclusively on Nov. 13 after two weeks of protracted negotiations in Geneva aimed at replacing the 1986 cocoa agreement due to expire in September 1993.
(The extension of the pact had been agreed by the council of the International Cocoa Organization (ICCO) on Feb. 19-21, 1992; for an earlier extension see p. 37335.)
The principal disagreement was over the maximum size of buffer stocks, affecting the extent to which cocoa could be "bought in" to defend a floor price in times of market surplus.
The European Communities (EC), the main representative of consumer interests in the absence of any US participation, began the talks by proposing a limit of 300,000 tonnes and would not move beyond 330,000, whereas producer countries began by seeking a 600,000 tonne limit and would come down no further than 380,000.
A proposal by producer countries to finance the plan, based on equal contributions from both sides via a levy system, was also rejected by the EC, which demanded that funds be drawn from existing assets — i.e., in practice, from arrears owed to the present agreement by the two biggest producers, Côte d'Ivoire and Brazil.
INTERNATIONAL
ISLAMIC DEVELOPMENT BANK
Annual meeting
Finance Ministers and central bank officials from 46 member countries of the Islamic Development Bank (IDB) held their 17th annual meeting in the Iranian capital, Tehran, on Nov. 10-11 [for last meeting see p. 39031].
A resolution adopted on Nov. 11 confirmed that Albania would become a member of the IDB, following approval in December by the Islamic Conference Organization (ICO) of Albania's application for membership.
On Nov. 10 IDB president Ahmed Muhammad Ali told delegates that the IDB had approved 194 financing operations worth 968,000,000 Islamic dinars (ID)(about US$1,330 million) during 1991-92, representing a 48 per cent increase over the previous year.
Gross income from operations in 1991-92 totalled about US$150,000,000 compared with US$142,000,000 in 1990-91.
Urging closer co-operation between member states and the new Moslem republics of the former Soviet Union, Ali said that the IDB would "multiply" efforts "to promote counter-trade and intra-trade deals" .
He also disclosed that US$6,000,000 had been allocated in emergency aid, and a further US$15,000,000 for reconstruction, to help Moslems in the former Yugoslav republic of Bosnia-Hercegovina.
On Nov. 11 delegates approved a special account, initially totalling US$100,000,000, for the IDB's least developed member countries.
(In July the IDB had raised its authorized capital to assist development in poorer member countries — see p. 39031.)
INTERNATIONAL
ENVIRONMENT
UNEP conference on ozone layer
Ministers from 91 countries gathered in Copenhagen on Nov. 23-25 for a UN Environment Programme (UNEP) conference on the ozone layer.
They agreed to tighten targets under the 1987 Montreal Protocol [see p. 35678]by bringing forward the phasing-out of chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) by four years to 1996.
The new agreement was made possible after a pledge by industrialized countries of an extra US$500,000,000, on top of US$240,000,000 already committed, to help developing countries adapt in 1994-96.
In return, developing countries agreed to bring methyl bromide, a substance used for fruit and grain preservation, under the protocol for the first time, and to freeze production at 1991 levels by 1995.
The Executive Director of UNEP, Mostafa Tolba, who had advocated a shorter timetable, said that "the package [was]not enough" , adding that the depletion of the ozone layer by CFCs was "an unfair action to future generations" and that "we have done the damage; we have to undo it" .
Environmental groups also criticized the agreement, claiming that governments had bowed to the demands of chemical companies.
INTERNATIONAL
WHO
Congress on AIDS in Asia and the Pacific
The second International Congress on Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS) in Asia and the Pacific, sponsored by the World Health Organization (WHO), the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and the Indian government, was held in the Indian capital, New Delhi, on Nov. 8-12.
Inaugurating the congress, Indian Vice-President K. R. Narayanan urged that work on ways to strengthen the human immune system should use "a combination of allopathic and traditional systems of medicine" .
In a keynote address on Nov. 8 the Director of the WHO Global Programme on AIDS, Michael Merson, said that the AIDS pandemic in Asia might ultimately be more massive in scope and overwhelming in impact than anywhere else in the world [see also pp. 38747; 39032].
More than 1,500,000 people were estimated by the WHO to have been infected with HIV (human immuno-deficiency virus) in Asia and the Pacific.
In India alone the number of confirmed HIV-infected cases, currently totalling 11,000, was expected to rise to at least 50,000 by 1995.
A UNDP report released at the congress warned that AIDS could threaten the economic well-being of Asian countries, which by the year 2000 would account for 42 per cent of the world's projected 100,000,000 cases.
In a separate report, due for release in December, the UNDP estimated that income lost from death due to AIDS ranged from US$10,000 per case in India to over US$240,000 per case in South Korea.
Medical care costs ranged from US$1,100 per case in India to over US$4,000 per case in South Korea [for US estimates of medical costs see p.
R149].
The vulnerability of developing economies, especially in Africa, was also highlighted in a worldwide study conducted by the London-based Panos Institute whose findings, released on Nov. 26, showed that in some African countries, notably Uganda and Zambia, AIDS had largely destroyed "the most productive sector" of the population.
Cholera outbreak in Zambia
An outbreak of cholera in the Zambian copper-belt town of Kitwe, first detected in late October, was reported on Nov. 10-11 to have killed an estimated 350 people [see also p.
R160].
INTERNATIONAL
AVIATION
Air crashes in China
A Chinese Boeing 737 crashed near the tourist resort of Guilin in Guangxi province, southern China, on Nov. 24, killing all 141 people on board.
The accident, the cause of which had not as of the end of November been determined, was the worst ever reported in Chinese civil aviation history.
On Nov. 5, 33 people had died after a Soviet-built Chinese helicopter crashed into a crowded department store in Yuanyang, in Henan province.
Aviation industry losses
The Director-General of the International Air Transport Association (IATA), Günter Eser, said on Nov. 2 that losses suffered by the international airline industry were expected to total US$2,500 million in 1992 (coming after losses of $4,000 million in 1991 and $2,700 million in 1990).
Addressing representatives from 212 member airlines at IATA's annual meeting in Montreal, Eser warned that the present crisis, aggravated by a 4.4 per cent drop in passenger numbers on scheduled services, was likely to continue until at least 1994.
INTERNATIONAL
SPACE RESEARCH
Return of US shuttle
The United States space shuttle Columbia returned to Earth on Nov. 1, ending a 10-day mission.
The National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) had been criticized for risking the lives of six astronauts, merely to launch a satellite which could have been put into orbit more cheaply by an unmanned rocket.
NASA argued, however, that the flight had been an important step in the development of the proposed Freedom space station.
INTERNATIONAL
VATICAN
Rehabilitation of Galileo
Following 13 years' deliberation by a special Vatican commission, Pope John Paul II on Oct. 31 formally rehabilitated Galileo Galilei, the Italian astronomer, mathematician and physicist who was forced by the Inquisition in 1633 to recant his assertion that the earth orbited the sun.
Galileo's view contradicted Church doctrine of the time that the earth was in a fixed position.
The commission found that Galileo's judges had acted in good faith but had been "incapable of dissociating faith from an age-old cosmology" .
New catechism
A new catechism of the Roman Catholic Church was introduced on Nov. 16, replacing the original version drawn up in 1566.
The new version included condemnation of drunken and dangerous driving, drug trafficking and tax evasion; it stated that homosexuals had to be treated with respect and understanding but had to refrain from sexual activity [for August document on homosexuality see p. 39033].
INTERNATIONAL
NATO
The North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) Assembly, comprising legislators from 16 member countries, elected Loïc Bouvard of France as president on Nov. 19; Bouvard, 63, the first Frenchman to hold the post in 33 years, was elected for a two-year term to succeed Charles Rose, a member of the US Congress.