

Bright intervals are possible and apart from the chance of a light shower it should stay dry milder than of late with a top temperature of eleven celsius fifty two fahrenheit in a moderate south easterly wind.
Mist and patchy fog will form tonight and drizzle is likely in places too.
The overnight low eight celsius that's forty six degrees fahrenheit.
Good afternoon from the county's favourite station it's half past twelve.
Radio Nottingham news headlines with Alison Ford.
Calverton Colliery is to close in just three weeks' time.
The proposed closure was confirmed just twenty four hours after British Coal announced the pit was to go into the review procedure and revealed that it's lost more than six million pounds in the last six months.
British Coal's Midlands Group Director John Longdon has recommended that Calverton should cease production by November the nineteenth.
Nottinghamshire police have released a recording of a girl they believe called the Kingsmill Hospital at Sutton in Ashfield claiming she'd had a baby.
They think it's the same teenager who's made at least a dozen calls to the police and a hospital in Lincolnshire she sometimes uses the name Cindy and sometimes Linda.
She says she's fourteen and that the father of her child is her own dad.
A member of staff has been suspended from a centre for the handicapped in Nottinghamshire pending an internal investigation.
The probe at Redoaks Training Centre in Ringworth follows a police investigation at Stonecross Lane Residential Unit in Mansfield.
Nottinghamshire County Council won't confirm what the latest allegations are.
They've stressed the two cases aren't linked.
A Nottingham car salesman who went with two prostitutes aged fourteen and fifteen has been jailed for three years.
Forty seven year old John House of Fairwell Drive in Bulwell denied having unlawful sexual intercourse with the girls but was found guilty at Nottingham Crown Court.
Recorded crime in England and Wales rose by three point eight per cent in the year to June.
Home Office figures put the total of offences at a record five point seven million but the rate of increase showed a sharp drop on the two previous years and more than half the recorded crime was either theft of or from vehicles.
And Nottinghamshire's business leaders are the least confident in the East Midlands about the prospects of increased sales according to a survey by the accountants Price Waterhouse.
The survey also says that ten per cent of the county's companies think the market will actually contract in the next six months.
Those are the headlines I'll be back with the news in detail at one o'clock.
At twelve thirty two traffic and travel for Wednesday lunchtime listen for a space in a moment first traffic further afield from Jonathan Clays.
And we take a long range view if you're heading on the motorways this afternoon.
Er locally no real troubles on the M One er if you're heading down to Leicestershire we have the work at twenty two on the M One not really causing too many troubles but some brand new work on the go in Northants today between junctions nineteen and eighteen that's the M Six down towards Rugby.
Southbound looks pretty slow heading into those roadworks as well for the time being.
Of course at the top of Derbyshire at junction thirty on the M One we still have the work there.
Again just two lanes open can slow things and a quick glance elsewhere well no real troubles reported just a look at the A One Stanford still the roadworks on the go there both north and south will slow things down.
Jonathan Clay's A A Roadwatch.
The Forest park and ride attendant tells me they're fairly busy but with still parking space  site for the moment and there's room to park on the Colwick Race Course and the Queens Drive site too and that's  service does offer free parking for yourself and your passengers and you can travel into and out of the city again for a pound.
Not too many problems on the parking front in the centre of Mansfield.
The Walken Street car park attendant tells me there's still plenty of parking space available there.
In Nottingham city centre though the Royal Hotel car park that's fairly busy and there are still queues at both entrances of the Victoria Centre and it will take you a good few minutes if you want to get yourself parked in Trinity Square car park they're still operating on a one out one in basis so obviously better to avoid that one if you want to get yourself parked up you can avoid those queues there's plenty of room at the Stoney Street car park that's in the  Market there's always the Fletchergate car park St James Street you'll find that next to the Albany Hotel or you could er make your way to the Broadmoor Centre you won't have to queue to get in there.
Next update in around twenty five minutes time.
F M one O three point eight and ninety five point five it's Radio Nottingham Nottinghamshire's favourite station.
Now it's erm twelve thirty four let's go back to the news this lunchtime.
As we've just heard in the headlines Nottinghamshire police have taken the unusual step of releasing a recording of a girl they believe has made at least a dozen calls claiming she's given birth.
The initial call was made to the Kingsmill Hospital in Sutton in Ashfield on Saturday night.
Since then she's contact Nottinghamshire and Lincolnshire police and the Lincoln County Hospital.
She uses two name Cindy and Linda and claims to be fourteen years old.
She says she lives on a housing estate on the outskirts of Mansfield.
says that I was the one that killed it and I didn't.
He was the one that got me pregnant and he says that I can't come home at all now and I phoned the hospital, yes, and they said that come in and if I go in then you're going to arrest me and then you'll just call my dad like you always have done every time I've run away from home and then every time you lot have took me back home and then I end up getting pregnant.
Acting Detective Superintendent Mick Cox is leading the enquiry he's been talking to Nigel Bell and telling him they're convinced that the same girl has made all the phone calls.
We sent er our er receptionist to Lincoln to listen to the tape recording.
Er she'd held the girl in conversation at Mansfield er for quite a while and she's listened to the tape and she's convinced it's the same girl.
Given the amount of calls and the fact that they're telephoned in different areas it seems a lot of trouble to go through if it was a hoax.
Yes exactly and er you've heard the tape er she sounds very harassed er and we're concerned for her welfare.
When was the last telephone call made?
On Monday evening we had all these these calls over a three day period.
What's come out in the in the telephone call which you recorded was that er the father baby she is alleging is actually her own father what do you think do you think that puts her in any danger the fact that you're making this public that the father may hear this.
That's a possibility but this has been talked through with both the Social Services and the the hospital and er we've decided to take that chance.
In terms of your inquiries where have you been trying to get information from?
What about local schools in the area?
We've been in touch with all the local schools in the in the Mansfield area er we've followed up inquiries of girls that have not been at school and so on and er these er have led to er to nothing.
She says that she she lives in a on the estate on the outskirts of Mansfield have you been checking around that area?
Yes but of of course we've got a number of estates er around the Mansfield er but we have made inquiries we've er er we've made appeals through the press and the radio as you well know.
Are there any leads at the moment?
None at all only the er er the tape recorded message that she er er left with the er police at Lincoln.
Given the prospect that that her father is actually the father of this child do you that she'll still be at home?
I've no idea I can't er I can't say whether she would be at home or not.
What about assurances then she's obviously distressed she thinks that she's going to be in trouble if she come to the police.
Well I'm bothered about her health and that and that's what I must emphasize to her if she's listening that er as far as we're concerned we would want to just give her some sympathy advice and support in relation to this matter.
Well what about family ties family ties are strong if she's worried her father's going to get into trouble as well.
Yes I can appreciate that but at this moment I'm not worried or bothered about any prosecutions in relation to this matter I'm bothered about the ch the child's er health.
She can contact the hospital or the Social Services where who've agreed to er to talk to her and give her all the advice and comfort that she needs.
From your point of view apart from waiting for further calls from her what can the police do?
Well we're still continuing to to monitor the situation we're still carrying on inquiries at er at schools we're going further afield now in case there is some suggestion that she she might be living further afield er towards Worksop or even in towards Derbyshire.
Now if you did recognize the voice or you think you can help the police then there's a free phone number to contact it's O eight hundred six to six nine nine nine it's O eight hundred six to six nine nine nine that's a free phone number so it won't cost you anything to call O eight hundred six to six nine nine nine it's the number to call if you did recognize the voice there or you think you can help the police in any way O eight hundred six to six nine nine nine and there'll be more on that in our next main news which is on the way at one o'clock.
Now let's look at some placed to go and thinks to do and people to see for later on today.
This lunchtime from one until three the Meadows Community Art Centre are running a craft marathon.
You can go along there and make crafts cards and Christmas presents no experience is necessary and you can take one object home each day and the remaining items will be sold at a Christmas Craft Fair to raise funds for the arts project.
It's free to have a go and the Centre is on Queens Walk in the Meadows in Nottingham that's from one until three today if you want to go there.
One till three as well the Special Needs Support Group are meeting at Ilkeston Health Centre and they offer mutual support and understanding to those parents who have children with special needs.
One fifteen till three fifteen the Blidworth Wow Group are meeting in the Blidworth Social and Welfare Centre to learn more about screen printing.
A creche is provided and that costs fifty P ten bob.
One thirty until three thirty a friendly ballroom and sequence tea dance with refreshments is on and the I C C on Mansfield Road in Nottingham the International Community Centre and that's half one till half three.
Half one until three forty five sequence dancing on at St John's Church Hall on Greylands Road at Bilborough the cost is seventy five pence there including a cup of tea and bickies too.
One forty five the Keep Fit Association and got ladies keep fit to music at Attenborough Village Hall.
Six till seven this evening the youth and junior group of the Beeston Red Cross are meeting at a hundred and fifty six High Road in Beeston that's the Red Cross Centre at six.
Seven o'clock an evening of entertainment with clairvoyant medium Brian Gibson is on at the Scout's Headquarters on Lovers Lane at Newark tickets are two fifty there seven until nine.
A ten week preparation course on to the Open University programme leading to the diploma in Health and Social Welfare starts.
This is at Clarendon College at seven and that's on Pallam Avenue just off Mansfield Road in Nottingham er contact the college for more information that starts at seven tonight.
Seven thirty a tour of the Broadmarsh Caves leads from the Broadmarsh Centre to book a place on the tour call Nottingham four eight three five O four four eight three five O four.
Half seven the Hare and Hounds at Warsop and District Camera Club they're meeting at the Hare and Hounds pub in Warsop and tonight they have a competition Slides in Action and seven thirty Slimmers Clubs U K are meeting at the Age Concern Centre  Street in Beeston and seven thirty as well until eight thirty a mixed ability aerobics class is on in the gymnasium of Rainworth Recreation Centre that's one fifty there and Joe Walker  Zydeco Band direct from Louisiana are appearing at the Old Vic on Fletchergate at Nottingham tonight at half seven six pounds the tickets there four pounds concessions and they're available on the door.
Anything you're up to let us know it's What's On B B C Radio Nottingham P O Box two two two in Nottingham Nottingham N G one three H Z to write to er give us a couple of weeks' notice if you can.
You tell us and we'll tell Nottinghamshire for free so that's What's On B B C Radio Nottingham Box two two two in Nottingham Nottingham N G one three H Z to write to and don't forget tonight as well er if you want to come out and see us we're doing Drinking Partners our pub quiz er we're in the Star Inn on Middle Street in Beeston and the evening there starts at eight o'clock.
Albert Hammond that is and er A Free Electric Band it's Radio Nottingham it's a quarter to one and er Action Line Action Line time now and er in a film Thelma and Louise that's starter of the trend for stronger independent women if er you fancy a lift but want something a little less drastic then our Louise from the Action Line team is here today with something to tickle your fancy I'm scared now I hope you're not suggesting that er women take to their cars and mow down any unsuspecting male that gets in their way .
Now would I Geoff do you think I really would do you then.
Well I would hope not actually that's that's a relief so er so so tell us what we're talking about today.
Well I'm going to suggest going back to education.
Returning to learning is not easy for everyone especially if you've had time out to bring up your kids.
You may need a lot of confidence a lot of support and you might even need some help looking after your children if they're quite young.
Well if you live in Snainton towns then I've got details of an organization that can help out with all those things and help you get back onto the learning ladder and maybe into a job.
All right then tell us who they are and what they do.
Okay well there's something we talk about a lot on the Action Line they're called Fast Forward and they're a training agency.
They run courses especially for people who might find it difficult to do a course at their local college because of things like language difficulties and the fact that you might have children to look after.
David is an education and training development worker for Fast Forward.
Here he is to explain what Fast Forward do and why they're needed.
There are a lot of barriers that exist between people and training some of them could be things like they don't have access to child care it could be they lack confidence so we go for support and we can offer training which is local we can offer language support.
Basically we we try to break down any barriers that might exist between local people and the training opportunities that do exist.
That was David who works for Fast Forward.
It sounds really good because as David said you choose the course and they'll help you out with all the practical things like child care and travel expenses.
What about the the actual courses though what kind of courses can you do?
Well they've got er links with six colleges so they can offer you more or less anything from management to catering to horticulture.
They've got erm an adult literacy course if you want to brush up on your reading and your writing they've got computer courses they've got a course in sound engineering and a works skills for women course which is what Sarah did.
Well it involved a lot of things a bit of everything.
Typing and word processing everything really.
It was very good very very good for women that have been home for a long time and want to get their confidence back.
At the end you know what you want and you get your child care and your travel care.
I go to college now I'm doing my G C S Es and I'm enjoying them very much and I'm glad I went onto that course first.
That was Sarah who did the Works Skills for Women Course at Fast Forward and that's now helped her to get on to some G C S E courses at college.
Can anyone go along to Fast Forward then is it open to all comers.
Yep erm well anyone can go along but you do have to live in Snainton or St Annes.
You don't need any qualifications or anything like that.
If this is you and you'd like to get back into education and get on a course why not go along to Fast Forward.
They can help you with your training needs your child care and your travel and they can also provide the support you need if you're not confident about going back to learning.
Here's Sarah again.
I didn't want to stay at home I wanted to get back into education and I didn't know how to the easiest way I suppose.
It was so scary coming you know all them years staying at home you lose all your confidence and it's a very very good way and I recommend all women to do that who are like me children and have been home that long.
My family was very very supportive my mum was very happy that I was doing something for myself later on in my life it will help me very much and my husband was very very good.
That was Sarah talking about her course at Fast Forward.
Now if this sounds like it could be the kind of course you need call Action Line and they'll put you in touch with the people at Fast Forward and once you've got the training and the qualifications the next thing is the application form isn't it and you've got details as well today of someone who can help with that haven't you?
That's right trying to find work these days can be demanding and extremely frustrating so you want to make sure that you give yourself the best chance of getting a job and one way to help is to do a good application form and know how to handle yourself in an interview.
Well there's an organization in Radford who can help out with both of these things they're called A T O Training and they can tell you all you need to know about things like application forms and interview techniques as well as advice about further education and wan t what to do if you want to start your own business.
Now Fast Forward was for everyone wasn't it, this one isn't?
No it isn't.
First of all you have to be unemployed and you have to be black or Asian.
Now it's especially for people who are black or Asian because a lot of the time they miss out on the opportunities that are available to a lot of other people because of things like language barriers and although you might think it's unfair it's not actually illegal.
The Race Relations Act says that you can do this you can have courses especially for black or Asian people so as I said you have to be unemployed you have to be black or Asian and you have to live in either Radford Hyson Green St Annes Lenton or Snainton.
I'll just say those again it's Radford Hyson Green St Annes Lenton or Snainton.
If this is you and you'd like some help or advice about interviews and application forms then call us on Nottingham four double one two double two and we'll put in touch with A T O Training and if this isn't you if you're not black or Asian and you would like some help then you can call us as well and we'll try and find something for you.
All right four double one two double two to call Radio Nottingham's Action Line if you want to know any more about Fast Forward and the courses available there and how you can get on them or if you want to know about A T O Training as well four double one two double two and try and call Action Line before four o'clock this afternoon if you can.
Er what's happening tomorrow then?
Well Carolyn's here tomorrow Geoff to show that age is just a state of mind.
That's tomorrow but 
All right.
Don't forget our bonfire list.
If you want to know where your nearest display is then you can call us now on Nottingham four double one two double two.
If you're stuck for somewhere to take the kids on firework night and you want to know the one that's nearest to you Action Line have got a great big long list you've got piles haven't you?
Piles and piles.
They've got piles over there er four double one two double two to call Action Line and er try and call before four o'clock this afternoon if you can for the er information about the firework displays that are near to you for more details about Fast Forward and details about A T O Training as well Nottingham four double one two double two for Radio Nottingham's Action Line call before four.
Billy Joel and er the River of Dreams it's Radio Nottingham six minutes to one o'clock now Kids' County for today these have been the clues, It's cheap it's quite big and you can see a pub and you can see the Victoria Baths.
Erm the Castle and Aldi Supermarket guess so far Cecil's on from Plumtree hello.
Hello there Geoffrey.
How are you?
Oh I'm very well thank you and you .
Marvellous.
Good man.
Absolutely marvellous.
Er what do you think about this erm this leaf stem sculpture that all the fuss is about you know the one that's down by er Marks and Spencers?
Well I I mean I actually the the leaf sculpture itself I I don't really think a lot of it.
Don't you?
Not really no I 
What about the trees?
What about the trees that are all around it?
Oh the trees should remain.
Cos they want to pull the trees up as well.
Well I can't understand anyone want to pull trees down I mean I've got a tree in the in my garden it's about seventy feet high.
I know it's a bit dangerous but I wouldn't cut it down.
Yeah I mean I think I think they'll put some more there afterwards but
Yes but you know I mean a tr a tree takes a long time to mature doesn't it?
Yeah.
You know and I mean it seems such a shame to cut it I mean they're living things aren't they?
You'd have er there's somebody on yesterday who said that thinks it should er it should be against the law to cut a tree down.
Well of course there is there is such a thing as a preservation order  isn't there ?
Yeah yeah.
So I mean you stick those on them and er and er they won't be able to cut them down.
Well we'll see what we say anyway we've got er we've got a couple of the Councillors on erm after one o'clock today Councillor Stuart Argyle and we've got David Poole on as well 
Oh right 
to give us both sides of the argument so we'll see what they have to say and er invite people's calls as well see what they think about it.
it would be very interesting to hear what they've got to say I mean especially someone who wants to cut them down I can't understand anyone wanting to cut trees down unless they're dangerous.
Yeah tree van 
You know I mean 
Tree vandalism it's called eh?
Well it is I mean trees give off oxygen anyway don't they?
Mm yeah.
You know and they soak up carbon dioxide so it's good for the environment.
Yeah.
Yeah why anyone wants to cut them I don't know.
Yeah well we'll see what they say.
Yeah it will be very interesting yes very interesting .
We'll see what they say see what they say afterwards.
Because people are getting rather agitated about it  you know.
yeah.
Erm anyway the Kids' County what are we talking about?
Well I I thought after your first two clues it was Green's Windmill.
Oh.
Oh.
Oh Cecil no.
Oh oh dear 
You passed it.
Oh what a shame.
Never mind have a go have a go again soon.
I will.
Tarrah.
Tarrah.
Bye bye.
Er Hilda's on from Southwell  Southwell .
Hi Southwell.
Are you all right?
Yes I'm fine.
I could tell you were going to be a Southwell one.
Oh really?
Southwell  For goodness sake 
Southwell You didn't say it correctly.
Southwell erm what you up to today Hilda.
Well I've been making Christmas cake this morning so I feel quite er happy with myself.
Oh I see.
Slosh a bit in the cake and slosh a bit in your throat .
That's right.
Is it one for you and one for me?
Almost yes.
How much have you put in?
Er four tablespoons in the cake.
Have you and how much have you put in you?
Well I licked the spoon.
Did you?
.
And you licked it again and you filled it up and you licked it again.
No no.
Are you going to keep feeding it up until Christmas?
Yes every week it has to be fed.
Do you how much do put in when you give it a feed?
Well you prick it all over with your a knitting needle or something
Mhm.
and then put about two tablespoons on each time and stand back.
Well you'll have a happy Christmas won't you?
Mm.
Kids' County what are they talking about?
Snainton Market.
Yes.
Ooh.
Yes.
Hooray it took so long to get that sorted as well .
Yes I know cos you did have it on a few weeks ago.
Did we?
The same thing.
No.
Mm.
No.
My daughter's been trying to get on for ages.
Has she?
Yeah but you ignored her last week.
Oh I would never do that.
I think you were sick of the kids.
Oh kids.
.
Grrr never mind they've all gone back to school haven't they?
Yes it's wonderful.
Thank the Lord there is a God.
You can have erm loads off the stuff off the conveyor belt for you for today you can have er a video loads of C Ds some sweets and toffees and things erm some crates of moist toilet tissue.
Wonderful.
Cos they sent me loads of that and er I'll sort you out with a T shirt as well all right?
Yes find super thanks Geoff.
Okey-dokey well erm hang on the line and er we'll get you all sorted.
Best do another one best do er Kids' County number two for today same as before Nottinghamshire's kids talking about Nottinghamshire's people and places and things I need to know where they're describing remember whatever the answer is it's always somewhere around Nottinghamshire always somewhere in the county three four three four three four to ring then for er Kids' County number two for today here's the clues, It's got barbed wire around it it's made of wood it's long.
There it's got barbed wire around it it's made of wood and it's long where are they talking about what are they talking about somewhere around Nottinghamshire Nottingham three four three four three four to call from this lot of clues, It's got barbed wire around it it's made of wood it's long.
There what are they on about?
I tell you what you can get for it you can have erm a make-up bag with a string of pearls in they're not real one you can have er more of that moist erm tissue stuff er a bag with sweetener things in it there's er a video about a Biggin Air Show and loads of marshmallows too for Kids' County number two here's the clues, It's got barbed wire around it its made of wood it's long.
Nottingham three four three four three four to ring and er call as well and tell me what you think about that leaf statue and the trees round there cos we've got the councillors on talking about that after er one o'clock today.
A quick look at the travel then from Annie Smith.
On the parking front in the centre of Nottingham you'll find a space at St James Street and the Arndale Centre car park but Victoria Centre's got a few minutes wait at the York Street entrance and Trinity Square still very busy next update in ten minutes time.
And we'll do the whole lot altogether the er traffic and the trains and planes in full every day on the county's favourite at ten past one.
Good afternoon from Nottinghamshire's favourite radio station.
At one o'clock it's the headlines this lunchtime it's announced that Calverton Colliery's to close before the end of the month.
The police appeal for the public's help in identifying the voice of a girl who rung a Nottinghamshire hospital claiming she'd had a baby and a member of staff is suspended from a centre for the handicapped in Nottinghamshire pending an internal investigation.
They're the headlines today the details from Alison Ford.
Calverton Colliery is to close in just over two weeks' time.
The closure has been confirmed twenty four hours after British Coal announced the pit was to go into the review procedure and revealed that it's lost more than six million pounds in the last six months.
Union leaders at the pit say they'll challenge the closure by taking legal action.
Sarah Sturdy reports.
British Coal's Midlands Group Director John Longdon has recommended that Calverton should cease production by November the nineteenth.
He says continuing heavy losses and falling markets have given him no option but to propose that the six hundred and forty man pit should close.
The Union Leaders he met today at Calverton Miners Welfare say they'll challenge the closure through the pit review procedure.
But even if that lasts the full nine months British Coal has the final say on whether the pit should be shut down.
Nottinghamshire police have released a recording of a girl they believed called the Kingsmill Hospital at Sutton in Ashfield claiming she'd had a baby.
They think it's the same teenager who's made at least a dozen calls to the police and a hospital in Lincolnshire since reporting the birth at the weekend.
This report from Nigel Bell.
I was the one that killed it and I didn't.
He was the one that got me pregnant.
This is the voice of the girl that sometimes uses the name Cindy and sometimes Linda.
She says she's fourteen and that the father of the child is her own dad.
Acting Detective Superintendent Mick Cox says they realize the girl could be in danger but believe it's necessary to broadcast the recording.
This has been talked through but with both the Social Services and the the hospital and er we decided to take that chance.
They've checked schools and housing estates in the Mansfield area but say they've no leads.
Half a dozen officers are investigating the case but police forces across the East Midlands are on standby.
Mick Cox is urging anyone who recognizes this voice to contact the police.
There's a free phone number O eight hundred six two six nine nine nine.
Every time I've run away from home and then every time you lot have took me back home and then I end up getting pregnant.
At the James Bolger murder trial in Preston the jury has been told how two the two eleven year old defendants tormented an elderly woman shortly before they allegedly abducted James Bolger.
They've denied abduction and murdering James also attempting to abduct another child.
Kevin Bucket reports.
The court has been today hearing evidence from witnesses building up a picture of what the who defendants were doing in the hours before the alleged abduction of James Bolger.
A qualified nurse Pamela Armstrong said that she and two other woman had been running a stall in the Bootle Strand shopping centre.
At one point an elderly woman was looking at the display when the two defendants starting tormenting her.
Miss Armstrong said the defendants were in some way prodding the woman from behind she swung round as if to hit the children with her bag and they ran off.
Another witness Mrs Angela Higgins said she saw the defendants shouting and behaving stupidly.
She said one of them spoke to her own four year old child.
It's alleged that later in the day the defendants abducted James Bolger took him to a railway embankment and murdered him.
The case is continuing.
A member of staff has been suspended from a centre for the handicapped in Nottinghamshire pending an internal investigation.
The probe by the County Council at Redoaks Training Centre in Rainworth follows a police investigation at Stone Cross Lane Residential Unit in Mansfield.
Rob Tomlinson reports.
Nottinghamshire County Council won't confirm what the latest allegations are about but it's been reported that they centre on fraud and sexual harassment at Redoaks.
An inquiry is being conducted internally at the council run centre and police have not been called in.
However two weeks ago they were called in to investigate claims of physical abuse at Stone Cross Lane Residential Unit in Mansfield a warden run complex for mentally handicapped adults.
Detectives were alerted by Central Nottinghamshire Health Care Trust and it's understood their inquiries will take some time.
They say there is no link between that investigation and the County Council's probe into allegations at Redoaks.
You're listening to B B C Radio Nottingham news it's coming up to five past one.
A Nottingham car salesman who went with two prostitutes aged fourteen and fifteen has been jailed for three years.
Forty seven year old John House of Fairwell Drive in Bulwell denied having unlawful sexual intercourse with the girls but was found guilty at Nottingham Crown Court.
Chris Throup reports.
The jury at the trial heard that House's sessions with the two girls were arranged by nineteen year old Natalie Meadows who introduced them to prostitution.
He drove them to fields in the Derbyshire countryside where the offences took place.
House was arrested after the mother of the fifteen year old took down his car registration number.
The car was traced to dealers in Nottingham where he'd worked for nine years.
At Lincoln Crown Court today Judge Richard Hutchinson who'd adjourned the case for reports sentenced him to two consecutive eighteen month prison terms.
Meadows of  Hill Road in Baysford was found guilty of two charges of controlling prostitutes and two of aiding unlawful sex.
She'll be sentenced at a later date.
A forty six year old Nottingham Museum assistant has been remanded in custody charged with the murder of her eighty year old mother over eighteen months ago.
Patricia Gregg of  Mews in the Meadows had surrendered herself to police yesterday morning before appearing before City Magistrates today.
This report from Paula Boystones.
Beatrice Gregg was found dead at her home in  Close in March last year.
Today a bail application was refused and Miss Gregg was remanded in custody for seven days.
Last year an inquest was told how a milkman became suspicious when he noticed milk had not been taken in from the doorstep of the house.
A post-mortem examination at the time showed she'd been hit on the head with a blunt instrument.
Miss Gregg told detectives her mother had been waiting for the handyman to call at the time of her death.
The man was never traced.
After today's hearing Miss Gregg's solicitor Donald Worsley said he intended to make a bail application to a Judge in Chambers and if this failed he would then go to the High Court.
A hundred and thirty three Manchester United fans are appearing in court in Istanbul after trouble at a hotel.
Thirty one others were held but escaped from custody.
The British Consulate says some of the United supporters are likely to be charged and all of them will be held until after this evenings game against the Turkish champions .
One Manchester United fan insisted he'd seen very few disturbances.
Never been in trouble at all like and and I've certainly not seen any trouble.
I've been out on the on the streets and the roads and we've had a few beers and I've not seen any trouble but the first I've heard of trouble was was this morning after breakfast in a nearby hotel and and by by the trouble that's been caused I don't know the details of it but I believe it's been quite intense really.
British and Irish Ministers have begun talks in Belfast on the political future of Northern Ireland.
Before going into the meeting the Irish team spoke of a good deal of hope for peace and the Northern Ireland Secretary Sir Patrick Mayhew said all options remained open.
Recorded crime in England and Wales rose by three point eight per cent in the year to June.
Home Office figures put the total of offences at a record five point seven million but the rate of increase showed a sharp drop on the two previous years.
John Silverman reports.
On the face of it the trend is encouraging.
Recorded crime fell in eight police force areas the rate of increase in violent crime was significantly lower than the previous year and the rise in reported thefts was the smallest for four years.
But within the statistics there are signs that the mobility of criminals is inflicting more crimes on rural areas than the cities and the amount of vehicle crime continues to cause concern.
The Home Office Minister David Maclean said that despite some encouraging signs the Government would not become complacent on crime.
That's the news now and a look at the lunchtime sport here's John Shaw.
Nottingham Forest are likely to stick with the same team that beats Notts County for tonight's match against Millwall at the City ground the London club are currently eleventh in the First Division Forest will go above them if the Reds win.
Notts County striker Rob Matthews returns for the Magpies Reserves against Wolves at Meadow Lane tonight Robbie Turner will also play.
Kick-off is at seven o'clock.
Mansfield Town Caretaker Manager Bill Bearden has given his whole squad the day off to try to stop the spread of the flu virus.
It hit it hit Ian Stringfellow last week and caused Nicky Platten now to pull out at the last minute last night.
Manchester United have selection problems for this afternoons European Cup Tie against the Turkish side .
Gary Pallister is already ruled out and there's a doubt concerning Brian Robson who has a sinus infection.
If Robson doesn't play then Roy Keen will take his place.
And an announcement will be made later today about the venue for the World Cup qualifier between Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland which is scheduled for Belfast on November the seventeenth.
The match may have to be moved because of the recent violence in the province.
And the main points of the news again this lunchtime.
A member of staff has been suspended from a centre for the handicapped in Nottinghamshire pending an internal investigation.
Nottinghamshire police have released a recording of a girl they believe called the Kingsmill Hospital at Sutton in Ashfield claiming she'd had a baby and Calverton Colliery is to close in just over two weeks' time.
The announcement was confirmed twenty four hours after British Coal said the pit was to go into the review procedure.
Union leaders there say they'll challenge the procedure by taking legal action.
Ten past one traffic and trains and planes at lunchtime.
On the trains British Rail say no problems all doing find East Midlands Airport all okay as well let's listen for a space now with Annie Smith.
Good news if you're making you way to park at the Walken Street car park in the centre of Mansfield the attendant tells me they've got plenty of space.
On the park and ride sites the Forest is busy but I'm told there's parking room still available and there's room on the Queens Drive site and ample space at the  Racecourse just follow the yellow signs for that particular site.
If you want to park in Nottingham city centre there's space at the Arndale Centre car park that's at the bottom of Maid Marion Way or you could even made your way to the Stoney Street car park you'll find that in the Leys Market.
Trinity Square still proving to be very busy so expect a few minutes wait if you want to get yourself parked in there and have a couple of minutes wait if you want to get into the Victoria Centre that's at the York Street entrance.
Finally taking a look at traffic in and around Nottingham's roads the vehicles I can see are moving steadily.
Annie Smith Radio Nottingham Travel.
On the motorways no problems at the moment as far as we know.
The A Six O Nine Trowell Road there's resurfacing taking place there between Arlston Drive and Burnwood Drive so watch it.
On the A One near to Markham Moor north bound lane closures expected now until five o'clock tomorrow.
On the A Six Twenty there's railway bridge work taking place between  and Welham extra lights there.
And problems still in Baysford cos of the closure of David Lane and Southwick Street diversions in operation there long delays expected.
At Collington Chapel Lane is closed until Friday cos they're putting a new sewer in there and traffic's being diverted there along Main Street and at Totton there's roadworks on Nottingham Road at the junction with Attenborough Lane delays likely there especially at busy times that'll do us for now we'll update the traffic for you again in half an hours time.
It's Radio Nottingham F M one O three point eight and ninety five point five Nottinghamshire's favourite station with the weather forecast for the rest of the afternoon.
Staying cloudy in most places although a few bright intervals at possible and apart from the odd chance of a light shower it should stay dry milder than of late top temperature eleven celsius fifty two fahrenheit mist and patchy fog will form tonight and drizzle is likely in places too the overnight low eight celsius forty six fahrenheit mist and fog clearing slowly tomorrow a dull start it should brighten up later on though sunny intervals developing the high tomorrow thirteen degrees.
The Chairman of the Board and er You've Got Me Dangling on a String it's radio Nottingham it's Geoff Owen here till two this afternoon.
Dennis McCarthy on Afternoon Special from two till half four Alan Clifford at tea time in for John Simons from half four until seven o'clock at tea time later.
Radio Nottingham sport on from seven and then John Tanton from ten until midnight to come on the county's favourite.
Er Kids' County on to our second one for today Rita's on from Mansfield hello Rita.
Hello.
How are you?
All right.
Good oh and what's happening to you then today?
Well we're just watching Coronation Street she asked me to turn it off.
She's what?
Says stop watching Coronation Street and listen to Radio Nottingham.
What you can do both at the same time can you?
Yes.
Yes well of course you can Rita you know have two things there together it's okay it's fine.
Er the clues for our second Kids' County for today are these ones, It's got barbed wire round it it's made of wood it's long.
There it has barbed wire around it it's made of wood and it's long Rita.
Is it  Major Oak?
Major Oak no no no.
I didn't think it would be.
No it could have been though couldn't it?
Well you can go back and watch that thing now can't you?
Well I'll watch for  come back.
Aye?
coming back  
 
or whatever her name is.
Bye Rita
Bye.
Bye bye.
Katherine is on from Chilwell hello Katherine.
Hello.
Hello how are you?
Fine thank you.
And what end of Chilwell are you at?
Erm we're on the traffic lights where all the work is  Lane.
Oh are you down there is it hell?
Oh terrible awful .
Is it he every morning it's hell .
Every morning you can't get the car in 
What's it like now?
Just the same all the workmen are there can't cross the road
Can't you?
Can't hear no it terrible.
Oh and can you hear it rumbling all the time?
Oh yes the jack hammering.
Wobbling about?
Yes.
There and you're si and you're sitting there on your sofa and you get this strange rumbling 
That's right near the window yes and all the dust is coming in we've got to put up with it till Christmas.
Until when?
Till about Christmas.
Ah.
December it's not going to finish till December.
But you'll be able to get all the tinsel out won't you when it goes.
Yes.
What do you think about this statue and all these trees we've been talking about the ones around by Marks and Spencers yes ?
Well I was thinking maybe we could bring it to Beeston with the other one.
Do you think so what 
Match up one each end.
I like that one that's in Beeston of the old man sitting on the bench there .
Oh that's nice but people keep knocking little bits off it.
Yeah.
Knocked his nose and knocked his foot.
It's a bit fragile isn't it I suppose .
Yes it's a shame.
Little little extremities.
That's right.
So you'll have it in Beeston will you Katherine ?
Yes 
Maybe you could present it to those workmen.


You know when they've when they've finished.
That's a good idea.
You could give it to them couldn't you ?
They could have a little roundabout they're going to have there.
It's a little pressie.
What about the trees though do you think they should take the trees down?
No I don't think they should no I think they've been there quite a while it's a shame to.
Cos they're quite old trees those aren't they ?
Yes yes they should leave them really.
They want to put up some of these little spindly poky trees.
Oh no.
You know the ones that that pop up everywhere.
No they should leave those there really they look 
You think so 
They look quite nice.
All right then well I'll get the I'll get the two councillors on in a minute.
Okay.
And we'll see what they have to say and if you feel so moved you can ring back and shout at them Katherine.
Yes thank you.
All right er Kids' County here's the clues these ones, It's got barbed wire round it it's made of wood it's long.
There it's got barbed wire round it it's made of wood and it's long.
I was going to say Major Oak.
Oh Katherine.
I know.
That's what Rita just said can't you think of anything else ?
I can't think of anything else either no.
You nana.
My husband really thought it would be Major Oak.
Are these workmen outside of your house are they the ones with the er with the trousers hanging half way down their bum?
Oh yeah there's about twelve of them yeah when they bend  down  their trousers fall down .
They're all that sort of are they.
Well er off to have a look at some workmen's bums out the window and have a nice afternoon Katherine.
Okay thank you bye .
Tarrah bye bye.
Er Kids' County I'll give you some more clues these might help, It's got tunnels it's metal round the edge it's green.
There it's got tunnels and it's metal around the edge and it's green three four three four three four to ring for a bash at Kids' County and er we know it's not the Major Oak cos that's what they've both guessed so far all right.
Here's the clues then all together then this lot, It's got barbed wire round it it's made of wood it's long it's got tunnels it's metal round the edge it's green.
There somewhere around Nottinghamshire something around Nottinghamshire what are they describing there three four three four three four to call for a bash at Kids' County don't leave it too long before you call and er if you want to talk to the councillors about the leaf stem and trees you can call as well.
There Art Garfunkel that is and I Believe When I Fall in Love it'll be Forever.
It's Radio Nottingham it's one twenty two erm Muriel Poole and erm what's this or twin Alan from the Stockhill Estate happy birthday have fun lots of love to you from Christine and from Derek and from Karl as well so have a lovely day.
Er David Wilson from Booton happy birthday love from Susan and Andrew and Amanda and from Adam as well.
A budgie lost lost from the Lenton area yesterday tea time at six o'clock from Sherwin Road it's green and it's called Freddie seven nine one six five six to ring seven nine one six five six if you can help there.
Er a dog lost from Bulwell on Sunday it's long haired it's a Jack Russell and it's white and black it's female no collar  to call if you can help here.
Er cat lost from Newthorpe Common yesterday it's black and white called Tasha and it's female one year old .
A letter erm from New Baysford it says  Two weeks ago my car was nicked in Illkeston in the Pimlico car park between the hours of two and five whilst shopping.
Could you please announce this on your show.
Well all right then it's er a red Escort Laser with blue graphics and it's bright rosso red in colour and it's C  and there's some slight rust on the driver's from wing and there's red paint on the exhaust and it's grey inside.
If you've seen it somewhere then can you call  a reward of twenty five pounds offered to the person who can advise where the car is payment will be upon receipt of retrieving the vehicle.
It's come from Miss Dawn  who wants her car back  it's a red Escort Laser it's bright rosso red and it's got a bit of rust on the driver's front wing and red paint on the exhaust.
If er someone's taken it for a ride and dumped it near you then can you call Nottingham  and it's Dawn  who wants her car back anything I can do you for three four three four three four is the number to ring.
If you want to shout about the leaf stem and the trees then call now.
Talking to two of the Nottingham councillors who are rather agitated about it all and talk to you as well give us a ring.
Afternoon Special this afternoon we have a couple of interesting guests to meet George Hamilton the fourth will be with us he's involved in the tribute to Patsie Clyne Show and Esther Rantzen who's here for the Child Line campaign.
Funny Man is the competition and we have a new pre-release video as a prize and there's a phone-in and you can take part and have a chat on the air Afternoon Special this afternoon just after the two o'clock news.
Forest are at home tonight it's Millwall who try and stop Stammon and we of course will be there too.
Tommy Cooper talking at length about when he ruled at the Den and we'll be talking to  about his Norwegian career and his arrival at the City ground.
And apart from the Bohemian Rhapsody news of the rest of the European football tonight and we have the double attacking spearhead of Colin Fray and Martin Fisher at the City ground and you listening to the classiest football cover on Radio Nottingham from five past seven.
Now er over the last few days we've been er talking quite a lot about er that statue you know the one that's down by er down by Marks and Spencers that's the best way to describe where it is the leaf stand the er the one that looks like a tulip and water dribbles down the side of it.
Well they want to move it they want to develop the area and er now they're talking as well about taking the trees out from around there too which is really getting up people's noses it would seem.
Councillor David Poole is on hello.
Hello.
Thanks for coming on David now you've hated this thing ever since it's gone up haven't you?
Yes yes er and and the price it cost the er tax payers and rate payers of Nottingham in the first place to put it there yes.
tell us what's going to happen to the area then David.
Well it's going to be revamped as er as you probably know that part of the City is being slowly revamped er and this is one which is going to be done in about the middle of next year.
Er it's going to have er a circular area with benches and for shoppers can relax and everything but er unfortunately as you say there's going to be three mature trees in the centre of St Peters Square will be removed as part of the opening up of the area.
It seems that this is what's annoying people the most though 
Mm yes.
lots of people really couldn't give a stuff about the the statue there.
We've had a few people coming on and saying they want it to stay there or they want to leave it there but it's the trees that's really annoying people.
Why have they got to go David?
Well that's the question I've been asking in committees er because I'm I brought this up when they did  nicely when they took all the trees away from down er Long Row on the High Street.
There was a lovely tree outside old Boots shop there they took all them away and put these little ones down the middle and I also brought it up when they did Weekday Cross they took the trees which had only been there a few years they took them all down and put put some others up some little  twiggly things you know.
Er I did ask the question as well what what's going to happen to these trees or what happens to these trees when the City Council removes them and I've never got an answer yet and I'm going to keep asking somebody some day will give me an answer.
I mean are the just destroyed or are they removed and reused again we don't know.
All right we've got er Councillor Stuart Argyle in here as well Stuart good afternoon.
Er hello Geoff.
Hello erm so tell us what your stance on all of this is you're furious about the trees aren't you?
Well I'm concerned Geoff as a Ward Councillor I read about this in the paper that the Environment Committee which David is on er agreed to this scheme which is I'm all for having squares in the city centre and places for people to sit and enjoy and I'm ambivalent about the leaf stem.
I understand it's been offered several homes so that would be nice.
But I am concerned for the three trees that David has just mentioned being removed.
I need to know that it's necessary to remove all those trees I've been told all sorts of things like they're in pots and they'll become pot bound they're growing outwards they might fall down they might fracture mains they block off the er view of the church well I think they're a nice asset in the city centre.
This is a city without a lot of parks in its centre only the Castle and er not a lot of trees not mature trees so er er I need to know that it's necessary to move these trees.
All right David do you still think it's necessary to move them?
Er  Stuart Argyle on I also say that they are removing one tree outside the former Horse and Groom public house as well.
I didn't know that.
They are er Stuart but they replace replacing by eleven new trees to be planted eight among the seating area on Albert Street and three on erm the footway outside the Horse and Groom.
But are those trees those that the little er the little spindly ones what do they call them engineers trees don't they because they don't take much looking after .
Yes we were told they're going to be trees like that because they've had a lot of trouble with pigeons roosting in the erm the mature trees and it's impossible for people to sit on the benches underneath cos of er pigeon mess.
Well well if 
coming on  
Yeah do Stuart 
pigeons.
The pigeons are of cause er er er a cause of debate in the city centre some people like pigeons some don't some say there are far too many pigeons.
And it's a bit of a nonsense to say that pigeons perch in trees you may see an odd pigeon sort of settle in a tree but not for long.
Pigeons are derived from the Rock Dove and  which nested and perched in cliff side and buildings are the nearest thing so I the pigeons aren't really an argument and you do if you want proper birds in the city centre such as thrushes and blackbirds and even sparrows you need real trees to encourage them and the these trees are fairly mature and helpful.
If you want to come in on any of this three four three four three four you can call now.
Mary's on from Baysford hello Mary.
Hello Geoff.
What have you got to say then you want to talk to David Poole.
Yes I do well firstly I do believe the statue should go.
Why?
Erm I just don't like it I think it's horrible.
Mhm is is that the same for everything else around the city that you don't like you're quite happy to just knock it down would you and take it away somewhere else ?
No just that one.
Just the statue okay what about the trees around there ?
The trees we should fight like mad to save them.
Mhm cos they've been there for ages haven't they Mary don't you think?
Yeah and we need more green in the city not less.
And do and do you think erm do you think it's justified to take the trees down because you're going to put up some some new little ones in their place ?
No definitely not.
And do you care if the pigeons sit in the trees?
No.
No all right.
They don't sit in trees anyway.
No tell me what er tell me what you want to say to Councillor Poole?
The other thing is it's a question to Councillor Poole I mean why should the people of Nottingham give any credibility to anything said by someone who is quoted in the Daily Sport of all newspapers as saying and I quote, Surely the County Council could erect something more in keeping with the City's heritage like a little old lady in a shawl.
Now as far as I'm concerned and many people this remark is ageist and sexist and really what has it got to do with Nottingham heritage?
All right David is that what 
I've no just a 
Okay carry on
Albert Ball or William Booth or if he really wants a statue of a lady why not Maid Marian in a lace shawl?
All right then David Poole did you say that really?
I said that we ought to er somebody asked me er from one of the national papers which ought to be put in place there and I did suggest that we ought to have a statue like just been mentioned to somebody from Beeston they've got a nice man on a bench there.
I suggested putting an old lady sitting on a bench with a lace shawl erm er sculpture of so that it represents er Nottingham lace and etcetera and I said it would look more attractive and catch people's eye than what's there at the present.
So it was it was the lace that you wanted emphasizing rather than a 
Yes 
little old lady on a bench?
That's it.
Oh I see Mary is that any better.
Er no.
Oh no okay.
No certainly not it's not I mean a little old lady yes the lace has something to do with Nottingham Nottingham's heritage we all know that.
A little old lady has not.
Maid Marian has in lace.
So perhaps perhaps Maid Marian with some lace on?
Certainly.
I knew I knew you'd be happy.
Well Mary we'll wait and see thanks for calling on.
Er Dorothy's on from Carlton hello Dorothy.
Hello.
Hello.
What have you got to say about it all Dorothy?
Well firstly I don't like the tree the leaf and I honestly think that it should be place as a permanent position in the foyer of County Hall as a permanent reminder to all councillors on the waste of public tax payers' money.
Wouldn't it be a greater waste of money though now having got the thing there though to shift it out the way completely Dorothy?
Well it's better than going in the river like you suggested yesterday where it's hidden and forgotten  permanent reminder .
Well I'll tell you tell you who suggested that yesterday now let me have a look it was one of the councillors wasn't it said lob it in the bottom of the arboretum lake it was er Conservative Councillor Charles Clarke who said the only suitable place for that daft leaf is in the middle of the arboretum lake.
But he says again that we shouldn't move the trees simply for something which is meant to fit in nature doesn't always fit in.
What do you think Dorothy should the trees go as well?
I think life of trees is very precious and should remain precious.
So so we keep the trees there?
We keep the trees erm they're on about the trees are mature well my suggestion is there's a lot of councillors that are very mature and really they could do far better getting eleven spindly new younger councillors to make these decisions on behalf of all the public tax payers in Nottingham.
So er you'd like to lop the councillors as well would you?
Well I think the public ought to have more interests in these things that are happening in Nottingham.
Mm well we're inviting people to call 
Really important.
people to call now three four three four three four if you want to come in on this.
Erm Mrs Moody from Hucknall thinks that er that leaf stem thing ought to be off in a garden somewhere.
Er Councillor Poole it seems that nobody wants to shift the trees.
That's correct yes and I don't blame them and er if Stuart Argyle thinks the same way we'll we'll certainly er see what we can do about pressing for keeping these trees.
I mean myself has mentioned it now in committee but er I was a lone voice you see that's the that's the trouble when you've got fifteen other members and and they don't seem to be bothered about trees.
What should people do if if they they want to protest about it further David?
Well they could address their letters to myself Councillor David Poole or Councillor Stuart Argyle to the Council House erm the suggestion you know er their the thoughts the thoughts on this what er they could er erm help us in our campaign and also about the leaf stem as well if they want to write to me at the Council House suggesting and I mean proper places to where it should go because that's really up to County Council but er at least if I had some suggestions we can pass them over to the County Council where where it could go.
But Stuart you'd welcome that as well would you people to write to you?
Yes certainly.
A lady has just said one of your earlier callers has just said that Council are out of touch well we shouldn't be out of touch and that is this exercise you have two councillors on here from different parties showing a concern for the trees.
I'm not so bothered about the leaf stem.
What does interest me about the leaf stem she suggested it should be put in the foyer of County Hall well when Nottingham becomes a unitary stat unitary authority and County Hall is made into an hotel perhaps it would be a bit unfortunate for the visitors to have the leaf stem er when they book in.
That's going to be er in the future perhaps or not but er the problem now is er is those trees.
Let's get er a couple of more people's er opinions on Peter's on from West Bridgford hello Peter.
Yeah hello good morning Geoff.
You know we we've heard a lot about this leaf bud structure and what to replace it with but since this is Nottingham and this centre of lace why couldn't they put something there like a loom or something sculptured to look like a loom?
My second point is the trees.
Now I'm an ex-gardener I'm a horticulturist it take roughly about forty years for trees to reach maturity it doesn't say much for our planners if they plan to put those trees there and then now are gonna have them up again it sounds much like change for changes sake and that that it basically my comment.
Why can't they plan for a longer term for those trees?
You you you know as as a gardener then about these er these little trees that they'll be replaced with these little spindly ones
Yes.
can they grow as big can they grow to to look as attractive as these old maturer trees that are there now?
No no er erm well er there is Prunus  that's a plum I mean a cherry that grows up and various ones like that the only trouble is with these type of things they can be more of a nuisance than the trees that you do have now because those trees growing up those spindly ones as you put it erm some gardeners call them  or whatever name they use I but the trouble is bits die in the centre of those and they tend to drop down and they can be in time more far more of a nuisance than the trees they've got now which seems to me quite suitable.
Mm well thanks for your thoughts Peter echoing what everybody else has said and er thanks for coming on telling us about the new trees as well.
Stuart that's the point isn't it that they're not going to look as good?
Well you've only got to go onto Longrow Smithy Row and see those trees there they're like toy town trees.
Peop they're like they're like umbrellas that need unfolding and people say oh they'll spread out and they'll develop foliage well there're similar sorts of trees on Castlegate and they've been there about three years they've done nothing in fact they're dying.
And er  you know there is this attitude that nature it has been said nature is untidy well nature by its very definition is untidy.
But  you know you see those tr trees outside St Peters Square they look good the church looks good framed behind them in the country they're trees country churches are surrounded by trees and they look better for it they frame buildings.
Yeah it won't look so good if they they put those funny little trees up there.
All right Barbara is on from Chilwell.
Hi Barbara.
Hello Geoff.
What are your thoughts then?
My thoughts the leaf stem should never have been there in the first place it was a waste of money.
What do they do with it now then?
Whatever they like bottom of the River Trent if you like but it would be very  going off the subject and I've only got a minute or two to spare but what someone pointed out to me that terrible monstrosity outside the Theatre Royal subway and every time I pass I fume inwardly.
I've been meaning to write to The Post letter page about it for several years.
It's an insult to feminism and I'd like to know how much that cost out of the rates.
All right yeah well let's erm le let's stick to talking about the leaf stem for now cos we don't want to go on er slagging off every bit of art that's around the city centre do we Barbara otherwise  
is it art over the Royal Centre  
we'd be here all day .
That's not art it's horrible Geoff insult to 
You don't like that either.
Insult to womanhood it's an ugly monstrosity.
All right then well 
I've seen people come up and stop and stare aghast at it.
Well er we'll leave that for another day now Barbara.
Do you think do you think about the trees  the trees should stay there or what?
Yes I do yes.
And what do you think about this idea of turning it into like a little piazza there for everyone to sit out on do you like that idea?
Well yes anything like that especially as it should be the shopping area.
Yeah.
Yes.
If you had if you had some seat there though do you think the seats would be nice under some trees?
Of course yes I know it encourages the pigeons and they make a mess but anything to beautify the inner city.
All right Barbara thanks for coming on .
Thank you Geoff.
We'll talk about the one by the Theatre another day and see what people think about that.
Er Freda's on hello Freda.
Oh I'm here again.
Oh right what's up ?
Now now then Geoff we don't go to Nottingham to look at trees we don't go to Nottingham to look at the countryside we go to see the shops and spend money.
And that er leaf was absolutely diabolical.
Mhm.
Anybody can can spend other people's money and and as for that lady saying we want the young people on the Council good heavens the young ones  would spend it quicker than the old ones .
So do you think the trees aren't important then are you not bothered about them.
I'm not bothered about them you've got tre you can go in the countryside and see that you've got trees at well a lot of us have got them outside our own houses.
Do you not think that I mean the people who were saying keep them there they're saying it adds something to what's in the city centre do you not agree?
I'm I'm not er well if they're going to er if they're going to lose their leaves like they are doing now people are slipping on them aren't they.
Mm maybe the odd one or two will you know Freda 
Yes yes well leave the trees where they are but but that diabolical thing well art today I don't know what they think art is.
You liked you like nice holes with flowers and vases on and things 
I like the I like the I like the old the old art we used to have in the olden days mind you I like everything that's old er that's why I like you Geoff cos you're old.
Yeah well I'm catching you up Freda


Er thanks for coming on.
Well we're going to Nottingham to spend money.
All right then
Bye bye.
Tarrah there I think I think we'd better leave it there otherwise we are going to be here all day.
Er give a final word to David Poole.
Yeah well on what people have said I I think that er there's a possibility that er if Stuart and myself get together with the officers concerned that we if these trees are pruned and trimmed as they they're saying they're over overgrown at the moment surely that would cut them down in size and if they're regular pruned every so many years they won't they won't be a nuisance I don't think in future years.
All right then er a final word to Stuart as well.
Er yeah thank you yeah the trees really do matter.
I mean David's talking about the leaf stem I couldn't care less about the leaf stem I'm with most people I understand that Councillor Barry Jackson's offered to look after it in his garden cos he likes it and he's welcome to do that.
But er Nottingham's er city that's proud of its nature it's not generally realized that there's about a hundred nature reserves in the City of Nottingham maintained by the city of the Notts Wild Life Trust and er this is great on the outskirts but in the city centre there's too little nature in it.
There's only the castle grounds that's a park in the city centre you've got to pay a quid to go in there on Saturdays and Sundays and I think these trees really matter I am concerned and I'm going to ask questions about them and I will talk to David about it as well although the leaf stem he can keep himself.
well we've got people on both sides of the political fence agreeing here for one.
Erm if you want to er to make your voice heard about it then write them letters write letters into your councillors erm and er and let them know what you think or you can write them to me and I'll pass them on.
I'll say thanks very much to Councillor Stuart Argyle for coming in our thanks as well to David Poole for joining us on the phone thanks David.
Thanking you
Thank you.
I'll leave you for now it's Radio Nottingham it's seventeen minutes to two.
I think all we can do after that is er have a Frank this is er Frank Sinatra and Brazil.
There Frank Sinatra that is and er Brazil it's Radio Nottingham fourteen minutes to two bit late with everything today thanks for all your calls on that.
Erm more calls than we could cope with in the end for  and er see what happens to it and keep in touch write to your councillors and let them know what you think or write to me and I'll pass the letters on.
June from Mansfield's on hello June.
Hello.
How are you?
Fine thank you.
Marvellous and what's been happening with you today?
Erm I've been out shopping today getting wood to put a floor in the cellar.
You what?
Putting a floor into the make a pantry.
In the cellar?
Yes.
So you can store all your wine down there is it?


Or your beer and your booze.
Yes yes that's it home-made wines and things.
Oh are you is that what you're going to do?
Yes.
Have you started making them already or
Oh yes been making it a long time.
And how many bottles have you got then June?
Oh we've still got them in the demijohns yet
Have you?
Yes.
I often wonder about this er a demijohn would imply that's half a john wouldn't it?


so can you can you get one that's twice as big that's called a john?
I'm no yes I think you can actually.
Can you?
Yes yes you can get them .
I've never heard of that before.
No but you can get them big.
You can get a john can you you can get a big john?
Yes.
I see oh er fireworks winner Mrs  from Eastwood heard the firework noise just then so she's off to Alton Towers with the family to see the fireworks stop calling for that now.
Tracey's on from Radford next hello Tracey.
Hello.
You all right?
Yes fine thanks.
Good we're doing family things today we had erm we had why these hard times are making the families pull closer together on earlier on and we're all er looking after each other a lot more so I want a thirty seconds worth of family things today for Loot at Lunchtime.
Tell me about your family Tracey.
Married got a husband got three children three boys Daniel Ben and Thomas.
Mhm how old?
Erm six and a half nearly three and nearly one.
I can hear is that Thomas we can hear shouting?
No that's Ben that's the one that's nearly three.
Oh is it?
Yes he's playing.
Yeah where's the little one?
In bed.
In bed asleep?
Yes.
Just how you like them.
That's right eldest one 
But you don't 
at school.
You don't know what they're thinking about though do you?
No.
Thirty seconds worth of family things I'll put June on from Mansfield first cos June's out champ are you ready?
Yes.
Here we go.
House home baby nappy  naughty cot bed bath rattle crib brother sister aunty uncle mum dad grandpa  stories boys girls hats coats shoes gloves smiles frowns tears joy meals wheels cards games Christmas Easter church love holidays chores outings cleaning carpet tables sofas chairs bedtime stories prayers books baking cooking pastry cakes bread sweets fireworks crackers birthday treats parties smi theatre flicks panto tricks magic shows Punch and Judy swim dance skip.
Ah you got sixty two June
Oh my goodness
Oh my stars sixty two you got that's not a bad score that is it?
Should be all right Tracey from Radford's going to try and knock the  smile off you face  aren't you Tracey?
Yes.
You've got sixty two to beat thirty seconds worth of things to do with families and your time starts now.
Brother brother-in-law sister sister-in-law aunty uncle grandma granddad great grandma great granddad mother-in-law father-in-law niece nephews cousins children babies teenagers family car family house family outing family entertainment family birthdays weddings anniversaries Christmas Easter grandchildren mamas papas granddads dadas nan nanas children's toys children's parties children's clothes coat jumpers vest trousers socks shoes dress cardigan birthday parties toys cars rattles crisps family tree family car.
Tracey?
Yes.
Your content was good but you were lacking pace I think forty eight you got so I want the weather forecast from you next all right?
Oh.
Hang on the line don't put the phone down and June from Mansfield sixty two gives you a list of prizes numbers between one and ten choose three of them.
Erm one.
Number one is some Turbaco Chilli Nods in tubes.
One?
Er yes.
Er what what else have I have I had five?
This is a new list today it's a brand spanking new one.
Oh five.
Number five is er a mug Radio Nottingham new style 
I've already got one.
Have you well have another one get a set.
Another one?
Erm seven.
Number seven loads and loads and loads and loads of this moist toilet tissue cos we're trying to get rid of it all so you've got the  lot .
Right.
I'll talk to you tomorrow okay?
Erm I'm not in tomorrow I'm in on Friday.
Oh are you well you'll have to come back on Friday then and we'll find somebody else to take you on tomorrow.
right oh 
Okay tarrah
Right bye
Bye bye.
Hey why aren't you in tomorrow?
I'm at er Chesterfield doing the er
Oh of course 
charity market.
Well that's a good enough excuse and good luck with it tomorrow.
All right thank you.
Bye bye.
Bye.
Loot at Lunchtime back tomorrow then ten to one quarter to oneish listen in then we'll give you the qualifying question.
Gracious me it's ten to two now yakking on a lot today er Beverley Craven this is and er Love Scenes we'll get er chunk three of Nottinghamshire's Big Bang on before two.
Beverley Craven that is and er Love Scenes it's Radio Nottingham six minutes to two.
Er trains are all okay say British Rail no problems there no problems at the airport two motorways are all fine as well.
Er delays problems still in Baysford cos of the closure of David Lane and Southwick Street diversions in operation there.
Chapel Lane at Coddington is closed until Friday and at Totton there's roadworks on Nottingham Road at the junction with Attenborough Lane delays are likely especially in busy times.
Will update the traffic for you throughout the afternoon and a full service at tea time Alan Clifford on from half four till seven o'clock.
F M one O three point eight and ninety five point five the weather forecast for the rest of the day.
From Tracey from Radford off you go.
Okay staying cloudy for most of the day should stay dry patchy fog will form overnight with a little drizzle.
Tomorrow should brighten up with sunny intervals and the outlook for Friday is mainly dry with sunny spells.
Marvellous Tracey absolutely marvellous.
Er put the next bit on for me save me the job say Nottinghamshire's Big Bang.
Nottinghamshire's Big Bang.
Fireworks.
Fireworks.
Day three.
Day three.
Bye.
Good bye.
The Trading Standards Department of the County Council is responsible for legal controls on fireworks.
In particular that fireworks comply with the British Standard that people register that they are keeping fireworks retailers and wholesalers so that we can go and inspect the storage conditions er and that people obey the law by not selling fireworks to people under the age of sixteen.
That's John  Nottinghamshire's Assistant Chief Trading Standards Officer.
It's his department's job to make sure the law's being applied when it comes to fireworks.
The requirement i is that th when they are stored in the erm shops they're stored in safe conditions.
That means they are stored in in containers which the public haven't got access to and away from any possibility of er naked flames or any other methods of ignition getting to them.
Mike  is an Assistant Divisional Officer for Nottinghamshire Fire Brigade.
He'd like to see everybody going to public bonfires instead of having private ones.
In my opinion er and probably a lot of fire officers' opinions as well bonfires in private houses are no longer necessary.
But i if while we've got them we will still be there we will still be called to put them out and one of these days we'll be dealing with bonfires when somebody's house is on fire and we need to be there instead.
Er with the possibility of er well horrific situation developing at that I wouldn't like particularly to talk about.
So how do Trading Standards make sure that people aren't selling fireworks to those under age?
We will try and take  we will er as usual send young children definitely under the age of sixteen into shops to see if people will sell fireworks to them and if they do then er we will take the appropriate action which may mean criminal proceedings.
It's the er the only way we can see of effectively enforcing that part of the law.
It is important the fireworks don't get into young children's hands because they themselves er will be in danger.
Mike  says that it's surprisingly not just at this time of the year when they have trouble with bonfires that go out of control.
Right throughout the year we will attend er a number of bonfires every single month.
Er a quiet month will be one and an say building up to October and November time as many as fifty sixty in that particular period.
So far if we take on the ninety ninety two figures we attended something like eight hundred bonfires.
Precautionary measure and in fact to put fires out.
Er in November of last year we actually attended fifty five bonfires that got out of hand.
If we hadn't have put them out then serious injury and damage could have been done to property.
There are statistics kept on accidents by er Central Government which all hospitals are asked to put to but you've got to realize that these are only people who have attended hospital.
Most accidents in the last year occurred at private or er family parties as opposed to larger displays.
There were nearly twice as many accidents at private parties as there were nn er public displays.
But then there are street accidents which usually mean people discharging fireworks in the street which in itself is an offence enforced by the police.
The highest type of firework last year if it was specified was the sparkler remarkably enough and we would make this point very seriously that parents tend to give children sm very small children sparklers and they must remember tha that these things are fireworks they are dangerous they do get red hot er they must supervise them at all times when they give them sparklers cos they may wave them around they may se set somebody else's clothing on fire with them they may get the sparks in their eyes if they get too close to them er and one particular danger of course is that they they may get hold of en the hot end when the firework  has finally extinguished and they think it's all finished with.
And that is very very hot and will give some nasty burns to people's hands.
The business about sparklers erm it is one of those things where the very young children like to hold a sparkler but it has got to be done under proper supervised conditions.
You are playing with a fire the temperature at the tip when it's burning is approaching about a thousand degrees centigrade.
And that is awfully hot it's enough to bend steel and you can the effects of that on the metalwork after it's burnt away.
And there we are putting it into a three or four year old's hand something that's erm got that sort of temperature round it.
Trading Standards on Nottinghamshire's Big Bang so a week of fireworks chunk four of that on tomorrow.
It's er Dennis next with Afternoon Special I'll see you tonight at the Star Inn on Middle Street in Beeston at eight o'clock for Drinking Partners if you want to come along and watch there.
It's the county's favourite radio station B B C Radio Nottingham the time now's two o'clock.
Radio Nottingham news with Dave Harper.
Calverton Colliery is to close in just over two week's time with the expected loss of around six hundred and fifty jobs.
The proposed closure has been confirmed twenty four hours after British Coal announced the pit was to go into the review procedure and it was revealed that it had lost more than six million pounds in the last six months.
Union leaders at the pit say they'll challenge the closure by taking legal action.
Nottinghamshire police have revealed released a recording of a girl they believe called the Kingsmill Hospital in Sutton in Ashfield claiming she'd had a baby.
They think it's the same teenager who's made at least a dozen calls to the police and a hospital in Lincolnshire since reporting the birth at the weekend.
Nigel Bell reports.
I was the one that killed it and I didn't.
He was the one that got me pregnant.
This is the voice of the girl who sometimes uses the name Cindy and sometimes Linda.
She says she's fourteen and that the father of her child is her own dad.
Acting Detective Superintendent Mick Cox says they realize the girl could be in danger but believe it's necessary to broadcast the recording.
This has been talked through but with both the Social Services and the the er hospital and er we decided to take that chance.
They've checked schools and housing estates in the Mansfield area but say they've no leads.
Half a dozen officers are investigating the case but police forces across the East Midlands are on standby.
Mick Cox is urging anyone who recognizes this voice to contact the police.
There's a free phone number O eight hundred six two six nine nine nine.
And every time I've run away from home and then every time you lot have took me back home and then I end up getting pregnant.
At the trial of two eleven year old boys accused of murdering the toddler James Bolger the court has heard a statement given to the police by James's mother Denise.
She described how he disappeared and how she frantically searched for him.
The boys have denied abducting and murdering James and attempting to abduct another child.
From Preston Crown Court Kevin Bucket.
Denise Bolger gave her statement to the police on February the thirteenth the day after her son James disappeared but before his body was found on a railway embankment in Walton.
She described how she was at a butcher's shop when she noticed James had gone.
She ran into other nearby shops looking for him and asking people if they'd seen him.
Then she reported his disappearance to the shopping centre security office and the police were called.
Mrs Bolger who's expecting a baby next month has not been in court but her husband Ralph sat through the first two days.
The court also heard evidence today from a nurse who was in the shopping centre several hours before James Bolger disappeared.
She said she saw the two defendants tormenting an elderly woman by prodding her from behind.
Then they ran away.
The trial is continuing.
Crime in England and Wales has risen to record levels according to the latest Home Office figures.
They showed that in the year to June reported crime was almost four per cent higher than in the previous twelve months.
But the rate of increase is much smaller than in recent years and some police forces including the Metropolitan Police recorded fewer crimes.
A member of staff has been suspended from a centre for the handicapped in Nottinghamshire pending and internal investigation.
The probe at Redoaks Training Centre in Rainworth follows a police investigation at Stone Cross Lane Residential Unit in Mansfield.
Nottinghamshire County Council won't confirm what the latest allegations are about but it's reported that they centre on fraud and sexual abuse at Redoaks.
They've stressed that the two cases aren't linked though.
Huge fires are still raging out of control in California.
Thousands of people have been forced to move out of their homes in the exclusive resort of Malibu and suburbs northwest of Los Angeles.
Several people are reported to have been seriously injured.
A State funeral mass has been held in Rome for the film director  who died at the weekend.
Thousands packed the Basilica where the service was held others followed the mass from the Square outside.
The director whose most famous films include the  and Eight and a Half will be buried in the family crypt in his home town of Rimini.
On to the weather forecast now for Nottinghamshire.
Many area 