

John Macnicol
The evacuation of schoolchildren
In the social history of twentieth-century Britain the Second World War stands out as a watershed; the sheer scale and magnitude of the events that took place during those crucial six years seems to lend indisputable credibility to the view that modern wars are a major force behind progressive social change.
Yet the term ‘social change’ is highly problematic.
We know that Britain ended the 1940s with a Labour government, a National Health Service, a Keynesian Treasury and an economy that was capable of delivering the magic triumvirate of full employment, low inflation and economic growth.
All this would have been unthinkable in the 1930s; though, as Paul Addison has pointed out, there were signs that a progressivist tide of ‘middle opinion’ was rising gently, nevertheless the speed with which these developments occurred after 1940 must be attributed to the peculiar conditions brought about by the war.
Yet, without minimising the very real material and political benefits gained by ordinary working-class people in the 1940s, one must recognise the qualitatively ambiguous nature of these welfare innovations: a National Health Service which greatly benefited working-class women and children but also consolidated the power of an elite of consultants; secondary education for all, but qualitatively differentiated, with selection by and large on grounds of social class, and the independent sector left intact; a comprehensive social security system, but with benefit rates no higher in relation to average earnings than they had been in the 1930s.
Even at this level, evaluation of the war's influence is superficial, because it is limited to political, legislative and institutional innovation.
Defined in this way, social change may be quantifiable — but as an historical concept it may tell us little about the experiences of ordinary people.
For example, during the Second World War there was a dramatic  increase in the number of children having free or subsidised school meals in public elementary and grant-aided secondary schools — from 130,000 in July 1940 to 1,840,000 in October 1945.
Superficially, this could be cited as evidence of progressive social change.
Yet the First World War produced exactly the opposite result: after an initial rise from 120,000 in 1914 to 600,000 in 1915 the number of children taking meals fell to 75,000 in 1918 — caused, of course, by the fact that improved employment opportunities and higher real wages brought about by the war economy lifted an increasing number of parents above the eligibility level.
A more subtle qualitative measurement would have to discover, therefore, whether, in terms of the economics of everyday life, ordinary working-class families in 1914- 18 gained more in higher wages, economic freedom and consequent self-perceived dignity than they lost through the contraction of the school meals service.
Evaluating war and social change in such experiential terms is further complicated by the fact that the Second World War brought to the lives of British citizens a degree of personal disruption that is almost incalculable — though well captured in some of the literature of the time, notably Graham Greene's The Ministry of Fear (1943).
In 1939 less than half the population left home even for a single night in the year; 3 yet during the course of the war there were 60 million changes of address in a civilian population of 38 million.
More than in any other period, there is the problem of aggregating a multitude of personal life-histories.
For example, it has often been argued — most notably by Stanislav Andreski — that the common shared experience of blitzkreig bombing brought many civilians into the front line, producing a high ‘military participation ratio’ and thus a large amount of social change.
Yet the actual experience of bombing was sharply differentiated.
The famous German raid on Coventry on the night of 14 November 1940 brought widespread devastation and civilian demoralisation (such that a cordon had to be thrown round the city, and news from it heavily censored); likewise, the bombing of the East End of London intimidated its inhabitants far more than the government dared admit at the time.
However, to many devil-may-care young people London in the blitz was a place of exhilaration and excitement.
Colin Perry has recorded how, as a carefree eighteen-year-old, he would climb up to rooftops in order to watch the air raids.
Similarly, for one young musician London was'’ Boys' True Adventure’come to life…
I couldn't wait for the air raids.
I never had any thoughts of being killed or anything.’
If we consider briefly the effect of bombing on that section of the  community that was potentially the most vulnerable — the children we can see that again the effects varied.
Studies and personal observations by teachers, social workers and school medical officers during the war emphasised the children's remarkable ability to maintain emotional equilibrium if they remained in the company of cheerful parents: a typical report by one school medical officer to the Board of Education stated:
I had the opportunity to see several hundred children during the last month.
On several occasions I saw them and watched them while bombs were falling in the neighbourhood and air raids were overhead and asked them questions relating to war, sirens, etc…
Children have adapted themselves to present conditions of life surprisingly well…
Even children who were bombed out of their homes did not seem to suffer in any way…
There is no question of shock.
Anna Freud, from her work in the Hampstead Clinic, likewise found that young children could endure the experience of bombing with relative equanimity if in the care of their mothers; sometimes it even appealed to their natural feelings of aggression.
However, studies also showed that if bombing was accompanied by evacuation and the destruction of family ties it did induce emotional problems; this dual verdict was stressed by the Board of Education after the war, having reviewed the evidence from child guidance clinics.
It must be evident, therefore, that establishing a clear causal link between the intensity of a war and its effect on the social experiences and material conditions of an affected population is highly complex.
Even more difficult is evaluating ideological and attitudinal change — for example, the extent to which a war experience forces different groups in the population to alter their perceptions of social problems.
Merely documenting legislative and institutional change is not enough: one must examine, in Arthur Marwick's words, changes ‘in ideas and in social attitudes and relationships, in how people and classes saw each other, and, most important, in how they saw themselves’.
’ Here this approach will be explored by investigating one particularly appropriate episode in the social history of the Second World War — the evacuation of schoolchildren in the first few months after September 1939.
In the 1930s fears of bombing casualties in a future war led to government plans for the dispersal of the population; dispersal, it was felt, would not only remove civilians from the highly vulnerable urban conurbations where blitzkreig bombing would be concentrated, but would also minimise casualties by spreading the population as thinly  as possible.
Accordingly, in the late 1930s there was much secret civil defence planning within Whitehall, culminating in the publication of the Anderson report on evacuation in October 1938.
Circulars were issued to local authorities; arrangements were made for the billeting of evacuees (involving detailed surveys of available accommodation); those citizens most at risk (principally children, mothers with pre-school children, the elderly, the blind, the disabled) were identified as belonging to the ‘priority classes’; and, most important of all, the country was divided into evacuation areas (containing 11 million people, from which 3 million in the priority classes would be removed), reception areas (16 million) which would host the evacuees, and neutral areas (13 million).
During the Munich crisis of September 1938 some rehearsals for evacuation were carried out, and in the following months arrangements were speeded up.
Nevertheless, when the first real wave of evacuation took place, on and after 1 September 1939, it was conducted in an atmosphere of haste and confusion.
Over the course of several days there was removed to reception areas a total of 826,959 unaccompanied schoolchildren, 523,670 mothers with pre-school children, 12,705 expectant mothers, and 173,000 others in the priority classes.
Evacuees were dispersed to billets over a wide area: for example, London children were spread from Land's End to the Wash, under 476 billeting authorities and 73 education authorities.
The scheme only operated because of the assistance given voluntarily by groups such as the Women's Voluntary Service, 17,000 of whose members were mobilised on 1 September.
Evacuees frequently began their journey early in the morning at a railway station thronged with crowds of forlorn and confused children, clutching suitcase and gas mask.
Exact destinations were kept secret, and rail journeys would be long and slow — with the result that many of the children, already traumatised by separation from their families, arrived at their destinations tired, frightened and lonely.
Reception arrangements often went badly: a rural area expecting a few dozen docile grammar-school girls could find itself, at ten o'clock in the evening, invaded by a hundred resentful East End mothers with exhausted and fretful babies.
Billeting allocation was frequently chaotic: host families could be hostile; children might be selected according to their good looks and manners; in rural areas, farmers often gleefully snapped up the strongest boys and set them to work on the land.
Most of all, after a few days there began to appear a growing chorus of complaint from hosts about the condition of some of the evacuees.
Stories, much enhanced in the retelling, circulated about dirty, lice-ridden  children who were ignorant of the basic rules of civilisation: the entire stock of clothing of a girl evacuee from Liverpool might consist of a light cotton dress and a pair of plimsolls; evacuees did not know how to use a knife and fork properly; they displayed an alarming ignorance of the joys of country life, being surprised that apples grew on trees and not in boxes; and, worst of all, their lack of toilet training extended way beyond mere bed-wetting (which, it was alleged, took place frequently) to unimaginable depths of depravity.
‘You dirty thing, messing up the lady's carpet.
Go and do it in the corner,’ said one Glasgow mother to her child, in a story that has passed into the folklore of the Second World War.
Typical of this portrayal of the evacuee stereotype was Oliver Lyttleton's recollection:
They duly arrived, some suffering from childish illnesses and one or two from impetigo.
I was afraid of infection spreading amongst them, but we did our best and packed them in.
I got a shock: I had little dreamt that English children could be so completely ignorant of the rules of hygiene, and that they would regard the floors and carpets as suitable places upon which to relieve themselves.
I was still more surprised when some of their parents arrived in motor cars to see them at the weekend
As we shall see, this sort of reaction was to be highly publicised, both then and after.
By early 1940 there had been a substantial drift-back of evacuees to the cities: something like 80% had returned.
There were subsequent waves of evacuation — during the blitz of late 1940, via the Children's Overseas Reception Scheme of the same year (which sent children principally to Canada), and in 1944 when the V1 and V2 rockets arrived — and, of course, roughly 2 million people evacuated themselves by private arrangement in the first months of the war.
Evacuation was thus a constant migration of population — on Titmuss's estimate, some 4 million people were dealt with by the government scheme over the course of the war — and in later waves many of the problems of inadequate medical inspection, inappropriate billeting, lack of schooling and so on were overcome.
This study will, therefore, concentrate on the first wave of evacuation during the ‘phoney war’ period because it was this stage that caused most controversy.
Why was evacuation such an important episode in the social history of the Second World War?
Two answers immediately suggest themselves.
First, it was, after bombing, the most crucial life-event experienced by the civilian population.
At a stroke, family ties were disrupted: children found themselves, at an appallingly early age, having to stand on their  own two feet in a strange and often hostile environment; parents were suddenly deprived of their offspring.
Of course, evacuation was only a part of the enormous social disruption brought about by the war; but subsequent recollections by evacuees, such as those collected by B. S. Johnson, pay eloquent testimony to the lasting effects — both negative and positive — it had on those who endured it, and suggest that qualitatively it was an experience that stood apart from the wider social confusion of wartime.
Second, evacuation has been identified by many writers as an enormously important causal factor in the construction of that wartime reformist consensus that led to the Welfare State legislation of the late 1940s.
According to many accounts, middle-class complacency was severely shocked by the evidence of the children's condition: in Newcastle, for example, of 31,000 children registering for evacuation, 13% were found to be deficient in footwear and 21 % deficient in clothing; in Scotland, 39% of children turned up in clothing that was ‘bad or deplorable’.
The shock experienced in middle-class circles was graphically summed up, shortly after the war, by the biographer of the wartime Archbishop of Canterbury:
Who were these boys and girls half-fed, half-clothed, less than half-taught, complete strangers to the most elementary social discipline and the ordinary decencies of a civilised home?
Only one answer was possible.
They were the products of the free institutions of which Britons are bidden to think with pride…one duty was clear: even the vaguest altruist felt that something ought to be done about it.
And this ‘vague altruism’ apparently permeated up to the highest levels in government: for example, Neville Chamberlain, who had been a leading figure in the pre-war National Government's denial of the problem of child malnutrition, was so shocked by the stories of the children's condition that he commented to his sister, ‘I never knew that such conditions existed, and I feel ashamed of having been so ignorant of my neighbours.
For the rest of my life I mean to try and make amends by helping such people to live cleaner and healthier lives.’
The thesis that evacuation was a crucial factor in the creation of a wartime reformist consensus was first suggested by Richard Titmuss: indeed, it was the central theme of his brilliant study of social policy in wartime, Problems of Social Policy (1950).
Titmuss argued that the social upheavals, sharing of sacrifices and threat of invasion during the first part of the war acted as a catalytic influence on social policy development.
Evacuation, and the revelations associated with it, ‘dominated social policy for at least the first nine months of the war’ and ‘aroused the conscience of the nation’, leading to a much wider debate on the condition of the people.
A crucial turning point was the Dunkirk experience of July 1940: this sharing of danger led to a ‘rearrangement of values’ among the governing class, such that henceforth they accepted the need for universal social services as reflecting this ‘pooling of national resources and sharing of risks’.
‘Acceptance of these principles moved forward the goals of welfare,’ Titmuss argued: after July 1940 the number of children taking school meals doubled in twelve months and those taking milk in schools rose 50%.
The social debate and revolution in attitude engendered by evacuation thus produced a whole string of welfare reforms, from the more liberal administration of National Assistance to the 1944 Education Act.
Some historians of the war have recently expressed serious reservations about the Titmuss interpretation.
Arthur Marwick, for example, while agreeing that the evacuation revelations aroused a new sense of social concern ‘among an articulate few’, nevertheless casts doubt upon the idea that it suddenly dispelled middle-class prejudices about there being a feckless and dirty section of the working class.
However, others have been content to accept the message in Problems of Social Policy: for example, Peter Gosden, in his detailed study of education in the war, cites Titmuss as the authoritative source on the social consequences of evacuation; likewise, Raynes Minns concludes that the revelations of the children's condition ‘made headlines, and once again , as in 1914, when the physical condition of army recruits was found to be so poor, war forced a British government to recognise the extremes of poverty and neglect that survived in our cities, and eventually to act by expanding our welfare services’.
This chapter will, therefore, examine evacuation as an historical episode by addressing three issues: first, why the initial evacuation scheme was such a failure — and whether this failure was caused, as many middle-class observers argued, by the children's behaviour.
Second, it will examine, in the light of Titmuss's interpretation, the policy innovations and possible ideological realignments that resulted from the debate over the condition of the children.
And finally, it will investigate — as far as possible — how the evacuees themselves perceived the whole business; in other words, to adapt a phrase of E. P. Thompson's, it will try to rescue the children from the enormous condescension of history.
Why, then, did the first scheme fail?
In answering this question one is immediately struck by the contrast between, on the one hand, the long  history of civil defence preparation, of which the evacuation plan was an important part, and, on the other, the fact that in this planning there was a remarkable lack of attention paid to everyday human problems.
For example, as far back as 1923 a sub-committee of the Committee of Imperial Defence had looked into the distribution of doctors, dentists and hospital services in a future war (in effect, tasks that were taken up by the Emergency Medical Service in 1938), and air raid precautions had been discussed within Whitehall since 1924 by the Air Raid Precautions Committee of the Committee of Imperial Defence (which relinquished responsibility for this to the Home Office in 1935)
However, throughout the 1930s these preparations were seriously inhibited by the fact that all civil defence discussions were conducted in an atmosphere of secrecy and pessimism.
Secrecy was deemed politically wise because in the pacifist climate of the early 1930s planning for war could be misinterpreted as encouraging war.
Thus, for example, Baldwin's responses to questions in the House over Britain's preparedness for war were heavily guarded.
Inevitably, this affected the efficiency of the plans that were being drawn up by Whitehall.
Secondly, all participants in such discussions took a very pessimistic view of the likely scale of bombing casualties, and hence considered it pointless to plan in detail.
The air raids of 1917–18 had resulted in a casualty ratio of sixteen per ton of German bombs dropped (it was thought that this would be nearer fifty per ton for London), but after the Luftwaffe attacks on Barcelona in March 1938 the figure was uprated to seventy-two per ton.
On the basis that ‘the bomber will always get through’ officials within Whitehall made alarmist predictions that the declaration of war with Germany would be followed immediately by the devastation of cities, epidemics, disruption of food supplies, panic among the civilian population, the breakdown of essential services, and so on.
Thus Wing Commander Hodsoll, Secretary of the ARP Committee, gloomily warned his colleagues in November 1936 that ‘certain areas have been scheduled as likely to be subject to almost continuous bombing in the event of war’, and similar pessimism ran through the 1938 Anderson report on evacuation.
There was some recognition by planners that schools would provide particularly vulnerable targets, especially dangerous because they contained a high concentration of glass.
Public opinion would demand that schoolchildren be moved to safe areas; a serious raid on a school would be highly damaging to morale.
For example, civil servants collected information and press cuttings on the bombing of a school at  Getalfe, in Madrid, in October 1936, when 70 children were killed in horrific circumstances, and pondered over what would be the effect on public morale if a similar event were to happen in Britain.
However, because of the deeply held pessimism in Whitehall it was considered pointless to make detailed plans for an evacuation that would take place in an atmosphere of panic and confusion; railway timetables would matter little if bombs were raining down.
Of course— as Titmuss pointed out — had the Luftwaffe launched an all-out offensive on 3 September 1939, as everyone expected, this scenario would have come about.
Indeed, even after the first wave of evacuation had taken place it was the view of the Board of Education that ‘if there were any further large-scale evacuation it would probably be a hasty one, occasioned by sudden and serious bombing.
Medical examination of each child would then be almost out of the question’.
As a result of this pessimism, many important administrative arrangements were settled late in the day in many cases only after the Munich crisis of September 1938, as in the case of food distribution and transport.
By late 1938, in fact, the evident lack of official preparedness was causing concern both to outside bodies like the National Union of Teachers (who frequently complained about it) and to Civil Defence Regional Commissioners: for example, on 28 September 1938 one of them wrote to the Ministry of Health from his headquarters at Maidstone that:
We all arrived on Tuesday to find that the offices were completely unfurnished, without lighting, without telephone and without any equipment of any sort.
The result of two days bullying all round is that we have a few tables and two telephones and one borrowed typewriter.
The vagueness of the evacuation plans resulted in neither central nor local government knowing quite what the other was supposed to be doing.
For example, on the crucial question of the medical condition of the evacuees, which was to cause so much controversy, the Board of Education believed that local authorities had been adequately warned that pediculosis (head lice) would be a problem and had been given instructions on how to disinfect children by the use of steam baths; also that its memorandum Ev.
4, Government Evacuation Scheme (published in May 1939), emphasised that ‘the children should be sent away wearing their thickest and warmest footwear’.
Yet on the other hand surviving evidence tends to vindicate Richard Padley's accusation, in the Fabian survey of evacuation, that Whitehall used the decentralised local government system to shirk its responsibilities; the Ministry of  Health and Board of Education, he maintained, doled out ‘platitudinous’ advice via circulars and adopted an attitude of complacency over the possibility of medical problems among evacuee children, such as malnutrition, head lice, impetigo, etc.
For example, in December 1938 Ben Smith, MP, wrote to the Board of Education warning that on the evidence of the evacuation rehearsals of September 1938 there would be a sufficient number of ill-clad or poorly-shod children to hinder the successful operation of the scheme; but in reply the President of the Board of Education, Earl de la Warr, blandly denied that this would be so.
Margaret Cole's verdict was that the evacuation scheme had been drawn up by minds that were ‘military, male and middle-class’.
This was also the view of the other three main independent surveys (of Cambridge, Oxford and Scotland) and of many of the teachers involved; and by April 1940 officials in Whitehall were privately agreeing.
Analysing the substantial drift of evacuees back to the danger areas, the Air Raid Precautions Co-ordinating Committee concluded that ‘a detailed examination of available materials shows the basic cause to be the failure of the scheme to take account of either the viewpoint or the welfare of those concerned, be they evacuee or host’.
The first point to note, therefore, is that many of the disruptions in the first evacuation scheme, which produced so much distress in the children (resulting, in particular, in bed-wetting) were primarily the result of poor civil defence planning.
A brief consideration of the problems encountered in the first months after September 1939 will illustrate this.
Firstly, transport arrangements were often chaotic.
Having survived the milling crowds at the station platforms (in which they might easily be separated from brother or sister), children often found themselves bundled onto a train, not knowing their destination, and then enduring a long, slow journey in cramped coaches with no corridors or toilets.
Leslie Dunkling, who looked back on his evacuation experience as a ‘mental minefield’, described his journey thus:
Off we went as a tumultuous procession through the streets of West London.
In that first hour or so our excitement reached its peak.
It was only as the day wore on that we wearied of the journey and began to be afraid.
By the time we reached Totnes, in Devon, we had abandoned ourselves to our despair.
The younger ones, especially, sat in the church hall howling miserably, waiting to be claimed.
We were city mongrels, gathered from the streets, feeling helplessly lost.
William Boyd's excellent survey of evacuation in Scotland showed that out of sixty-eight questionnaire returns giving details of journeys in the  first wave, fully one-third spoke of their evacuees not arriving at their destinations until 5 p.m. or later; and it included graphic descriptions of such journeys, including the testimony of one teacher evacuated from Glasgow to Aberdeenshire, whose journey was:
the most depressing, deplorable and disgusting journey I have ever had the misfortune to make.
The train took 12½ hours to reach Aberdeen.
Half-hours and hours were spent in railway sidings until the line was clear.
The journey was a positive nightmare, increased by the darkness of the train (lit by blue lights) and the wretched rainstorm which greeted our arrival at the station.
The evacuees were famished when they arrived, having had no food for a matter of 12 hours.
There were innumerable complaints about the billeting and reception arrangements.
Billeting allowances were available to cover the cost of hosting an evacuee (for unaccompanied children, 10s 6d per week for the first child, 8s 6d each for subsequent children) and billeting officers had powers of compulsion to utilise appropriate accommodation, but most, being from the locality themselves, preferred to ruffle as few feathers as possible — with the result that on arrival many evacuees found themselves in a scene ‘reminiscent of a cross between an early Roman slave market and Selfridge's bargain basement’, as one witness put it.
Allegations were rife: evacuees complained of cruel and miserly hosts; hosts maintained that many parents had deliberately sent children off in their worst clothes in order to arouse sympathy and gifts of replacement clothing.
Defenders of the evacuees pointed out that the exercise had taken place at the end of a particularly hot summer, in which head lice would have thrived, that parents had not been properly informed of how long their children would be evacuated for (and hence despatched them in one day's clothing), or that the first day of evacuation (1 September) was a Friday — the day on which working-class financial resources would have been at their lowest, preventing parents buying extra garments for their children.
Some billeting arrangements were equally resented by both sides — as when Roman Catholic children from inner-city Liverpool were sent to staunchly Protestant North Wales, and some were the fault of nobody — as when in Cambridge a Greek head waiter's wife was given a bed inferior to that provided for the wife of an under-waiter.
In some rural communities the role of billeting officer brought out the worst in people, as Evelyn Waugh amusingly recorded in Put Out More Flags (1942).
Barbara Sothill finds that this duty has:
transformed her, in four months, from one of the most popular women in the countryside into a figure of terror.
When her car was seen approaching people  fled through covered lines of retreat, through side doors and stable yards, into the snow, anywhere to avoid her persuasive ‘But surely you could manage one more.
He's a boy this time and a very well behaved little fellow.’
But more often the allocation of billets reflected social relations and deferential attitudes in rural society, as when, according to one MP, at Inverary in Scotland 150 women and children were housed in a cold hall, with bedding of dirty mattresses and sacks of straw ‘with a broad arrow on them, that had been obtained from the local jail’, while near by the Duke of Argyll's castle was left uninhabited.
There were protests from parents that reception areas were often close to prime military targets: for example, such areas in Essex were in the flight path of bombers; Dundee, north of the Tay bridge, was an evacuation area, while Newport, south of it, was a reception area.
These were but some of the thousands of complaints and allegations made in the autumn of 1939, all adding up to a condemnation of the way billeting had been planned.
There was another problem that provided perhaps the harshest verdict on the government's preparations — the drift-back to the danger areas.
Owing to the absence of widespread German air raids, some 45% of unaccompanied children and 80% of mothers with pre-school children had returned by the end of November 1939.
By the end of February 1940, out of 3 million people in the priority classes (of which only 1,165,000 had actually taken part in the evacuation) a mere 477,000 remained in the safe reception areas.
In educational and governmental circles there was great concern over this: apart from the dangers involved, it meant that — on a National Union of Teachers estimate — some 750,000 children were not receiving formal education in early 1940, since most schools in evacuation areas had been closed.
All the Board of Education could do was aim for a minimum of half-time school provision by Easter.
Meanwhile, it was feared, children in the cities were running wild like ‘street arabs’(as one official put it), without schooling or the protection of the school medical service; there were fears that juvenile delinquency was on the increase as a result.
Some attempts were made to stem the tide: in November and December 1939 (in view of the approach of Christmas) the Board of Education and Ministry of Health launched, via the Ministry of Information, a propaganda campaign to persuade parents to keep their children in reception areas.
Articles were placed in the press chronicling the joys of country life (and — as will be shown — fruitless attempts were made to demonstrate that the rural environment was having a positive effect on the children's health); talks were given on the radio to parents; special posters were printed; and  it was arranged for the Queen to visit certain schools in November to publicise the scheme.
All this failed; evacuees voted with their feet, and the drift-back continued.
Officials gloomily realised that the inadequate billeting arrangements devised by Whitehall had discredited the scheme, and a propaganda campaign would make little difference.
Only when heavy raids on cities began would parents participate willingly in a future evacuation scheme.
But the problems of transport, billeting and the drift-back paled into insignificance compared with the outcry over the alleged medical condition and anti-social behaviour of the evacuees.
Immediately after the first wave of evacuation had taken place there was a chorus of outrage from reception areas about some of the evacuees — evidently those from the poorest homes in inner-city areas — who were said to be filthy, verminous, incontinent, ungrateful and thoroughly ill-mannered.
In the press, in the House of Commons, in reports to government departments and in popular folklore there emerged the evacuee stereotype — a dirty, lice-ridden and foul-mouthed urchin who wet the bed with monotonous regularity, preferred fish and chips to a proper three-course meal and was about as domesticated as a wildcat; similarly, the evacuee mother appeared as a negligent slut, impossible to live with and having the vocabulary of a Billingsgate fish porter.
To their alarm, civil servants began to receive a growing stream of horrifying reports.
For example, on 22 September 1939 the Department of Health for Scotland Advisory Committee on Evacuation noted that ‘the Billeting Appeal Tribunal in Perth had numerous appeals supported by medical certificates to the effect that the health of the householder would be injured by the presence of evacuees in the home’.
Probably the loudest chorus of complaint came from North Wales, where Liverpool children had been billeted: thus Lord Wyndham (Civil Defence Regional Commissioner for Wales) wrote to the President of the Board of Education on 25 October 1939 that:
approximately twenty-five per cent of the children evacuated were in such a filthy condition that they had to be specially treated.
These have now been cleaned up, but it took us some time to cope with this disgraceful state of affairs…the condition of these children, and the behaviour of many of the mothers, has completely dissipated the goodwill and welcome accorded to them by the Welsh people, whose hospitality is proverbial.
From other Regional Commissioners came stories of mattresses, bed linen and clothing having to be destroyed, so infested were they with evacuated lice.
What was the actual medical condition of the evacuees?
Unfortunately the true picture will never be established, for insufficient evidence survives.
Crucially, evacuees in the first wave were never subjected to systematic medical inspection — with the result that allegations thrived, both then and subsequently.
So many of the stories were wild exaggerations, inflamed by a number of factors — the ‘culture contact’ between rural and urban society, personal resentment (particularly if two women were forced to share the same kitchen), the strangeness of the whole situation at the start of a frightening new war, or simply as Angus Calder put it the English tendency to confuse manners with morals.
Hence, for example, children wet the bed — usually for a very brief period — for a variety of understandable reasons: emotional upset over the strange and terrifying journey, homesickness, fear of their new foster parents — sometimes because a toilet was inaccessible.
Yet, as the Cambridge evacuation survey commented wryly, hosts presented this as if it were ‘an entirely unknown phenomenon in the past, and that evacuation produced a Niagara all over English and Scottish country beds’.
The surviving evidence is thus both unspecific and contradictory.
For example, some of the most condemnatory reports came from a Miss Lily Boys, County Organiser of the Women's Voluntary Service in Lincolnshire, who assisted with the reception arrangements there.
She attested in September 1939 that ‘universally, householders have been shocked at the disgraceful and disgusting conditions in which a certain portion of the population lives’, and that ‘the low slum type form the majority of the mothers, some out for what they can get, most of them dirty, many of them idle and unwilling to work or pull their weight’.
There had been, according to her, ‘an enormous percentage’ of dirty and verminous children from Hull, Leeds and Grimsby.
Yet, a few days earlier, another observer had monitored the evacuation rehearsals of a comparable group of children — also from Hull — to Lincolnshire and had reported that ‘the children were well shod, happy, calm, equipped completely with adequate rucksack or canvas containers’.
Irresponsible behaviour was by no means confined to the evacuees.
For example, stories of piles of urine-soaked mattresses having to be burned by harassed billeting officers have to be placed alongside evidence that hosts sometimes invented bed-wetting cases in order to claim the extra 3s 6d billeting allowance for additional laundry costs: in Llantrisant, in Wales, the total paid out in such allowances rose from 43 in 1940–41 to a staggering 350 in 1941–42, until there was an official investigation  whereupon the number of reported cases fell dramatically.
The confusing and contradictory nature of the medical evidence comes over even more clearly when one examines the findings of the later waves of evacuation, for in these the Board of Education and Ministry of Health, anxious not to repeat their mistakes of September 1939, did intervene more actively.
Systematic medical inspection took place (the famous ‘hair raids’), and more robust instructions were issued to local authorities via circulars (such as the charmingly entitled The Louse and How to Deal With It); an official ‘Louse Infestation Committee’ was even set up to ponder the matter.
After May 1940 each evacuee child was medically examined and assigned a record card, on which were entered (in coded form) details of any ailments.
From these later inspections, the proportion of children with problems appears to have been low: for example, of four schools in Shepherds Bush, London, sending 670 children to Pontypridd in June 1940, there were ‘only one or two with a few nits’; of 300 children being evacuated from Northwold Road Public Elementary School, in the East End, in June 1940, only twenty-five were marked as needing special attention (or 8%), comprising one with scabies, five with nits, eight with eneurisis (bed-wetting) and eleven with ‘other conditions’; of 1,211 children going from Stretford (Manchester) schools in the same month, only eighty suffered from vermin or nits, and only fourteen from eneurisis.
However, E. F. Mott, Director of Education in Liverpool (whose children were so resented in North Wales), found the proportion of verminous children in three Liverpool schools in poor areas to be 18%, 18% (after inspection) and 30% (an estimate).
By and large, these and other regional officers' reports from the second wave of evacuation did not indicate that the outcry of September 1939 was justified; typical of them was the verdict of one officer in October 1940 that ‘the general standard of those evacuated is good and 80% of them should offer no difficulty at all in billeting’.
Of course, these reports were as biased towards optimism as the nervous hosts of September 1939 were biased towards pessimism; and in the later waves great care was taken by teachers, medical officers and even parents not to repeat the mistakes of the first months of the war.
The most reliable and systematic survey was that carried out by Dr Kenneth Mellanby into pediculosis, and it revealed an incidence that was quite high.
In December 1939 Mellanby had written to the Board of Education, drawing attention to the sharp difference between pre-war medical inspection returns for pediculosis in children (approximately 10%) and the claims of hosts in the reception areas that it was rife.
The  Board decided to sponsor a research project by Mellanby to ascertain the true incidence, given the controversy that was developing.
As Dr J. A. Glover put it, ‘though I fear the findings would be disquieting it seems to me wiser for the Board itself to discover and publish the true position rather than that others should do so’.
Mellanby obtained from thirty-two hospitals in selected rural and urban areas the records of children admitted.
He found the rural areas to have a very low incidence of head lice, but for urban children it was indeed quite high, and varied significantly by age and sex.
In boys it rose from 11.0% in those under one year of age to 44.6% in those aged two, then went steadily down to 30.8% in those aged eight, and 1.6% in those aged eighteen.
For girls the distribution was different: 12.3% in those under one, up to about 50% almost all through the ages two to twelve; then a fall, but still as high as 12.8% at the age of nineteen.
On average, therefore, the incidence of head lice in the urban child was about three times higher than had been recorded by school medical officers before the war.
Evacuation did, therefore, provide a sudden and unexpected revelation of the true incidence of head lice, but this was no reflection on the quality of working-class parenthood, as many hosts believed.
Mellanby located the causes in environmental and even cultural factors — the greater intermingling of city children, overcrowded dwellings or — in girls the fashion for ‘permanent waves’, in which hair would be set and then left uncombed and unwashed for long periods.
The marked rural-urban difference in incidence, however, made the louse a symbol of the wider cultural differences between town and country that caused so much resentment on both sides.
This was reflected in an interesting phenomenon noticed by Mellanby: many school medical officers in safe urban reception areas were insistent that head lice had been virtually unknown in their area until the dirty, verminous and ill-mannered inner city evacuees arrived; they were shocked when confronted with past hospital records for their town showing that this was not so.
The implication in the complaints of many hosts that urban working-class life was degrading was further refuted by the evidence of the effect of evacuation on the children's health.
Contrary to what everyone expected, urban children suddenly subjected to the apparently healthy environment of fresh air and green fields did not show any marked improvement in health.
This was a curious phenomenon that perplexed and exasperated those involved in running the scheme.
The initial and understandable — impression of teachers was that children were  thriving on country life.
In her interesting and vivid description of the first wave Marjorie Cosens quoted numerous testimonies by teachers to this effect, and some of them even wrote to the Board of Education.
For example, in November 1939 the headmaster of Wesley Road School, Willesden, wrote to the Board, claiming that ever since they had been evacuated to Rugby his pupils had shown definite increases in height and weight growth rates.
Impressed by such testimony, Kenneth Lindsay (Parliamentary Secretary to the Board of Education) told the House of Commons on 16 November 1939:
The children who have gone to the country are much taller, stronger and better fed, they sleep longer and in every way they are alert and more easy to teach.
That is the testimony of teacher after teacher, of Inspectors, of parents and, notoriously, of the children themselves.
Among the children of a Woolwich school evacuated to somewhere in Kent the average weight of the boys has increased during the last month by 2½ lb. and of girls by 3½ lb.
Throughout the first months of the war Board of Education officials were desperate to find convincing proof of this, so that it could be used as publicity to stop the drift-back to the danger areas.
However, the Board soon ran into difficulties.
It seemed tantalisingly obvious that country life was healthier, but actually proving it was another matter.
Obtaining a representative sample of children to study in early 1940 was well nigh impossible: were those children who remained in billets in February 1940 a tiny minority who had enjoyed the evacuation experience, who liked country life, who had kindly hosts, who did not suffer homesickness, or who were being exceptionally well fed by their hosts?
The operation of these factors would render the results of any study practically useless, as the Board soon began to find.
For example, an investigation into height and weight growth rates was conducted in January 1940 on a group of Manchester children evacuated to Glossop: generally, evacuee children who drank milk regularly grew faster than those who did not, but those who paid for the milk showed faster growth rates than the poorer children who received it free indicating that social class factors were at work.
Much to the disappointment of the Board, surveys conducted in 1940 produced negative results: typical of them was the meticulous investigation, in late 1940, of a group of 1,119 London County Council children evacuated to rural areas; comparing them with an equivalent group of London children in 1938, the study concluded that ‘a period of evacuation of several months did not cause any significant difference in the rate of growth of evacuated children’.
Even more puzzling were the results of anthropometric surveys of camp school children made throughout the war.
(Camp schools were institutions where children lived communally and attended lessons all the time; though somewhat authoritarian in regime, they at least provided a well balanced diet and regular exercise through organised games.)
In 1942, 1943 and 1944 surveys were carried out on camp school children, and to the Board's amazement they indicated that such children actually experienced retarded growth rates.
Official despair was summed up in a letter from Sir Edward Howarth, Director of the National Camps Corporation (which ran the schools) to N. D. Bosworth Smith of the Board of Education, on 13 August 1942; Howarth had just read the latest report on the children's growth rates and commented:
I have read the report through several times and on each reading find it even more bewildering.
It is small wonder that Dr Underwood finds it a ‘little disconcerting’ as the inference of the inquiry, as far as it has gone at present, would appear to be that it is better for a child to stay in East London sleeping irregular hours in ill ventilated shelters and eating fish and chips than to have fresh air conditions in one of our Camps with regular hours of sleep and plenty of well prepared wholesome food (in which vegetables fresh from the garden play a large part) forming a diet balanced in accordance with the best advice obtainable from the Board of Education and others…
On a first reading it seems puzzling that the ‘Poorer Growth’ camps should be those of five or six of our best camp managers whose experience of diet is exceptional, and that the ‘Good Growth’camps should include two Managers whose catering has constantly to be reviewed as not up to our standard.
Thus did ordinary children confound the experts.
The only explanation that officials could come up with was that, since children grew fastest during school holiday periods, the constant attendance at a camp school inhibited development: the regime of organised games, for example, caused children to burn up too much energy.
As the new President of the Board of Education, R. A. Butler, put it, in delightful contrast to his officials' rather ponderous concern, ‘Children are human and if they run about too much don't put on weight.
School discipline always has this effect on one.’
Clearly, therefore, children preferred the inner-city environment and family life in which they had been born and reared.
Yet within Whitehall there was a marked reluctance to accept the implications behind such evidence; officials tended to fall back on the convenient explanation that the ‘problem evacuees’ revealed in September 1939 were a product of poor-quality home life among some sections of the working class rather than highly exaggerated cultural differences or poverty.
Far from there  being a ‘rearrangement of values’, as Titmuss believed, officials tended to cling stubbornly to entrenched attitudes.
This was clearly illustrated by official reaction to the charge, made in the first months of the war, that the revelations of head lice, impetigo, scabies and general uncleanliness were proof that the school medical service had serious deficiencies: clearly, such conditions had been markedly under-recorded in medical inspections before the war.
Both the Board of Education and Ministry of Health were acutely sensitive on this issue, given the controversy that had raged in the 1930s over the issue of child malnutrition and ill health.
In February 1940 the Chief Medical Officer at the Board of Education, Sir Arthur MacNalty, outlined to Sir Maurice Holmes (Permanent Secretary at the Board) his response to such criticisms.
Essentially he held to the line taken by the Ministry of Health in the 1930s: the school medical service was primarily educational, and had never been designed as a complete child health service, nor as an agency to relieve poverty as such — indeed, it operated within strict terms of reference set down by Parliament; systematic medical inspection of evacuees would have been impossible in the conditions of panic and devastation forecast by all civil defence planners before the war; many of the evacuees' problems, such as bed-wetting, had cleared up quickly.
Finally, MacNalty absolved the school medical service from prime responsibility for the condition of the evacuees: while acknowledging the ‘unexpectedly high incidence of pediculosis and bad habits among school children’ that had been revealed, he favoured the following analysis:
The root cause of these conditions lies in the home.
They mean that slum clearances still lack completion; that low standards of living still persist, and that the lessons taught in the school and clinic, and good social habits, do not always survive the pressure of bad home circumstances when young people have passed from supervision.
Holmes agreed that it was in ‘the homes of the children’ that ‘the source of the trouble so often lies’and concluded that ‘the problem of the dirty school child is not one which could be solved by any enquiry into the School Medical Service’.
This, in short, was a commitment to the time-honoured strategy of educating the parents into better habits rather than an acceptance of the need for a universalist Welfare State.
If one looks at one particular example of policy-making — the expansion of free or subsidised milk to children — one sees another striking demonstration of official reluctance to alter traditional patterns of thinking.
This is an interesting case to examine, of course, because in  Problems of Social Policy Titmuss presented it as a clear example of a policy change engendered originally by the social debate on evacuation, and then given sudden new urgency by the ‘decisive’ influence of Dunkirk in July 1940; a marked change in government thinking — a new acceptance of the milk-in-schools scheme as a universalist social service rather than a relief measure tainted with Poor Law associations — took place ‘five days after the evacuation of the British Expeditionary Force from Dunkirk’.
As a result, the number of children taking milk in schools on any one day rose from 2,479,000 in February 1941 (57.6% of those attending school) to 3,428,000 in February 1944 (76.3%).
Yet the surviving evidence suggests a very different interpretation to that offered by Titmuss — and one which, interestingly enough, was summarised in The Health of the School Child, 1939–45, published in 1947.
Space does not permit a full account of the highly complex arrangements for providing milk to schoolchildren that developed out of the 1934 ‘milk-in-schools’ scheme.
Essentially, there had grown up in the 1930s a system of subsidies which enabled milk to be bought cheaply by local education authorities for distribution (free or at minimal cost) to children.
While recognising the undeniable (if somewhat over-stressed) value of milk in a child's nutritional development, the Board of Education and Ministry of Health also appreciated that greater milk consumption would be a way of reducing the surplus stocks then being held by producers.
The 1934 milk-in-schools scheme was thus closely bound up with wider questions of production targets, availability of supply and price fixing, supervised by the Milk Marketing Board.
Briefly, the wartime expansion took place for three reasons.
First, expansion was being planned prior to the outbreak of war, and the events of 1939–45 were simply a natural continuation.
A White Paper of July 1937 had stated it to be the government's aim further to reduce the price of liquid milk to local authorities in order to improve distribution; throughout 1938 there were discussions within the Board of Education, and in July 1939 a Milk Industry Act was passed.
Second, milk in schools became part of wider wartime rationing and food policy.
During the first year of the war, evacuation, the closure of schools and other disruptions threw the milk distribution system into some disarray.
(The result was a marked fall in the number of children taking milk in schools — from an estimated daily average of 2,500,000 in 1938–39 down to 2,100,000 in July 1940).
Even in December 1940 — well after the  Dunkirk turning-point identified by Titmuss — the  Ministry of Food was uncertain whether expansion was possible because of the continuing ‘precarious’ supply situation.
However, in mid-1940, just about the time of Dunkirk — but quite unconnected with it expansion of the milk supply to children took on a new urgency as the Ministry of Food belatedly worked out a national food policy for an island race threatened by the submarine.
Accordingly, on 12 June 1940 Lord Woolton, Minister of Food, despatched a memorandum to the Food Policy Committee of the War Cabinet in which he identified three groups in the population to whom food distribution should be improved: workers in factories (‘if we are to obtain the maximum production over a long period of time from them’), people on low incomes and ‘children of school age and under and nursing mothers whom, on grounds both of humanity and of racial preservation, it is essential we should protect against malnutrition’.
These ‘social capital’ arguments may have been what Titmuss meant when he argued that major wars increase governmental concern for women and children, and produce social policies to protect them.
But the context in which they were voiced by Lord Woolton was the much wider concern about the nutritional status, and hence the efficiency and morale, of the whole population — in other words, arguments of utility rather than social justice; unequal shares would have meant starvation for some — hardly the best recipe for a united war effort.
By mid-1941, therefore, it was the prevailing view within the Board of Education that the milk-in-schools scheme was ‘an essential part of our war food policy and not mainly a scheme to increase milk drinking and use up a surplus of liquid milk’; by that time, for example, the Ministry of Food was assuming, for rationing calculation purposes, that each child was receiving five-sixths of a pint of milk per day.
Expansion was further spurred on by the reduction in the meat allowance in school canteens that the Ministry of Food was forced to introduce in 1941, owing to problems of supply.
The milk ration for children was increased specifically to compensate for the nutritional shortfall in school meals that would otherwise have occurred; civil servants realised there would be a public outcry if the meat reduction took place and nothing was done to make up for it.
Wartime expansion of milk consumption took place for a third reason that related more to specific practical problems than to a new attitude on the part of policy-makers: simply, the disruptions of wartime made it virtually impossible to implement the pre-war means test criteria, such as the definition of a ‘necessitous’ child eligible for free milk, or the distinguishing of those children receiving cheap milk for the under-fives  under section 2 of the 1939 Milk Industry Act.
Means testing was expensive, clumsy and time-wasting.
With children constantly moving between evacuation and reception areas, endless administrative problems arose.
By February 1940 Board of Education officials were realising the futility of trying to operate pre-war means tests: for example, it might be difficult to trace the parents of an evacuated child.
The London County Council had found that it simply was not worth trying to recover the cost of milk from the 25% of London parents whose income was high enough to make them liable for the full billeting contribution, since ‘the few pounds they had succeeded in recovering over a period of several months were far less than the cost of its collection’.
For these three reasons, therefore, the Board of Education Circular No. 1567 of late 1941 announced the government's aim of increasing milk consumption among schoolchildren to as near 100% as possible.
Within Whitehall, therefore, there was surprise and concern that evacuation should have revealed so many symptoms of inner-city poverty, but the reaction of officials to these revelations was to seek their cause in working-class mores rather than to swing round to support for increased State intervention to raise living standards.
This analysis was held, in a much more robust form, by quite a substantial section of middle-class opinion — particularly within the voluntary social work profession.
When considering the long-term effects of the social debate on evacuation, therefore, we must recognise that, as well as helping to construct an ideological climate favourable to welfare legislation, it also boosted a conservative, behaviouristic analysis of poverty that viewed the root cause of the children's condition as family failure, poor parenting and general social inadequacy.
Thus for the Women's Group on Public Welfare, in their study of evacuation, Our Towns (1943):
The effect of evacuation was to flood the dark places with light and bring home to the national consciousness that the ‘submerged tenth’ described by Charles Booth still exists in our towns like a hidden sore, poor, dirty and crude in its habits, an intolerable and degrading burden to decent people forced by poverty to neighbour with it.
Within this group are the ‘problem families’, always on the edge of pauperism and crime, riddled with mental and physical defects, in and out of the Courts for child neglect, a menace to the community of which the gravity is out of all proportion to their numbers.
And, having provided a generally pessimistic account of the evacuee children's condition, Our Towns drew the conclusion that what was needed was primarily a reform of the education system that would ‘lay  the foundations for community life and expose the schools to the pressure of middle-class standards and requirements’, with an emphasis on ‘training for future wives’.
Likewise, in reviewing Our Towns, the journal Social Work argued that two things stood out about its analysis of the evacuation experience —‘our failure to educate our girls as home-makers, in spite of seventy years of compulsory education, and our failure to provide our people with the raw material for home-making’.
This interpretation was also shared by most of the speakers in a House of Lords debate on 5 May 1943.
Lord Geddes introduced a motion on ‘the shock of public opinion in the reception areas caused in September 1939’, calling for the government to work for ‘positive health’ among the people.
Geddes had just read Our Towns, and clearly its analysis fitted in with his observations of the evacuees, for he praised it warmly.
The evacuee mothers, he maintained, ‘seemed quite unable to do very much for themselves.
They were quite obviously without any effective social traditions.
They did not know how to cook’; their culinary skills extended only to bread and jam or bought fish and chips.
They were, he said, ‘cultural orphans’, and ‘the children just did not know at all how to keep a house clean.
They were like untrained puppies or untrained kittens; they messed in the corner of any room’.
Something was very wrong, ‘not on the medical side, because that was not too bad, but on the teaching side and on the disciplinary side’.
Other Lords (including the Archbishop of York and Lord (Cosmo) Lang, ex-Archbishop of Canterbury) were also strongly in agreement with Our Towns: Lang, for example, maintained that:
many of the children came from homes where the houses were decent, where the wages were good, and where, apparently, the state of the children was not due to any real defect in the conditions under which they were living but simply to the heedlessness, the shiftlessness, the carelessness and the ignorance of the mothers.
Reading accounts of evacuation by more conservatively-minded social commentators, one repeatedly encounters this analysis.
For example, John A. F. Watson, chairman of the South East London Juvenile Court, commented on one woman's account of dealing with ‘problem’ evacuees that:
the behaviour of some of these children, their habits and their language, will leave the average reader aghast.
And the cause is manifest in every sordid glimpse we gain of their parents and their homes…the enduring lesson to be learned from this painful wartime experiment is that the primary aim of education must be to produce not merely cleverer children, but in the next generation wiser parents
Evacuation, in short, marks the conceptual transition from the ‘social problem group’ of the inter-war years to the ‘problem family’of the 1940s and 1950s.
The latter was less crudely hereditarian in emphasis and in keeping with the Keynesian optimism of the 1940s — less pessimistic, in that problem families were seen as amenable to character reform through intensive social work intervention.
But many argued that evacuation had revealed more clearly than ever the existence of a degraded ‘underclass’, and in the late 1940s and 1950s several inconclusive but much-publicised surveys were conducted into the precise numerical incidence of problem families in Britain.
Until its ideological crisis of the 1960s the social work profession was deeply influenced by the ‘problem family’ concept, and many commentators dated the origins of this interpretation to the evacuation revelations of September 1939.
Finally, after so much emphasis on the views of middle-class adults, what of the children themselves?
They saw evacuation through very different eyes.
B. S. Johnson's collection of memoirs records the great variety in the treatment meted out by hosts — from kindness and generosity to unimaginable cruelty — and how, above all, the behaviour of inner-city children that so horrified Women's Institute moralisers was frequently a natural and adaptive response to the emotional trauma of family separation and to the strangeness of country life.
The Oxford, Cambridge, Fabian and Scottish surveys were all very sympathetic to the children, and tried hard to present their perspective.
They found that the vast majority of bed-wetting cases cleared up very quickly, especially if treated sympathetically.
They vividly recorded the perplexed reactions of evacuees, from one woman's uneasy comment, ‘there's too much grass about’, to the London boy who was horrified that milk should come from a dirty cow and not a clean bottle.
Oxford was ‘full of forbidding old ladies’ who hovered behind lace curtains, waiting to report children who played in the street too noisily.
London children in Oxford missed the warmth and communality of East End street life; as one girl put it:
I cannot do as I like in the house.
I must also come in when I am told and sit down and eat my meals properly and not run out into the street with a slice of bread in my hand.
Evacuation, in fact, revealed the essential solidarity of working-class family life — quite the opposite of what many middle-class observers maintained.
The most common reason for children returning to the danger areas was homesickness for parents and relatives, or parents worrying endlessly about them.
Revealingly, the Oxford survey found  that, of 217 unaccompanied evacuee children, fully 87% received at least one letter per week and/or a quarterly visit from their parents.
And only a derisory 3% said they would want to live in Oxford after the war.
This sort of first-hand evidence from the children reveals how utterly distorted were the verdicts of groups such as the National Federation of Women's Institutes when, after citing highly selective and impressionistic reports from their local workers — which tended to repeat ad nauseam the ‘fish and chips’ allegations and held the evacuee mother up to ridicule — they concluded:
Real affection between foster parents and the child is the general rule…
Almost without exception, if any comment is made it includes a reference to the immense improvement in the health and manners of the children and to their gains in weight…
There are hardly any reports of home sickness and many accounts of how the children cried bitterly when they were removed by their parents.
This chapter has tried to show in the space available — how complex was the evacuation experience.
It was an episode that affected the children in many different ways, but running through the diversity of experience was the trauma of family separation and the culture shock of coping with a new environment.
These difficulties were greatly exacerbated by poor civil defence planning.
A minority of the children — the exact proportion cannot be established — displayed symptoms of the poverty and deprivation that had been quite commonplace in the 1930s, and significantly under-recorded by government reports; these medical and social symptoms horrified many hosts in the reception areas precisely because they seemed to epitomise wider rural-urban cultural differences.
In a sense, evacuation did provide a shock to public consciousness and a ‘throwing together of social classes’(though it must be remembered that most hosts, like most evacuees, were working-class).
However, it is difficult to find evidence that this brought about fundamental ideological shifts on the part of different groups — notably, within Whitehall.
Evacuation required the help of a large number of middle-class voluntary workers in the rural areas who, perhaps more than any other section of the population, had very fixed ideas of social propriety; it was this lobby that propagated the wildly exaggerated and inaccurate stories of the evacuees' condition.
In short, the social debate on evacuation probably served to reinforce existing analyses of working-class poverty rather than to change them: for conservative social observers, it confirmed their view that the bulk of the problems were caused by an incorrigible underclass of personally inadequate ‘cultural orphans’ for whom a Welfare State could do little.
Evacuation thus shows us that the ideological consensus of wartime, so stressed by Titmuss and some historians, was something of a myth.
John Stevenson
Planners' moon?
The Second World War and the planning movement
On 4 January 1941, with the Battle of Britain only just won and the blitz still raging, Edward Hulton's Picture Post published a special edition under the headline ‘A Plan for Britain'.
Between the advertisements for Brylcream and Bile Beans was set out a forty-page prospectus for a ‘new Britain', consisting of a series of short articles putting forward proposals for a fresh approach to employment, social security, town planning, architecture, the countryside, education, health, the medical services and leisure.
Contributors included Thomas Balogh, Maxwell Fry, A. D. Lindsay, Julian Huxley and J. B. Priestley.
In an editorial foreword the need for this prospectus was explained.
The previous war had ended with the country unprepared for the transition from war to peace: ‘The plan was not there.
We got no new Britain, and we got no new Europe.’
In contrast, ‘this time we can be better prepared…this is a time for doing the thinking, so that we can make things how we want them to be’.
These proposals, with their aspirations for the future, put forward in a popular picture magazine, illustrate strikingly an important theme in British wartime politics.
The ideas carried in the individual features, including an end to mass unemployment, a planned economy, a comprehensive system of social security and health care, a clean sweep of all that was old-fashioned and squalid in housing and the urban legacy of the industrial revolution, and many more, represented a virtual glossary of progressive views current in the Britain of the 1930s and its contributors a fair cross-section of the high-minded and socially concerned individuals who had been advocating these and similar ideas well before the outbreak of war.
But the war was here the occasion for their collective expression, at a time when, with the threat of invasion passed, debates about the future shape of British society were becoming a major ingredient in political discussion.
Picture Post was in no doubt  about their justification: ‘Our plan for a new Britain is not something outside the war, or something after the war.
It is an essential part of our war aims.
It is, indeed, our most positive war aim.
The new Britain is the country we are fighting for.’
Expressed in this way, ‘A Plan for Britain' was symptomatic of a mood of collectivist enthusiasm which seemed to find its opportunity in the shared perils and challenges of the early years of the war.
The growth of what Paul Addison has called ‘Attlee consensus’ clearly drew upon the kind of ideas represented in the Picture Post issue.
Clearly many of the schemes and proposals outlined there were to find full or partial implementation in the Butler Education Act, the creation of the Welfare State and a National Health Service, the New Town and National Parks Acts, and the nationalisation of basic industries.
The drive towards greater State intervention and a more collectivist solution to the nation's pre-war problems has been properly identified as part of the legacy of the ‘people's war’.
In this consensus, ‘planning’ formed a major if somewhat ambiguous ingredient.
In some areas it was an end in itself, notably in the field of town and environmental planning, in others the means by which changes should be brought about, essentially through well thought out rationalisation and reorganisation, or, more broadly, as a global commitment to the future — the only way of ensuring that desirable social and economic changes could be brought about.
While ‘planning’ in these various guises seemed to find its moment in the Second World War, it also drew upon a long evolution of social and political thought which stretched back to before the Great War.
The rise of State intervention in the social sphere prior to 1914 has been acknowledged as marking the beginnings of the process of greater involvement which was to find expression in the Second World War.
Social investigation by the late Victorian and Edwardian pioneers laid out the contours and dimensions of social problems, such as poverty, in ways which suggested solutions.
The burst of social legislation prior to 1914 was possible only within a context in which the most obvious social evils of the day, such as the poverty caused by old age, sickness and unemployment, had been identified and shown to be amenable to State action.
The Great War, with the enormous challenges it posed to the assumptions of laissez-faire liberalism, took the role of the State a great deal further.
By its end the State had assumed greater control than ever before of the nation's economy and manpower resources.
Control of the munitions industry and its related establishments was soon followed in  other sections of industry.
By a process which almost seemed inevitable the State found itself directing a major part of the country's industries, and controlling or licensing most of the remainder.
Government ‘controllers’ to deal with shipping, labour, food, food production and national service greatly extended the control of government.
Following munitions, shipbuilding and ship repairing, virtually all transport by rail, sea or canal, flour milling, agriculture, collieries and the chemical industry had become part of a network of control.
Intervention and planning of resources became necessary in almost every sphere.
The introduction of conscription was not only crucial to obtain the manpower resources necessary but also to plan a total war economy.
If conscription represented a major presumption upon the values of Edwardian Britain, so too did the growing battery of controls over licensing hours, house rents, rationing and information.
By the latter years of the war, the experience of government direction and the evident need to recompense the sacrifices of the home population encouraged the desire to carry wartime controls into lasting social reform and post-war ‘reconstruction’.
The impact of the war was put forcibly by Seebohm Rowntree in 1918:
The war has torn the scales from our eyes, and forced us to see things as they really are, and by the light of this clearer vision we have come to regard many conditions as intolerable which before had only seemed inevitable…
As a nation, however, we acquiesced in this state of things.
We were so familiar with it that its evils failed to impress us.
Even in our progressive and sanguine moods, the utmost that we hoped for was a very gradual and a very tentative improvement.
But the war changed all this.
We have completely revised our notions as to what is possible or impossible.
We have seen accomplished within a few brief months or years reforms to which we should have assigned, not decades, but generations.
I do not believe for a moment that in the future we shall allow millions of our fellow-countrymen, through no fault of their own, to pass through life ill-housed, ill-clothed, ill-fed, ill-educated.
Significantly, ‘reconstruction’ implied planning for the future.
A Reconstruction Committee was formed in March 1916 which was turned in July 1917, under the impact of growing labour unrest and the first Russian revolution, into the Ministry of Reconstruction.
The Ministry worked through a series of committees which investigated demobilisation, labour, unemployment pay and housing.
Its reports provided a series of blueprints for post-war society.
A committee under J. H. Whitley proposed the establishment of joint industrial councils made up of representatives of employers and workers, operating on national, district and works level to resolve peacefully industrial disputes.
Reports on housing, drawing upon the experience of model estates built before the  war and during it for special groups such as munition workers, paved the way for the massive scheme of ‘homes fit for heroes’ inaugurated by the post-war coalition government.
Similarly, attention was turned to education: the Board of Education Report for 1917–18 declared that the War ‘has certainly brought a clearer and wider recognition of the value of education, and, while showing the defects and shortcomings of our system, has produced the resolution to improve it’.
Amongst a broad section of opinion, not only vote-seeking politicians, the idea of ‘reconstruction’ with its blueprints for the future tapped currents of social thinking which antedated the war, but now sustained by the example of the role of the State in managing the war effort.
It was William Beveridge who hailed a revolution in public administration: ‘We have…under the stress of war, made practical discoveries in the art of government almost comparable to the immense discoveries made at the same time in the art of flying’.
The effect on attitudes towards greater State intervention and the role of planning has been summed up by Rodney Barker:
By the closing years of the war the pacific complement of all this military collectivism was the preparation for social reconstruction with the onset of peace, carried out by the state and pursued with the assistance of its own investigative committees.
Once lodged in the realm of ‘common sense’ and sustained by ‘practical’measures, state collectivism looked less and less like contestable belief, and became increasingly the broad starting point for argument, rather than its disputed conclusion.
But plans for post-war reconstruction were to bear only limited fruit.
Although the promise of a ‘land fit for heroes to live in’ secured a victory for Lloyd George and his coalition government in 1918, it was soon to find its promises increasingly hard to fulfil as the post-war boom petered out and Britain moved into the years of the Slump.
Even before the ‘Geddes axe’ cut a swathe through the ambitious post-war housing programme and halted the further extension of welfare provision in such areas as education, a certain faltering in the reconstructivist drive was evident.
The Ministry of Reconstruction, the only potential co-ordinating body for post-war plans, was dismantled in June 1919, just when it should have been at the peak of its activities.
None the less, the spirit which had animated plans for post-war construction did not die away in the interwar years.
In part at least, the conditions which frustrated their fuller implication also provided the justification for renewed efforts to improve social conditions.
There was a continuing output of serious social investigation which had as its aim  the accurate delineation of social problems and implicitly or explicitly to indicate solutions.
A. L. Bowley's study of 1925, Has Poverty Diminished?, was able to compare conditions in five towns in the early 1920s with those immediately prior to the war and, while showing the improvements that had taken place, demonstrate the still significant causes of poverty.
The Social Survey of Merseyside and The New Survey of London Life and Labour were under way by the late 1920s.
In the mid-1930s Seebohm Rowntree was in a particularly strong position to comment authoritatively on changes in living conditions when he repeated his 1899 enquiry in York.
The rise of unemployment led to its own set of enquiries, initially into the condition of the depressed areas and eventually, more in the '30s than in the '20s, into the problems of the unemployed themselves.
Housing and the slum problem, town and country planning, population and family policy, nutrition and public health all come under detailed scrutiny.
The intellectual thrust of many of these enquiries was towards a more ‘scientific’ study of society, building upon the empirical traditions of the social enquiries of the late Victorian and Edwardian era.
The use of the ‘street survey’ and the ‘random sample’went hand in hand with the attempt to measure deprivation through the use of ‘poverty lines’, standards of ‘minimum needs’, ‘overcrowding’indices, and objective standards of health and adequate nutrition.
Malcolm Muggeridge wryly but perceptively noted, ‘Facts were wanted about everyone and everything — cross-sections of society, symptomatic opinions and observations, detailed investigations and statistics’.
The purpose of these studies varied widely; many felt constrained by their academic background to make only guarded recommendations, in an area fraught with political implications.
Other writers, such as Seebohm Rowntree, were much less guarded, putting forward solutions to family poverty and circulating new ideas about how they could be reconciled with the economic needs of industry.
Socialist writers like the Coles clearly saw rational diagnosis as an indictment of a wasteful social system.
Inevitably, in time, some of the progressive ideas being put forward seeped into public consciousness.
Many pressure groups set themselves the task of sedulously winning over influential opinion to their view of the future.
For example, the Family Endowment Society, led by Eleanor Rathbone, argued strongly for a system of family allowances, enlisting the support of people like William Beveridge and Seebohm Rowntree for a measure which was widely recognised as a major step towards eliminating poverty.
A similar course, however, was being pursued by the varied groups pressing for such things as nursery schools, a national health service, ‘new towns’ and National Parks.
But while the advocacy of many of these proposals drew upon long-term developments in social and political thought, it was the economic situation in the inter-war years which forced many to address the question of how the endemic problems of overcapacity in basic industries, structural unemployment and the evident failure of laissez-faire to preserve national prosperity could be overcome.
Even by the end of the 1920s there were the beginnings of calls for a more directly interventionist role by government and some deliberate trade and industrial policy for the future.
When the depression worsened after the Wall Street crash, the fringe voices of ‘unorthodox’ economists and politicians were joined by increasing numbers of people who looked to new ways of solving the country's problems.
High on this agenda was economic planning.
In Reconstruction, published in 1933, Harold Macmillan wrote, '’ Planning’is forced upon us…not for idealistic reasons but because the old mechanism which served us when markets were expanding naturally and spontaneously is no longer adequate when the tendency is in the opposite direction'.
Although laissez-faire was by no means discarded in the 1930s and the dead hand of economic orthodoxy, particularly in fiscal matters remained strong, there were signs of change in the stance of government in some areas.
As Angus Calder has noted, there was a formidable catalogue of reorganisation and rationalisation carried out either by the government or with its encouragement.
By the outbreak of the war the State had reorganised the railways into four companies where there had been 130 before; nationally owned corporations had been created in broadcasting and air passenger transport; a national grid for electricity supply had been created and a national supply industry organised; agriculture had been rescued from the doldrums by regulation of its prices and quota systems; while encouragement had been given to sometimes savage reductions of capacity in shipbuilding, textiles and mining.
Calder has called this an ‘irreversible break’ with the past, and the preparations from the mid-'30s for a future war showed the extent to which the lessons learned in the Great War were applied even before hostilities broke out.
The ‘shadow factory’ schemes, begun in 1936, showed the determination of the government to control vital war production from the outset.
The rubicon of conscription, crossed so painfully and reluctantly in 1916, was accepted as a necessity from the start of any future war.
The Military Training Act of 1939 effectively introduced conscription in peacetime for the first time in Britain's history.
While the government remained wedded to  budgetary orthodoxy, it was by 1938 allocating over a quarter of the budget to defence, prefiguring the even greater commitments after war's outbreak.
Outside government, what has been called a ‘young man's consensus’ was developing on the necessity of greater State intervention in both the economic and the social sphere.
These views crystallised in pressure groups such as Political and Economic Planning, established in 1931, and the Next Five Years Group, formed in 1934.
Covering a broader range than the single-issue groups, they presented reports and analyses on a wide range of economic and social issues which generally looked forward to the legislation of the 1940s.
The list of those involved in PEP during the 1930s and early 1940s included the banker Basil Blackett, businessmen such as Laurence Neal and Israel Sieff, the scientist Julian Huxley, the educational pioneer and National MP Kenneth Lindsay, architects and town-planning enthusiasts such as Maxwell Fry, Raymond Unwin and Ernest Simon, the anthropologist Tom Harrisson, academics such as Alexander Cairncross, John Maynard Keynes and William Beveridge, and sympathetic MPs such as Harold Macmillan and Sir Arnold Wilson.
Major reports were produced on housing, social services, the health services, the press and the location of industry.
Its shorter Broadsheets, over 150 of which had been produced by 1940, provided discussion on a wide range of topics of economic and social concern.
PEP had a strong technocratic outlook, drawing most of its support and research groups from managers, academics and other experts.
Its General Secretary, Max Nicholson, has summed up the thrust of much of its work as being: to supersede piecemeal treatment of public policy by co-ordinated policies founded on ‘fact-based’ and ‘research-based’programmes; reliable decision-making based upon accurate and comprehensive forecasting; and the implementation of policy through democratic principles.
The Next Five Years Group tended towards a less technocratic style.
Its members again included many of those involved in progressive causes between the wars, especially in education and the social services, including Seebohm Rowntree, H. G. Wells, Siegfried Sassoon, R. C. K. Ensor, H. A. L. Fisher, G. P. Gooch, J. A. Hobson and William Temple.
Again, the proposals of the Next Five Years Group anticipated many of the developments of the 1940s, such as a National Development Board, greater public investment in housing, the co-ordination of social services to achieve a ‘National Minimum’, the expansion of secondary education, and town and country planning.
The young Harold Macmillan was especially active in the group, eventually taking charge of it and its periodical New Outlook.
The views he expressed in The Middle Way, published in 1938, pointing towards a managed economy and the expansion of welfare services to achieve a national minimum, came close to expressing the essential ingredients of what both PEP and the Next Five Years Group wanted in the way of a change of direction by the National Government.
Macmillan, with a few other radical Tories, such as Robert Boothby, Julian Amery and Duncan Sandys, represented a strand of Conservative thinking which already accepted much of the argument of ‘middle opinion’.
In spite of only a short period of minority government the Labour Party in the 1920s had also developed some ambitious long-term policies.
Following the debacle of 1931, the trade unions came to play an increasingly important part in shaping Labour policy.
Ernest Bevin, for example, in his pamphlet My Plan for 200,000 Workers, proposed a raising of the school leaving age to sixteen, earlier retirement and a shorter working week.
Meanwhile a number of prominent Labour figures, such as G. D. H. Cole, Douglas Jay, Hugh Dalton and Herbert Morrison were beginning to reshape Labour policy towards an acceptance of planning and Keynesian economics, through books, pamphlets, discussion circles and the work of bodies such as the New Fabian Research Bureau, founded in 1931.
Liberal improvers, progressive Conservatives and socialists found themselves sharing some common ground in this assumption that it was the duty of the State to provide a better life for its citizens and which found expression in support for comprehensive social welfare, a national health service and a more humane treatment of those in need.
For Labour as for‘middle opinion’ as a whole, increased State intervention and central direction went hand in hand with faith in a more rational and ordered treatment of social questions — an essentially technocratic approach — which found its most characteristic expression in the enthusiasm for ‘planning’.
Planning, at least in the form of extensive control of the ‘reins of economic power’, had traditionally occupied a central part in socialist thought, and public control of economic resources, production and allocation were part of the essential features of left-wing thought between the wars.
This was reflected in admiration for the achievements of the Russian revolution and the Five Year Plans, so that during the interwar years socialist writers such as G. D. H. Cole advocated planning in contradiction to the chaos, irrationality and waste of the capitalist system.
Capitalism was indicted as a gigantic muddle, whereas socialism stood for rationality and a co-ordinated approach to economic and social  questions — planning was the practical expression of socialism.
15 Thus in 1934 Barbara Wootton in Plan or no Plan advocated the advantages of economic planning and central, public management in promoting equality, fairness and a reduction in unemployment, while Douglas Jay in The Socialist Case in 1938 argued that collectivist planning was the only way to achieve a just and fair society.
But while the socialist concern for planning was important, not least in view of Labour's victory at the polls in 1945, perhaps the most significant feature of the inter-war years was the acceptance by ‘middle opinion’ of the need for planning without the destruction of the capitalist system.
Hence planning was not a uniquely left- or right-wing cause between the wars, it was a response from progressive capitalists, professional people, academics, centrist politicians and socialists who found in it a means of advance over a wide range of social and economic problems.
Up to the 1930s the word ‘planning’ was still associated primarily with ‘town’planning and military staffwork.
Indeed, the first official use of the term came in the Housing and Town and Country Planning Acts of 1909 and 1919.
As late as 1933, however, the Oxford English Dictionary did not recognise the existence of the single word ‘planning’, though it was by then coming into use on the Continent as an alternative to totalitarianism, particularly in the fields of economic management and social policy.
The formation of Political and Economic Planning and the publication of a 20,000 word supplement to the Week-end Review of ‘A National Plan for Great Britain' inaugurated this use in Britain.
The article criticised the ‘hopeless confusion of the post-war years’ which had created the risk ‘that in incompetent hands this country may go drifting on either towards a sharp crisis which might have revolutionary consequences, or to dictatorship, or perhaps worse still to gradual decline…
‘. In its call for ‘rigorous constructive argument’ and a general reorganisation of the political, social and economic structure of the country it articulated the frustrations of a broad spectrum of opinion with existing policies.
16 Although the totalitarian overtones of ‘planning’ attracted some criticism and many socialists remained cool about the concept of a basically capitalist planned economy, the idea of planning had entered the mainstream of ‘middle opinion’by the mid-1930s.
If by the outbreak of the Second World War there existed a substantial body of opinion which looked forward to a fresh approach to economic and social problems, this increasingly influential consensus found its moment with the coming of the war and, in particular, in the atmosphere of national emergency after the evacuation of Dunkirk and the fall of  France in 1940.
A mood of collectivism and common endeavour — for a time at least— transformed the context of the debate about the conduct of economic and social policy.
The planning movement of the 1930s was to find its apotheosis in the conduct of the war and the plans for post-war reconstruction in almost every field from social security to new town development.
PEP had set up a Post-war Aims Group even before the war began, and within a week of its outbreak had circulated.a draft report on war aims.
As well as devoting attention to the management of the war economy, it had by July 1942 produced a broadsheet, Planning for Social Security, which substantially anticipated the Beveridge report in calling for a national minimum income, universal family allowances, a national health service and a Ministry of Social Security.
A similar pointer to opinion was the ‘volunteer army’ of post-war planners who launched a series of reconstruction projects in 1940–41.
Amongst the most ambitious was the Nuffield College Reconstruction Survey, proposed by G. D. H. Cole, supported by influential backers such as Arthur Greenwood and John Reith, and financed from a Treasury grant.
All three main parties had reconstruction committees working on postwar plans by 1941, while professional groups such as the BMA and the Town and Country Planning Association provided their own schemes.
Interest in economic ‘planning’ received a tremendous boost from the sheer practicalities of the war effort.
The necessities of equipping the armed forces, preserving the home population at a decent minimum level and running an efficient war economy brought government control and direction into almost every aspect of people's lives.
The results were certainly dramatic in terms of the war effort.
Britain was soon devoting something like half its national product to the war, a massive shift of resources, unthinkable in peacetime.
The ‘standing army’ of over a million unemployed was mopped up during the first year of hostilities, and between 1939 and 1943 almost 3 million jobs were added to the labour market, including many jobs for women.
With almost every resource in short supply, the management of the war economy required not only government control but complex and intricate planning of requirements and allocation.
But these problems also had a social dimension.
War production — the very continuance of the war itself — depended on civilian morale; morale determined the need to take account of the blueprints for the future which had been articulated before the war began.
Once the immediate crisis of 1940 had been weathered and the country embarked upon the long haul of productive effort and austerity, groups like the ‘1941 Committee’ pressed Britain's war aims  in terms of plans for the future.
The committee's first leaflet, We Must Win, declared: ‘We must set out ideals and objectives in clear terms and we must so order our own mode of life and social system that men may know that we offer a happiness, freedom and prosperity which can never flourish under Hitler's totalitarianism.
By 1942 the Labour Party Conference was also calling for a comprehensive scheme of social security, adequate cash payments to provide security whatever the contingency, a scheme of family allowances, and a national health service.
The war, then, provided opportunities, but the extent to which they were taken up depended in large degree upon the contingent circumstances of the case being argued.
The influence of the Second World War on the introduction of a comprehensive system of National Insurance, the National Health Service, Family Allowances, and town and country planning can hardly be ignored.
The primary mechanism suggested for this relationship of war with advances in social welfare is political: that the demands of total war forced government to make concessions to organised labour and the working classes in general which otherwise might have taken much longer to achieve.
Indeed, it was Beveridge himself who claimed in the midst of the war that ‘the most general effect of war is to make he common people more important’.
It is however, important to place the wartime advances in their appropriate pre-war context.
In the case of the Second World War the point is clear.
The social investigations of the inter-war years and the literature of concern about unemployment and other social problems prepared the ground for wartime legislation.
The pressure groups such as Political and Economic Planning and the Next Five Years Group had already foreshadowed many of the policies indicated by the Beveridge report, while the BMA was already an advocate of the creation of a comprehensive health service.
Hence the interwar years had seen the development of what has been called ‘a consensus of social responsibility’ which accepted the necessity of greater State intervention, planning and full employment as major priorities.
At least as important as the arguments of the wartime planners was that their schemes emerged into a climate which was receptive to their main conclusions.
Equally, it would be unwise to minimise the effects of the peculiar circumstances created by the war.
There is little doubt that the national crisis of 1940–41 played a significant part in turning plans for comprehensive welfare from high-minded aspiration into practical legislation.
Perhaps most important is the need to recognise that a balance of forces was usually operating at any one time: pressure groups for change, politicians, civil servants and individual personalities all had a part to play.
Similarly, many different motives came into play, ranging from political manipulation to the purest altruism.
Circumstances could clearly alter the balance in favour of one group rather than another and emphasise some considerations more than others.
In this connection, individual policy decisions have to be taken very much in their own context by a close examination of the design and implementation of particular pieces of legislation.
Appropriately, it was the field where the term ‘planning’ had been first originated, town and country planning, that provided the most decisive example of the war acting as an agent of deliberate plans for the future.
The Barlow Commission, which reported in January 1940, has been called the ‘planners’ breakthrough', with its recommendations for greater government control of industrial and urban growth, especially in the south-east of England.
As it happened, the threat of bombing forced the dispersal of industry from the vulnerable south-east and demanded firm controls over the siting of factories and the utilisation of land.
Moreover, the destruction wrought by the blitz turned ‘rebuilding Britain' from a vaguely desirable objective into a necessity.
Hardly had the dust settled on the bomb damage when ambitious plans for large-scale rebuilding were pouring off the drawing boards of architects and town planners.
They were encouraged by the appointment in October 1940 of Sir John Reith as the head of the new Ministry of Works, not only to supervise repairing bomb-damaged buildings but also to consult other departments and organisations about the post-war rebuilding of cities.
One of Reith's first actions as Minister of Works was to appoint a panel of consultants to advise him on post-war planning.
A series of objectives were drawn up which followed closely upon the views of progressive planners: they included controlled development of all areas and the utilisation of land to the best advantage, the limitation of urban expansion, redevelopment of congested areas, the correlation of transport and amenities, improved architectural treatment, and the preservation of places of historic interest, national parks and coastal areas.
Although Reith was dismissed in February 1942, his initiative in these areas had set in train a series of plans for comprehensive redevelopment.
One such plan was Reith's appointment of Patrick Abercrombie and the LCC architect J. H. Forshaw to draw up a scheme for the rebuilding of London.
The result was The County of London Plan, published in 1943, and a further report, commissioned by Reith's successor, Wyndham Portal, the Greater London Plan of 1944.
Others were the establishment of committees under Mr Justice Uthwatt to examine the crucial question of compensation for planning development and the Scott committee on the future of the countryside.
Plans were also inaugurated for the reconstruction of cities and towns such as Glasgow, Exeter, Hull and Coventry.
The example of Coventry perhaps best exemplifies the dovetailing of pre-war concerns with the effects of the blitz.
One of the first cities to set up an Architectural Department in 1938, an exhibition in May-June 1939 illustrated plans for a redesigned civic centre, with lectures by such well known authorities on town planning as Thomas Sharp, author of Oxford Re-planned, and Clough Williams-Ellis, builder of the Italianate village of Portmeirion in Snowdonia.
These plans remained in an abstract stage until the destruction of much of the centre of Coventry in November 1940.
At their first meeting after the blitz the General Purposes Committee recommended the setting up of a City Redevelopment Committee to consider ‘the steps which it will be desirable for the municipality to take to secure a worthy replanning and redevelopment of the city’.
Coventry was chosen by Lord Reith as one of a handful of cities to be used as a prototype of large-scale urban planning.
Although there were divisions in the local authority as to how far the plan should redesign radically the traditional city centre, it was entirely symptomatic of the mood of the time that both the City Development Committee and Lord Reith should accept the more radical scheme outlined by Donald Gibson, the city architect.
Within six months of the blitz which had devastated the city centre, an exhibition of sketches and plans outlined a redesigned city centre, based on the principle of pedestrian shopping precincts, zoned development and an inner ring road.
The creation of the Ministry of Town and Country Planning in 1943, followed by the Town and Country Planning Act of 1944, provided both the machinery and the powers for comprehensive redevelopment on the lines envisaged by the more ambitious advocates of planning.
Subsequently the 1947 Town and Country Planning Act brought almost all development under control by making it subject to planning permission.
Development plans were to be prepared for every area of the country, the powers being transferred away from the small district councils to the county and borough councils.
Co-ordination of local plans was to be carried out by the Ministry of Town and Country Planning, while development rights in land were nationalised.
Similarly, the New Towns Act of 1946 provided for the setting up of Development
Corporations to plan and create new towns where considered ‘expedient in the national interest’.
The corporations had wide powers of acquisition and management of the requisite areas ‘and generally to do anything necessary or expedient for the purposes of the new town or for the purposes incidental thereto’.
Similarly, the war provided a receptive atmosphere for a reappraisal of the economic and recreational role of the countryside.
By 1941 L. F. Easterbrook, the agricultural expert and journalist, associated with Lloyd George's plan for the land, was urging through the pages of Picture Post the need for a ‘Land Commission’ which would operate a national strategy to apportion land for agriculture, forestry, building, roads, allotments, factories, playing fields and national parks, while others supported the demand for public access to the countryside and the creation of specially designated areas as ‘lungs’for the urban areas.
The Scott report, published in 1942, urged the setting up of a planning system embracing the countryside as well as the town, mainly with a view to preserving the best agricultural land from urban development, but also recommending the setting up of national parks.
Following the appointment of the first Minister of Town and Country Planning in 1943, the government committed itself to create National Parks.
The issue of control of land use remained more contentious; a White Paper on the control of land use was shelved by the coalition government and not dealt with until the Town and Country Planning Act of 1947 under the post-war Labour administration.
The proposal for National Parks, however, received further support in the Dower report, published in 1945, and that of the Hobhouse committee, which proposed setting up a National Parks Commission paid for out of public funds.
These were eventually embodied in the National Parks and Access to the Countryside Act of 1949.
Town and country planning were important symbols of the more farsighted and strategic uses of planning, of necessity areas which would take years to come to full fruition.
These aspirations were shared by the Beveridge committee on social insurance which was set up in 1941 at the same time as the Uthwatt committee and the Scott committee.
The Beveridge report was to breathe the same spirit of optimism and confidence that long-standing problems could be tackled.
Just as the slums, squalor and muddle of towns and cities could be overcome by planning, so could social evils.
As Beveridge himself stated plainly:
The Plan for Social Security is put forward as part of a general programme of social policy.
It is one part only of an attack upon five great evils: upon the physical Want with which it is directly concerned, upon Disease which often  causes Want and brings many other troubles in its train, upon Ignorance which no democracy can afford among its citizens, upon the Squalor which arises mainly through haphazard distribution of industry and population, and upon Idleness which destroys wealth and corrupts men, whether they are well-fed or not, when they are idle.’
Guided by these principles, the ‘Beveridge plan’ assumed that the government would provide family allowances, create a comprehensive health service and maintain full employment.
His plan for social insurance envisaged a single weekly flat-rate contribution which would provide a comprehensive system of social insurance ‘from the cradle to the grave’, including unemployment benefit, sickness benefit, disability benefit, workmen's compensation, old age, widows' and orphans' pensions and benefits, funeral grants and maternity benefit.
A system of ‘National Assistance’ was to be maintained for all those who fell outside the other benefits to be paid for by the national exchequer.
The level of contribution was to be fixed at a level within the reach of every employed person, with benefits paid at a ‘national minimum income for subsistence’, and the whole system co-ordinated by a new Ministry of Social Security.
Beveridge's scheme was not, as has been stressed many times, revolutionary.
Through a ‘deal’ with Keynes at the Treasury, the financial implications of the report involved only an extra 100 million per annum from central government, far less than Beveridge himself had initially estimated.
Essentially his proposals were a rationalisation of existing insurance schemes, based on the time-honoured principle of contributions from employee, employer and the State.
The preservation of the principle of ‘insurance’ was a clear throw-back to the days of Lloyd George and, as he explained in a radio broadcast, his ‘Plan for Britain' was ‘based on the contributory principle of giving not free allowances to all from the State, but giving benefits as of right in virtue of contributions made by the insured persons themselves’.
It provided a national minimum, not an allocation of relief on the basis of need.
None the less, the tone of the report was radical, particularly in Beveridge's expressed desire to abolish the ‘five giants’, to give a new sense of purpose to democracy, to promote national solidarity, and define the goals of the war.
As he observed in the report, if the Allies could ‘plan for a better peace even while waging war, they will win together two victories which in truth are indivisible’.
But the Beveridge report was just that a report, not legislation.
There was a much more cautious response to the Beveridge proposals among politicians and administrators.
Above  all, Churchill was opposed to passing major legislation before the war was won.
Parliament merely welcomed the proposals and Churchill warned of ‘a dangerous optimism’ and the raising of ‘false hopes’.
None the less, the enthusiasm aroused by the report and the wide support it achieved among Labour politicians, sections of the Conservative Party and a broad spectrum of opinion led to a series of government White Papers in 1944 organised by the Minister of Reconstruction, Lord Woolton.
In February A National Health Service proposed a free comprehensive health service covering every branch of medical and allied activity.
In May a paper, Employment Policy, accepted the Keynesian economic argument of using public expenditure to avoid cyclical unemployment.
Decaying regions were to be given aid to create new industries along the lines of the Barlow report of 1940.
In September 1944 a third White Paper, Social Insurance, accepted most of the proposals of the Beveridge report, especially that of comprehensive coverage for all persons and types of risk, and formed the basis of Labour's Insurance Act of 1946.
With the Butler Education Act of 1944 and the introduction of Family Allowances in 1945, the chief elements of the ‘Welfare State’ were put in place in the last years of the war.
But these schemes, dramatic as they seemed, fell somewhat short of the comprehensive social planning dreamt of by some to eliminate social evils.
Crucially, they awaited implementation until after the war was won, when their plans would be vulnerable to the necessities of the moment.
In itself the Beveridge structure rested on a set of assumptions about employment and family allowances which could not be planned for and might easily have proved disastrously misplaced.
As an example, when Family Allowances were finally accepted by the Treasury it was partly to avoid the risk of wartime inflation through wage rises and the more expensive — and some would have said more efficacious — solution of a minimum wage.
As it was, the Treasury set rates lower than Beveridge thought necessary to solve family poverty.
Very quickly, by the early 1950s, the idea that a true ‘Welfare State’ had been created and that it offered an effective means of solving social inequalities was being criticised by the likes of Richard Titmuss.
Titmuss, like other contemporaries, wrote in the context of an awareness that poverty and other social problems had not been eliminated.
For example, it was apparent that the belief that with the establishment of a comprehensive system of National Insurance fewer and fewer people would need the ‘safety net’ of National Assistance was being proved false, with over a million allowances being paid out weekly in 1949.
Similarly, the  ‘rediscovery of poverty’ through studies conducted by people such as Brian Abel-Smith and Peter Townsend revealed hundreds of thousands living at or below the standard of income recommended by the National Assistance scales and a continuing increase in the numbers claiming National Assistance benefits.
Concern too with low pay, one-parent families, the elderly, and inadequate housing — often backed by new postwar pressure groups — implicitly cast doubt upon the magnitude and wisdom of the ‘welfare revolution’ achieved in the 1940s.
Titmuss was one who called into question the effectiveness of the legislation achieved in the creation of the Welfare State.
He called for a more critical approach, one which recognised the failures and shortcomings of what had been achieved, an accurate assessment of the intentions of policy-makers and legislators, and proper consideration of alternatives which might have been adopted.
Above all, however, it was perhaps in the field of economic planning that the failure of the planning movement to fulfil its ambition is most clear.
Paul Addison has argued that the character of the ‘Attlee consensus’ was one which fell far short of full-blooded planning of a totalitarian kind:
In general, the reform programme originated in the thought of the upper middle class of socially concerned professional people, of whom Beveridge and Keynes were the patron saints.
To render capitalism more humane and efficient was the principal aim of the professional expert.
In World War II the humane technocrat provided a patriotic compromise between Socialism and Conservatism which virtually satisfied the desire of the Labour Party for social amelioration, without in any way attacking the roots of exploitation and in justice.
Another writer has argued that, apart from the period of financial crisis in the immediate aftermath of the war, government control amounted to little more than the application of Keynesian nostrums and wartime controls rather than the application of thoroughgoing plans for the reconstruction of industry.
The central feature of Labour's economic plans was nationalisation, and of a particular kind, through the public corporation, which changed ownership but neither management nor control.
The nationalisation programme was soon to be regarded as failing to tackle many of the country's more fundamental economic problems, such as the still heavy reliance of the old industrial areas upon a narrow range of traditional industries — a reliance, if anything, re-emphasised by the needs of war — and the chronic problems of poor management, the commercial application of new technology, and industrial relations.
‘Planning’ in this context was more apparent than real.
Critically, the proposal put forward by Keynes and others in the  inter-war years for an ‘Economic General Staff’ responsible for planning policy was never implemented.
Although attempts to inject a more strategic element into economic management were made in the aftermath of the fuel crisis of 1947, in practice they went little further than attempts at greater co-ordination.
Another generation of Labour leaders, in the 1960s, were still left to search for the Holy Grail of economic planning.
Richard Crossman, for one, in 1965 lamented, ‘How much more humane and imaginative our post-war reconstruction would have proved if government departments had been invigorated by an influx of experts with special knowledge, new ideas and a sympathy for the Government's domestic and foreign policies’ .3– George Brown's National Plan of 1965 represented a belated attempt to recapture the ground perceived to have been lost since the war ended.
These and even later attempts to resurrect ‘planning’, especially economic planning, raise the basic difficulty in seeing the Second World War as the planners' triumph.
Viewed in perspective, the planning enthusiasm of the 1930s and 1940s represented the fusion of still vital forces of optimism and social idealism with the scientific and technocratic spirit of the twentieth century.
Characterised by its faith in ‘experts’ and a certain high-mindedness, ‘planning’offered an attractive vogue word for a host of widely differing objectives and impulses.
As post-war critics of both social and economic policy were to indicate, strategic planning with clear long-term goals and the machinery to implement them was rarely to be found.
In a post-war climate where nationalisation was the key component in the economic sphere, and reorganisation and rationalisation of what already existed the most characteristic feature of social policy, ‘planning’ failed to dislodge the established administrative systems or to overcome the temptation to make do with ad hoc measures.
Both features — a faith in traditional institutions and short-term solutions to particular problems — were to remain characteristic features of public policy well into the post-war era.
Rory MacLeod
The promise of full employment
Introduction
The fortunes of wartime Britain were at a low ebb in July 1941.
Every one of the European allies by whose side she had fought against Nazi Germany for the previous two years was now defeated and occupied.
Her latest ally, Soviet Russia, was reeling under Hitler's onslaught and it was widely expected she could not last out the year.
In the Middle East, Rommel was inflicting defeat after defeat on the Eighth Army.
Final victory over Germany appeared a long way off.
And even if victory were achieved, what would be the state of the country after the war?
In particular, what would be the job prospects for the men who would be demobilised?
In the short term many had been promised their old jobs back, but there was much gloom about the longer term.
Mass Observation, the pioneering surveyors of public opinion, recorded in July that ‘a large proportion [of the public]clearly feel that post-war unemployment;(a) will occur,(b) is avoidable.
That is to say, they expect it but think it will be due to government and other errors’.
What made people feel mass unemployment after the war was inevitable?
It was very probably the memory of what had happened after the previous war.
Demobilisation was muddled and the government made no attempt to help returning servicemen resume their former employment.
The result was a lot of unemployment and bitterness among the ex-soldiers.
Economic controls were lifted as quickly as possible.
There was a short restocking boom which was followed by a slump.
In 1921 unemployment averaged nearly 14%, and it obstinately refused to clear up throughout the decade.
When a change finally did occur in 1929 it was for the worse.
Unemployment rose from a level of about 10% (which had been maintained throughout most of the '20s) to a high of 23% in 1932.
The recovery was slow and by 1937 the rate was still at 9%. 3 By 1941, then, people looked back across two decades of mass  unemployment to the end of the previous war, and by and large they assumed the same thing would happen again.
Yet, as Mass-Observation reported, there was a feeling that matters could be handled differently.
The preparations for war had boosted employment, and there were no dole queues by July 1941.
As the war went on, the feeling grew that unemployment was a preventable evil.
The phrase ‘full employment’ became popular.
It was often used simply to mean a situation better than had prevailed before the war and it had a powerful if vague appeal.
In the Beveridge report an average unemployment rate of 8 ½%; was mentioned, but as optimism grew figures as low as 3% came to be used.
Although many people had no clear idea of what level of employment was ‘full’, none the less they felt it would not be the level of employment of the '20s or '30s.
By 1944 public concern that there should be no repetition of the errors of that period resulted in a government commitment to pursue peacetime policies aimed at maintaining a high and stable level of employment.
In July 1941, however, the prevailing mood about post-war employment was pessimistic.
Mass-Observation gives us a glimpse of this mood in that month of July, using a piece of reportage submitted by one of their investigators:
Investigator [to RAF service policeman in cafe].
You look all very well in that uniform now, but what chance will you stand after the war?’
M40C [i.e. male, forty, social class C].
Oh, he'll stand a fine chance if he's musical.
You know how it was in 1919?
You're all right if you can play a musical instrument one o' these one-string fiddles, Jew's harp, ham-bone, play the comb, or one o' these sewing-machines (gesticulates with his hands, pedals with his feet); you can stick up a board in front of you saying ‘Ex-Service Man’, ‘Hero’, put on a row of medals — an' you can go into any of these back streets and nobody'll stop you.
Hundreds of soldiers doing it after the last war — and airmen.
What you want to do is learn to play the organ.
Thinking in Whitehall on full employment
The discussion about the service policeman's job prospects might have been more sanguine had it been known that civil servants in Whitehall were reading a provocative paper on full employment policy.
The author was James Meade, a young economist working in the Cabinet Office.
Before the war he had been an academic.
When the war began the civil service was expanded to cope with a multitude of new tasks.
In particular, economists and statisticians were needed to help formulate economic policy, not only in the departments but in the Cabinet Office  as well .
By January 1941 a Central Statistical Office was turning out regular reports on production figures, inflation, consumption and manpower resources.
Churchill had S Branch, his own unit of economists and statisticians.
But most important was the Economic Section of the War Cabinet Secretariat.
It was this body to which Meade belonged.
Working for the Lord President's Committee, chaired by Sir John Anderson (which was described to Roosevelt as ‘an Economic War Cabinet’), the Section was at the heart of economic policy-making.
It developed a close relationship with S Branch.
Some of its members had moved in left-wing circles before the war and there was tension between them and the permanent civil servants.
The economists had considerable prestige inside the government, based on their success in wartime planning, particularly the counter-inflation policy.
Keynes had published work during 1939 to show the size of the incipient wartime inflation problem.
This work had two novelties.
First, it used national income figures to show the size of the problem; secondly, its economic analysis was a genuinely dynamic one, showing clearly how the inflationary spiral was operating.
Keynes suggested that a scheme of deferred pay, to be repaid to the workers after the war, would ease the problem.
Repayment could be timed to smooth out the boom-slump cycle which was widely expected to follow the war.
When Churchill became Prime Minister Keynes was invited into the Treasury, where he continued to press for some sort of deferred pay.
Part of the inflationary gap was closed by the success of Bevin in getting the trade unions to follow a voluntary pay policy.
Keynes and the economists in the Cabinet Office worked on estimating the size of the gap which remained to be closed, and the 1941 budget incorporated their approach.
A smaller version of the deferred pay plan was adopted, but of equal importance was the use of national income statistics for the first time by any government as a guide to policy.
This involved a wholly new emphasis upon the performance of the economy as a whole and an estimate of the effect of government policy upon it.
By July 1941 the war economy was running smoothly and the economists turned their attention to post-war matters.
In his paper Meade was concerned that the mistakes made after the last war should be avoided.
He suggested that government controls on the economy be retained after the war to prevent the boom-slump pattern of the years after 1918 occurring again.
He went on to argue that the key to avoiding
mass unemployment was regulation of the level of effective demand for goods and services within the economy.
The government should plan its own spending ahead to even out the booms and slumps of the coming peacetime years, and should also act to control the volume of private demand.
This could be done in several ways — taxation policy, consumer credits, direct regulation of investment — directed to the one end of stabilising demand.
If this was not enough, then the government should consider a policy of deficit finance, permanent if necessary, to increase demand and provide jobs.
Meade was in fact suggesting that remedies for unemployment proposed by Keynes and others before the war should be adopted, and he drew upon the experience of running the wartime economy to suggest how these policies could be made to work.
Although there was widespread concern about employment prospects after the war, there was little domestic pressure on the government to consider this, or indeed other post-war plans, before the publication of the Beveridge report at the end of 1942.
Meade's paper would not on its own have caused more than a few small ripples in the higher echelons of the civil service.
The pledges about post-war economic policy which were extracted from the government before Beveridge were due to the United States and the importance it attached to statements of economic war aims, which were incorporated in the Atlantic Charter and the Mutual Aid Agreement between the two countries.
The Americans wanted a world-wide system of free trade.
Roosevelt's advisers believed the collapse of international trade between the wars had made unemployment worse and encouraged the rise of Fascism.
The Atlantic Charter signed by Churchill and Roosevelt in August 1941 called for action to give ‘all states access, on equal terms, to the trade and to the raw materials of the world which are needed for their economic prosperity’.
British public opinion welcomed the Charter but for the government it involved repudiating the policies of protection and imperial preference, adopted in the depths of the world depression.
Furthermore, the Charter implied that the two greatest trading nations of the world should take domestic action to expand their demand, for the international expansion of trade which the Americans wanted to see after the war would necessarily be the sum of many domestic expansions.
The discussions over the Mutual Aid Agreement in early 1942 fully recognised the importance of full employment.
The agreement noted that there must be ‘agreed action…directed to the expansion, by appropriate international and domestic measures, of production, employment, and the exchange of goods’.
Whitehall set to work on the implications of the Charter for postwar economic policy, but senior Ministers had no time to spare and the series of politicians who assumed responsibility for post-war planning had little weight in Cabinet.
The work done at this time did, however, serve to educate the permanent officials in the new approach to economic policy.
The Treasury in particular came to the view that the influence of the economists in the Cabinet Office on post-war planning was unhealthy.
Work had been done in the Treasury before the war on the introduction of a counter-cyclical element into public spending to help stabilise employment.
But it was a long step from this to Meade's contention that the government could by its adjustment of demand raise the level of employment permanently.
The Treasury's official head from 1942 to 1945, Sir Richard Hopkins, was in favour of giving consideration to Meade's ideas but some of his subordinates were worried about the implications of managing demand to achieve full employment.
They circulated to the officials working on post-war plans a paper designed to refute the Section's approach.
It was written by Sir Hubert Henderson, an Oxford don recruited into the Treasury at the start of the war.
He was pessimistic about Britain's economic prospects and felt that a free-trade policy would leave her at the mercy of economic storms like that of 1931.
If full employment were to be achieved the economy would suck in imports and exports would be diverted to the domestic market.
This would lead to a balance of payments crisis and devaluation, coupled with domestic inflation as wages were bid up by employers' demand for labour.
He felt the major risk after the war was not unemployment but inflation caused by shortages of goods.
The government should be devoting more time to considering how the wartime counter-inflation policy could be continued in peacetime.
As Keynes pointed out, the Treasury's opposition to planning for post-war full employment was a lost cause, because when post-war plans came under the political spotlight the Labour members of the government would undoubtedly press for an expansionist policy.
The Treasury was under a cloud from 1940 to 1943.
This was partly because Sir Horace Wilson, a close adviser of Chamberlain and greatly disliked by Churchill and the Labour Party, remained its official head until 1942.
In part it was due to the association of the Treasury with the economic policy of Baldwin and Chamberlain, men now discredited as appeasers.
The  Treasury was consulted less about economic matters, and its place in servicing the relevant Cabinet committees was taken by the Economic Section.
To some extent this was natural, for, as economic mobilisation became total, finance took a back seat to the direct controls over labour and materials.
It took some three years of war before the political spotlight began to play on employment plans.
After the fall of France in June 1940 there was little time to think about the shape of the post-war world.
Wartime opinion surveys showed consistently, however, that unemployment remained a matter of concern.
For instance, an opinion poll taken in September 1941 indicated that 44% of the sample felt a return to mass unemployment inevitable.
But from 1941 onwards there was a gradual increase in optimism.
By September 1943 (when Italy surrendered) the proportion of people who felt mass unemployment was inevitable had fallen to 19%.
The public's ideas for providing full employment were coloured by the success of wartime planning, but they remained largely the notions of the years before the war, as Table 1, compiled immediately following the publication of the Beveridge report in December 1942, shows: a public works programme was mentioned four times as frequently as socialism, which was less popular than solutions based on reducing the amount of work to be done by individuals, and in the number wanting work.
A continuation of wartime industrial conscription was a popular choice.
The Beveridge report brought the topic of full employment into public prominence.
The coalition had to agree in principle to the report, announcing its determination to implement the report's assumption that mass unemployment must be prevented.
Beveridge argued that this assumption was necessary, for otherwise there would be no effective test of a willingness to work.
Also, the social insurance scheme would cost more if there was a high level of unemployment.
A member of the Section was secretary to Beveridge's committee and the Section suggested several devices to alter the volume of effective demand.
For instance, a scheme (devised by Meade) to alter social insurance contributions according to the state of the economy, so they rose in a boom and fell in a slump, thus helping to stabilise purchasing power, was mentioned to Beveridge.
Conservative Ministers were supported by the Treasury in arguing that no commitment should be made to implementing the Beveridge report.
Churchill was initially against promising post-war reforms, but his adviser Lord Cherwell, who was in touch with the Section, persuaded him it was impracticable to reject Beveridge.
In March 1943 the Prime Minister broadcast on the theme of a Four Year Plan for peace, and announced the government's intention to plan to prevent the return of mass unemployment after the war.
He indicated this would be done by a public works policy which ‘would have a balancing effect on development and can be turned on and off as circumstances require’.
Nonetheless the Conservatives' opposition to Beveridge disillusioned many people who felt they could not be trusted to implement the report, regardless of any promises they might make.
Labour Ministers were eager to press ahead with plans for the peace, and Dalton told the Commons that he looked forward to a full employment target which would be considerably below Beveridge's 8 ½%; dge ly.
More pressure was put on the government when Beveridge, disappointed in his hopes of conducting an official enquiry into full employment, set up his own private investigation.
It would have been embarrassing if Beveridge were to come out with another popular report.
There was now a deadline to discussions about full employment — the government had to come forward with a policy before Beveridge.
The first step they took was to estimate figures for national income after the war, so that the scale of spending necessary to raise employment could be estimated.
The Section took over this work from the Treasury (who had made some embarrassing errors in their calculation) and submitted detailed proposals for post-war full employment to a Cabinet  committee chaired by Anderson in May 1943.
The proposals were similar to those in Meade's paper of July 1941.
They suggested a public investment programme which could be planned ahead to counteract the fall in private investment during a slump.
The budget need not be balanced every year but should be balanced over the trade cycle, with surpluses in booms and deficits in slumps.
The volume of consumption should be adjusted by altering taxes and social insurance contributions, raising them to dampen down a boom and cutting them at the beginning of a depression.
The Section went a long step further than this, however.
They suggested that if a policy of balancing a budget over the trade cycle still resulted in unacceptable high unemployment, then a permanent policy of deficit finance would be called for to provide extra jobs.
In other words the State should, if necessary, permanently provide jobs and accept a continuing increase in the national debt.
Sir Kingsley Wood, the Chancellor of the Exchequer, who sat on the committee, wanted this paper shelved, but his view was rejected.
The Treasury prepared a response which concentrated on the difficulty of translating economic theory into practice, and on the political implications of the economists' suggestions.
For instance, what level of full employment should the government aim at, and what level of spending would be required to achieve it?
What period was to be taken as the ‘trade cycle’ over which government spending would balance?
The Treasury felt strongly that changes in taxation for purposes of stabilising employment would immediately become a political football.
Governments would find it easy to cut taxes and unbalance the budget when unemployment was rising, but there would be a lot of resistance to raising taxes to create a surplus of revenue when prosperous times returned.
The optimism of the Section's paper, summed up in its conclusion that ‘we are finally coming to understand the governing tendencies of the economic mechanism’, was rejected by the Treasury, who felt it was ‘academic and dangerous’.
Meanwhile Bevin, the Minister of Labour, was involved in talks with Churchill on continuing the coalition after the war.
He wanted to take responsibility for employment policy.
Bevin remembered the mistakes of the years after 1918 when, he felt, the returning soldiers had been cheated of the social and economic reforms they had a right to expect.
He suggested that the peacetime Ministry of Labour should assume responsibility for co-ordinating the implementation of a full employment policy.
The discussions encompassed the minimum programme for such a peacetime coalition.
Cherwell argued to Churchill that what he termed plans for social betterment, among which was a full employment policy, were non-political and should be part of an agreed programme.
In any event, Cherwell felt, it would be politically unwise to suspend work on full employment, given the public interest and the fact that Beveridge was working on his own report.
Churchill agreed and decided that, regardless of the outcome of the talks about continuing the coalition into peacetime, ‘any decisions which are needed for the supreme objects of FOOD and EMPLOYMENT in the years immediately after the war must be taken whether they involve legislation and whether they are controversial or not’.
Talks on a post-war coalition concluded indecisively, but the Prime Minister had called for progress to be made on plans for full employment.
Meanwhile work on full employment policy had been handed down by the politicians to a committee of officials.
Given the divisions between Labour and Conservative and the unresolved question of which Whitehall department should have responsibility for the policy, this was a predictable response.
The committee was chaired by Hopkins, the senior Treasury official most sympathetic to Keynesian ideas, and he used his power to amend, but not fundamentally to alter, the approach of the Section to achieving full employment.
That battle had been fought and won over the Beveridge report.
Before Hopkins's committee could meet Wood died and was replaced as Chancellor by Anderson.
This weakened the Section's influence at a crucial time and correspondingly strengthened the hand of the Treasury.
Attlee took over Anderson's job but the Section had less influence under him.
The Treasury now enjoyed the advantage of a strong Chancellor, respected throughout Whitehall as Wood had not been.
Why did Anderson seek the Exchequer?
Churchill had already earmarked Lyttleton for the job.
Part of the reason may have been his desire to strengthen the Treasury's hand in discussions about economic policy, particularly given Bevin's desire to move responsibility for full employment policy to the Ministry of Labour.
If so, he was successful.
The renaissance of the Treasury may be dated from his appointment in September 1943.
When the committee met Hopkins resisted the Section's attempts to get a new definition of full employment of 2 ½%; unemployed, preferring to stick to Beveridge's 8 ½%; dge.
He was in favour of a counter-cyclical public investment programme to even out booms and slumps and, like Keynes, he supported Meade's scheme for varying social insurance contributions, but he was wary of wider plans for altering taxation to influence demand.
Those in the Treasury who had tried to stop consideration of demand management attacked again.
The thrust of their argument continued to be on the political implications.
They did not deny that the fundamental cure of the trade cycle was to stabilise demand, but they felt that the remedies suggested by the economists would be difficult to implement and would have undesirable side effects.
Politicians would be tempted to unbalance the budget and raise public spending by borrowing money, citing Keynesian doctrine to provide intellectual justification for a populist move.
The public would become used to high employment financed by permanent deficits and would object to any attempt to cut the deficit by raising taxes.
Inflation would quickly result, and there would be a collapse in business confidence.
This would result in a countervailing fall in private investment as public spending rose.
The Treasury of 1943 was not skilled at arguing about economic theory or the details of national income statistics, but they felt that the new economic approach ignored practical problems which they, rather than the academic economists, were best qualified to judge.
The committee's report was a compromise.
The Treasury accepted that a five-year programme of public investment should be planned, and that if it failed to prove adequate to secure full employment, then changes in taxes to encourage private investment and consumption should be made, but the question of budget deficits remained a bone of contention and was fudged in the report.
It was concluded that the net effect of all the plans outlined would be to affect employment by not more than 10%.
Since unemployment had risen as high as 23% between the wars the committee did not satisfy everybody who was involved in the full employment discussions.
The question of whether inflation would result from demand management was not seriously tackled.
There were two reasons.
The first was that the informal wages policy arranged by Bevin had been successful in stemming wartime inflation, and it was assumed this could be continued in peacetime.
The second was that the economists were complacent about the problem.
Inflation would have some good effects, they felt; it would impoverish the rentiers, reduce the burden of the national debt (as it had done in France after World War I) and transfer purchasing power to successful new businessmen and workers.
The report concluded, ‘we should be very foolish to argue that the economic system would not work if prices and incomes were behaving as they have  behaved during some of the most prosperous epochs; that is to say, rising slowly’.
An important proposal was that the government should have an antitrust policy to curb monopoly power in business.
The question of the monopoly power of the trade unions however, was not tackled.
It was hoped that the responsibility and sense of restraint they had displayed under Bevin's guidance would continue.
Location of industry policy, for which Dalton was pressing strongly, was referred to in an aside but not discussed in any detail.
The report was necessarily a compromise, given the opposition to a powerful full employment policy.
The Section, whose attention was anyway moving towards international measures co-ordinated with the Americans to promote trade, rested content with the general endorsement of the demand management approach.
The Treasury was prepared to accept this provided there was no commitment to immediate action.
The intellectual drive which had propelled the Section's plans for demand management up to senior politicians had fallen off, and full employment policy was coming to consist more of vague intentions than of concrete measures to assure the fulfilment of the promise already made to the public.
Keynes thought it resembled a Gruyère cheese — holes without the surrounding cheese!
While the Hopkins committee was sitting Churchill upgraded the status of post-war planning by appointing Lord Woolton as Minister of Reconstruction.
The aim of the discussion on full employment policy in his Cabinet committee was to put out a statement before Beveridge, and the politicians were prepared to slide over practical difficulties in implementing the policy — all that was required was a statement of principles.
It was now spring 1944 and Beveridge was reported to have his book ready for the printers.
The government was running out of time.
A White Paper on employment policy, based on the Hopkins report, was considered by the War Cabinet, and published on 19 May.
Its foreword contained the kernel of the policy: ‘The Government accept as one of their prime aims and responsibilities the maintenance of a high and stable level of employment after the war.’
Keynes thought this was worth the whole of the rest of the White Paper put together.
Then came the inevitable qualifications — much depended on the state of international trade and on the efficient running of industry.
The approach used analysis of national income data to quantify the regulation of demand, and when the statement turned from discussion  of the transition to a peacetime economy it became a standard exposition of Keynesian policy prescriptions as interpreted by the academic economists in Whitehall.
The pre-conditions of mobility of resources and price-wage stability were set out, and within this framework the effects of altering demand were explained.
The main tool of policy was to be public spending, but work in Whitehall on schemes for the regulation of private investment and consumption was to continue.
The most developed of these, Meade's scheme for varying social insurance contributions, was given special prominence.
The public were promised that it would be introduced after the war (it never was) and if successful would be followed by tax changes and other ideas such as tax credits to regulate demand.
As in the Hopkins report, the crucial issue of deficit finance was fudged, and it was stated that none of what was proposed would involve ‘deliberate planning for a deficit in the National Budget in years of subnormal trade activity’.
The implication was that balance would be achieved over the trade cycle.
The White Paper was the first the public had heard of the discussions on full employment policy since the Beveridge report.
It proposed not a planned economy in which the State would direct resources but a managed one where the State would influence the use of resources through its fiscal policy.
Its analysis was straightforwardly Keynesian and in that sense was revolutionary, but its actual proposals were weak, reflecting the government's desire on the one hand to pre-empt Beveridge and on the other not to commit the coalition to detailed policies.
Within a month the Allies invaded France and public attention shifted to the fighting there.
In Whitehall there was a falling-off of interest in full employment.
The Section became engrossed in the preparations for Bretton Woods and the founding of the IMF, and the Labour politicians who had pressed for a declaration of post-war policy were getting ready to fight the next general election.
Dalton did succeed in getting a Distribution of Industry Act passed before the election, but anti-trust policy made no progress (although the anti-trust ideas in the White Paper were enacted as the Monopolies and Restrictive Practices Act of 1948).
The White Paper promised that information would be gathered to help implement demand management, but no work was done until the autumn of 1945.
The Treasury assumed departmental responsibility for full employment policy when Sir Edward Bridges succeeded Hopkins in early 1945.
The Section continued in being but declined in importance after the war when many of its members returned to academic life, and it  absorbed into the Treasury.
Thinking outside Whitehall on full employment
The employment White Paper was published under a coalition dominated by Conservatives and Labour, but it was not the result of discussion within each party, and although leading politicians on both sides endorsed its policy it would be wrong to say that it reflected the considered view of either party.
One Conservative pressure group was interested in the subject — the Tory Reform Group.
It was set up at the time of the publication of the Beveridge report by a group of young MPs who had strong links with the forces.
They sensed the change in political mood and were anxious that the Conservatives should not get out of step with the public.
The Tory Reformers agreed with the Keynesian analysis of trade depression.
They felt that after the war the government should take powers to control the volume of investment, and the resources of the economy should be centrally assessed and allocated with the aim of reaching and staying at full employment.
Interests which might stand in the way of this programme, such as the Bank of England, would be nationalised.
Their policy would involve vigorous anti-trust action.
However, they had little effect on the mainstream of Conservative thinking.
The party was looking at full employment and a committee reported on the question in January 1944.
It accepted that public spending should be used counter-cyclically after the war, but private firms were merely to be exhorted to plan their spending to iron out booms and slumps, and there was no mention of the thorny question of anti-trust policy.
Controls should be lifted as soon as possible after the war.
The document left many questions unanswered and when it was not endorsed by any major party figure it slid into oblivion.
The party conference of March 1945 endorsed the policies outlined in the White Paper and called for the abandonment by industry and unions of restrictive practices.
However, the electorate did not trust the Conservatives on full employment policy, and this feeling was confirmed by the aggressive anti-socialist tenor of the election campaign, when the rallying cry was for decontrol as quickly as possible.
Just as many Conservatives were suspicious of the middle ground in domestic politics occupied by the coalition, so were many Labour Party activists.
The Labour Ministers were educated in the language and  concepts of Keynesian economics by the academic economists in the government.
It seemed plausible that demand management could be continued in the longer term in peacetime, and it fitted in with many of Labour's goals.
For instance, demand management might require that government spending should be held at a high level to keep the economy at full pressure, while Labour's plans also called for a high level of State spending.
If, as seemed likely, one cause of unemployment was an excess of savings over investment, the equalisation of decisions to save and decisions to invest could be brought about by Labour's plans for progressive taxation which would redistribute income to the poorer sections of society.
These would spend a larger proportion of their incomes and so net savings would be reduced.
The need for a stable rate of investment to aid the planning of demand could be used to advocate the take-over of sections of the economy and the regulation of their spending.
Finally, the Keynesian approach provided arguments for the Beveridge plan, which would among other things increase the worker's purchasing power in a depression.
However, the implications of the Keynesian approach to the economy were far-reaching.
Labour advocated measures such as nationalisation to help run the economy more efficiently and provide full employment with prosperity.
If the Keynesian approach were correct and demand management (and associated changes in public spending and tax policy) could equally well produce full employment and prosperity, then some of Labour's policies would become unnecessary on strictly economic grounds.
For instance, nationalisation of basic industries could be advocated both from a Keynesian and a socialist viewpoint, but for a Keynesian it was not an initial step preparatory to full common ownership of the means of production, distribution and exchange, but a pragmatic move to enable the economy to be run more efficiently.
There was here a latent tension, perhaps most fully apparent in the contrast between socialist demands for State corporations and the Keynesians' call for an anti-trust policy to oppose monopoly power.
Dalton interwove the two viewpoints in Labour's June 1944 statement on full employment (which he described as largely Keynesian with some socialist additions) and Labour's 1945 election manifesto was more convincing on full employment than anything put out by the Conservatives.
In the long run full employment was to be achieved through the overall control of purchasing power, and monopolies and cartels would be subject to State supervision to promote efficiency and an expansionist economic policy.
The tension between Keynesian and  socialist viewpoints remained latent.
The White Paper stated,'…employment cannot be created by Act of Parliament or Government action alone'.
The government hoped that industry and the trade unions would co-operate in measures to achieve full employment in the context of an efficient and internationally competitive economy, but the response was not very encouraging.
There was a consensus of sorts among businessmen and trade unionists, but it was a consensus for protection of the home market and statutory cartels to control output and prices.
There were businessmen who welcomed Keynesian ideas and accepted the popular wartime view that industry had strong social obligations.
Samuel Courtauld, the textile industrialist, and his supporters warned that industrialists must come to terms with the new mood in favour of government intervention.
The government had the right to control private investment in the interests of society, and Courtauld agreed with Beveridge that to surrender this freedom would not necessarily lead to the erosion of others.
However, most businessmen looked forward to a speedy lifting of wartime controls.
The post-war economic policy which they preferred was articulated by the Federation of British Industry (the predecessor of the CBI) in 1944.
It called for a strengthening of trade associations after the war, with statutory power to fix prices and output levels.
These cartels would protect industry against any post-war slump, and in return industry would co-operate with government economic policy, though not to the point of accepting restrictions on profits or investment.
Imperial preference and taxes to discourage imported goods should be maintained.
In fact businessmen wanted State assistance but they were not prepared to offer any real quid pro quo in the shape of control over their activities.
Nationalisation and anti-trust policies were both rejected.
Full employment was a desirable goal, but if the price of full employment was State restriction on the freedom of businessmen to order their own affairs, then that freedom must take priority even if mass unemployment was the result.
They feared a post-war depression but wanted a return to pre-war policies.
This fear was shared by trade union leaders, who saw such things as restrictive practices (condemned in the White Paper) as a protection against unemployment.
They feared that if there was another depression the unions would be left defenceless if they abandoned traditional practices which preserved jobs in the short term.
The TUC's plans for the part of the economy which it did not want to nationalise were far removed from the anti-trust policy which the coalition was considering.
It too wanted statutory producer groups to protect jobs and profits.
There were elements in its thinking, however, which were akin to the Keynesians' views.
A national investment board should decide on the overall level of investment to preserve full employment, and deficit spending was advocated if it were necessary to prevent unemployment.
The TUC was not prepared to abandon its sectional interest if measures to secure full employment were thought to be contrary to the interests of the unions.
It went to the extent of stating, ‘…the TUC could not at any stage commit itself in advance to approve or acquiesce in the methods to be adopted to reach full employment simply because those methods can be shown to be well fitted and even necessary to the achievement of that objective…
‘. The unions and employers both wanted full employment, but on their own terms.
The conclusion must be that neither side of industry was prepared to give up the old ways of doing things to achieve full employment.
Even the government's limited plans for post-war intervention aroused their opposition and they were far more opposed to the far-reaching controls advocated by Beveridge.
The popular success of his report had made Beveridge's a household name.
Assumption C, ‘the maintenance of employment and the prevention of mass unemployment’, was the third of the Assumptions in his report.
A low level of unemployment would certainly make the finance of the social security scheme less perilous but there had been no organised lobbying for a full employment policy.
Beveridge had some contact with the Section, but it was not the Keynesians who changed Beveridge's mind about the practicability of providing full employment in time of peace.
It was the war itself which convinced him that economic planning by the State was necessary to prevent a return to mass unemployment.
His views on the kind of action which would be needed changed as he was educated in Keynesian economics after 1942.
His initial prescription was a cure based on State control of production and on detailed planning of labour.
Later he placed more emphasis on the indirect regulation of demand by State spending and tax policy, although his ideas still incorporated a detailed interventionist role for the State.31 In autumn 1943 he presented a paper at one of the Nuffield conferences organised by G. D. H. Cole to discuss post-war prospects.
He was  convinced that full employment could be achieved without requiring all the measures of State intervention which a year before (at a previous conference) he had argued were essential.
The economists advising Beveridge had converted him to their own views, which Beveridge described as ‘the socialisation of demand’.
The State should continue the control of interest rates, and to this should be added alterations in taxation, and policies to redistribute income in order to raise purchasing power and cut savings.
Private investment should be supplemented by State spending to ensure full employment of resources.
Nationalisation plans were tentative and not in the forefront of his measures to keep full employment.
The main influence on Beveridge's thinking on full employment policy came from Kaldor and his exposition of alternative fiscal policies.
He set out several routes by which the government could raise employment.
Some would involve deficit finance and an unbalanced budget; some would not.
Some routes would mean that the State's share of total expenditure would rise; some would not.
Using the information provided by the White Papers on National Income and Expenditure begun in 1941, Kaldor showed how each route to full employment would have worked before the war.
He demonstrated that a rise in State spending unaccompanied by an increase in taxes would have stimulated the economy towards full employment with the smallest change.
The fact that he could provide a series of alternative policies to achieve full employment led Beveridge to claim that he had avoided the controversy between socialism and capitalism as the only ways of operating a modern economy.
The desired levels of consumption and public and private investment would be achieved by taxation, increased State spending and the licensing of all private investment projects.
Unlike the employment White Paper, which concentrated on varying public investment to counterbalance changes in private investment and consumption, Beveridge wanted to regulate all three.
Beveridge became more sanguine about the level of full employment which could be achieved at the same time as he proposed less control by the government over the economy.
In December 1942 the Beveridge report considered that if not more than 8 ½%; of workers could not obtain jobs, this might be an acceptable level of post-war employment.
In the same month he told a Nuffield conference that his proposals should ensure that only 6% of the workforce were unemployed.
In his book he played with various figures — unemployment equal to vacancies, vacancies greater than the number of unemployed — and settled for 3%  unemployment (1% frictional, 1% seasonal and 1% for the unavoidable variations in foreign demand for British goods).
As we have seen, Beveridge claimed that ‘the socialisation of demand’ approach to full employment by-passed the controversy about socialism versus capitalism.
This was disingenuous, for the policy in practice would involve greater State intervention, and Beveridge certainly thought that the share of resources taken by the State would rise markedly.
His team went further in hoping that only a quarter of total investment would remain in private hands.
The programme Beveridge put forward in his book was in fact fundamentally radical.
It was published at the end of 1944 and had far less political impact than his report.
The government had published the employment White Paper, and the war was drawing to a close.
Conclusion
The conventional explanation of the coalition's commitment to provide ‘a high and stable level of employment after the war’ is that men in positions of power were convinced the aim could be achieved by a policy of managing effective demand, as advocated by Keynes and his supporters.
The publication of the General Theory before the war was part of Keynes's campaign to persuade his fellow economists that his proposition — that the trade cycle could be ironed out by the government adjusting the volume of demand in the economy — was correct.
When economists took up positions in government during the war, the theory goes, they acted as missionaries, converting politicians and civil servants alike to Keynesianism.
This view, which asserts the seminal role of ideas in history, derives from Keynes himself.
It is clearly attractive to those whose sense of professional worth is linked to a belief that ideas are important in determining events.
And in this case there is some evidence to support it.
Economists were recruited into Whitehall in large numbers.
They did exercise great influence.
Some of their ideas were shown to work; the counter-inflation programme (or at least that part of it which closed the inflationary gap from the fiscal end) was worked out by them and was a successful contrast to the experience of World War I. Yet by itself the explanation is inadequate.
Other ideas which circulated before the war, and which were adopted as policies during the war, did not gain acceptance as post-war aims — a national food and dietary policy for instance, or the State production of cheap, well made, utility goods.
Equally important in explaining the full employment promise is the public mood of economic and social radicalism which characterised Britain during the war years.
Every commentator of the period remarked upon it and many explanations were offered — the rationing of goods, which involved equality of sacrifice; the evacuation of the towns, which showed the middle class the relative deprivation of youngsters in the working-class urban areas; and so forth.
The war changed national life and individual ways of living, and so in a general sense it struck at the very roots of conservatism.
However, this explanation cannot be directly linked with the popular pressure for a post-war full employment policy.
There were two crucial links in the process.
The first was the experience of what had happened after World War I. The government's retreat from many areas of economic life had been followed by a prolonged depression.
There is nothing like the existence of a disastrous parallel for concentrating attention on alternative courses of action.
The ending of wartime controls over the economy when peace came was not a popular cry, whatever the Conservative Party and business interests may have thought.
The second was the rhythm of the war itself, which gave time for the detailed discussion of post-war policy.
The importance of the pattern of military events cannot be underestimated.
World War I had been a desperate see-saw battle up till its closing days.
World War II was very different.
After the battles of Midway, El Alamein and Stalingrad it was apparent that, to paraphrase Churchill, the ring was closing round the Axis and there could be only one outcome.
Britain's armed forces were not fully committed to the struggle until after D Day, and it is this gap in time between the turn of fortune and the invasion of Europe that saw the most intense interest in post-war planning and, in particular, full employment policy.
After June 1944 public interest was concentrated on the battlefront in France.
Hence in part at least the lack of interest in Beveridge's plans for full employment, which were published at the end of 1944.
It is therefore incorrect to attribute all the credit for the promise of full employment to the conversion of men of power and influence to Keynesian ideas.
Equally it is inadequate to say the promise was given solely as a response to the political pressure of wartime radicalism.
Full employment would never have occupied the attention of the government to the extent it did had there not been pressure to give both a commitment and some explanation of how it would be honoured.
On the other hand the unequivocal wording of the promise and the particular path of  demand management which was to be followed were indeed due to a growing intellectual conviction at the centre of the government machine that full employment need not involve root-and-branch change in the economy and society.
The role of Churchill in the development of full employment policy is greater than has generally been supposed.
It is true to say that he was almost exclusively concerned with military operations, and he spent much of his time in the latter stages of the war at a series of international conferences.
The evidence is strong, however, that he put his weight behind a full employment policy.
His advisers in S Branch provided an alternative source of economic advice to the permanent civil servants, and they were strong supporters of the Section's approach.
Churchill's decision to set up S Branch and his support for the economists within the Cabinet Office stemmed from an enduring distrust of official advice on economic policy which can be dated back to his unhappy time at the Treasury in 1924–29, particularly his much criticised decision, taken on official advice, to return to the gold standard in 1925.
The concept of altering demand to remain at full employment was one he did not find it difficult to grasp.
Several stories illustrate this.
A typical example is his remarks at the Cabinet meeting which approved the employment White Paper, when he suggested that at the beginning of a slump the Cabinet should declare a ‘Salute the stomach’ week along the lines of the wartime ‘Salute the soldier’weeks, but with the emphasis on spending rather than saving.
He would hold a series of great banquets at No. 10 as an example to the nation to spend its way out of depression.
At crucial moments Churchill swung his weight behind the Keynesian approach.
Initially reluctant to tackle the area of post-war policy (doubtless with thoughts of Lloyd George's empty words of a quarter-century previously), when he did so he insisted on a full-blooded promise over the opposition of many in his party and administration.
Since the coalition broke up after the defeat of Germany there is no way of knowing how the policy outlined in the full employment promise of May 1944 might have been implemented without the profound changes in the role of the State in peacetime economic life introduced by the post-war Labour government.
There is no knowing either whether the measures to prevent a depression would have worked in the years after the war, because the problems were inflation and a balance of payments deficit, just as the anti-Keynesians at the Treasury had predicted.
The full employment promise was never tested in those years.
It was given at a time of full employment and full employment persisted  into the post-war world.
Another generation found the promise tested, and found it wanting.
Between 1974 and 1976 the Labour government tried to operate a counter-cyclical policy to keep full employment in the face of the first world depression for forty years.
That policy collapsed in the face of determined financial opposition to the growth of public-sector borrowing and a precipitous decline in the exchange rate.
Both those obstacles had been foreseen by the anti-Keynesians at the Treasury thirty years before.
The sterling crisis was a natural consequence of trying to maintain domestic demand without import controls; the investors' strike was due to unease about the social changes, including the effects of rapid inflation, which it was feared would result from the government's restoration of full employment.
The consensus on full employment lasted as long as measures to achieve full employment involved only marginal changes to society.
When the necessary changes became radical the consensus disappeared.
In this sense the wartime consensus was an illusion based on the extrapolation of wartime solidarity into peacetime and on the fact that all that was required was the maintenance of full employment, not its creation anew.
Since that period government has retreated from the promise of full employment.
Did the belief in the effectiveness of that promise affect Britain during the era of full employment?
It is arguable that it did.
The demand management policies by which it was to be achieved seemed to offer a progressive alternative to socialism by providing the economic background which would allow measures of social betterment to be carried out without socialist control of the economy.
Thus it provided an underpinning for the social democratic viewpoint in political life.
Next, the implication that full employment could be achieved by budget deficits encouraged the separation of decisions to spend from decisions to tax, and there has been a tendency for the former to grow faster than the latter.
The notion that spending and taxation would be balanced over some notional trade cycle was never realistic politics.
The most interesting question of all can never be effectively answered.
Was the uninterrupted growth and full employment of the '50s and '60s partly due to a belief (which can be traced back to World War II) that demand management would prevent mass unemployment if it ever showed signs of recurring?
In retrospect it seems remarkable that economic policy should have paid lip service for so long to an untested hypothesis.
Deborah Thom
The 1944 Education Act: the ‘art of the possible’?
R. A. Butler believed the Education Act that was introduced and passed during his tenure as President of the Board of Education was a major change, in the direction of making Britain educationally ‘one nation, not two’.
In 1945 his leading civil servant, Sir Maurice Holmes, took a much less dramatic (and optimistic) view.
I take it that it was the clear intention of Parliament (certainly it's in line with my own inclination) that the net of secondary education should be cast more widely into the lower income scales; that class-distinction should be tempered and blurred throughout the educational field, and that merit — whatever that may be — should be the test, rather than money or social background, of a person's fitness to receive an expensive secondary education.
It was not the intention, of course, that all of this should come to pass at one stroke, nor is it clear that it can ever wholly come to pass.
Nevertheless, the goal is further ‘democratisation’(is there a decent word for this?) whether the goal is a worthy one or not this is of course arguable — we are bound to proceed towards it
How was it that secondary education for all, the organising impulse behind the 1944 Act, should have been interpreted in so restricted a way?
Why did the manner of its interpretation mirror the existing grammar school education of 20% of twelve-year-olds rather than the needs of the rest, the majority?
How much was changed by the Act?
Arthur Marwick has argued that ‘vested interests prepared to frustrate other social reforms accepted the need for educational reform’.
I want to argue that Holmes was right — that the Act created little that was new; it refined an existing, highly meritocratic system.
Vested interests shaped the reform.
This system was already elaborated in pre-war policy documents and substantially accepted by policy-makers The first years of war extended the pre-war system as constraints on expenditure were removed.
They also ensured that local authorities would not, and could  not, create new administrative systems for education in the post-war period.
Wallace summarises the Act as:
no more than the embodiment of administrative arrangements which would give order to a confused system and some of which had been recommended and accepted as desirable during the previous two decades.
In order to demonstrate this thesis I shall look at the changes in the examination filter that separated children at the age of eleven into different types of secondary education — the ‘eleven-plus’.
This, if anything, was an explicit embodiment of the notion of merit and that notion of educational distinction which Butler saw replacing class distinction.
It was at the local level — where educational policy was put into organisational shape — that change actually took place.
The change that occurred was mostly before the Act, either despite the war or hindered by war conditions.
The educational aspects of social change can be assessed only by looking at the local education authorities.
They administered education in conformity with the law and the controls on grants for special places but they had considerable autonomy within those constraints.
The pre-war situation
In 1938, when the Spens report elaborated the demands for reform which had been expressed throughout the interwar years, the educational system was clearly having undesirable social effects.
Secondary education, mainly in schools now known as grammar schools, was available nationally for 20% of children over the age of eleven, with pronounced regional variations.
In some areas technical and central schools also provided for children who stayed on beyond the leaving age of fourteen.
The rest were educated from five until fourteen in elementary schools.
Elementary schools were free and governed under one set of regulations.
Secondary schools charged fees and were governed by another.
Teachers in elementary schools were trained specifically to teach in them, secondary school teachers were mostly graduates and their wages and social standing were much higher than their elementary colleagues'.
During the 1930s more and more areas allocated children to secondary education entirely by examination in which the places in secondary schools were 100% ‘special places’, in an attempt to widen the social range of secondary schooling.
Fees were assessed by a means-tested scale, approved by central government, which meant that children of large, poor families paid none.
To win a special place a child had to demonstrate ‘ability to profit’ from secondary education.
Profit was measured broadly by success in the matriculation examination, the school certificate.
Parents of children who qualified for secondary education signed an undertaking that the child would complete the course, and they could be fined if they failed to keep their word.
Profit was also demonstrated by worldly success after school, since an elementary education was a major barrier if a young person wanted any job of middle-class status or rewards.
The separation of children at eleven was a classification system that perpetuated social class division; it was also an educational typology.
However poor, a child who passed the hurdle of the special place examination would get an education which would open up university or further training and, if not that, a white-collar, clean, respectable job — and in many cases an allowance to help with his or her maintenance.
So the theory went, and the ideology of an education available to talent was sustained by new developments in psychometry which made the notion of ability one much easier to substantiate.
The ideology of merit as the criterion of access to secondary education and its subsequent social and economic rewards was well entrenched by the time of the outbreak of war, as were the mechanics of separation into two distinct types of education.
Dr Gillian Sutherland's book Ability, Merit and Measurement has shown how testing in some ways preceded theoretical elaborations of the intelligence quotient — and how this was established by the time of the Spens report of 1938.
The ideology of merit in the inter-war years
The ideology of the educational system which had gained most ground by 1944 was the notion of merit.
Godfrey Thomson, who had most effectively established intelligence tests as a means of identifying children with potential for a grammar school education through Moray House tests, saw his life's work as establishing equality of access to further education for all children.
He had been most concerned with the inequality of provision between rural and urban areas which made tests of attainment a massive handicap for rural or impoverished urban children.
Tawney perceived the same problem throughout his career of commentary on the education system.
His attempts to reform it were guided by the insights of close collaborators from within the educational system, in particular William Brockington, Chief Education Officer of Leicestershire, and Lady Simon, of the Manchester Education  Committee.
Both had been involved in the discussion of policy of the Hadow report On the Education of the Adolescent of 1926 and the Spens report of 1938.
Both documents shared the same basic principles: education should divide at eleven; it should be free in both primary and secondary stages; and that the secondary stage should reflect the variety of abilities and aptitudes of the adolescent in institutional form.
Tawney can-be said to have both formulated Labour Party education policy by writing in 1922 the key document, Secondary Education for All, and to have reflected the demands of successive conferences for educational reform — particularly for the secondary age group.
His writing both expressed and shaped the ‘secondary education’ that was demanded.
Most ‘educationists’ subscribed to the same principle, although a few teachers in the National Association of Labour Teachers and the TUC had begun to look beyond ‘equality of opportunity’to equality of provision.
There was a tension in Tawney's thought between the demands of the exceptional, the wasted talents of children denied access to secondary education by poverty and lack of provision, and the demands and needs of the average, who had no secondary education at all, but subsisted on the same educational diet throughout their school career.
By the late 1930s the argument had swung emphatically towards the first of these two aspects of the idea.
Unless a society is to utilise only a fraction of the intelligence at its disposal it must obviously in one way or another make sufficient provision for vertical mobility to ensure that capacity passes, unimpeded by vulgar irrelevancies of class or income to the type of education fitted to develop it.
Tawney wrote of the great waste of ‘exceptional talent, which is sterilised for want of educational opportunities’.
The biologised vocabulary of this description is part of the explanation for increased concern over wastage of talent.
Others shared this concern and used similar terms in the late 1930s.
The work of the Social Biology Unit under Lancelot Hogben at the LSE (published mainly in Political Arithmetic) sustained a powerful, bleak argument based on both the presumed inexorable decline of population in Britain and the associated decline and waste of national intelligence.
12 Grace Leybourne buttressed such arguments in Education and the Birth Rate by demonstrating that the middle classes and the intelligent were paying for the high costs of education by family limitation at the dysgenic expense of the national interest.
Olive Maguiness argued that the scholarship system itself was dysgenic because of its effects on social  mobility; she wrote that the bright members of the working class were removed from their environment, which encouraged fertility, and encouraged to defer child-bearing in favour of career.
The effect of such formulations on those who enacted education policy is difficult to estimate.
Individual authors could write on the decline of national intelligence but public debate did not necessarily lead to action.
Pressure groups also raised the issue.
The Eugenics Society, with about 800 fellows and members in 1938–39, was deeply concerned, and had moved to the left on the issue of educational reform as a result.
J. B. S. Haldane argued in 1938, ‘We may, I think, if the existing differences in fertility of social class continue, expect a slow decline of perhaps 1 or 2 per cent per generation in the mean intelligence quotient of the country’.
He was doing so in a book which, in the main, attacked eugenics.
The Titmusses quoted this gloomy conclusion in Parents Revolt.
They argued that the dysgenic effects were not as great as this figure, since the difference in intelligence between social classes was not that great, but they accepted the logic of an argument based on differential fertility by social class.
Titmuss was funded by the Eugenics Society as Secretary of the Population Investigation Committee and was himself a leading member of the society.
He can be seen as representative of the pre-war analysis of social problem in biological, hereditarian terms although he was firmly on the dominant environmentalist wing of the Eugenics Society itself.
Local education officers and civil servants rarely used the biologised terms of debate common within the Eugenics Society or the wider, scientific community.
They did, however, cite the arguments of those who did.
The Labour Party and the Fabian Society both published pamphlets on educational reform which acknowledged this strand of thought while not totally accepting it.
They referred to ‘equality of opportunity’ tout court or of the waste of talent.
The professional press, on the other hand, was specifically concerned with the question.
The British Journal of Educational Psychology published an article on the negative correlation between fertility and intelligence by Gerald O'Hanlon in 1940 and an attack by Charlotte Fleming on the assumption that socio-economic level and intelligence were highly related in 1943 The Times Educational Supplement reviewed Maguiness's book Environment and Heredity without querying the causal assumption that intelligence was mainly inherited.
Cyril Burt published in 1943 and 1944 his two most fraudulent pieces  demonstrating a link between heredity and social class with intelligence as the major factor in the link.
These pieces did not go unchallenged.
The challenge was against the conclusion he drew — not against his hereditarian assumptions or his statistical expertise.
Both appeared in the technical educational psychology press, which was read by some teachers; both were cited in the journals which were read by most teachers — the TES and the journal of the Association of Education Committees, Education.
Such evidence is negative.
Absence of comment does not equal approval.
I would argue though that publication of such material when other writers could not get published is an indication of the bounds of the acceptable in public debate.
The question of the birth rate was to be more crucial in the years after the Education Act, in the debates around the Royal Commission on Population, which reported in 1948–49, but the existence of the commission itself from 1943 demonstrates public and official concern with such ideas in the first few years of the war.
The discussion of national intelligence and the psychologists' debates over it did not initiate the idea of a system of education specifically designed to foster talent, to prevent waste of intelligence as a national resource.
That system had been intended for some time.
But the discussion did give added weight to the demand for reform at a time when concepts of national interest were more frequently deployed — wartime.
Reform of ‘special places’ and equality of opportunity
Contemporaries all agreed that there must be radical change in the ‘special place’ examination.
Tawney called it ‘a barbarity’, ‘an abomination’ and insisted that it should go.
Professor C. W. Valentine of Birmingham, when reviewing a study of the system in the West Riding of Yorkshire, talked of the undesirable backwash effect of the examination, and recommended an intelligence test instead because of its ‘reliability and speed of marking’.
The Times Educational Supplement applauded the increased use of intelligence tests and deplored the existing exams: ‘Some day our successors may come to marvel at the degree of assurance which leads us to think that ability to profit can be predicted thus.
There was little public knowledge of the extent to which intelligence tests had already become part of the machinery of secondary selection by 1940, nor how far their use was tied in with that of standardised tests of attainment in English and arithmetic, which were  provided, marked and correlated by the same person or organisation.
English pragmatism had made it possible for many educational administrators to use an intelligence test in addition to examinations of attainment, as a refinement of their selection process.
This proceeding ignored the current theory that intelligence was independent of social background.
By 1940 at least sixty-eight local authorities were already using some sort of intelligence test; about half these also used standardised attainment tests.
Some forty local authorities in England had used tests from Moray House, which was the main agency for group tests.
It was headed by Professor Godfrey Thomson and already produced tests which correlated very highly with secondary school success.
Moray House advocated using tests for selection, testing all children at eleven, and making adjustments for age and sex to achieve even-handed distribution of secondary school places.
The notion of a career freely open to all talents was thus considerably stimulated by the provision of a fair, visibly fair, method of allocation.
The demand to separate out tests of intelligence from tests of attainment was one based on a simple belief — that, in the words of Cyril Burt, ‘By intelligence is meant inborn, general intellectual ability’.
The Mass-Observation reports of 1942 and 1944 indicate one group of well informed people who accepted this notion of intelligence.
The panel of observers were asked their desires for educational reform.
Their answers showed an ‘unprecedented unanimity’.
Seventy-one per cent of respondents wrote and said that the change they would most like to see was ‘equality of opportunity’.
This was interpreted variously but making secondary education free, providing better facilities and raising the school leaving age were seen as the most obvious means to that end.
They also saw the best means of placing children in secondary education as tests of ability, usually described as intelligence tests.
This belief in the capacity of intelligence tests to measure the entire child population was echoed by the rarer suggestion that educational psychologists should play a greater part in the allocation process.
Many quoted approvingly the popular metonymic slogan that ‘the sons of duke and dustman should sit side by side’, demonstrating a romanticism about class relations very common in Reconstruction rhetoric.
The intelligence test was seen as the direct means of overcoming class difference in access to schooling — although this remained a means of social reform, not reform itself.
The work of educational psychologists helped to ratify the use of tests, the technical solution, as a key component in educational reform, by altering the special place exam.
In 1942 the Scottish Council for Research  in Education published the conclusions of McClelland's study of selection procedures for secondary education.
This survey demonstrated that the best single predictor was an intelligence test, but the best compound one was a battery of tests (the ‘best’ meaning, in this context, the method that correlated most directly with success in secondary school certificate exams).
The survey was widely reviewed and accepted as authoritative.
It allayed doubts about the technique and its freedom from cultural determinants that were already being expressed.
One correspondent to the TES wrote that what was being measured was too simple to determine a child's future.
The four NUT representatives who spoke to the Norwood committee in 1943 denounced tests; their executive committee demanded that their use ‘should not result in children with the highest intelligence being allocated to any one type of secondary school’.
A few observers had already commented on the effectiveness of coaching for tests, a factor which was to lead to the first serious public disquiet over tests as measurement of innate, unalterable and asocial ability — although such comments were not yet thoroughly substantiated.
These technical, professional discussions had already shaped the direction of change before the Act was drafted, in and out of war.
War conditions added to the general impetus for change but at the same time they also inhibited change.
War and evacuation, 1939–42
The immediate impact of war on the educational system was to expose the disparities of secondary provision between local authorities.
Several London children who had been allocated to secondary education in a grammar or central school found, after they were evacuated, that they were denied it by the absence of such provision in their reception area.
(The children of foreigners, particularly from ‘enemy’ countries, got a nasty response from some local authorities.)
Another disparity was the different levels of income used in means tests for ‘special places’; parents could move house (as they were more likely to in war) and suddenly find themselves liable for greatly increased fees.
Rising levels of income meant that some ungenerous authorities were taking fees from almost all parents of secondary school children.
Surrey, for example, was described as ‘not sufficiently generous’ when it raised the income scale to allow for the rise in wages to match the cost of living.
The official of the Board concerned, G. G. Williams, sounded almost regretful when he said, ‘It is not our practice to interfere with an Authority's discretion  when the scales are not over-generous in our opinion’.
It remained the case that the Board would not encourage more spending.
War also had a clear effect on the perceptions of the child population by professionals.
In theory evacuation turned the child population over to the State — although, in practice, however much the TES called for it, government did not make evacuation compulsory.
Evacuation, Cyril Burt argued, presented an ‘opportunity for the teacher…
A vast amount of information could be collected about the instinctive and emotional development of the normal child and its relation to his intellectual growth and interests’.
In a sense the normal child was turned into a problem by the process of evacuation.
Child society was thrown open to public scrutiny by the detachment of so many children from their family of birth.
The effects of evacuation were perceived in terms of social pathology, so that although evacuation was pronounced less harmful than had been feared the effect of the analysis was to see the normal development of children as problematic, and to emphasise the compensatory role of agencies outside the family — school and its directing bodies in particular.
Paradoxically, though, schools themselves were not always treated carefully.
The most extreme case was the school in Norfolk which was divided into twenty-three parts.
Schools also found themselves expropriated by the ARP or other military or civil defence organisations.
Changes in the function of the school and the home encouraged the expansion of child guidance and thence the educational psychology profession.
‘War put child guidance on the map’, wrote Doris Wills — but it also put educational psychologists on the map, accentuated their claim to a permanent place in the education system as mediators between society and the educators.
At the same time war focused attention on schooling.
Changes occurred as a by-product of war emergency which greatly affected people's view of the secondary selection system.
The first change was in the means test itself.
Income levels rose, as did prices.
Fixed scales for the rate at which fees would be paid excluded hardly anyone; as a result parents who were comparatively poor suddenly found themselves liable for fees.
The local authorities tended to be more generous in their revision than the Board desired but most of the arrangements agreed showed that the authority usually got its way.
If it did not, it could always argue that many more children would be withdrawn from school altogether.
Many authorities were making a conscious effort to expand the social group from which their secondary pupils were drawn.
There  continued, then, to be systematic efforts to standardise examination procedure, to apply it to the whole age group, and to make it more equitable.
The role of the inspectorate
The inspectorate, who came into most frequent contact with the diversities of local procedures, were consistently interested in ‘modernising’ the selection system, and in some ways they were the single group most responsible for altering local authority activities.
Some of them obviously exceeded their duties in their zeal for examination improvement, as a memo of December 1942 makes clear: These examinations are to be regarded as a domestic affair of the Local Education Authorities for the conduct of which no responsibility must rest upon Inspectors…
If an inspector was consulted
on the value of intelligence tests or of the reliability of certain statistical devices used in these examinations, there is no reason why he should not give his views, bur he will no doubt make it clear how far the views are personal to himself.
33
And, the memo went on, it was his duty to make representations about the conduct of the exam ‘where that leaves something to be desired’.
An example of such pressure involving an attempt to change an inequitable system that appears to bear no relation to wartime was on the Isle of Ely.
Here its own Examination Board had recommended dropping dictation in the exam but the Education Committee ‘missed the point’ and persisted in keeping it.
By 1941 the arguments of some of its own members and the increasingly acerbic comments of the inspectorate succeeded, and the committee abandoned dictation.
It then accepted a new structure in which a minimum standard of English and arithmetic qualified a child to go on to an intelligence test to measure its ‘capacity’.
4– The inspectors could encourage change but not enforce it — central bodies had no direct power over secondary selection.
Local authority initiatives
In the three years 1940 43 twenty-four local authorities are recorded in the press as altering their examination procedures.45 Several more did so without informing the press, as their minutes show.
Such alterations ranged from the introduction of record cards with ‘unique’ The 1944 Education Act assessment of character in Sheffield to the attempt to reduce the age-range of candidates in Caernarvonshire to those between the ages of ten and thirteen.
Such changes were frequently described as implementing Hadow.
In so far as they established the break at eleven years of age and encouraged a different curriculum from that of the elementary school the description was apt, but these changes also refined the older system of sponsored mobility for a few.
Several authorities raised the number of special places (accessible by open competition) and thus reduced the number of fee-payers.
They raised them to 100% so that all secondary education was to be carried out on selection by merit.47
Several authorities increased their maintenance allowances, paid to the children of very poor families to stay on at secondary school, –5 to compensate for the failure to raise the school leaving age to fifteen, scheduled to take place in 1939, but held back by the war.
The result was to move towards increasing the secondary school population, especially from the poor but intelligent children kept out by existing provision.
There were other ways in which the years 1938–43 can be seen as a continuum in which reforming hopes of the interwar years no longer had to be deferred.
For example, ten new schools were opened by various local authorities in 1938–39 as barriers against substantial expenditure were lifted.
In the localities innovation often preceded the 1944 Act, because it was innovation created by the conclusions of the Hadow committee of 1926 rather than a novel revision of the system.
Change also occurred because of temporary exigencies of wartime administration.
Homogeneity increased.
Hertfordshire, for example, wished to examine all eleven-year-olds in its area.
They ‘borrowed’ Essex's exam on payment of a small fee.
The number of authorities using Moray House tests rose dramatically in 1941 and 1942.
They were already validated and could be bought as a package.
This was probably cheaper than setting or marking exams locally or than employing an individual solely for the purpose.
Nationally the major figures in educational policy were not much inclined to innovate.
They had been sitting together at the top of their organisations throughout the years of cut-backs.
The ‘friendly and conspiratorial triumvirate’ of Sir Maurice Holmes, Sir Percival Sharp and Sir Fred Mander had held their respective positions at the Board of Education, the AEC and the NUT since 1936, 1925 and 1931.
Sharp fulminated against any notion of equality of opportunity while the financial disparities between authorities remained, but his writing on  the subject leads one to suspect that he viewed it as a ‘shibboleth’ in more ways than financial ones.
It was in the localities that the war stimulated innovation in classroom practice, but such innovation was usually makeshift, not prefigurative, and much of it was for the duration only.
Nationally the war did lead to one innovation when the government created an imaginative attempt to cope with teacher shortage in the Emergency Training Service, which trained teachers without academic qualifications after national service.
This did not get under way until 1943, took in the first students in 1944 and produced its first teachers in 1946.
Little was done, or could have been done under the imperatives of war needs as interpreted at the time, to close down the schools on the Black List, long overdue for closure and replacement, or to rebuild inner-city schools.
Problems such as overcrowded classrooms became newly visible both in debates over reconstruction and evacuation and in the concern with ‘the state of the nation’ as expressed in fears for ‘the visible embodiments of posterity’, the nation's children.
The construction of the Act
As The Times Educational Supplement argued in suggesting the outlines of educational reform:
The basis of that conception must be that citizenship begins at twenty-one; that up to that age all boys and girls are wards of the State and are to be regarded as in a state of tutelage; and that during these twenty-one years no effort must be spared to give each one according to his capacities, and limited by no other considerations, the fullest opportunity to develop every innate power.
Only thus can we hope to produce a noble race.
Earlier in the same piece the editor had pointed out that the education system had been ‘The most effective safeguard of the social stratification we all in our heart of hearts bow down and worship’.
The plans for reform in the Board of Education Green Book, the White Paper and the Bill as eventually published showed increasingly less sign of any such holistic enterprise — and ensured that social stratification remained safe within the educational system.
Built into it were the notions of merit as a guiding principle, and, despite all the aspirations of reformers, examinations and their effects continued to shape the structure of English education.
It was the beginnings of change in some local authorities and the pressure from the left that created the move to reform within the Board  of Education.
The Board began to discuss changes during Herwald Ramsbotham's tenure as president; the intention was explicitly to pre-empt more radical change.
Holmes said, ‘I think this is a matter on which we should lead rather than follow’.
R. S. Wood argued that ‘Mean and meagre planning will be disregarded and officials’ views discounted, and others will be asked to design the New Jerusalem'.
He acknowledged that ‘the war is now moving us more and more in the direction of Labour's ideas and ‘ideals’ '.
Several of the Board's leading civil servants had been pressing for more equality in provision.
Cleary argued forcefully for his view of war as an agent of democratisation:
Modern large-scale war, and particularly a ‘total’ war of democracy against dictatorship, emphasises the essential unity of the nation, the common interests of all its members and the need for making a reality of the democratic system which we profess to be defending.
The civil servants who drafted the first version of the Bill, the Green Book, were not united on any issue but the simple one that there needed to be reform at all.
In particular they battled over the key question for secondary education — the age of transfer and the nature of secondary school organisation.
Both Wallace and Gosden have shown how the interests of existing secondary education were maintained at the Board, ‘in the national interest’, against the demand for multilateral schooling, which came from those most concerned with the education of the majority of eleven-to-fourteen-year-olds in the elementary and technical sections, as they were then called.
The existing age of transfer was to be kept at eleven to keep the time in grammar school to at least four years, since the ‘new’ school leaving age was to be fifteen.
R. A. Butler, who took over at the Board in 1941, warned about this major point.
He minuted in October 1942:
I have for long been concerned to provide an opportunity for children to revise their choice of school between the ages of 11 and 13.
That is to say I am not satisfied that the age of 11 is the one and ideal age at which children should decide upon their future lives.
When he was told that transfer between schools would be possible, and that schools would be encouraged to have a common but diverse curriculum for all eleven-to-thirteen-year-olds, Butler said that he felt ‘much comforted’.
The process of designing the Act took nearly two years; Butler took a further year to steer it through Parliament.
R. G. Wallace and Kevin Jeffereys have disagreed about the relative responsibilities of politicians  — R. A. Butler and J. Chuter Ede — and their civil servants for the reforming intentions of the Act.
My argument here is not on that issue, since the focus of their attention was on Parliament and parliamentary procedure and I want to introduce the other side of reform into the debate — where it has received insufficient attention.
But it does seem to be the case that contemporary interest and the comments of historians have been concentrated in this way partly because of the shortage of public comment in the war on such issues.
War has had a searchlight effect on historians as well as contemporaries, rendering the area outside the beam yet more obscure.
Of course the debate in government and Parliament was crucial but it was not the only way in which the educational reform was tested at the time nor the only way to assess it later.
In the country at large there was some pronounced hostility but it came mainly from one quarter and on one issue — churchmen and the religious settlement.
This was largely unexpected by civil servants at the Board, though not by Churchill, but it meant that the educational problems of an extension and perpetuation of the existing system were minimised.
The White Paper
Tawney described the White Paper of 1943, On Educational Reconstruction, as:
a programme of reconstruction which if applied in practice would create an educational edifice not unworthy of the British people…
That programme is a synthesis.
Of the items contained in it, few are novel and some will be criticised…
The nation will not easily forgive any group or party which deprives the rising generation of the brighter future promised by the measure outlined by Mr Butler.
He felt it necessary to sound the warning bell against sectionalism to preserve the reform at all.
Contemporaries feared a repetition of 1918, when post-war educational reform (the Fisher Act) had been stopped by depression and government limits on spending.
They feared the abandoning of the complete package for the sake of religious interests.
So the plan was discussed and accepted as a whole; its weaknesses as innovative legislation thus went unchallenged.
The other group worried by the White Paper was the local authorities.
They were to be cut.
All Part III authorities (who dealt only with elementary education) were to go.
The Association of Education Committees would lose, at a stroke, half its members and most of its  political clout, since the remaining authorities — the municipal boroughs and the counties — already had associations which dealt with education.
They were also to be subject to greater control by central government, since the Minister, as the President of the Board was to become, could intervene if an authority was not providing an education ‘appropriate to the age, ability and aptitude of the child’.
Parental wishes were also to be taken into account, though what that meant was unclear.
Sir Percival Sharp fought for the AEC mainly on the first issue — but could find no support — so that the second, the potential extension of the power of central government, went largely unchallenged.
Sharp commented frequently, with hostility, on government's novel espousal of ‘equality of opportunity’ in the absence of any equality of treatment of local authorities.
The religious issue was solved after difficult negotiations.
Butler won over his own party and a majority of Labour and Liberal MPs by shrewd use of Archbishop Temple's support for the ‘agreed’ syllabus.
This meant that the Churches could allow some of their schools to become nondenominational in exchange for financial support of the rest and an agreed minimum of Christian instruction in all schools.
The main opposition came from Roman Catholics, who organised substantial vocal heckling groups at public meetings, and several MPs who battled over the issue inside Parliament.
Political controversy on this issue meant advocates of radical reform of internal school organisation were marginalised by the public discussion.
Chuter-Ede advocated ‘no rocking the boat’; as deputy to the President at the Board of Education he was heeded by Labour colleagues who wanted a systematic change.
The Act in practice
The Bill passed into law in 1944.
The immediate effect was to make local authorities examine their existing provision.
All had to prepare a Development Plan describing five years' improvement to bring about secondary education for all.
At the same time existing children of eleven to fourteen had to be assessed for their placing in secondary education.
The instruments already used for the special place exam were the easiest to adopt, and existing eleven-to-fourteen-year-olds took the exam for reallocation.
There were few transfers as a result, since the exam used had already segregated them.
As later research was to show, the quality of schooling between eleven and fourteen had a pronounced effect on all measures, including the intelligence quotient.
The one factor which  might have altered this made little difference.
In an attempt to make good the teacher shortage schoolchildren were encouraged to stay on at school to do teacher training by circular No. 1654 in 1947.
LEAs were allowed to open special classes or put these children into grammar schools.
The result was that the existing grammar-secondary modern division was further embedded.
Short-term emergency measures perpetuated a division along social grounds that inhibited long-term change.
In very few education committees did the passing of the Act cause any change in the selection process at all; in many the change was cosmetic.
Yet this change did not require much expenditure or creative thought allocation as a concept could have been deployed, rather than selection.
The novel techniques that had appeared represented a refinement of existing procedures, in particular the development of school record cards.
The new Foundation for Educational Research (later the National Foundation, NFER) saw the development of record cards as one of their first tasks.
Kent already used one and it improved this, which in turn was used as the model by the NFER.
In fact the extension of record cards did not make an alternative, an allocation system, but a more accurate selection system.
They were mostly used to discriminate between doubtful grammar school entrants.
Lord Alexander says now that the Development Plans were never taken seriously, that it was then thought ‘a nonsense’ to try to project five years ahead.
They were variously dealt with.
The form used was complicated but could not compensate for the deficiencies of information about a population that was still highly mobile and still undergoing the stresses of war.
Projections of secondary school population, let alone the entire existing school population, were often arbitrary.
Some authorities wanted to develop new forms of secondary education.
Middlesex was not allowed to build or even organise multilateral schools because they would be too large if ‘appropriate’ education was provided.
Anglesey on the other hand could, since comprehensive schools were the easiest solution to rural isolation and the lack of any funding for new buildings.
Authorities were refused the chance a few wanted to take — to interpret ‘education appropriate to age, ability and aptitude’ as meaning comprehensive, or multilateral, education in which all children attended the same school from eleven onwards.
LEAs could do this only if they had dispersed populations.
Government's new power was limited to restraint upon LEA innovation.
It did not enforce innovation at all.
The tripartite model of grammar, technical and modern education was more explicit in the circular which interpreted the Act — circular No.  144.
Development plans which did not follow this model were rejected.
Some authorities already provided technical education.
More did not — but included provision for it in the other types of school.
Local authorities had almost completely ignored the Norwood report of 1943.
This had argued, dogmatically and with no scientific evidence, that there were three types of child mind — the academic, the practical, and the non-verbal — which was, as contemporaries pointed out, happily coincident with existing types of school.
The majority of LEAs did not accept that a clearly defined technical ability could be clearly identified at the age of eleven.
Only W. P. Alexander, no longer practising as a psychologist in 1945, believed tests could identify it.
Even those who thought that spatial perception would stand in for technical ability at age thirteen felt that the match between the specific ability and general intelligence was too close to allow it to generate a specialised educational form.
The result was that the social results of different forms of education perpetuated the hierarchy of demand — grammar schools first, technical second and secondary modern for the rest.
The belief of the NUT that intelligence tests would be used to grade pupils on one scale rather than place them on a set of scales was amply vindicated.
Selection for technical education continued to take place, generally at thirteen, but it tended to reflect existing patterns set by two years of secondary schooling so that grammar school successes were unlikely to change in mid-stream.
Selection in the localities
In 1947 the NUT conducted a survey of local authorities' selection procedures.
The results were published in 1949 and showed an increasing homogeneity of practice.
Of the 106 authorities who responded and could be used for analysis, seventy-eight were described as using some form of standardised intelligence test and nearly all were using examination procedures to measure attainment in English and arithmetic, though the variety of standard, ‘tried out’ and internal tests was wider.
Thirteen were recorded as not using an intelligence test as a determinant, though some of these used one in a few individual cases or as a qualifier.
There was as yet no uniformity of practice among local authorities, who continued to rely on a wide variety of examining methods, though more had turned to external test agencies — organisations or examiners — than in the past.
This survey also showed an intention to change which reflected the intensity of public scrutiny in the period after the Act.
The other innovation of the early 1940s had not been generally  adopted.
School records or reports were in use in thirty-two authorities, with thirty-nine more hoping to introduce them soon.
Yet what this meant in practice varied greatly.
Some used complicated test systems.
Head teachers often filled them in and were asked to estimate intelligence, attainment or special abilities using tests or their own judgement.
They were also asked to assess ‘home environment and attitude’ in thirty-one authorities, ‘sociability’and ‘conduct and moral character’in twelve, co-operation in eleven, and in one each imagination, personal habits and personal appearance.
What it meant to move towards school records could be to increase the subjective, teacher-controlled element in selection or to diminish the relative effects of differences between teachers or schools — it was never an unambiguous change.
As intelligence tests had not superseded the older attainments tests, so school records did not supersede the test battery.
The ‘eleven-plus’ of the period after the 1944 Act was the ‘special places examination’of advanced LEAs before the war, used by more authorities.
It is not clear why the motives of the White Paper of 1943, the intentions of the inspectorate and the hopes of educational reformers were so little heeded in the specific detail of selection.
The section of the White Paper which specified ‘school records, supplemented if necessary by intelligence tests’ was dropped from the Bill without any discussion.
The obvious explanation is that the finer points of selection were to be left to the LEAs as compensation for loss of power, because central direction was unnecessary.
The movement towards meritocracy was not complete.
The rhetoric of equal opportunity could not finally win over the entrenched interests in a broad-meshed filter, a crude sieve for the child population.
The single most important move of the 1938–50 period was the extension of selection to the entire age group, and the 1944 Act actually made this more commonplace, but it did not create the move — only forty-three LEAs, less than half, considered the whole group throughout the selection process, another forty LEAs qualified children by excluding those who did badly in a first exam as part of the selection procedure.
The pattern was clearly set by which the extension of secondary education, because it was free, would increase the pressure effect of the exam whatever form it took.
Lessons in ‘intelligence’ were added in many junior schools to the existing basics of English and arithmetic.
In 1947, when the school leaving age rose to fifteen after a battle in Cabinet, the pressures on the junior school rose further, since the difference between grammar schools and others was diminished, as there was only one year between them, not two.
Many  local authorities used the ‘direct grant’ schools (which took in at least 25% of their children by merit from maintained primary schools and had fee-payers as well) as the top rung of their local educational ladder.
These schools now provided a free alternative to expensive private education — so that the number of middle-class children in them rose.
The number of working-class children also rose, but the relative proportions remained approximately the same.
Halsey, Heath and Ridge have argued persuasively that the post-war education system's achievements never did match up to the meritocratic ideals of its creators.
In so far as progress towards meritocracy was slow involving a gentle democratisation, as Holmes had argued — this was correct, but another factor must lie in the unmeritocratic aspirations of the local authorities, who administered the educational change.
Local authorities' ideology of education varied, and was not always consistent within the LEA.
Some leading figures were anti-meritocratic, like Alderman Walter Hyman, chairman of the West Riding Education Committee, and his education officer, Alexander Clegg.
Clegg consulted four psychologists on the feasibility of selection for technical education at eleven (G. B. Jeffrey, Charlotte Fleming, Godfrey Thomson and Cyril Burt), and their advice was so clearly in support of his belief that it was not possible that he refused to select for it at all.
Instead he moved slowly towards a system which allocated by ranking children by school record, then ranking schools rather than subjecting pupils to a once-and-for-all examination, eventually towards non-selective education altogether.
Middlesex, Southend on Sea and London all intended comprehensive schooling — London eventually acquired a modified version of it.
Some were extremely meritocratic.
In Sheffield there had been an attempt to rank grammar schools, and W. P. Alexander, the education officer, had argued then, and after 1945 as secretary of the AEC, for selection of 5% at the top, not 20%. 83 In practice, local authorities were constrained in the crucial years 1944–50 by existing buildings, shortage of funds for new ones and by existing teaching staff from making substantial innovations in their arrangements at all.
Classrooms remained obstinately limited by size and equipment to specific purposes.
Government grants were available at 55% of expenditure for capital projects but austerity measures after 1946 under successive Labour Ministers ensured that those were limited.
LEAs were explicitly forbidden to use them to reorganise schools.
Lack of funds is only part of the answer in explaining the ad hoc nature of change and the limited extent of it.
If people genuinely wanted social change from the  educational system (and they did), they generally wanted it in familiar guise.
For a few years the child population remained at pre-war size and existing facilities could match demand.
By the time post-war expansion affected secondary schooling the adjustments necessary to meet the demands of central and local government had been made.
Demographic pressures were signally important in producing change in the educational system.
There appears to be a crude fit between districts of expanding population and prosperity and egalitarian educational aspirations.
It did not work directly, but since the end of the war did coincide with a change in personnel at local level it was quite often the case that local authorities had new education officers at a time when they were eager to innovate.
The post-war generation of education officers were mainly university-educated, often had substantial educational research experience (often self-motivated and directed) and frequently had qualifications in educational psychology or law.
In Hertfordshire, Wiltshire and Norfolk, for example, a young staff found themselves given a free hand to alter the educational system.
In the two latter districts rural education, rather than academic excellence, was seen as a primary purpose of the local system; in such areas technical education took on a specialised meaning.
Local hierarchy did not always read off academic excellence as the desired end of local practice, so that there was less concern in these rural areas for the fate of the top few than for that of the majority.
On the other hand, meritocracy could be used to argue for comprehensives, as in Coventry or Middlesex, as well as grammar schools as in Birmingham or Leeds.
Psychologists' debates
There were also developments within educational psychology in the late 1940s which ensured that simple notions of merit did not go unchallenged.
Teacher trainers in Liverpool, at the London Institute of Education, and elsewhere, argued against the prevailing orthodoxy on intelligence tests.
Alice Heim was beginning her work on creativity in which she claimed that verbal reasoning tests ignored vital aspects of child potential.
Philip Vernon was beginning to question the efficiency of tests by querying whether they measured accurately.
Most of these, if asked, would have been unwilling to support any increase in attainment testing or in subjective assessment of character, but their expressed unease about testing could help to feed that of others, who would then fall back on what had ‘worked’ in the past.
A part of the  ideology of ‘muddling through’ was an acceptance of pragmatism in social policy, even a glorying in it, which helped to sustain a distrust of too much expertise, particularly in a scientific field.
Some educational psychologists were turning away from psychometry.
The child guidance movement had created a multiplying number of clinics already, particularly acceptable in wartime, and this multiplication continued when war was over.
The insights of psychoanalysis fed into a science of the child mind which rooted behaviour, particularly aberrant behaviour, firmly in family relations.
Susan Isaacs, Melanie Klein, D. W. Winnicott and C. W. Valentine all presented child ‘maladjustment’ as a pathology created by social surroundings in addition to family behaviour.
These matters spilled over into the British Psychological Society and eventually in 1951–52 led to a major row on the benefits of psychoanalysis, which meant that the relationship between scientific developments and educational practice became further confused.
If the public acceptance of psychoanalysis meant anything for secondary selection it did mean that the scientificity of any description of the mind became more suspect — its subjectivity more evident.
Testing technique
Technically, post-war testing became more and more rigorous.
Successive NFER analysis demonstrated that the most effective selection process could select only 90% of children adequately — 10% would be misplaced.
So long as selection policies did not come under scrutiny this was acceptable.
Once, however, the child population began to rise, a new population question arose.
Free secondary education increased the pressure on space.
The ideology of merit had elevated the grammar school above technical schools, technical schools above secondary moderns.
The equal opportunity for social mobility was a commonplace in the public mind but pressure of numbers began to render that equality suspect, since it seemed unequal in fact.
Other policies had tended to limit equality or parity between schools at the same time.
The secondary teachers' unions, particularly the Joint Four, had made a great outcry about the exodus of the grammar school teachers from the profession.
This was a result of the new Burnham system of teacher payment, which signally raised the pay of junior school teachers but also abolished some of the differential between them and secondary school teachers, and, in some cases, actually cut the latter  group's pay.
The outcry was, to a certain extent, factitious.
Schools did lose staff but it seems more likely to have been a reflection of the generally low level of teachers' pay at a time of full employment.
It was not the highly qualified classics, history or English teachers who left, but those who could use their degrees in industry or the civil service.
However, local authorities dealt with teacher shortage by using the incentive payments under Burnham (for posts of special responsibility) to ‘top up’ grammar school salaries.
Hence parity between teachers in schools was undermined.
There also lay embedded in the system the inequality of paying not for the job but for the qualifications: degrees received a year's extra increment and as a result earnings differentials rose.
Women, who predominated in the junior schools, did not get equal pay in principle until 1955 (or in reality until 1962), despite a vigorous campaign throughout the 1940s, so yet further inequality was built in between groups of teachers.
A second factor undermining the parity between schools was the absence of new premises.
Many of the schools opened immediately after the war did not result from the Education Act.
They had been built just before the war and were only now being used for their intended purpose.
New buildings did not appear in any numbers until the 1950s.
Until then premises were provided through the effective makeshift of the HORSA programme, the main achievement of George Tomlinson, the Minister of Works.
This scheme housed children in large numbers in temporary prefabricated huts.
The bulk of the ‘new’ child population was in secondary modern schools; most of these were in huts.
Grammar schools already had adequate facilities or could build them from scratch.
They formed a proportion of new schools greater than the proportion of children they served (though this may have been because they were more likely to have suffered from bombing in city centres).
There were local variations.
Many rural authorities followed the example of Cambridgeshire village colleges inspired by Henry Morris, the chief education officer, so that Devon, Somerset and Leicestershire all wrote the notion into their development plans and did actually build some, which would support the argument that the major move towards equality that was achieved by the 1944 Education Act was the diminution of the gap between rural and urban children — this was not Butler's two nations becoming one but it was a step towards it.
Why had innovation been perceived?
Firstly because some did take place.
The provision of free secondary education did make it possible for many children to get more easily the education they desired.
Secondly, the raising of the school leaving age in 1947 meant that the difference between types of secondary schooling was not so marked as it had been.
This was a result not of the Bill or of the war but of a 1938 decision whose effect was delayed by the outbreak of war.
It coincided with the Act, though, and thus could be perceived as more integrally related.
The rhetoric of reconstruction provides another part of the answer.
The Education Act provided a convenient peg upon which to hang ‘statist’ notions of reform — from those of all political parties who advocated reform from above through increased power to central government.
It was the only measure of its kind achieved in wartime; and it was achieved by agreement, despite the hiccoughs in its parliamentary progress.
The effect of the development plan programme was to lay existing procedures bare, to make them explicit and visible to every citizen, not just the interested parties, parents and teachers.
There was some impression of novelty simply because the subject was newly looked into.
Innovation had to take place cheaply, since central government could not fund much in the way of capital projects.
It was at the pivot of the secondary system — the process of selection — that innovation apparently took place.
Most commercially available tests were produced by Moray House or, to a lesser extent, until the 1960s, by the NFER.
Both were charitable bodies, of high professional standards, whose main activity was the production, validation and marking of statistically appropriate selection procedures.
Their tests were cheaper and apparently fairer than local ‘home-made’ ones and they conveniently transferred the odium that selection incurred on to a distant, impartial public body.
Increased attention to secondary education meant that justice had to be seen to be done.
However, despite some change in secondary selection, it remains the case, most remarkably, that though wartime and free education made the arguments of economy, fairness and impartiality more applicable they did not make them universally acceptable.
The force working most clearly for uniformity was the growth in the child population, and since that was itself not uniform it was uneven in its effects.
By 1952 almost all English education authorities had adopted an intelligence test in their selection process; psychologists debated the effects of social agencies coaching and practice — on IQ scores; but Hertfordshire gave up the eleven-plus exam altogether, after having had one for at least fifteen years.
Conclusion
The Act did tend to homogeneity, to the exploitation of meritocratic notions in pursuit of pragmatic ends, but it created little in the way of innovation or social levelling.
It is ironic that Holmes's acceptance of the meritocratic possibilities of democratisation should have led to an Act which allowed for the creation of the comprehensive school — but in fact the ideology he shared with other administrators was one that could embrace the comprehensive, which was, at times, argued in the context of a more successful way of providing a selective education.
It is not surprising, though.
R. A. Butler, Sir Maurice Holmes, G. Thomson, R. H. Tawney, W. P. Alexander, W. Brockington — all shared a strong commitment to something each called equality of opportunity.
They were all in a position to publicise their beliefs, to embody them in legislation or in local authority practice.
The war made their beliefs seem realisable by adding to State authority a moral authority that it had lacked, but dependence upon State action was not a novel perception or created by war.
What is perhaps most startling is that so many agents of educational change — local education officers and education committees — remained so untouched by the principles.
In practice direct grant schools, the perpetuation of the public school system and the vested interests of sections of teachers as well as that complex animal, parental wishes, worked to maintain the status quo ante bellum to a much greater extent than even the most lukewarm of reformers could have wished.
It is at the local level that change needs to be assessed and at which the variety of political forces at work was best displayed.
It remained the case that, as A. J. P. Taylor remarked, there was, after the 1944 Act, a class distinction between those who went to grammar school and those who did not.
What is more arguable is how new it was, and how very much it departed from the old.
Henry Pelling
The impact of the war on the Labour Party
It is customarily assumed that the five years and eight months between the outbreak of war with Nazi Germany in September 1939 and the final collapse of that power in May 1945 was an epoch of ever-increasing radicalism, both for the British electorate and for the Labour Party itself.
Professor Richard Titmuss rather implied this when he wrote in his Essays on the Welfare State that:
The aims and context of social policy, both in peace and war, are…determined — at least to a substantial extent — by how far the co-operation of the masses is essential to the successful prosecution of the war.
Both Professor Arthur Marwick and Dr Paul Addison have maintained in their respective works on this period that this co-operation was indeed essential, and that the consequent outcome was a government of the left.
But both authors recognise that experience in office in the coalition government had made the Labour leaders more cautious than they would otherwise have been: Dr Marwick comments that ‘Middle-class radicalism and official trade unionism were much stronger influences than left-wing Socialism’, and Dr Addison speaks of an ‘Attlee consensus’ to which the Conservatives, when they returned to office in 1951, also subscribed.
Nor can any general law of ‘radicalisation as a result of mobilisation’ be regarded as valid solely on the basis of the war's impact: we may recall that at the end of the First World War the electorate voted for a substantially Conservative Parliament, albeit under the leadership of Lloyd George, the wartime Prime Minister.
It would be truer to say that the regime which enters the war is usually discredited at the war's end, probably because of its supposed lack of adequate provision for the armed forces in the final pre-war years.
Before the Second World War, to be sure, it looked as if the Labour  Party would be unable to break out of a minority role in British politics.
Although the 1935 general election confirmed its position as the only main challenger for the left-wing vote, in that election it secured only 154 MPs — less than a quarter of the total membership of the Commons.
At that time the party seemed to have many of the characteristics of a party which did not expect to win elections: it had changed its leadership only a few weeks before the general election was called, Lansbury having resigned and been replaced by Attlee on a temporary basis; and it suffered from a good deal of internal factionalism, and found its major policy demand — collective security through the League of Nations —‘scooped’ by Stanley Baldwin, the Prime Minister.
The prospects of the party improved somewhat with the adoption at the 1937 conference of an ‘Immediate Programme’ of nationalisation for a single term of office: this included all the major measures of the post-war Labour government except for iron and steel, which in any case was not to be fundamentally reorganised before the Labour government left office in 1951.
But at the conference it was for the first time agreed to allow the constituency parties to elect their own separate representatives to the National Executive, and this at once led to the appearance in this category of Sir Stafford Cripps, Professor Harold Laski and D. N. Pritt — all advocates of close collaboration with the Communist Party, and Pritt indistinguishable from an actual card-carrying member.
The trade union leadership of the party at this time often sounded at least as hostile to the National Government as the constituency party members: at the 1939 conference Ernest Bevin was to be heard emphasising that he was
…anxious to prevent this Movement fighting for the preservation of the Paris Bourse, the London Stock Exchange, the Amsterdam Exchange, and Wall Street.
And Herbert Morrison moved at the same conference a resolution condemning the government's introduction of conscription: the resolution was carried by more than three to one.
Meanwhile Cripps and two other Labour MPs, Aneurin Bevan and G. R. Strauss, were expelled from the party for advocating the policy of a ‘popular front’ in alliance with Liberals and Communists, and (in Cripps's case) for circulating a memorandum proposing this to all affiliated organisations.
It was not until the crisis of late August 1939, when the Nazi-Soviet pact was announced, clearly foreshadowing the impending attack on Poland, that the Labour Party and the movement at large shook off its hostility to the government at least to the extent of supporting, and in the crisis of early September demanding, an early declaration of war.
The Labour leaders refused to join a reconstituted War Cabinet under Neville Chamberlain's premiership, for party divisions were still acute: but, with the Liberals, Labour accepted an electoral truce whereby the main parties undertook to refrain from opposing the candidate of any retiring member's party at by-elections occasioned during the war.
This in no way limited the cut-and-thrust of political disagreement.
In the winter of 1939–40 pacifist feeling was still strong inside the Labour Party, and it was reinforced by the anti-war attitude of the Communists and ‘crypto-Communists’, the latter being Labour Party members who, whether under Communist Party instructions or not, consistently supported Communist policies without openly joining the Communist Party.
When Soviet troops invaded Finland in November 1939, for instance, there was widespread sympathy in Britain for the latest victims of aggression; but D. N. Pritt, although a member of the Labour Party National Executive, attempted to justify the role of the Russians.
In March 1940 he was expelled from the Labour Party, and the University Labour Federation, which represented students of Labour sympathies, was disaffiliated for the same reason.
Henceforth socialist organisation in the universities was for many years weakened by division between ‘socialist’— i.e. Communist-controlled or influenced-societies and Labour Clubs supporting the Labour Party.
When in May 1940 the Commons divided on an issue of confidence in the Chamberlain government's handling of the war, and the normal government majority was seen to have dropped significantly, Chamberlain decided to resign and to make way for Churchill, a leader more acceptable to the opposition parties.
At this point Attlee and Greenwood, the leader and deputy leader of the Labour Party, were invited by Churchill to join his small War Cabinet; and many of their colleagues were also invited to join the new administration.
Although Attlee and Greenwood were ready to accept the invitation, they did not do so at once but made sure that both the National Executive and the annual Conference, which were conveniently meeting at the same time, it being the Whit weekend, were fully consulted and in agreement with their acceptance of office.
In addition, a special meeting of the National Council of Labour — the body that represented the General Council of the Trades Union Congress as well as the Parliamentary Labour Party and the National Executive — was hastily summoned to endorse the commitment.
This illustrated the leadership's caution and carefulness in committing the entire Labour movement to their entry into office in a broad-based coalition headed by a Conservative leader long regarded  as the bitter enemy of the movement but recognised as a formidable fighting man — Winston Churchill.
But the Labour leaders' caution was understandable in the light of the amendments made to the party constitution after the break with Ramsay MacDonald in 1931, the last leader to have favoured a coalition government, whose action had led to a split in the party and his expulsion from membership.
In succeeding years of wartime the annual conference continued to take place, though not at the seaside and not usually for a full week.
The conference of 1944 had to be postponed owing to the difficulties of travel, which were imposed in the spring and summer of that year when the Allied invasion forces used Britain as their base for the ‘reentry’ into France: it was finally held in December.
Meanwhile, at the end of October 1944, in moving a resolution for the annual prolongation of Parliament, Churchill had declared, have myself a clear view that it would be wrong to continue this Parliament beyond the period of the German war'.
This was at a time when the resistance of Japan was expected to continue for anything up to eighteen months later.
Churchill called for a return of all party agents who were in the armed forces, and found that they were overwhelmingly Conservative.
This may have led him to exaggerate the extent to which Labour Party organisation had been maintained during the war, while Conservative Party organisation had languished:
Many of the trade union leaders wanted of course to go to the front, but the whole process of organising our production…forbade their release.
At the same time they maintained — and who could blame them?— their party affiliations; and once our mortal danger had passed these increasingly took on a partisan character.
Thus on one side there had been complete effacement of party activities, while on the other they ran forward unresisted.
It was certainly true that there were very few Labour Party full-time agents in the armed forces, but one major reason for this was that there were so few of them even in peacetime, and, of those who existed, many were above the age of military service.
The Labour total in 1939, as listed in the annual conference report of that year, was 133, compared with a Conservative total of well over 450 in 1937.
As for wartime political activity, this was naturally inhibited for all the main parties by the electoral truce.
Thus in the period when Labour was still in opposition in the early part of the war — September 1939 to May 1940 — there were twenty-one by-elections, but only six Labour candidates were put up and they of course were for the previously Labour-held seats: two of these were unopposed and the other four faced candidates  of fringe groups, who did not poll well.
In general, political propaganda was already difficult in this ‘phoney’ war period, and a number of full-time agents found their appointments terminated, though some special ‘war grants’were paid by the central party organisation.
With the formation of the coalition in May 1940, the central organisation was itself weakened by the absorption of the two leading officers of the Research Department into the government: Arthur Greenwood took office in Churchill's Cabinet and Grant McKenzie was recruited to assist Attlee in the latter's government tasks.
During the Battle of Britain and the succeeding period of the so-called ‘blitz' — the night bombardment of cities throughout the autumn and winter of 1940–41 — it became still more difficult to conduct party activity.
Individual membership declined by a quarter — from 408, 844 in 1939 to 304, 124 in 1940 — and by the end of 1941 it was down by a further third — to 206, 622.
Late in 1941 a memorandum to the National Executive indicated, as might have been expected, that the main area of loss of membership was London and the home and eastern counties, where it had been most necessary to evacuate the population.
The memorandum listed a formidable catalogue of difficulties which were being encountered:
1 Operation of the Military Forces Acts.
2 Recruitment and geographical transference of labour, including an increasing number of women workers.
3 Tempo of work — overtime, night and weekend shifts.
4 The blitz and blackout.
5 Lack of meeting places and facilities for social gatherings, meetings, etc.
6 Evacuation.
7 Occupation of the more responsible party workers on civil defence duties and national work, including Air Raid Precautions, fire-watching, Home Guard, salvage drives, war savings groups, Women's Voluntary Service, etc.
8 Number of constituency and borough party agents ceasing agency work and taking wartime employment.
From 1940 political activity was damped down not only by the maintenance of the electoral truce but also by a suspension of local government elections.
Accompanying all this was ‘the transference of public interest from politics to war news and war strategy’.
After Hitler's invasion of Russia, however, which also meant a  slackening of air attacks upon Britain, the decline in individual party membership was stemmed and a gradual revival took place.
At the end of 1942 the total was 218,783 and at the end of 1943 235,501.
Owing to the increased employment on war work, trade union membership had in any case been on the increase.
By the end of 1941, with the entry of the United States into the war as a belligerent, the prospects of a favourable outcome seemed to be ensured and discussion could begin in earnest about post-war reconstruction.
When the government actually lost a seat at Maldon in Essex on 25 June 1942 to a left-wing independent, Tom Driberg, Attlee dismissed it as ‘a mere expression of discontent’.
It was true that it followed close on a humiliation for British arms the loss of the fortress of Tobruk in North Africa and the withdrawal of the Eighth Army to the Egyptian frontier.
Attlee commented at the 1943 party conference, ‘As a matter of fact you can see the votes at byelections going up and down in accordance with the progress of our armies in Africa’.
But already at the time Attlee was speaking the situation was changing again.
Sir Richard Acland and a group of colleagues, mostly middleclass socialists, had established a new party called Common Wealth which undertook to challenge Conservative candidates at by-elections.
There was nothing to stop Labour voters from supporting such rebels against the party truce in the privacy of the ballot box, although party members who publicly supported Common Wealth candidates suffered expulsion.
But the seats that Common Wealth began to win were often seats which Labour would have stood little chance of winning even under the most favourable conditions.
For instance, Eddisbury in Cheshire, a largely rural constituency, was won by John Loverseed, a man who had the unique distinction of having served as an air force pilot in both the Spanish civil war and the Battle of Britain.
This success took place in March 1943; it was repeated in January 1944 by a less remarkable candidate at a similar rural constituency in Yorkshire-Skipton.
Neither of these seats was to return a Labour candidate even under the exceptionally favourable circumstances of July 1945.
This left-wing revival among the electorate took place at a time when some devoted socialists were becoming disillusioned with the prospects of actually accomplishing any sort of social revolution during the war itself.
George Orwell, for instance, had written in 1940, ‘Either we turn this into a revolutionary war, or we lose it’.
(He was to apologise for this braggadocio two years later.)
The standpoint that he held, however, went all the way to the top.
The injunction that Churchill gave Hugh  Dalton, in asking him to oversee the Special Operations Executive, was ‘to set Europe ablaze’.
It did not come to much: but it was perhaps essential before Britain obtained major allies to believe that somehow a revolutionary movement could be incited to grow in occupied Europe.
Except in the mountainous Balkans, this did not prove possible: and it has more recently been argued that resistance was ‘seldom effective, sometimes stultifying, frequently dangerous, and almost always too costly’.
Nor was there any likelihood of a spontaneous revolt against the Nazi regime in Germany — not even after the overthrow of Mussolini in Italy in the summer of 1943.
On the other hand, people in Britain grew increasingly impressed by the success of the Soviet troops on the eastern front.
The King himself, sensing the popular mood and indeed sharing it, marked the victory of the Red Army at Stalingrad by presenting to the Soviet government the ‘Sword of Stalingrad’ as a symbol of British respect.
It was assumed, perhaps naively, that the Russian successes were due to what Dalton called ‘a planned economic life, unhindered by sectional interests’.
The Labour Party's political revival was also advanced by the publication of the Beveridge report on Social Insurance and Allied Services, on 2 December 1942.
The report had initially been commissioned by Arthur Greenwood when he was in the War Cabinet: its purpose had been to recommend measures to consolidate existing welfare provisions, which tended to vary from one scheme to another.
But the character of the report as it turned out in the end owed a great deal to Sir William Beveridge himself, who determined to make a ‘crusade’ out of it for the sake of the achievement of social reform.
He thus took as his starting point three major reforms which had not yet been accepted by the government, namely the establishment of family allowances, the creation of a national health service, and the maintenance by government policy of a ‘high and stable level’ of employment.
When the Beveridge report was debated in the Commons in mid-February 1943 Churchill himself was ill and the government's case was argued by Sir Kingsley Wood, the Chancellor of the Exchequer, a Conservative, and Sir John Anderson, the Lord President, who was a former civil servant elevated to ministerial rank.
Although in fact they accepted all three Beveridge ‘assumptions’ on behalf of the coalition government, the impression they gave was one of hesitancy and caution; and the result was that the Parliamentary Labour Party, for the one and only time during the coalition years, decided to put down an amendment to the government motion and thus divide the House.
Of the 121  members who voted for the opposition amendment the very great majority — indeed, a majority of the total Labour Party in the House were Labour members.
Meanwhile the Beveridge report secured widespread publicity in the press and aroused much discussion both in the armed forces and in the public at large.
The action of the Parliamentary Party was very embarrassing for the Labour Ministers, who of course could not join their colleagues in the opposition lobby; but it did more than anything else in wartime to identify the Labour Party with the widespread popular desire for social reform in the post-war world.
At the subsequent party conference the National Executive made a point of reasserting its adherence to the electoral truce.
In a statement to the conference the executive acknowledged the important role of the Ministers in preparing plans for the armistice, for the rehabilitation of world trade and commerce and for the reconstruction of Britain herself.
A resolution to maintain the truce was carried by an overwhelming majority.
At the same time the executive resisted a renewed attempt by sympathisers for the affiliation of the Communist Party.
The attempt had been strengthened by the respect and admiration for Russian arms that had been aroused by Russian resistance on the eastern front.
But J. S. Middleton, the Labour Party General Secretary, had set out in a series of published letters to Harry Pollitt, the Communist secretary, the arguments against allowing Communist affiliation: they were largely based upon the fact that the Communists adhered to the Communist International, based in Moscow, and were bound to obey its orders.
Shortly before the conference, however, to the chagrin of the executive, Moscow decreed the disbandment of the International.
At the conference the executive spokesmen had to retailor their remarks to suit this new situation.
But, although the Mineworkers' Federation supported the proposal, it was defeated by a majority of almost three to one.
An attempt to recognise Common Wealth as suitable for affiliation was rejected without a vote.
–8
Nevertheless, the party contained not a few who disapproved of the caution of the Labour leadership in retaining the electoral truce yet apparently obtaining so few significant concessions in respect of policy from the coalition government.
In an article published in America Harold Laski attacked both Attlee and the trade union leadership:
In my view it is clear that the party is very much in search of a leader, very anxious, if it is to make an adequate showing at the next general election, over the fact that it needs a symbol of more meaning to the mass electorate than Mr Attlee.
He added, incautiously, ‘There is hardly any aspect of policy today in which trade union leaders are not a brake on the wheel’.
Laski's attack was drawn to the attention of the executive at its ensuing meeting, and a statement was issued formally repudiating it.
But the executive also turned its collective mind to the task of responding to a resolution at the conference which had been sponsored by the Preston Trades Council, drawing attention to the deficiencies of the party in facing a general election, and asking that the machinery should be improved so that the party might ‘make a determined bid for a Labour majority at the next General Election’.
This galvanised the National Agent, R. T. Windle, into making plans for an individual membership campaign early in 1944; and it led to the executive summoning a conference of trade union officers so as to encourage them to contribute to a general election fund and to increase the proportion of their contracting-in membership — which was much less than half the total membership they reported to the Trades Union Congress.
In addition, arrangements were made to reinforce the party's regional councils; and three-year grants were to be paid from the general election fund to enable constituency parties to employ full-time agents.
The membership campaign was reported to be ‘developing satisfactorily’ at the National Executive's organisation sub-committee meeting in June 1944, but MPs were reported to be reluctant to travel long distances during the Normandy invasion period, and ‘preoccupation with invasion fears and worries’led to a ‘damping down’of activity.
All the same, constituency party membership rose that year to 265,763, an increase of well over 10% on 1943.35 With the sudden break-out of the armies from the Normandy bridgehead, it looked as if what Churchill called the ‘German war’ was about to come to its conclusion; and, as we have seen, in October 1944, when the Commons once more renewed the electoral truce for a year, it was Churchill himself who said that this would be the signal for the dissolution of the coalition.
Already almost a year earlier Churchill had recognised that the enemy collapse in Europe might come at any time.
After the Italian surrender in the summer of 1943 he privately reckoned the chances of a similar German collapse at six to four against; and he recognised, partly under pressure from Attlee and others on the Labour side, that he ought to appoint a senior Minister to co-ordinate the planning of reconstruction.
In November Lord Woolton, a man of no party affiliation but who had been a successful Minister of Food, was appointed to the task, and was given a seat in the War Cabinet.
Woolton took on to his staff a small  group of civil servants who had been working out the implications of the Beveridge report, and also the Uthwatt report on land values.
As it turned out, the prolongation of the war enabled the plans to be quite far advanced before the final collapse of German resistance in May 1945.
In 1944 R. A. Butler, the President of the Board of Education, enacted a new Education Act which gave aid to Church schools in a new compromise and made provision for the raising of the school leaving age to fifteen at the end of the war and to sixteen at some date thereafter.
And in October that year Sir William Jowitt of the Labour Party was appointed to head a new Ministry of National Insurance.
It should not be thought that Labour Ministers were concerned only with domestic policy, although Morrison was Home Secretary, Bevin was Minister of Labour, and Dalton (from early 1942) President of the Board of Trade.
Attlee served as chairman of the Armistice Terms and Civil Administration Committee of the Cabinet, set up in November 1943.
In April 1944 it was renamed the Armistice and Post-war Committee: Ernest Bevin was among its seven permanent members.
This meant that senior Labour leaders were brought to deal with the problems of the post-war treatment of Germany and the need for providing occupation forces.
Both Dalton and Alexander, the First Lord of the Admiralty, argued at meetings of the committee that Germany should be deprived of war-making industries, though not to the extent of the ‘pastoralisation’ proposed by Henry Morgenthau, the US Secretary of the Treasury, and accepted for a time by Churchill and Roosevelt at their meeting at Quebec in September 1944.
Foreign policy questions were also discussed by the War Cabinet as a whole.
In July 1944 Attlee presented a paper on ‘Foreign Policy and the Flying Bomb’, which pointed out that it would henceforth be impossible for Britain to rely upon the English Channel as a defence against her enemies: From our point of view, Norway, Denmark, Holland and France are necessary outposts of Britain and, in as much as Britain is now as she has been for a hundred years a shield for the U.S., outposts of America as well.
Their defence is necessary to our defence and without us they cannot defend themselves.
In April 1945 Attlee prepared a memorandum for the Cabinet to the effect that his committee favoured the retention of compulsory military service after the war.
But Bevin indicated that the Labour Ministers would need to consult the National Executive of the party and the General Council of the Trades Union Congress before finally committing  themselves.
This was done in May 1945, before the dissolution of the coalition.
It has been argued that there was a cleavage between the Labour Ministers and the extra-parliamentary party on these issues.
It is true that some members of the party were inclined to take a ‘soft’ line towards Germany: prominent among them were Philip Noel-Baker and Richard Stokes, both of them middle-class members of the party.
But opposing them were associates of a group calling itself ‘Fight for Freedom’, who felt that it would be necessary to deal harshly with Germany at the end of the war.
This group was quite influential among leading trade unionists; and at the 1943 annual conference of the Labour Party they carried an amendment against an attempt by Stokes to reject the liability of ‘the German people as a whole for the atrocities committed under Nazism’.
The vote was carried against Stokes by a majority of well over two to one; but Noel-Baker later argued in a letter to Attlee that ‘the overwhelming majority of the Constituency Party delegates were against ‘Fight for Freedom’ and Vansittartism'.
Lord Vansittart, a former Foreign Office official, had written a pamphlet entitled Black Record blaming the Germans for a record of barbarism going back to the era of the Roman Empire.
Noel-Baker continued in his letter to Attlee: ‘In the card vote, however, they [the constituency party delegates]were heavily outvoted by the Trade Union delegates, and in particular by the Miners’ Federation and the Transport and General Workers.’
Three months later, after the Trades Union Congress meeting at Southport, Noel-Baker reported that the Miners and the Transport Workers had changed sides and rejected the ‘Fight for Freedom’ standpoint.
In any case the resolution of the party conference of 1943 gave Hugh Dalton, who was on the side of the ‘anti-Germans’, and was chairman of the party's International Committee, the opportunity to draft a statement on the ‘International Post-war Settlement’ emphasising German responsibility for the war and the need for her to pay reparations to the Allies.
The statement conceded that there were many ‘good’ Germans but commented that ‘they are singularly ineffective in restraining the bad Germans’.
Naturally Noel-Baker, whom Dalton described as ‘a terrible old Genevan Tory’, was very critical; but Dalton managed to silence Harold Laski, another potential opponent on the committee, by putting in a strongly pro-Zionist paragraph about Palestine.
Dalton's opponents were weakened by a general recognition that the Russians were also in favour of a strong line against Germany.
The draft statement had to undergo some further minor amendment, but was substantially accepted by the executive.
Its approval at the conference in December 1944 was moved by Attlee himself, and carried with little opposition.
Dalton wrote in his diary, ‘I have got my way on all essentials’.
The realism of Labour's attitude towards foreign policy was reinforced by Bevin's insistence, both at meetings of the National Executive (to which he was specially invited) and at the 1945 Labour Party Conference at Blackpool that it was essential to continue with military service while Britain retained the responsibility for maintaining occupation forces in Germany and elsewhere.
Bevin said:
We must introduce…another National Service Act for a limited period until we know exactly what is going to happen…
We must continue the obligation to serve until we have brought home the men who have been fighting.
That is a definite obligation upon us.
We cannot say what the occupation of Germany will involve at the moment, or what will be our obligations in the East and at home.
By approving Bevin's statement the conference committed itself to accepting National Service in peacetime for the first time ever.
The Labour Party entered the election campaign with more advantages than it realised.
Few of its members, remembering the success of Lloyd George in  1981 , expected to win against the personal appeal of Winston Churchill, who was regarded almost universally as the principal saviour of the country, not only in the crisis of 1940 but in the years of partnership with foreign allies.
Yet Labour had a double advantage with the electors: its leaders had served with complete loyalty in the coalition, and had thereby secured valuable experience of government, mostly, to be sure, on the home front; but the party in Parliament had also by its single rebellion in 1943 made it clear to all that it was dissatisfied with the coalition's progress towards social reform.
A final essential advantage for the party manifested itself in the general election campaign, when Attlee, for so long the ‘unknown Opposition Leader’, came to notice as a sober and responsible figure apparently capable of assuming the reins of government.
Throughout the war (except during the worst days of the blitz) the Gallup Poll had been assessing the popularity of the government, and of Churchill himself as Prime Minister.
Churchill's personal popularity had been vouched for invariably by above 75% of the respondents, and the government, though poorly regarded during the setbacks to British  arms in 1942, after the battle of El Alamein was never below 70%.
In 1943 the pollsters began to ask people how they would vote ‘if a general election were held tomorrow’.
The results, which were regularly published in the Liberal newspaper the News Chronicle, showed that there was a Labour lead over the Conservatives of 10% or more.
The Liberal Party obtained only about 9% of the voters' support, and Common Wealth merely 1% or 2%.
It was easy, however, to discount this evidence at a time when opinion polls were in their infancy, at least so far as credibility was concerned, and when it was universally thought that support would return to Churchill as soon as his formidable oratorical skills were thrown in on one side of the party contest.
As for the evidence of the by-elections, Attlee himself had discounted it in 1943:
I suppose every electioneer knows that at a by-election every person with any kind of grievance tends to vote against the Government…
We should be very ill-advised to build too much on by-election votes.
It was thus with some caution that Labour Ministers — who stood to lose their salaries in the event of the party's defeat — approached the question of the break-up of the coalition.
Attlee thought that the coalition should continue until after the end of the war with Japan, however long that should take — and, as we have seen, it was expected to take another eighteen months after the collapse of Nazi Germany.
He seems to have taken this view because he was perturbed about the growing power and intransigence of the Soviet Union, whose diplomats he had encountered at the foundation conference of the United Nations in San Francisco in April 1945.
Thus on the eve of the Labour Party Conference at Blackpool in May 1945, which he hurried back from America to attend, Attlee called on Churchill at Downing Street and discussed with him the possibility of maintaining the coalition for a further period.
He recommended an amendment to Churchill's published statement to the other party leaders suggesting this course, to say that the government would ‘In the meantime…together do our utmost to implement the proposals for social security and full employment contained in the White Papers which we have laid before Parliament’.
Bevin and Dalton agreed with Attlee's views, although at this late stage they were  doubtful whether the National Executive would agree.
We now know that Attlee did in fact put the case to the executive, but that only three of its members, all trade union representatives, agreed with him.
When the majority executive recommendation — to withdraw from the coalition and fight an early  general election — was put to the conference, it was accepted with only two dissentients.
The break-up of the coalition and Churchill's formation of a ‘caretaker’ government, consisting largely of his Conservative supporters together with just a few non-party men, followed almost at once.
None of the Labour leaders felt that they should disobey the ruling of Conference that they should return to opposition: and some of them, most notably Morrison, were obviously relishing the prospect of the return to party politics.
As early as February Morrison had been elected chairman of the party's Campaign Committee, which was a sub-committee of the National Executive.
With the aid of his colleagues and the drafting assistance of the party's newly appointed research secretary, Michael Young (formerly secretary of the independent research organisation Political and Economic Planning) he prepared a manifesto entitled Let us Face the Future.
In this document the case for the nationalisation of key industries was argued on practical grounds in each instance: thus ‘public ownership of the fuel and power industries’ would ‘bring great economies in operation and make it possible to modernise production methods and to raise safety standards’; ‘public ownership of inland transport’would mean ‘co-ordination of transport services by rail, road and canal’; and the iron and steel industry would become efficient ‘only if public ownership replaces private monopoly’.
Nevertheless the manifesto was in respect of nationalisation little more than an elaboration of the party's one-term programme as accepted at the 1937 conference, with the addition of iron and steel, which had been included as a concession to a radical resolution proposed by Ian Mikardo at the 1944 conference and carried against the advice of the platform.
Of course the proposals of the Beveridge report also now came in for mention.
The references to foreign policy were, no doubt intentionally, vague: the manifesto called for the ‘consolidation’ of the ‘great war-time association of the British Commonwealth with the USA and the USSR’.
To suggest that on past form ‘the Tories’ could not be relied upon to maintain the association with Russia, the document added:
Let it not be forgotten that in the years leading to the war the Tories were so scared of Russia that they missed the chance to establish a partnership which might well have prevented war.
Sympathy for the Soviet Union was a major advantage to the Labour Party during the campaign, because there had been widespread admiration of the achievements of the Red Army, not only in maintaining a successful resistance for almost four years but also in crowning that  resistance with the capture of Berlin in spring 1945.
For weeks on end in 1942 and 1943 and early 1944, before the Western Allies had launched their invasion of Normandy, the progress of the battle on the eastern front had been the principal item in the national newspapers, whatever their political complexion.
The Ministry of Information had also played a leading part in lauding the military qualities of the Soviet ally, and indeed many other of its domestic accomplishments: in February 1943 it organised a meeting at the Albert Hall to celebrate the twenty-fifth anniversary of the foundation of the Red Army.
This was a most unusual indication of the strength of public feeling, for it was apparently motivated, so far as the Ministry was concerned, by the desire to ‘steal the thunder’ of the Communist Party and prevent that body from obtaining the credit for the popular enthusiasm.
The government was evidently worried by Home Intelligence reports to the effect that there was an almost ‘unanimous belief that the success of the Russian armies is due to the political system of that country’.
To some extent, the Communist Party of Great Britain benefited from this: its membership trebled after the German invasion, reaching a peak of about 56,000 in 1943.
But the impact on the Labour Party, which no longer needed to be slightly ashamed of its ‘socialist’ label, was also almost certainly of a positive character.
Nor did Labour suffer to the slightest extent in popular esteem from its link with the trade unions.
This was because owing to wartime censorship there had been little in the newspapers about industrial disputes.
The strikes in the shipyards, which held up the construction of new warships vital for the battle of the Atlantic, would have been heartily unpopular had they been publicised, and some of the adverse publicity would have reflected upon the party.
It is true, though, that the general level of strike action was low during the war: the number of working days lost in all six years was less than that lost in just two years (1917 and 1918) of the First World War.
The fact that Bevin, the leading figure in British trade unionism, had joined the government as Minister of Labour and was doing what he could to limit industrial conflict encouraged the sense among the public that the unions as a whole were behaving responsibly in the nation's crisis.
Since the unions were tied so closely to the Labour Party, this was important for the party's standing in the election.
When the National Executive came to choose speakers for its ten BBC broadcasts, it could call upon a wide range of ministerial talent.
None of the speakers spoke more than once, but they included several senior  Ministers, Attlee beginning the series and Morrison concluding it.
The Conservatives, on the other hand, were anxious to stress the importance of Churchill's leadership, and he delivered four of their ten broadcasts; the Conservative manifesto was also linked with his name, being entitled Mr. Churchill's Declaration of Policy to the Electors.
It was evidently the Conservative intention to associate their campaign as closely as possible with the personality of the wartime leader.
There was clearly a danger for the Labour Party that its candidate for the premiership would not ‘emerge’ as a potential leader; this was reinforced by the fact that the Labour manifesto, Let us Face the Future, did not even mention his name.
In spite of this, Attlee, who had played a part during the war which was very largely behind the scenes — he had been Deputy Prime Minister and chairman of innumerable Cabinet committees — did ‘emerge’ during the campaign as a figure of importance, and this was largely an accidental result of Churchill's tactics in conducting his own campaign.
When Churchill gave his first broadcast, suggesting that the Labour Party might have to resort to ‘some form of Gestapo, no doubt very humanely directed in the first instance’, the electors were bound to regard it as a gross exaggeration; Attlee, following the next night, could readily ask his audience to distinguish between ‘Winston Churchill, the great leader in war of a united nation, and Mr Churchill the party leader of the Conservatives’.
A few days later, when Churchill invited Attlee to accompany him to the Potsdam conference — which was due to meet before the election result would be known — Harold Laski, as chairman of the National Executive, warned Attlee publicly that he should go ‘in the role of observer only’, because Labour would expect to have a distinctive foreign policy thereafter.
Churchill at once sought to exploit this potential rift among his opponents, but Attlee replied firmly to the effect that as leader of his party he was free to make commitments on its behalf.
In the last days of the campaign Churchill returned to the attack, pointing out the danger to the parliamentary leadership of the Labour Party posed by the National Executive; but Attlee replied patiently, explaining the constitutional position of himself and his colleagues as he saw it; naturally his supporters — with the exception of Laski himself — did not gainsay his arguments, and on the whole the electorate took little interest in the discussion.
As the Nuffield historians of the election put it, ‘There can be little doubt that Mr Attlee had the better of these exchanges’.
They might also have noted that they played an important part in bringing Attlee more fully to the notice of the electors.
Attlee  finally discovered that he was a figure of importance in British politics when he went to Potsdam with Churchill in July, and found that he was greeted with more warmth by the British forces in Berlin than Churchill himself.
He wrote to his wife, ‘I got a lot of cheers & shouts of ‘Good Old Clem’ from the troops watching’.
Churchill gave Attlee one last boost when they were both back in London and the election results — postponed for three weeks owing to the need to bring from abroad the postal votes of the forces serving overseas — were at last declared.
Churchill had been thinking of delaying his resignation, even if defeated, until after the weekend; but the results were so devastating to his party that on the very evening of the declaration of most of them — 26 July — he decided to go to the palace, resign his commission as Prime Minister, and invite the King to send for Attlee.
He called on the King at 7.00 p.m.; at 7.30 p.m.
Attlee drove up, to be invited to take Churchill's place.
This rapid development quelled the movement, which had been proceeding behind the scenes, to replace Attlee with a more obviously partisan anti-Churchillian such as Morrison.
Although the Labour victory was an overwhelming one in terms of parliamentary seats — 393 out of a total of 640, whereas the Conservatives and their allies obtained only 213 — the proportion of the voters who voted Labour was still less than half, at 47 — 8%.
The Labour Party gained substantially on this occasion from the ‘first past the post’ electoral system and from the unequal size of the constituencies, whose boundaries were overdue for redistribution.
In an appendix to the Nuffield study of the election David Butler showed that the average size of Labour-won constituencies was 51,000 electors, compared with Conservative-won at 57,000.
It was apparent that Labour had done well in the old inner cities, which the population had been leaving in the previous decade, partly owing to the growth of suburbs, partly owing to the effects of wartime bombing.
Indeed, the redistribution of boundaries that took place in 1948 was reckoned in the subsequent elections to have cost the Labour Party between twenty and forty seats.
Labour's newly-elected Members of Parliament contained many of a different type from the old hands of the 1935 Parliament.
Owing to the successes in constituencies previously thought unlikely prospects, where many of the candidates were young middle-class aspirants, the character of the party changed and the proportion of trade union nominees, most of them at least in late middle age, declined.
Trade union-sponsored MPs, who in the 1935 Parliament had accounted for more than half the party, were now less than a third of the total.
On the other hand the number of university graduates greatly increased: many of them had served in the forces, usually as officers, and several had been temporary civil servants.
The change did not mean that the new recruits to Parliament were any less committed to socialism: indeed, many of them probably understood its teachings even better than had the bulk of MPs of the pre-war era.
Their commitment to the nationalisation programme of Let us Face the Future was fully demonstrated when they revealed their opposition to any attempts to ‘water down’ the principle of public ownership, as over civil aviation in 1945–46 and over iron and steel in 1947.
But this is not the place to discuss the details of post-war politics.
It only remains to emphasise that the new Parliamentary Labour Party was socially far more representative of the country as a whole than the party of 1935 onwards, and that its leadership, which had had the experience of participation in government during the war, was able to assume the reins of office without any of the difficulties that Ramsay MacDonald encountered in forming his minority governments in 1924 and 1929.
What Dr Addison has appropriately described as the ‘Attlee consensus’ had arrived, and prevailed thereafter for almost a generation.