

Employment Rights Equal Opportunities and Disabled Persons: The Ingredients of Reform
INTRODUCTION
The arguments for disabled employment rights in Britain have been fuelled by a number of factors.
Disabled adults of working age are a significant and identifiable minority group, experiencing a rate of unemployment far greater than that for the general population.
Disabled employees are frequently occupationally segregated in low paid employment and suffer a marked differential in gross earned income when compared with their ‘able bodied’ counterparts.
The labour market disadvantages of people with disabilities have been largely caused by unequal treatment institutional discrimination and structural barriers to equal opportunity, rather than by the limitations of disability itself.
Existing employment law in turn has failed to protect the employment expectations of disabled people.
Laws to prohibit discrimination on the ground of disability and to advance equal opportunities for disabled Britons have been mooted for some time.
Although reform proposals have received little political support, the case for disability discrimination legislation has become increasingly compelling.
It is now supported in many quarters and most importantly by disabled people themselves.
while European Community law has been a source of reform in the sex discrimination field, it has offered little consolation for disability rights activists.
In the absence of and equal treatment directive, the expectations of disabled people to equality of employment opportunity in Europe rest upon frail  foundations.
Accordingly, the disability rights movement has looked for lessons from abroad when drawing up a manifesto for reform.
The civil rights legislation of the United States (US) has been especially inspirational.
American disability rights activists learnt much from the struggles of women and African-Americans for basic civil rights.
The disability discrimination provisions of the federal Rehabilitation Act 1973 were modelled upon the sex and race discrimination measures of Title VII in the Civil Rights Act 1964, but applied only to employment by the federal government, by federal contractors and by employers in federally-financed programmes and activities.
However, private sector employers in the US are now subject to the anti discrimination and affirmative action provisions of the Americans with Disabilities Act 1990 (ADA) and its supporting regulations.
The Act has been embraced by British reformers as a model for disabled employment rights here.
The Civil Rights (Disabled Persons) Bill 1992 (CRDP Bill) was patently fashioned after the US law.
The Bill sought to prohibit employment discrimination against qualified disabled persons on the ground of their disability.
The prohibition on discrimination would apply to job application procedures, recruitment and selection, training, promotion, dismissal, remuneration and any other employment terms, conditions and privileges.
It completed all stages of the legislative process in the House of Lords but, being a private member's bill, has so far failed to obtain a Second Reading in the House of Commons, despite cross-party support.
This article sets out a framework for the reform of disabled employment rights.
The comparative method discloses a number of key issues which any legislation guaranteeing equal employment rights for disabled workers must address.
The article examines five of these issues.
First, how is the protected class to be identified?
Second, can disability itself become a qualification for employment?
Third, how is disability discrimination to be recognised?
Fourth, should employers be required to accommodate disability?
Fifth, how should employment screening for disability be controlled?
2.
THE PROTECTED CLASS
Identifying the protected class in sex and race discrimination law has not been generally problematic.
The same will not be true of disability discrimination legislation.
The definition of ‘disability’ must be both inclusive and exclusive: embracing individuals outside the limited popular perception of ‘disability’, yet excepting idiosyncrasies, human traits and transient illness.
A distinction must be drawn between chronic or handicapping conditions and temporary or minor maladies.
In the US, ‘disability’ is defined as:
a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more of the major life activities of [an]individual.
For this purpose, ‘impairment’ is described as:
any physiological disorder or condition, cosmetic disfigurements, or anatomical loss affecting one or more of the following body systems: neurological; musculo-skeletal; special sense organs; respiratory, including speech organs; cardiovascular; reproductive; digestive; genitourinary; haemic and lymphatic; skin; and endocrine…[and]any mental or psychological disorder, such as mental retardation, organic brain syndrome, emotional or mental illness, and specific learning disabilities
A dilemma for British reformers is whether to list or illustrate the types of impairment envisaged.
A court might refuse to treat as a disability any condition unlisted, while a failure to exemplify indicative impairments could be a hostage to fortune as courts will tend to construe the protected class narrowly.
Public policy might also require the exclusion or exceptional treatment of certain ‘disabilities’, such as alcoholism, drug dependence and contagious diseases.
Any measures or devices used to mitigate the effects of impairment should be discounted in identifying disability status.
A hearing-impaired woman using a hearing aid or a man prescribed insulin to control diabetes are nevertheless ‘disabled’.
Minor impairments, inherent characteristics and environmental, cultural or economic disadvantages do not count as disabilities.
For example, left-handedness has not been considered an impairment, while above-average weight has not been viewed an impairment unless the result of a physiological  disorder.
On the other hand, contagious diseases should normally be within the definition, and workers with HIV/AIDS would be within the protected class.
However, it is not the description of disability that matters, but rather its effect upon a person's major life activities.
The existence of disability must be demonstrated and must also present a substantial handicap to the individual's life.
This may be measured in two ways.
A person may be unable to perform a major life activity which an average person could perform.
Alternatively, an individual may be significantly restricted as to the condition, manner or duration under which they can perform a major life activity as compared to an average person.
The factors which will be relevant are the nature and severity of the impairment, its actual or expected duration, and its likely permanent or long term impact.
There must also be a causal connection between disability and a substantial limitation on a major life activity.
A job applicant who is unable to read because of dyslexia is disabled, for instance, but not where illiteracy is due to lack of education.
American employers objected to the inclusion of working as a major life activity.
Persons who were merely unable to perform particular types of job and who were not really handicapped by their disability might be protected.
However, limited employability can only be relied upon when the individual is not handicapped in any other way.
The disability must preclude an individual from working for an employer in a class or broad range of jobs.
Inability to work in a particular job or profession or for a particular employer is insufficient.
This will be particularly the case where the disability only prevents the individual pursuing a vocation in a specialised job or profession involving extraordinary skill, prowess or talent.
The protected class must also admit to its membership those who are not presently disabled but who have a previous history of disability, or who are  wrongly perceived as being disabled.
In the US, the protected class includes a person whose disability represents no handicap to employment but is treated by employers as if it did; or whose disability is a handicap to employment but only as a result of the attitudes of others towards it; or who has no disability at all but is erroneously treated by employers as disabled.
As the Supreme Court has explained:
[An]impairment might not diminish a person's physical or mental capabilities, but could nevertheless substantially limit that person's ability to work as a result of the negative reactions of others to the impairment…
Congress acknowledged that the society's accumulated fears about disability and disease are as handicapping as are the physical limitations that flow from actual impairment.
The law must be broad enough to cover situations where employment decisions are made based upon the misconceptions of co-workers.
The dismissal of an HIV-infected employee (or one erroneously assumed to be HIV-infected) because co-workers feared transmission of the virus should be remediable.
The employee should not need to show that the perception is incorrect nor that he or she is not actually disabled at all.
It is the employer's perception which matters, not the employee's medical status.
Thus, discrimination against disabled persons which is founded upon stereotypical attitudes and ignorance is caught, as well as that based upon prejudice.
For example, an employer who, without any attempt at an individual medical assessment, inaccurately pre-judges epileptic applicants for positions as being unable to perform the job, will have treated those applicants as disabled, even though in fact their impairments might not limit their major life activities at all or only to the extent that others react adversely to them.
Few claimants will want to attract the social stigma which attaches to a characterisation of a person as disabled.
Few cases are litigated in the US unless the plaintiff is clearly a person with disabilities.
In marginal cases, the court will have to be convinced that a substantially limiting disability exists but that, as a result, the individual is not so disabled as to be unable to perform the job in question.
This ‘Catch-22’ will affect a claimant's perception of the chances of  winning a case.
On the other hand, American employers seldom challenge a plaintiff's claim to be a disabled person.
As in personal injury litigation, marshalling expert medical evidence to undermine a claimant's contentions will cause employers to measure the costs against the benefits of doing so.
Defendants will not wish to lose the sympathy of the court by aggressively attacking the plaintiff's disability status, especially when there is a second line of defence, to be discussed next.
QUALIFICATION FOR EMPLOYMENT
Anti-discrimination and equal opportunity legislation is often said to promote reverse discrimination or preferential treatment in favour of the minority or group the law was designed to protect.
It is argued that the law results in employers unwillingly or unwittingly engaging or promoting minorities, regardless of their abilities or qualifications, and whether or not they are the best person for the job.
Disability discrimination law is remarkably sensitive to this argument.
The contention that employers will be forced to employ or retain disabled persons incapable of doing the job must be met head on.
There are a number of legal formulae by which any suggestion of reverse discrimination is ruled out.
However, the formula for achieving this end in the North American jurisdictions is the so-called ‘otherwise qualified’ standard or ‘bona fide occupational requirement’test.
The ADA provides that an employer shall not discriminate against a ‘qualified individual with a disability’, meaning such an individual:
who, with or without reasonable accommodation, can perform the essential functions of the employment position that such individual holds or desires…
It is thus a defence to show that the reason for the alleged act of discrimination was not the plaintiff's disability but rather an inability to perform the work in question.
The defence requires employers to identify the essential functions of the job.
The law is concerned with job tasks which are fundamental rather than marginal.
Requiring a driver's licence where driving is not a major or frequent component of the actual work done, or where any driving duties could be easily allocated to fellow workers, could be an act of disability discrimination.
In respect of a job requiring ability to access, input and retrieve information from a computer, it would not be essential that the employee is able to use the keyboard or read the  visual display if adaptive equipment or software would enable a disabled person to undertake the work, albeit in a different manner.
Best practice suggests that to comply with the law employers must identify and document the requirements for a position in terms of skills, experience and education, and should apply job analysis techniques to catalogue the essential functions of the post.
In deciding what functions are ‘essential’, due consideration is given to the employer's judgement, but the employer's view is not determinative of the issue.
The existence of a written job description prepared in advance of recruitment and selection is considered evidence of the job's essential functions, but would not be accepted uncritically.
Evidence might also be brought of the amount of time spent performing the function, the consequences of it not being performed by the job-holder, the relevant terms of any collective agreements, the work experience of past holders of the position, and the current work experience of co-workers in similar jobs.
A job function might be regarded as essential if performance of the function is the reason the position exists at all; or performance could only be re-distributed amongst a limited number of employees; or the position has to be filled by someone with particular expertise or ability to perform what is a highly specialised function.
The end result is that disabled persons must have the requisite skills, educational background, experience and other qualifications for the job.
Subjective qualities, such as personality and work habits, may also be considered; but no account should otherwise be taken of disability, what might happen in the future or any impact on health insurance or workers' compensation costs.
The employer is only allowed to discriminate on the basis of personal merit and suitability for the job.
This leads us to consider the meaning of unlawful discrimination.
In the major common law countries, the legal concept of discrimination is largely derived from the disparate treatment and adverse impact analysis of the US Supreme Court in Griggs v Duke Power Co.
That analysis is so well understood in North America that their discrimination statutes merely enact a general prohibition on employment discrimination on account of disability.
However, the British sex and race discrimination legislation spells out the  equivalent concepts of direct and indirect discrimination.
For disability rights reform, it might be thought sufficient to take the framework of the British discrimination statutes, add the terms ‘disability’ and ‘disabled person’where appropriate, and supply a definition of the newly protected class.
Where employers discriminate because of disability by treating disabled persons less favourably than others, the existing concept of direct discrimination would be sufficient.
Where disabled persons are treated less favourably than others because they cannot comply with a requirement with which a substantially higher proportion of non-disabled persons can comply, and the requirement is not justifiable in the circumstances, indirect discrimination will arise.
However, disability discrimination gives rise to additio
5 ACCOMMODATING DISABILITY
Reasonable accommodation involves the making of modifications or adjustments in the employment process and to the workplace environment so as to ensure that disabled persons are not discriminated against but may enjoy equal employment opportunities with others.
In the US legislation, reasonable accommodation includes:
making existing facilities used by employees readily accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities; and…job restructuring, part-time or modified work schedules, reassignment to a vacant position, acquisition or modification of equipment or devices, appropriate adjustment or modifications of examinations, training materials or policies, the provision of qualified readers or interpreters, and other similar accommodations for individuals with disabilities.
The concept of ‘reasonable accommodation’ plays two possible roles.
First, it may be an aspect of the decision whether disabled persons are ‘qualified’ or not, in the sense of whether they can perform the essential functions of the job.
If they can do the job with or without reasonable accommodation then they are ‘qualified’.'
Second, a failure to make reasonable accommodation might be an act of discrimination, as might be a refusal to employ disabled applicants because the employer would have to accommodate their disabilities.
Job restructuring entails the reallocation or redistribution of non-essential or marginal functions, or the alteration of the performance of an essential function.
It should not involve a fundamental alteration of the position's particular requirements.
For example, in one case, an employer refused to hire a visually impaired applicant for the position of research analyst.
The employer concluded that the possible accommodation of appointing a reader to assist the applicant would not be reasonable as it would result in the duties of employment being largely performed by the reader and not by the applicant.
Despite this, the hiring of a personal assistant might be a reasonable accommodation in some circumstances.
It would seem logical that reassignment need only be considered in respect of positions for which the disabled employee is qualified.
A more difficult question is whether employers can rely upon collective agreements to circumvent the need to make job reassignment.
A number of American cases ruled that reassignment need not be made where the disabled employee had insufficient seniority under local union agreements or where collective bargaining had established job-related standards for the reassigned position which the disabled employee could not meet.
This is an unresolved issue.
If a vacant position is not immediately available, reassignment might still be considered if the employer knows of a position which will become vacant within a reasonable time.
It might also be permissible to reassign to a job at a lower grade if the employee cannot be accommodated in the present job and there are no equivalent vacant positions.
Ideally, the salary of the disabled employee should be ‘red-circled’ or maintained at its present level, but only if red-circling would also occur upon reassignment for other reasons.
Reassignment should not be in itself a cause of discrimination.
Reassignment of disabled employees to segregated or undesirable work militates against the general principles established by US law.
A failure to make reasonable accommodation would be subject to the defence of ‘undue hardship’.
If the employer can demonstrate that the proposed accommodation would cause undue hardship to the operation of the business, a failure to provide accommodation is not discriminatory.
In considering what would amount to undue hardship, the nature and cost of the accommodation should be looked at.
The availability of grants from public funds to meet the expense of the accommodation will be significant.
The effect of the accommodation on the workplace should be examined in the context of its financial resources, its work-force, its expenses, and the impact upon the operation of the site.
Nevertheless, in many cases, especially where the employer is part of a corporate group, it may be necessary to widen the inquiry so as to consider the employer's overall financial resources, the overall size of the business, the type of operation, and the overall composition, structure and functions of the work-force.
Otherwise, there is a danger that a parent company might prefer to close a small or isolated branch or site rather than incur investment costs in making reasonable accommodation or, alternatively, might argue that compliance with reasonable accommodation will result in job losses.
The burden of proof should be upon the employer to demonstrate undue hardship.
The 
6.
PRE EMPLOYMENT SCREENING
Pre-employment health screening is apparently widespread in the US.
A medical examination between the selection and placement stages of the recruitment process is frequently a condition of engagement.
Such medical  assessments are often used for making adverse employment decisions against people for trivial reasons and in respect of the mildest of conditions which bear no relationship to the requirements of the job.
With the advent of genetic screening techniques, the possibilities also exist for eliminating from employment consideration those whose genetic traits predict an increased risk of future disease or injury.
Apologists for these practices allege that employing disabled workers increases insurance costs, endangers safety compliance, results in higher rates of turnover, absenteeism and sick leave, and creates a greater potential for civil liability.
Whatever the merits of these arguments, where employment decisions are taken having screened for disability, applicants or employees may never know whether their disability has informed a determination of their employment opportunities.
Although British employers do not use medical screening to the same extent, disability discrimination law must regulate such screening in application forms, medical questionnaires and examinations, and interview questions.
Such regulation is now in place in the US.
The use of medical examinations as a means of screening out disabled persons from employment would need to be regulated.
Such proposals should apply to all applicants and employees, regardless of disability.
Employers would be prohibited from conducting a medical examination of any employment applicant, except for the single purpose of ascertaining ability to perform job-related functions.
However, once an offer of employment has been made, a medical examination could be required before the new recruit commences employment duties.
In that case, the employer could make the employment offer conditional upon the results of the medical examination.
Safeguards would have to be built into the use of post-selection, pre-placement medical examinations, which should only be permitted if all successful applicants are subjected to such a medical examination.
However, there would be nothing to prevent an employer from requiring disabled applicants to submit to a more extensive medical examination than others.
Once in employment, employees would not be required to undergo a medical examination at the behest of the employer, except to ascertain an employee's  continuing ability to perform job-related functions.
However, voluntary medical examinations may be conducted as part of an occupational health programme.
Any information obtained from a lawful medical examination regarding the medical condition and history of a disabled person would be collected and maintained on separate forms and in separate medical files.
Such information should be treated as a confidential medical record.
However, the employer may inform supervisors and managers of any necessary restrictions on the work or duties of a disabled person and of any necessary accommodations.
Furthermore, when appropriate, the employer may inform first aid and safety personnel where an employee's disability might require emergency treatment or necessitate the taking of special precautions.
Subjecting applicants or employees to medical examinations is not the only means that employers have used to screen out disabled employees.
Application forms and pre-employment questionnaires frequently solicit the medical history of applicants and may be used to reach employment decisions which disadvantage persons with disabilities.
Such inquiries also occur face-to-face during the course of an interview or selection procedure.
Employers should be prohibited from making inquiries of any applicants or employees as to whether they are a person with a disability.
7.
CONCLUSION
Equal rights for disabled workers is an ideal and idea whose time has come.
The realisation of that goal requires the goodwill and positive action of the majority: the ‘temporarily able-bodied’.
All stand to gain from such legislation and comparative employment law can be used to empower disabled people.
Nevertheless, other lessons from abroad will need to be learnt before any new disability discrimination law can work.
What continued role, if any, is there for a  disabled workers' quota?
Would the existence of the quota scheme undermine the moral argument that disabled people deserve equal treatment and opportunity as of right rather than by concession?
Might any fear that disabled employment opportunities would collapse if the prop of the statutory quota were to be removed be assuaged by placing a statutory obligation upon employers to adopt and to implement an affirmative action plan?
The means to enforce the non-discrimination principle need to be looked at afresh, although this is not a question unique to disability discrimination.
Lessons from abroad instruct us to re-examine the role of the individual complaint-based method of tackling discriminatory practices which are institutionalised and group-oriented.
The mobilisation of commercial forces through the use of contract compliance techniques is one approach; the adoption of class action procedures is another.
Discrimination remedies too require re-thinking and the challenge of enacting disability employment rights provides a timely opportunity to do so.
There is also little point in outlawing employment discrimination if the disadvantage and discrimination experienced by disabled people in other walks of life are not redressed.
The Americans with Disabilities Act, and comparable laws in Canada and Australia, also address discrimination in education, services, accommodation and transport, while mandating the demolition of architectural and structural barriers which have denied disabled people physical access to schools, colleges, public buildings and places of work.
The Commissioner for the Rights of Trade Union Members-A Framework for the Future?
The post of Commissioner for the Rights of Trade Union Members was established under the provisions of section 19 of the Employment Act 1988, in order to help protect certain statutory rights of trade union members.
The first Commissioner to be appointed is Gill Rowlands, and her office opened for business in December 1988.
This article will look at the work of the Commissioner during the past four and a half years, the problems which she has faced, and will conclude that she provides a model for other areas of dispute resolution.
Much of the factual information contained in this article was ascertained during visits to the Commissioner's office in Warrington during the summer months of 1992, when selected files were examined and interviews were conducted with the Commissioner and her staff.
Inevitably, therefore, this piece generally reflects the way in which the Commissioner and her staff perceive her role and the procedures which they adopt.
1.
INTRODUCTION
Before the post of Commissioner was established, it was considered in the Green Paper, Trade Unions and Their Members, that trade union members needed to be ‘exceptionally determined and sometimes courageous’ if they were to embark on the process of claiming and enforcing the full rights which the law gave to them.
This concern was based on evidence that procedures available through the courts to enforce compliance with provisions of Part I of the Trade Union Act 1984 were not being used.
The Green Paper showed that ten declarations had been made by the Certification Officer upholding complaints, but in no case had the complainant then sought an enforcement order from the 
High Court.
It was concluded that the reason for this was that the prospect of litigation against a trade union was too formidable for individual members.
It was considered that there was a need for a public authority to play a role in securing access to and observance of the law, where the issues involved justified it, if individuals might otherwise be deterred from bringing cases to the courts because of their complexity, the financial costs involved or for any other reason.
B analysis of the Commissioners Work
The existence of the Commissioner has clearly had an impact on the protection of rights of trade union members, and this can be seen upon examination of the figures produced by the Commissioner which analyse her work.
In the most recent annual report of the Commissioner, which reports on her activities during the period 1 April 1991 to 31 March 1992, it can be seen that the Commissioner received 345 enquiries and 64 formal applications for assistance.
These figures show that the number of applications received almost doubled, and that enquiries increased by 48%, compared to the previous year's figures.
Of the 64 formal applications received, were out of scope, 5 applications were dropped by the applicants, 4 were under consideration when the report was written, and 22 applicants were not assisted.
This left 14 applicants who were assisted during the reporting period.
The assistance given ranged from financial assistance for the procurement of legal advice to the issuing of court orders.
Apart from the steady increase in inquiries and applications, it is suggested that this year 1991–1992 was a typical one and can be characterised by the existence of a large number of inquiries, a relatively low number of applicants, and an even smaller number of assisted applicants.
C. The Scope of the Commissioner's Work
Originally, the Commissioner could provide assistance to any union member who was taking, or contemplating taking, proceedings against their union or an official or trustee of the union in a complaint that the union had breached  various specific statutory duties.
However, after the Commissioner had been in office for a mere three months the Government introduced a Green Paper which proposed to extend her powers significantly, and under the Employment Act 1990, section 10, she was given power to assist members in enforcement of their common law contractual rights against the union.
Specifically, the Commissioner may grant assistance when trade union members complain that their union has failed or is likely to fail to observe the requirements of its own rule book in relation to various defined activities.
Assistance may only be granted, however, where the Commissioner believes that the breach of rule about which the member is complaining is one which affects or may affect other members of the union or that similar breaches of the rules have been or may be committed in relation to other members of the union.
Assistance is only available to those who are able to bring relevant proceedings to court in their own right.
Since 1st November 1990, at the applicant's discretion, the words, ‘assisted by the Commissioner for the Rights of Trade Union Members’, can be added after their name in the title of proceedings, although the Commissioner can never be an actual party to those proceedings.
The aim behind this use of the Commissioner's name is twofold: to give assisted persons more assurance that the Commissioner stands behind them in the proceedings, and to increase public awareness of the grant of assistance and of the Commissioner.
In around 75% of cases the Commissioner's name is added to the title of the proceedings.
D. Assistance Granted
The assistance which the Commissioner can provide includes the paying of any legal advice and/or representation and the making arrangements for legal advice or representation.
It may be a combination of both of these.
In granting assistance the Commissioner will always indicate the extent of that  assistance-for example, up to which particular stage in any current or prospective court proceedings it will be available.
E. The Procedure
On receipt of an application the Commissioner and her team will decide if the application is of a type that can be assisted and if so whether, on the merits of the case, assistance should be granted.
In deciding whether to give assistance the Commissioner may consider whether the case raises a question of principle, whether it is so complex that it would be unreasonable to expect an individual to proceed alone and whether the issue is a matter of substantial public interest.
There is no duty upon the Commissioner to have regard to these vague considerations which should therefore not be seen as a potential fetter on the Commissioner's discretion.
Unlike legal aid where applicants must qualify financially, the financial status of an applicant before the Commissioner is not taken into account.
As part of the decision making process, the Commissioner may be mindful of the fact that some cases will serve as test cases.
No doubt, it would be very helpful if certain matters went to court for determination, and this may be a factor taken into account in deciding whether to assist or not.
However, the Commissioner will consider each case individually-the merits of one case are not balanced against another.
Once the Commissioner has agreed to pay for legal advice or representation in particular proceedings, the assisted person need incur no further significant costs in taking those proceedings, or in any steps preliminary to those proceedings.
The Commissioner will not offer assistance retrospectively; any expenditure already incurred before the Commissioner has made her decision to provide assistance must be funded by the applicant.
Anyone granted assistance will be given a choice about the arrangements to be made, subject to the terms of the offer of assistance by the Commissioner.
For example, assisted persons will be able to decide to use their own legal advisers  and be reimbursed by the Commissioner, or to have the Commissioner arrange to do this on their behalf.
The most usual situation is for the Commissioner to be asked to advise on the selection of a solicitor, and the applicant will be given a list from which to choose.
After the applicant has approached one of the solicitors, the Commissioner will then contact the solicitor and a law costs agreement will be negotiated and drawn up.
Once a solicitor has been instructed by the applicant, it is evident from the files examined that the Commissioner keeps a close eye on the case, and is kept informed of all progress and developments by way of regular reports from the solicitor.
It is, however, the trade union member who is the solicitor's client, even though the Commissioner will be paying the bill.
If the Commissioner grants assistance, the trade union concerned must be notified that assistance is being provided in relation to legal proceedings which have been or are commenced.
If assistance is not granted the Commissioner may inform the applicant of the reasons for the decision, but is under no obligation to do so.
In fact, the Commissioner's policy is to give reasons, wherever possible.
The most common reasons given are that although the complaint is within scope, there is no realistic remedy, or there is no real evidence of the complaint being well-founded.
Alternatively, the Commissioner will usually delay providing assistance if an internal investigation into the problem is currently being conducted by the trade union.
This gives rise to the possibility that such an investigation could be used by the union as a stalling facility to prevent the applicant from being assisted by the Commissioner.
However, there is no clear evidence that such a situation has arisen to date.
There is no right of appeal against the Commissioners decision, but the possibility of judicial review is available.
The most usual course of action for disappointed applicants will be for them to write back to the Com 
F. Protection for the Applicant
Union members who apply for the Commissioner's assistance are protected against being disciplined by their unions because they have done so.
A member disciplined by the union for this reason may complain to an Industrial Tribunal which, if it finds the complaint well founded, will make a declaration to that effect.
The declaration can lead to an award of compensation being made by the Industrial Tribunal or, in some cases, the Employment Appeal Tribunal.
2.
SOME EXAMPLES OF CASES WHERE THE COMMISSIONER HAS GRANTED ASSISTANCE
A. Industrial Action Ballots
The Commissioner is sometimes called upon to assist in the enforcement of the law concerning industrial action ballots.
In one case the union concerned had balloted its members on several variations of industrial action.
On the ballot paper it was unclear whether the member was voting ‘yes or no’ to all industrial action or only to certain aspects — no overtime, non-attendance at meetings etc.
A member of a local branch of the union claimed that this could be viewed as a ‘rolled up’ ballot question, and applied for the Commissioner's assistance.
The Commissioner supported the application and a solicitor was appointed.
Having sought counsel's opinion, the solicitor was contacted by the union.
The union then decided to co-operate by conducting an appropriate ballot, and a consent order was issued by the High Court.
B. Proceedings of Committees etc.
Since the Commissioner's remit has been extended to cover breaches of trade union rules, 10 applications have been received for assistance where applicants have alleged rule breaches concerning the constitution or proceedings of any trade union committee, conference or other body.
In four of those cases, three of which related to complaints about the same matter, assistance has been granted by the Commissioner.
The three related complaints concerned a National Executive Committee's attempt to renege upon a ten year old conference agreement without a vote at conference.
Three union members claimed that this was in breach of rule, and an order to reinstate the agreement was issued by the court.
The union complied with the order and paid the costs of the action.
The other case in which assistance was granted concerned a complaint that the union, in breach of the rules, was trying to split motions for vote.
An interlocutory injunction was sought, but not granted by the court, where it was said that there had been a breach, but that an injunction would not be granted on a balance of convenience.
The applicant was however satisfied with the result and felt vindicated by the fact that the breach of rule had been acknowledged.
C. Inspection of Trade Union Accounts
The Commissioner has received several applications for assistance concerning the right for a member to inspect the union's accounting records.
Often, the applicants are recommended to re-contact their unions formally to seek access to accounts, stating that this is on the recommendation of the Commissioner, and access has been provided.
In one case, following the grant of assistance, a writ was issued.
The applicant had been granted access to accounts on condition that he paid what was considered to be excessive amounts for rent of room, photocopying, and a union official's salary.
The court ordered the union to allow access to the accounts with only minimal charges being allowed.
In another case where an applicant had been refused any access to accounts, the Commissioner's assistance resulted in a solicitor's letter being sent to the union.
Access was then granted without the need for litigation.
3.
PROBLEMS FACED BY THE COMMISSIONER
It is submitted that several obstacles have faced and some will continue to  face the Commissioner as she carries out her work.
If the Commissioner is to be used as a model for other areas of dispute resolution, as will be suggested infra, it will be useful to consider how those problems have been tackled and whether they would pose significant difficulties in other areas.
A. Publicity
An elementary problem which the Commissioner encountered was that of publicity.
There is a fine line to be drawn between making union members aware of the Commissioner and her role and encouraging members to bring actions.
The Commissioner is not there to canvass for work, but she does consider that publicity is a valid function of her office.
In fact, as soon as her office was set up, she developed a marketing plan which aims to:
increase general awareness of the Commissioner and her role and to ensure, as far as reasonably practicable, that trade union members will have access to information about the assistance the Commissioner can provide and how to apply for that assistance
.
A variety of methods have been employed in order to fulfil these objectives, from the distribution of publicity material to informal meetings with senior trade union officials and members of the legal profession.
To a great extent these methods seem to have worked.
It would be an exaggeration to say that every trade union member is now aware of the Commissioner, but it is probable that a disgruntled member's first contact point would be able to pass on the relevant information.
The Commissioner is satisfied that public information centres are now more aware of her role.
Lawyers are also more familiar with the Commissioner and are more frequently pointing clients with complaints about their unions in her direction.
The Commissioner has adopted a higher profile recently by exhibiting at various professional gatherings.
The only source of feedback available upon these endeavours is the number of enquiries and applications being made to the Commissioner, and these are increasing.
B. Reaction of Trade Unions
A further potential and equally predictable difficulty to face the Commissioner was the reaction of the unions.
The unions had already endured the  Conservative Government's policy of granting individual rights, thus increasingly undermining collective power; the range of actions that trade union members can take has been increased, and the procedures for doing so have been simplified, for example, by some new actions being justiciable in Industrial Tribunals, or by referring the matter to the Certification Officer.
The ‘next step’ of setting up a public authority-the Commissioner for the Rights of Trade Union Members-to assist actively in enforcing such individual rights could have been too much to swallow for the unions.
The Commissioner herself was sensitive to this perception, and was keen, right from the start, to establish herself as an independent and neutral body.
By June 1991 the Commissioner considered that ‘past misconceptions were disappearing’.
There had been ‘an encouraging change in attitude’ among some trade union national executive members, ‘rank and file’members and others.
In the words of the Commissioner, ‘trade union members are becoming increasingly confident in my ability to provide a way forward for all concerned’.
Whether the Commissioner is being over-optimistic, or whether her perceptions are indeed correct, could well be a fertile area for further study, examining the trade union experience of the Commissioner.
C. The Comparison with the EOC and CRE
It is tempting to compare the role of the Commissioner with that of the Equal Opportunities Commission and the Commission for Racial Equality, bodies that are empowered to support individual cases in connection with complaints about discrimination on grounds of sex or race respectively.
However, the Commissioner's powers are much more limited than those of either of these bodies.
Her role is simply to assist union members in taking certain specified types of legal action against their trade union.
The Commissioner has no power to conduct formal investigations, to obtain information, or to issue codes of practice, unlike the EOC and CRE.
On a more practical level, in assisting a trade union member, unlike the EOC or CRE, s3 the Commissioner is not empowered to seek a settlement of the dispute through conciliation.
The Commissioner stressed right from the start that she is not an Ombudsman-it is not the task of her office to offer a conciliation or advisory service to help resolve disputes between a union and its members.
This does not mean, however, that the Commissioner is always determined to go to court.
There is clearly an element of informal conciliation-if only to safeguard public money.
Applicants for assistance will usually be encouraged to seek an internal solution to their problem.
Often the mere fact that the trade union member has approached the Commissioner will lead to the satisfactory resolution of the problem.
This may account for the regular citation in the Commissioner's Annual Reports of several applications ‘not pursued’ by the applicants.
What the Commissioner will not do, however, is act as a go-between; the contact with the union concerning resolution of disputes will be with the member, not the Commissioner.
The Commissioner feels that trade union members sometimes find it difficult to accept her limited role and that they would like to see her resolve a wide range of problems.
Whether or not there is a place for a trade union Ombudsman to carry out investigations and give general advice to unions, it is considered that this task should not be given to the Commissioner in view of the benefit to be derived from her maintaining an independent position.
Technical Problems
On the whole the legislation which governs the operation of the Commissioner is reasonably straightforward, especially since its consolidation in the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992.
Nevertheless, there are several areas which could cause confusion, and these generally relate to the extension to the Commissioner's remit in section 109(2) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 concerning breach of trade union rules.
There seems to be fine line between breaches of rules which would be covered by section 109(2) and those which would not.
Resort to logic does not seem to help in ascertaining the distinction.
Breaches of rules concerning ‘the constitution or proceedings of any committee, conference or other body’ are within the Commissioner's remit.
Does ‘the constitution’ mean the make-up of the committee or does it mean the constitutionality of the committee?
Would ‘the authorising or endorsing of industrial action’ extend to failing to hold a ballot on whether to call off industrial action, if the rules required this? s9
Do the union rules incorporate the principles of natural justice, so that a breach thereof brings the action with the Commissioner's remit?
The Commissioner's role is to assist trade union members-but does the inclusion of ‘disciplinary proceedings by the union (including expulsion)’ mean that ex-trade union members can be assisted by the Commissioner?
These are important questions and any doubt about the answers may lead to the Commissioner acting ultra vires.
The Commissioner herself is the only legally qualified person in her office, and it is not surprising to learn that Treasury solicitor's advice is often sought before a decision is made to grant assistance or not 
E The solutions
It is submitted that in just four years the Commissioner and her team have succeeded, to a great extent, in ironing out many of the initial difficulties which were encountered.
Publicity will inevitably be a challenge when a new post or system is established, and in this case the challenge has been dealt with effectively.
Again, opposition from those affected by the new legislation-here, the trade unions is somewhat unavoidable.
Being ostensibly part of the Conservative Government's policy of controlling the internal running of trade unions, her role has inevitably been seen as being both political and provocative.
However, good practices established by the Commissioner can only help to enhance her image within the trade union movement.
Upon the introduction of a new institution it is commonplace for analogies to be drawn with existing institutions.
This can cause difficulties if wrong assumptions are drawn as to the potential of the new body.
Once more, here, certain trade union members have been disappointed with the Commissioner's ineffectual response to their complaints.
Promotion of the role of the Commissioner, emphasising both her capabilities and her limitations should help to alleviate this problem.
The extent of any initial technical problems that will arise will depend upon the drafting of the enabling legislation, and the good sense of those who must interpret it.
It is hoped that solutions will be found to the problems evidenced  supra as and when they become necessary.
In this regard, it might have been useful to have a stronger legal background within the Commissioner's office.
4.
JUSTIFYING THE POSITION OF THE COMMISSIONER
The most challenging on-going problem for the Commissioner will be that of justifying her position.
Was there a real need to create the Commissioner for the Rights of Trade Union Members?
In the past members wanting to enforce rights against their union were burdened with the costs of litigation, which may have only been mitigated to some extent by the availability of legal aid.
It was suggested, perhaps uncontroversially, in the Green Paper, Trade Unions and Their Members, that a system for enforcing the statutory duties which a trade union owes to its members should serve three purposes -enable interested parties to initiate complaint procedures easily and at reasonable costs; -ensure that such complaints are handled speedily and that remedies available where complaints are upheld are effective; and -give protection against unfair treatment of complainants by trade unions.
These purposes could have been served without the creation of a publicly funded official.
As well as the appointment of the Commissioner, recent legislation has paved the way for certain rights to be enforced by procedures which are cheaper, more expeditious and more informal than the ordinary courts.
For example, the right not to unjustifiably disciplined is enforceable in an Industrial Tribunal.
Certain other rights, such as the right to inspect the register of trade union members, can be made the subject of a complaint to the Certification Officer.
One obvious alternative to the appointment of the Commissioner would have been to give further jurisdiction to the Industrial Tribunals, instead of the High Court, to enforce such rights which now fall within the scope of the Commissioner's work.
Then, the arguments concerning accessibility, formality, time and expense would have been, to some extent, less valid.
It could be claimed that it is unacceptable for public money to be used to fund the Commissioner, especially when it is remembered that legal aid is not available for legal representation before Industrial Tribunals, for example, for unfair dismissal claims.
How can the special treatment for members wishing to sue their unions be justified?
It is assumed that the nature of members' complaints against their union is such as to warrant special support, but why is this so?
The Government could not point to evidence of particular abuse of power by trade unions.
Furthermore, with the abolition of the post entry closed shop, the link between union membership and employment has largely disappeared; members dissatisfied with their union can voluntarily resign without the threat of losing their job.
There is no legal aid for unfair dismissal cases against employers, and yet the number of such applications is far greater, and the consequences much more serious, than complaints of alleged unlawful behaviour by trade unions.
It is difficult, therefore, to justify the role of the Commissioner on the grounds of the extent of, or the serious consequences of, abuse of union power.
The Government suggested that there is a clear public interest in ensuring that the statutory duties owed by unions to their membership in general are observed.
Indeed, at first the Commissioner's role was limited to those areas in the nature of public rights, now specified in section 109(1) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992.
However, it has been seen that in a very short time, the Commissioner's powers were extended to cover the private rights of members to enforce union rules-to sue for breach of contract-including individual complaints concerning discipline and expulsion.
The Government also considered that members contemplating or taking proceedings against their union face considerable disadvantages; trade unions are large organisations with substantial resources and expertise to call upon when legal proceedings are imminent or taking
5.
THE COMMISSIONER AS A FRAMEWORK FOR THE FUTURE
In the previous section several arguments have been put forward that question the justification for the existence of the Commissioner.
However, it can be seen that her presence could be more readily accepted if there were comparable Commissioners in existence, assisting in areas other than those involving trade union members and their unions.
It is the fact that there is only one  Commissioner who operates in a narrow area of disputes that is difficult to condone.
It is suggested that the Commissioner would provide a good model for the establishment of similar posts in other areas of dispute.
In fact, the author notes with great interest a proposal in the latest Trade Union Reform and Employment Rights Bill to create another Commissioner-the Commissioner for Protection Against Unlawful Industrial Action-modelled along the lines of the Commissioner for the Rights of Trade Union Members.
The purpose of this Commissioner is to give assistance to members of the public wishing to sue a trade union if their supply of goods or services is affected by industrial action.
An arguably more compelling situation where a Commissioner may be of great use is in the area of unfair dismissal actions before an Industrial Tribunal.
As has been seen, many of the grounds put forward by the Government to support the establishment of the Commissioner are equally valid in the area of dismissal disputes.
The procedures adopted by the Commissioner have been documented in this article in some detail, as it is considered that the systems established by the Commissioner and her office for dealing with her work are highly effective and that such systems could be adapted and applied in other areas of dispute.
It is to be hoped that the political reasons behind her appointment will be forgotten, and that, on a positive note, the Commissioner will be used as a paradigm for comparable areas of dispute resolution.
Employee Inventions Revisited
The right of an employee inventor to claim statutory compensation from his employer has recently been asserted before the courts for the first time in a series of three reported cases emanating from the Comptroller of Patents and the Patents Court.
Section 40(1) of the Patents Act 1977 permits an employee inventor to apply to either tribunal for a single or periodic award of compensation over and above the salary he is already earning.
The amount of such compensation is equated to a fair share of the economic benefit which the employer has derived or may derive from the invention which the employee conceived and developed.
The genesis of this right to compensation can be traced to the protracted debate which took place within the Standard Advisory Committee on Patents in the wake of the Department of Trade's publication in 1975 of a White Paper on the future of patent law.
The Standing Committee was exercised by a single issue: should an employee who develops an invention in the course of his contractual duties receive a special monetary reward for the contribution which that invention has made to his employer's business?
As 80–85 per cent of patents are generally held to derive from inventions made by employees in the course of their employment, the resolution of this issue had direct impact on the thousands of workplaces generating patent applications each year.
The White Paper had indicated the government's willingness to introduce a statutory compensation scheme if ‘substantial evidence’ could be adduced to show that employee inventors were being unfairly rewarded under voluntary arrangements with their employers.
The Institute of Patentees and Inventors  and several parliamentarians were able to cite instances where employees had received little or no material reward beyond their ordinary salary following the successful commercial exploitation of their invention by the employer or the employer's licensees.
The arguments which thus preoccupied the Standing Committee divided along predictably partisan lines.
The TUC and the Institute sought a compulsory compensation scheme similar to that successfully operated in Sweden.
Their proposal would have allowed employee inventors to apply to a tribunal to assess what would constitute a ‘fair’ reward for their efforts in the light of all the circumstances attending the creation and subsequent exploitation of the invention.
The absence of such a scheme was said to be a disincentive to those who might otherwise be encouraged to exercise their inventive talents to the full.
The CBI and other industrial representatives argued that such incentives already existed in the form of the employee's salary, the training undergone at the firm's expense, and the provision of a suitable working environment.
Moreover, some employers chose to make ex gratia awards not only as cash payments or share option schemes, but also in the form of extended periods of leave or the improvement of on-site research facilities.
In short, it was contended that additional rewards for employees should be left entirely to the discretion of individual employers.
The government eventually adopted a political compromise.
It was accepted in principle that an employee should be entitled to a statutory reward for his employer's successful exploitation of the product of his inventive labours.
However, the right to seek such compensation under section 40(1) was to be restricted to cases where the employee could demonstrate that his invention was ‘of outstanding benefit to the employer’.
As the Lord Chancellor indicated when the Bill was in committee, the provision was deliberately tailored to meet those exceptional cases involving ‘the sort of invention which may revolutionise a company or perhaps even a whole industry’
To succeed in a claim for compensation, therefore, an employee must overcome the various thresholds or conditions specified in secti 
2.
SOURCE OF BENEFIT: PATENT OR INVENTION?
At the outset, the employee inventor seeking statutory compensation has to establish the true source of the benefit derived by his employer from the invention.
As might be expected, the term ‘benefit’ in this connection means benefit in money or money's worth.
According to section 40(1), the court or the comptroller must be satisfied that ‘the patent is (having regard among other things to the size and nature of the employer's undertaking) of outstanding benefit to the employer and that by reason of those facts it is just that the employee should be awarded compensation to be paid by the employer’.
Clearly, therefore, the source of benefit to the employer has to be the patent, rather than the invention, which the employee has developed.
The foregoing distinction is critical to the employee's prospects of gaining an award.
The right to apply for compensation is undoubtedly lost if the employer chooses not to seek to patent an invention which is nonetheless patentable.
The employer may have reached this decision on purely strategic, rather than personal or malicious, grounds The employer may calculate, for instance, that a real commercial benefit can only be derived from gaining a market lead in a highly competitive sector (such as electronics or fibre optics) with a new product that would otherwise be obsolescent by the time the patent filing and examination process  has run its course.
In these circumstances, the employer may rely on the law protecting trade secrets and begin in-house production or, alternatively, license others to use or develop the relevant know-how generated by the invention.
In either event, the business may make material gains from an invention which could have been patented.
Similarly, a new method or process of manufacture which does not lend itself to detailed analysis by competitors will probably remain immune from imitation by rivals precisely because the employer has avoided the mandatory public disclosure involved in proceeding with a patent application.
But even where the employer has patented the new product or process in the UK or elsewhere, the employee may still find himself barred from seeking compensation if the court orders revocation of the patent following proceedings brought by his employer against an alleged infringer.
Revocation may occur, for instance, where the defendant who is alleged to have infringed the patent can establish that he had developed and publicly used the substance of the patented invention (perhaps in another country and even for non-commercial purposes) before the employer From the employee's point of view, revocation of the patent almost inevitably removes the opportunity which the employer had to make substantial gains from the invention.
The series of recent decisions considered here indicates, however, that the employer may face other difficulties should the employer's patent remain unchallenged.
B. Developmental Work
Sometimes a patent application is made largely to prevent others imitating the underlying idea while the patentee seeks to develop or refine the invention into something which is marketable.
In these circumstances, can the employer legitimately avoid liability under section 40(1)?
In particular, can the benefit the employer derives from the invention be confined to the refinements made to a product or process after the patent application was filed?
This was the argument advanced by the employer in British Steel Plc's Patent.
The employer contended that the benefit derived from the employee's invention of a new valve, for use in steel-making, should not be linked to the patented article itself but rather to the extensive development work expended on it by him after the application had been filed with the Patent Office.
This work had been carried out to remove what the Comptroller's hearing officer accepted were ‘major technical obstacles [which]stood in the way of the deployment of the rotary valve.
The employer had, therefore, to incur heavy development costs before any net tangible benefits would accrue from the invention.
The hearing officer dismissed this argument which a fortiori would have meant that the ‘greater the departure an employee's invention represented relative to conventional technology, the less would be his chance of succeeding in his application under section 40(1), since such an invention would be likely to require a greater degree of development work to put it into practice.
It is submitted that the hearing officer correctly interpreted the policy underlying section 40(1).
There is no indication in either the legislation or the relevant debates that Parliament intended claims to be defeated by confining the court's economic enquiry solely to the later developments undertaken in relation to the patented invention.
The employee's claim was, however, effectively refused in the British Steel case because such benefits as might be expected to flow to the employer from refinements to the patented product had not (yet) materialised.
The chronology of events in this instance is particularly instructive.
The employee had conceived the idea for the valve in March 1985 and was able to test it for the first time several months later; the employer applied for a UK patent in March 1986; and three years later the employee applied for compensation.
Clearly, then, the first three years of the patent had not yielded any net benefit to the employer, although the latter readily conceded that the undeveloped patent was itself a ‘key development’ and a ‘world beater’.
More generally, therefore, an employee's initial idea may be several steps ahead of the present state-of-the-art and yet be too far removed from practical and profitable application to be of immediate benefit.
In sum, the patented article or process may require to undergo extensive trials and refinements before it is sufficiently ‘productionised’ or marketable to generate identifiable gains for the employer.
Until this has happened, however, the employee's application under section 40(1) is liable to be dismissed as, at best, premature.
3.
EVIDENCE OF BENEFIT
The nature of the benefit which the employer is said to have derived from a particular invention is readily ascertainable if the employee can show that the employer is in receipt of royalty payments from licensees who have been permitted to develop, manufacture and market the patented article or process.
In such cases, the employee probably need only lead evidence based on the employer's certified accounts.
However, the evidential task becomes more difficult if the employer opts to make and refine the patented invention himself.
For example, the employer may be shown to have an increased order book after the invention has been patented.
It could be counter-argued by the employer that increased customer interest was less due to the inherent qualities of the patented invention itself than to the uncompetitive prices charged by other suppliers of similar products.
Similarly, the employer could contend that sales had risen in large part because of his superior after-sales service or the comprehensive warranty offered to customers.
The employer could conceivably advance the proposition that an effective advertising campaign had raised consumer awareness of the whole range of his products or services.
If the argument is sustained in any of these instances, the benefit which the employer has derived from the patented invention is effectively reduced or even negated.
It is possible to foresee other evidential problems.
For instance, to what extent should increased sales of non-patented items be considered as a benefit accruing to the employer in relation to customers ordering patented goods?
And what other economic factors ought to be considered as benefits derived by the employer?
These are some of the issues which were raised directly in recent proceedings before the comptroller or the court.
A. Single Customer Sales
In Memco-Med's Patent, 2s the Patents Court had to consider whether the employer's sales of a patented product to a single customer amounted to the creation of a benefit under section 40(1).
Otis, the well-known lift manufacturer, had encouraged the employer in 1979 to refine an existing Otis patent relating to lift door detector units.
Two of the employer's staff were able to develop an improved form of circuitry known as the ‘R’ model, which became the subject of a patent application by the employer in 1981.
As a further encouragement to the employer, Otis placed an order in 1980 for 1,000 units of the proposed improved model when it was eventually developed.
It became apparent, however, in 1983 that the ‘R’ model was experiencing technical difficulties and further develop  -ment work was undertaken.
Otis continued to buy the R model until the L2 patented model went into full-scale production in 1986.
By 1990, Otis was buying more L2 detectors than ‘R’ model units.
Did the sales of the ‘R’ model constitute a benefit derived by the employer from the patent?
It was estimated that sales of the detector to Otis had earned the employer over £4 million during the period 1982 to 1986 and the revenue generated by these sales represented at least 80% of the employer's turnover.
Aldous J. concluded, however, that the proportion of turnover attributable to ‘R’ model sales did not mean that the employer had gained any benefit as such.
The fact that the employer ‘only sells a patented product to one customer and therefore [the employer's]existence depends on sales of that product does not mean that the patent is of any benefit.’
The court accepted the employer's argument that sales to Otis were entirely due to the good relationship between the two companies and the price and quality of the units which the employer was able to supply.
Moreover, it was believed that the relationship was such that sales to Otis would probably have remained unaffected if the patent had not been granted.
The sales of ‘R’ model clearly represented the difference between viable liquidity and probable bankruptcy for the employer.
Indeed, Otis were the only purchasers of this version of the detector unit and were content to remain customers even when technical problems emerged in 1985.
While the decision cannot be impugned on the facts, it undoubtedly confirms the difficulties which inventor employees face where the employer's sales can only be traced to a single main purchaser of the patented product.
The fact that the employer's turnover (and ultimate viability) is to a large extent periled on supply contracts entered into because of formal tying agreements or informal ‘understandings’ does not augur well for the employee's prospects unless he can show that the patent influenced the customer to buy on the scale which he did.
This will be far from easy to establish in view of the very strength of the business relationship which has generated this level of turnover for the employer.
At the very least, the employee may need to show that the customer began to make an active search for an alternative supplier when be became aware that the patented article had to undergo important technical refinements after it had been put into use.
B. Non-Patented Sales
The employer who has obtained patent protection for an invention which is undergoing refinement may agree to supply customers with one of his own non  patented substitute products until the development work has reached its conclusion.
Is the revenue generated by such contracts truly derived from the employer's position as patentee of the invention?
In GEC's Patent, the employer had obtained patent protection for a cockpit display unit which had been invented by an employee for use in military aircraft.
The US Air Force placed substantial orders for display units incorporating the patented invention with the employer before 1983.
These contracts could not be fulfilled as the units had to be redesigned and tested.
Further contracts for non-patented equipment were placed with the employer in 1983 and 1985.
These contracts were worth $75 million each.
In 1986, the employer signed the main contract to supply redesigned equipment based on the patented invention.
This contract was worth $72 million.
In the following year, the employer built a new factory principally to make equipment to meet the latest contract.
The employee inventor argued that the sums received by the employer under the 1983 and 1985 contracts should be regarded as benefits deriving from the possession of a patent over the invention.
Specifically, it was contended that these earlier or interim contracts would not have been agreed had the customer not already placed an order before 1983 to buy patented equipment.
The hearing officer held that it was for the employee to establish that the employer's possession of patent protection was an influential factor in persuading the customer to order wholly non-patented items while awaiting the redesign of the patented invention.
While it is conceded that this decision is correct, it nevertheless leaves the employee with a difficult evidential task.
A host of factors may have influenced the signing of interim contracts, including such matters as the price, product quality and availability, and the provision of after-sales know-how or expertise.
Again, few long-standing customers will surely want to compromise their future bargaining position by revealing to the court the true weight which they gave to the various considerations before them prior to the placing of interim contracts with the employer.
C. Reduced Costs.
The employer may only opt to use the patented invention in his business, perhaps because of the specialised nature of the invention and the business itself.
Alternatively, he may choose to retail it or license others to exploit the patent.
In either event, the employee will probably seek to argue that operational savings properly fall to be regarded as a benefit derived from the patent.
In British Steel plc's Patent, the employer was able to conclude a world-wide licensing agreement in respect of the patented valve invented by the  employee.
Under the agreement, the employer was paid a fee of £30,000 and the right to receive royalties of 10% on sales or sub-licences.
The employer had not received any royalty income by the time the employee applied for compensation under section 40(1).
There was evidence that potential sub-licensees were deterred by the level of royalty sought and by the non-exclusivity of the licences on offer.
Because the employee could only therefore point to the licensing fee as a tangible form of benefit, he also argued that the employer's use of the valve in the steel production process at its South Teesside plant generated other economic benefits.
In particular, it was said that the employer was thereby saving on royalties payable to the patentee or licensee of alternative components; the valve reduced processing costs and disposals of scrap; output had increased; and the frequency of employee injury had declined so as to reduce absences from work and claims for compensation.
On the evidence, the hearing officer considered that only the reduction in the disposal of scrap material amounted to a proven and readily quantifiable benefit.
This view was in large measure instantiated by the employer's claim in an application for the Queen's Award for Technology that use of the new valve ensured a ‘startling 1% improvement in scrapping rate which could equate to [a]saving of £0.5 million per annum’.
The employee's estimate of £100,000 in savings was accordingly thought to be too conservative.
Significantly, some of the other alleged benefits were flatly contradicted by the employer; others were found to exist but could not be confirmed in precise financial terms.
Presumably the employee would have led evidence as to the latter if the employer's accounts had indeed contained such information.
In the absence of a specially commissioned cost analysis on the impact of a particular patent, it is submitted that few employers will know or retain the detailed financial data which will assist the employee in his claim for compensation.
D. Onus of Proof
In GEC's Patent, the hearing officer held that the initial onus fell on the employer to establish that he did not benefit from obtaining a patent.
Where the employer secured a monetary benefit as a result of a contract for the sale of patented goods or services, the presumption was raised that the benefit derived under the contract was attributable in part to the presence of the patent.’
This presumption was justified on the basis that the grant of the patent ensured a monopoly position allowing the employer to charge higher prices and lawfully prevent others imitating the substance of the invention without permission.
The  same evidential approach was later adopted by the hearing officer in British Steel's Patent.
On the other hand, Aldous J held in Memco-Med Ltd's Patent that the onus of proof lies upon the employee to show, on the balance of probabilities, that the employer has derived benefit from the patented invention.
It is respectfully submitted that the latter approach is supported by the wording of the provision.
Section 40(1) permits the court only to award compensation on an application made by the employee which inter alia establishes that the latter made the patented invention which is of outstanding benefit to the employer and that ‘by reason of those facts it is just that the employee should be awarded compensation’.
The legislation does therefore not set up any presumption in the employee's favour; rather it is for him as claimant to lead evidence which tends to establish that it is more likely than not the employer gained from possession of the patent.
It is possible, of course, that the onus will later shift to the employer in the light of the evidence adduced by the employee.
4.
OUTSTANDING BENEFIT
The employee's success in establishing the right to compensation critically depends on proving that the patented invention ‘is of outstanding benefit to the employer’.
This qualification contains two distinct but related elements.
First, the benefit attributable to the patent must be shown to be current at the time of the employee's application; the prospect of future benefits such as royalty payments from foreign sub-licensees is only relevant to the quantum of compensation awarded should outstanding benefit be proved.
The hearing officer in British Steel plc's Patent confirmed this interpretation in the following terms:
Although, having once decided under section 40(1) that an award was warranted, I would be required by section 41(1) to take account of any benefit the employer ‘might reasonably be expected to derive’, section 40(1) requires me to decide whether the patent is of outstanding benefit, and I conclude that this entails my satisfying myself that such benefit has already been and is being achieved.
Secondly, the past and current benefit to the employer must not merely be substantial or even valuable; it has to be outstanding if compensation is to be awarded.
Notably, the quality threshold is tied to the employer's existing  exploitation of the patented invention.
Thus an invention which represents a remarkable advance on the prior art in a particular field may nevertheless fail this requirement because the employer neglects (or is simply unable) to market it properly.
The patent may, for instance, have been licensed on terms which are commercially unattractive to potential sub-licensees with superior production techniques or who enjoy established access to trans-national sales outlets.
The employer's plans to export the invention may be thwarted by a volatile exchange rate or the unexpected imposition of heavy import tariffs in target markets.
There is also the possibility that the invention represents only a modest (but nonetheless patented) improvement on the employer's existing products; hence it may take several years simply to recoup the research and development costs.
Alternatively, the employer may have chosen not to exploit the invention at all since it would effectively reduce customer demand for an established and more expensive substitute already produced as part of his current range of activities.
In each case mentioned, therefore, the employer's commercial assessment and endeavours or the prevailing economic circumstances will significantly reduce or even remove any prospect the employee might have of being entitled to a compensation award.
The employee's assertion that the invention has generated outstanding benefit has to be determined in relation to all the surrounding facts and circumstances.
In particular, however, section 40(1) directs that this assessment has to be made with regard to ‘among other things the size and nature of the employer's undertaking’.
The logic of this benchmark would suggest that the employee inventor in a small business is far more likely to succeed in satisfying the quality threshold for benefit to the employer.
An invention which is properly exploited by a small business may have a dramatic impact on the employer's turnover; a larger business, on the other hand, may be able to generate a far larger sales income with the same invention but ultimately produce an insignificant effect on the latter's overall liquidity.
Taken to its conclusion, this hypothesis prefigures the paradoxical consequence that the smaller business may find itself liable to pay compensation which only the larger business is realistically able to meet.
Two of the recent decisions highlight some of the problems facing employees seeking to correlate the benefit the employer has gained with the size and nature of the latter's business.
In GEC's Patent, the 1986 contract for the supply of the patented item to the US Air Force was worth $72 million to the employer.
Both parties accepted that the employer was a ‘medium-sized’ subsidiary of GEC.
There was however no detailed evidence of the employer's turnover or size  although it was not disputed that the profit under the contract amounted to $10.8 million.
As regards the nature of the business, the hearing officer found that the invention of the display units represented an important advance in an-essential component in the employer's final product.
Indeed, as a component, it was found that the units themselves would have sold on their own merit.
However it was held that the benefit from the 1986 contract was not outstanding as the customer had chosen to place earlier contracts worth $75 million for non-patented display units despite being fully aware of the invention's existence and capabilities.
Figures relating to the size of the employer's business were however available to the hearing officer in British Steel's Patent.
It had earlier been found that the total benefit to the employer of the new valve from low 
5.
CONCLUSION
The increasing number of no-union deals in high technology and other industrial endeavours at the cutting edge of technical innovation inevitably invests the employee compensation scheme with greater potential importance than it assumed when it first became law.
One of the few signs of encouragement to emerge from the reported cases considered here is that some current employee inventors cannot easily be ‘bought off’ by employers anxious to avoid compensation claims.
The applicant in the British Steel case received an ex gratia payment of £10,000 and was awarded an MBE on the recommendation of his employer.
Similarly, in the employee in the GEC case had received an MBE and various other awards at the behest of the company.
On the other hand, all three decisions confirm that an employee would be rashly optimistic if he expects to gain compensation from the mere fact the employer is selling or otherwise exploiting the patented invention with a significant measure of success.
The initial onus will be on the employee as applicant to demonstrate an outstanding benefit to the employer; and as we have seen, this is no easy task.
Moreover, the egregious nature of the benefit to be established is such that few employees will be able to satisfy the quality threshold incorporated in section 40(1).
The deterrent effect which these difficulties have on potential claims for compensation is undoubtedly compounded by the non-availability of legal aid to putative applicants in many cases.
It is surely time to re-cast the law on employee inventions to tilt the balance away from the employer.
Initially, this could be done by instituting two fairly modest reforms.
First, the requirement to show ‘outstanding benefit’ should be amended to read ‘substantial benefit’.
Such an amendment would permit claims where the employee's invention falls short of revolutionising the employer's  position but nonetheless contributes greatly to the latter's economic well-being.
And secondly, the proposals in the 1983 Green Paper should now be implemented in part measure.
Employee inventors should be allowed to seek an exclusive licence from the employer where the patented invention remains un-exploited for more than, say, twelve months; for instance, licences may have been offered by the employer to third parties on commercially unrealistic terms.
It would then be up to the employee to set up his own business and exploit the patent if he is able to attract venture or loan capital to do so.
The latter reform cannot be introduced without hazarding some risks.
The grant of a patent can too often assume a talismanic significance for those closely involved in its conception and development.
In particular, it may foster the inventor's ill-informed optimism that he has something which can be developed and exploited for commercial gain.
And should the inventor then fail in the business he has established to exploit the invention which his employer was unwilling or unable to utilise, he may be left so disillusioned that his talents and abilities are ultimately lost to the country as a whole.
Conversely, however, the employee's success under a compulsory licence could conceivably drive the employer out of business, with the consequent loss of his entrepreneurial contribution to the nation's wealth.
Both results are, of course, consistent with the competitive nature of commercial activity and cannot, it is submitted, realistically be avoided if a measure of justice is to be accorded to the inventor whose endeavours remain unused by the employer.
RECENT CASES
Sex Discrimination and Pregnant Women
Webb v EMO Air Cargo (UK) Ltd [19931 IRLR 27 (HL) 1993 ICR 175
The referral of a set of questions under Article 177 EEC by the House of Lords in Webb v EMO Air Cargo (UK) Ltd raises the issue of the ambit of anti-discrimination law in relation to pregnant women under the Sex Discrimination Act 1975 and Council Directive 76/207/EEC and also the scope of the protections offered under Council Directive 92185/ EEC (OJ L 348/1) which gives improved rights to pregnant and breast-feeding women in the United Kingdom.
Webb concerns the dismissal of a woman who discovered that she was pregnant shortly after being hired as a maternity leave replacement.
The applicant needed six months training in order to learn the skills of the new job and had expressed the desire to resume work after her baby was born since the employer had indicated that the job could become a permanent position.
Ms Webb's allegation that the dismissal constituted direct and indirect sex discrimination was dismissed by the Industrial Tribunal, the Employment Appeal Tribunal and the Court of Appeal (noted by Hare (1991) ILJ 124).
This is surprising since the European Court of Justice (ECJ) has ruled in  that the refusal to engage a pregnant woman and a dismissal on grounds of pregnancy are a form of direct discrimination covered by Council Directive 76/207/ EEC without the necessity to resort to comparisons with the treatment which would be meted out to a man in a comparable situation.
The British courts have, however, chosen to distinguish the special facts of Webb, in order not to follow the ECJ rulings.
In Webb we see once again the tendency of the House of Lords to begin with a discussion of the relevant national law and then move on to discuss the relevance of any Community law provisions.
This approach is difficult to reconcile with the principle of supremacy of Community law and would not seem to be the correct way to apply the principle of indirect effect the duty of the national courts to interpret national law as far as possible to bring it into line with Community obligations.
In Webb there is only one speech, delivered by Lord Keith.
His Lordship begins by looking at direct discrimination under section l(l) (a) of the Sex Discrimination Act 1975 and concludes that there is no doubt that in general to dismiss a woman because she is pregnant or to refuse to employ a woman of childbearing age because she may become pregnant is unlawful direct discrimination since childbearing and the capacity for childbearing are characteristics of the female sex.
To apply these characteristics as the criterion for dismissal or refusal to employ is to apply a gender-based criterion, which the majority of the House of Lords has already held to be unlawful direct discrimination in James v Eastleigh Borough Council [1990]2 AC 751.
At this stage there is no reference to the appropriate rulings of the ECJ.
Lord Keith then seeks to distinguish the approach which should be taken in Webb from  the ruling in James v Eastleigh Borough Council on the ground that Ms Webb was not dismissed simply because she was pregnant but because she would be unavailable for work at the critical period.
This, of course, opens the door for the employer to argue that the true reason for any unfavourable treatment is not gender-related.
In Webb the employer was allowed to put forward an explanation, which was accepted as being gender-neutral, that an employee was needed at a specific time to be trained and to cover for a period of maternity leave with the probability of being retained as a permanent employee.
Having rejected the need for an appropriate comparison to be made with a man for true pregnancy-related dismissals Lord Keith then resumes the need for a comparison when a gender-neutral explanation is put forward for the unfavourable treatment.
In Webb it was accepted that a man in similar circumstances who would be unavailable at th
…the correct comparison is not with any man but with an hypothetical man who would also be unavailable at the critical time.
The relevant circumstance for purposes of the comparison required by section 5(3) to be made is expected unavailability at the material time (p 30).
This is a departure from the soul-searching that has gone on since Hayes v Malleable Working Men's Club and Institute [1985]ICR 703, of trying to find a useful comparative male illness (prostate operation? arthritic hips?) to emulate a medical condition comparable to the inconvenience caused to employers by a female employee's pregnancy.
But of course it does nothing to improve employment rights for men or women who may be temporarily incapacitated.
What is odd about the comparison made in Webb is that the comparison is used as the evidence to show that the unfavourable treatment is not gender related rather than as the basis of a comparison for similar treatment.
But the explanation could have been phrased in a different way: it was precisely because she was pregnant that Ms Webb would be unavailable for work at the critical time.
In Dekker the employer had tried to argue that the refusal to hire was not on the grounds of pregnancy but on the ground of adverse financial consequences the firm could not pay for a replacement during the period of maternity leave needed by Ms Dekker and as a result the firm would be short-staffed.
The ECJ gave short shrift to these supposedly gender-neutral justifications.
It is hard to see the difference between Lord Keith's arguments and those of the ECJ in Dekker.
Turning to indirect discrimination under section l(l) (b) of the Sex Discrimination Act 1975 the Industrial Tribunal had applied the defence that the condition was justifiable on account of the reasonable needs of the employer's business using the test formulated by Eveleigh LJ in Ojutiku and Obuzuni v Manpower Services Commission [1982]ICR 661.
Before the House of Lords Ms Webh argued that the later decision of the Court of Appeal in Hampson v Department of Education and Science [1990]2 All ER 25 had now superseded this test and should be applied accordingly.
Lord Keith agreed with the Court of Appeal's finding in Webb, that even if the later test were applied, the employer's defence would still be justifiable.
After deciding the correct application of British law, Lord Keith then moves on to  discuss the two relevant decisions of the ECJ, in Dekker and Hertz, but does not apply a rigorous analysis of the cases to the situation in Webb.
The focus of attention is upon whether the national law could be interpreted so as to give effect to Community law obligations.
In Duke v GEC Reliance Ltd [1988]AC 618 the House of Lords had declined to apply a purposive interpretation to national legislation pre-dating a Community Directive.
This self-imposed limitation is quietly dropped in Webb with the acceptance of  that in applying national law.
whether the provisions in question were adopted before or after the Directive, a national court must interpret the national law as far as possible in the light and wording of the Directive in order to achieve the aims of the Community law.
Lord Keith attempts to ‘distinguish’ the situation in Marleasing from the situation in British law.
He argues that:
…the provision of Spanish law in issue…was of a general character capable of being construed either widely or narrowly.
It did not refer specifically to the grounds upon which the nullity of a public limited company might be ordered.
If it had done so, and had included among such grounds the case where the company had been formed with the purpose of defrauding creditors…the Spanish court would have been entitled to give effect to it notwithstanding the terms of the Directive (p 32).
Lord Keith, along with other British judges, sees the rule in Marleasing as one of interpretation only which leaves the national judge a margin of discretion to find that it is not possible to reconcile national law with Community law.
In other cases where British judges have been unable to reconcile Community and national law they have thrown the burden of responsibility back upon the government and suggested that the applicants sue the government for breach of a Community obligation under Case C-6190 and C-9190 Francovich and Bonifaci v Italy [1992]IRLR 84.
It is disappointing that their Lordships did not refer the question of the extent of the interpretative obligation under Marleasing to the ECJ.
Lord Keith argued that the interpretation of the Directive was unclear on the point at issue in Webb.
Only when this point was clarified would the House of Lords be in a position to decide whether it was possible to construe the Sex Discrimination Act 1975 in accordance with the Directive.
A reference was also necessary since it was possible that a similar case might arise in the public sector of employment where the Directive would have direct effect.
A set of simple questions have been posed to the ECJ.
The House of Lords has asked whether it is sex discrimination, contrary to Directive 76/207/EEC, to dismiss a female employee when she has been engaged for the specific purpose of replacing (after training) another female employee who is about to go on maternity leave and when the maternity leave replacement discovers very shortly after appointment that she too is pregnant and will need maternity leave and the employer dismisses her because he needs the job holder to be at work during that period.
Had the employer known of the pregnancy at the date of appointment he would not have appointed the woman and the employer would also have dismissed a male employee engaged for this purpose who required a leave of absence at the same time for medical or other reasons.
The answers to these questions will have significance not only for the interpretation of  dismissals and refusals to hire under Council Directive 76/207/EEC but also for the interpretation of Article 10 of Council Directive 92/85/EEC and other unfavourable treatment of pregnant women which the employer or the state claims is gender-neutral.
To understand what constitutes pregnancy-related unfavourable treatment is crucial since Article 10 of Council Directive 92/85/EEC obliges the Member States to take the measures necessary to prohibit the dismissal of women who are pregnant, have recently given birth or are breast-feeding, during the period from the beginning of the pregnancy to the end of the period of national maternity leave except in exceptional circumstances not connected with their condition which are permitted by national law.
The employer must notify the substantiated grounds for the dismissal in writing.
This provision is being enacted in Clause 21 of the Trade Union Reform and Employment Rights Bill currently before Parliament.
Throughout the litigation in Webb there is an open feeling of sympathy towards the employer in this type of situation and the problem has been posed in terms of the unusual facts of the case.
Yet each year the Equal Opportunities Commission receives between 700–800 enquiries relating to pregnancy dismissals.
These figures can only be the tip of the iceberg when we see the low rates of eligibility for maternity benefits and full time participation in the paid labour market for mothers with young children (S. McRae, Maternity Rights in Britain, 1991 PSI).
The answers provided by the ECJ will influence the degree of tolerance extended to women who may not always wish to or may not be able to control their fertility and yet are capable of combining paid work and motherhood if given the chance
Health and Safety at Work: Degree of Risk and Mitigation of Sentence
R v Sanyo ElectricalManufacturing IUK) Ltd
[1992]156 Justice of the Peace Reports 863 ICA
While the Court of Appeal (Criminal Division) decision R v Sanyo Electrical Manufacturing (UK) Ltd, is a case which is of interest in its own right, its real significance is that it is yet more evidence of an increasing awareness by the courts of the crucial role they have to play in securing a healthier and safer working environment by ensuring that infractions of health and safety, and related legislation, are properly penalised.
The background to the case lay in two allegations brought against the company in respect of incidents which had occurred in 1990 at their Newton Aycliffe factory, where microwave ovens were manufactured.
It was alleged that the company had failed to  prevent danger from electrical conductors contrary to reg. 2 of the Electricity (Factories Act) Special Regulations 1944 (SR & 01944 No. 739), and section 33(1) (a) of the Health and Safety at Work etc.
Act 1974.
In the first a female employee received a potentially fatal electric shock of perhaps five and a half thousand volts while testing ovens for high voltage leakage.
She was thrown across the room and received minor injuries but was saved from serious injury by the operation of a circuit breaker.
The second count alleged that, over a period of time, there had been a breach of the 1944 Regulations in respect of the safety precautions taken while testing ovens for leakage of microwaves.
The testing procedure necessitated the exposure of a considerable number of conductors placing employees at risk from electric shock, with possible fatal results.
The company pleaded guilty in the Crown Court and were fined 10,000 on each count, a total of 20,000.
They appealed against sentence.
There had been a previous, material, conviction in 1989.
An employee had been electrocuted when working on the magnetron assembly line of the company's Thornaby-on-Tees factory, which was engaged in another stage of the microwave oven manufacturing process, when he had come into contact with exposed conductors.
The company was fined 2,000 and as a result of that conviction and the Health and Safety Executive's (HSE) recommendations additional safety precautions were introduced on the assembly line which were not, however, extended to the testing process at the Newton Aycliffe plant.
Before the Court of Appeal submissions were made on the company's behalf that the Crown Court had failed to take into account the lack of gravity of the offences and had over-emphasised both the company's ability to pay a substantial fine and the possibility of an accident occurring.
The risk to quality control testers had been minimal.
More specifically, the accident resulting from the first incident had only taken place because of a concatenation of events leading to it which could not have been foreseen.
Mr Justice Rose, in the Court of Appeal, categorically rejected those submissions.
The purpose of the 1944 Regulations, and by inference like legislation, was to protect employees against the consequences of doing things by reason of inadvertence or inattention which they would not normally do.
Doubtless the Court was influenced by the fact that though the risk to employees may well have been minimal (and two accidents in two years would suggest that that was not so) the consequences of any such risk materialising were potentially serious and, indeed, in one instance had been fatal.
Accordingly the Court was ‘wholly un-persuaded’ that the fines imposed by the Crown Court were excessive.
The HSE's propensity (or more realistically reluctance) to prosecute, except as a last resort or where there is no alternative, is well-known and is touched on by Phil James in ‘Reforming British Health and Safety Law: a framework for discussion’(1992) 21 Industrial Law Journal 83–105, together with the related area of penalties.
Because prosecution is a last resort it is not unreasonable to suggest that the offe
Time Limits in Claims for Unfair Dismissal; Advice from Solicitors
London International College v Sen
[1992]IRLR 292 (EAT)
The decision of the Employment Appeal Tribunal in London International College v Sen is to be welcomed by lawyers, CAB workers, Trade Union advisors and in particular by people who seek and rely on the advice of the above.
The Employment Appeal Tribunal decision confirms that late applications can be allowed in notwithstanding the fact that the Applicant relied on the advice of a solicitor.
It is an all too common situation that the advisor miscalculates or simply forgets the relevant time limit within which the application must be made.
For unfair dismissal claims, applicants have until now been prevented from pursuing their claim if it was presented late by reason of a fault on the part of the advisor.
The recent decision however reaffirms the discretionary nature of the power to let in late claims and also restates the principle that fault on the part of the advisor is a factor which the tribunal will take into account and is not an automatic exclusionary rule.
For unfair dismissal claims, the claim must be presented within three months of the effective date of termination (EDT).
If the claim is presented late, the tribunal has a discretion to allow a late claim to be submitted if it was ‘not reasonably practicable’ for the Applicant to present it in time (EPCA 1978 section 67(2)).
This is clearly a virtually unfettered discretion.
Such a wide discretion must be exercised fairly if it is to comply with the requirements of natural justice.
The facts of the Sen case were that Mr Sen was dismissed on 9th July 1990.
He used the internal appeal procedure and then contacted a solicitor.
The solicitor advised him that he should submit his claim on or before 9th October.
(This is incorrect as the law says the claim must be presented before the end of the period of three months beginning with the EDT i.e. in this case on the 8th October at the latest.)
Mr Sen also contacted the Central Office of the Industrial Tribunal to check the time limit and was informed by a member of their staff that he should submit his claim by 9th October.
When he duly did this, he was one day out of time.
The solicitor and member of the IT staff had both given him incorrect advice.
This is not an uncommon occurrence as the law on calculation of the EDT is becoming even more complex.
The Industrial Tribunal held that it was not reasonably practicable to  present the claim in time (i.e. they would exercise their discretion to allow it in late).
The decision in the case of Jean Sorelle Ltd v Rybak ([1991]IRLR 153 (EAT)) had decided that where an applicant acts on the advice of a member of the IT staff, it was open to an IT to hold that it was not reasonably practicable for the claim to have been presented in time.
Therefore, the IT in Mr Sen's case could have allowed his claim in because he had acted on the advice of a member of IT staff.
The solicitor acting for the College sought a review of the decision on the ground that no argument on the Rybak decision had been heard before the IT.
The decision had just been reported in the Times.
The solicitor acting for the College sought to argue that the Rybak case did not help Mr Sen as he had also acted on the advice of a solicitor.
He said that the erroneous advice from the IT member of staff was irrelevant because of the advice which Mr Sen had already been given by a solicitor.
The IT on review allowed the claim to proceed.
On appeal to the Employment Appeal Tribunal, the solicitor for the College argued that the mere fact of consulting a solicitor renders it reasonably practicable to present a claim in time.
Reference was made to the decision of the Court of Appeal in the case of Riley v Tesco Stores Ltd ([1980]IRLR 103 (CA)).
Waller LJ said:
Once a man knows of his right it is more difficult to say that it was not reasonably practicable to give notice within a reasonable time.
If he reasonably does not discover his right until a short time before the last days of the three months have elapsed, then obviously it would probably not be reasonably practicable to give notice in time.
Despite what the EAT in the Sen case go on to say about the Riley decision, it is submitted that it was an established rule of law as a result of that and other decisions that where an applicant instructs solicitors or advisors to act on his/her behalf and through their default the claim is presented out of time, the tribunal would not have exercised their discretion to allow the claim in.
In other words, they would have found it was reasonably practicable to present the claim in time.
To quote Lord Denning:
If a man engages skilled advisors to act for him and they mistake the time limit and present it too late he is out.
His remedy is against them (Dedman v British Building Ltd,[1974]ICR 53 at 61F)
It is reassuring then that the EAT in Sen state in clear terms that the question is one of fact for the tribunal.
They said:
There is no rule of law that the mere fact of consulting a solicitor renders it then and thereafter reasonably practicable to present an originating application in time.
It is a question of fact in every case.
Although the taking of professional advice is a material circumstance, the substantial cause of the failure to comply with the statutory time limit is one of the matters for investigation.
In the instant case the IT were entitled to find that it was not reasonably practicable for Mr Sen to have presented his unfair dismissal claim in time, notwithstanding that he had been given erroneous advice about the time limit by a solicitor in circumstances where he had also been wrongly advised as to the time limit by a member of the IT staff.
Reference was also made to the decision of the Court of Appeal in Palmer v Southend-on-Sea  Borough Council ([1984]IRLR 19 (CA)).
After reasserting that the question of lateness was a question of fact for the tribunal, May LJ gives a lists of circumstances which the IT may wish to consider
…the manner in which, and reason for which, the employee was dismissed, including the extent to which, if at all, the employer's conciliatory appeals machinery has been used.
It will no doubt investigate what was the substantial cause of the employee's failure to comply with the statutory time limit; whether he had been physically prevented from complying with the limitation period, for instance by illness or a postal strike, or something similar.
It may be relevant for the Industrial Tribunal to investigate whether at the time he was dismissed and if not then when thereafter, he knew that he had the right to complain that he had been unfairly dismissed; in some cases the Tribunal may have to consider whether there has been any misrepresentation about any relevant matter by the employer to the employee.
It will frequently be necessary for it to know whether the employee was being advised at any material time and, if so, by whom; of the extent of the advisers' knowledge of the facts of the employee's case; and of the nature of any advice which they may have given to him.
In any event it will probably be relevant in most cases for the Industrial Tribunal to ask itself whether there has been any substantial fault on the part of the employee or his adviser which has led to the failure to comply with the statutory time limit
May LJ accepts that no such list can be exhaustive and stressed that it was a matter of fact for the Industrial Tribunal to decide.
He also observed that, as it was a question of fact
…it is seldom that an appeal from its decision will lie.
Advisers should set up and operate a diary system for entry of limitation dates in cases where they have advised clients on the point.
Where a claim is presented late and the reason is that the date is overlooked by the adviser, this may not be fatal to the claim in the Industrial Tribunal.
The Tribunal can consider it as one of the facts along with those set out by Lord Justice May in the Palmer case as well as any which are relevant in the particular case.
As the law is complex to apply in some cases where the notice period needs to be calculated and perhaps added to the three months limit or, as in the Sen case, the adviser simply got the calculation of the three months wrong, the claim should be presented and the Tribunal asked to consider the facts before exercising its discretion.
If a Tribunal refuses to consider a fact as relevant or operates an exclusion without considering any of the facts, this is a mistake of law and an appeal will be appropriate.
As legal aid is available for appeals to the Employment Appeal Tribunal, the applicant has a chance of pursuing his unfair dismissal claim rather than facing the prospect of bringing a negligence action against the adviser.
It must be preferable that the original action proceed rather than being convoluted into a negligence action.
Dismissal for Refusal to Accept New Terms of Employment
St John of God (Care Services) Ltd v Brooks
[19921 IRLR 546;[1992]ICR 715 (EAT)
In an economic climate such as that obtaining at the current time, employers are even more likely than usual to wish to alter their employees' terms and conditions of employment, whether relating to pay, overtime requirements or other matters.
The case which is the subject of this note provides a useful insight into the analysis of an unfair dismissal claim which arises out of an employee's refusal to accept new terms and either resignation followed by a constructive dismissal claim or dismissal consequent upon that refusal.
There is usually no problem in establishing that the reason for the dismissal falls within the concept of ‘some other substantial reason’(namely, the need to rearrange terms and conditions).
The interesting issues in this area arise from the balancing of the interests of employer and employee involved in the assessment of whether the dismissal was unfair.
In this case, the economic circumstances of a hospital necessitated, as the only alternative to closure (in the employer's view), a reduction of employees' holidays, the abolition of overtime rates, replacement of a generous sick pay scheme by statutory sick pay and a standstill on pay levels.
The employers utilised what appears to be in practice a fairly standard procedure intended to minimise the risk of facing unfair dismissal proceedings with regard to both procedural fairness and the substantive reasonableness of any resulting dismissals of ‘refuseniks’.
In February 1989 the proposed new terms and conditions were outlined by letter to staff and, after subsequent fruitless negotiations with the unions, in April 1989 a notice was sent informing the employees that the changes would be discussed with them, that they would be given a reasonable time to consider the new contracts and that they would be dismissed if they did not accept them.
140 out of 170 employees eventually accepted and, after being interviewed, 30 were given 12 weeks' notice to terminate their contracts.
Of these 30 dismissals those which came before the Industrial Tribunal in this case were found to be unfair.
The appeal to the EAT was based on the issue of whether the Tribunal had relied on a correct statement of the law when it referred to an excerpt from Harvey on Industrial Relations and Employment Law (based on the EAT decision in Richmond Precision Engineering v Pearce ([1985]IRLR 179) which stated that ‘[t]he crucial question is whether the terms offered were those which a reasonable employer could offer’.
The Tribunal had held that the offer, involving as it did such dramatic alterations to employees' contracts, was not reasonable.
Where an employer seeks to impose new terms, he necessarily faces the problem of the previously bargained contract of employment and must initially show a sound good business reason to justify the changes when dismissals resulting from refusals to accept them are assessed for their fairness.
In applying s 57(3) of the 1978 Employment Protection (Consolidation) Act to determine the fairness of dismissals the Tribunal has taken on board in a pluralistic fashion the interests of employees in this situation.
However, it is in the various statements indicating the extent to which managerial  prerogative is constrained in this context that differences of emphasis have emerged relating to what should be looked at in the assessment of the employer's reasonableness in dismissing ‘refuseniks’
In Evans v Elemeta Holdings Limited ([1982]IRLR 143), the EAT held that it was reasonable for an employee to refuse new terms which included an obligation to work potentially unlimited overtime.
This was no doubt an acceptable enough decision on the facts had the EAT not propounded the thesis that ‘if it was reasonable for [the employee]to decline these terms, then it would have been unreasonable for the employers to dismiss him for such refusal’.
The issue of the confli
RESEARCH AND REPORTS
Towards a New Industrial Relations?
One of the most commonplace simplicities in the 1980s was that there were two alternative forms of industrial relations available to employers in Britain: one was based on employee involvement, flexible forms of work organisation, single-union deals or no union representation and the other persisted with multi-union representation, traditional forms of work organisation, strict workplace discipline and offered employees little opportunity for direct participation in their work or in the affairs of the enterprise.
The first of these characterisations was often associated with new inward investment and, in particular, with Japanese companies.
Indeed, some commentators spoke of the ‘Japanisation’ of British industrial relations.
The second was primarily associated with older, indigenous employers.
The progressive human resource management policies of the former were seen to equip these organisations with a key competitive resource: a well-trained work-force committed to the aims of the enterprise.
The problem with such characterisations is, of course, their exclusivity: that the so called new industrial relations or human resource management strategies represent a clean break from an ‘old’ industrial relations system, that there has been a qualitative change in the manner in which the employment relationship is managed.
In this study for the Employment Department, Peck and Stone provide some very interesting evidence on employers' attempts to embrace the new industrial relations.
One of their key concerns is to examine how the labour management practices of in-coming companies differ from those older, indigenous enterprises.
They also ask: are native enterprises being presented with a powerful ‘demonstration effect’ where, given the opportunity, they would prefer to be rid of an old industrial relations system in preference for the one used by their newly-arrived neighbours?
And if so, are we witnessing a convergence of industrial relations practices on a new type?
Following a preliminary examination of these new inward investors by means of a postal questionnaire survey, the authors selected a matched sample (controlling for employment size, sector and production process) of old and new manufacturing firms.
The new plants were defined as those which had begun operations after 1980 while the older organisations had all been established before 1975.
The study was confined to the North-East, but this had the advantage of providing the authors with a large number of Far Eastern companies, reputedly the highest concentration of Japanese firms in the country.
Before examining the study's findings in some depth, it is interesting to report on some of the results which arose from the preliminary postal survey.
The most striking finding was that 69% of the new firms were non-union.
The proportion was highest amongst American, EC and Far Eastern companies.
As one might have anticipated, the absence of union recognition was particularly associated with smaller enterprises.
Nearly half of the plants had joint consultative committees (JCCs), 69% had introduced single status  conditions of employment, 79% had no individual payment bonuses and almost half had done away with clocking-on.
In addition, many firms claimed to have introduced flexible work agreements, with 71% claiming to have team-working and nearly two-fifths operating to a just-in-time production system.
At this level of analysis, at least, it would appear that these green-field organisations had many of the attributes associated with the new industrial relations.
Upon closer examination, however, it was revealed that there were at least three ways in which such a conclusion would be misleading.
In the first place, half of the non-union green-field site companies did not have a formal system whereby management informed or consulted with their employees.
More
EUROPEAN DEVELOPMENTS SECTION
Remedies in Equality Law
Judgement No 1360/1992 of the Greek Supreme Civil Court
the Community law principles
National courts have the duty to interpret and apply national law in such ways as to ensure that a real and effective sanction, i.e. a sanction satisfying the principles of proportionality, effectiveness and non discrimination or comparability, is imposed.
A recent judgement (No 1360/1992) of the Greek Supreme Civil Court (SCC) constitutes an example of compliance with Community Law requirements in respect of a sex discriminatory refusal to hire.
This judgement, which is typical of how Community law should be applied, is the second occasion in the Greek legal system upon which Community equality law has been overtly applied by the SCC (two previous judgements, Nos 657 and 658 of the same year, applied Article 119 of the Treaty in a sex discrimination case concerning a family allowance paid by the employer and also interpreted the equal pay principle of the Greek Constitution in the light of Article 119).
The obligation of Member States to provide for and impose real and effective sanctions in respect of a breach of Community law has been derived by the European Court of Justice (ECJ) from two fundamental Community law principles: the principle of co-operation and the principle of effective judicial protection.
The first of these principles is laid down in Article 5 of the EEC Treaty, which requires Member States to take all appropriate measures to ensure the effectiveness of Community law; the second principle underlies the constitutional tradition common to the Member States and is also laid down in Articles 6 and 13 of the European Convention of Human Rights.
The principle of effective judicial protection is expressed by a provision on the three Sex Equality Directives (75/117 on equal pay, 176/207 on equal treatment in employment and 79/7 on equal treatment in social security) which requires Member States to introduce into their internal legal order such measures as are needed to enable all persons who consider themselves wronged by discrimination ‘to pursue their claims by judicial process’.
These provisions which must be construed in the light of the principle they express, confer upon every person, who considers him/herself discriminated against, a right to an effective national judicial remedy and a right to a real and effective sanction.
Aforementioned principles and provisions are binding on all Member State authorities, including the courts.
Whenever a specific sanction is not prescribed by Community Law, it is left to the discretion of the Member States to choose among the different solutions suitable to achieve the objective of the provision infringed.
However, the sanction chosen should be real and effective, that is, it should satisfy cumulatively the following three conditions:(a) it should be adequate in relation to the damage sustained (principle of proportionality),(b) it should have a real deterrent effect on the author of the infringement (principle of  effectiveness) and (c) it should be at least comparable to the sanctions imposed for infringements of national law of similar nature and importance (principle of non discrimination or of comparability).
(See Case 68188, Commission v Greece [1989]ECR 2979 and Fitzpatrick, ‘The Effectiveness of Equality Law Remedies: A European Community Law Perspective’ in Hepple and Szyszczak (ed), Discrimination: The Limits of Law, London 1992, pp 67 ff).
The obligation of national courts to ensure the application of a real and effective sanction implies their obligation to interpret national law in conformity with the requirements of Community law (see Docksey and Fitzpatrick, ‘The Duty of National Courts to Interpret Provisions of National Law in Accordance with Community Law’(1991) 20 ILJ 113).
Thus, national courts should search within their national legal system and apply the sanction which satisfies best the requirements of Community law.
This should occur even if this is not the sanct 
The Greek sanction for an unlawful refusal to hire: automatic hiring
In Greece the sanction for any unlawful refusal to hire, in the case of a public open competition for the filling of vacancies, is automatic hiring.
Relevant well-established civil court case law is based on the general provisions of the Civil Code relating to the conclusion of contracts.
According to this case law, the announcement of the competition is considered as a proposal to conclude an individual contract of employment and the participation in the competition as an acceptance of this proposal, the conclusion of the contract being subject to the suspensive condition of the candidate's success in passing the competitive examination.
As soon as the candidate passes the examination, his/her contract of employment is considered as having been concluded, even in a case where the employer has hired in his/her stead a candidate who has obtained lower marks at the examination.
In the latter case, the contract of employment of the unlawfully rejected candidate is considered as having been automatically concluded as from the date on which  the other candidate has been hired.
The automatically hired candidate has a claim for payment of his/her salary from that date forward, plus interest from the date of his/her automatic hiring up until the date of actual payment and may also claim further compensation for eventual pecuniary damage or injury to feelings.
In such cases, the hiring of the other candidate remains valid (see Mitsou, Equality in Law between Men and Women in the European Community, 2nd vol, National Reports, Louvain-la-Neuve, 1986, pp 207 ff)
Directive 76/207 has been implemented in Greece by Act 1414/1984, which proclaimsthe principle of equal treatment of men and women with respect to, inter alia , access to employment (Article 3).
The only sanctions provided by this statute are administrative (fines inflicted by labour inspectors), rather than any civil sanctions (pecuniary or non pecuniary)
GREEK SUPREME CIVIL COURT JUDGMENT NO 1360/1992
The facts of the case in which the Greek SCC has rendered judgment No 1360/1992 are as follows:
The defendant, a Greek bank of the private sector, had announced a public open competition for hiring of male and female employees, specifying that appointments would be made on the basis of separate lists of successful candidates, according to sex and marks obtained.
On March 5, 1986, the bank hired a male candidate who obtained a mark of 46.50 and subsequently it hired another six male candidates who had obtained marks between 46.50 and 42 while it did not hire the claimant, a woman who had obtained a mark of 48.
The claimant brought an action against the bank claiming that she be considered as automatically hired as from March 5,1986 (the date on which the first of above male candidates had been hired) and she be paid the relevant salary, plus interest, from that same date forward up to the actual payment.
The first instance (labour) court fully upheld the claim on the basis of the general provisions of the Civil Code relating to the conclusion of contracts in conjunction with Act 1414/1984, i.e. it applied aforementioned well established case law relating to unlawful refusal to hire, mentioning also the von Colson judgment of the ECJ.
However, the Court of Appeal (which judges on both points of law and points of fact) reversed this decision and dismissed the claim, considering that the hiring of the seven men was justified by the needs of the bank.
The SCC (which judges only on points of law) heard the appeal from the Court of Appeal judgment and ruled as follows
: As a result of Act 1414/1984, as construed in the light of Directive 76/207, that is, in conformity with the wording and the spirit and purpose thereof, the employer is not allowed when announcing a public open competition for the hiring of personnel, to infringe the principle of sex equality with respect to either the means for attracting  candidates or the criteria of their assessment.
Consequently, it is prohibited to announce separate recruitment and to set up separate lists of successful candidates according to sex as well as to hire from the list of successful candidates of one sex without taking into consideration the higher marks of successful candidates of the other sex.
Such discrimination is contrary to the principle of equal treatment of men and women regarding access to employment, which requires the setting up of a single list of successful candidates, without any regard to their sex, according to the marks obtained, and the hiring from this list according to the marks, irrespective of the candidates' sex and the needs invoked by the employer, except in cases of occupational activities for which, by reason of their nature or the context in which they are carried out, the sex of the worker constitutes a determining factor.
It is true that Act 1414/1984, while providing for administrative sanctions, does notprovide for a system of civil sanctions for the protection of workers who are wronged by failure to apply the equal treatment principle as defined by Article 3 of Act 1414/1984 and the Directive.
However the ECJ has ruled that equal treatment cannot be established without an appropriate system of sanctions and that national courts are required to seek among the provisions of national law those which imply the most effective sanction, such a sanction being the one which guarantees real and effective judicial protection of the wronged worker and has a real deterrent effect on the employer.
Moreover, the seriousness of the sanction must be proportionate to the damage sustained by the worker.
In order to guarantee the application of the Directive, national courts are required to interpret their national law in the light of the wording and the purpose of the Directive (see judgments of 10.4.1984, Case 79/83, Harz and Case 14/83 Colson).
In the Greek legal o 
Conclusion
This is the first judgement of a Greek court by which Greek Law 9act 1414/1984 implementing Directive 76/207is interpreted and applied in conformity with Community Law (Directive 76/207) as construed by ECJ case law.
The sanction imposed is real and effective since it satisfied all three conditions required by Community law; it is adequate in relation to the damage sustained by the claimant, since the claimant is put in the position in which she would have been had the discriminatory refusal to hire her not occurred, both as concerns the post of employment and the income therefrom; it has a real deterrent effect on the defendant bank who will not only have to pay the amount of about seven years' monthly salary, plus interest, but will furthermore find itself with an additional employee (the claimant and the man hired in her stead); it is the same sanction as the one imposed for any other illegal refusal to hire.
Thus, the SCC has applied all three, already mentioned, Community law principles relating to sanctions; the principles of proportionality, of effectiveness and of non discrimination or comparability.
It must be noted that, according to well established case law, the worker automatically hired by virtue of a judicial decision like the one of the SCC has the right, as any other worker, to be really employed, within the framework of good faith, good morals and usage's.
If the employer pays the salary but refuses the services of the worker and this refusal offends his/her personality (e.g., lowers his/her reputation amongst fellow workers, prevents his/her professional development etc.), the worker can claim that the employer be condemned to pay him/her compensation and/or to really employ him/her; in the second case, the employer will also be condemned by the same judgement to a pecuniary sanction and to detention in case he does not employ the worker.
This adds to the effectiveness of the sanction.
Moreover, the claimant who has been successful in a  case like the one in which the SCC judgement was rendered can bring an action for compensation of any additional financial damage sustained and/or for compensation for injury to feeling.
Such a claim can of course be brought in the same action by which the recognition of the automatic hiring and the awarding of the relevant salary is sought.
This also increases the effectiveness of the sanction.
As can be seen, in comparison with many other Member States, including the United Kingdom, Greece enjoys a very powerful and dynamic system of employment law sanctions.
Until this case, the potential of this system in relation to sex equality rights had lain dormant, as, indeed, had the potential significance of the Community principles of equality.
This decisive judgement of the SCC, like the two previous ones of the same year relating to equal pay, may well provide a catalyst for further developments within both Greek substantive and procedural equality law
.
Transfers Again: Contracting Out and the Employee's Option
In these two, highly important decisions by the European Court of Justice on the interpretation of the Transfers Directive (Directive 77/187/EEC) the Court has once again injected itself into issues of current legal and political controversy in the United Kingdom, namely the rights of workers whose employer decides (or is compelled by government policy) to contract out the provision of services, previously provided in-house, to an outside employer.
More important, in the second case the Court has taken a major step by allowing notions of classical freedom of contract to play an important part in its interpretation of the Directive.
This approach involves some down-grading of the Directive's purpose of facilitating the transfer of businesses, but it is not clear how far it increases the real, as opposed to the formal, freedom of action of employees.
The point at issue in the second case was the fundamental one of whether the Directive compels an employee to transfer when the employing enterprise is sold or whether the Directive merely creates an option for the employee to transfer.
This question was debated by commentators when the Directive was adopted by the Community and its translation into  UK law was being considered (see Elias,(1982) 3 Company Lawyer 147).
Since then, it has rather dropped out of sight, especially after the ECJ in Cases 144 and 145/87, Berg and Busschers v Besselsen [1988]ECR 2559 had seemed to adopt the analysis that the transfer of the contract of employment was compulsory as to both employer and employee.
Now in Katsikas the Court has asserted that the Directive does not require the employee to take advantage of the transfer provisions if he or she decides that it is not in his or her best interests to do so.
It is proposed to look at these two issues in turn.
A. The facts and holding in Rask.
In Rask the Court was faced with a typical case of an employer which had decided that the management of a particular ancillary part of its activities, in this case the management of its staff canteens, could be achieved more effectively by entrusting it to a specialist operator, ISS (the defendants in the national litigation) rather than by continuing to provide it itself.
It is important to see, however, that what was involved in the contract between the employer (the multi-national Philips) and the specialist operator was little more than the sub-contracting of the management of the canteens.
Under the contract with ISS Philips undertook to pay ISS a fixed monthly sum to cover ISS's direct and indirect labour costs, insurance, the upkeep of the workplace and the costs of management.
In addition, a variable sum was payable by Philips to cover items such as cleaning materials, table napkins and other disposable items.
Philips kept their ownership of the buildings and equipment used in the preparation and serving of the food, but made them available to ISS without charge (while undertaking to maintain them in good order) and Philips even paid for the electricity, water and telephone costs involved in the canteen operation and for the removal of waste.
ISS agreed to provide in return the skill of planning the menus, ordering and preparing the food and, above all, the recruitment and training of the work-force employed in the canteens.
What the case does not make clear is how ISS made its profit, although it seems that Philips retained some control over the prices charged by ISS (see point 14 of the judgement).
Clearly, the essence of the arrangement was the purchase by Philips of the management skills of ISS, with the fixed costs and even some of the variable costs of the canteen operation remaining with Philips.
Perhaps unlike many such a contract in the UK, the agreement between Philips and ISS required the latter to employ all the former's canteen personnel o 
B Analysis
It has sometimes been remarked that the courts test for transfer of an enterprise is an employment one rather than a commercial one.
On the basis of the above analysis by the Court it might be more accurate to say that the test is a commercial one but that it relates not to the transfer of ownership of enterprises, but to the transfer of economic or organisational activities.
The test is not based on a property lawyers view of the world but that of the businessman.
Thus it might be that the old English  case of Woodhouse v Brotherhood 1972]ICR 186 would be decided the same way under the Directive, because the facts, as found in that case, were that the transferee employer used the factory and the machines to produce different products from those made by the transferor and sold them in different markets.
The relevant employees, however, still worked at the same machines, doing the same kind of jobs.
The case itself was decided on the basis that the ownership of a business was not transferred to the transferee employer, but even under the organisational test of the Directive it could be said that the business did not preserve its identity: the same machines were being used, but in a different business.
On a pure labour law test, on the other hand, it might be said that the fact that the employees were doing the same kind of work on the same machines should be enough to amount to a transfer of a business.
For an elaboration of this point see P L Davies, ‘Acquired Rights, Creditors’ Rights, Freedom of Contract and Industrial Democracy' (1989) 9 Yearbook of European Law 21.
Even with this limitation, however, and even given the fact that the Court in this case says by way of principle little that it has not said in previous cases, one should not underestimate the impact of this new illustration of the Court's conception of the reach of the Directive in terms of the nature of the activities it covers.
The Court's approach in Rask is also very much in line with its decision in another case decided earlier in 1992, Case C-29/91, Dr Sophie Redmond Stichting v Bartol [1992]IRLR 367.
In that case, which involved the transfer of patients and the lease of a building from one drug dependency foundation to another as a result of the local authority's decision to transfer its subsidy, the Court took the same view that the decisive criterion was whether the business in question retained its identity and adopted a similar approach to the range of factors to be taken into account by the national court in deciding this matter.
However, the important additional point in that case was that the transferor foundation was in principle and in fact a legal person whose objects were non-commercial.
The Advocate General in that case was clear that the social policy objectives of the Directive required that it be applied to a non-profit making foundation as much as to an ordinary business.
The Court was much less explicit on the matter, but nevertheless did hold that the transaction was not incapable of falling within the scope of the Directive on the ground that it ‘arises out of the grant of subsidies to foundations or associations whose services are not remunerated.’
Provided national law would confer protection upon the employees of such an employer, then the transaction would in principle be covered by the Directive.
C. Impact upon UK law.
The combined effect of these two decisions, at least if the broader implications of the Redmond Stichting decision are followed, upon UK law in relation to contracting out is clearly very significant, as the UK government seems now to have realised.
In December, the Department of the Environment was seeking to require local authorities, which had inserted clauses in tender documents obliging contractors to maintain terms and conditions of employment, to re-tender without the offending clause, on the grounds that it concerned a ‘non-commercial matter’ within section 17 of the Local Government Act 1988 (Financial Times, December 12,1992).
By February the Attorney General and the Lord Advocate were advising that ‘the Directive is capable of applying to transfers from government departments into the private sector’, a view which  undermined the government's previous approach of ‘construing the Directive as narrowly as possible’(The Guardian, February 16, 1993)
How far must the domestic law be re-assessed?
Clearly, the Redmond Stichting decision suggests that the restriction in the UK Regulations, which excludes undertakings ‘not in the nature of a commercial venture’(Reg 2(1)), is un-sustainable.
Indeed, under pressure from the European Commission, clause 29(2) of the Trade Union Reform and Employment Rights Bill 1993 proposes to remove the restriction.
Thus, cases such as Expro Services Ltd v Smith [1991]IRLR 156, involving the contracting out by the Ministry of Defence of its catering function, should not fail in the future on the grounds that the catering operation, as carried on by the Ministry, was not in the nature of a commercial venture.
However, can employees who have been denied the benefit of the Regulations in the past on the basis of the non-commercial venture exclusion seek any effective remedy at this late stage?
Such employees might well have claims for compensation against the UK government for defective implementation of the Directive, if they can show that, had the restriction not been included in the Regulations, their claim would have succeeded.
See Cases C-6/90 and C-9/90, Francovich and Bonifaci v Italian Republic [1992]IRLR 84.
The decision in Rask is, of course, considerable help in support of the contention that the claim would otherwise have succeeded, but cannot be said to be conclusive on the point, since it is for the national court to evaluate all the circumstances when assessing whether there was in any particular case a transfer of a business.
However, it must be recognised that such claims for compensation would involve an extension of Francovich, both because that was a case of complete non-implementation, not just defective implementation, and because the UK government could argue that its implementation of the Directive in 1981 was done on the basis of its good faith understanding of what European law then required and so there was no element of fault in its decision-making at that time.
Furthermore, there would be scope for an argument that the plaintiff's loss flowed not so much from the inclusion of the non-commercial venture restriction in the domestic legislation as from the unduly narrow interpretation of that phrase by the domestic courts.
This argument would raise the question of whether the Member State is liable for ‘erroneous’ interpretation of domestic legislation by national courts.
It is clear that the decision in Francovich does no more than usher in the doctrine of state liability for failure to legislate and that the full impact of the doctrine remains to be established.
Alternatively, employees who might have sued the transferor employer (i.e. the government department) directly on the Directive, because, say, they had been dismissed by the department in the course of a contracting out, are not time-barred, if they act before the 1993 Bill is enacted.
This is because, after Case C-208/90, Emmott v Ministe 
D. Franchising.
However, the significance of the above cases is not confined to activities not in the nature of commercial ventures or to the past or to contracting out by government.
Rask, after all, did not involve the government but rather a private-sector company as the transferor.
The organisational or economic test re-affirmed in that case suggests that the UK courts ought to take a broader approach to the interpretation of the phrase ‘transfer from one person to another of an undertaking’ within reg 3(1) of the UK Regulations.
(On this see the note by Linden in (1992) 21 ILJ 293.)
Moreover, given the open-ended nature of this phrase and the already existing divergence of opinion among the national courts as to how those words are to be interpreted, this would seem to be a classic situation for the UK courts to give effect to Community law by interpretation of the national law so as to achieve congruence between the national and the Community norms.
See Case 106/89, Marleasing SA v La Commercial International de Alimentacion SA [1992]I CMLR 305.
What then would the broader approach entail?
The 1993 Bill takes a cautious step, by proposing an amendment to the effect that a transfer may be found to have occurred ‘whether or not any property is transferred to the transferee by the transferor’.
However, an approach in line with the European authorities requires more than this essentially negative provision.
As suggested above, what Community law seems to require national courts positively to do is to identify an organisational function and then to ascertain whether control of that function has been transferred from one person to another in such a way that the function retains its operational structure.
If so, the Directive will normally operate so as to transfer the employees employed by the former controller in the discharge of the function to the new controller and on the same terms and conditions of employment.
Moreover, although Rask was concerned with the initial decision to contract out, what the Court says seems equally applicable to any subsequent transfer of the function to another sub-contractor.
In this context, the Court's well-known flexibility about how the transfer occurs (for example, whether it occurs indirectly via a third party) and whether it involves a temporary cessation of the activities in question (see Redmond Stichting at points 11–13) is important.
Thus, as far as the termination and re-grant of a franchise is concerned, Rask suggests that the decision of the EAT in LMCDrains Ltd v Waught (EAT 182/90), upholding an application of the Regulations, is to be preferred over that of the same court in Robert Seligman Corp v Baker [1983]ICR 770, denying their applicability.
Running a hair-dressing salon or drain clearing service as a franchisee is  usually to be running a distinct organisational operation, and a new franchisee is put in control of the same operation when the franchise is transferred or terminated and re-granted.
The question which is perhaps left open by the Court's decisions so far is whether a retention of the business's identity can be found, say in the case of a franchise, where none of the employees, equipment or buildings used by the transferor in the activity pass to the transferee.
Though that may be an unusual situation in relation to franchises, it could be found in cases of a simple contract to provide services (cf Curling v Securicor Ltd [1992]IRLR 549: termination of contract to manage a detention centre and its award to another company).
E. Alterations by the transferee .
A further question addressed by the Court in Rask related to the freedom of the transferee to alter the terms and conditions of the workers unilaterally, on the assumption that the Directive was applicable to the case.
Again the Court applied its established reasoning, in this instance to the effect that the Directive is intended to bring about only a 
.2.
FREEDOM OF CONTRACT RESUSCITATED
A. The facts and holding in Katsikas.
If Rask is a case which produces startling results in the UK, it does so simply by applying the established lines of ECJ reasoning about this Directive to new situations.
In Katsikas, on the other hand, the Court makes a new departure in its own reasoning.
In both the cases joined in this second preliminary reference the employee had refused to transfer to the transferee employer.
In Kafsikas  Mr Konstaninidis transferred his restaurant business to Mr Mitossis, but Mr Katsikas, a chef, refused to transfer and was dismissed by Mr Konstaninidis, against whom the action in the national court was brought.
Similarly, in the second case the defendant company in the national litigation had transferred its cargo loading and unloading business to another company, but the plaintiff employees refused to transfer to the new employers and were dismissed by the transferor.
The relevant German national legislation was Article 613 of the  introduced in 1972 and amended in 1980 to take account of the Directive.
The essence of the matter was stated in the first sentence of Article 613: ‘when an enterprise or a part of an enterprise is transferred to another owner (sic) as a result of a legal transaction, the latter shall succeed to the rights and obligations under the contracts of employment existing at the date of the transfer’(my translation).
Although silent on the point, Article 613 had been interpreted by the German Federal Labour Court (BAG) as permitting the employee to object to the transfer of the contract to the transferee, in which case the contract continued with the transferor (see BAG AP No 1 on Article 613 of the BGB and BAG AP No 55 on Article 613 of the BGB).
Was such a provision consistent with the Directive?
Two arguments were put forward by those seeking to support the decisions of the BAG.
The first was that the interpretation of the BAG constituted a more favourable provision within Article 7 of the Directive, which provides that Member States may ‘apply or introduce laws, regulations or administrative provisions which are more favourable to employees.’
The second was that Article 3(1) of the Directive' the transferor's rights and obligations arising from a contract of employment or from an employment relationship existing on the date of a transfer within the meaning of Article 1(1) shall, by reason of such transfer, be transferred to the transferee' did not require an employee who was opposed to the transfer to have his contract transferred with the business.
The ECJ chose to answer the question by accepting the second argument.
This was, apparently, the bolder approach.
The Article 7 argument would have allowed Germany to continue with its opt-out provision for the benefit of employees, but the argument does not imply that countries, such as the UK, which in their national legislation make the transfer compulsory upon both employee and employer, are acting inconsistently with Community law.
The Article 3(1) argument, on the other hand, does raise serious questions about status of national rules which impose upon employees an obligation which the Directive does not require to be imposed.
We shall discuss this issue further below after we have examined the nature of the ECJ's reasoning.
Although the Court refused to answer the Article 7 question, given its response to the argument based on Article 3, common lawyers will be pleased to see the Court's comment on one aspect of the Article 7 argument.
This was the fact that Article 613 of the BGB does not in terms give the employee the right to refuse to opt out; the right of refusal is the result of judicial interpretation, albeit consistent judicial interpretation, of the legislative text.
Could such interpretation count as ‘laws, regulations or administrative provisions’ within the meaning of Article 7 of the Directive?
The Court was clear that the meaning o 
B. Choice versus protection.
More fundamentally, the decision in Katsikas raises the issue of whether the employee can most effectively be safeguarded by legal provisions which are mandatory and so cannot be contracted out of or whether the law must respect the employee's freedom to choose.
The former approach may be regarded as paternalistic or a proper expression of public policy, and the latter as showing respect for the autonomy of the individual or as permitting the exploitation of the worker, depending on one's point of view.
The debate is, of course, a fundamental one in labour law.
In the context of the transfer of businesses the former approach can amount to forcing the worker to work for someone he or she has not chosen.
The common law in England has generally set its face against this (see Nokes v Doncaster Amalgamated Collieries Ltd [1940]AC 1014 (HL)) and statute has followed suit (see the expression of this policy in section 236 of TULRECA).
The ECJ has rather wavered over the issue in relation to the Transfers Directive.
It must be admitted at once that the contract of employment is not very promising ground for paternalist legislation aimed at advancing social protection through compulsion.
The problem results from the fact that the compulsory element in the Directive, so far as it exists, relates merely to the transfer of the contract of employment, but the contract of employment is a consensual relationship, at least as far as the employee is concerned, and so it is in principle available to be terminated unilaterally by the employee at any time or to be modified with the joint consent of employee and employer.
How far is the Court prepared to go in reducing the employee's freedom in order to ensure that the worker is  not overborne?
In Case 324/86, Daddy's Dance Hall [1988]ECR 739 the dilemma is neatly illustrated.
The employee after the transfer had agreed a modification of his contract in a sense unfavourable to him in exchange for other changes which were to his benefit.
The Court held on the one hand that the protection of the Directive was a matter of public policy and so the worker could not trade away his right under the Directive to the maintenance of the same terms and conditions, even if‘the employee obtains new benefits in compensation for the disadvantages resulting from an amendment to his contract of employment so that , taking the matter as a whole, he is not placed in a worse position than before’(point 15).
On the other hand, the Court was at pains to say that in a world of partial harmonisation the employee was free to agree with the transferee any changes he might have agreed with the transferor (point 16)
As to the actual transfer itself, the Court had already held in Case 105/84, Mikkelsen[1985] ECR 2639 that ‘the protection which the Directive is intended to guarantee is however redundant where the person concerned decides of his own accord not to continue the employment relationship with the new employer after the transfer…’ and so resigns or terminates the employment by agreement from the date of the transfer (point 16).
However, the Court had also held in Case 362/90, d'Urso,[1990]1 ECR 4105 that a collective decision to contract out of the Directive was not binding on individual employees who wish subsequently to transfer.
In that case the union had negotiated a favourable package for those employees whom the transferee did not want to take on and who, it was agreed, should remain with the transferor.
The plaintiff individual workers were held to be entitled to assert their right to transfer.
This decision might have been regarded as one asserting the value of individual choice, but the Court put it on a rather different basis, saying that ‘the implementation of the rights conferred on the employees by the Directive could not be dependent on the consent either of the transferor or of the transferee or of the employees themselves, wit 
C. The position of the worker who chooses not to transfer.
How much value to the  individual will this new interpretation of the Directive be?
Clearly, those who drafted the Directive thought that normally it would be in the interests of the employee to transfer with the business.
That this may not be the case in certain instances does not take much imagination to comprehend.
The transferee employer may not be a very attractive proposition from the employee's point of view, say where what is envisaged is transfer from the shelter of the public sector to a private sector operator with little knowledge of the industry.
In such cases, if what is being transferred is a part only of the business, the employee may well prefer to assert a claim to continue employment with the transferor in the retained parts of the business this was the stance of the employees in Katsikas.
In this way, Katsikas complements Rask.
The former gives the employee an option and the latter extends the situations in which the option is available.
However, the employee's option may not be the simple one of staying with the transferor or going over to the transferee.
The limited nature of the Court's view of the employee's option needs to be understood.
Article 3 of the Directive does not prevent the employee refusing to transfer, but the Court is equally clear that ‘the Directive does not oblige Member States to provide that the contract or the employment relationship is continued by the transferor’(point 35).
This is a matter of subsidiarity: ‘it is for the Member States to decide on the future of the contract of employment or employment relationship.’
The Member States may indeed decide that the employee's contract shall simply continue with the transferor, but they may equally decide that the employee's refusal to transfer shall be regarded as a termination of the contract by the employer or, even, that the refusal to transfer is to be treated as a determination of the contract of by the employee (point 36).
It will all depend on the choice to be made by the national legislatures, and in the case of countries which make the third choice the employee's option not to transfer may give the worker no more than he or she already has under the Mikkelsen doctrine i.e. the option of going over or resigning from employment with the transferor.
There is certainly no suggestion that Member States have to resile from the position adopted by the EAT in Newns v British Airways [1992]IRLR 575 that individual employees have no right to restrain a proposed transfer by their employer of the business on the grounds that the employee does not wish to transfer.
D. Katsikas and the right not to transfer
One can only speculate about the line the UK legislature would take, should it address itself to this problem, except that it is not too difficult to predict that the present administration would change the law so as to minimise the protections afforded to the worker.
What, however, is the immediate impact of the Katsikas decision on UK law, even without legislative intervention?
There seems to be a strong argument now that the provisions of Regulation 5 of the UK Transfer Regulations, in so far as they make the transfer of the contract of employment compulsory on the employee as well as the employer, are ultra vires and so susceptible to judicial review, in the sense that the government in making the Regulations exceeded the powers conferred on it by the European Communities Act 1972 to make law by delegated legislation.
Section 2(2) of that Act provides that regulations may be made ‘for the purpose of implementing any Community obligation of the United Kingdom or for the purpose of dealing with matters arising out of or related to any such obligation.’
Since the ECJ is  clear in Katsikas that the Directive does not require the transfer to be made binding on the employee, it is difficult to see how the ultra vires argument can be resisted, unless the courts rescue the government by an extraordinary act of interpretation of Regulation 5 by holding that the UK Regulations, even in their present form, impose no obligation to transfer on the employee.
If then Regulation 5 is amenable to review so as to remove the compulsion upon the employee to transfer, whilst leaving the compulsion upon the employer in place, then the employee will indeed have a right to refuse to go over to the transferee, at least until such time as the government recasts the law.
What is more difficult to see is whether Katsikas requires the UK government to amend the law so as to protect the employee's freedom to refuse to transfer.
In fact, the Government has chosen to provide in the TURER Bill that the employee may object to the transfer, but such objection will operate so as to terminate the employment and the transferor will not be regarded as having dismissed the employee.
This raises the question of whether the interpretation of the Directive adopted in Katsikas confers any Community law right upon workers in the UK not to go with the business.
Although the interpretation of Article 3 of the Directive, which is rejected by the Court but which is the one embodied in Regulation 5 of the UK Regulations, is characterised by the Court as threatening ‘the fundamental rights of the worker’ to choose for whom he or she will work, the Court's interpretation is phrased in negative terms.
The position is, the Court says, that Article 3(1) ‘does not prevent’ a worker from refusing to transfer and thus deciding ‘not to take advantage of the protection conferred by the Directive’(point 33).
For the positive right not to transfer the plaintiffs in the particular case were relying, of course, on their national legislation, namely the interpretation placed upon Article 613 of the BGB by the German Federal Labour Court.
Where, however, as in the UK, the national legislation does not give the worker any such right, does Katsikas create a Community right not to transfer?
On the one hand, the protection of fundamental rights is an established source of law for the ECJ, so that this decision should perhaps not be taken to exclude the interpretation that the Directive places the decision on opting out in the hands of the workers themselves.
On the other hand, the Court in terms says that a worker who decides not to transfer deprives him- or herself of the protection of the Directive.
Does subsidiarity mean that the Member States should be permitted to decide whether that decision is an individual matter or one for the national state to take on the basis of its view of where the best interests of 
CONCLUSION
Four years ago the present writer published the article cited above in which it was suggested, inter alia, that the Court had been relatively little influenced in its interpretation of the Directive by arguments based on classical notions of freedom of contract.
In the light of Katsikas that judgement cannot stand.
Underlying the previous analysis was the view that the Court had resolved the conflict between freedom of contract and social protection by opting for the latter.
Katsikas re-opens that conflict without, however, resolving it.
In particular, there re-appears the stark contrast, which the common law rule also generated, between the position of workers, the business of whose employer is transferred by a purchase of the shares in the employing company and who are indeed sold with the business, and that of workers whose employer transfers the business itself.
If ownership of a majority of the shares of the employing company, whether the employer is a holding company or only one of a number of subsidiaries in a group of companies, falls into new hands, the employees of that company come under the control of the new owners of the company, whether they consent to that development or not.
True, in formal terms the identity of the employer has not changed, but in the organisational terms stressed by the Court in Rask and in terms of the sorts of objections to the new controllers that the employees in Katsikas had in mind, the formal answer goes very little distance to meet the substance of their points.
If compulsion is not to be the order of the day where the business itself is transferred, can it be accepted when the transfer is of the company which owns the business?
These points were made a long time ago by Kahn-Freund in (1940–1) 4 MLR 221, but have never been satisfactorily answered.
On the other hand, if the right to refuse to transfer does not entail the right to remain for the transferor, perhaps the employee's right to refuse on the sale of a business is nearly illusory, and he or she is in reality in no better position than the worker who sees the employing company bought over his or her head.