

P &: O Central Services
Staff Handbook
The aim of this handbook is to help employees to understand and appreciate their terms and conditions of employment; it contains information in addition to the requirements of the Employment Protection (Consolidation) Act 1978 as amended.
This handbook will help to give you an overall view of the businesses of the P&O Group to which you belong.
The Group is rich in tradition and strong in resources offering to its employees a great deal of scope for a fulfilling and rewarding career.
The contents of this handbook may be amended from time to time.
P&O Central Services
P&O Central Services comprise the .
All these departments provide a support service to the Group in their specialised fields.
What the Group does
The P&O Group is broadly based, with extensive UK and overseas operations and with substantial investments in businesses outside the traditional shipping interests implied by the Group's title.
The key-note of all the Group's activities, past and present, is quality of service and pride in high level performance.
The original Peninsular Steam Navigation Company was founded in 1837 with the award of an Admiralty contract to carry mails to the Iberian Peninsula; it is one of the few British companies that operate under a Royal Charter — granted in 1840.
The Company developed a world-wide shipping empire which now, some 150 years later, has further developed into a major international group of companies with widespread interests and a workforce of some 48,000 people in locations around the world.
The overall control of the Group's international activities is the responsibility of the Group Chairman and the Board of Directors.
The Board ensures that the Group's resources are used effectively and that companies of the Group are managed properly in the best interests of both shareholders and employees.
The companies which make up the P&O Group operate in a wide variety of fields on a world-wide basis.
Some of the main areas of operation are:
Housebuilding and Construction
Commercial building projects in the UK and abroad; private house-building in the UK and the USA.
Property
Development and management of and investment in property in the UK and abroad.
Cruising and Leisure
World-wide cruising operation plus leisure, holiday and travel interests.
Shipping
World-wide freight/cargo services and ferry services to and from the UK.
Road Haulage, Forwarding, Warehousing
Road transport network throughout Europe with substantial warehousing, wet and dry bonded storage, and wine shipping.
Oil Related Services
Off-shore oil industry support companies.
Industrial Distribution
Distribution of engineering tools.
Catering
A group of companies specialising in commercial catering and vending services.
Exhibition Services
Earls Court and Olympia together with a number of ancillary exhibition service companies.
Security Services
Security and guarding services including the London Silver Vaults.
Insurance, Agency and Consultancy Services
Include design, safety and electronic communication services, insurance, ship agency service, shipbrokers and charterers.
Conditions of Employment
Engagement
On appointment you will receive, either in the form of a letter of appointment or separately, a statement of the principal terms and conditions of employment as required by the Employment Protection (Consolidation) Act 1978 as amended.
Once you are engaged, you should complete a Personal History Form.
It is important that this form is completed accurately; if you fail to do so and, in particular, if you conceal any medical condition which could affect your work, your continued employment could be placed at risk.
Your Job and Salary
When you join the Company your salary will have been agreed between your Manager and the Personnel Department taking into account your qualifications and experience and the salaries of people in comparable jobs in Central Services.
Closely related jobs, for example most secretarial and clerical jobs, are assessed to a common standard and salary ranges allocated within which service and experience in the job can be recognised.
All salaries are reviewed periodically, normally on an annual basis at 1 January.
Inability to Attend for Work
(see also Sick Pay and Long Term Sickness Benefit
If you are unable to attend for work for any reason, you must ensure that your immediate Manager is informed before 10 am on the first day of absence so that arrangements can be made to deal with your work.
Reasons for any absence must be given and, in the event of continued absence, you must comply with the appropriate rules for notifying your Manager which are included in your written terms and conditions of employment.
Leave of Absence
You may wish to seek leave of absence in special circumstances such as the death of a close relative, marriage, severe illness or similar important reasons.
If you wish to obtain such leave you should first approach your Manager, who is responsible for deciding whether to give permission and whether any absence authorised will be paid or unpaid.
Your Manager will notify your Personnel Manager of any leave authorised.
Sick Pay
(see also Inability to Attend for Work and Long Term Sickness Benefit
If you are absent for reasons of sickness or injury, your entitlement to pay will be as set out in your letter of appointment and/or statement of principal terms and conditions of employment, on condition that:
i)
you submit to the Company any necessary medical certificate(s);
ii)
you reimburse the Company, where appropriate, with the full amount of your State sickness benefit.
Medical Examination
All prospective employees are required to undergo a medical examination at a medical establishment nominated by the Company.
Thereafter, the Company may require an employee to undergo further medical examination; for example, after prolonged or persistent illness and prior to entering the P&O Group Pension Scheme.
Holidays
Holiday entitlement differs slightly according to job level, age and length of service.
As well as your annual holiday entitlement, the Company observes the usual statutory bank and public holidays.
Pensions
You are not obliged to join the P&O Group Pension Scheme but, should you choose to do so, the minimum contribution (5% of salary) will be deducted at source.
Full details of all aspects of your pension, including additional voluntary contributions, are given in a separate booklet which will be supplied by the Personnel Manager.
Health and Safety
You have a general statutory responsibility to take reasonable care of your health and safety and that of other people who may be affected by your acts or omissions at work.
In all parts of the Group there are managers who have responsibility for health and safety.
The P&O Group aims to meet its responsibilities through a variety of means as appropriate to the industries in which its companies operate.
On joining P&O Group Central Services you will be provided with a leaflet on Health and Safety.
Maternity Provisions
Details of maternity rights, including absence from work and maternity pay, may be obtained from the Personnel Manager who should be advised once pregnancy has been confirmed.
The Data Protection Act 1984
The Company holds personal information on its employees on computer files and, in accordance with the principles set out in the Data Protection Act 1984, undertakes that such information will only be used for purposes relevant to your employment with the Company and will not be disclosed to other bodies without your permission.
Every effort will be made to ensure that the information held is accurate and up-to-date and it is in your own interest to tell the Personnel Department if your personal circumstances change; for example, if you get married or move house.
Under the Data Protection Act you are entitled, subject to certain limitations, to know what data about yourself is held on computer and, if you wish to exercise this right, you should in the first instance approach the Personnel Department.
Some Rules for Your Attention
Discipline
You should be aware that the Company has an established procedure for dealing with cases where an employee's performance or conduct is unsatisfactory.
This procedure includes an oral and/or written warning, suspension or summary dismissal.
You should familiarise yourself with the procedure.
Ask the Personnel Manager to show you a copy.
Security
Any employee who has charge of Company property is responsible for taking all reasonable precautions in making sure that it is not lost, stolen or damaged.
A very serious view is taken of any circumstance where an employee is found to be in unauthorised possession of Company property; such conduct may lead to dismissal.
Fire Precautions
Instructions about what to do in case of fire are placed in prominent positions throughout your place of work.
Please make sure you are thoroughly familiar with them.
First Aid
(see also Medical Facilities
First aid boxes are held by selected staff who are trained in first aid techniques.
The names, telephone numbers and locations of trained staff are shown on the Company's noticeboards.
Economy
You are requested to switch off lights when these are not needed and to exercise proper economy in the use of telephones and other company equipment.
Jury Service
Leave of absence with pay is granted to all employees who are required to attend jury service.
As soon as you receive the official letter from the Court, you should inform your Manager.
He/She will ensure, through the Personnel Department, that the Pay Department is informed.
The form (which you will have received from the Court) for certifying loss of earnings should be passed to the Personnel Department.
On return to work, you will be required to submit to your Manager evidence of all monies received whilst attending jury service; he/she will ensure that the Personnel and Pay Departments are informed as necessary.
You may keep travel and subsistence expenses paid during jury service, but as your normal salary will have been paid in your absence, any payments received for loss of earnings must be made over to the Company.
Outside Activities
You may wish to take part in activities outside office hours, such as local community work or the Territorial Army.
If so, please make sure that this does not distract you from your work.
In any case, you should discuss your intentions fully with your Manager.
Personal Property
Personal property, including motor cars, money and other valuables, are left on the Company's premises at your own risk.
The Company does not accept liability for any loss or damage.
Company Property
You will be provided by the Company with equipment and tools necessary for you to do your job.
All items of equipment remain the property of the Company and must be returned immediately on request.
Communication with the Press
If you are approached by a representative of the Press on any matter, you should make no comment of any kind and refer the caller to    — keeping your Manager informed.
Benefits and Facilities
AMENDMENT
Medical Facilities
The Company has arranged for clinic facilities to be available at Lloyds & City Medical Centre, situated at  (ten minutes walk from Bank Tube Station).
Full immunisation and travel clinic services can be provided.
In the event of a personal accident, immediate assistance should be sought from the member of staff trained in first aid responsible for your area.
Should there be a need to visit or receive advice from the clinic, arrangements should be made through the Personnel Department.
In an emergency, advice may be sought direct from the Lloyds & City Medical Centre on .
BUPA Well Woman Scheme
All female staff aged 20 years or more, subject to the completion of one years service, are eligible to join the BUPA Well Woman Scheme.
Further details may be obtained from the Personnel Manager.
BUPACARE Scheme
A BUPACARE group scheme is available to all staff.
The advantage which this scheme affords is a 25% reduction on normal subscription rates or, in the case of staff between the ages of 18 and 24 years, a reduction of 40%.
Subscriptions are deducted monthly through the Group payroll and remitted to the British United Provident Association.
Subscriptions
The Company may pay your subscription to a professional association related to your profession or to your job.
Payment is at the discretion of your Manager who will tell you whether or not you qualify for such a payment.
Season Ticket Loans
You may be eligible for a season ticket loan.
Ask the Personnel Manager for details.
Long Term Sickness Benefit Scheme
A long term sickness benefit scheme may provide financial assistance to employees who are absent through injury/sickness for periods in excess of 26 weeks.
Salary payments under the terms of this scheme will be made entirely at the discretion of the Company.
P&O Profit Sharing Scheme (1985)
An employee profit sharing scheme is open to all UK full time (minimum of 25 hours per week) employees of the company who have completed five years continuous service as at 1 April.
At the Board's discretion, a profit sharing pool not exceeding 5% of the company's consolidated annual UK pre-tax profits will be apportioned amongst eligible employees.
The profit sharing pool will be paid to  Trustees who will acquire deferred stock in the company to hold it on behalf of participating employees.
The full details of the scheme will be announced annually to individual participating employees.
P&O Group Services Profit Incentive Scheme (1985)
P&O Group Head Office and Central Services staff who have completed one years service at 1 April following the year to which the incentive relates and who are in company service on the payment date, will be eligible for a bonus subject to a set target of profitability having been achieved by the Group.
The continuity of the Scheme and its arrangements will be reviewed annually; payments made will not be pensionable and will not be a contractual right.
The full details of the scheme and eligibility can be explained to you by your Manager or Personnel Department.
SAYESO
The Company offers employees the opportunity to buy Company stock by means of a Save As You Earn Contract — a scheme which has the approval of the Inland Revenue.
Options may be granted, at times determined by the directors, to employees who enter into the Save As You Earn Contract.
On each option date employees will be notified, by circulation and notice board, of the price at which options are available; applications are made by completing the appropriate form which is incorporated in the Rules of the Scheme available from the Personnel Manager.
Building Society Savings Accounts
Arrangements have been made with the Woolwich Equitable Building Society whereby regular monthly savings can be deducted from salary and credited to the Society's Share or Savings Plan Accounts.
The Manage of the Group Pay Department will be pleased to provide you with further information.
Charitable Donations — Give As You Earn
The Company operates the Give As You Earn payroll deduction scheme for donations to charities under the auspices of the Charities Aid Foundation.
Under this scheme you may donate up to a maximum of £240 a year to a charity or charities of your choice free of income tax.
Full details will be provided by the Personnel Department on request.
Retirement Gifts
On retirement, a discretionary gift, varying in value according to length of continuous service, may be made by the Company to an employee.
Communications and Wavelength
You will be kept informed of Group affairs through the issue of Group News and  Information notices and through occasional departmental briefings by your Manager.
In addition, the Group Information Department produces an in-house newspaper ‘Wavelength’ which is circulated every month to employees throughout the Group and to P&O Group pensioners.
Drinks Services
Free hot and cold drinks are available.
Further Education
You will be encouraged to undertake further training which may be helpful to the development of your career.
Full details are available from the Personnel Department.
Insurance
The Company holds a personal accident insurance policy in its own name covering all permanent employees anywhere in the world, whether or not engaged on Company business, subject to certain specified exclusions.
Benefit is payable at the rate of salary × 2 in the event of death or serious permanent injury.
Should a claim arise, the money received may, at the discretion of the Company, be paid either to an injured employee or (in the case of death) to the deceased employee's dependants.
These provisions are in addition to the cover provided by the P&O Group Pension Scheme.
The Company will indemnify your next of kin for travelling expenses incurred necessarily in visiting you should you be confined to hospital as a direct result of an accident sustained whilst engaged on Company business.
Authenticated medical expenses incurred in obtaining essential treatment whilst abroad on Company business will be indemnified subject to certain provisions relating to NHS reciprocal treatment arrangements.
Insurance also covers personal effects required during travel on Company business and the use of privately owned motor vehicles for authorised business purposes.
In the event of a claim arising, further details may be obtained from the Personnel Department.
Insurance Facilities
Favourable rates for Central Services employees may be obtained on private insurance policies e.g. household, travel, private motoring etc.
Policies are obtainable from the Eagle Star Insurance Company PLC and the Bishopsgate Insurance Company PLC.
Concessionary Travel
P&O Cruises Ltd — providing you have had three years service with the Group, you and eligible members of your immediate family may travel on cruise ships at special concessionary rates.
Details and application forms are available from the Personnel Department.
Completed application forms must be certified by the applicant's Manager, approved by the Head of Division and then sent direct to  P&O Cruises.
The allocation of berths to staff or relatives is made by P&O Cruises.
Berths only become available to staff or relatives when the ship is not fully booked.
You may not always be successful in your application.
Successful applicants will be informed as soon as possible, but sometimes notification can only be given two or three days before sailing.
P&O Ferries Ltd — Concessionary rates are given to Group employees and close relatives travelling on the P&O Ferries Orkney and Shetland Services — Aberdeen/Lerwick and Scrabster/Stromness routes.
Application forms may be obtained from P&O Ferries,
North Sea Ferries Ltd — Concessionary rates are available to Group employees and relatives on the Hull/Europoort and Hull/Zeebrugge routes if the level of commercial bookings allows.
Concessions only apply to standard fares and not to fares that have already been discounted.
Application should be made to:.
P&O European Ferries Ltd — Provided that you have had more than 1 years service with the Group, concessionary fares are available to you and your relatives travelling on the  routes.
Applications should be made to .
Application forms are available from the Personnel Department.
Bovis Homes
P&O Group employees are offered a discount of 2% on the purchase of Bovis homes.
For further details contact:.
Sports and Social — The Maori Club
The Maori Club, situated at Worcester Park in S.W. London, offers club facilities to P&O group employees and their families to play cricket, football, hockey and tennis.
All P&O employees are automatically granted social membership of the Maori Club.
Details of joining fees for the respective sports sections of the club may be obtained from the Personnel Department.