

Best of British!
YOUR award-winning BNFL News has had the honour of representing Great Britain in a prestigious European editing competition.
The paper was selected by the British Association of Industrial Editors to take part in the Federation of European Industrial Editors Associations' GrandPrix, which was being staged in Paris this month.
The GrandPrix, held during the FEIEA's three-day triennial congress, was the first such competition and attracted entries from 12 European nations.
Norman Woodhouse, the BAIE's Director of European Affairs said: ‘It is a tribute to the publications which have been selected to have been chosen to enter this first pan-European competition.
‘The aim is to raise standards of internal communications in companies.
BNFL News is a leader in its field and can help other publications to improve their standards.’
As BNFL News went to press results of the judging — which involved votes from 200 delegates — had yet to come through…
Watch this space!
SUPER THORP IS ‘ENVY OF THE WORLD’
THORP BNFL's newly-completed jewel-in-the-crown super plant, has been hailed as the envy of the nuclear world.
Also described as Britain's most successful industrial investment and one of Europe's largest and most complex engineering projects, the Thermal Oxide reprocessing Plant was completed to a deadline set six years ago.
The nation's press were invited to tour the facility earlier this month and reporters, cameramen and TV crews went into the heart of the plant.
director International Group, told them its technology was ‘the envy of the nuclear nations of the world’.
All were impressed by the size and complexity of THORP, which was later described in the Carlisle-based Evening News and Star as an ‘awe-inspiring cathedral to the atomic age’.
Tickled pink…
‘HOW tickled I am,’ said Springfields catering assistant Jeanette Ascroft when comedian Ken Dodd and his famous tickling sticks dropped in.
And she was delighted and discumknockerated when the King of the Diddymen took time off to congratulate her on her forthcoming wedding to Springfields maintenance fitter Tony Lindsay.
The first citizen of Knotty Ash was on site to put one of his tickling sticks in a time capsule, made at Springfields, which is to be buried in the grounds of a new heart transplant centre at Manchester's Wythenshawe Hospital.
‘How plumptious I feel and tickled pink,’ said Ken as he entertained an audience in the staff restaurant.
Familiar faces on our stand
BNFL was among 50 exhibitors who put their message across at the recent local government conference in Blackpool.
The company's stand, in the resort's Winter Gardens, was alongside such diverse interests as British Rail and B & Q. Other exhibitors included Eurotunnel, ICL and Nuclear Electric.
Famous political faces to visit the BNFL team included & names & titles .
Pick up the news
FROM the next issue of BNFL News changes to our distribution system are planned to be phased in.
Starting with Risley site, the BNFL News April edition will be available only from several of the new blue and white dispenser units which will be placed in prominent locations in all buildings on site.
If the new system is a success it will be adopted on other sites at a later date.
BNFL News editor  said: ‘The dispensers will be placed so that no one will have to go out of their way to pick up a copy and they will be topped up regularly.
‘With the current desk delivery some people are getting their copy a week after others.
A pickup system will be far more efficient for the workforce and the Company.’
New £2.5 million institute will forge links with universities
Dr.BERRY TAKES ON TOP RESEARCH JOB
BNFL is to set up a £2.5 million world class research institute in cumbria to undertake environmental and occupational studies.
The Westlakes Research Institute, to be located at the Westlakes Science and Technology Park, Whitehaven, will pursue a number of core activities including epidemiology, bio-safety, molecular biology and environmental issues ranging from pollution prevention to waste disposal.
Dr Roger Berry, currently BNFL's Director of Health & Safety, is to be its first director.
He will take up his new post next month.
It is intended that the Institute will quickly become a fully independent unit, although the early impetus will be provided by BNFL.
The company will meet launch costs of some £2.5 million.
Use will also be made of BNFL's expertise and technical skills, both at Sellafield and in the company's bio-analytical and cytogenetic laboratories recently relocated at Westlakes.
It is planned to establish close links between the new Institute and universities, particularly in the north, with whom discussions have already taken place.
These links will be used to develop higher degree courses and specialist courses on relevant topics associated with the universities.
Dr Berry has considerable experience in the work it will undertake.
He was previously professor of oncology at the Middlesex hospital medical school and a commissioner of the International Commission on Radiological Protection [ICRP].
He will combine this new job with his other roles as a CBI member of the Health & Safety Commission working group on ionising radiations, a civil consultant on radiation medicine to the Royal Navy and RAF, a non-executive director at Clatterbridge centre for oncology trust and secretary of the ICRP committee on the implementation of the commission's recommendations.,
Dr. Berry said of his new appointment: ‘I see the Westlakes research Institute as providing a tremendous opportunity for extending scientific and technological knowledge.
It will be of immense benefit to west Cumbria and the region as a whole.
‘I confidently predict that the institute will achieve a national and international reputation for excellence.
‘I am particularly excited about the opportunities that it will provide for opening up for the first time higher educational facilities in the area.
‘BNFL's backing for the project should ensure its success and West Cumbria is going to have a unique and exciting new facility on its hands,’ he said.
Dr Berry will be succeeded as BNFL Director of Health and Safety by his deputy, Mr David Coulston, who has worked for the company on related matters for more than 20 years.
New men join the Board
DR GREGG BUTLER and Ken Jackson have been appointed executive directors of BNFL.
Their appointments have been approved by the Secretary of State for Energy, the Rt Hon John Wakeham MP.
Dr Butler is director of BNFL's UK Group which comprises Reactor, Magnox Reprocessing, Waste Management and Defence divisions.
He read metallurgy at Swansea University and received his PhD from there before joining the production group of the UKAEA which became BNFL in 1971.
He is a chartered engineer and a Member of Metallurgists.
Ken Jackson is Director of International Group, comprising THORP and Fuel, Transport and enrichment divisions.
A graduate of Clare College, Cambridge, where he read mechanical sciences, he joined BNFL at Sellafield in 1981.
He is a chartered engineer and a Fellow of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers.
Tom cops for a top award
PC TOM COLLIAR from Chapelcross received commendation from chief of AEA Police, Hugh McMorris for long service and good conduct during his 22 year career.
Tom joined the AEA police at Sellafield in 1969 and then transferred to Chapelcross in 1974, where he completed 18 years service.
He received a Royal Warrant and medal containing the inscription, ‘For exemplary police service’.
Chapelcorse Inspector Tom Finley commented: ‘PC Colliar is a conscientious officer who can always be relied upon.’
BNFL News in Brief 
Help in sight for Panama
THE recent ‘Gift of Sight’ appeal proved a great success.
Although the scheme was run for only a few weeks, more than 1,000 pairs of spectacles were collected from BNFL sites.
The glasses were sent to Lenscrafters in London where they have been recycled.
The re-vamped specs will be distributed to under privileged people in Panama.
Risley Employee communications clerk Pat Hunt, who helped organise BNFL's response to the appeal, said she wanted to thank all employees who generously donated spectacles and also the site collectors for their help.
Conference triumph
THE Capenhurst decommissioning team has been awarded a plaque in recognition of a paper presented at the Oak Ridge Conference in the United States.
The paper, on gaseous diffusion plant decommissioning, was selected as one of the 10 best presentations at the US Department of Energy's conference on waste management.
Produced by a team which includes deputy general manager , and  the paper was presented at the conference by , vice-president, marketing, of BNFL Inc.
Nuclear is a winner
THE ‘green’ credentials of nuclear power as an alternative to ozone-depleting fossil fuels were overwhelmingly accepted after a debate in the Cambridge Union Engineering Society.
There was a 50-strong vote in favour of nuclear power, with 27 against and 11 abstentions.
Tipped for the top
PROCESS worker Elaine Wright, the 17-year-old winner of Sellafield's HG Davey award, is the youngest nominee for the Chemical Industries Association young person of the year award.
The CIA award scheme aims to commend people under the age of 26 who excel at their profession in the industry.
If Elaine wins the regional award next month, she will go through to the national final in May.
Party plea
EMPLOYEES at Springfields are being asked to help out at the site's retired employees' party on Friday, April 10.
Anyone who wants to do a good turn and have an entertaining evening is asked to contact & name .
IT'S THE CENTRE OF INTEREST…
Visitors flood into BNFL's showpiece
THERE has been a big rise in the number of people going to the Sellafield Visitors Centre.
Latest figures show that during the first two months of this year more than 14,000 took up the Company's invitation to find out more about nuclear power by visiting Sellafield.
That compares with just 6,000 for the same period in 1991.
The news has been hailed as a major success for the showpiece centre, currently one of Cumbria's top tourist attractions and the subject of a recent TV advertising campaign.
Company publicity manager  said: ‘This shows that the national TV campaign has done its job and the visitors Centre staff have been magnificent in coping with the big increase in visitors.
‘These figures are not just a temporary blip.
Totals for the past six months, which is since the TV campaign started, are more than 15,000 up on last year.
Our campaigns are not just aimed at boosting the Visitors Centre.
We also plug West Cumbria and this is helping to bring in a lot of tourism to the whole region.’
Meanwhile, the centre has published a programme of more than 30 special events which are being staged there over the next six months.
Fantasy
These attractions are as diverse as war games, vintage vehicles and flying falcons.
Planned events include a fantasy role-playing war games day, an Easter egg hunt and motorcycle display.
There are also regular events such as painting demonstrations and dog handling shows as well as a visit by the West Cumbria Vintage Car club and an antiques and bric-a-brac fair.
Details of all events can be obtained from the Visitors Centre on & phone No;
We're the big spenders says sir christopher
BNFL's investment in West cumbria — including spending on plant at Sellafield — amounted to around one and a half millions pounds a day, every day, for the last 10 years, Sir Christopher Harding told guests at a dinner of the Cumbria Society.
As the country's biggest industrial employer, he said, Sellafield directly employed a workforce of 7,000 people, last year putting £136 million into the area's economy in wages and salaries alone.
In addition, £60 million was spent locally on goods and services for the site.
For more than a decade, Sellafield has been Western Europe's biggest industrial construction site, employing 5,000 contractors' employees in addition to its own staff of around 7,000.
It was estimated that another 50,000 jobs in British factories and workshops had been sustained by it.
Looking to the future, Sir Christopher said that the intention by UK Nirex to develop a deep underground repository at Sellafield — due to be the subject of a planning application this autumn with a subsequent public inquiry to follow — was of great significance.
‘If the outcome is favourable and the Government gives consent, construction could start in 1995, leading to operation of the repository by 2005,’ Sir Christopher said.
Reactor Staff get a screen test
STATE-of-the-art computer simulators are helping train reactor operators at Chapelcross and Calder Hall.
Marconi simulation Ltd have installed the equipment to enable reactor staff to experience fault recognition and rectification in situations that would not normally happen in everyday operations.
Minor faults to full-blown emergencies can be realistically created on screens which give a lifelike vision of dials and control room gadgetry.
The custom-built systems have successfully undergone an evaluation period during which Marconi, together with BNFL, commissioned the equipment to ensure compatibility with Reactor Division requirements.
Calder Hall Training Manager  who was project manager for the installation at both sites, said: ‘These computers give the operators an opportunity to experience potential events in a realistic simulation and are capable of continuous modifications, development and expansion.’
People in the news
GARY HAS FUN ON THE PISTE
HURTLING down a mountain on skis can be a frightening experience for even the most able-bodied among us.
But for Sellafield purchasing supervisor Gary Jackson the situation was potentially alarming.
For Gary 36, paralysed five years ago after falling from a ladder during DIY work at his Haverigg home, went on the downhill run on little more than a converted chair.
He undertook the experience on a trip to the Anzere in the Swiss alps.
There, supported by an organisation known as ‘Back-Up’, he spent a week progressing from rudimentary skills to the challenge of solo runs down the glacier du Wildhorn.
Assisting him in the difficult early days were ‘ski buddies’, able-bodied skiers who gave one-to-one tuition.
Since his tragic mishap, the former marathon runner has accomplished many projects including an outward bound course, abseiling and canoeing.
He said of his winter sporting expedition: ‘I felt I'd reached a decent standard by the end of the week, although I did take a tumble or two.
It was good to be up mountains again, as I used to enjoy mountaineering before my accident.
It's great to be given the opportunity to try another outdoor activity and I enjoyed the challenge.
…and Alan scales the heights
WHEN Capenhurst employees raised money 16 years ago to send cerebral palsy sufferer Alan Barnes to America for treatment, they little realised the heights to which he would rise.
For Alan, whose father Bill worked at Capenhurst for 24 years, has been to Russia where he was part of a group of four handicapped people on an expedition to climb the 1,800ft Mount Elbius in South Georgia.
Alan, 31, was the only person from the North West chosen by MENCAP to join the Russian trip to celebrate the charity's silver jubilee.
His mother Margaret, said, ‘This shows just what handicapped people can achieve.
Alan almost reached the summit but felt dizzy and had to come down.’
Alan's trip to America 16 years ago was to receive treatment at the Institute of Human Potential in Philadelphia.
‘Many people from Capenhurst were involved with helping to give Alan therapy and taking part in the charity events,’ said Peter Pears, chairman of the benevolent fund which also gave a donation.
SHAUN MARTIALS A NEW CLUB SPIRIT
MARTIAL arts expert Shaun Mudie is the driving force behind his local judo club's latest success.
Recently, nine members of Windscale Judo Club achieved a higher level in the sport after successfully completing an upgrading contest.
The nine, tutored by Calder Hall painter and decorator Shaun, proved they had the stamina to fight throughout a day which began at 5.30 am.
They didn't arrive home until late in the evening.
Shaun, aged 25, an instructor at the club in his spare time, teaches children as young as six in the art of self defence.
He first started Judo 13 years ago at school and this soon developed into tai-boxing and ju-jitsu.
Shaun became a brown belt in judo and a black belt in ju-jitsu, as well as being Carlisle's county champion from 1985 to 1988.
There are now over 20 members in the judo club which meets twice a week in the Egremont market hall.
Pilots honoured
A CAIRN has been raised in honour of two Polish pilots who died when their planes crashed 50 years ago.
Whitehaven ATC erected the memorial near the summit of Scafell, overlooking the crash site of the two Hurricane aircraft.
‘I was surprised to find much more wreckage than I expected,’ said BNFL Sellafield apprentice Paul Rooney.
‘The remains of the engine and parts of the wings could clearly be seen but most of the plane has been recovered by a salvage team during the war,’ added Paul, a cadet Warrant Officer in the squadron.
A plaque giving details of the incident was fixed in place by the cadets, with the help of Harry Paterson, AEA Windscale's technical administration manager and Eric Young, BNFL apprentice training instructor.
A dedication ceremony was held by the squadron chaplain at the memorial on the snow-covered fellside.
A perfect match!
CHURCH matters will never be far away for Sellafield technical support officer David Ivey and his new wife, Marilyn.
For David, a churchwarden, and Marilyn, a deacon, met at the Church of the Holy Trinity in Millom.
And, after a honeymoon in Tenerife, the couple have made their home in Bigrigg where their involvement in the Church is set to continue.
Marilyn has been licensed at a special service at St John's Church there, effectively joining the ministry team in the parish of Egremont.
Cumbrian-born David works in the nuclear materials accounts and safeguards office at Sellafield.
GENEROUS employees at Springfields have helped seven local charities.
Donations totalling £15,000 have been set aside from the site's charity trust fund to buy much needed equipment to help mothers and children, the elderly, the injured, the deaf and handicapped in the area.
Penpal power for pupils
PUPILS at Distington Junior School in Cumbria have made a host of new, long-distance penpals thanks to their close links with Sellafield.
On a recent visit to the Ringhalls nuclear power station in Sweden, Sellafield Public Relations manager Duncan Jackson and information officer Dave Curry were asked by Distington headmaster John Nixon to pass on more than 60 letters to a school close to the Ringhals plant.
They handed the letters to a school in Varobaco and the replies are already flooding in!
FAST way ahead for NOFC
THE state-of-the-art £144m New Oxide Fuels Complex being built at Springfields will have one of the world's most advanced computer systems at its heart.
A £13 million contract, one of Europe's largest, to provide all control and management systems for NOFC has been won by the SEMA Group.
They have teamed up with Instem Computer Systems, who have been awarded a sub-contract worth £3 million.
Additional packages of work estimated at £2 million are expected to be sub-contracted to Instem in the next few months.
The NOFC plant, scheduled for completion by May 1995, will integrate under one roof total fuel production, currently in five separate plants at Springfield.
Software
It will strengthen BNFL's position as a world leader in nuclear fuel production into the next century.
One of the most significant features of NOFC is the high degree of automation employed throughout the manufacturing process.
This has created the need for a highly integrated network of computer systems and programmable logic controllers.
The core of these systems will be SEMA Group's FAST software, selected because of its ability to satisfy BNFL's stringent functionality and performance criteria to ensure rapid response times for operators in the control room.
TOP CLASS Praise for our schools link-up
BNFL took a further step along the road of its partnership with schools when about 100 employees from throughout the company converged on Risley for the second annual governors' seminar.
This year, for the first time, many head teachers accompanied the governors on their fact finding mission and were given stirring messages of support by speaker after speaker.
‘We read a lot these days about school and industry partnerships but I am pleased to say that ‘partnership’ is not a new word to us,’said Corporate Affairs Director and Company Secretary, Harold Bolter.
‘We have been involved in such a partnership for some years now and the fact that many governors have been accompanied by their head teachers today is an indication of how successful it has been,’ he added.
Interest
Mr. Bolter said BNFL's commitment had been recognised nationally and was clearly illustrated by such initiatives as ‘Living with Technology’, a series of resource packs designed to help teachers cope with the technical aspects of the national curriculum.
This had aroused international interest from such countries as Argentina, Zimbabwe and Australia.
Mr. Bolter said BNFL was a company firmly based in science and technology, employing an above-average 2,132 graduates.
During 1991 they had recruited 109 graduates and were expecting to recruit a similar number in 1992.
‘We also believe very strongly in further education,’ he said.
‘In the last financial year more than 1,000 of our employees were pursuing studies in this way.’
Mr. Bolter, who was himself recently appointed a school governor, was accompanied by head teacher Monica Galt of Kings Road primary school, Old Trafford.
Mrs Galt was among speakers who included Mrs Mary Chuck of Padgate High School, Mr Chris Jones of the National Curriculum Council, Morgan Rue of BNFL's technical support group and Mr David Peachey, Cheshire county education officer.
Guests were welcomed by Rod Othen, corporate education manager.
A teacher for 25 years, Mrs Galt described the work of a governor as ‘vital’.
‘It's all very well nominating a person to be a governor of a school, but then a company has to continue to give its support,’ she pointed out.
It seems BNFL is doing just that and I also welcome the fact that on a day like this they are letting someone like me make an input,’ she added.
Also giving the seminar favourable marks were Bill Walker and Martin McGrath from Sellafield.
Bill, a shop manager in engineering services, is a governor of the 170-place Monkwray junior school, and Martin, an implementation engineer, serves on the governing body of the similarly sized St Patrick's infant school at Cleator Moor.
‘It helps you take a broader view,’ said Martin, attending his second such seminar.
Bill added: ‘The fact they have brought in head teachers makes it even more worthwhile.’
Both men can point to specific ways in which BNFL has helped their schools.
‘We went to the schools’ liaison officer and asked him if the company could produce our prospectus in a professional manner.’
said Martin.
‘With the current shortage of money facing us it was greatly appreciated.’
Said Bill: ‘Resources are scarce and the information cassettes and videos have helped us a lot.
The Visitors Centre at Sellafield has been particularly helpful.’
WORKERS PLAY IT SAFER…
THE average radiation exposure to a Sellafield site worker is now less than the average dose which people in the United Kingdom receive every year from natural radiation sources.
The dramatic decrease, which underlines the continued progress being made on the safety front, means that the Sellafield average is only 2.4 millisieverts a year, slightly under the national average of 2.5 mSv.
There was a dramatic fall too in the number of workers whose radiation dose exceeded 15 millisieverts, down from more than 100 to less than 10.
Sellafield's Health and Safety Manager, Colin Partington, said there were various reasons for the outstanding performance, including new radiation shielding and changes in working practices.
He said credit was due to the contribution of workers on the joint committees which look at ways of reducing radiation exposure.
Piano plea
AN appeal has gone out from Buxton Opera House where organisers of the BNFL-backed Questfest are asking for the loan of a Clavinova electric piano full-size keyboard.
The instrument would be used for rehearsals for the festival of new musicals and would be fully insured by Buxton Opera House.
Anyone who can help is asked to contact & name in the BNFL Press Office & phone no.
Workshops help plan for future
SIR Bernard Ingham was a guest speaker at two senior management conferences held at the Broughton Park Hotel near Preston.
The conferences were attended by a total of 200 delegates from all areas of BNFL management.
Sir Bernard's address was one of several contributions which assisted delegates in a number of workshops.
The eight workshops considered widely differing aspects of the company's business and brought a valuable exchange of ideas and input into future company policy.
Chief Executive Neville Chamberlain welcomed the delegates and gave a general review.
Other contributions included group directors' reports from Dr Greg Butler, Ken Jackson and Peter Roberts and there was an outline of the company's performance and prospects from Peter Phillips.
Harold Bolter spoke on the review of headquarters and an overview of progress on TQM was given by Dr Bill Wilkinson and Gregg Butler.
Landy Langley, President of BNFL Inc, described the work of the US subsidiary and Derek May referred to BNFL's strategic planning.
ARE GREENPEACE GETTING SET FOR U-TURN ON NUCLEAR POWER?
Chairman tells union delegates why the old enemy may be changing its tune.
reports from the trades union conference at Blackpool.
GREENPEACE, who have been among nuclear power's strongest critics in the past, could switch to become supporters of the industry.
This was a prediction made by BNFL Chairman Sir Christopher Harding during his address to the annual trades union conference at Blackpool.
He told the 114 delegates assembled at the resort's Savoy Hotel how the environmental group had regarded BNFL when he took office in 1986: ‘You remember, they re-named April the first, my first day in office, British Nuclear Fools Day.
Well they are still highly critical, highly hostile towards us and what we stand for’ he said.
But I sense they take us much more seriously now, and recognise that we have powerful arguments for the environmental respectability, the positive environmental value, indeed, of nuclear energy.
‘I do not rule out the possibility that even Greenpeace may be one day be converted on the subject of nuclear power.
I think I detect straws in the wind that point in that direction.
‘The current Greenpeace business plan highlights global warming as their number one cause of environmental concern and their number one campaigning issue.
Nuclear power is not listed, these days, among their priority targets.’
Sir Christopher went on: ‘It seems to me that once environmentalists start addressing the greenhouse effect and the ozone gap as matters of prime concern, logic will eventually drive them to recognise the contribution nuclear energy can make, as a replacement for fossil fuels, in helping to cut these global threats.’
Other indications of a swing towards nuclear power were given to delegates.
Honesty
Sir Christopher told them: ‘We now have evidence that such intellectual reassessments are already taking place.
The Club of Rome, an international group of politicians and academics which, for the past 20 years, has campaigned against nuclear power, has now published a report accepting — albeit reluctantly — that nuclear power MUST be allowed to play a significant part in world energy production.’
He said that great strides had been made by BNFL since 1986 with particular successes in the areas of UK and overseas customer relationships, relations with the DoE and the regulators and a ‘vast improvement’ in media relations through BNFL's policy of honesty and openness.
Sir Christopher added: ‘The nuclear industry's battle for the heart and mind of the trade union movement over the case for nuclear power goes on.
Arthur Scargill's influence seems to have diminished, but the trade union world as a whole is far from being convinced that nuclear power is a good thing and that development should be encouraged.
‘There is an area in which we owe a debt of gratitude to the National Campaign for the Nuclear Industry.
This grass roots trade union group within BNFL has mounted a highly effective pro-active campaign of support, characterised by enthusiasm and well-informed argument.
It's encouraging that the NCNI is now spreading its influence to other sectors of the nuclear industry.’
He told delegates: ‘The Company's relationship with the trade unions with which it negotiates is healthy and constructive.
This is due in large part to the national officers and to yourselves and your colleagues.
Spotlight
‘With our own staff I believe the Company has fostered a greater sense of confidence in what it is seeking to achieve and the way it is going about achieving it.
We have recognised the need for new initiatives to seek new markets for products and services.’
Sir Christopher then turned the spotlight on BNFL's push to get new business through its marketing department.
He revealed that the US subsidiary, BNFL Inc., has now won 18 contracts worth some 20 million dollars.
Marketing activity is being targeted on central and eastern Europe and the Company considering setting up an office in Seoul to take advantage of new business opportunities which could arise from the signing of a bilateral agreement between the UK and Korean Governments.
He added: ‘We have achieved a great deal together over the past six years.
That has only been possible because of the combined effort by the whole BNFL team, led so effectively by our outstanding Chief Executive, Neville Chamberlain.
‘In the BNFL strategic plan, which aims to provide a blue print for our future development, the Company has defined its mission, and here I quote: ‘To be the world leader in nuclear fuel services, setting the standards in safety, quality and efficiency’.’
Salvation Army visit to Sellafield
A VISIT to Sellafield by the Fleetwood branch of the Salvation Army has broken new ground at the site.
A 12-strong party of homeless men, who currently reside at the Fleetwood Hostel in Lancashire, were offered the chance to visit Sellafield to stimulate their interest in industry and give them a day out to remember.
Visits supervisor Jenny Wallace said of the group: ‘This was the first time we had welcomed a party from the Salvation Army.
The men asked some very technical questions and during conversation it turned out that one of them had worked on the construction of the Visitors’ Centre and another had been employed on the construction of one of the Scottish nuclear power stations.’
She added: ‘Everyone enjoyed themselves so much that they are now seriously considering organising another visit!’
WATCHING THE BIRDIES
A SURVEY of Springfields' rich bird population is to be carried out as part of an international study.
Members of the Fylde Bird Group, together with volunteer employees, have installed a number of bird boxes to prepare the ground for an investigation into the vast numbers of birds who make the nuclear fuel plant their home.
Regular visits will be made to capture a variety of birds for tagging with special identification rings.
The birds will be released unharmed and the data collected will be used to compile a profile of their nesting and migratory habits.
Staying on for a while
SPEAKING of his decision to step down as chairman, Sir Christopher told delegates that he was leaving the company in good hands.
He told conference delegates he had been asked by the BNFL board and the Government to continue in his post for a short period after March 31 as his successor — John Guinness, currently Permanent Secretary in the DoE — could not easily be released from that post until after the general election.
Sir Christopher said: ‘I have already referred to my belief that Chairmen have a shelf life of somewhere between five and 10 years.
At the end of March I will have completed six years.
It is for that reason, and for that reason alone, I decided to step down.
‘I do not yet know what I will do next, but it will not be full-time with Hanson plc.
Having been Chairman of BNFL I would like to contribute as a Chairman in the future…and that, I believe, is how I can make my best contribution.
Ideally I would like one mainstream involvement with two or three subsidiary roles, one being with Hanson plc.’
He added: ‘When I leave BNFL what I will miss most will be the people.
It's a tremendous team, I have greatly enjoyed being part of it.
‘There is still a great deal to be done both inside the company and within the industry in order to ensure that we secure the right outcome to the 1994 review [of nuclear power].
‘I know, however, that you will go from strength to strength with your new Chairman and I am confident that you will be extremely successful.
There will no doubt be difficulties and problems along the way but the BNFL team have the ability, the determination and the vision to solve these.
I have immensely valued your advice, help, support, commitment, encouragement and above all your friendship over the last six years.
It has been magnificent.’
He concluded: ‘Together with the rest of your colleagues I wish you all every possible success in the future.
I shall watch your progress with pride and pleasure.
BNFL is in good hands…
YOURS.’
Jimmy Airlie of the AEW told Sir Christopher: ‘It is our view that BNFL, under your chairmanship, has become more open and more sensitive to the need to develop good public relations in order to more effectively put the case for nuclear energy.
Can I say on behalf of this body that we are genuinely sorry to see you go.
We know you will be a success in whatever new venture you take up and we wish you and your family all the best in the future.’
BNFL ENGINEERING CLINCH SPAIN DEAL
SHAKE on it!
Bernard Kelly, general manager BNFL Engineering and Gonzalo Diez, director of Madrid-based Initec's nuclear division, clinch a deal for BNFL expertise to be ‘exported’ to Spain.
Under the agreement Risley's John Prior, Carl Anderson and Ian Croft will be seconded to Initec for between six and 12 months.
The team, led by John will be providing support and training on the computer-aided plant design management system [PDMS].
Initec is a large design group which undertakes work for nuclear and non-nuclear plants.
The company has purchased several PDMS terminals, but has been having difficulty in using them effectively.
BNFL engineering, which has extensive experience in using PDMS, offered to assist Initec.
The contract is worth up to £200,000.
Mr Kelly said: ‘We are very pleased to be associated with Initec.
This is an important opportunity for BNFL Engineering to demonstrate its capabilities, particularly in the application of PDMS, BNFL and Initec are hoping to develop a longer-term relationship.’
Boost for youth
SELLAFIELD has given a major cash boost to a unique local scheme geared to helping young people in the area.
The Whitehaven Youth Trust is renovating the old Whitehaven Market Hall and setting up a youth club.
BNFL's donation towards the scheme is £25,000 while Sellafield Charity Snowball Committee has given a further £2,000.
Cash towards the £50,000 project has also been secured from the European Regional Development Fund.
THE INSIDE STORY Press get to the heart of superplant
BNFL proudly unveiled its flagship operation to the nation's press as construction of the huge Thermal Oxide Reprocessing Plant [THORP]was completed.
Hailed as Britain's most successful industrial investment and one of Europe's largest and most complex engineering projects, the Sellafield plant has been built to a deadline set six years ago.
BNFL threw open the doors of THORP to members of the press earlier this month and reporters, cameramen and TV crews were invited by Ken Jackson, Director International Group, to ‘get to the heart’ of the plant before the start of active commissioning.
He explained that once that process was begun some parts of THORP would no longer be accessible.
Operation
Accompanied by David Bonser, director of THORP Division, chief engineer Maurice Bullock and Jim Coote, health and safety manager, THORP Division, Ken Jackson took the media party on a guided tour.
Mr Jackson explained how operations will begin at the end of this year with an order book which already guarantees THORP's capacity well beyond the year 2002.
Built at a cost of almost £2,800 million, including the costs of its share of supporting facilities, THORP's business is now worth around £9,000 million.
The complex will reprocess spent fuel from nuclear power stations in the UK, Japan, Germany, Switzerland, Holland, Sweden, Italy, Canada and Spain.
The first 10 years' capacity of 7,000 tonnes of spent fuel is taken up and full provision for the decommissioning of all THORP facilities will have been covered during this period.
About one-third each of those orders are from the UK, Japan and mainland Europe.
Orders for the second 10 years, by which time the capital costs of THORP will also have been recovered, are coming in steadily with more than 40 per-cent capacity sold to Germany, Nuclear Electric and Scottish Nuclear.
The plant is very much a recycling process.
some 96 per cent of the spent fuel which goes in comes out as reusable material.
‘THORP is already a successful project which will underpin BNFL's profitability over the next 25 years,’ said Ken Jackson, who was project director for five-and-a-half years.
‘It will contribute billions of pounds to Britain's balance of payments and will sustain BNFL as one of Britain's biggest yen earners.
‘The technology is the envy of the nuclear nations of the world.
It will meet the most stringent of safety requirements and have no significant impact on the environment.’
Success
He also told reporters: ‘It was completed on time and is a first class facility, designed and engineered to the very highest standards.
‘It is an achievement we are proud of, not just technically but in its project management.’
David Bonser commented: ‘The completion of construction is a tremendous team success which has built on the efforts of many people over many years.
There is now great momentum and enthusiasm from everyone in the project team which forms an excellent springboard for commissioning this year.’
And Maurice Bullock told BNFL News: ‘There has been a tremendous effort from all concerned.
THORP is a great technological achievement and a shining example of the best of British know-how and skills.
‘All BNFL people and contractor companies involved have done an excellent job and I would like to express the company's thanks.
‘It has been hectic, but they have all done their bit to make sure we got the building finished on time.’
THORP is one of only two commercial-scale oxide reprocessing facilities in the world and combines all the facilities necessary to reprocess nuclear fuel.
It was given the go-ahead in 1977 with construction starting in 1984.
Some of the facts and figures connected with the 500 metre-long structure are mind-boggling — 65,000 tonnes of steelwork, 220,000 tonnes of concrete [enough to fill a queue of cement mixers stretching from London to Manchester], 1,800 miles of electrical and instrument cable and enough pipework to stretch from Sellafield to London.
The complex project, which employed 7,500 people at the height of construction, will continue to provide substantial numbers of jobs to contractors, in support of commissioning, for the rest of 1992.
Once operational, 1,400 BNFL personnel will man THORP and its associated plants.
Ken is put in the picture
BNFL chief Executive Neville Chamberlain praised construction and commissioning teams during a visit to the newly-completed super plant.
And there was a special thank you for Ken Jackson in the form of an original oil painting by local artist Graham Twyford of THORP under construction.
Ken was presented with the impressive work by Mr Chamberlain during a celebration lunch at Sellafield's Sella Park.
Earlier Mr Chamberlain spent two hours visiting sections of THORP including the shear cave and chemical separation area.
He met several members of the construction and commissioning teams during the comprehensive tour.
news round
FINAL FLING FOR LEWIS
THOSE old jokes about kilts and Scotsmen surfaced when Lewis Rugg, painting supervisor at Sellafield, arrived for his retirement party dressed in authentic Burnett tartan.
The 60-year-old native of Aberdeenshire, from where the tartan originates, was ready for the quips.
‘They asked me if there was anything worn under the kilt and I told them no, it was all in good working order,’ remarked Lewis drily.
After 37 years on the site, Lewis was given a mini hi-fi system and an inscribed tankard by colleagues who wished him well in retirement.
He recalled that one of his first jobs was helping to prepare Calder Hall power station in 1957 for the opening ceremony performed by the Queen.
‘The contractors had done a lot of the work, but we had to go over some of it again, including painting the wooden treads on the stairs just to make sure it was right,’ he explained.
‘Among changes he has seen during his career are the introduction of new painting materials and safety methods.
‘A lot of the lead-based paints we used in the old days wouldn't be permitted today,’ he pointed out.
‘Most of the work in those days was by ladder and we used a bosun's chair for the high buildings — something definitely banned today.’
Lewis, who served his apprenticeship in Scotland before heading south to Sellafield, worked as a chargehand before becoming a foreman in charge of a team of 20 painters.
He lives in Whitehaven with his wife, Hilda, and his plans for retirement include helping out at the local United Reformed Church where he is an elder.’
Harry's family follows in his footsteps
FORTY years at Sellafield have come to an end for Harry Brocklebank, but he will not be short of news about the site.
For six of Harry's seven children work there.
He spent 30 years of his career in the main machine shop at Sellafield, with a short break of seven years in the graphite shop.
His career began with the Ministry of Supply at windscale after two years Army service spent in India.
As a courier, he travelled the sub-continent extensively.
Now 65, he says he is looking forward to spending more time on his hobbies, including helping out at his local church.
Hobbies
‘I really have enjoyed my time with BNFL and I am sure I will miss everyone,’ he said.
Harry has three children working full time for BNFL David, John and Jennifer.
A fourth, Audrey Cowman, works part time.
A fifth member of the family, Steve, works for a contractor and daughter Marie is employed by the AEA.
Ron Pattison, Engineering and Maintenance Service Works Manager, presented Harry with a set of brass candlesticks.
David is prepared for his retirement
STANDARDS engineer David Savage has retired after 11 years with BNFL at Risley.
David joined BNFL in 1981 after 22 years with the General Engineering Company in Radcliffe.
He is looking forward to an active retirement thanks to his association with the boy scout movement.
‘I joined the Bank Street troop in Bolton as a scout leader 20 years ago and remained to become their scoutmaster.
I later became district scout leader,’ said David.
A loyal Bolton Wanderers supporter his hobbies include music and gardening and he and wife Mavis are members of the National Trust.
He was presented with a cut glass crystal decanter by senior purchasing manager David Bayston.
HELP!
IT'S ALL GREEK TO ME
PUZZLED by Polish?
Baffled by Bulgarian?
Or simply confused by Cantonese?
Then it's reassuring to know that BNFL's Translation and Language Service is at your disposal.
Senior translator Jenny Johnstone speaks three European languages.
and should the request be for something ‘esoteric’, there are about 15 freelance translators she can call upon, all with their own specialities.
Jenny, who works three days a week, is assisted by full-time clerical officer Christine Ormston who runs the office at room D519, Dalton House, Risley.
Hasty
Together they handle incoming requests for help from the whole company, many for translations of technical material, contracts, safety reports, business correspondence, patent specifications and standards.
Where necessary, interpreters are provided for business meetings and visits.
‘It all depends on which language is required, but we can usually cover most of them quickly enough,’ says Jenny.
She recalled a recent appeal for a Lithuanian translation which resulted in a hasty phone call to the embassy in London.
The translations services comes under Corporate Marketing Director Douglas Marr is very keen on this aspect of communication.
The team has been joined by full-time translator Sarah Hutton, whose specialities are Dutch and Russian.
The service can cope with most things but tight deadlines continue to be the bane of their lives.
‘To have a 58-page French document in on Monday which needs translating to English by Thursday is quite a task,’ says Jenny.
‘We rely heavily on the typing pool and we also use what we call the translation panel, which is people within BNFL’.
So, if you can converse in Czechoslovakian, dabble in Danish or even get by in Greek, then Jenny and Christine would like to hear from you on .
Starlab booster
A CHEQUE for £3,000 from Springfields will help Lancashire schoolchildren get a closer look at the heavens.
A mobile, inflatable planetarium costing £9,000 will now be used in the region by up to 10,000 pupils each year.
The ‘starlab2 will boost limited resources for studying astronomy and will be able to accommodate 30 pupils at a time.
Lancashire Polytechnic raised two thirds of the cash needed and the Lancashire Education Authority will cover the running costs.
Motoring news
THINK ELECTRIC
THIS amazing vehicle is an idea from FORD for a less oil dependent future.
The Ghia Connecta is a concept electric car using technology FORD has developed for the Ecostar electric delivery vans, to appear on our roads in 1993.
Its 330-volt motor can be recharged from any domestic power point and an ingenious braking system allows the car to partly recharge itself during operation.
Solar panels in the roof power a climate control system.
Its body is made of high strength, low weight carbon fibre and the little car can carry up to four adults and two children.
Micro motor marvel
THIS nippy number brings a little joy everyday to Risley! for the distinctive white and blue buggy, one of only 15 in existence, is daily transport for its owner, diminutive Joy Crane, who joined Information Services in Hinton House ten months ago.
It is an Alto Duo, a kit car which Joy's dad made for her some four years ago.
Powered by a souped-up, 80 bhp Mini engine it has a tough steel frame and fibreglass bodywork.
Capable of an impressive 110 mph the little car — it's 10 inches SHORTER than a Mini — is now quite rare as the company which made the kits shut down after only 15 were sold.
And it brought Joy more than admiring glances — her cute car also led to romance.
She met husband Paul, who then owned an Alto Duo, through the car's somewhat exclusive owners’ club.
He has now sold his Duo and drives another unusual kit car, a Vincent Hurricane which is a 60's style open sports car.
Joy, who lives in Astley, is justifiably proud of her micro motor, which is worth around £3,000 and boasts a CB unit, stereo and alarm.
She said: ‘It's certainly not boring.
The only drawbacks are you can't be ladylike getting in and out and police tend to follow me to get a better look!’.
PARIS WILL GET AN EIFFEL OF GORDON'S PRIDE AND JOY!
SPRINGFIELDS design engineer Gordon Lund is taking the love of his life for a weekend in Paris…with his wife's blessing!
In fact Gordon's wife Johanna will be going too, for the object of her husband's affection is his beautiful 1968 Lotus Elan + 2.
The classic car, worth an estimated £11,000, is taking part in the ‘Run to EuroDisney’— a car rally to the Paris theme park which aims to raise cash for Save the Children — in May.
More than 1,000 classic and vintage vehicles are due to take part in the 350-mile event.
Gordon, Johanna and youngest son Matthew plan to combine the trip with a family holiday in France.
Mint
The Lotus, now quite a rare model, came into Gordon's possession in 1981 and he spent thousands of hours restoring it to mint condition, despite it having done an estimated 200,000 miles.
It is now his daily transport to and from work.
He said: ‘I am looking forward to the rally.
The highlight is a parade through part of the EuroDisney resort which all the cars will take part in.
It is a long way but I am sure the Lotus will get us there and back without any trouble.’
Gordon, whose eldest son is a final year apprentice at the Preston site, is now seeking sponsors for the trip and added: ‘It is a very worthwhile cause and I would be delighted to hear from anyone who can help.’
LETTER BOX
IT IS with deep regret that we announce the demise of EPDD flexi-day.
Much loved by few, hated by so many, it thrived during the happy days of large plant builds at Capenhurst.
It took a turn for the worse with the reduction in numbers of personnel here at site and was taken from us suddenly in March when the outcome of a company-wide vote [on what should have been agreed locally]was announced.
To misquote Sir Winston Churchill: ‘Never in the field of human conflict did the votes of so many influence the outcome of so few in so much time.’
Rest in Peace.
Friends of EPDD.
PS: We trust the above is suitable for inclusion in your newspaper and, if so, will reflect its impartiality.
thank you.
EDITOR: As we have always said it is YOUR newspaper, although not being prepared to put a name to letters [even if the name is not for inclusion]means authors cannot collect the £25 Star Letter prize.
Pamela Watson from Sellafield, who went under the nom-de-plume of R.E.
Dastra in our last issue, has come forward to claim the £25 prize and a cheque is on its way to her.
I write to say how well the BNFL News maintains its standard of excellence.
& name .
PHOTO FOCUS
Paul's joining the top scholars
PAUL DAWSON, who works in the design office at Capenhurst, was designated a Whitworth Scholar at an award ceremony held at the Institution of Mechanical Engineers' London headquarters.
The event was attended by Tim Eggar, Minister of State for Education and Martin Swainston, President of the Whitworth Society.
The Whitworth Scholarships were founded in 1868 by Sir Joseph Whitworth, who developed national standards for engineering measurement and dimensions.
Ron Mellor, CBE, from the Institute, stressed the scheme's importance.
‘A number of distinguished engineers have been Whitworth Scholars, and we expect this year's award winners to be high achievers in their subsequent careers,’ he said.
Hands across the sea
A MEETING of maritime minds took place at the BNFL Ramsden Dock Terminal in Barrow recently.
It happened during a visit of two captains from the Nord Pas de Calais, the vessel which carries freight between Dunkirk and Dover.
Capt. Hughes Vincent and Capt. Pierre Lecointre had expressed an interest in visiting Sellafield and Barrow because one of their regular cargoes is spent nuclear fuel from European reactors en route for Sellafield.
During a three-day tour of BNFL facilities the captains, who were accompanied by NTL's representative in Dunkirk, Gilbert Fasquel, saw THORP Receipt and Storage and the Flask Maintenance Facility at Sellafield and the transport section at Springfields.
They also toured Ramsden Dock and had a close look at Pacific Pintail with help of dock terminal manager Bob Croft and former PNTL ships captain Malcolm Miller, who is now land-based in the Transport Department at Risley.
NTL transport manager Sid Blackburn and BNFL press officer Bill Anderton played host to the captains for their stay.
Weld done, Bal
SPRINGFIELDS employee Bal Misry has been awarded £2,392 for a money-saving suggestions he made about weld samples.
Bal, 32, component manufacturing, AGR Canning, suggested that weld samples should be made from parted-off remnant produced during the manufacture of the fuel can.
The weld samples were previously produced using good AGR tubing but with this new method an estimated £6,835 per year will be saved.
Works manager Geoff Smith said that, to his knowledge, this is the highest award ever received in component manufacturing.
Bal is thinking of using the money for a holiday and is looking forward to submitting more ideas in the future.
HELP FOR HOSPICE
CAPENHURST's sports and Social Club committee has presented a cheque for more than £330 to the Good shepherd Hospice in Chester.
Committee members Nigel Fiddler and Shirley Woods raised the money from a raffle.
It is the latest in a chain of fund-raising events organised by the committee.
Nigel and Shirley handed over the cheque to matron Ann Teaney.
CHRIS'S GIFT
RESOURCEFUL catering worker christine Greenall has done her bit to fill a gap in the hospital service.
When Christine, a canteen waitress at Sellafield, suffered an injury to her back she was referred to Carlisle Infirmary for a scan.
She decided it would be much better if the sophisticated scanning equipment was also available at the Southern end of the county.
So she organised cabaret evenings and discos to help buy a scanner for the Barrow Infirmary.
The result — a cheque for £1,163 — was handed over by Christine to Dr Peter Cranshaw.
I ‘I hope that what little I have been able to do will enable others to benefit,’ said Christine.
A £5,000 donation has also been made to the Barrow scanner appeal by the Sellafield Snowball committee.
Sport news
Tiddlers take the trophy
CAPENHURST anglers didn't hook any whoppers, but they did manage to net enough tiddlers to ensure that the scales tipped in their favour in a challenge match against the Greyhound Angling Club from Chester.
The annual competition saw quite a rare occurrence in the sport of fishing.
A tie break situation was forced when with each team having won one leg, they both recorded exactly the same weight, right down to the last gramme, in the third and final match.
‘Both teams and 12 pegs for the five hour competition which was fished on the Shropshire Union Canal,’ said Alf Whitmore, who captained the Capenhurst side.
‘It was a bad day and we only caught about 2lb 6oz but it was enough to land the trophy, 2 added Alf, a foreman in the fabrication department.
In fact, he finished with the best weight, a 1lb 15oz haul of Dace.
GIANT KILLERS!
Three-goal blitz keeps CMS ahead
A SUDDEN second-half blast of three goals put Corporate Management Services in the driving seat of a tense soccer battle with computer giants, MBS Technology.
Despite two late goals by MBS, the BNFL side hung on to win 4–3 in a thrilling encounter in the Midlands.
It was a fairly even first half and the teams entered the dressing room equal at 1–1.
But the second period began with a bang for the CMS side and a quick treble which put them in a commanding position.
In the dying minutes the computer men rallied to net two in succession and CMS found themselves fighting to hold the one goal difference.
But the game ended in a victory for the BNFL lads whose scorers were  (2), and , who the players voted man of the match.
The game was played, under floodlights, at Walsall FC's ground-the club is sponsored by MBS Technology plc and the teams had full use of all facilities.
‘The ground was superb.
It is probably one of the newest purpose built grounds in the Football league and can hold about 12,000 spectators.
There were only about 60 watching on the night, so it's safe to say there was no crowd trouble!’ said  who organised and captained the CMS side.
‘There were 17 players in the team and everyone got on the pitch at some point during the game,’ he added.
Head of CMS  played in goal.
He accepted the original challenge from Technology plc and said: ‘I'd like to express my appreciation to Walsall FC and especially to Technology plc, who arranged the coach for the CMS team's 15 spectators who travelled down to Walsall and for organising the match officials and buffet in the evening.’
‘It was a splendid night and a return match is on the cards.’
Assault for charity
THERE was a record response to last year's Uranium Factor with teams from five BNFL sites taking part in the army assault course challenge.
In all, 29 teams contributed to a grand total of £16,200 raised by nuclear industry organisations, including AEA technology, NNC and Nuclear Electric.
the money was equally distributed to the British Heart Foundation, Mencap, multiple sclerosis and NSPCC.
If anyone would like further information about this year's event, or would be prepared to act as a site co-ordinator, they should contact & name & phone no;
The big French test for Craig
SELLAFIELD apprentice  is aiming to establish himself in Great Britain's amateur rugby league under-19 side when he takes the field in Albi, France later this month.
It will be a fourth BARLA international appearance for  a second year apprentice electrician.
He came on as substitute in the stand-off position for both tests against Australia in December and started the recent Anglo-French clash at Hilton Park, Leigh, as scrum half.
Though he has yet to finish on a winning side — Great Britain lost both tests and were defeated 8-O at Leigh — & name is confident the side will come up with the goods this time.
‘The Australians were far better organised than us, but I think we have never before been as close to matching their fitness and defensive capabilities.
We learned a great deal from those matches and this can only help us in the future,’ he said.
‘Our attacking play is every bit as good as theirs, and that suits me, as ball handling is probably the strongest aspect of my game,’ he added.
‘Scrum-half is my favourite position.’
On the club scene he has played for Cumberland first division side Hensingham for 10 years and featured in the team which won the Cumberland under-19 title this season.
He is also a regular in the club's open age side.
18, still has ambitions to turn professional.
‘I'd like to play for one of the glamour clubs like Wigan or Leeds and one day play at Wembley,’ he said.
We're hitting the trail to put across the nuclear message
KING OF THE ROAD
SHOW STOPPER: The new wagon — one of the biggest articulated vehicles on the road.
READY to hit the exhibition trail is BNFL's new, purpose-built Mobile Exhibition Unit.
One of the biggest articulated vehicles on the road, the 44-foot long unit replaces an ageing, converted lorry trailer.
Director of corporate Affairs and Company Secretary Harold Bolter got behind the wheel of the blue and white juggernaut and welcomed the hi-tech unit, saying it was exactly what BNFL needed to take its nuclear message to the public.
Mr Bolter added: ‘It is one of the most advanced vehicles of its type.
I am sure it will prove very successful.
Costing £140,000, the unit has many new features including its own power supply from a ‘silent running’ generator, a separate hospitality room, a galley, air conditioning and audio-visual displays.
It also boasts an hydraulic system which enables a 20-foot pod to be extended to increase the display area and allows the whole vehicle to lower itself down to a floor height of just 18 inches above the ground.
Unlike its predecessor, the Mobile Exhibition Unit has ramps to ease access for the disabled.
Company exhibitions manager Rob Axon said: ‘It was built from scratch to our own design and so will prove far better than the old trailer.
‘One advantage is that it can be used indoors at the bigger exhibition centres, thus saving the time and expense of setting up individual exhibitions.’
The unit went on display at Risley site earlier this month and moves to Capenhurst [March 23–24], Springfields [March 25–26], Sellafield [March 30-31]and Chapelcross [April 2–3]before an official public opening at the Edinburgh Science Festival.
You mustn't miss the BNFL buses
SPRINGFIELDS is also getting the message across in transportation terms.
The site has sponsored two buses, painted in company colours, which promote Preston Guild.
The two vehicles, which will be used on normal service routes in and around Preston over the next 12 months, are just part of an overall £40,000 which BNFL is putting into the prestigious event.
Held only once every 20 years, Preston Guild attracts visitors from all over the world.
The event is being backed by other major local employers including Leyland Daf, BAe and National Westminster Bank.
Springfields is supporting several events including a Lancashire Industry exhibition and illuminations in a local park and is providing a mobile play facility to Preston neighbourhood unit.