

THE NATIONAL CERTIFICATE
NATIONAL CERTIFICATE PROVISION IN OFFICE ADMINISTRATION AND TECHNOLOGY (including SVQs in Business Administration)
Guide to the Office Administration and Technology modules for the attention of staff delivering these modules in colleges, schools and other centres.
The Guide will also be of benefit to others interested in this provision such as careers officers and recruitment officers.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
These Guidelines have been produced on behalf of SCOTVEC by members of the SCOTVEC Module Development Group for Office Administration and Technology in collaboration with the Curriculum Advice and Support Team (CAST).
1 PURPOSE
The purpose of these Guidelines is to
explain the reasons for the extensive revision which the Office Administration and Technology Modules have recently undergone
aid interpretation of the descriptors in those areas where some centres have experienced difficulty
give guidance to centres on articulation routes available to candidates.
The Guidelines will be of benefit to those delivering the modules in colleges, schools and other centres.
They will also provide a useful source of information for other users such as career officers and training and recruitment officers.
3 SCOTTISH VOCATIONAL QUALIFICATIONS (SVQs) AND THE ROLE OF THE INDUSTRY LEAD BODIES
In October 1989, Ian Lang, Scottish Education Minister, announced that SCOTVEC would have responsibility for the accreditation and development of Scottish Vocational Qualifications (SVQs).
SVQs are based on the national standards determined by those responsible for identifying standards of performance in industry ie. the Industry Lead Bodies (ILBs).
ILBs will therefore have ‘ownership’ of the SVQs for their own sectors, and SCOTVEC will work in partnership with industry in their development to ensure that they have flexibility, coherence and relevance.
In the area of Business Administration the SVQs at levels I and II are based on standards of competence identified as appropriate to office workers by the Administrative, Business and Commercial Training Group (ABCTG), a cross sectoral Lead Body set up in 1986.
Levels I and II are generally interpreted as follows:
Level I: Foundation and basic work activities
Level II A broad range of skills and responsibilities.
During the revision of the Office Administration and Technology modules, the Module Development Group incorporated the latest draft of the Lead Body standards of competence into the relevant modules, and these were conditionally approved as SVQs in Business Administration for session 1990/91.
Finalised Lead Body standards have now been published and some fine tuning of the modules may be required to ensure that all the Lead Body standards are explicitly stated in the modules.
The Level I qualification covers the following administrative functions: and for session 1990/91 comprises the following modules:
The National Certificate in Business Administration at Level II provides progression from Level I and is available via 3 routes:
Apart from the relevant common foundation Lead Body units at Level I, the following additional units are common to the 3 routes::
An offshoot of the ABCTG — the National Working Party on Secretarial Standards (NWPSS) has recently published the national standards of performance expected of competent secretarial and administrative staff at:
Level III: Complex/skilled and/or supervisory work
These standards have been incorporated into SCOTVEC unitised provision at Higher National level, and an SVQ at Level III may be available in April 1991.
Level IV: Managerial/specialist
Standards are at an early stage of development and will be the focus of the newly formed Administration Lead Body's work.
The SVQs in Business Administration at Levels I and II are expected to have a wide appeal for employers and candidates alike and will probably be of particular interest to Youth Training (YT) and Employment Training (ET) trainees involved in office work.
It should be borne in mind, however, that the modules which constitute the award are merely an indication of the expected level of competence to be demonstrated by office workers who hold a qualification at Level I and II.
Not all modules incorporate Lead Body standards, but in order to achieve the required competences there will be occasions when other modules will be needed to develop the necessary skills.
For example, although Text Processing 5 is named as the module which forms part of the SVQ in Business Administration (Secretarial) at Level II, in the case of trainees without previous experience, the normal route to Text Processing 5 would be as follows:
If the trainee wishes to achieve the module on screen based equipment and have this endorsed on the certificate, the inclusion of Introduction to Word Processing in his/her programme would normally be recommended.
Annexe 1 gives a flowchart of progression through the provision; advice on progression has been provided by the Scottish Consultative Council on the Curriculum (SCCC) and should be available in centres.
Annexe 2 indicates progression from National Certificate to units of the HNC in Office Administration and HND in Information and Office Management.
4 SUGGESTED LEARNING AND TEACHING APPROACHES
The purpose of an SVQ is to give recognition to a person who has shown that he/she can attain the standards of competence associated with the qualification.
The award guarantees that the candidate is competent in a significant range of work activities.
But what is competence?
One of the more useful definitions comes from the Training Agency:
‘Competence is a wide concept which embodies the ability to transfer skills and knowledge to new situations within the occupational area.
It is described as a series of demonstrable outcomes independent of the particular method (eg. type of equipment) or process (eg. location of learning) by which the outcomes are achieved.
It encompasses organisation and planning of work, innovation and coping with non-routine activities.
It includes those qualities of personal effectiveness that are required in the workplace to deal with co-workers, managers and customers.’
In order to prepare students/trainees for this work role in the area of Business Administration, staff may need to rethink their own role, implement different methodologies and, where necessary, reorganise their use of resources.
In order to meet the requirements of ABCTG which demand the assessment of competence in the conditions of the workplace, centres could eg. transform their classrooms into training offices.
The training office is based on the idea that hands-on experience in running a realistic office under the guidance of a tutor/supervisor is the best preparation for productive work.
Trainees could carry out office work for small simulated companies.
Alternatively, the training office may provide real administrative support to the college or community in the same way as a training restaurant or training salon.
A practical way forward for some centres may be the use of Work Experience modules.
Staff will probably spend increasing amounts of time on devising simulations and developing assignments.
The best assignments allow learners to progress at their own pace and provide opportunities for tutors and learners to tailor provision to meet individual needs.
Developing simulations and practical integrated assignments to create structured learning experiences patterned upon work place tasks, activities and processes which closely match the practices of the workplace, takes time and effort and will probably involve enlisting employers as partners to achieve a truly realistic environment and to utilise the opportunities available in the workplace.
Integrated learning programmes offer an opportunity for a team approach and the forging of new partnerships.
The tasks of managing individual learning programmes — their planning, implementation and support — will become an important role for all staff.
5 ASSESSMENT ISSUES
The Lead Body has specified that the assessment environment should be as natural as possible and model the conditions of the workplace — its realism, consistency of performance and the need to deal with unexpected contingencies.
It has been SCOTVEC's consistent view that centres can not only prepare students/trainees to the level of occupational competence, but can also model the requirements of the workplace.
It is the requirement for consistency of performance which implies multiple assessments.
It is generally agreed that students/trainees are observed performing on many occasions over a period of time as a natural part of the learning process.
It is this formative assessment experienced in the context of a realistic working environment, eg. a training office, which could help to take the sting out of the summative assessment.
If it is accepted that successful formative attempts can contribute to the summative assessment, the actual number of formal assessments could be substantially reduced.
(The formative successes need, however, to be recorded and must of course meet the requirements of the performance criteria).
The role of the learner and peers in the assessment process should also be considered.
A centre could devise eg. a ‘student centred’ assessment system where each learner is responsible for collecting evidence of his/her achievement and judging his/her own performance against the criteria.
Centre and workplace staff could confirm and verify the learner's self-assessment.
Increasingly the role of initial assessment will take on a new importance and will focus on centres' guidance structures and procedures.
More and more trainees will present themselves at centres with widely varying degrees of knowledge, skills and attitudes in different areas and will ask for these to be recognised in some way or other.
It could be eg. through the accreditation of prior learning which is fast gaining ground, or by being credited with a learning outcome or two, or by being placed on a more advanced module.
The range of variables is enormous but in each case the staff will have to make the right decision and correctly judge each trainee's competence.
Assessment opportunities are available in different locations.
Although centres generally have more control over what learning and assessment opportunities are offered, it may be preferable for some learning outcomes to be assessed in the workplace, if this opportunity exists; eg. if a YT trainee carries out reception duties in the workplace it would be more realistic if the centre could arrange for the relevant module (or learning outcomes) to be assessed in the work environment.
A number of centres have already established their own working arrangements with local employers to the benefit of their trainees, vastly reducing the need for simulated assessments.
Workplace learning and assessment will become increasingly more important as SVQs, which are based on occupational competence, gradually gain ground.
6 SUPPORT MATERIAL
The following selection of support materials may be found helpful by centres:
Assessment exemplars for Module No. 6170040 Information Technology: Office Applications are presently being produced by CAST.
These are not intended to be prescriptive but centres may find them a useful resource in the delivery of the module.
Other materials relative to specific modules are also being developed through regional initiatives and college consortia arrangements.
Centres should ensure that assessment procedures being used are valid and reliable and in accordance with the information contained within each module descriptor.
Enquiries concerning support material should be directed:.
GENERAL POINTS RELATING TO THE REVISED DESCRIPTORS
Annexe 3 (a)
Work or tasks should be prioritised — this can be achieved by giving verbal instructions, setting deadlines or adding written instructions to tasks in the pack, eg. the Financial Statement in the set of tasks is required by 1030 hours for the Board Meeting.
Interruptions should be ‘arranged’, eg. a telephone call has to  be made or attended to, some urgent photocopying must be done, a note on a task which required information from a supervisor, a coffee/lunch break within a batch of work or a person interrupting the work.
Word count — means that words are counted, ie. ‘a word is a word’— do not count 5 strokes to make a word.
Groups of figures could as one word, eg.  equals 3 words.
Production work — students should be encouraged to prioritise and to produce work within deadlines throughout, in order to mirror as closely as possible the conditions of the workplace.
Organisational house style — it is anticipated that each centre will devise a suitable house style which takes account of keyboarding conventions.
Trainees, however, should be aware of alternative layouts.
Business forms — where screen based equipment is being used students can recall templates or stored formats and insert relevant information by doing a ‘fill’.
When devising simulations centres may wish to consider integrating 2 or more Learning Outcomes.
If any part of such a simulation is not achieved then the trainee should be credited only with the Learning Outcomes which have been achieved and will, after appropriate remediation need to work through another similar situation in order to demonstrate competence in the remaining Learning Outcomes.
In the interests of the trainee, it would be advisable if commercial packages were used, but not for non Lead Body modules alternative packages may be acceptable provided the Learning Outcomes can be achieved.
Transmitting and receiving of electronic information appears in several modules.
As long as the Performance Criteria are met this Learning Outcome is transferable.
Evidence of achievement should be cross-referenced and kept for assessors.
CLASSIFICATION OF DESCRIPTORS
Annexe 3 (b)
SPECIFIC POINTS RELATED TO THE REVISED DESCRIPTORS
Word Processing Skills
P4 — 1.3 — the third item in the list should be interpreted as ‘insertion of blank spaces, or boxes, or adding a column — whichever is appropriate to the document being produced.’
P4 — 4 edits are required in each of 1.3 and 1.4.
P5 — it would be helpful if functions selected for assessment tasks could be identified in relation to each document and made available to assessors.
Clerical Procedures
P6 Learning Outcome 4 —…
To confine the task to manageable proportions centres may read 20 copies as 20 copied sheets not 20 documents.
P8 Learning Outcome 8 — The proforma refers to letter or memo headed paper.
The trainee is expected to compose a letter and a memo from short notes provided.
Reception Skills 2
P5 Learning Outcome 1 — Centres who wish to do so may find it advisable to use realistic simulation to achieve this outcome, provided a multi-line switchboard is used.
Information Technology: Office Applications
The minimum requirement for Learning Outcome 4 is that at least one task will use an integrated facility.
However it may be in the trainee's interests if integrated facilities are used throughout eg. the transfer of data from one application to another.
An example of the use of integrated tasks is given below:
Task 1 could be the interrogation of a database file to produce a list of customers in a geographical area, selecting fields relevant to the task and listing them in a format most useful to area sales reps.
Task 2 could be locating a spreadsheet file of sales figures for area representatives for the last 6 months.
A column for total sales and/or for the calculation of commission on a percentage basis would be added.
The figures could be displayed in a specified graphical format OR a separate print-out made for each representative including only relevant cells.
Task 3 could be locating/creating a skeleton letter informing customers of a new product.
This could be merged with names and addresses from the database in Task 1.
Alternatively, a report could be located/created and an extract from the spreadsheet file in Task 2 would be imported in grid format or, if the system allows, in specified graphical format.
Administrative Procedures
Learning Outcome 6, page 10.
In 6.2, 15 files (letters, memos, reports etc.) will be stored on disk under filenames which convey no meaning.
The task may be simplified for trainees if they are given a hard copy of the 15 documents so that an appropriate system for naming the files can be selected; file extensions, eg. LET, MEM, REP, may be used to assist identification.
Files will be re-named on disk and, if the system allows, a print-out of the file directory made as evidence.
If this is not possible, a written record will be made of the amended filenames.
Handling Business Documents
Because Learning Outcome 2 and Learning Outcome 4 are linked, centres may find it beneficial to deliver and assess them together.
Where centres are having difficulty with Learning Outcome 5 they may consider noting discrepancies on a discrepancy report form.
A form letter should be completed and sent to the supplier when errors occur.
Invoices passed for payment could be prelisted in computer prior to posting.
P5 Learning Outcome 3 — In this Learning  Outcome only a simple ‘database’ is required, eg. this could be a stock control programme, a spreadsheet or part of an accounts package.
Ideally this Learning Outcome should be integrated with Learning Outcome 1.
Methods of Payment
The assessment of this module lends itself readily to an integrated assignment where evidence may be generated which is appropriate for more than one outcome.
THE NATIONAL CERTIFICATE
PHYSICAL EDUCATION AND RECREATION GUIDE TO PROVISION
SCOTTISH VOCATIONAL EDUCATION COUNCIL
PHYSICAL EDUCATION AND RECREATION MODULES
1 INTRODUCTION
1.1 In 1984 SCOTVEC introduced 16 modules for Physical Education and Recreation.
They were extremely successful and by the summer of 1988 student presentations had reached 6471 from 39 colleges and 5029 from 123 secondary schools.
1.2 SCOTVEC, as custodian of the National Certificate Catalogue of module descriptors has a responsibility for maintaining an up-to-date provision.
In June 1986 SCOTVEC published The National Certificate — Guide to Procedures which stated:
‘monitoring, evaluation and review are key concepts in any modular provision arising naturally from the emphasis in National Certificate on flexibility and choice, negotiation, continuous and internal assessment.’
It was decided that sufficient experience had been gained in the three years of presentations for Physical Education and Recreation modules to allow a review in this area.
1.3 In 1986 a Module Development Group was formed and considered the case for change.
1.3.1 Teachers, moderators and subject assessors had expressed the view that there was a need for extending continuity and progression of the existing module.
1.3.2 Teachers reported difficulties in the delivery of the module descriptors within allocated time durations and in meeting assessment requirements which were not always clearly stated.
1.3.3 In the wider community there was praise in the Gunn Report for the way in which the modules had opened up training pathways to satisfy employment needs in Leisure and Recreation.
1.3.4 Other groups such as the Scottish Sports Council and the Scottish Health Education Group saw the opportunity for providing some form of national accreditation for health and fitness training, sports coaching and community sports leadership.
1.3.5 There was a need for provision which articulated with awards of other bodies eg the National Coaching Foundation.
1.4 The case for change was therefore irrefutable leaving only the problem of how best to effect the changes while maintaining a balance between modules for personal development and the more insistent vocational claims.
2 THE NEW MODEL
2.1 During 1986 — 87 the Module Development Group considered a suitable structure for Physical Education and Recreation provision within National Certificate, negotiating agreement with interested bodies as appropriate.
2.2 The case for change was presented in a report which recommended a structure for continuity and progression.
This structure is shown in Annex 1.
2.3 The proposals for change embodied in the report were accepted and a new arrangement of 35 modules was agreed which may be found in Section 00 of Interdisciplinary Studies in the National Certificate Catalogue under the heading Physical Education and Recreation (see Annex 2).
They fall into the main categories of Practical Performance, Sports Leadership, and a General section which includes Health Related Fitness, Movement Observation and Analysis and Physical Recreation in the Community.
2.4 PRACTICAL PERFORMANCE
There are currently twenty one modules.
The former 71369 Physical Education: an Activity Approach continues without revision (renumbered as 70009).
It has proved to be popular, relevant and appropriate, especially for continuation classes in colleges of further education.
For each of the four sub-groups of Games and Sports, Aquatics, Outdoor Pursuits and Dance greater continuity and progression has been made possible by the introduction of five modules extending from the very basic introductory level to performance, tactical awareness, and knowledge and understanding commensurate with good club standards.
The modules in each sub-group have been written generically and have applications to a wide range of games and sports, aquatics, outdoor pursuits and dance forms.
Certification is currently available for a number of different activities within each sub-group as follows:
Each activity is listed discretely in the National Certificate Catalogue for certification purposes.
2.5 SPORTS LEADERSHIP
Sports Leadership again has sub-groups.
3 MODULAR PROGRAMMES
Modules may be offered as free-standing units or in integrated modular programmes depending on the needs of various client groups.
4 REGISTRATION AND CERTIFICATION
This will be in accordance with The National Certificate — Guide to Procedures.
5 SUPPORT MATERIAL
Support packages for curriculum and staff development are available directly from CAST.
THE NATIONAL CERTIFICATE
MUSIC MAKING
For The Attention of Music Staff in Schools, Colleges and other centres
1 PURPOSE
1.1 This is a guidance document to draw attention to the radical changes which have taken place for Session 1987–88 to the module descriptors in:
1.2 These module descriptors are now referenced in the current National Catalogue under the heading Music Making and the following new titles are used:
1.3 A student may undertake a variety of Music Making modules at the same or at a different level for a combination of music categories.
Centres should note, that to recognise student achievement on more than one instrument, modules have been given separate instrumental categories.
The modules are designed to attract all who are interested in music making.
2 INTEGRATED PROGRAMMES
Centres should note that in an integrated programme of music modules a centre may register a candidate for each of the modules for which it is anticipated the candidate will be successful ie which allows the candidate to be certificated at his/her maximum level of attainment (see paragraph 5 on Registration).
In the same way, group and solo activities may be combined, allowing the candidate to be certificated both in group and solo performance.
3 MUSIC MAKING MODULES
3.1 Module descriptors which have been reviewed for session 1987–88 (eg Music Making modules) or which are being introduced in session 1987–88 for the first time are identified in the National Catalogue by a first digit 7.
The Catalogue will, therefore, contain module descriptors, some of which will have identifier first digit 6 and others identifier first digit 7.
3.2 The following series of module numbers and titles should be read in conjunction with the detailed module descriptors for session 1987–88.
3.3 There are three important changes arising from the revision of modules which are now embodied in the new modules in Music Making: Solo:
i
there is one general module descriptor which applies both to vocal work and to a range of instrumental types;
ii
the styles of music making are wide ranging and adequately cater for ethnic/folk and Scottish music, thus dispensing with the need to have separate descriptors for these categories;
iii
there is now provision for a student to undertake modules at the same, as well as different levels.
A student having completed Music Making: Solo 1 may proceed to Solo 2 or remain at the same level, provided that the study employs different techniques: for example, voice and keyboard; guitar and bass guitar; violin and sitar.
3.4 Groups for music making can be comprised of voices only, instruments only, or a mixture of voice(s) and instruments, and as in Music Making: Solo can perform music in any style eg rock band music with vocalist, recorder consort.
3.5 
Classification of instruments
The list which follows gives the seven classifications of instruments which can involve solo or group:
The use of Strings 1 and 2 is not intended to be indicative of levels.
The instrument categories of Strings 1 and Strings 2 exist in order that a student can, if he/she wishes, register for two string instruments in the same module at the same level for different string techniques.
Thus allowing the student to be certificated for a breadth of technique in string instruments.
Centres are asked to note that a wide range of instruments is acceptable.
4 NEW MODULES — BRIEF DETAILS
A general module which enables the student to acquire basic practical musical skills in an instrument or in voice in order to increase his/her enjoyment and understanding of music.
A general module which enables the student to build upon basic music skills in an instrument or in voice and to take some responsibility in rehearsal rooms.
A specialist module which enables the student to extend his/her musical skills in voice and become self sufficient in rehearsal and performance.
A general module which enables the student to acquire basic skills in group music making, using instruments and/or voices.
A general module which allows the student to build on basic skills in group music making and take some responsibility in rehearsal routines.
A specialist module which enables the student to extend his/her musical skill in group music and to become self-supporting in rehearsal and performance.
Music Making: Solo modules may be run in conjunction with other Music Making: Solo modules in an integrated programme which allows the student to be certificated at his/her level of attainment.
Music Making: Group modules may be run in conjunction with other Music Making: Group modules in an integrated programme which allows the student to be certificated at his/her level of attainment.
Solo and group activities may also be combined, allowing the student to be certificated both in solo and group performances.
5 REGISTRATION
5.1 Centres are asked to refer to the current version of the SCOTVEC publication: THE NATIONAL CERTIFICATE — GUIDE TO PROCEDURES for details about Student Registration and Enrolment.
5.2 For the series of Music Making modules, Centres should register a candidate for each of the modules for which it is anticipated the candidate will be successful.
If however, a student achieves a level different from that which was anticipated then the centre should notify the National Certificate Unit, SCOTVEC, for the attention of the Education Officer (Validation/Moderation) and adjustments will be made to individual registrations.
For example:
a candidate who is registered for 71619 Music Making: Solo 1 (Brass) may have the registration adjusted to 71626 Music Making: Solo 2 (Brass);
conversely a candidate who is registered for 71638 Music Making: Solo 3 (Woodwind) but is unlikely to be successful in this module may have the registration adjusted to 71631 Music Making: Solo 2 (Woodwind).
6 MUSIC MAKING: SUB-HEADINGS
The current National Catalogue contains sub-headings for the music modules as follows:
7 FUTURE DEVELOPMENT
The overall provision of current module descriptors in the music area regularly receives review by a Module Development Group.
The Module Development Group would welcome any comment or suggestions which will be considered when reviewing the module descriptors.
Comments should be submitted in writing to the Assistant Director,, using a Module Comment Form obtainable from the Council.
A GUIDE TO THE NATIONAL CERTIFICATE IN TRAVEL
1 INTRODUCTION
These guidelines have been prepared for the information and guidance of staff in centres preparing and offering the National Certificate in Travel, and should be read in conjunction with the module descriptors.
The National Certificate in Travel has been designed in collaboration with the Association of British Travel Agents National Training Board (ABTA NTB) who are the Industry Lead Body for the retail travel sector and is aimed at those seeking a career in the retail travel trade, primarily and traditionally school leavers.
However it is expected that it will also be attractive to people currently employed in the industry who require formal qualifications and desire to enhance their career prospects.
It may also be suitable for those seeking employment in other areas for example airlines, railways, tour operators, car rental and ferry operators.
The travel industry is a diverse and dynamic one and it is essential that the programme produces competent, versatile people who react positively to change and understand the forces which bring it about.
The programme aims to develop the personal and interpersonal skills essential for success in the service sector, where effective communication is necessary to meet customer needs.
Business and customer handling skills must be developed in the context of the travel industry.
The award consists of a programme of National Certificate modules and the ten core modules include the competences required for a career in the retail travel trade.
A series of complementary modules has been identified and these introduce more specialised areas and provide the opportunity to further expand the key skills embedded within the core modules.
2 THE PROGRAMME
The programme for the National Certificate in Travel is detailed below:
Students must achieve 18 full module equivalents to be awarded the National Certificate in Travel.
This will comprise the 10 core modules (totalling 13 full module equivalents) with the further 5 module equivalents to be drawn from the optional modules detailed below.
A brief description of each of the core modules is detailed below.
92399 Introduction to the Travel Industry
The student will gain a knowledge and understanding of the travel industry and its technology as well as hands-on experience of BTTS/Prestel.
92401 Accommodation, Package Holidays and Ancillary Services
The student will be able to process client requirements for accommodation, package holidays and ancillary services and accept payment for all travel services.
92402 Coach, Rail, Sea Travel and Car Carrying Services
The student will be able to process client requirements for UK coach and rail services and ferry services within and from the UK.
The student will also be able to provide information on sea travel.
5110430 Air Travel
The student will develop the skills and knowledge required to process client requirements for air travel sold in and ticketed in the UK for journeys both within the UK and originating from the UK (SITI).
92404 Travel Industry Geography: British Isles
The student will develop a working knowledge of tourist destinations within the British Isles which should improve his/her product knowledge.
5110460 Travel Industry  Geography : European and Mediterranean
The student will develop a working knowledge of tourist destinations within the land mass of Europe, the Mediterranean coastlands and islands, and the Atlantic islands of the north west coast of Africa.
92406 Travel Agency Practice
The student will be able to process client requirements for travel and ancillary services in practical situations by integrating knowledge and skills acquired in other modules.
The student will be able to demonstrate and use current trade practices, support systems and client contact skills.
92407 Travel and Tourism Study Visit
The student will be able to provide clients with resort information, advice on travel requirements and documentation for a visit outwith Scotland.
The student will be able to assess the tourist qualities of a destination, including accessibility, amenities and attractions, and its suitability for various client types.
The student will demonstrate the interpersonal skills and self-management skills required by an employee in the travel industry.
91370–71 Languages Level 1
Level 1 is the first of a graded series of modules which develop the student's ability to use the target language to communicate with other speakers of that language.
The modules will help the student to establish social relations, to transact the business of everyday living, to interpret spoken and written material for information and/or pleasure as well as vocational purposes where appropriate.
Module 1 is designed for beginners ie those with no prior knowledge of the target language.
The module is available for the following languages:.
5110500 Travel and Tourism Work Experience
The student will be able to develop, the in the workplace, skills acquired in course based modules.
Particular emphasis is placed on the development of interpersonal skills, self awareness, and the ability to seek and use information available in travel and tourism offices.
It is expected that centres will provide a range of the complementary modules and ensure a meaningful programme is offered.
Through the completion of core and optional modules students may cover aspects of related qualifications, such as the Certificate of Travel Agency Competence.
Where students intend to complete COTAC 1, centres would be expected to offer module 5110490 Travel Agency Competence.
The centre would be expected to offer an appropriate studies advisory service as well as guidance and counselling, and it is strongly recommended that specialist travel staff are involved in the student recruitment process.
Students should be made aware of:
the aims, structure and learning style of the programme
the specific vocational focus of the programme
responsibilities of students undertaking National Certificate in Travel
the assessment requirements, both summative and formative
the contribution that the programme can make to realistic career expectations.
3 INTEGRATION IN DELIVERY AND ASSESSMENT
A strongly integrated approach to the programme, particularly over assessments and between all modules in the programme should be developed.
Core themes should be used to:
allow the programme team to collaborate on learning and assessment strategies
to enhance the relevance of the programme by incorporating important aspects of working in the travel industry, such as service to customers
assist in the development of common skills
assist integration in the programme by linking modules.
4 PROGRAMME REVIEW MECHANISMS
There should be an ongoing process of evaluation as the programme develops to ensure that it continues to meet the needs of the students and employers and enables the students to achieve its objectives.
The process should also feed into a formal review in which students, employers and the staff participate, to enable the team to produce an action plan.
The following is a guide to what to cover in the whole review process:
the working of the course team;
staff development needs;
the assessment instruments;
the relevance of materials used as needs of students and employers change;
employers' involvement;
learning materials and equipment;
visits, work experience placements;
operation of the model travel and tourism centre;
where undertaken, satisfactory preparation of students for entry to examinations such as COTAC 1;
timetabling arrangements;
recruitment and admissions policy;
induction and counselling arrangements;
recent SCOTVEC curriculum publications;
follow-up of ex-students' employment destinations and career progression subsequent to education and training.
5 INDUSTRY LINKS
Strong links with industry are essential for the success of the programme.
Employer involvement is important for all courses because of the need to keep teaching/learning relevant and up to date.
Formal liaison/advisory committees form a useful part of these links, but more direct involvement with the programme must be established, by, for instance:
working groups to develop assignments and assessment materials;
outside speakers;
regular employer inputs;
assistance with resources; the workplace as a learning resource;
visits;
staff development, including secondments;
planning, provision and monitoring of work experience;
programme design and review.
6 RESOURCES
It is highly desirable for the effective delivery of the award if staff with recent travel experience are involved in the delivery of the programme.
It is further suggested that:
formal and effective staff industry updates in Travel and an in-service development mechanism for all staff involved in the programme are provided;
specialist and core staff are encouraged by the centre to attend forums for the development of Travel training education;
a wide variety of travel texts and periodicals to supplement sets of specialist textbooks are provided along with an adequate supply of up to date technical directories, guides and brochures to support practical exercises and assignments.
6.1 The Model Travel and Tourism Information Centre
An invaluable resource in the delivery of the programme is the model travel and tourism centre.
The points noted below are  intended to serve as a guide on how to maximise this resource.
The Centre should ideally be equipped with an integral viewdata system, a good counter area, internal and external telephone systems, brochure racks, filing cabinets, travel agency desks and a substantial display area.
It should house the full complement of technical guides, manuals and publications.
The Centre should be timetabled for operational use by students and formally supervised by a designated member of staff.
The use of the Centre should be fully integrated within the course.
Within a realistic teaching environment it should be used to develop counter, written and telephone contact skills in conjunction with personal effectiveness and travel skills training.
Authentic role plays, perhaps in conjunction with CCTV, to develop customer care skills should be incorporated in its use.
Students' performance at counter, telephone and viewdata transactions should be assessed.
Assignments linked to work in the Centre should be developed and conducted through viewdata.
7 WORK EXPERIENCE
The work experience element certificated through module 5110500 Travel and Tourism Work Experience, forms an essential part of the programme.
Work experience will provide the opportunity for personal and social development of the student along with the underpinning of skills covered in the core and optional modules.
Guidance on the operation of the work experience element is outlined below.
ensure each placement has a designated central contact whose experience, status and authority is sufficient to guarantee the quality of training;
establish a communication system for effective liaison with relevant personnel within the Centre and the placement;
ensure each placement can provide all the resources needed to assess the module in accordance with the module descriptor;
provide clear documented evidence of the competences achieved in the placement;
establish, in association, with each placement, an adequate system of induction, guidance and support for the student;
ensure each placement provides opportunity for personal development and adopts a student-centred approach which is responsive to the individual learning needs of the student;
seek agreement from the placement that centre staff can carry out monitoring visits as required;
check insurance requirements and legal restrictions on various placements;
brief students on the need for their proactivity whilst on placement.
Underline the need to maximise the short time available to them to their best advantage.
Explain to both students and organisations the role of work experience in personal development and its part in the planned programme.
provide comprehensive guidelines on the work experience which includes a student briefing, an employer briefing and a student work checklist;
ensure the appropriate timing and structure of the work experience;
provide an opportunity for the debriefing of students, discussing both the work supervisor's and tutor's assessment of them on an individual basis.
Enable the student to place the experience in the context of personal and educational development;
monitor and discuss with organisations the smooth running of the programme, improving it where necessary;
work towards permanent links with employing organisations in support of the wider aspects of industry/education partnership;
provide clear guidelines to the workplace supervisor in order that the student may experience the conditions necessary to overtake the requirements for the successful completion of the module.
7.1 The Centre should:
This could include for example:
circulating employees with information about the work experience scheme and its purposes, ie what is expected of the employees towards the student;
providing the student with information about the organisation;
inviting the student to a preliminary interview where possible;
clarifying administrative details, eg starting and finishing times, appropriate forms of dress, insurance, health and safety regulations, confidentiality;
providing guidance to the student on their responsibilities with regard to:
finding out about the organisation the importance of good timekeeping, dress and behaviour;
it may be advantageous for the student to receive a preliminary interview at the workplace.
Students should be made aware of the positive and negative aspects of work experience and should be encouraged to take a realistic approach as part of their learning experience.
8 TRAVEL STUDY VISIT
A travel study visit is required as part of the programme.
Details of the requirements are specified within the module descriptor 92407 and the tutor should ensure that the structure of the visit allows the requirements of the outcomes and performance criteria to be overtaken.
9 OTHER PUBLICATIONS
NATIONAL CERTIFICATE PROVISION IN PERSONAL AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT
GUIDE TO THE 1987–1988 REVIEW OF PERSONAL AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT MODULES FOR THE ATTENTION OF PERSONAL AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT STAFF IN SCHOOLS, COLLEGES AND OTHER CENTRES
1 INTRODUCTION
1.1 Guidelines in Personal and Social Development (PSD) are intended to address a wide audience including the following:
(a)
tutors and others delivering PSD modules;
(b)
those responsible for designing and marketing modular programmes;
(c)
users of the modules including employers, managing agents, and admissions officers to tertiary education.
1.2 The purposes of the Guidelines are:
(a)
to explain the aims of PSD modules;
(b)
to provide an outline of National Certificate provision in this area;
(c)
to outline the application of PSD modules for a variety of client groups in a range of settings;
(d)
to highlight delivery issues including programme design, learning and teaching approaches and assessment procedures.
1.3 A list of current PSD descriptors is given on page 8.
Those in the 8 series have been introduced in Session 1988/89.
The series 6 descriptors are subject to future revision.
2 AIMS OF PERSONAL AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT MODULES
2.1 PSD modules are designed to provide for the development of skills and behaviours identified in the aims of the Action Plan (Chapter 2).
It has been recognised that personal effectiveness in all aspects of life, including work, requires the development of certain broad transferable skills.
There are opportunities for the development of personal effectiveness in a wide range of National Certificate modules and other programmes.
PSD modules are, however, distinguished by having the promotion of personal effectiveness as their explicit and central purpose.
2.2 In 1987 a project was established jointly by SCOTVEC and CAST to examine arrangements for PSD within National Certificate.
Four aims for PSD were identified:
(a)
the development of task management skills, including planning, organising and decision making;
(b)
the development of interpersonal skills and group skills;
(c)
the development of self awareness, including insight, self-reliance and self-confidence;
(d)
the ability to seek and use appropriate knowledge.
These aims are seen as central to the development of personal effectiveness which is widely believed, for example by The Training Agency, to be a fundamental aspect of vocational competence.
All PSD learning outcomes flow directly from these four aims, although the weighting on individual aims may vary from module to module.
3 APPLICATIONS OF PSD MODULES
3.1 PSD modules are designed to offer most students choice and scope for development.
They cater for young people and adults.
They offer young people, in particular, help in the transition from dependence to independence.
They offer adults ways of returning to education, perhaps through the desire for self development and change, or in search of fresh interests and commitments.
3.2 PSD modules may be included in a wide range of programmes and none are highly specialised.
However, each module places different demands on the student and those responsible for programme design and guiding students in the selection of modules should bear these demands in mind, so that modules are taken which are appropriate to interest, experience and previous attainment.
It is particularly important in PSD that students should value the activities and goals of modules they are taking.
4 PROGRESSIVE LEVELS
4.1 Within the various groupings of PSD modules there are progressive degrees of difficulty in order to:
(a)
provide targets for a wide population of students;
(b)
provide progression for students in PSD skills and behaviours;
(c)
provide articulation from SEB courses to NC modules and from NC modules to advanced courses;
(d)
certificate personal effectiveness at the student's level of attainment.
4.2 Preferred entry level statements in the module descriptors give guidance on the demands of different modules in the cognate group and provide points of reference for selection and initial registration.
Although preferred entry levels are not mandatory, the guidance given in the module descriptors may be summarised as follows:
4.3 Differentiation of degrees of difficulty is characterised by the growth from dependence to independence or autonomy, from application of well-rehearsed routines to coping with unusual situations, gaining increasing confidence in assuming leadership roles, developing self-awareness, including the ability to identify personal strengths and weaknesses and developing a range of interpersonal skills and the contexts within which they are displayed.
Differentiation between progressive modules also features a change in the role of the tutor.
Annex 1 also details how this changes during progression.
In relation to PSD aims, level one competences are achieved with a high degree of tutor support and close supervision, level two with limited support and supervision, and at level three the emphasis is on the responsibility of the student to organise his/her activities — the tutor's role is one of stimulating and monitoring progress and being available on a consultative basis.
For further details, please refer to Annex 1.
5 PROGRAMME DESIGN IN PSD
5.1 PSD modules offer schools, colleges and other agencies a flexible system of modular provision.
Within the limits imposed by the descriptors, ie mandatory learning outcomes and performance criteria, centres are free to implement PSD modules in a variety of ways to meet local needs and make the best use of existing resources, including the expertise of teaching staff and others.
The modules can be offered as free standing courses, or linked together or with other modules in integrated programmes.
The module duration of 20, 40 or 80 hours is a notional design length and may be adjusted according to the capabilities and progress of the student.
Centres are free to deliver modules in ways and over periods of time that best suit the needs and interests of students.
5.2 The way in which PSD modules are offered in a centre is likely to influence strongly the chances of success.
As a ‘new’ curricular area, the rationale for PSD modules will have to be carefully explained to students, parents and employers.
A ‘users’ guide to PSD, including details of the modules available in a particular centre, is one possible approach and Annex 2 may assist centres in the preparation of such a guide.
5.3 PSD methods are student-centred and activity based and in relation to programme design, centres should arrange groups which are small enough to allow for practical activity.
6 LEARNING AND TEACHING APPROACHES
6.1 The selection of learning and teaching approaches is of central importance in PSD modules.
While student-centred approaches are common to many National Certificate programmes, the development of PSD skills and behaviours is dependent on such student-centred approaches as setting tasks jointly with students and reviewing and learning from experience.
Personal and social development is most likely to occur when students take responsibility for their own learning and seek consciously to develop PSD competences through practice and reflection on their own experience.
It is through reflection and review that much of the learning will occur and PSD tutors should lay great emphasis on review sessions.
Tutors will also make a positive contribution to learning through structured input, tutor-led discussion and formative assessment of individuals.
The role of the tutor is not simply to offer students an experience which leads to their being assessed at pre-existing levels of competence, but actively to assist students to enhance their skills, knowledge and behaviour.
6.2 It is important that students fully understand the learning outcomes and methods of the PSD modules they are taking.
Induction activity at the outset of the module should focus on the PSD skills and behaviours to be developed in the module and introduce students to the learning, teaching, and assessment approaches which will be used.
6.3 Involving students in the decisions which affect them is valuable for personal development as well as a powerful motivating factor.
Within the context of each module or group of modules where they are linked in an integrated programme, students have a part to play in determining what, how, when, where and at what pace they learn.
This approach recognises the importance of starting from the interests and experiences of students, of encouraging active rather than passive roles and of ensuring that there is correspondence between the aims and learning outcomes of Personal and Social Development, and the processes through which the learning takes place.
6.4 Learning and teaching approaches in PSD should help students to develop self awareness.
It should be borne in mind, however, that some approaches, used without proper consideration of the issues involved, may be distressing or even damaging.
Some students will be new to the experience of sharing views on individual strengths and weaknesses and may feel exposed and vulnerable.
Tutors should use approaches which, while challenging, provide appropriate degrees of support.
6.5 The implications of PSD methods for the tutor include:
learning how and when to give control to the student;
negotiating aspects of a programme of learning;
starting from the student's prior experiences and interests;
creating opportunities for students to learn through engaging in challenging activities;
being accessible and providing the appropriate degree of support when necessary;
supporting and guiding experimental learning;
modelling personally effective behaviour.
6.6 The implications of PSD methods for the student include:
taking responsibility for his/her learning;
negotiating aspects of a programme of learning;
developing awareness of self and others;
working effectively in groups;
working towards independent activity;
practising new skills and behaviours;
reflecting on and learning from experience.
7 ASSESSMENT PROCEDURES
7.1 An important Instrument of Assessment in the 8 series PSD descriptors introduced in Session 1988/89 is the Personal Interview.
This Instrument of Assessment is a particular application of the reviewing process with which PSD tutors will already be familiar.
7.2 Reviewing can be defined as the process of analysing personal/group experience in order to learn from it more effectively.
It involves:
(a)
looking back to learning activities completed and identifying achievements, difficulties, methods of working, insights gained, etc;
(b)
using this understanding to critically examine current activities and go on to set targets for the future.
7.3 The Personal Interview takes the reviewing process a step further by using this as an Instrument of Assessment.
Two forms of the Personal Interview may be identified:
(a)
discrete, involving time allocation, tutor planning and student preparation;
(b)
integrated as a continuous strand of interaction between tutor and student throughout the time of the module, with achievements being logged as and when evidence is gathered.
Personal Interviews will often be on a one to one basis but can also be undertaken as a group exercise.
This would be at the discretion of the tutor, for example in a whole group report back toward the end of a Local Investigations module.
Note that the reviewing activities associated with Personal Interviews are in no way comparable with the procedures of job interviews.
Personal Interviews must operate as collaborative activity between tutor and students directed towards reaching agreement on the achievement of learning outcomes.
7.4 There are a number of reasons for the decision to use Personal Interviews as an Instrument of Assessment in PSD:
(a)
they permit the collation and review of evidence of student attainment from different sources eg. from the student, the supervisor or the tutor, thus contributing to the validity and reliability of assessment;
(b)
they allow evidence from out of centre activity, eg. work experience, to be reviewed, thus contributing to the validity and reliability of assessment;
(c)
while evidence from different sources is taken into account the final decision on the attainment of learning outcomes rests with the professional judgement of the tutor;
(d)
assessment is not dependent on good written communication skills;
(e)
they provide an opportunity for students to explain their intentions and values and to comment on their own performance, thus contributing to the collaborative nature of the assessment procedure.
7.5 The Assessment Procedures section of each descriptor identifies the minimum assessment evidence required.
For example, in Work Experience 1, the recommended assessment evidence supporting the Personal Interview and Practical Exercises is:
Annex 3 lists instruments of assessment and documentary evidence supporting it.
8.
THE ROLE OF THE PSD TUTOR
8.1 The role of PSD tutors is a demanding one.
The list of knowledge, skills and behaviour set out below gives an indication of the main demands of the role and may serve to help tutors identify their own staff development needs.
(a)
Awareness of the significance of PSD to competence in work, higher education and other life contexts and an ability to relate PSD provision to other areas of the student's experience.
(b)
Development of the tutor's task management skills, interpersonal skills and self-awareness, in order to act as role-model.
(c)
Knowledge of some of the main findings of research which underpin the tutoring of personal and social development, eg. group dynamics.
(d)
Design and use of induction, negotiating, interviewing and debriefing techniques.
(e)
Use of learning approaches in which students take responsibility.
(f)
Organisation of resources to facilitate student-centred learning in and out of college.
(g)
Development of skills, such as coaching, supporting, facilitating.
(h)
Design of a range of means of gathering assessment evidence, eg. self and peer-assessment procedures, supervisors' reports etc.
(i)
Marketing of PSD.
9.
PROVISION SESSION 1988–89
9.1 Provision for Session 1988–89 is as follows:
The following 6 modules, not changed for session 1988–89, will be subject to future revision:
10.
FUTURE DEVELOPMENTS
New provision is being investigated in the following areas:
11.
REGISTRATION AND CERTIFICATION
This will be in accordance with The National Certificate — Guide to Procedures.
Copies of this document are circulated to centres each year (see para 13.3).
12.
SUPPORT MATERIAL
Support packages for curriculum and staff development are available directly from CAST.
Enquiries concerning support material should be directed to:
ANNEX 3
16 + A Guide to Personal and Social Development Modules
(Revised April 1988)
The broad aims of all of these modules are to develop planning and organisational skills, interpersonal skills and self-awareness through the various experiences that they offer.
This should be borne in mind while reading the following descriptions so that the medium does not become confused with the aims.
Several of the original PSD modules will remain in the PSD section of the SCOTVEC Catalogue pending a revision in 1988–89.
The descriptions of these modules are included in the final section of this guide.
Personal and Social Development modules may be included in a wide range of programmes.
They may be taken as free-standing courses or as part of a programme of modules.
The arrangement of PSD modules into two or three levels of demand enables tutors to tailor a programme of personal and social development to meet the needs of students whose life experience, maturity and personal circumstances vary.
The three levels within each module set increasingly demanding targets for students.
Level One modules operate with a high degree of tutor/supervisor support, Level Two with a limited degree of tutor support and at Level Three students are given a high degree of responsibility to plan, organise and undertake their own activities.
The tutor's role changes throughout the progression from one of direct support to one of monitoring and consultation.
Students may progress through a series of modules from Level One to Level Three, or they may begin at whichever is appropriate to them, depending on qualifications already held.
Level One modules have no formal entry requirement.
Level Two modules have a preferred entry level of any Level One PSD module, 61002 Communications Two or Standard Grade in Social and Vocational Skills at 4.
Level Three modules have an entry requirement of any Level Two PSD module, 61003 Communications 3 or Standard Grade Social and Vocational skills at 2.
What follows is a guide to the PSD modules which are included in the National Certificate Catalogue 1988/89.
This provides an outline of the purpose of each module and what is expected from students.
PART A
GUIDANCE
81188 Induction (1/2)
This module aims to assist students to gain the maximum benefit from their chosen education/training programme by providing planned induction.
It can be used by a variety of students/trainees who are in transition from one education/training programme to another.
The student is given the opportunity for self-appraisal and realistic goal setting.
The key elements of his/her chosen programme of education/training are introduced and in-house administrative and organisational arrangements explained.
Students are also given the opportunity to review the learning they have gained through the induction process and to identify any areas where they need clarification.
EXPERIENCE
81200–81202 Work Experience 1–3
These three modules provide a framework for organising and certificating work experience for a diverse population.
At Level One the student will contribute to the planning and arrangement of work experience.
The experience should provide a general introduction to the world of work and the opportunity to begin self-awareness of the individual's skills, aptitudes and interests in relation to work.
Both during and after work experience the student is given the opportunity to identify the contribution of work experience to his/her personal and social development and to relate the experience to future plans for work, education or training.
At Level Two the student will plan and arrange work experience and carry out tasks during the experience with limited support from tutors/supervisors.
The onus will be on the student to display the ability to work co-operatively with others during the planning and undertaking of work experience.
Students will be asked to monitor their own personal and social development which has taken place as a result of work experience and to review this in conjunction with the tutor.
This learning will be related to future plans for work, education or training and other aspects of the student's life.
At Level Three the student will identify personal development goals in relation to work experience, devise and arrange a programme of work experience to help achieve these goals and implement the programme, working independently.
Throughout the module, tutor/supervisor will closely monitor student performance and will be available as a resource when needed.
During work experience students are expected to exhibit a high degree of interpersonal skills in initiating and sustaining working relationships.
A contract which covers the programme of work will be agreed between student and supervisor and students are expected to adhere to the contract so far as is practicable.
A work-based project will be completed as part of the programme.
Students will monitor their own progress during the module and will be expected to analyse and evaluate the contribution of work experience to their personal and social development, relating the findings to future work, education or training.
81203–81205 Community Involvement 1–3
These three modules provide a framework for organising and certificating community involvement for a diverse population.
At Level One the student will contribute to the planning and arrangement of community involvement.
Students will be given support to enable them to identify the type of work they would prefer and the tutor will undertake the placement organisation with some contribution from the student.
The community involvement will provide the opportunity for students to develop awareness of the needs of others and of their own skills, aptitudes and interests in relation to work within the community.
Both during and after work experience the student is given the opportunity to express his/her feelings and reactions to the community involvement.
At Level Two the student will plan and arrange community involvement and carry out tasks during the experience with limited support from tutor/supervisor.
Emphasis will be placed on the student's ability to work co-operatively during the planning and implementation of community involvement.
Students will be asked to monitor their own personal and social development which has taken place as a result of the experience and to review this in conjunction with the tutor.
This learning will be related to two other areas of the student's life so that transferability of the process skills involved in the module can be realised and accentuated.
At Level Three the student will identify personal and social development goals in relation to community involvement and arrange a programme to help achieve these goals, working independently.
Throughout the module the tutor/supervisor will closely monitor student performance and will be available as a resource when needed.
During community involvement students are expected to exhibit a high degree of interpersonal skills in initiating and sustaining working relationships and responding to the needs of others.
A contract which covers the programme of community involvement will be agreed between student and supervisor and students are expected to adhere to the contract as far as is practicable.
A community based project will be completed as part of the programme.
Students will monitor their own progress during the module and will be expected to analyse and evaluate the contribution of community involvement to their personal and social development, relating the findings to other areas of life.
This will emphasise the transferability of the process skills involved in the module.
81206–81208 Residential Experience 1–3
These three modules provide residential experience for students whose needs will vary greatly.
Although it is a group undertaking, the residential will provide the means for students to be assessed and to assess themselves as individuals.
At Level One the student will contribute to the planning and organisation of residential experience and carry out tasks during residential experience with support from the tutor.
Students will be asked to identify the contribution of residential experience to their own personal and social development and to identify the contribution which they have made to the residential experience.
Group work and team work skills will be emphasised and students will be encouraged to express their personal feelings and reactions to the residential experience.
At Level Two students will plan and organise elements of residential experience, taking into account their personal abilities, preferences and goals when selecting tasks.
They will be expected to carry out tasks during the residential with limited support from the tutor and to monitor their own progress in terms of personal and social development.
Emphasis will be placed on co-operative working and team-building and encouragement will be given to students to recognise the transferability of these skills, along with other process skills acquired/improved during the module, to other aspects of their lives.
Students will be asked to review and record their feelings and reactions to the residential experience.
At Level Three students will identify personal development goals they wish to acquire through residential experience and will take responsibility, along with other group members for the planning, organising and implementation of a residential experience.
Each student will be asked to negotiate a leadership role on at least one occasion and take full responsibility for organising an activity for the group.
Students will be asked to monitor their own performance in terms of the learning outcomes and performance criteria throughout the module and to undertake an analysis and evaluation of the learning they have gained.
81209–81211 Enterprise Activity 1–3
These three modules provide an opportunity for enterprise activity for a diverse population.
The modules provide experience in the broadest definition of enterprise activity and need not be confined to the setting up of a profit-making business venture.
At Level One students will contribute to the planning and arrangement of enterprise activity projects and will work as individuals or in small groups with tutor support.
The contexts for enterprise activity may be taken from small business ideas, community enterprise or some form of co-operative activity.
Students will be introduced to the language of business and emphasis will be placed on the interpersonal skills involved in this type of activity.
Students will be asked to identify the contribution of enterprise activity to their own personal and social development and to recognise their own feelings and reaction to the experience.
At Level Two students will plan and organise enterprise activity, taking into account their personal abilities, preferences and the goals which they have set for themselves.
Decisions must be reached regarding the type of activity and all necessary arrangements made.
Emphasis will be placed on interpersonal skills and the student's ability to work co-operatively with others and to give support and encouragement, maintaining good relations with clients/customers.
Students will be required to review the contribution of enterprise activity to their own personal and social development and to relate the learning gained to other areas of life, recognising the transferability of process skills.
At Level Three students will identify personal development goals and devise and arrange enterprise activity to enable them to meet these goals.
The student is required to take a leading role in undertaking the activity and to initiate and sustain working relationships throughout the module.
The skills required to carry out enterprise activity at Level Three are complex and require the student to deal with a variety of tasks which are running concurrently.
Students will be expected to monitor their own performance throughout the module and to analyse and evaluate the contribution of enterprise activity to their own personal and social development.
They will be asked to recognise the transferability of the skills used during the module to other areas of life.
INVESTIGATIONS
81212–81214 Local Investigations 1–3
This series of modules provides opportunities for students to undertake investigation activities designed to improve their knowledge and understanding of their local area.
Subjects which may be investigated are very wide-ranging and may be drawn from history, the environment, politics, culture or from issues of local concern — housing, consumer issues, education etc.
At Level One students will work together in small groups to carry out small scale investigations into aspects of life in the local area.
The tasks will be clearly defined by the tutor and the tutor will provide instruction in the methodology which is to be used in carrying out the investigation.
Students will be asked to monitor their progress throughout and to take part in regular review sessions.
The interpersonal skills used during the module will be identified and assessed.
Students will be expected to identify the strengths and weaknesses in their contribution to the investigation and to comment on their personal feelings and reactions and on the value of the learning gained to their personal and social development.
This module is recommended for those with limited experience of working in groups.
At Level Two students may work as individuals or in small groups.
They will plan and undertake a local investigation, working co-operatively with others, either group members or others with whom they come into contact during the investigation.
A variety of investigation techniques may be used eg field studies, interviews, questionnaires, audio and video recording, etc.
The use of interpersonal skills will be emphasised and the student will be asked to express their personal feelings and reactions to the learning gained and to review the value of the learning gained in relation to personal and social development.
At Level Three students will independently devise, plan and undertake a local investigation.
They will work as individuals or in small groups and the investigation skills involved will be complex.
Students will closely monitor their own progress and complete detailed record keeping on all aspects of the investigation.
Emphasis will be placed on the initiation and sustaining of working relationships throughout the module and the interpersonal skills used during the module will be assessed.
Students will be asked to analyse and evaluate the learning gained through the local investigation and to describe their personal feelings and reactions to the experience.
81215–81217 Contemporary Issues 1–3
This series of modules provides students with the opportunity to explore topics which will increase their awareness and understanding of contemporary issues in addition to focussing on planning, organisational and interpersonal skills.
At Level One students will work as individuals or in small groups to select and investigate a Contemporary Issue.
The tutor will provide instruction in methodologies involved in an investigation and in the interpersonal skills which may be required.
Regular review sessions will be held to enable students to identify the learning gained and to evaluate progress.
In group discussions, students will be expected to evaluate their own performance in terms of strengths and weaknesses and to express their own feelings and reactions to the learning gained.
At Level Two students will plan and undertake an investigation into a contemporary issue of their choice.
They will be encouraged to use a variety of information search and recording techniques and to present their findings in a format of their choice.
Regular reviews of progress will take place and students are asked to carefully monitor their own performance.
Emphasis will be placed on the use of interpersonal skills appropriate to this type of investigation and students will be assessed on their use of these skills.
Students will review the learning they have gained as a result of the investigation and will be given the opportunity to express their personal feelings and reactions to this.
At Level Three students will independently devise, plan and undertake an investigation into a Contemporary Issue.
They will work as individuals or in small groups and the investigation skills employed will be complex.
Students will closely monitor their own progress and complete detailed record-keeping on all aspects of the investigation.
The method of reporting findings will be of the students' own choice.
Emphasis will be placed on the initiation and sustaining of working relation skills throughout the module and interpersonal skills used will be assessed.
Students will be asked to analyse and evaluate the learning gained through the investigation of a contemporary issue and describe their personal feelings and reactions to the experience.
81218–81219 Community Welfare 1–2
These modules offer students the opportunity to raise their awareness of the scope for both individual and community action in relation to community welfare and community needs.
Students are given the opportunity to develop an understanding of the system of welfare benefits.
Level One Community Welfare has a preferred entry level of any other PSD Level One module, 61002 Communications 2 or Standard Grade in Social and Vocational Skills at 4.
It is recommended that those who have little or no experience of investigation techniques should complete 81218 Community Welfare 1.
At Level One students will work as individuals or in small groups to plan and carry out an investigation into an aspect of Community Welfare with limited support from the tutor.
The investigation will focus on areas of social need which the student identifies as being prevalent in the local community.
The student may also wish to investigate the range of provision, both statutory and non-statutory, which aim to meet these needs.
Students are required to keep a record of the planning and implementation of the investigation.
Regular review sessions will be held to enable the students to identify the learning gained and students will be asked to carefully monitor their own progress.
Emphasis will be placed on the use of interpersonal skills appropriate to this type of investigation and students will be assessed on their use of these skills.
Students will be asked to review the learning they have gained as a result of conducting the investigation and they will be asked to express personal feelings and reactions to the experience.
At Level Two students will independently devise, plan and undertake an investigation into an aspect of Community Welfare.
They will work as individuals or small groups and the investigation skills employed will be complex.
Students will identify aspects of social need which are prevalent in their local area and also the organisations, statutory and voluntary, which aim to meet these needs.
Investigations will centre upon the student's choice of appropriate topic, based on this preliminary identification of need.
The method of reporting findings will be the student's choice.
Emphasis will be  placed on the initiation and sustaining of working relationships and interpersonal skills will be assessed.
Students will be asked to analyse and evaluate the learning gained as a result of the investigation and to describe their personal feelings and reactions to it.
81220 Roles and Behaviour
This module aims to develop the  student's perception of his/her own roles and behaviours and those of others.
The module features a limited level of tutor support and has a preferred entry level of any other Level One PSD module, 61002 Communications Two or Standard Grade Social and Vocational Skills at 4.
It is recommended that those who have little or no experience of investigation techniques and/or group work skills should complete 81212 Local Investigations 1 prior to commencing 81220 Roles and Behaviour.
The module will be undertaken on a group basis and self and peer assessment will feature strongly.
Students are expected to keep records of their work and experience and to monitor their own performance carefully.
The use of interpersonal skills is an important aspect of the module and the demonstration of these skills will be assessed.
Students will be asked to reflect on the investigations and to identify the learning gained in relation to personal and social development.
81222–81223 Life and Work 1–2
These modules provide the opportunity for students to develop personal effectiveness in a context which the student values, eg. work, leisure, learning activities.
They provide an open-ended structure which can accommodate the  students' own negotiated programmes of activities.
Students are asked to assess their current skills, knowledge and behaviours and to set personal goals in relation to these.
At Level One students are given a high degree of support and supervision when devising and implementing a programme of activities.
The scope for those activities is wide-ranging and students will be encouraged to undertake activities which provide opportunities for the use and development of interpersonal skills.
Students will be asked to identify the contribution of the knowledge and skills gained to their own personal and social development.
At Level Two students will plan and undertake a programme of activities designed to improve their personal effectiveness.
A key feature of the module is that the programme should reflect activities and contexts which the student values and has chosen.
Because of this the range of content and contexts for the programme of activities is very wide-ranging.
Self-assessment is a key feature of the module and students should set targets for themselves based on their initial self-assessment.
Students are also asked to analyse and evaluate the progress they have made towards their set target, identifying the learning they have gained and expressing their feelings and reactions to the experience.
81224–81225 Leisure and Recreation 1–2
These modules provide students with the opportunity to plan and undertake a leisure and recreation programme which extends their current appreciation of what constitutes leisure and recreation activities.
They are designed to make students aware of the personal and social development which is an intrinsic part of undertaking such a programme of activities.
At Level One students will contribute to the planning of a leisure and recreation programme, bearing in mind the constraints which may operate as a result of the degree of supervision under which this module operates.
Students, in addition to monitoring progress in their chose pursuit(s), will be expected to identify the skills they have used in planning, undertaking and reviewing the activities and to recognise the transferability of these skills.
At Level Two students will devise and undertake a programme of leisure and recreation activities, operating on a largely independent basis but still under supervision from appropriate staff.
Record-keeping, reviewing and evaluation are important aspects of the module and students will be encouraged to recognise the importance of these procedures and skills.
Time will be spent on recognising the importance of leisure and recreation pursuits in a balanced life-style and students will be encouraged to move away from their traditional view of leisure and recreation pursuits and explore less obvious activities.
There is an element of assessment of the interpersonal skills used during the module and students will be asked to express their feelings and reactions to the experience as a whole.
81226–81227 Health Choices 1–2
These modules provide the opportunity to plan and undertake a health and fitness programme appropriate to individual and group needs and to increase awareness of the implications of health and fitness for personal development.
At Level One students will examine their present attitudes to health and fitness and use this information to set personal targets and define goals for themselves.
They will be encouraged to consider the many factors which affect personal health and fitness.
In addition to the activities involved in their programme, students will record their experiences, feelings, reactions and the skills used in setting up and implementing their programme.
They will also be asked to set future targets for health and fitness.
At Level Two students will complete a self assessment, taking into account their attitude and behaviours and the factors which currently affect their health and fitness.
The scope for a programme of health and fitness is very wide-ranging and students will operate their programme with a degree of independence.
They will investigate appropriate facilities for undertaking their programme and keep appropriate records of all activities.
Regular review sessions will be held to monitor progress in all aspects of the programme, with emphasis being placed on personal and social development.
81228–81229 Job Seeking Skills 1–2
These modules provide the opportunity for students to develop a range of job-seeking skills, undertake a job search programme and develop self-presentation skills.
At Level One students will undertake self-assessment, identify qualities and skills and relate these to appropriate vocational areas.
A range of practical exercises will be undertaken, designed to improve the student's job-seeking abilities.
Emphasis will be placed on self-presentation skills and interpersonal skills.
Students will be asked to review their overall performance during the module and to update their initial self-assessment, relating this to their job-seeking potential.
At Level Two students will be expected to carry out an extensive job-search plan, operating largely independently.
Detailed self-assessment and the compilation of a job-search log will be expected.
A range of practical exercises will be undertaken, designed to improve the student's job-seeking abilities.
Emphasis will be placed on good self-presentation and interpersonal skills.
Students will set themselves realistic targets for a job search programme and review skills and abilities in relation to future job-seeking activities.
PART B
Descriptions of PSD Modules which will remain unchanged for the 1988–89 session
61173 — Managing Your Money
This module aims to develop life skills in money management including calculating income and deductions from income, making decisions on saving and spending and preparing a personal budget.
There are no special entry requirements for the module.
61179 — Accident Prevention and First Aid (½ Module)
A module which provides an introduction to the issues of health and safety, both in the home and in the workplace and aims to develop skills in emergency procedures and basic first aid.
The approach is a practical one with demonstrations and practical exercises throughout much of the 20 hours.
The module is particularly suitable for inclusion in off-the-job training programmes within YTS.
There are no special entry requirements for the module.
61181 — Consumer Skills (½ Module)
This module is designed to develop consumer skills and provides an introduction to advertising practices and pressures, consumer rights, sources of consumer advice, buying skills and ways of dealing with unsatisfactory goods and services.
There are no special entry requirements for the module.
61189 — Parentcraft
The purpose of this module is to provide the opportunity to explore questions of having and bringing up a family, to develop knowledge and skills in being a parent in areas selected on the basis of each individual's needs and interests, and to help people enjoy being parents.
The module is equally suitable as preparation for future adulthood with young people in full education and as a complement to the experience of parenting with adults returning to education.
There are no special entry requirements for the module.
61191 — Living Skills
This module is designed to provide a short course in personal life skills for students who have good passes in O Grade and/or Standard Grade courses.
It aims to develop knowledge and skills in personal budgeting, consumer skills, health and fitness and identifying and responding to social needs in the local community.
The module is particularly suitable for students with a personal or vocational interest in Home Economics.
The preferred entry level for the module is Standard Grade 2 English, 61003 Communication 3 or equivalent and Standard Grade 5 Mathematics.
61193 — Linking On-The-Job Experiences with Off-The-Job Education and Training
This module aims to provide a framework within which a student can maximise the benefits to be gained from a programme which integrates education, training and work experience.
There are no special entry requirements for the module.
NATIONAL CERTIFICATE PROVISION IN MATHEMATICS
GUIDE TO THE 1987–1988 REVIEW OF MATHEMATICS MODULES FOR THE ATTENTION OF MATHEMATICS STAFF IN SCHOOLS, COLLEGES AND OTHER CENTRES
SCOTTISH VOCATIONAL EDUCATION COUNCIL
NATIONAL CERTIFICATE IN MATHEMATICS MODULES
1.
PURPOSE
This is a guidance document to highlight the changes which have taken place for session 1988–89 to Mathematics module descriptors.
2.
AIM OF THE REVIEW
The main aim of the review was to indicate clear standards in the Mathematics module descriptors in accordance with the Guidelines for Module Writers.
This was done by establishing clearly defined Performance Criteria, Instruments of Assessment and Test Specifications.
3.
REVIEW PROCESS
3.1 It is envisaged that the review of the modules will be undertaken over 3 years.
3.2 For session 1988–89 12 of the most widely used descriptors were revised:
3.3 The module descriptors were reviewed by a National Development Officer in conjunction with a Module Development Group.
Membership of the Group included Subject Assessors and representatives from colleges, schools and the Inspectorate.
3.4 Module descriptors which have been revised for session 1988–89 are identified in the National Certificate Catalogue by a first digit 8.
The Catalogue therefore contains Mathematics module descriptors, some of which have identifier first digit 6 and others with identifier first digit 8.
4.
CHANGES TO THE ASSESSMENT PROCEDURES
4.1 An important change to all the revised module descriptors is the role of the workfile and diagnostic worksheets.
It is recognised that these are important aspects of the learning and teaching approaches for the modules and it is recommended that they are used for formative assessment.
However they should no longer be used for summative assessment and need not be retained for inspection by the Subject Assessor.
4.2 The summative assessment for project based modules  will consist of:
(a)
calculation and/or graphical exercises: the exercises for the various Learning Outcomes can be combined or carried out after each Learning Outcome; within each exercise each performance criterion should be able to be clearly distinguished;
(b)
one project lasting 8–12 hours.
4.3 The summative assessment for the project based module 81063 will consist of:
(a)
an assignment;
(b)
calculation and/or graphical exercises: the exercises for the various Learning Outcomes can be combined or carried out after each Learning Outcome; within each exercise each performance criterion should be able to be clearly distinguished;
(c)
one project lasting 8–12 hours.
4.4 The summative assessment for the problem solving modules  will consist of:
(a)
calculation and/or graphical exercises: the exercises for the various Learning Outcomes can be combined or carried out after each Learning Outcome; within each exercise each performance criterion should be able to be clearly distinguished;
(b)
an assignment consisting of a number of problems.
An example of a problem which could form part of an assignment is attached as Appendix 2.
The problem is applicable to 81058 Mathematics: Analysis/Algebra 1.
4.5 In the module descriptors the performance level for calculation and graphical exercises is stated as the satisfactory achievement being demonstrated by the student producing a correct response.
An incorrect response should be considered as a response which demonstrates a lack of understanding of the concept(s) being assessed and is not caused by a trivial arithmetic error.
5.
IMPLICATIONS OF THE REVIEW
5.1 The changes to the Assessment Procedures required a review of the  Learning Outcomes and a reduction of the overlap between the modules.
5.2 The original philosophy of the modules remains the same: the learning and teaching approaches should be student-centred, participative, integrated and where possible practical.
6.
FUTURE DEVELOPMENT
The review process will continue during session 1988–89 and it is anticipated that the following modules will be revised for session 1989–90:
Appendix 1 EXAMPLE OF A PROJECT APPLICABLE TO 81052 MATHEMATICS: GRADE 2
Learning Outcome
The student should complete a project which requires the application of mathematical knowledge and skills
Performance Criteria
The student should:
(a)
plans the project;
(b)
gathers appropriate information;
(c)
analyses the information;
(d)
summarises the results.
Instrument of Assessment
Project
The following project could be used to assess the above Learning Outcome.
Title: Let's Go To An Interview
Sometime in the near future you may have to go for an interview and therefore you will be asking yourself the following questions:
‘How do I get there?’
‘What is the quickest way to get there?’
‘What is the cheapest way to get there?’
‘Is the quickest way the cheapest way?’
This project involves planning for three methods of travel; costing each one; estimating the time for each one; and finally deciding on the quickest and/or cheapest method of travel.
You live in Glasgow and you have just received a letter from a company requesting you to attend for interview at the Station Hotel, Inverness on Tuesday morning at 9.30 am.
The company will meet all reasonable expenses.
Therefore, you have to decide the quickest and/or cheapest way of attending the interview.
You have a choice of method of travel: you may travel by road, by rail, or by air.
Whichever method you select you must be able to justify it to the company in order to recover your expenses.
You will find it useful to follow Helpsheet 1.
HELPSHEET 1
PLANNING
Select each method of travel in turn.
For each method draw up a list of information and data that you require:
GATHERING INFORMATION
Select each method of travel in turn.
— for each method collect/obtain the information to enable you to establish cost and time for each method of travel.
ANALYSING INFORMATION
Select each method of travel in turn.
For each method:
study the information and data;
carry out the necessary calculations to establish cost and time;
detail your findings and important calculations.
Compare each method of travel on the basis of cost and time.
Reach a decision.
Summarise your findings for each method of travel.
Decide on how you are going to present your findings.
Present findings.
State any assumptions made with reasons.
State, giving reasons, your decision.
Present a report based on all aspects of the project.
SUMMARISING RESULTS
This project has been adapted with the permission of CAST from the CAST Curricula Package for 1052 Mathematics: Grade 2.
Appendix 2
EXAMPLE OF A PROBLEM APPLICABLE TO 81058 MATHEMATICS: ANALYSIS/ALGEBRA 1
Learning Outcome
The student should apply mathematical knowledge and skills in a problem solving context.
Performance Criteria
The student:
(a)
interprets the problem;
(b)
selects a strategy to solve the problem;
(c)
obtains a satisfactory solution;
(d)
communicates the solution accurately and logically.
Instrument of Assessment
Assignment consisting of a number of problems.
The following problem could form part of an assignment to assess the above Learning Outcome.
A helicopter pilot has to fly to a point 200 kilometres due East.
He can fly his helicopter at 100 kph.
The wind is gusting from the North at speeds of between 20 kph and 40 kph.
Make a mathematical model, in the form of a diagram, of this information and use it to determine the shortest and longest possible flight times.
Having made the model, the solution can be obtained by using trigonometry or scale drawing (as here).
In either case, the ‘relevant’ speeds due East are 
The flight times should, therefore, lie between 
(Estimation of errors involved in measurement is appropriate and should be encouraged)
NATIONAL CERTIFICATE
PROVISION IN LAW
Session 1989–90
Acknowledgements
These Guidelines have been produced on behalf of SCOTVEC by members of the SCOTVEC Module Development Group for Law with the Curriculum Advice and Support Team.
Scottish Vocational Education Council
National Certificate Law Modules
1 Purpose
The purpose of these Guidelines is to highlight the changes to the Law modules in the National Certificate Catalogue which are being implemented from session 1989–90.
The Guidelines will be of benefit to those delivering the modules in colleges, schools and other centres.
They will also provide a useful source of information for other users such as careers officers and recruitment officers.
2 Background
The principal aims of the review of the Law modules were:
(a)
to update provision to take account of changes in client needs and changes in legislation;
(b)
to update provision to take account of SCOTVEC requirements for writing module descriptors as detailed in the document The National Certificate — Guidelines for Module Writers, to ensure that statements of national standards are clear and well formed.
3 Law Provision
3.1 The module descriptors were reviewed by the SCOTVEC Module Development Group responsible for Law provision.
Membership of the Group included subject assessors, representatives from colleges, schools, commerce and the inspectorate.
3.2 Module descriptors which have been revised or developed for session 1989–90 are identified in the National Certificate Catalogue by a first digit 9.
3.3 The current provision is as follows:
3.4 
Law Modules — Brief Details
92350 Young People and the Law Purpose
This module introduces the student to the laws governing some of the more common social relationships and institutions encountered in everyday life.
It is intended mainly, although not exclusively, for young people and informs them of their basic rights.
92351 The Scottish Legal Framework Purpose
This module enables the student to acquire a working knowledge of the sources of law in Scotland and of the courts and the role of the various members of the legal profession who practise in them.
The module may act as a foundation for students wishing to pursue their studies in the area of law.
92352 Health and Safety in the Work Environment Purpose
This module enables the student, from any type of work environment, to acquire an understanding of the obligations of employer and employee, in both common and statute law, to ensure the health and safety of employers, employees and the general public.
92353 Law in Employment Purpose
This module enables the student who is in work, or about to enter work, to acquire an understanding of his/her legal rights and obligation under a contract of employment.
92354 Consumer Law Purpose
This module enables a student who is working in retailing to acquire a basic knowledge of consumer law.
It also promotes a wider understanding among consumers of their legal relationship with the retailer.
92355 Contract Law Purpose
This module enables the student to acquire a knowledge of contractual principles and their application.
It also provides a basis for progress to 92354 Consumer Law.
92356 Introduction to Administrative Law Purpose
This module enables the student to acquire a knowledge of the basic legal principles relating to the British system of government.
92357 Hotel Law for Reception and Front Office Staff (× ½) Purpose
This module will enable hotel receptionists and front office staff to apply the law when dealing with guests and travellers.
It could be taken in conjunction with 92190 Hotel Reception.
92358 Housing Law Purpose
This module enables the student who is working in housing or who has an interest in the subject area, to acquire a basic knowledge of relevant areas of housing law.
92359 People and the Criminal Law Purpose
This module introduces the student to criminal law and its organisation in Scotland.
This module could usefully be combined with 92350 Young People and the Law to provide an elementary integrated teaching and learning package in practical aspects of legal rights and obligations.
It could also be used as a taster for students who may wish to take further modules, eg. 92351 The Scottish Legal Framework.
92361 Criminal Law Enforcement Purpose
This module is intended for students to pursue a career in the Police Force, Procurator Fiscal Service or Sheriff Clerk's Department, eg precognition officers.
It may also be suitable for students wishing to gain an insight into how crime is prosecuted in Scotland.
It covers the role and functions of the police and Procurator Fiscal in the reporting and prosecution of crime.
Students may find 92351 The Scottish Legal Framework or 92359 People and the Criminal Law useful as complementary modules.
4 Outline of Changes
4.1 The Assessment Procedures sections of the modules have been updated to show clearly defined performance criteria, standard use of terminology for instruments of assessment, detailed assessment specifications and performance levels.
4.2 Learning Outcomes have been amended to reflect the actual competences the student will have on successful completion of a module rather than reflecting knowledge acquired by the student.
In many cases this has involved rewording of Learning Outcomes but little change to the basic philosophy of the module.
Where changes to Learning Outcomes are more significant and do reflect changes of emphasis or rationale of the module descriptor, these are highlighted in paragraph 4.3.
4.3 The main changes to the provision for session 1989–90 are:
92350 Young People and the Law (formerly 62350 People and the Law)
Title changed.
Two additional Learning Outcomes covering minimum legal ages and traffic legislation.
Shift of emphasis of module towards young people.
92351 The Scottish Legal Framework (formerly 72351 The Legal Framework)
Title changed.
Criminal and civil law now covered in discrete Learning Outcomes.
Specific Learning Outcome on Children's Hearings System.
92352 Health and Safety in the Work Environment (formerly 62352 Health and Safety in the Work Environment)
Learning Outcome on The Shops, Offices and Railway Premises Act 1963 replaced by one on the production of a report for a healthy and safe working environment.
92353 Law in Employment (formerly 62353 Law in the Workplace and 62360 Employment Law)
Title changed.
Learning Outcomes amended to include race and sex discrimination laws relating to employment.
Two former modules Law in the Workplace and Employment Law now subsumed within this module.
92354 Consumer Law (formerly 62355 Contract Law (× ½)
Now a full module.
Former learning Outcome 1 is now two Learning Outcomes.
92355 Contract Law (formerly 62355 Contract Law (× 2)
Now a single module.
Some rationalisation and removal of material resulting in a reduction of Learning Outcomes from eight to five.
92356 Introduction to Administrative Law (formerly 62356 Constitutional Law)
Title changed.
Extensive revision to Learning Outcomes.
Original three Learning Outcomes replaced by five revised ones.
92357 Hotel Law for Reception and Front Office Staff (× ½)(formerly Hotel Law for Reception and Front Office Staff (× ½)
Learning Outcomes 1 and 2 combined.
92358 Housing Law (formerly 62358 Housing Law)
Learning Outcomes now more practically based.
92359 People and the Criminal Law (formerly 62359 People and the Criminal Law)
Learning Outcomes reduced from five to four.
Learning Outcome on legal aid removed.
92361 Criminal Law Enforcement
New module.
5 Suggested Learning and Teaching Approaches
The basic National Certificate philosophy of encouraging learning which is student-centred, participative, integrated where appropriate and practical where possible, is of course an essential feature of all the modules.
Each module has a section on Suggested Learning and Teaching Approaches which could be used in the delivery of the module.
Centres may, and are encouraged to, develop their own approaches.
6 Assessment Procedures
6.1 An important change in the assessment procedures in the revised provision is the more widespread use of investigative exercises such as assignments and case studies.
Where these are used, students may be allowed access to reference materials which should reflect closely those available in an employment situation.
It is recognised that assignments and case studies can also be significant aspects of learning and teaching approaches in the modules as well as being used for summative assessment purposes.
When case studies and assignments are being used for summative assessment they should be retained for inspection by the Subject Assessor.
6.2 Descriptions of these two instruments of assessment as given in the document The National Certificate — A Guide to Assessment, are:
Assignment
An assignment consists of any problem solving exercise set by a teacher/lecturer with clear guidelines and specified length.
While assignments are difficult to define precisely, they are more structured and less open-ended than projects.
Assignments differ from practical exercises in that they do not necessarily involve strict adherence to a prescribed procedure and they are not concerned exclusively with manual skills.
Where the assignment involves an investigation, the assessment is likely to be based on students carrying out a series of instructions correctly and drawing valid conclusions from the results.
Case study
Case studies consist of a description of an event concerning a real life or simulated situation, usually in the form of a paragraph of text, a video, a picture or a role play exercise which is then followed by a series of instructions which prompt the student into analysing the situation presented, drawing conclusions and making decisions or suggested courses of action.
They may be completed by individuals or small groups.
An example of an assignment and a case study/set of case studies, prepared by CAST, is included in the appendices to these Guidelines.
6.3 A range of other instruments of assessment are also utilised in the revised provision.
These include:
Instrument
SCOTVEC Description 
short answer questions
questions with a predetermined answer of no more than a few words
restricted response questions
provide scope for responses that are more discursive than short answer but less open-ended than the extended response variety
extended response questions
commonly known as an essay, this instrument of assessment is the most open-ended type of written assessment
practical exercise
presents the student with the opportunity of displaying practical skills which may involve carrying out a specific task or procedure or the production of an artefact
simulation
any structural assessment exercise involving the organisation and achievement of a specific task which is resource based and which seeks to simulate real life situations
6.4 Assessment procedures in the revised provision also include clearly defined performance criteria and performance levels so that standards can be more readily recognised and adhered to nationally.
7 Further Provision
7.1 Where gaps in provision are identified the council permits centres to submit Locally Devised Modules.
The procedure for doing this is explained fully in Appendix 3 of The National Certificate — Catalogue of Module Descriptors.
8 Support material
8.1 Centres may find the CAST/TRIST Report: Teaching Law Modules useful.
Although this was published by CAST in 1986 and focuses on the pre-revised Law modules, much of the material could be adapted to suit the revised provision.
8.2 Assessment exemplars for the Law modules are being produced by CAST.
These are not intended to be prescriptive but centres might find them a useful resource in the delivery of the modules.
Validated centres may if they wish adapt these to suit their own teaching styles and to correspond with the contexts in which the modules are being offered.
Centres should ensure that assessment procedures being used are valid and reliable and in accordance with the information contained within each module descriptor.
Appendix 1
Example of a case study applicable to 92355 Contract Law: Learning Outcome 1
Learning Outcome 1
Explain how a contract is formed.
Instrument of assessment
Case study/set of case studies.
Case study
Fred has come into money, since his aunt has left him £5,000.
He has just seen a prospectus in which the Government is offering for sale, shares in British Rail.
He decides to apply for 500 shares.
He then sees displayed in a shop window, a fur coat priced at £500, and decides he would like to buy it as a present for his wife.
He sees a car advertised for sale in a newspaper.
He offers to buy it for £1,000.
The owner says he will sell at that price, but only if Fred collects the car and pays for it within the next 2 hours.
Fred has meanwhile offered to sell his own car to Brian for £500, giving Brian seven days to make up his mind.
Finally, Fred has invited his wife out to dinner.
Answer the following questions, each with a few lines of explanation.
1.
Assuming that Fred's wife has accepted the dinner invitation, have they made a contract?
2.
Which of the following, if any, would be an ‘offer’ in law?
(a)
The offer to buy shares.
(b)
The display of the fur coat in the window.
(c)
Fred's offer to buy the car for £1,000.
(d)
Fred's offer to sell his car to Brian.
3.
How would the condition that Fred should collect the car and pay for it within 2 hours be treated in law?
Is it:
(a)
an acceptance;
(b)
a counter-offer;
(c)
an expression of willingness to negotiate.
4.
If Fred regrets offering his old car to Brian, can he withdraw his offer?
If Brian agrees to buy the car, then changes his mind, can he withdraw his acceptance?
Appendix 2
Example of a case study applicable to 92355 Contract Law: Learning Outcome 1
Learning Outcome 1
Explain how a contract is formed.
Instrument of assessment
Case study/set of case studies.
Set of case studies
1.
Fiona Jones has been accepted as a student on a law course at Glasgow University.
Her Uncle Tom is delighted and arranges to take her out for a slap up meal.
At the time and date arranged, he meets an old friend and decides not to turn up for the meal with his niece.
Fiona is advised by fellow students that she can sue Uncle Tom for breach of contract.
Explain whether she may or may not sue.
2.
A car in the forecourt of Johnston Garage has a sign which says £1,000.
Jack Wilson walks in, hands over £1,000 and demands the car.
(a)
Explain whether or not the garage must accept this and hand over the car.
(b)
Explain if it would have made any difference if the garage owner had said he would sell the car for £1,000 although no price was displayed.
3.
Wilson Decorators survey a house and agree to carry out interior decorations for £800.
The owner Harry Wills accepts, provided they supply the materials and start next Monday.
Explain whether this is a legally binding contract and whether or not Wilson Decorators must supply materials and receive £800.
4.
Bob Anderson posts a letter to ABC Computers ordering a specific computer priced at £1,500.
His wife on hearing of this is displeased, so to maintain matrimonial harmony, he sends a telex cancelling his order.
Explain the position:
(a)
if the letter is received before the telex;
(b)
if the telex is received before the letter.
Appendix 3
Example of an assignment applicable to 92355 Contract Law: Learning Outcome 2
Learning Outcome
Explain the law relating to written contracts.
Instrument of assessment
Assignment.
Assignment
1.
Your client Paul Pry has just set up in his own business selling computers, and hopes to employ several people.
He is worried about various formalities relating to written contracts, and wonders in particular whether hire purchase agreements need to be in writing, whether any special formalities apply to contracts of employment, and if a contract leasing premises needs to be in any particular form.
He is also uncertain about whether or not contracts in which he hopes to sell computers costing several thousand pounds need to be in writing.
Draft a report indicating three examples of contracts which need to be in writing.
2.
Pry now asks you to advise him about a house he wants to buy.
He is prepared to offer £50,000 for the house, including the carpets and curtains.
Draft an offer for the house in formal writing.
3.
Suppose now that Pry and the seller of the house have reached agreement on the sale, but no formal acceptance of Pry's offer has been drawn up by the seller's solicitors.
Both Pry and the seller could normally exercise a right to withdraw, but may be personally barred from doing so.
Give three examples of circumstances which might bring the doctrine of personal bar into play.
National Certificate Modules Provision in Sciences Guidance Notes
Foreword
The review of the SCOTVEC National Certificate Modules in Sciences has resulted in the development of a new matrix of Sciences modules.
The matrix is designed to be flexible and adaptable so that it can readily be adjusted to respond to needs identified by users.
The provision of multiple points of entry makes it possible to react to market forces especially in the areas of retraining, returning to science, and widening access to Higher Education.
The emphasis in the modules is on competences which relate directly to the needs of industry and commerce, professional bodies and Higher Education.
This will be further enhanced by the identification of the occupational standards by appropriate Lead Bodies.
It is anticipated that Group Awards incorporating these modules and relating to the same needs will be developed.
The matrix incorporates the recreational and social aspects of science and is designed to permit the development of further modules in this area.
These might provide links to Social Sciences and other provisions.
Some of the new modules may be suitable for introducing an element of science into other programmes and may be used to broaden the science education of students.
The matrix enables links to the awards of other examining bodies to be established.
In particular the new provision is designed so that school pupils will be able to move between National Certificate Modules, Scottish Examination Board (SEB) Standard Grades, Higher Grades, Sixth Year Studies and Short Courses.
It is not intended that the SCOTVEC Sciences provision should duplicate that of the SEB but it should articulate with the SEB provision in such a way as to allow transfer between the two systems.
It is envisaged that during the phasing out of‘O’ Grades and the introduction of the Revised Higher syllabuses the needs of school pupils will be well served by the new sciences module matrix.
In developing the New National Certificate Modules in Sciences attention has been paid to the advice contained in the Scottish Consultative Council on the Curriculum (SCCC) Supplement to the Handbook for Senior Promoted Staff in Schools — Standard Grade.
Throughout the new Sciences provision the emphasis is on the development of scientific attitudes and the vocational applications of science.
The need for a scientifically aware community and the wider implications for science at a national and international level is recognised and the matrix will allow for future needs to be readily incorporated.
The new National Certificate Modules in Sciences will provide the possibility of a range of modules appropriate to the needs of the individual, industry and employers well into the 1990s.
Acknowledgements
SCOTVEC gratefully acknowledges the work of all the members of the module writing teams and the team coordinators in the development of the new Sciences modules and the work of  and  of the Scottish Further Education Unit in the preparation of this document.
The support and guidance of colleagues in Industry, Schools, Further and Higher Education is also acknowledged.
Introduction
The aim of this guidance document is to provide users with information that will enable them to use the new Sciences provision effectively.
Part 1 provides an introduction to SCOTVEC National Certificate Modules.
There are sections on the concept of competence, the module descriptor and Group Awards.
This part of the document will be of particular use to those new to National Certificate Modules but will also serve as a useful summary for those already familiar with the system.
Part 2 includes information on progression and articulation.
It includes a grid diagram showing all of the new Sciences modules that will be available to centres for session 1991/92.
This section will be particularly useful for those wishing to gain a general impression of the new provision together with the concept of articulation and progression.
Part 3 provides examples of the way in which programmes may be developed using the new Sciences modules.
These suggestions illustrate the flexibility of the provision and are not intended to be prescriptive in any way.
This section will be of particular value to programme co-ordinators and staff involved in the planning for delivery of modules.
Part 4 outlines the future developments envisaged for the Sciences.
Further advice on progression from S3/S4 to S5/S6 is contained in the SCCC publication: A Supplement to the Handbook for Senior Promoted Staff in Schools — Standard Grade — August 1990.
Part 1: SCOTVEC National Certificate Modules
An Overview
SCOTVEC National Certificate Modules were introduced in 1984 and were designed to replace the prevailing system of ONCs (Ordinary National Certificates) and ONDs (Ordinary National Diplomas) which were based on subjects grouped together to give courses in a particular area.
These courses tended, on the whole, to be externally examined and students only received a certificate if they successfully completed the whole course.
National Certificate Modules, by contrast, are designed to afford a high degree of flexibility and responsiveness.
As such, a student may take one or two modules only or a whole set of modules specifically grouped together to meet the needs of a particular industry or employer.
Flexibility is enhanced further by the range of study options available.
For example, modules may be taken at school as an integral part of the curriculum, part-time at college, or on day-release from work.
Competence
The SCOTVEC National Certificate Modules provision is competence based.
Competence:
embraces the ability to transfer skills and knowledge to new situations;
encompasses the organisation and planning of activities, coping with non routine as well as routine situations and making innovations to meet changing circumstances;
includes the ability to interact effectively with others, either co-workers or clients.
Competence can also be defined as:
‘The ability to perform activities required to the standards specified.’
National Certificate Modules
A module is an individual unit of certification, based on a number of Outcomes and associated Performance Criteria.
Success in all Outcomes leads to the award of the module, although if not all the Outcomes are achieved, credit will be given for those that are.
There are no external examinations — assessment is internal, designed to guidelines provided by SCOTVEC, and measures the candidates' achievement in the Outcomes.
Because the assessment is internal, there is flexibility in its timing and hence a student can work towards a module at his or her own pace.
National Certificate Modules are designed to accommodate blocks of learning, normally lasting around 40 hours.
National Certificate Modules are delivered in schools, further education colleges and other approved centres throughout Scotland and because they are separate units in their own right, modules can be taken in a variety of ways to accommodate the circumstances of the individual — full-time, part-time, distance or open-learning or a combination of these.
SCOTVEC National Certificate Modules can be used:
to acquire new practical or cognitive skills or to update existing skills.
They are used by those who are:
seeking employment;
wishing to progress in education or training;
retraining for a new job;
learning to cope with new technology;
returning to work after a break;
seeking to enhance another course;
wishing to take a course for interest.
Module Descriptors
For each SCOTVEC module, there is an associated module descriptor which is essentially a description of what is to be covered and how.
The two most important features of any module descriptor are:
(a)
a statement of OUTCOMES — which explains what a candidate should achieve in terms of practical or cognitive skills and knowledge;
(b)
the PERFORMANCE CRITERIA — precise statements of the standards to be achieved in order to complete each Outcome successfully.
Annex 1 illustrates the formal adopted in the National Certificate module descriptor and explains the content of each section.
The Assessment Procedures section of the module descriptor is designed to provide the tutor with the information required to devise assessment material.
The Assessment Procedures will specify an Instrument of Assessment.
Annex 2 provides a short summary of the instruments incorporated in the revised SCOTVEC Sciences provision.
Centres requiring advice on assessment procedures should contact their local SCOTVEC Field Officer; arrangements can be made for a Subject Assessor to contact the centre.
Quality Assurance
Both individuals and employers need to be certain that SCOTVEC's qualifications are:
of a consistent, high standard over time and location;
relevant to industry;
of the greatest possible benefit to students.
The quality of SCOTVEC's National Certificate Modules is assured in a number of ways:
(a)
by careful design and writing of the module descriptors, thus defining the skills and knowledge to be acquired and specifying the standards to be achieved;
(b)
by requiring that centres in which modules are to be offered meet a set of rigorous approval criteria, the aim of which is to ensure that appropriate staff, materials and resources are in place;
(c)
through the activities of SCOTVEC Field Officers, each of whom is responsible for a certain group of centres within a designated geographical area.
The Field Officers provide advice and information, monitor the provision of modules and act as a link between the centres and SCOTVEC;
(d)
through SCOTVEC Subject Assessors who are appointed from industry, commerce or education, usually on a part-time basis.
Again, they have a monitoring role, looking at the way in which candidates are assessed against performance criteria and ensuring that comparable standards of performance are being achieved throughout Scotland;
(e)
by conducting regular reviews of SCOTVEC; s quality assurance systems and implementing improvements where appropriate.
Group Awards
SCOTVEC's certification arrangements allow for a framework of awards designed to combine the high degree of flexibility contained in a modular system with the clarity and ease of recognition of separately certificated Group Awards for particular programmes of modules.
Thus, in addition to certificating individual modules, the Council will certificate groupings of modules as Group Awards if they attract recognition by relevant users as being worthy of certification.
This may include Group Awards which are recognised for employment purposes or for progression to Higher Education.
Success in individual modules and in Group Awards, together with the formal recognition they have received, will be recorded in SCOTVEC's Record of Education and Training (RET), a computerised commutative certificate.
Annex 3 RET Summary of Procedures provides information on entering candidates for National Certificate Modules.
Part 2: The Sciences Module Matrix
General Features of the Matrix
The matrix assigns the modules in the new Sciences provision to three stages.
It should be noted that the stages are defined purely for the purposes of this review and do not feature in the National Certificate Catalogue.
Stage 1
Modules which provide for the development of basic competences in Sciences.
Modules at this stage have minimal pre entry recommendations and offer opportunities to develop a wide range of skills, some of which may lead to vocational competence.
Stage 2
Modules which form the basis of programmes in specific Sciences at the level of fundamentals.
Basic skills are further developed such that some vocational competences in the individual Science disciplines may be achieved.
These modules may form the core of Group Awards in Sciences.
Stage 3
Modules under development at this stage will provide a wide range of opportunities to specialise in the Sciences and to develop further vocational competences.
Students may be placed at a particular point in the range of modules depending on their competence profile.
The exit competence of one stage of provision provides the entry competence to the next stage.
The way in which entry and exit competences are linked is shown in the following diagram.
Modules have been developed in four subject areas:
Generic Sciences
Modules in which competences are developed applicable in a range of contexts.
These will include such basic skills as measuring and recording, using equipment, problem-solving and report writing.
Progression through the Generic Sciences modules will involve the development of analytical and evaluative skills and awareness of the wider application of scientific principles.
Biological Sciences
Modules in which competences required for occupations in a biology context are developed.
These will include basic skills as well as specialised competences in areas of applied biology.
Chemical Sciences
Modules in which competences required for occupations in a chemistry context are developed.
These will include basic skills as well as specialised competences in areas of applied chemistry.
Physical Sciences
Modules in which competences required for occupations in a physics context are developed.
These will include basic skills as well as specialised competences in areas of applied physics.
Part 3: How to use the Sciences Module Matrix
Programming of National Certificate Modules
The matrix of Sciences modules may be considered as providing a bank of competences to be drawn on by individuals through a number of outlets.
The way in which programmes of modules are constructed depends of the needs of the students.
Programmes may be designed to provide a broad base for some students or be narrowly focused for others.
This may be achieved by using modules from the same Stage or by bringing together modules from different Stages as necessary.
It is important when designing programmes to be aware of modules in the other areas of the catalogue and to provide integration and logical links to vocational areas where appropriate.
The following diagram illustrates how Sciences may relate to other areas of the catalogue.
The possibility of progression to modules requiring higher levels of competence should also be borne in mind when designing programmes.
The key features of the modules are the Outcomes and Performance Criteria and in the design of programmes in the Content/Context and Suggested Learning/Teaching Approaches can be modified to meet the particular needs of the students.
Outcomes may be achieved in any order and in developing programmes of modules it is advisable to explore ways in which Outcomes from different modules can be effectively integrated to provide better learning experiences for students.
It is possible, therefore, to integrate modules in such a way that Outcomes may be overtaken in less time than the total notional time for the programme.
The Preferred Entry Level as stated in the module descriptor is a guide to the previous achievement assumed by the module writers and Outcome statements reflect the competences acquired on successful completion of the module.
In planning programmes of modules each student should undertake modules that add to their competences without having to repeat Outcomes unnecessarily.
It follows, therefore, that all programmes of modules or even individual modules, should start with an induction period during which the specific needs of students can be determined and appropriate learning experiences indicated.
This induction period could, for some involve Accreditation of Prior Learning, consideration of records of achievement or profiles; for others it might involve the identification of learning difficulties or special needs provision.
Effective induction is the key to providing relevant and rewarding programmes of modules.
Programming of Sciences Modules
The Stage 1 modules are particular appropriate for developing introductory programmes for progression into Higher Grades.
The Stage 2 modules are designed to provide the basis for progression in vocational competence and provide the opportunity for negotiating routes to Higher Education included advanced Further Education.
Reference should also be made to the SCCC Advice on Progression from S3/S4 to S5/S6.
Further information on programmes which have so far been developed to enable students to gain entry to Higher Education can be obtained from the Scottish Wider Access Programme (SWAP)— see page 22.
Those centres already offering programmes including Sciences modules should refer to Annex 4.
This indicates which of the revised modules replace existing modules.
The dates of publication of the new Sciences modules are given in Annex 5.
The suggestions which follow are offered for guidance to centres developing programmes of Sciences modules.
They are not intended to be prescriptive but are illustrative of the flexibility of National Certificate Modules in planning a curriculum.
Generic Sciences Programmes
The Generic Sciences modules have been designed so that they can be integrated into programmes in the individual sciences, providing appropriate science background for vocational programmes in other areas, or be used as general or leisure interest modules.
Stage 1 Generic Sciences modules provide a starting point for those students with little or no science background and will be particularly useful for programmes being developed for adult returners or for those with Standard Grade at Grade 5/6 who wish to continue in science.
A suitable introductory programme in science would be:
Any appropriate context could be used in these modules to match the interests and needs of the students.
For those students with some science background the following grouping provides a valuable programme:
By using an appropriate context this grouping could be used to direct students into the specific sciences.
For example, a student with Standard Grade Science at Grade 5/6 who wished to progress in Biological Sciences could be offered the above programme in a biology context and follow it with a further programme of Stage 1 Biological Sciences modules.
This would allow the student to improve their achievement profile.
Similar programmes could be developed in a chemistry or physics context.
The Stage 1 Generic Sciences modules can also be used to complement the other Stage 1 science modules in a biology, chemistry or physics context to provide additional practical and problem-solving skills.
Science Practical Skills (× ½) or Introducing Science Investigation Skills (× ½) could be achieved within a programme for some students, depending on their ability, without increasing the notional time of the programme.
Stage 2 Generic Sciences modules are intended to complement the appropriate Stage 2 Sciences modules and can be integrated into programmes as necessary.
For students who have already achieved a Standard Grade in Science at Grade 3 and who wish to progress in a specific science area it would be possible to construct a programme using an appropriate context with the modules:
This provides a core of material which would be supplemented with appropriate Stage 2 modules.
Biological Sciences Programmes
The following grouping of modules provides a basic ‘core’ of biology:
A programme that may provide a route to the Revised Higher Grade course could be developed by adding further Stage 1 Biological Sciences modules (see page 10) to this core.
The choice of additional modules would depend on the student's needs and achievement profile.
A Stage 1 Human Biology programme could be based on:
Additional practical and problem-solving skills may be developed by integrating either of these programmes with:
Students lacking science background could be advised to start with Stage 1 Generic Sciences modules delivered in a biology context before embarking on the Biological Sciences modules.
State 2 modules in Biological Sciences enable the development of several programmes including vocational programmes and programmes which may provide routes to Advanced Further Education and to Higher Education.
A core is recommended, comprising:
This can be supplemented with further Stage 2 Biological Sciences modules (see page 10).
The choice of the additional modules would depend on the student's need and achievement profile.
For a Biology programme the core could be supplemented with:
For a Stage 2 Human Biology programme the core could be supplemented with:
For those students wishing to develop skills in Microbiology it is recommended that, before attempting the Stage 2 modules in Microbiology, the following modules are achieved:
A programme for Microbiology/Biotechnology can be constructed using the above two modules together with:
Additional programmes can be developed depending on the needs and achievement profile of the student.
In each case it may be possible to provide additional practical and problem-solving skills by integrating either one or both of the following into the programmes (this could be particularly important for those students wishing to enter Higher Education):
The Biological Sciences modules may be used to provide the basis for developing programmes in a number of vocational areas such as caring, health studies, hygiene, food production, agriculture, horticulture, microbiology, physiology, biochemistry and ecology.
Therefore programme planners should be prepared to provide links to modules in other areas of the catalogue.
Chemical Sciences Programmes
The following groups of modules may provide a route to the Revised Higher Grade course in Chemistry;
When undertaking this programme, which provides an introduction to chemistry, it is advisable to integrate the Outcomes of Introducing Fundamentals of Chemistry into the other modules so that concepts can be developed throughout the programme.
Additional practical and problem-solving skills may be developed by integrating this programme with:
Students lacking science background could be advised to start with Stage 1 Generic Sciences modules delivered in a chemistry context before embarking on the Chemical Sciences modules.
The following grouping of Stage 2 modules may form a core for vocational programmes and may provide a route to Advanced Further Education and Higher Education:
Additional practical work and problem-solving skills may be developed by integrating either one or both of the following modules into the programme (this could be particularly important for those students wishing to enter Higher Education:
Other modules may be included depending on the needs and achievement profile of the student.
The Chemical Sciences modules may be used as part of programmes in a number of vocational areas such as chemical processing, pharmaceuticals, biochemistry, petrochemicals and agriculture.
Physical Sciences Programmes
The following groups of modules may provide a route to the Revised Higher Grade course in Physics:
The module Introducing Heat (× ½) may be used to broaden a student's knowledge of Physics and may be used in vocational programmes such as catering.
Additional practical and problem-solving skills may be developed by integrating these modules with:
Students lacking science background could be advised to start with Stage 1 Generic Sciences modules delivered in a physics context before embarking on the Physical Sciences modules.
The following grouping of Stage 2 modules may form a core for vocational programmes and may provide a route to Advanced Further Education and Higher Education:
Additional practical work and problem-solving skills may be developed by integrating either one or both of the following modules into the programme:
Other modules may be included depending on the needs and achievement profile of the student.
The Physical Sciences modules may be used as part of programmes in a number of vocational areas such as medical physics, optical technology, electrical engineering, electronic engineering, catering, instrumentation, computer technology, metallurgy, building and civil engineering.
Part 4: Future Developments
SCOTVEC is currently considering the developing of additional modules at Stages 2 and 3 for publication in 1992.
These modules will provide the opportunity for students to specialise in the Sciences and develop vocational competences including Lead Body Standards where these are available.
Future plans for the Sciences will also involve negotiations with appropriate bodies regarding formal recognition of the new provision.
In some cases this may involve the development of Group Awards.
To further this end, consultation will be undertaken with SUCE (Scottish Universities Council on Entrance), Central Institutions, Access consortia, professional bodies and employer organisations.
Annex 1
Structure of Module Descriptors
Module Descriptors contain the following information and advice:
Catalogue Reference
This allows the easy identification of modules within the Catalogue.
Module Number, Date
This ensures that the correct module descriptor is being used.
Title
This is intended to give a clear idea of what the module is about.
It may also indicate a level of achievement within a suite of modules eg. most Stage 1 Sciences modules have ‘Introducing’ in the title indicating the achievement of basic competences.
Purpose
This gives a guide to the general changes in the candidate which are to be brought about.
An explanation is given of the uses for which the module was designed and the ways in which it can best be used.
Any limitations on its use or recognition are also given.
Preferred Entry Level
This shows the level of previous achievement without which it is likely that a candidate will have difficulty in successfully completing the module.
Outcomes
These specify what the candidate must be able to do to be accredited.
Outcomes embrace both practical and cognitive competences.
They are written in terms of what the student is able to demonstrate as a result of learning rather than in terms of what a student will have to do to achieve the competences.
Outcomes cannot be changed.
Performance Criteria
These indicate the standards against which the competences must be measured and assessed.
These cannot be changed.
Assessment Procedures
This section suggests an appropriate way in which student performance can be assessed.
Recommended Assessment Procedures may be altered with the prior approval of the Council.
additional advice is also given on
Content/Context
This advisory section of the descriptor gives an indication to tutors of the range of contexts within which a module could be offered and the subject matter which would assist in the achievement of the Outcomes.
Learning and Teaching
This advisory section of the descriptor suggests learning strategies which enable the Outcomes to be achieved in the most student centred, participative and practical way possible.
Annex 2
List of Standard Instruments of Assessment Used in New Sciences Modules
Assessment of Practical Competence
Practical Exercises
This form of assessment presents the student with the opportunity of displaying practical skills which may involve the completion of a specified task or procedure or the production of an artifact.
Assignment
An assignment may be defined as a mini project or as any problem solving exercise with clear guidelines and of specified length.
Assessment of Cognitive Competence
Objective Tests or Questions
Multiple Choice
This type of test item consists of a question or incomplete statement followed by four or five options from which the student selects the correct one.
Matching
This form of assessment consists of two lists — a set of statements and a set of responses.
The student is required to record which response matches each of the statements.
Grid Question
This type of assessment consists of a series of questions which the student answers by selecting the correct response(s) from those presented in the accompanying grid.
Alternative Responses
In this type of question, the student is presented with a statement and two possible responses from which the correct one must be selected.
Short Answer
This type of constructed response item consists of a question with a predetermined answer of no more than a few words.
Completion
In completion terms, the student is required to supply the word(s) which complete a given statement.
Free Response Tests
Restricted Response
This type of question provides scope for responses which are more discursive than short answer but less open ended than the extended response variety.
Extended Response
Commonly known as an essay, this form of assessment is the most open-ended type of written test.
It may be useful in the assessment of higher level cognitive competences.
Structured Question
A structured question consists of a diagram, a paragraph of text, a picture…etc followed by a number of related questions.
Case Study
A case study provides students with opportunities for exercising problem solving and decision making skills in a particular context.
Assignment
An assignment can be used to assess cognitive competence, especially in a problem solving context.
Transition Arrangements for SVQs in Business Administration
SCOTVEC's provision for Business Administration ranges from skills based modules and units, at various proficiency levels, through Scottish Vocational Qualifications (SVQs) to Higher National Certificates (HNCs) and Higher National Diplomas (HNDs).
In addition, links for progression have been established to degree courses and professional qualifications.
NATIONAL CERTIFICATE MODULES AND HIGHER NATIONAL UNITS
The range of National Certificate Modules has recently been enhanced and extended.
Developments at the elementary level, particularly with regard to the schools sector, are currently underway and introductory modules in Office Practice are being developed.
HN Units for Business Administration, Office Administration and Office Management have been developed for HNCs and HNDs.
These can also be taken as individual units.
HIGHER NATIONAL CERTIFICATES AND DIPLOMAS
The main awards which have been developed under the Advanced Courses Development Programme are:
These replace the HNC/HND Business Studies and the HNC/HND Secretarial Studies.
Several units in the HNC Office Administration were specifically designed to incorporate the standards of industry Lead Bodies with a view to linking to Scottish Vocational Qualifications (SVQs).
As well as these general awards, there are a number of specialist HNC/HNDs in .
SCOTTISH VOCATIONAL QUALIFICATIONS (SVQs)
SVQs contain the competences required to carry out particular job functions.
Their holders are able to demonstrate skills and knowledge to industrial standards in the context of the workplace.
As with other SCOTVEC awards, SVQs are specified in outcomes, unit-based and independent of any particular mode of learning.
The SVQs developed to date relate to occupational competence and specific sectors of industry.
However the recent White Paper ‘Access and Opportunity’(May 1991) invited SCOTVEC to develop broader, more general awards within the SVQ framework.
Development of these is now underway and it is anticipated that a range in a number of occupational sectors will be available for introduction in September 1992.
Recently a group of SVQs in Business Administration has been accredited.
These are based on the occupational standards as defined by the industry Lead Body (the Administration Lead Body, incorporating the Administration, Business and Commerce Training Group and the National Working Party for Secretarial Standards).
These new SVQs are:
The SVQs are designed to be assessed in the workplace, or, where this is not possible, in simulations which enable assessment to be undertaken to demonstrate consistent, comprehensive performance under workplace conditions including difficult and stressful circumstances.
Each of these SVQs incorporates National Certificate Modules and so can be delivered in colleges and training establishments, as well as in the workplace.
However, providers will require either to establish a partnership with an employer, enabling access to a workplace, or will have to establish a simulation which has a high correspondence with workplace conditions.
Strategies such as a supervisory and monitoring approach, using self and peer assessment, may be used to assist the overall assessment process.
A work based Administration SVQ at Level III (Secretarial) is currently in preparation.
This will again be based on competence demonstrated in the workplace, but it may be possible for centres using the appropriate units from the HNC in Office Administration and Lead Body assessment approaches to be approved to offer the SVQ.
This has the benefit of enabling credit transfer between the SVQ and HNC/HNDs and, ultimately, degrees and professional qualifications.
PREPARATORY MODULES
To prepare students for the modules contained in the SVQs, a number of preparatory modules have been created.
For example, Text Processing 5 is the SVQ module and Text Processing 1 to 4 provide the opportunity to acquire the skills leading to the occupational standards.
Keyboarding and other preparatory modules are under development and the Office Practice area is under consideration, with a view to developing further non-SVQ modules.
Annex 1
SVQs IN ADMINISTRATION
Transition Arrangements
The following modules appeared in the 1990/91 National Certificate Catalogue and were revised and replaced in the 1991/92 Catalogue.
Candidate enrolments will be accepted until 31 July 1992.
Annex 2
SVQs IN ADMINISTRATION
Transition Arrangements
The following indicates the current conditions of awards for SVQs in Business Administration.
Students who complete the appropriate modules before 1 January 1993 will be entitled to the SVQ.
Annex 3
SVQs IN ADMINISTRATION
Transition Arrangements
The following gives the revised conditions of award for the new SVQs in Administration.
Annex 4
SVQs IN ADMINISTRATION
Transition Arrangements
The following modules from the 1989/90 Catalogue will continue to be available in 1991/92 for centres who have successfully sought approval from SCOTVEC.
Candidates may be enrolled until 31 July 1992.
It should be noted that none of these modules contributes to current SVQs, though they may be used to prepare candidates for the SVQ modules (see Annexes 2 and 3).
A centre wishing to offer any of these modules in the Session 1991/92 should write, explaining the reasons, to  .
CURRENT DEVELOPMENTS
A National Development Officer has been appointed to investigate the need for, and possible content of, a more general SVQ in Administration for centres which wish to offer a nationally recognised award, but do not want to offer the SVQ based on occupational competence.
It is anticipated that this award will enable some credit transfer into the SVQ and will also allow options.
It will also be suitable for access and progression to more advanced awards.
A COHERENT PROVISION
SCOTVEC's aim in developing these awards is to ensure a comprehensive framework which caters for the needs of employment and the individual, has clearly defined access and progression routes and is understood by centres, students and employers.
Full details of these arrangements are given in Annexes to this paper.
General Enquiries on this area should be directed to  at SCOTVEC..
National Certificate Provision in Mathematics
A Guide to Mathematical Investigations
SCOTVEC 1991
BACKGROUND
As part of the Council's programme of work for session 1990/91, it was agreed to review the ‘core’ mathematics modules.
All centres using National Certificate mathematics provision were requested to submit comments which would be of assistance to the review.
On the basis of the many replies received, revisions were undertaken to .
A complete list of mathematics modules will be found in section L4 of the National Certificate Catalogue.
It was decided to introduce a formal investigation as part of the summative assessment process as well as supporting investigative techniques during the teaching and learning process.
The use of investigations promotes active learning, the acquisition of transferable skills and articulates well with other educational provision.
Since this will be a new approach for many users of mathematics modules, additional support is being provided in the form of this ‘Guide to Mathematical Investigations’, which includes guidance on, and exemplars of, possible investigations.
WHY INVESTIGATE?
The justification for promoting investigative approaches to learning and teaching is that it:
allows students to relate new ideas and concepts to existing knowledge;
encourages the development of a range of mathematical skills and strategies;
promotes sustained thinking, the use of initiative and extended communication;
can be an effective method for identifying students' weaknesses, particularly if discussion takes place with the students;
gives students the opportunity to consider real life problems in preparation for adult life, the work of employment, further training or education;
provides students with the opportunity to work in groups.
INVESTIGATIVE TECHNIQUES IN TEACHING AND LEARNING
The development of appropriate mathematical strategies and skills is best acquired through investigative approaches.
In practice every opportunity should be taken to encourage students to formulate ideas for themselves.
To support the student's learning in this area, the tutor should consider ways in which mathematical skills and content can be presented to the student in order to encourage the formulation of ideas.
A simple example of this would be, for example, where the formula for area was introduced by the student:
drawing rectangles on squared paper;
constructing a table showing length, breadth and area (area by counting squares;
looking for a relationship between the length, breadth and area.
This structured approach might then be extended to other shapes.
The successful undertaking of subsequent investigations by the student will depend on the extent to which this type of investigative approach has been fostered.
The purpose of this approach is to give students the opportunity of developing a range of mathematical skills and strategies which can then be applied in the formal investigation.
Suitable strategies might include:
simplifying the problem;
trial and improvement;
organising a list;
constructing tables, diagrams, graphs or models;
spotting and exploring patterns;
making and justifying conjectures;
extending an investigation by generalising.
By careful selection of topics from the content of the module, the student can be provided with the opportunity of exploring the usefulness and limitations of selected strategies to different types of problem before going on to tackle the formal investigation.
GUIDE TO INVESTIGATIONS
Framework for initiating and supporting investigations
Ideas for investigations can normally be generated and developed from almost any mathematical activity.
The ability to look beyond the current activity is important in this process.
Much material has been prepared and published.
These sources include:
1
books of suitable investigations;
2
mathematical journals and magazines;
3
banks of suitable investigations (these may have been produced in relation to other examinations or tests;
4
cross curricular and real life problems eg. Stock Control in Business Education;
5
Scottish Consultative Council on the Curriculum Exemplar materials.
Keeping a ‘suggestion box’ of possible topics for investigation is one practical and simple way of generating a class bank of ideas.
Selection of a suitable topic for investigation out of a set of possibilities can be made through the application of a number of criteria which can act as a useful screen for filtering out unsuitable topics.
It is essential that any topic should meet all of the following:
allow all of the performance criteria to be met;
only requires resources which are readily available;
relate to some of the topics within the module;
be capable of completion in the time recommended.
It is desirable that any topics should meet some of the following:
reflect students' interests;
have a practical dimension;
give scope for a range of strategies to be employed;
give an opportunity for divergent thinking;
be capable of extension.
The selection of appropriate investigations is a crucial process.
Students should be made aware of the above criteria and should be encouraged to carry out their own evaluation of any potential investigation which they might use for summative assessment purposes.
Working in groups or utilising classroom discussion could be a useful approach.
Outline Plans are a very useful way of setting down:
the initial approach to the investigation;
the key factors or parameters associated with it;
the strategies which could be adopted, with some justification for selection;
time, equipment and other resource implications.
A log book or diary of activities may be maintained during the investigation.
This should contain information of two distinct types:
a record of the activities undertaken along with any results and conclusions;
a note of how the results obtained determined the direction in which the investigation proceeded.
Recording of activities provides the student with the opportunity to demonstrate how key factors are influencing the conduct of the investigation.
There is no requirement that all the stages of the investigation should be mapped out at the planning stage.
The performance criteria are written in a manner which accommodates changes in direction when key factors are identified either at the beginning or during the course of the investigation.
The communication of findings can be carried out in any manner which meets the performance criteria.
While the student is encouraged to keep a record of the activities undertaken and the progress achieved in the investigation, there is no requirement for a written report as a means of communicating the results.
It is likely, however, that this will prove to be the usual way of communicating findings.
ROLE OF THE TUTOR
Investigation is an area where it can often be difficult for the tutor to gauge the level of assistance which can be given without denying the student the opportunity to satisfy all the performance criteria.
For example, to indicate explicitly which strategy to employ is to deny the student the opportunity of selection.
The role which the tutor should adopt is that of a sounding board for students' ideas and suggestions.
The catch-all response ‘What do you think?’ to the students' requests for assistance provides the opportunity to engage the student in discussion of possible options.
A simple support strategy which the tutor can employ is to suggest that the student:
writes down what the problem is considered to be;
reviews what has been achieved and what is known;
writes down the immediate short term objective which has to be achieved;
considers ways of using what is known to achieve the objective.
The tutor's role will be to help clarify and develop these activities.
It is essential, however, that the student takes responsibility for the final decisions on the selection of strategies and means of implementation.
With students who are inexperienced in investigating, it is likely that frequent discussion may be necessary.
INDUCTION
The role of the tutor is to clarify the process of investigation and the way in which the performance criteria may be satisfied.
Exemplar assessments could be made available for students to study in order to give guidance on what is expected.
Short class investigations on the same topic could be initiated on a group basis with feedback from each of the groups.
This will generate confidence in using the approach.
This would then be a useful time to engage in the brainstorming process to generate additional topics for individual investigations and give practice in applying the selection criteria.
SELECTION OF A TOPIC
The role of the tutor is clear and unrestricted.
There can be as much discussion as is required and students can be directed to known sources of topics.
Whenever a preliminary selection has been made the student should be encouraged to consider the feasibility of the topic in terms of the resource implications and other constraints.
PLANNING STAGE
This is a critical stage of the investigation.
The role of the tutor is that of trying to anticipate if the strategies selected or suggested are a realistic means of implementation.
If some aspects are not feasible then either the range or direction of the investigation may require to change or, in the extreme case, a new investigation may need to be selected.
The final selection of the investigation must rest with the student.
IMPLEMENTATION
The tutor is permitted to assist the student in obtaining and operationalising any resources required for the investigation, eg computers and software.
In addition, the tutor can advise on alternative equipment or software which will perform the required functions more quickly or more effectively.
While the conduct of the investigation is summative in respect of the investigations Outcome, it can be a means of formative assessment for other Outcomes.
The tutor must always remember that while the investigation can be a means of assessing other skills, it does not require to fulfil this function and consequently assistance may be given freely in areas which are not being summatively assessed.
For example, is the student is encountering difficulty in transposing a formula while clearly understanding the problem, then specific assistance is appropriate.
It is clearly impossible to anticipate every eventuality, but the guiding principle must be that if the source of difficulty does not lie in the implementation of a selected strategy and is not being assessed during the conduct of the investigation, then assistance can be given.
TUTOR INTERVENTION
If a project grinds to a premature halt, the tutor must first evaluate if sufficient evidence has or can be generated for assessment purposes.
If sufficient evidence is available or can be generated on what has been achieved, the student should be made aware of this and be advised to prepare to communicate the findings.
If sufficient evidence is not available, progress must be reviewed to try to find a way forward.
If this is unsuccessful, the present situation must be analysed to determine where it went wrong, and a feasible second investigation started.
A revised project brief should be drawn up and logged in the record of activities.
GATHERING EVIDENCE
If the investigation is a sustained piece of work extending over a period of weeks, a diary work file or log book of activities should be maintained.
This is a useful means of gathering evidence for assessment purposes.
In addition to entering the details and results of activities, a note of how decisions were taken and why specified options were selected should be included.
An outline plan is not only a very useful means of focussing attention on all the important issues before implementation, it is also a very useful piece of evidence for assessment purposes.
As indicated earlier it is not essential for the findings to be communicated by means of a written report, but it is likely that this will be the mode adopted by the majority of students.
SUMMATIVE ASSESSMENT OF INVESTIGATIONS
CONDUCTING THE INVESTIGATION
Group work may be encouraged during the investigation and the tutor may give appropriate guidance to the student if required.
This will not mean telling the student how to carry out the investigation.
It is necessary to ensure that each student meets all the performance criteria.
EVIDENCE
Each student must produce evidence which shows that the five performance criteria relating to the investigation Outcome have been met.
The evidence will usually be contained in a written report, but for some students it may be more suitable to present this evidence orally.
A tutor report and a checklist recording satisfactory achievement of performance criteria should accompany evidence which has been presented orally.
The following indicates what may be regarded as evidence for each performance criterion.
PC(a)
Identification of key factors of the investigation is correct.
The student could produce an overview or outline plan containing a consideration of ideas showing the main components of the investigation.
PC(b)
Identification of strategies is appropriate to the situation.
The student may consider a number of strategies for the investigation and select those which are considered appropriate eg in investigating the phasing of traffic lights at a road junction, the student may consider using trial and improvement, graphical techniques, algebraic analysis, calculus etc as strategies.
As well as evidence of the selection of a strategy, there should be evidence of the justification for selection eg the student explains why graphical techniques were used to investigate the phasing of traffic lights.
PC(c)
Implementation of appropriate strategies is correct.
There should be evidence of the selected strategies being used properly eg if an analytical approach is being used for finding the minimum surface area of a container, while investigating containers, it would be expected that the steps of the process were correct.
PC(d)
Drawing of conclusions is appropriate to the investigation.
There should be evidence of summarising and drawing appropriate conclusions from the evidence obtained during the investigation.
PC(e)
Communication of findings is clear.
This may be in the form of a report containing written evidence, diagrams or graphs as appropriate.
The level of communication used should allow the target audience to obtain a full understanding of the whole investigation which has been carried out.
LEVEL
The level of difficulty of an investigation should be appropriate to the module in which the investigation is being carried out.
Guidance should be given as appropriate to ensure that a student carries out the investigation involving mathematical techniques or skills acquired within the module.
APPENDIX 1
BASED ON ‘A GUIDE TO ASSESSMENT’: SCOTVEC 1988
INSTRUMENT OF ASSESSMENT — PROJECT
A project is any exercise or investigation in which the time constraints have been relaxed.
Projects have the following characteristics:
they are more comprehensive and open ended than assignments;
they may be tackled by individuals or by a group;
they usually involve a significant part of the work being carried out without close supervision;
they involve less direction from the tutor.
All projects involve the following stages:
1
planning the project
2
devising the investigation activities
3
conducting the investigation
4
analysing the results
5
reporting on the conclusions
Projects may be very practically based.
USES
Projects provide a useful means of bringing together a wide range of skills and for integrating different activities within a module.
They are particularly suited to the assessment of Outcomes concerned with analysis, synthesis and evaluation.
As an instrument of assessment, however, the project is most effective when the students concerned already possess the necessary skills in planning, accessing resource material and in writing reports.
For projects to be completed successfully, continuing guidance and tutor support is essential.
Projects can be used to assess a wide range of cognitive and practical competences.
Projects provide the student with the opportunity to demonstrate personal initiative.
It can be difficult to assess individual performance with group investigations.
It can be difficult to assess high-inference skills such as originality, commitment, initiative…etc.
Projects can be relatively time consuming to complete and assess.
Reliability of assessment may be difficult to achieve.
ADVANTAGES
LIMITATIONS
APPENDIX 2
EXEMPLAR INVESTIGATION 1
THE BRAILLE ALPHABET
In the 19th century a Frenchman, Louis Braille, invented an alphabet to help blind people.
The Braille Alphabet consists of patterns of dots raised above the surface of the paper, arranged on 3 × 2 rectangular grids.
Each rectangular pattern corresponds to a letter.
1
Investigate how many different patterns of dots are possible in a 2 × 2 grid.
2
Investigate how many different patterns of dots are possible in a 3 × 2 grid.
3
Find out how the patterns are used in the Braille Alphabet.
4
How many patterns are possible in an n × 2 grid?
NOTES FOR TEACHERS
EXEMPLAR INVESTIGATION 1
THE BRAILLE ALPHABET
This investigation would be appropriate for Core Maths 3.
Students should be encouraged to find out about the Braille Alphabet from eg an encyclopaedia.
The investigation should begin with a 2 × 2 grid.
Students will normally draw the patterns and care must be taken that all combinations are recorded.
A systematic approach should be encouraged, and results entered into a table.
At this stage a pattern may begin to emerge.
The same process should be carried out using a 3 × 2 grid.
Students may by now feel competent to generalise, and they should be encouraged to write down the number of patterns in a 4 × 2 grid, and test their answer by drawing.
EXEMPLAR INVESTIGATION 2
ESTIMATION AND ERRORS
Instead of using measuring tools, many tradesmen merely estimate the dimensions of the surface on which they will be working.
This can give rise to errors which will affect the amount of material and consequently the cost of the job to the customer.
The rectangle drawn above represents one wall of a room which has an actual height of 2.4 metres and a length of 6.3 metres.
Using these figures to obtain the actual area of this wall gives 
1 Calculate the area that a tradesman would use if he estimated the height to be 2 metres and the length to be 6 metres.
2 Calculate the percentage error that this would produce.
The percentage error may be calculated from 
3 Now estimate the length and height of one of the walls of the room in which you are sitting and then use a measuring tape to check its actual values.
Calculate the percentage error which resulted from your estimation of the dimensions.
4 Position 6 people 1 metre away from the same wall and ask them to estimate the length and height of the same wall and calculate the average percentage error that these estimates will produce in the estimation of the area of the wall.
Position a different 6 people 5 metres away from the same wall and ask them for their estimates.
Compare the two average percentage errors obtained by the two groups.
Is there any conclusion which can be drawn from the results, which might link the average percentage error and the distance of the person from the wall?
5 Identify two other factors which might affect the size of the percentage error and conduct an investigation to consider what effect, if any, that these factors have had on the error.
EXEMPLAR INVESTIGATION 3
DRINKS CANS
Drinks cans are made in different sizes, but most are approximately cylindrical in shape.
1
The ‘standard’ Cola can holds 330ml.
Given that the radius is approximately 33mm, determine the height of the can.
2
Determine the surface area of this can.
3
Given that the volume remains fixed at 330ml, determine the dimensions of a can which gives a minium surface area.
4
Find the actual dimensions of a ‘standard’ Cola can.
Why do you think the standard Cola can isn't the same size as the optimum size (minimum surface area) of a 330ml can?
5
Given a ‘new’ industry standard of 250ml size can, determine possible sizes of can.
6
Find the dimensions of the ‘new’ 250ml can.
Why do you think these sizes were chosen?
7
Discuss the size of the ‘giant’ Cola can.
8
If you were given the freedom to choose a new size of can, what would you choose?
Give an explanation and reasons.
NOTES FOR TEACHERS
EXEMPLAR INVESTIGATION 3
DRINKS CANS
This investigation may be used for different modules.
The mathematical skills used will depend on the module and due account should be taken of this.
a)
Although cans have been considered here, the principle may be applied to other containers, eg milk cartons, soap powder boxes etc.
b)
You may want the students to bring in drinks cans for investigation.
c)
The student may be given appropriate formulae with the investigation or you may want the student to obtain the formulae from eg books, the tutor or other sources.
d)
The students may measure the cans or refer to the information sheet for dimensions.
e)
In question 3 the student may use trial and improvement, graphical techniques, algebra or calculus depending on which module this investigation is being used in.
f)
Although optimisation (a closed problem) forms part of this investigation, open divergent thinking should be the main part of the investigation.
g)
You may wish to extend this investigation to consider other issues eg comparing the following 250ml containers: can, juice carton (cuboid) and glass bottle.
INFORMATION SHEET
EXEMPLAR INVESTIGATION 3
DRINKS CANS
EXEMPLAR INVESTIGATION 4
TIMETABLES
Determine the number of trains required to maintain a service between Glasgow and Edinburgh, based on the current timetable.
NOTES FOR TEACHERS
EXEMPLAR INVESTIGATION 4
TIMETABLES
a)
This investigation may be changed to suit local circumstances eg a bus timetable from Manhattan to the Bronx may be used!
b)
The following factsheet or a real timetable may be used for this investigation.
c)
The specification of the problem does not appear to give much scope for divergent thinking or investigation, but if other factors which as servicing of rolling stock, breakdowns and altering the frequency of trains is included, the investigation can become more open.
d)
The key factors such as turnaround time, effect of breakdowns, peak times etc should be taken into account.
e)
This could be extended for other, larger networks and relationships established between number of trains, frequency and distance.