

Delivering Economic Development
The task of delivering economic development in Glasgow is unique within the Scottish Enterprise Network.
Its urban context and scale present a special set of challenges and problems as well as genuine advantages and opportunities.
When I became Chairman on the retiral of Lord Macfarlane in June 1992, I welcomed the prospect of such a challenging and rewarding task.
My first year as Chairman has, I believe, been an exciting and successful one for the Agency.
In difficult economic conditions, GDA has delivered a wide range of projects and programmes designed to meet Glasgow's particular economic development needs.
Wealth generation and the creation of employment opportunities lie at the very heart of economic development.
GDA has achieved significant results in these areas: attracting major inward investment, developing programmes to encourage business start-ups, and helping existing companies adapt successfully to new technologies, management practices and export markets.
As Glasgow's agency for economic development, GDA has worked closely with its partners in the city to ensure those living in peripheral estates and inner city areas have access to new opportunities.
GDA will continue to devote substantial resources to the task of unlocking the economic potential of these disadvantaged areas and their residents.
However, it is increasingly clear that the scale of this challenge is such that it demands a response from a national as well as local level.
We have worked closely throughout the year with our partners in the Scottish Enterprise Network — both Scottish Enterprise National and other LECs — achieving our common goal of delivering economic development throughout Scotland.
I am particularly pleased to have seen these relationships mature and strengthen.
During the last year, like many businesses, GDA has responded to economic circumstances by restructuring and slimming down our organisation.
During this uncertain time, I have been extremely impressed by the continued commitment of the Agency's staff.
Our people are clearly our key resource.
To ensure the continuing development of that resource, I was very pleased to launch formally in November our own programme towards achieving Investors in People status for GDA.
I would like to thank Tom Johnston, Councillor Pat Lally and Professor David Vines, who all left the Board during the year, for their contribution; and I would again pay tribute to Lord Macfarlane.
The commitment of these individuals played a key role in the birth and early achievements of GDA.
The Agency has been fortunate to find replacements in Professor Robert Jack, Professor Stan Mason, Councillor Jean McFadden and Celia Urquhart, all of whom have already made substantial contributions.
I am also grateful for the continuing support of the other Board members, particularly Michael Lunn who has been of great assistance to me in his capacity of Deputy Chairman.
Together, we can look back on a year of consider- able success, and forward to a new year of challenge.
Balancing Priorities
The unique urban quality of GDA's operational area means that we face, as the Chairman has already highlighted, a very special set of problems and opportunities.
Our operational area embraces the commercial core of Scotland's largest city, offering great potential for further growth.
It also encompasses — in the inner city areas and peripheral estates — Scotland's greatest concentration of social and economic problems.
Our challenge is to balance these priorities: maximising Glasgow's metropolitan strengths, while addressing the needs of its disadvantaged areas.
Despite economic recession, I am very pleased that, over the last year, we have not only delivered £56 million of projects and programmes but that we are achieving that balance.
Glasgow's business core, set in a quality urban environment — which GDA works to improve still further — has helped us attract several major inward investments and expansions.
Notable amongst these successes have been the announcements regarding the Ministry of Defence Army Personnel Centre and Direct Line Insurance.
Glasgow offers an excellent Higher Education infrastructure and the Agency's Technology Programme aims to build on this strength by helping it develop stronger links with key high technology companies.
In association with Scottish Enterprise, GDA has also developed a new Business Venture Programme, the most ambitious of its kind.
This Programme aims to establish new, quality companies in Glasgow.
At the same time, considerable effort has gone into promoting the economic development of the city's disadvantaged areas.
Working with Local Development Organisations, through training and business support schemes and specific projects such as the Flexible Learning Centre in Drumchapel and the Easterhouse Entrepreneurship Programme, GDA has made considerable progress in extending economic opportunities where they are needed most.
In addition to the substantial delivery of Government programmes, the Agency has also been able to deploy earned surpluses on a range of innovative projects from training to business development financing.
The Chairman has already paid tribute to the dedication of the Agency's staff in achieving these aims.
I would strongly endorse this sentiment and record my own appreciation for their commitment and support.
During the year I began a significant organisational restructuring.
This will result in greater focus on our business priorities and the needs of our customers.
I am confident that these changes will make GDA an even more effective organisation as it faces the challenges and opportunities of the year ahead.
Improving Business Performance
Over the past year, in the face of a challenging economic environment, GDA has been very active in assisting Glasgow's companies to survive and grow.
During the first half of the year, GDA reorganised several core business assistance programmes.
We launched the innovative Glasgow Integrated Start-up Support programme, providing a comprehensive package for individuals seeking to set up their own businesses.
This included awareness training, financial support and aftercare.
In its first six months of operation, over 1600 people were accepted into the programme, resulting in over 250 new businesses starting to date.
Our colleagues in Development Projects Division formulated the Business Venture Programme in partnership with Scottish Enterprise.
Now in its first phase of implementation, this Programme aims to foster the creation of team-managed, fast-growth, export-oriented new businesses.
GDA's business counsellors were in great demand during the year, with over 28,000 hours of business counselling given to clients.
The Better Business Scheme was restructured during the year, with additional support being offered to companies threatened by the depressed economic climate.
Almost 800 companies were assisted by the programme.
The Investors in People initiative launched last year continued to grow in activity.
During the year, Glasgow gained the distinction of having the largest company — the Clydesdale Bank — to achieve the IIP standard; as well as the smallest — Esteem Ltd, a ten employee company.
Currently, thirty companies have formally committed to attain IIP with GDA's assistance.
The Business Skills Seminars for small businesses were attended by over 2,300 people during the year.
GDA also launched two major new projects in the area of technology research and design.
The Technology Development Project, supported by the European Commission (EC), helps Glasgow companies undertake a new area of research or product development activity.
An important step in the enhancement of Glasgow's technological infrastructure was achieved when GDA secured £200,000 from the EC funded STRIDE programme to support the creation of a Software Test and Evaluation Centre.
The Centre combines — for the first time — the joint expertise of Glasgow University, the National Engineering Laboratory and Glasgow Caledonian University.
GDA was heavily involved in Hoover's announcement during the year to retain and re-invest in its Cambuslang operation.
The package of assistance offered to Cambuslang was a critical element in convincing the Hoover management to support the Glasgow operation.
At time of writing, the company is again reviewing its entire European operations and the Agency is continuing to work to secure the future of the Cambuslang plant.
Barrhead Sanitaryware plc, the phoenix company created when Armitage Shanks closed their operation in Barrhead, has located in Glasgow and is receiving business development assistance from GDA.
£640,000 was provided to the Local Enterprise network of Trusts and Area Initiatives for Business Development purposes, and investments in excess of £500,000 were made in Glasgow businesses.
This investment activity levered a further £2.5 million into projects supported by GDA.
Glasgow's growing importance as a European commercial centre was underlined by the city's selection as the venue for Europartenariat ‘93 — the largest European event for small and medium sized enterprises.
Organised by Scottish Enterprise National, the event is scheduled for December and will be attended by over 1600 European business visitors.
GDA is working in close partnership with SEN in the development and organisation of this prestigious event.
The EuroGateway Project — the first of only two Scottish projects supported by the EC RECITE programme — has scored its first success.
Two Scottish companies have opened new European branches with assistance from the German partner in the project.
This will allow them unparalleled access to German and northern European markets.
The ‘Options for Change’ Defence Review has implications for a large number of Scottish companies.
GDA, as part of the SEN Scottish Defence Initiative, is pro-actively addressing the needs of defence dependent companies by assisting them in a programme of new market identification and diversification.
GDA also led an initiative to allow Scottish companies to identify opportunities in the defence market, still the largest single market in the UK.
Over 550 companies attended a series of seminars and one-to-one meetings with Ministry of Defence purchasing staff — including, for the first time, the Defence Works Service which deals with physical projects.
This was viewed by the MoD as one of the most successful events ever held.
A strong local business base is a necessary condition for the economic future of Glasgow.
The Business Development Division of GDA will continue to seek to stimulate and develop business performance and looks forward to an increasingly close and productive relationship with the city's business community.
Building Skills
Delivering economic development means creating an environment of enterprise and capability within which success can bloom.
A skilled, flexible workforce is a key element in that environment.
GDA has worked throughout the year to find new and better ways of maximising Glasgow's human resources — developing training provision which focuses on the needs of both individuals and companies within the city.
Throughout last year, we geared the majority of our mainstream Youth and Adult Training support programmes to achieving recognised National Vocational Qualifications.
This was mainly at Level II but with an increasing achievement at Level III and above.
We also maintained a high level of special needs training — over 20% of all provision.
During the year, 6,000 people joined Youth Training and 8,200 joined Adult Training.
We saw a total of 8,500 people — youth and adult — in training throughout the year, and 4,000 youth and adult trainees successfully made the transition from training into employment.
In total, 4,700 people gained vocational qualifications or credit achievement through the Youth and Adult Training programmes.
The Training and Employment Grants Scheme (TEGS) has been particularly successful in Glasgow.
An intensive marketing campaign early in the year encouraged more small and medium sized Glasgow companies to offer training and employment opportunities for the longer term unemployed.
Such was the response, in fact, that by early in the second half of the year we had to increase the budget by an additional £250,000.
The result was to see 450 previously long term unemployed people move into jobs with training — in almost all cases to vocational qualification Level II or above.
In addition to mainstream training funds, we secured over £500,000 in European funding which we matched with other partners in the city to increase the level and range of training available to both companies and individuals.
GDA continued to support greater training and employment opportunities for special groups such as Glasgow's young single homeless and ethnic minorities.
In this, we worked closely with partners such as the Strathclyde Council for Racial Equality, the local authorities and the business and voluntary sectors in the city.
Last year, in comparison to our first year of operation, GDA experienced greater constraints upon resources available to support training.
Despite this, we were able to ensure that no young person covered by the Youth Training Guarantee was turned away because of a lack of available opportunities.
The Glasgow Careers Service was an invaluable partner in implementing this guarantee.
During the year, GDA committed to introducing Youth Credits in Glasgow from April 1994.
A dedicated development team has been established to encourage increased involvement by other major partners in the city: the education authority, careers services, employers, training providers and many others.
This is a particularly exciting development — offering opportunities beyond that of simply being a new way of funding the training of young people.
The Scottish Quality Management System (SQMS) was officially launched by the Secretary of State for Scotland in March.
SQMS had been developed by the Scottish Enterprise network in partnership with SCOTVEC, the Scottish Office, the Education Department, the Scottish Further Education Unit, and Highlands & Islands Enterprise.
Designed for education and training organisations, SQMS builds on existing quality systems and guidelines in Scotland.
GDA was involved in the project steering group and training providers in Glasgow have field tested parts of the system.
GDA has now begun the process of introducing the system into the training provider network in Glasgow.
Throughout the year, the Agency effectively and successfully committed the resources available to it in support of training.
The activities outlined above, and the results achieved, strengthened the foundations established in our first year of operation — allowing the continued development of training programmes to realise the full economic potential of the people and businesses of Glasgow.
Realising Potential
The formulation and implementation of pilot, demonstration and otherwise innovative projects plays a crucial role in unlocking and mobilising the full potential of Glasgow's assets.
The Development Projects division works across all five GDA corporate objectives and undertakes a broad range of activities: from area regeneration to specific sectoral initiatives; from improving the quality of the city's human resources to charting a development strategy for the city's manufacturing base.
Throughout the year, a number of innovative projects, programmes and initiatives were formulated and delivered.
In the area of business performance, the Business Venture Programme was developed.
Aimed at improving Glasgow's record of ‘high flier’ new start companies, this Programme was launched at a New Firm Formation conference held in the Royal Concert Hall.
The conference was attended by 650 key business people and policy makers who heard an inspiring address by Rosabeth Moss Kantor, editor of the Harvard Business Review, and participated in workshop discussions on the issue of new firm formation.
Projects were delivered in the cultural industries sector.
In partnership with Glasgow City Council, Strathclyde Regional Council and the European Community, ‘Glasgow on Film’, a film-maker's guide to film locations and film-related suppliers in the city, was produced and distributed.
The UK's largest dedicated local film production fund was also established.
The Glasgow Film Fund, administered by the Glasgow-based Scottish Film Production Fund, will collaborate with Scottish Enterprise National and other LECs to establish Scotland as an active film-making area.
An initiative to improve the skills of local film makers was also piloted.
The Producers Development Initiative offers help and advice in developing, producing and distributing their work in the international marketplace.
A manufacturing strategy was developed to strengthen the international competitiveness of Glasgow's manufacturing sector.
The strategy identifies key issues which GDA and others in the city must address in order to offer this sector the environment it needs for success.
Early initiatives involve the provision of high quality industrial sites and premises, the delivery of business development services, and the creation of an industry-led Manufacturers’ Forum.
Projects were delivered in the field of human resource development, addressing the needs of both businesses and individuals — employed and unemployed.
A Defence Credits Initiative was piloted.
Around 200 workers made redundant due to Defence Budget cuts have taken the opportunity to use training credits to buy training best suited to their new career paths.
The Glasgow Education Business Partnership was established to co-ordinate links between education and industry throughout Glasgow.
This joint initiative involves representatives from the Glasgow business community, GDA, Strathclyde Regional Council and the further and higher education sectors.
GDA seeks to deliver economic development by empowering the bodies and individuals in the best position to find effective solutions.
In the field of area regeneration, in close partnership with Glasgow City Council and Strathclyde Regional Council, the network of locally-based Area Initiative Companies has been strengthened.
Through these companies, GDA is committed to realising the economic potential of the priority regeneration areas of Castlemilk, Drumchapel, the East-End, Glasgow North (Springburn), Gorbals, Easterhouse and Govan.
Resources and responsibility are devolved to these organisations and help is given to develop the skills needed for delivering high quality business development, training activities and projects.
In partnership with Glasgow City Council, Strathclyde Regional Council and the Strathclyde IDO, preparatory work has been undertaken to create the ‘Glasgow Fund’-a vehicle through which preferential finance will be provided for the start up and development of small businesses in Glasgow's disadvantaged areas.
The Easterhouse Entrepreneurship Programme is a demonstration project being promoted by the Greater Easterhouse Development Company.
Through intensive management training, its objective is to increase the business performance of existing companies in regeneration areas.
Work continued throughout the year to develop new visitor attractions and enhance the tourism appeal of the city.
Projects include the bid for the proposed National Gallery of Scottish Art, assistance to Strathclyde University's Visions project, based on John Logie Baird and his technological legacy, and the creation of a Tourism Training Unit.
Further work was also carried out on the International City Project, a long-term perspective for the development of Glasgow which has attracted interest from the highest levels in Government.
Developing Urban Quality
Economic development in Glasgow requires the provision of high quality business premises and a quality environment.
In particularly difficult market conditions, the Agency has worked with its partners in the public and private sectors to exploit the city's unique urban strengths to achieve these goals.
GDA assistance has enabled some significant projects to proceed.
Our response to recession must simply be to be more determined, focused and innovative.
The provision of quality modern industrial and business property is a priority.
Research has confirmed that Glasgow has too many old properties of the wrong size and in the wrong place, in contrast to the attractive greenfield sites — some with special status — enjoyed by other areas of Scotland.
Glasgow's industrial history has left many large derelict sites.
Active partnership with the private sector is being sought to redress this imbalance.
The St Rollox site in Springburn, one of the biggest projects involving GDA support, is a £25 million redevelopment of the former railway engine works to create a retail and business park, incorporating a major new investment by Royal Mail.
Through an effective partnership between Miller Developments and the Agency, the completed project is forecast to create and safeguard up to 1,600 jobs in an area of priority regeneration.
GDA has also supported a range of industrial, workshop and office developments.
With the Agency's assistance, Parkland is developing a former haulage contractor's yard in Maryhill to create more than 130,000 sq.
ft. of refurbished warehousing and manufacturing space, much of which is now occupied.
The Quadrangle at Ruchill is a 75,000 sq.
ft. conversion of a former paint factory into managed offices and workshops.
Units are available on flexible leasing arrangements and have already proved a great success.
EC Directives on food production mean that many Glasgow-based food manufacturers will have to upgrade old premises or build new ones.
GDA is promoting the development of two Food Parks — at Port Dundas and at Cambuslang — costing £15 million and providing 355,000 sq.ft. to cater for this demand.
Together, these developments are expected to create or safeguard up to 1,200 jobs.
The high quality of much of Glasgow's urban environment is increasingly important in attracting visitors and investors to the city.
It is the backdrop to the city's continued economic growth.
GDA will continue to give priority to projects which stimulate tourism and leisure, service industries, retailing in regeneration areas, higher education, culture and heritage.
The Cathedral Precinct project has made substantial progress, providing Scotland's finest medieval building with a splendid new setting — which includes prize-winning housing and the new St. Mungo Museum of Religion.
Improved coach and car parking has been provided for visitors to both the Cathedral and Provand's Lordship.
An extension of the project, which will improve the setting of Provand's Lordship, is now on site.
The £8 million restoration and conservation of Carlton Place — one of Glasgow's unsung riverside masterpieces — is almost complete.
The centrepiece of the Georgian terrace, Laurieston House, will be converted into a Georgian Museum.
To create the environment for success, the Agency has to develop the city's technological infrastructure.
GDA support enabled the setting up of the Robertson Institute in partnership with Glasgow University.
The Institute provides state-of-the-art accommodation, on-site, for companies involved in biotechnology.
The former Garden Festival site offers an excellent opportunity to attract new companies to the city and to provide existing firms with high quality new accommodation.
GDA has purchased the site from Laing Homes and plans are being prepared for an £80 million mixed development for business, media and leisure activities.
As an example of our approach to regeneration areas, work on the redevelopment of the Crown Street project has progressed to the point where most of the roads and services are in place and work is about to start on the first 200 houses.
The project is a partnership between GDA, Scottish Homes, Glasgow City Council and Strathclyde Regional Council.
On completion, it will provide more than 800 homes for sale and rent.
Last year, throughout the city, GDA sought out opportunities to develop Glasgow's property and environmental assets.
As the economic climate gradually improves, this process will be accelerated through an effective partnership between the public and private sectors.
Delivering the Best of Glagsow
Attracting new operations to Glasgow, securing second round expansion of recent arrivals and retaining existing operations, all contribute to the economic development of the city.
The role of GDA's Business Location Service is to deliver the best of Glasgow to meet the needs of organisations facing such location decisions.
During the past year the business location market has been highly competitive, with more locations chasing fewer projects.
Within this climate, however, Glasgow's success has been encouraging.
Success has come from effective teamwork, a more focused strategy and stronger marketing.
Teamwork contributed to both the identification of location clients and the delivery of Glasgow's attributes to meet their specific needs.
At an operational level, the business location network involved Locate in Scotland, Glasgow City Council, Strathclyde Regional Council, extensive contacts throughout the business community and several divisions within GDA itself.
Our business location strategy became more focused through a major review, which identified key opportunities for marketing, product improvement and sectoral priorities.
Marketing Glasgow as a premier business location involved a major advertising campaign, using the generic Glasgow's Alive theme and tackling head on the negative images of ‘No Mean City’.
Other location marketing activities included joint initiatives with Locate in Scotland in London and North America, a Financial Times survey on Glasgow and participation in complementary events such as the Scottish Financial Enterprise dinner in London.
Key results are summarised in the table of location decisions.
The Army Personnel Centre, safeguarding 300 existing jobs in Glasgow and promising a further 1,000 new jobs, is clearly the most significant.
It was encouraging that during many permutations and re-appraisals of the project, and a protracted consultation period, that Glasgow consistently came out as the most cost-effective location for this type of central administration function.
An announcement in May confirming the selection of Glasgow removed earlier uncertainty, although final confirmation has to wait for a further consultation period until the end of June.
Other decisions involving new operations include the rapid start up of Abbey National Life, the attraction of Jger Edv-Systeme, a small but significant software project from Germany, and the strong interest being expressed by two international hotel chains in establishing budget hotels in the city.
Encouraging second-round expansions have underlined Glasgow's increasing reputation as a cost effective location from which to conduct national and international business.
Direct Line Insurance, which first located in Glasgow in 1988, purchased one of the new office developments in the central business district and expects to more than double its employment in the city.
Other expansions involved Provincial Insurance, British Airways, Barclays Stockbrokers and the Criminal Injuries Compensation Board, whose decision to relocate a further 110 jobs to Glasgow virtually completes its entire transfer from London.
Retaining existing jobs is as important as attracting new ones.
The major success in safeguarding the Hoover operation against intense competition was the result of effective collaboration between GDA's Business Development Division, Scottish Office and the local plant.
New printing operations of the Daily Record are to be developed by the M8 motorway at North Cardonald and major investment in a new mechanised sorting office is being undertaken by Royal Mail at the St Rollox site in Springburn.
While GDA leads in the field of business location and receives tremendous support from its partners, our role in the attraction of conferences is to support the lead taken by the Greater Glasgow Tourist Board and Convention Bureau.
During the year, successful bids involving GDA support secured conferences which will bring 40,000 delegates to the city, generate an expenditure impact of over £25 million and enhance Glasgow's international profile.
Glasgow's success in business location must be continued and expanded, particularly in the manufacturing sector.
A major attribute of Glasgow is the way in which all parties collaborate to win new location customers for the city.
The Business Location Service is extremely grateful for the support it has been given and looks forward to even greater success with its partners in the year ahead.
Engaging the Future
A year ago, I believed GDA would spend 1992/93 helping Glasgow take advantage of the end of the recession.
With the wisdom of hindsight, that view was clearly premature.
However, the year ahead now looks more promising.
Over the next twelve months, the Agency will be working intensively with Glasgow companies to ensure they are fit to compete and to handle the particular business challenges presented by a period of growth.
On the manpower side, we will also direct our efforts to ensuring there is a highly skilled workforce available to meet the needs of existing Glasgow companies and those choosing to locate in the city.
Many commentators are, however, forecasting continued high levels of unemployment.
Our first response to this must be to work with our partners in the public and private sectors to generate new economic activity and employment opportunities, and to enhance the access to these jobs by all Glasgow's residents.
It is only by developing new companies, helping existing companies to survive and grow, and attracting new operations to the city that sustained employment opportunities will be created.
In the short to medium term, however, we may have to recognise that this may not be enough.
In addition to our business development and business location activities, the Agency is therefore formulating a new programme ‘Glasgow Works’.
The programme will seek to match unemployed people with worthwhile projects and to create an ‘intermediate job market’ for those facing continued long term unemployment.
This will allow them to make a substantial contribution to the local economy by utilising and developing their particular skills.
‘Making Glasgow work’ will be our main theme for the year ahead.
I am confident that we will deliver projects and programmes using all of the city's assets to do just that.
Directors Report at 31 March 1993
The Directors present their report and accounts for the year ended 31 March 1993.
Results and Dividends
Expenditure on funding economic development projects in accordance with the company's business plan exceeded income and the deficit for the year, after taxation, amounted to £902,000.
This deficit was funded by the use of surpluses earned in prior years.
Principal Activity and Review of the Business
The Company's principal activity is the promotion of economic development in the city of Glasgow.
A full review of activity is contained in the Chairman's Statement and Chief Executive's Review.
Fixed Assets
Fixed assets capitalised during the year amount to £865,000 of which £700,000 relates to tangible assets and £165,000 to investments.
The principal element of fixed assets is land and buildings acquired for development projects.
Although a beneficial financial interest in such assets remains with Scottish Enterprise as disclosed in note 1 to the accounts, they are shown in the company's accounts in order to reflect assets under the company's stewardship which will be developed in accordance with its business plan.
Directors and their Interests
The directors who served during the year were as follows:
Lord Macfarlane of Bearsden (resigned 30 June 1992)
J H Forbes Macpherson
Colin G Carnie
Campbell Christie
Sir Robert W S Easton
Ian J Irvine
Professor Ronald Lander
G Michael Lunn
William R Miller
Thomas Johnston (resigned 30 June 1992)
Professor David A Vines (resigned 30 June 1992)
Patrick J Lally (resigned 28 August 1992)
Professor J Stanley Mason (appointed 30 June 1992)
Celia M Urquhart (appointed 30 June 1992)
Jean A McFadden (appointed 30 October 1992)
Professor Robert B Jack (appointed 27 November 1992)
The Company does not have a share capital and is limited by guarantee.
The liability of members is limited to £1 each.
At 31 March 1993 the company had 12 members who are the directors.
Auditors
A resolution to reappoint Ernst & Young as auditors will be put to the members at the Annual General Meeting.
By Order of the Board
Group Income and Expenditure Account