

Chapter 1.
The purpose and use of the research thesis.
1.1 History.
Historically, the degree structure within British universities was stratified in three layers, as described by Phillips & Pugh.
The bachelor's degree was a measure of the attainment of a standard of general education; the master's degree was a licence to practise; and the doctorate was a licence to teach in a university.
(Naturally, Britain being the diverse country that it is, there have always been exceptions.
In Scotland, for example, the Master of Arts (M A) degree is normally the first degree in an Arts faculty, with Bachelor of Science (B Sc) being awarded in Science faculties).
The authors further state that
‘The concept of a university doctorate has always been clear.
As the highest degree that can be awarded, it proclaims that the recipient is worthy of being listened to as an equal by the appropriate university faculty.’
(p.17)
There are still several different types of higher degree designations within the UK.
At Cambridge, the ordinary degree is Bachelor of Arts (B A), which is converted to a Master's degree merely by payment of the requisite fee.
Elsewhere, Master of Philosophy (M Phil) and Master of Science (M Sc) degrees differ in the proportions of research and taught content, as discussed more fully in Section 2.1.
The majority of doctorate degrees are Doctor of Philosophy (Ph D), although, restricting discussion to scientific degrees, D Phil and Doctor of Science (D Sc) degrees are also awarded.
D Phil is the equivalent degree to Ph D offered at Oxford and some other universities, and is gained in the same way.
In this research, the two are treated as equivalent.
DSc is somewhat different, being awarded usually to recipients on the basis of a long and distinguished record of scientific publications within a subject field.
It is a recognition that a scientist has attained eminence within his or her research area, without necessarily undertaking formal supervised university research, and the thesis presented for the award of this degree generally consists of a review of the author's research, together with a collection of published papers.
The need, arising out of the structure of higher degree research, for objective evidence that the recipient has, in fact, reached the required standard, led to the requirement for the deposition of a dissertation or thesis.
Originally, in the early European universities, the thesis was an argument put forward and defended by the author in a public exposition conducted by members of the university faculty.
The remnants of this practice still exist in the form of the viva voce, where a student's work is assessed by examiners.
It is now generally accepted in most European and North American universities, that the candidate for a doctorate degree will provide the university with a written document as a record of work undertaken, whether research or otherwise, during the course of his or her studies.
In some European countries, such as Germany and the Netherlands, publication of this thesis is a pre-requisite before the degree is awarded, and specific journals exist for the publication of such theses.
1.2 Terminology.
The terms ‘thesis’ and ‘dissertation’were at one time rather interchangeable, but now in the UK, the term ‘thesis’is generally restricted to doctorate work, whereas master's degree candidates write a ‘dissertation’.
In the USA, some institutions use the opposite meanings, vide Boyer, and Horn, whereas others seem to use the terms interchangeably.
The relevant British Standard defines the thesis as
‘A statement of investigation or research, presenting the author's findings and any conclusions reached, submitted by the author in support of his candidature for a higher degree or professional qualification or other award’.
1.3 Previous work.
Of the major studies of the research thesis, Boyer looked at theses in the fields of botany, chemical engineering, chemistry and psychology, from three US universities during the period 1963 to 1967.
Davinson gives an overview of the topic, and is particularly useful as a source of national and subject thesis bibliographies.
He states that ‘it is especially intriguing to discover very little activity in the form of theses about theses’, and this remains true today, despite the growth in their numbers, and the extent to which they form an integral part of the scientific communication process.
Five British research studies have been undertaken so far, and their aims and methodologies were distinct and, to some extent, limited, largely due to the fact that three were Master's dissertations.
Hughes looked in depth at a single thesis, to assess the extent to which the information content of the thesis was eventually published in the literature.
Hand studied 65 theses on entomology produced within the colleges of the University of London over a five year period.
His aims included rectifying what he saw as the lack of information on derived publications, and on the time differences between thesis completion and publication.
He used a basic time range, later extended, of nine years, checking bibliographic coverage for 4 years before the base year, and four years afterwards.
Taylor presents an elegant and well-argued position on the bibliographical control aspects of the thesis and its derived publications, using theses on librarianship as his data set.
Hand restricted himself to University of London theses because of his ease of access to the original works, and he further restricted himself to a five year period.
The problems he encountered, which included the use of authors’ names (gender differences, dropped initials, etc.), nationality differences in publication rates, the lack of informative titles and so on, were all met with in the present survey also, with similar failures to idenitify uniquely some ‘problem’authors.
Hand is absolutely correct, in discussing subjective ‘assessments’ of thesis use, in saying that ‘The observations appeared to have no experimental basis at all, as demonstrated by the estimates for derived publications’.
As will be shown later, there is broad agreement between the figures derived by Hand, and those applying to Scottish geology.
(An online search of the LISA database found no mention of Hand as an author, and it is therefore concluded that, unfortunately, Hand's valuable work reported in his thesis remains unpublished).
Boyer used a questionnaire to find the derived publications, and this is something which Hand also considered.
He rejected this approach, however, largely because of the difficulty of finding authors’ current addresses.
If Hand could not do so for 65 theses, then tracing 550 authors of Scottish geology theses would have been even more daunting, and there would have been difficulties in selecting a statistically valid sub-set for a questionnaire.
Personal interviews represent another possible research methodology, but, as Gilbert says, interviewing techniques are very difficult to use, because they presuppose some considerable background knowledge on the part of the interviewers, and are hence not widely applicable in large subject areas having many specialised sub-disciplines.
The sheer numbers involved also ruled out this technique.
Using an author's view of what he considers a ‘derived’ publication may also be somewhat open to subjective interpretation, because some authors will want to suggest different degrees of derivation than others, whereas using a published bibliography ought, in theory, to be more objective, provided one can be sure of one's identification.
This will be dealt with more fully in Chapter 3.
Inter-disciplinary studies of thesis use are rather thin on the ground, but Judith Wood's recent study compared dissertations in the sciences and humanities, using Dissertation Abstracts online.
Using descriptors as follows:
Hard sciences: BIOL, CHEM, GEOL, MATH, PHYS
Social sciences: ANTHROPOL, EDUC, HIST, POL SCI, PSYCH, SOCIOL
Humanities: FINE ARTS, LIT
she found that the total numbers show an exponential growth post-war, but a decline from 1970 through 1984.
‘…slow-down already seen in many fields may well affect the nature of scientific communication’.
1.4 The purpose of the thesis.
Boyer, Davinson and some others have tackled this problem.
The conclusions that they draw are that theses have been written for a variety of purposes, which have changed over the years, and which vary according to customs in different countries.
There is general agreement, but without, in most cases, quantitative evidence, that the majority of theses are never read after completion.
Thus Davinson says (p.9) that
‘…a great deal of academic research work is never heard of again once it has served its basic purpose of obtaining another qualification for its originator.’
Again, on p.31, he opines
‘Implicitly, if not explicitly, the doctoral thesis has come to be thought of in some countries and institutions as simply the demonstration that a certain amount of research methodology has been transmitted and received, with much less emphasis than used to be the case upon the nature and significance of the topic explored.’
Dossick, quoting a Soviet source, says that:
‘Such works are frequently forgotten in restaurant after their author has finished celebrating the award of his degree.
Even dissertations that manage to reach the library shelves usually face nothing more than the gnawing criticism of mice.’
From the present findings, described later, it is clear that some theses are quite widely consulted, and the majority lead to the formal publication of research results in journals and books which, presumably, reach a wider readership.
If these results are subject-independent, the thesis becomes a very important vehicle for the communication of original ideas and new findings in science, and the reasons why some theses are never consulted, cited, or lead to derived publications, are more complex and subtle than Davinson's views, or those quoted by Dossick, might suggest.
Harris says that ‘The doctoral dissertation is intended to be an original contribution to knowledge.’
If this is so, there is considerable point to Beverley Halstead's letter to Nature in which he argues that academic publication of the research results should be a requirement before the award of a Ph D,(as is the case in some countries and institutions).
Some difficulties with this suggestion were pointed out by P A Lund in a reply published in October 1985.
He states that in new research areas, there is always the chance that some research projects have a low possibility of success, or otherwise lead to unpublishable negative results, and that to withhold a Ph D in such cases would seem unfair.
Perhaps the fairest approach would be that taken by D N Wood, in suggesting that acceptance requires that the work should be worthy of publication.
The standards for thesis acceptance should not be lower than those applied by journal referees when considering papers for publication.
Childs and Linnett distinguish two types of Ph D in science.
The first is concerned with a specific scientific problem, whereas the second relates to the development of a technique.
In the latter type, it is the technical aspect which is important, as for example Thesis Number 490, on methods of interpreting magnetic anomalies, in the present list.
It would not be surprising if such theses showed a different publication and citation pattern from those reporting primary research results.
Raisig and Kilgour conclude that theses enjoyed their greatest phase of usage, as fundamental sources of information carefully exploited by other researchers and writers, in the period from 1880 to 1910.
It was indeed during this period that many universities used copies of their theses as an exchange medium between universities in the USA and Europe.
This practise has almost entirely ceased, being obviated by the availability of theses in microfiche or paper from University Microfilms, as will be described later.
In a letter to Nature (Berry), the view is put forward that:
‘We firmly and explicitly reject the idea that a Ph D student should be primarily a research assistant involved in an ongoing research project…the preparation of a Ph D thesis…provides a means of ensuring that research undertaken is preserved and can be made available to others.’
Two currently prevailing ideas are promulgated in this letter.
The first is that the direction of research within a department is under the control of the supervisors in that Department, for whom the Ph D student does the donkey work.
The second is that the research is part of the total scientific oeuvre, and thus has a wider value.
The extent to which the first proposition is true could only be determined by interviewing all of the successful Ph D students, and all of their supervisors, and attempting to reconcile two, possibly conflicting, sets of answers.
It is more probable that in most cases, the relative contributions to the final research of student and supervisor could not easily be separated.
Good research can best be guided, and in many cases initiated, by an experienced supervisor, but in other cases, the spark of originality from the researcher is quenched rapidly by the supervisor who finds it difficult to distinguish between ‘guidance’ and ‘instruction’.
A Report by the Technical Change Centre draws attention to the variable standards of the research problem set, the variable standards of the supervisor, and the variable standard of the Ph D examination.
Anderson, of the Ciba Foundation, says that:
‘very few students choose their project in the UK.
Generally a supervisor will make an application to a research council, and get funding for a project, and then find a student.’
This the general situation in the physical sciences, but research in the humanities and social sciences is not dependent on research council funding to the same extent.
Grogan argues that ‘the main function of the thesis is to allow the candidate to demonstrate his grasp both of his subject and research method.’
This seems to be a rather narrow and limiting definition, and it could be refuted by pointing out that both subject knowledge and research methodology could equally well be tested by examination, without going to the additional effort of writing a thesis.
The Committee of Vice-Chancellors and Principals (CVCP) has made two attempts to define the purpose of the Ph D. The first, in 1975, said that the Ph D is a ‘training for independent scholars and research workers at the highest level.’
The second, in 1988 gives the two inter-related purposes of the Ph D as being:
‘1.
To enable the researcher to contribute new and significant ideas, and to make a positive contribution to knowledge, and
2.
To provide training in research methods which makes them capable subsequently of assuming the role of independent scholars and research workers at the highest level.’
This latter Report also makes the somewhat radical suggestion that taught courses should be introduced into Ph D training.
It is notable that such courses are becoming a feature in some universities, such as the DBA (Doctorate in Business Administration) at Strathclyde.
1.5 Research policy and research funding
Postgraduate research in the UK is currently dually funded by Government; by project research grants through the Research Councils, and by block grant from the Universities Funding Council (UFC), formerly the University Grants Committee (UGC).
Additionally, an increasing proportion of research funding is obtained from the private sector, either by sponsorship of particular projects which are generally goal-oriented, or by support for Departments with a proven track record for the application of research findings, or the generation of potentially economically exploitable ideas.
Thus the Natural Environment Research Council (NERC) granted single studentships in geology to 36 Departments; 17 received 2; 4 received 3; 2 each received 4 & 5 studentships, and one Department received 8 (UNIVERSITY GRANTS COMMITTEE).
This same Report said that the majority of submissions to it complained that resources were spread too thinly, but if grants were to be concentrated in fewer centres, this would doubtless lead to criticism in the other direction, and could force closure of some departments which fail to attract sufficient grants.
NERC is in a situation in which it cannot please every department, and it can only achieve a limited degree of acceptability by adopting the negative posture of being seen not to be unfair to particular departments (hence spreading small numbers of grants as widely as possible).
If the cake is too small in the first place, then no matter how it is cut, there will not be enough for everyone.
It seems likely therefore, because of widespread dissatisfaction within the academic community, that the whole area of Government funding for research in the United Kingdom will require fundamental changes in the way in which research is assessed and administered.
The UFC funds are allocated to the Universities for support of their teaching and research activities, whereas the Research Council money goes towards specific projects, reviewed by an internal assessment panel comprising subject specialists drawn from university departments.
Because of the growth in the number of applications, the fall in the value of Research Council grants, due to inflation, etc., and the consequent reduction in their absolute numbers, only Alpha-rated projects have any chance of receiving funding, and only a proportion of such proposals are successful.
The Research Councils process between six and seven thousand applications a year, rejecting some four thousand of them (Turney).
The UFC rates Departments for their contributions to national and international research, and allocates funds to Universities based on peer reviews of both their teaching and research standards.
As described by Swinnerton-Dyer in 1985, the UGC calculated the subject ‘pot’, and then split funds into teaching and research areas.
The situation has become somewhat more confusing of late, however.
The government plans to transfer some £100 million per year from the UFC to the Research Councils in support of indirect research costs, other than salaries and building costs, but as reported in October 1990 (Ince), the Councils are delaying the implementation of the scheme until there is agreement on the methods by which such costs are assessed.
Both UFC and Research Council funds tend to be placed with departments which have proven track records in research performance.
Within the Councils, the ‘proof’ still largely consists of peer reviews, although ABRC has attempted to assess the contribution which bibliometric studies might make to their decision-making, whilst the UFC now requires universities to provide it with bibliometric and other performance statistics.
Research proposals therefore tend to come from established departments, and also tend increasingly to consist of safe, conservative projects which have possibilities for future income-generation for the universities.
Turney has stated that
‘The emphasis in government policy on research with potential application, and on industrial exploitability, also creates unease.
Although ministers now stress that they recognise the importance of backing basic research without strings, the suspicion still lingers that decisions are shifting towards short-term payoffs.’
The radically innovative multi-disciplinary research proposal, say from the interface between the departments funded by SERC and MRC, is unlikely to be successful with either.
In the United States, there was a recognition that interdisciplinary proposals could ‘fall between the cracks’(Porter and Rossini), and the National Science Foundation set up separate panels to review proposals which fell into this category.
The difficulties of operating the system led to its failure, however, and proposals which bridge Chemistry and Biology, say, now have to have the approval of review bodies in both disciplines.
In this country, the creation of Interdisciplinary Research Centres (IRCs) within the universities, funded by the research councils alone or in collaboration with industry, has been recognised by the ABRC (Roberts, Phillips), but the assessment structures needed for the evaluation of such complex proposals are still in a rather fluid state.
Porter, quoted by Hall, suggests that these IRCs are removing from the research councils money which should be allocated to ‘responsive mode funding’(researchers applying directly to the councils for research grants) and basic research, because they were set up to foster research areas thought to have potential economic importance.
Similarly, changes in university structure which lead to the creation of new departments without previous track records, are extremely difficult to initiate successfully.
From all sides, therefore, there is pressure to perform, and to be seen to perform, within the middle ground, within which the majority of researchers are concentrated.
The normal pattern for the distribution of funding is a form of the Normal Distribution Curve, with the bulk of funding going to middle-of-the-road research carried out in Departments which are already pre-eminent, as can be seen from the figures for NERC support for geology quoted earlier.
Support for the Distribution's ‘tails’ diminishes rapidly in proportion to their distance from the centre.
The new UFC ratings for their Research Selectivity Exercise 1989, from which, it should be noted, no appeal was possible, provided ratings for individual cost centres [italics added]within Universities in terms of the ‘attainable levels of excellence’ in research, using a variety of indicators, some of which are bibliometric (publication counts and citation analysis).
The letter states that (Para. 4):
‘The new ratings will be used by the Council to inform calculations of grant for the academic year 1990/91 and for the funding period 1991-95…the Council's provisional decision to continue to fund research on the basis of competitive assessments of quality and…to increase the proportion of research resources that is allocated selectively.’
It could be argued that this is a prime example of what has been termed the ‘Matthew Effect’—‘For unto every one that hath shall be given, and he shall have abundance: but from him that hath not shall be taken away even that which he hath.’
Within the earth sciences field at least, however, the data presented here show that at a period of declining career opportunities world-wide, universities were accepting increasing numbers of graduates into Ph D studies.
There had to be some rationalisation of research funding in this field, and if the earth sciences are typical, other subjects could be expected to show similar effects in varying degrees.
The importance of bibliometric studies to this Review can be gauged from Para. 6, here quoted in full.
‘.
The exercise has been a process of ‘informed peer review’ in which ratings have been made on the basis of the judgements of experts, most of whom are university academic staff.
The weight that the advisory groups and panels chose to give to different categories of information provided by universities reflected differences between subjects.
However, it is fair to say that, compared with 1986, far more emphasis was placed on the data about publications (of which a much greater quantity was submitted this time), i.e. the judgments have been more ‘output led’.’
[italics added]
The terminology used in this Review (e.g. ‘cost centres’, ‘output-led measures’) suggests that there is a danger that research within UK universities might be weighted towards producing results which will satisfy accountants or statisticians, rather than scientific curiosity or national R & D needs.
Researchers do not normally look to accountants when seeking support for the imaginative leaps which have characterised the most major advances in science.
The use of such terminology derived from economics appears to be quite widespread, however, as evidenced by Anderson talking about ‘product evaluation’ when discussing the assessment of the value of research training.
‘Training’ is not normally considered a ‘product’in science; it is more frequently regarded as a continuous process.
Amongst the many criticisms of the UFC review, Montgomery combines the UFC rankings with employment records, and finds, somewhat surprisingly, that poor research is associated with enhanced job progress.
He argues that ‘it is possible that those universities which have done badly in the UFC exercise have paid the penalty of over-investment in course development and teaching’, obviously to the benefit of their students.
He further states that ‘Lack of time, equipment and manpower for research, and the pursuit of funds from non-UFC sources, ensure low research grades.’
This seems to suggest a negative feedback loop, driving the quality of research down by depriving it of central funds.
Another critique of the UFC rankings, this time on grounds of lack of intellectual rigour, is presented graphically by Morgan, who criticises the UFC research rankings because they are based on percentage scores, rather than on measures which take absolute size of departments into consideration.
He believes that the UFC is encouraging universities to reduce diversity, and to freeze the status quo.
A better indicator, in his view, would be to combine absolute size with relative performance.
Anderson suggests the combined use of ‘output measures’(completion rates, career profiles, studies of manpower output) and ‘impact measures’(publication counts, citations, and funding raised from grants).
The pilot exercise for this 1989 review was the UGC's Earth Science Review, carried out in 1986, and to which preliminary data from this thesis had been submitted.
The published departmental ratings arising out of this Review, insofar as they applied to Scottish geology, are discussed in Chapter 2.
The data was submitted on a confidential basis, because of the possibility of future publication, and so it is not possible to ascertain whether or not it had any influence on the deliberations of the Review body, but their conclusions on the quality of post-graduate geological research undertaken in Dundee and Strathclyde Universities were exactly in line with the quantitative findings described later.
Assessments of ‘quality’ invariably fall down when analysed too closely, because, by its nature, the term is subjective.
Thus Moed et al say that ‘we have deliberately avoided the use of the notion quality, since it is virtually impossible to operationalize this general concept’.
The authors state that citation counts indicate impact rather than quality.
A most stimulating discussion of ‘quality’ forms a thread in Robert M. Pirsig's novel ‘Zen in the art of motorcycle maintenance’.
The concept takes its place with ‘truth’ and ‘beauty’as an attribute which many may regard as an absolute, but which is finally dependant on its context.
An object, whether it be physical, like a carburettor valve, or an abstract construct, like a research study, either fits well in its appropriate situation, or it does not.
Measures of fit, in the context of the present study, can only be approximations.
When faced with decisions on the spending of national resources on research, there are two types of choice to make (Weinberg 1963).
There is the scientific choice of which subjects, sub-fields, or areas of research should be funded; and there is the institutional choice, of where the funds should be placed in order to achieve the desired effects.
Such choices are made on a national basis, and bibliometric methods could be applied to either.
Because of the smoothing effects of scale, however, they are likely to give more statistically valid results when applied to national performance, and international comparisons.
Infra-national comparisons could be expected to vary considerably, and may not be statistically valid, because of the size differences between departments within UK universities.
In terms of scientific choice, for example, it is possible to establish the value placed upon a country's contribution to high-energy physics, and to decide whether or not such research should be supported, but it would be difficult to measure the individual contributions made by isolated single researchers from small departments in the UK, when the major part of their work is carried out at international centres in Geneva, or California.
Weinberg returned to the subject of the criteria for funding choices in 1989, stating that an author's original work is driven by spective evaluation, whilst spective evaluation is usually aimed at institutional choice.
His distinction between the concepts of ‘value’ and ‘truth’is worth quoting, as loose usage of these terms occurs frequently in discussions of research evaluation,:
‘…the notion of value within science is at the philosophical heart of scientific administration, just as truth is at the heart of the practice of science’.
In a recent attempt to evaluate research, Van Raan concludes that ‘quantitative indicators should not be used by non-peers…
This is because interpretation of these indicators needs an ‘interaction’ between the data and background knowledge’.
The analogy is drawn between research assessment and the restriction of use of medical expert systems to physicians.
This seems to indicate a certain lack of trust in fund managers, rather than a weakness in bibliometric methodology.
The dual funding approach is beginning to become the pattern in other countries also.
Moed et al describe the position in the University of Leiden.
Previously, allocation of funds had been on a per capita student basis, but this changed to a research project grant system.
The writers had developed bibliometric indicators for analysing research group performance within two large faculties of the University.
By producing trend and level analyses they suggest a positive correlation between publication rates of research groups and their output.
They suggest that there is a bimodal distribution of citation counts, with short-term and long-term components.
They argue that if the ‘short-term’ citation frequency increases, this represents an increase in the impact of that research group.
If, simultaneously, the short-term frequency increases, but the numbers of citations per paper decreases, then the research group has reached the subject's saturation limit, and consideration should be given to levelling-off or reducing funding for these projects.
The Research Councils, through the Advisory Board for the Research Councils (ABRC) have commissioned a number of studies of research policy, in order to determine the best measures for the objective assessment of research productivity, and those carried out by the Science Policy Research Unit (SPRU) at Sussex University have been fundamental in reviewing existing measures, and suggesting new indicators which may be used singly or in combination.
The methodologies used by the SPRU workers have been described in a major review article by Martin & Irvine (1983).
This study sets down some navigation buoys for the course between the Scylla of growing research costs, and the Charybdis of cuts in national science budgets.
It is an attempt to use bibliometric methods for deciding on priorities between competing groups, by means of a study of a small number of major basic-research centres.
Science is modelled as a flow-chart, with a positive feed-back loop.
(Price (1976a) has drawn attention to the dangers of such loops, where ‘success breeds success but failure is not penalized’).
The authors counsel that one should only use indicators which yield convergent results, and they make the useful point that ‘while some of the output indicators are clearly linked to scientific production, their links with scientific progress are more complex and problematic.’
Their list of partial indicators includes publication counts, citation analysis, and peer review, and they neatly summarise the problems encountered in dealing with each indicator, and suggest methods by which the distorting effects of these problems can be minimised.
These problems are discussed later, in the chapters on Publications and Citations respectively.
Productivity can be measured, often relatively easily, but establishing the routes which have led to progress in science is a much more subtle undertaking, and contains a great deal which is either subjective or unmeasurable.
The same Unit (SPRU) carried out a later study (Martin, Irvine & Crouch 1985) which involved using research indicators for scientific choice, as earlier defined, for international comparisons, and also for institutional choice between competing UK research groups in two different research fields — Ocean Current studies, and Protein Crystallography.
The authors contend that
‘while peer review may be relatively successful in deciding among proposed new areas of research, it is far less satisfactory when it comes to identifying declining areas and groups.’
The SPRU report then goes on to contradict itself in stating ‘that [peer review]cannot provide adequate support for newly emerging areas of science’(ibid. p. 4), because of the entrenchment of particular interest-groups in decision-making bodies, such as the Research Councils.
Two of the authors (Irvine & Martin 1984) review approaches for identifying promising new areas of research.
These include citation measures to detect the emergence of new specialties, and interdisciplinary research approaches, which, by the application of knowledge derived from one field, may shed light on problems observed in another.
An example within the earth sciences might be the development of radiometric age dating, or geochronology, from the physics of radioactive decay.
The boundary conditions necessary for obtaining research output data for policy-making, as set out in the SPRU Report, include the following:
The data must be policy relevant.
The approach must be relatively inexpensive.
The approach must be capable of being used routinely.
It should be possible to focus on any field.
It should be possible to draw international comparisons.
The information should show trends over time.
Disaggregation of the statistics should show performance of any individual research centre.
Differences due to different methodologies or techniques ought to be identifiable (e.g. remote sensing vs. direct measurements).
The information should be in a publicly accessible and easily understood form.
The research undertaken on the two case studies was highly cost-effective (£3-4,000 per 50-100 researchers) in contrast to the co-citation and co-word studies, and resulted in clear demonstrations of the contributions made by the UK, and constituent research centres, to Ocean Currents and Protein Crystallography over time.
The authors draw attention to the need for input statistics, so that questions such as:
‘…have such research activities been restricted by lack of funds?
Or have the researchers concerned failed to make the best use of the resources available?’
can be seen to have relevance to measures of output.
Policy-makers are still faced with the choice of concentrating resources on centres/subjects with proven track records, or investing in less successful activities in order to improve their international standing.
Another paper describing the use of bibliometrics in research evaluation is Narin 1987, but this restricts itself to publication counts and citations, deriving a new indicator, the Top Decile Performance, which is that percent of an Institute's papers which are amongst the more highly cited 10% of papers in a field.
Narin suggests that this measure is independent of subfield or year, and that there is no evidence whatsoever for economies of scale in the production of papers.
In other words, small, low-productivity (in terms of publications) institutions produce papers which are just as influential (by citation measurements) as proportionally much larger research centres.
An excellent recent review article by White and McCain summarises the use of bibliometric measures as indicators in science funding policy.
The authors suggest that the advantages of bibliometric studies include:
’ An ability to map literatures intelligibly at different levels of scale;
Encouraging the results of mapping at the ‘full-text’ level where knowledge claims are made;
An ability to create useful indicators of developments in science, and, increasingly, in technology;
An ability to model dynamic aspects of literatures mathematically, with good to excellent fits;
Increasing relevance to practical information retrieval;
Growing skill in using computerized databases and statistical software for bibliometric ends; and
A multinational base of contributors as the relevance of bibliometric indicators to national scientific and engineering policies is perceived.’
Bibliometrics emerges not at the level of individual records of publications, but at the level of files of bibliographic records, in which values in the fields recur.
It is thus an aggregative process of data analysis, and should produce measures which are capable of analysis by standard statistical methods.
The ABRC research, which includes also American studies of co-citation measures, and French research on co-word indicators, began about a decade later than the American work funded by the National Science Foundation in Washington.
Narin's seminal Report to the Foundation, carried out by Computer Horizons Inc. on data from the Science Citation Index, represents the first major effort by any country's scientific policy-makers, to use bibliometric indicators to forecast and plan research expenditure on a national scale, although Price had, in 1969, related the size of a country's scientific literature to its Gross National Product (GNP).
Since 1987, the Committee of Vice-Chancellors and Principals, jointly with the (until 1988) UGC, has published an annual volume of University Management Statistics and Performance Indicators in the UK.
The following comments relate to the 1988 edition, which contains data from the academic year 1986-87.
Fifty-four indicators are tabulated for 53 universities, broken down into 37 cost centres.
Such essential measures as library expenditure per student, per capita computing costs, and many other management data, are now available for the first time in published form, so that universities can see at a glance how they measure up to similar institutions.
Extracts from these figures are listed as Table 1, which records expenditure on libraries and computing for the universities involved in the present study, and Table 2, which ranks these universities in terms of the proportions of post-graduate research carried out in these institutions.
Figure 1a shows a plot of expenditure on libraries and computing services per student.
It will be noted that London and Manchester universities spend more per head on computing than on libraries.
The same expenditure data are also plotted on Figure 1b against what is here called Research Orientation Ranking, that is the proportion of postgraduate research on ‘Other Physical Sciences’ in the CVCP Report.
Oxford and Cambridge appear to have per capita library expenditures well outside the normal range for other universities.
This may be because both are ‘National’ libraries with copyright functions, as well as serving the needs of their students and researchers.
The diagram shows Cardiff, Strathclyde, Belfast, Leeds and Aston spending below average on their libraries, and it also highlights those universities which concentrate much of their research effort on the physical sciences excluding physics, chemistry and geology.
St Andrews, Strathclyde, Aberdeen, Durham and Dundee are in the highest group in this category, reflecting a research orientation towards the sciences concerned, which include astronomy, materials science, climatology and meteorology.
All of these sciences impinge peripherally on the earth sciences, and in many cases, universities with a high research orientation ranking in these sciences are also those which figure prominently in the earth sciences.
The extent to which individual disciplines make use of libraries in their researches may be expected to vary, but when one sees that some universities spend 50% to 100% per capita more than others, it does suggest that the value placed by university managers on their libraries varies in some highly individualistic ways.
The University of Wales at Cardiff had the lowest expenditure per student on libraries in 1986-87, followed by Strathclyde.
It is suggested that there is scope here for further major research on the ways in which expenditure on support services affects the quality of the research produced.
As far as computing expenditure is concerned, ‘Other Physical Sciences’ include many of the ‘number-crunching’disciplines, where large numbers of complex calculations have to be performed on the research data, and so correlation between ranking (as defined above) and computer expenditure might be expected.
This does not appear to be the case, however.
Some universities (Manchester, Edinburgh, London) have developed as ‘Centres of Excellence’ in computing, providing regional computing services to external bodies on a partially commercial basis, and their expenditures clearly demonstrate this.
It is more difficult to account for the low figures associated with Glasgow, Reading, Sheffield and Cardiff.
These management statistics are going to have an increasingly important rôle in determining university funding and spending in the coming years, and it is to be hoped that figures for all disciplines will be available in future.
The warning given in the introduction to the Report states, however, that
‘uncritical use of these statistics may seriously damage the health of the universities.’
The university abbreviations below are used for Figure 1a and 1b, which follow.
The pressures driving research evaluation are, in the final analysis, political.
In a speech delivered to the Royal Society, of which she is a Fellow, the then Prime Minister, Mrs Thatcher, said that
We accept that we cannot measure the value of the work by economic output but this is no argument for lack of careful management in the way specific projects are constructed.
The money is not for top-heavy administration but for research.
It can and should be argued that most of the performance measures so far developed are, however, measures of research output rather than of administrative efficiency.
Till receipts say nothing about a business’ overheads.
Sir George Porter, in his reply declared that the allocation of these funds between projects must be the responsibility of the scientists.
Mechanisms by which scientists advised Government on national research priorities were indirect or diffuse, until Mrs Thatcher introduced the Advisory Committee on Science and Technology.
This is a private body advising Cabinet, and its views and deliberations are not made public.
Judgements as to its efficacy depend on observations of Government performance in the area of national expenditure on R & D, and evidence of clear thinking and rational policy-making is rather thin on the ground, partly as a result of the fact that the largest single proportion of Government-funded R & D is in the defence sector.
Views of individual scientists on science policy tend to be channelled through a multiplicity of professional societies, and the only unifying body which can claim to have an overview of national needs in science is the Royal Society.
Through one of its journals, Science and Public Affairs, the Society has an excellent vehicle for the conduct of dispassionate debate, not just on science funding, but also on the other ways in which science impinges on society.
1.6 Bibliographical control and availability
These aspects have been discussed at length by Davinson, Taylor, Urquhart, and Barker.
Within the UK, almost all universities notify the British Library Document Supply Centre (BLDSC) on deposit of new theses, and the majority supply BLDSC with copies for microfilming for loan.
The theses are scanned and included in British Reports, Translations and Theses, and made available online through the SIGLE database on BLAISE.
Aslib's Index to Theses is the other source of thesis information, greatly improved since it now includes thesis abstracts.
This may have implications for the future consultation of theses, as described in Chapter 4.
Specifically on geology, Laming has published lists of theses on the UK and its offshore areas, and within Scotland, the Rolfe and Will lists have tried to be as comprehensive as possible.
North American theses are listed in Dissertation Abstracts, also available online.
Some North American theses on Scottish geology exist, but they have not been taken into account in the present study.
Some matters concerning library practices will be further detailed in Chapter 4, and bibliographical aspects will be covered in Chapter 3.
Chapter 2.
The thesis data.
2.1 The published lists.
The series of papers which form the basic data set for this research (the Rolfe papers, and Will 1985), contained lists of theses arranged in a classified order.
The categories have changed with time, reflecting changes in emphases within the various sub-fields of geology.
An analysis of the proportions listed in these categories is given in Chapter 6.
In order to impose some consistency on the data, and to make bibliographic searching by author easier, the Rolfe listings were rearranged into a single file in alphabetical order of thesis author.
The contents of the Will list were similarly rearranged.
Combining the two lists into a single sequence was considered, but there were practical difficulties with the word processor files then in use, and keeping the data in two files enabled comparative searching by broad time period.
The primary lists then, compiled from the Rolfe and Will bibliographies, contained nearly 600 theses arranged in two alphabetically ordered files.
The initial editing removed some 30 M Sc theses from both files.
The relatively small proportion (5%) of such theses made it difficult to come to any statistically valid conclusions about the differences in use between Ph D and M Sc theses.
Some geology departments do not offer M Sc degrees, others offer very few, and the relative ‘value’ placed on them by the awarding universities varies.
There is, in general, no consensus on the standards which should apply to the granting of such degrees, the course contents, or the proportion of taught course content relative to research content.
(Strathclyde, for example, now offers the degree of M Phil for research degrees below the standard of Ph D, with M Sc being awarded for courses with a high content of teaching, by examination).
In the geological field, Aberdeen University has produced a number of M Sc theses derived from research on the geology of North Sea oil fields, in part financed by the local oil industry, and most have been subject to restricted access at the behest of the funding authorities.
One cannot therefore measure their use or their citation frequency, and the work is not normally published in any form.
Similarly, Strathclyde has produced M Sc theses on mineral exploration in a number of commercially interesting localities.
Experience gained in the course of employment as Librarian, British Geological Survey (BGS), Edinburgh, suggests that such theses have been of great practical benefit to the geological community.
By contrast, some other universities only award M Sc degrees by examination, without a dissertation of any kind.
Some of those universities who do demand a dissertation may not deposit copies with the British Library, and may not even have a copy available for inter-library loan.
They treat such dissertations in an entirely different way from Ph D theses, generally appearing to put a lower value on them as contributions to the science.
It was therefore decided to restrict the research data to Ph D, D Phil, D Sc and other equivalent degree theses.
By inspection, some theses in the original papers were deemed not to be primarily concerned with Scottish geology, geochemistry, or geophysics, and such theses were removed from the lists.
Research on, for example, molluscan biology, archaeology, vegetational variation, etc., may have Scottish areal content, and may to some extent impinge on the geology, but their relationships with the earth sciences were not straightforward, and research would have necessitated the use of bibliographical resources outwith the field of geology.
Excluded theses, including M Sc theses, are listed in Appendix 3.
Some other higher degree theses, not published in the Rolfe or Will papers, are also listed as omissions in Appendix 4.
These were found by inspection of Laming, which was published after the initial thesis selection had been made.
The edited files (Appendices 1 and 2) contain 550 doctorate theses resulting from research on Scottish geology, geochemistry and geophysics, undertaken in British universities and completed between 1960 and 1983.
The bibliometric studies involved the use of published and online bibliographic sources covering the literature published to the end of 1987.
2.2 Growth rates
The total number of theses produced in UK universities between 1960 and 1983 was approximately 180,000, of which 3632 were on the physical earth sciences — some 2% of the total.
These figures were derived from inspection of Aslib's Index to Theses.
Five hundred and fifty of these were doctorate theses on Scottish geology, almost one-sixth of all UK theses on geology.
Table 3 ranks these theses by university within four equal time periods, showing those universities which have made the most significant contributions to research on Scottish geology.
Of the total London University theses, 40 were from Imperial College.
None of the other colleges produced more than seven theses on Scottish geology.
Within the period 1960-65, an average of 17.3 theses on Scottish geology were produced each year (all universities).
The period between 1972 and 1977 saw a rapid increase to 26 theses per year.
This increase continued at a slightly reduced rate, to reach 29.5 in the period between 1978 and 1983.
If such research is indicative of UK research effort in geology as a whole, then the figures suggest that in the early 1970's, the numbers of students entering the field increased substantially, whilst at the same time, the universities were able and willing to support such an increase.
Two external factors suggest possible reasons for the increase in numbers.
The first is what Hallam has termed the ‘revolution in the earth sciences’(the word ‘revolution’ in his title implying a Kuhnian view of the transformation): the acceptance of plate tectonic evidence for the movements of continents, and the opening and closing of oceans.
Such an imaginative concept, involving the realisation that the earth is a dynamic planet in a constant state of movement, made geology a much more attractive and stimulating subject than the mere study of dusty rocks and fossils had seemed earlier, and many more undergraduates wanted to pursue careers in such an exciting field.
Simultaneously, the discovery of the North Sea's oil and gas fields in the late 1960's and early 1970's increased the demand for trained geologists and geophysicists.
The Institute of Geological Sciences, forerunner of today's British Geological Survey, was established by the Natural Environment Research Council in 1965, with a staff of around 650.
By 1973 the total staff was nearly 1400, with a large proportion being devoted to the needs of the offshore exploration industry, and onshore developments consequent upon the need for improved infrastructure and resource exploitation to meet the requirements of the new industry for new roads, bridges, rig construction yards, concrete platforms, management expertise, information technology, and a host of other peripheral activities.
The exploration industry itself took on staff at an increased rate, and the market conditions for employment obliged the universities to undertake the training required.
Some new departments were created, and most others expanded to meet the demands of government and industry.
The slow-down in the rate of increase between the third and fourth time bands reflects the saturation of the new ‘market’ as the industry reached maturity, and started to take on fewer new staff.
Indeed, because of the fluctuation in oil prices under the effects of market forces, some staff redundancies have affected geologists and geophysicists, industrially and in government employment.
These external pressures have worked through to the universities, and it may be argued that the current problems universities face in regard to research funding in the earth sciences are the result of the rapid, uncontrolled increases in the 1970's.
Arising out of the UFC Review carried out in 1989, research in UK Universities was rated according to‘attainable levels of excellence’ in a number of subject areas.
Earth sciences, because they had been so recently assessed in the UGC Earth Science Review, were excluded from this rating table, but the ratings for the category ‘Other Physical Sciences’, for those Universities also listed in Table 3, are:
The rankings range from 5 —(Research quality that equates to attainable levels of international excellence in some sub-areas of activity and to attainable levels of national excellence in virtually all others)-to 1 —(Research quality that equates to attainable levels of national excellence in none, or virtually none, of the sub-areas of activity).
The corresponding 1986 figures from the UGC review, as described by Crequer are:
This Review was subject to a number of appeals for re-assessment, but the final recommendations, as described in the Times Higher Education Supplement (Anon 1988) were that: Aberdeen should not support research in the earth sciences,(although lobbying from the petroleum industry and politicians ensured the continuation of its highly successful M Sc courses in petroleum geology); the Geology Department at St Andrews should merge with Geography; and that Glasgow should incorporate the departments at Dundee, Stirling and Strathclyde.
Aberdeen, Dundee, and St Andrews were among those which expanded rapidly in the early 1970's, whilst Strathclyde was established in 1965, and its Department of Applied Geology grew out of the Mining Department of one of the Colleges which merged to form the University.
The decline of deep mining world-wide, and particularly in Scotland, coincided with the slow-down in growth of the hydrocarbon exploration industry in Scotland to give Strathclyde particular problems.
Because of the differences in structure and gradings in the above two assessments, it is impossible to make direct comparisons, but the 1989 review includes within its Category 16 (Other Physical Sciences), such diverse subjects as astronomy, oceanography, and meteorology, some of which have teaching and research connections with the earth sciences.
The trends observed by analysis of Table 3 suggest that there has been a steady growth in research on Scottish geology, but that there have been differences in growth rates between universities over the time interval.
In order to study the growth rates in more detail, the data were broken down into annual figures,(See Table 4).
It will be seen that most of the numbers within individual years are small, and that there is no apparent pattern in the scatter of data.
Plotting the results as a simple histogram also shows a rather ragged and uneven picture of growth (Figure 2).
These year-by-year figures are thus not so useful for the analysis of large-scale trends as are the time-band figures in Table 3 previously discussed, but they do highlight the small-scale fluctuations in numbers of successful students in the subject field within individual departments in single years.
Why, for example, is there a gap between 1966 and 1969 in the University of London's Scottish geology thesis output?
If failure rates are constant,(and there is no reason for any alternative assumption), and no change in research policy within the department (and there is no evidence for this), then the gap is likely to have arisen solely as the result of lack of demand.
Other individual fluctuations can be assigned to specific causes with reasonable certainty.
Major research programmes involving several research students within a single department are likely to lead to the completion of several theses within the same academic year.
Because of the savings in overheads, and the capacity of such large, high-quality research programmes to attract external funding, such multi-student projects as the mapping of the geology of the Outer Hebrides on contract to the British Geological Survey may become more common in future, with the result that departmental research could become more project-oriented (applied research) than subject-inspired (basic research).
If the data are plotted as a cumulative graph (Figure 3), a growth trend is apparent.
The end point on this curve — the year 1983 — has an artificially low number of theses in it, due to the incomplete nature of the published sources of thesis data, as described in Will 1985.
Some universities take longer than others to notify Aslib of thesis titles, and some delay lending theses to the British Library Document Supply Centre (BLDSC) for microfilming and listing in British Reports, Translations and Theses (BRTT).
On checking BRTT for 1985, for example, one finds Scottish geology theses covering all years from 1978 to 1985.
Theses identified in the Laming list (Appendix 4) appear to show that Leeds, Cambridge and St. Andrews Universities were tardy in this respect.
Overall, the average number of theses per year is ‘, but the average for the last 10 year period is 32.
The growth appears to be fairly steady, and rather small, but there are dips at 1967-68, and 1972-74, and there is a tendency towards non-linearity in the rate of growth.
The figures are too small to allow accurate measurement of the exponent.
Cumulative curves must be considered as extreme smoothing devices (May), and relatively small changes in inclination of the line in the graph produce significant changes in estimated growth rates.
The average growth rate is 2.9% per annum(equivalent to about 3 additional theses per year).
When this is compared with the growth rate of 4% per annum for all UK theses, derived from inspection of the Aslib list, it is clear that Scottish geology is not one of the research areas showing rapid growth.
The ‘doubling time’, defined as the taken for the number of theses per year to double, is somewhere between 12 and 15 years, so that within the 24 years covered by the present study, the population has only doubled once.
(Doubling times, and other measures of the growth of science, are described in Price, a source of several significant bibliometric parameters now in general use).
The critical factors in determining the growth in the present study are all external; none are intrinsic to the science itself.
These factors include funding sources, the employment market for successful graduates, and the costs of running university departments.
It is possible to predict therefore, given the funding pressures of the late 1980's and early 1990's, that the numbers of successful graduates in the field will start to level off under the influence of market forces, until the next major theoretical advance, or the next rise in the value of those resources which geologists can be of assistance in exploiting.
2.3 Inter-University Comparisons
The mean number of Scottish geology theses per university over the period is 18.3, or 3.3% of the total.
Edinburgh University, with 94 Scottish geology theses, has produced five times the average number, and it will be instructive to try to find the reasons for this apparent concentration of research effort.
It is true that Edinburgh University is active in more than one of the earth science sub-fields — geology per se, geophysics, geochemistry, mineralogy, geomorphology etc. — whereas some universities are strong in only a single sub-field, such as palaeontology.
(As already mentioned, the UGC Earth Science Review rated Edinburgh as above average for research in geology and geophysics).
There are, too, very strong historical links between the city and the science; links which are well known and well documented.
James Hutton, the ‘Father of Modern Geology’, lived in Edinburgh, and his major geological work ‘Theory of the Earth’, one of the foundation stones of the scientific study of geology, was first read to a very early meeting of the Royal Society of Edinburgh.
(The bibliographical history of the publication of the different versions of Hutton's work is described fully by Craig et al in a fascinating piece of bibliographic detective-work.
The first version of Hutton's ideas was printed as an Abstract in 1788, and circulated to Fellows of the Society.
Of the seven copies of this abstract now known to exist, one is in the Library of the Royal Botanic Garden, whereas the Geological Survey does not have a copy).
This Society now, whilst international in its membership and publication policy, and multifarious in its interests, maintains close ties with the University's Geology Department.
Similarly, the national (i.e. Scottish) office of the UK's official Geological Survey has been located in Edinburgh since 1859.
This office is charged by Government with the duty of mapping the geology of the country, and with providing public access to the results of its work.
The original geological maps, which will be described in more detail below, were prepared only as single-copy manuscripts, making access for researchers outside Edinburgh more difficult, and leading to an unintentional positive discrimination in favour of locally-based students.
In addition, the proximity of the Survey to the University (they have been on the same site since 1975) led to contacts between their respective staffs, with a cross-fertilisation of ideas.
It will be seen later, however, by analysis of Table 3, that the high proportion of Scottish geology theses from Edinburgh University reflects its wider position as one of the major research centres within the earth sciences as a whole, and that its output (in terms of Ph D theses) is more balanced than a casual observation of Table 3 would suggest.
Edinburgh produces so many theses on geology as a whole that the number on Scottish geology is not disproportionate.
A comparison of the columns in Table 3 reveals the changes in proportion of theses produced within the time intervals.
The results for those universities producing more than a total of 10 theses on Scottish geology between 1960 and 1983 are shown ranked as Table 5 — Changes in proportion of Scottish geology theses with time.
In the recent past, most of the universities have not markedly changed the proportion of their research into Scottish geology, with the clear exceptions of Glasgow and London, both of which have significantly reduced the amount of such work, and of Aberdeen and Dundee, both of which have greatly increased their Scottish geological research.
The possible reasons for these changes are manifold, and mostly unquantifiable.
Supervisors with Scottish research interests may have moved elsewhere; the purposes of the research may have changed within universities; Research Council funding for such research may have changed or been re-distributed to other universities.
In order to establish the relative proportions of Scottish geological research to total geological research in UK universities, Aslib's Index to Theses (AIT) was scanned for the years 1960-1983, and the results are given in Table 6, which is in alphabetical order of university.
A ranked table of universities producing more than 10 geology theses is shown as Table 7.
Of the total of 3632 geology theses in Table 7, 550 were on Scottish geology — some 15% of the total.
This is disproportionate, both in terms of the total Scottish population, and of the Scottish student population, so there are indications that a study of Scottish geology is important to developments within the science as a whole, rather than a matter of purely local interest.
There are many reasons for undertaking research in Scottish geology.
The complexity of Scotland's rocks and structure — both at the surface and at depth — and the large age range of geological Systems represented in Scotland's rocks, give rise to questions which are of intrinsic interest to researchers attempting to unravel Scotland's geological history.
Then too, the solutions to some problems exemplified here have more general applicability to other areas.
Scotland's universities are in reasonably close proximity, and have relatively simpler access, to exposures of a wide range of rocks of different ages, origins, types and compositions.
The same cannot be said of some other British universities, whose students are obliged to travel considerable distances to observe the raw materials to which their research relates.
The data in Table 7 can be rearranged so as to rank universities in order of the proportion of Scottish theses to theses as a whole, and develop what might be called a ‘Parochiality Index’.
Those universities featuring highest in this list can be said to concentrate on local research.
The ranking is given as Table 8.
It will be clear that all of the Scottish universities offering geology doctorates concentrate more than half of their research effort on local geology, as evidenced by successful Ph D theses.
Of the other UK universities, Liverpool has a disproportionate interest in Scottish geology.
For a ‘hard-rock’ school, however, with interests in non-sedimentary rocks, this is hardly surprising, since the largest proportion of Britain's igneous and metamorphic rocks are at the surface in Scotland, compared with England.
The igneous and metamorphic rocks form what one can think of as the bones of the landscape, covered by sedimentary sequences of varying depths (muscles, internal organs?), and a thin skin of Quaternary (Ice-Age) material and new soil.
Each of these aspects of the geology is of interest to current researchers, but the differences have led to differing specialties within and between departments.
Teaching requirements ensure that within any department there will be expertise in all of these fields, but research interests will inevitably concentrate on a few aspects.
It may be thought that the highest-scoring universities in this list attract a higher than average proportion of indigenous students with local area research interests, but examination of the names of thesis authors from Strathclyde and Dundee universities, and confirmatory personal communications with the relevant departments, suggest that many of their students are not of local origin, but have come to the universities from overseas.
Later, it will be shown that for a variety of reasons such students within these departments produce theses which are seldom published, cited, or consulted.
2.4 Geographical coverage
Those theses in which, from inspection of the title, the precise research area covered could be identified, were plotted on a geological map of Scotland (Appendix 6), from which a diagram (Figure 4) was drawn, using the GRAPE package on a Vax 8600 computer with attached plotter.
The technique was fairly standard, involving the scaling of an outline map, supplied as a digitised 1:625,000 scale dataset by the Ordnance Survey, intercalating eight-figure National Grid values, and plotting points to which the thesis numbers were later referenced.
Several areas had very high densities of theses, and these were re-scaled and re-plotted as Figures 7 and 8.
Theses without any easily-defined locality were not included, and theses on more than one area are plotted at both localities.
A total of 286 theses with specific identifiable geographical co-ordinates are plotted on these maps.
Title scanning, as mentioned briefly above, was considered adequate for area identification.
Thesis titles in the earth sciences tend to be highly informative.
They almost invariably define the research topic, and the research area, clearly, concisely, and unambiguously.
There may be other research fields where this is not the case, but in chemistry, physics, and the other physical sciences, including geology, specificity in the titles of theses is the norm.
The same is true for published research papers in these sciences, and this is one of the reasons for the popularity of KWIC (Key Word In Context) indexes within chemistry and the earth sciences — the papers lend themselves to automated index production.
The apparent concentration of research effort in some well-favoured areas is justified by the intrinsic geological interest of these areas, but the large areas of Scotland in which no university-supported research has been undertaken must call for some explanation.
The Lewisian rocks of the North West Highlands of Scotland are Britain's oldest known rocks.
Their origins, their tectonic and metamorphic history, and their structural relations, present geologists with some of the most complex problems to be solved within the science as a whole, and so it is hardly surprising that many universities have research interests here.
Edinburgh, Glasgow, and London (particularly Imperial College) universities have all been involved in major research projects in this area, although the major structural problems had been elucidated in 1906 by scientists from the then Geological Survey of Scotland (Peach and others.
Skye, Rhum and Mull have exposures of major volcanic features, which exemplify many of the problems of modern volcanology on a world scale.
Devonian plants, the earliest known terrestrial plants, are seen at Rhynie, and are regularly used by palaeobotanists to develop techniques and expertise.
Some of the most intractable problems in Scottish geology relate to the structural and metamorphic history of the Moine Series rocks of the North West and Grampian Highlands, the ages of which have been matters of controversy and speculation since the early nineteenth century because of their structural complexity, and the lack of incontrovertible and unequivocal evidence of their absolute age, and it is noteworthy that research in these areas has been led by Geological Survey scientists, sometimes with university collaboration, and sometimes without.
The type of research which this kind of geology necessitates is careful, painstaking fieldwork, covering large areas of difficult terrain, and it is only by long-term work involving many individuals that the answers to the problems can be found.
University-led research tends to be on a smaller scale, and on a much shorter time-span, with the average Ph D taking just over three years to complete.
Universities can and have contributed to Geological Survey research, for example in producing the map and descriptive ‘Memoir’(this term is used with a specific meaning in geology) for the Aberdeen area (Sheet 77), part of the survey work was carried out by Ph D students from the University of Aberdeen on contract to the Geological Survey.
Survey staff contributed ‘quality control’ to the field mapping, and acted as external supervisors.
Such a role results, however, in a very tight circumscription of the researcher's programme, since it is geared to the production of an end product, rather than to new discoveries or stimulating original work.
The end result of areal geological research is usually a geological map of an area, since the map is the primary method of recording, displaying and publishing geological data.
Geophysical and geochemical research projects are frequently used to locate tectonic and metamorphic boundaries, which again are most concisely described by a map.
Some palaeontological works are systematic; that is to say, they describe a particular fossil, or group of fossils; or they are used stratigraphically, to delimit a geological zone within a particular time period, so that the age of a sedimentary sequence can be determined.
In the latter case also, the published result is usually a map.
If a thesis is published, there will in very many cases therefore be an accompanying geological map of an area, which can be used by others for verification, and as a basis for future research.
The BGS scientists, who are such prominent thesis consulters, as will be shown later, may incorporate data from such maps into the published national map series for which the Survey is responsible.
If no paper is produced from a thesis on a particular area, it is often other students who are most inconvenienced, rather than the Survey, who have a network of university contacts, and good inter-library loan facilities.
2.5 Database design
The data set was put onto two ORACLE databases on the NERC Computing Services’ Vax 8600 computer in BGS Edinburgh.
The first database (THESES87) related to some basic facts on each theses.
The fields were as follows:
The consultation records (described in Chapter 5) were put into a dBASE II database on a PC, and used as the basis for the construction of a second ORACLE database, CONSULT, which contained the following fields, one of which is common to THESES87:
Having a common field, THNUM, the two databases could be joined to show relationships.
Some analysis was carried out using the ORACLE databases prior to 1988, and a limited amount was possible for a short period thereafter.
Due to the subsequent lack of access to computing facilities, there was a delay in further database development until 1989.
Database work for this thesis was then completed using Microsoft Works on an IBM PS/2, re-keyboarding the existing data.
The major disadvantage is that the Works database function is a flat-file system, rather than a relational database, so that comparisons between separate databases had to made manually, rather than using relational database technology.
On the other hand, the charting options within the spreadsheet function in Works are robust and simple to operate, with the result that graphics for analysis of publication data are much better than they would otherwise have been.
Additional fields added to databases in Microsoft Works include:
2.6 Data Protection.
In accordance with the provisions of the Data Protection Act, all personal data held on computer files have been erased after analysis.
Listings of theses and publications are in the public domain, however, and so there is no restriction on the reproduction of such material.
Chapter 3.
Publication Measures.
3.1 Publication counts
The counting of published papers as a measure of the output of research has been used as a rather crude method of determining the productivity of research workers in some laboratories, such as by Vlachy.
These somewhat simplistic approaches have been the subject of just criticism, e.g. by Dixon, who urged caution on raw citation searching as proof of productivity, but who expressed overall support for its use in conjunction with other measures.
Criticism by many research workers has led to the development of ancillary measures, involving more sophisticated techniques.
It is no longer enough to make a simple count of publications; some attempt must be made to look at the informational content (bibliographies), peer group assessment (citations), and long-term value to the academic community (review articles).
Citation measures will be described in more detail in Chapter 5.
It has been clearly expressed (Anon 1970) that merely counting ‘publication rate would not distinguish between the fluency of genius and the loud noises of empty vessels.’
On the other hand, Menard says (p. 25), that:
‘Defining ‘science’ as the content of scientific journals, we need merely determine the amount of material published at various times to establish a growth curve.’
Clearly this is simplistic, if not mischievous, but on the other hand, we can only measure the measurable, and if science as a subject cannot be studied using scientific methods — deduction and induction, prediction and experiment — then measures of its output, in the form of scientific publications, have no logical validity.
The role of the scientific journal has not changed much in the 300 years since the publication of the first such journal, although greater dependence is placed on it than ever before, according to Osburn.
Journals are used to keep up-to-date; to follow developments in other fields; to get ideas for future research; to identify similar individuals; to screen out the irrelevant, and to find the relevant; and to minimise cost, time, and inconvenience in retrieval.
Publication in journals establishes intellectual ownership; gains recognition (which leads to career mobility); establishes personal contacts; fulfils contracts; shares information; and educates new practitioners.
Anderson et al 1978 combined peer ratings of universities with the numbers of publications produced by these universities within 10 scientific fields: Developmental Biology, Zoology, Pharmacy, Physiology, Mathematics, Microbiology, Psychology, Chemistry, Biochemistry, Physics.
They found high rank correlations between these two measures.
They developed a measure of the ‘average influence’ per paper, based on citation frequencies, and established a ‘total influence of the university’, defined as the product of the numbers of papers and the influence per paper.
The correlation of peer ratings with total influence exceeded the correlations with qualitative assessment or publication counts alone.
Thus authors who are highly regarded by their peers tend also to be those who publish frequently, and whose papers are highly cited.
The UFC 1989 Review admitted that the numerical totals of publications were not found to be helpful in the assessment process, and their panels were agreed that quantity did not equal quality.
Their views may have been coloured by the fact that they found evidence of significant misreporting of publication data in some areas, to the extent that they suggest automatically lowering research ratings as a penalty for discovered deliberate misreporting.
The errors found involved reporting abstracts and correspondence as full papers; co-authorship represented as sole authorship; papers only tenuously ‘in press’ reported as having been published; falsification of publication dates so as to appear within the review period; and totally fabricated references.
It is little wonder then that they say that ‘bibliometric analysis was as yet a very poor substitute for peer review’.
What they failed to consider, however, was that their source bibliographic data was gathered as reportage from correspondents, rather than as objective data files from established, reputable bibliographic sources.
3.1.1 Methodology
The American Geological Institute (AGI) began publishing its Bibliography and Index of Geology (BIG) in 1934, as an annual publication.
For a period in the 1950s and 60s, North American geology was indexed in a separate publication by the United States Geological Survey as Bibliography of North American Geology (BNAG), which does not concern us in this particular study, with the AGI's publication changing title to Bibliography and Index of Geology, excluding North America (BIGENA).
The two series rejoined and resumed the title Bibliography and Index of Geology, under which it continues.
The published monthly bibliography and its annual cumulations (which now run to 8 large volumes each year), have an online equivalent — GeoRef — which, at the time of initial searching covered all years from 1969 to the present.
It has since been retrospectively enlarged, going back to 1754 for North America, and progressively completing coverage for other countries, particularly European geology.
The original intention in the present work was to use GeoRef for checking the publication history of the thesis research.
An objective assessment of geological database coverage by Tenopir confirmed that Georef was the preferred database for searching, of the two which then currently existed.
(The second, GeoArchive, lapsed in 1986, but was relaunched on Dialog in 1989).
Tenopir used two research methodologies — a bibliographic method, and a subject profile method.
In the first, she used specialised bibliographies or review articles in a specific subject area.
She then looked for these citations in the databases.
Databases which had higher percentages of these citations were considered to have more extensive coverage.
The second method used subject terms to construct profiles, which were then run against the databases to be tested.
Review articles on volcanology were selected from Science Citation Index (SCI).
Two thousand, two hundred and fifty-four (2254) citations were retrieved, from which a sample set of 305 citations were checked against the two databases.
One hundred and eight (35%) were found in both databases.
GeoRef retrieved ‘5 of the citations (74%), of which 117 (38%) were unique to GeoRef.
GeoArchive retrieved only 115 of the citations (38%), 7 of which were unique to GeoArchive (2%).
Seventy-three citations (24%) were not found in either database.
Several reasons can be put forward for this gap, but the single largest factor is presumed to be the date coverage of the databases.
At the time, GeoRef covered the period from 1969 onward, and GeoArchive from 1974 onward.
Tenopir concluded that GeoRef has the edge in coverage per year, as well as in total coverage.
GeoRef assigns more subject headings for each record, and so has potentially higher recall by subject search.
On checking the journal coverage of BIG, it was found that all of the core journals, and the vast majority of the remainder, were covered by BIG and GeoRef, which in 1983 (in both published and online form) scanned 7,700 journals, and accordingly, the bibliographic checking was carried out solely in these sources, rather than GeoArchive.
AGI, which produces BIG, also collaborates with the national French bibliographic services of the Bureau de Recherches Geologiques et Minieres (BRGM), and the Centre National de Recherche Scientifique (CNRS), so that its European coverage is considered virtually complete for the present data set.
Burk supplies a non-critical listing of source and reference databases in the earth sciences, defining source databases as non-bibliographic (mostly in-house or private), and he uses the term ‘reference’ to mean bibliographic.
The numbers of ‘core'journals for this study is limited (see below), and the rigorous quality control imposed by strict refereeing policies of these journals ensures that very high scientific and editorial standards are applied.
For a paper on Scottish geology to be published in such journals is in itself a peer-group assessment of the value of that research to the scientific community.
Conversely, whilst there may in a few cases be valid reasons for a high quality paper not being submitted to such journals, it could be argued that in some cases publication outside the core represents a negative value judgement on the quality of that research.
3.1.2 Bibliographic searching.
For those authors completing theses before 1969, for the most prolific authors, and for ‘problematic’ authors (e.g. those whose citations contained some variations in forenames or initials, so that unambiguous attribution of authorship necessitated further investigation), manual searching of BIG was carried out, and for other authors GeoRef was searched online.
Since the thesis bibliography is an author list, and since BIG and GeoRef index all authors of papers, the search was conducted by author.
Both printed and online forms of the bibliography are exact equivalents when conducting author searches.
Analysis of the retrieved papers was then carried out to determine which publications were related to the author's thesis.
The titles of papers in geology are almost always invariably informative and precise.
In the case of areal geological research, the place name is invariably included both in the thesis title and the related paper(s).
Sources of errors in searching mainly involve failure to find related papers due to inconsistencies in the use of personal names.
Spelling errors in names was recognised as a potential problem, but in practice only two mis-spellings in citations were found.
Indexing inconsistencies caused a problem with searching the printed record.
Authors whose surnames begin with Mac, or Mc, were dealt with in different ways under differing editorial policies operating at different times.
In one period, all were placed together as if spelled out in full as ‘MAC’.
During another period, each variant was filed separately in strict alphabetical sequence, thus separating McDonald from Macdonald.
In a study dealing with Scottish subjects, the prefix occurred rather frequently, and necessitated great care in searching.
It is also possible that some research is directed towards developing a technique, methodology, computer program, or piece of equipment which has wide applicability, but whose initial testing was carried out within some field of Scottish geology.
Papers subsequently published by such researchers may show no obvious Scottish connection in their titles, but it cannot be assumed that the work is unrelated to their thesis topic.
As an example, Thesis number 9 was on mine waste contamination in Scotland and Wales.
This author's subsequent papers made no mention of Scotland, but made use of techniques developed during the course of his fieldwork.
The frequency of occurrence of such theses within this present work was very difficult to estimate, but is likely to be very low.
Most often, related papers are easy to determine because of the specificity of titles in the field, and unrelated papers are very obviously unrelated.
The problems posed by author's names are much more difficult to overcome.
In the case of BIG and GeoRef, indexing policies have changed over the years, with the result that all possible permutations of authors’ forenames and initials had to be allowed for whilst searching.
This was relatively easy in the published bibliography, but made for many tiresome expansions online.
For Arabic names, and other names with prefixes, it was found that there were inconsistencies in indexing: Al-Haddad appeared as Al-Haddad, and on another occasion as Haddad; El-Batroukh appeared in full in the first reference, then as Batroukh, and also as Batrouk.
Moed & Vriens found, in their study of inaccuracies in citations, that the largest single cause of discrepancies was the method of dealing with compound names, such as van, van der, de, Mac, and hyphenated names (some authorities cite under the first part, some under the second, some ignore the hyphen).
The end result is that in some cases, different authors having identical initials have been found.
It is, however, very unlikely that two authors with the same initials would be working within the field of Scottish geology, or of any other small, restricted field of knowledge, so that the figures for related papers are still likely to be reasonably accurate in these cases.
Only the figures for total references published will be in error on such occasions, whilst the figures for related references will be accurate.
The problems posed by authors changing their names are thought to be very limited.
It has been found that all of the women researchers who completed theses under their own names subsequently published under these names.
It is general that, in geology at least, women use their own names professionally.
In two cases, women students married before their theses were completed, used their married names in their theses, and subsequently published under these names.
One author adopted a new name for religious reasons, both being listed on his thesis, but a search of the bibliography under both names failed to discover publications under either.
3.2 Multiple authorships
The extent to which research results are published as jointly-authored papers has exercised a number of workers.
Vlachy 1970, in his study of publication characteristics of research establishments, defined total and fractional productivity, the latter simply derived by dividing joint papers in the ratio of the numbers of authors.
He concluded that those authors who collaborate with others most often, are by far the least prolific.
Vlachy's sample made no distinction between types of researcher, so it is not possible to determine how many of his sample population of papers were derived from theses.
Abelson noticed an increasing trend toward multiple authorship, deriving from the increasing size and cost of large science projects, such as space science and particle physics, where large numbers of people in multi-disciplinary teams are involved in carrying out relatively small numbers of experiments or observations.
The problem of assessing which of the team members has made a large enough contribution to the result to warrant their name appearing in the author list for the published paper is rather difficult.
A count of the related papers from Appendix 5 shows that, of the total of 621 derived papers, 259 were jointly authored (42% of the total).
Restricting the count to the researchers’ first derived papers, the figures are 326 derived papers, 152 jointly authored,(47% of the total).
There is thus a 5% difference in the extent of collaboration between an author's first and subsequent publications.
Looking at this second set, in 82 cases, the researcher is named as first author (54%), whilst in 70 cases, the supervisor is the first author (46%).
The choice seems to depend very much on the individual preferences of the supervisor.
Some supervisors invariably put their own name first in joint publications with their research students, whereas others adopt the opposite style.
It is not possible to identify the proportional contributions of student and supervisor to the publication, in terms of information content, but in the case of mapping assignments, it would be logical to assume that the student performed most of the fieldwork, deriving theoretical insights in later discussion with the supervisor and others.
First papers derived from mapping theses should, if this is the only consideration, either be singly authored, or should cite the researcher first.
This is true in 80% of the first related papers in Appendix 5, where a total of 97 papers (30%) appear to derive from field mapping.
Evans (1989) proposes that co-authorship should be restricted to those who have made more than 50% of the contribution to the Ideas, Experimental, or Publication phases of research.
(Evans also suggests in his original diagram that some unscrupulous scientists proceed directly from nascent idea to the writing up, without carrying out the experimental phase).
He ignores the fact that the major argument for including the supervisor's name in papers to which he or she has not made such a contribution is that it is the supervisor's reputation which has attracted the research grant or ensured publication.
Such a contribution cannot be assessed, but assuredly, the research could not take place without it.
Hay & Maddock found joint authorship in only 6% of their sample of thesis-derived research on human geography, which does suggest a different pattern of publication in geography to that in geology.
3.3 Derived and Related Publications
Three hundred and twenty-six authors (59%) published papers which appear, by inspection of their titles, to be related to their theses.
(Abstracts and correspondence were not counted as scientific papers).
Hay & Maddock, in their study of human geography theses, found that 26% of their sampled items were produced as the outcome of postgraduate research, but that eventually 50% of theses lead to publication of their results, including publication in book form.
The slightly lower figure may relate to the more discursive nature of the subject.
Initially, it was hoped that publications directly deriving from theses could be unambiguously identified, but this was not possible.
Too many titles contained terms which were clearly related to terms contained in thesis titles, such as common geographical and stratigraphical names; or regional studies including narrower geographical areas previously studied, but whose precise relationships to the Ph D research became more and more uncertain.
For this reason, the term ‘related publication’ is used for all publications bearing an identifiable relationship to the original research work.
The 326 authors produced a total of 621 related papers, an average of 1.9 related papers per thesis.
This is a much lower figure than Hand found for his sample of 65 entomological theses.
Forty of his theses had led to the publication of 144 derived articles, an average of 3.6 papers per thesis.
The extent to which entomological publication rates are typical of the whole field of biology is unknown, however, and so it would be unwise to use his figures to compare biology with the earth sciences.
Equally, the figure is lower than figure derived by Hughes for her single chemistry thesis, where she found elements of the thesis research in five subsequent papers.
This single value cannot be used statistically when comparing chemistry with geology, but it does suggest that some elements of Ph D research are diffused into the literature in a much more widespread manner than could be expected by simple inspection of the titles of papers.
By using the chapter and section contents of her chemistry thesis, she listed each piece of information contained in the thesis, and then compared the list with each of the author's published papers in a similar way.
The 36% of the thesis information not published included unclear results, negative results, or information which could neither be slotted into the papers nor aggregated to make a whole paper.
(As with the Hand thesis, an online search of the LISA database failed to find any evidence that Hughes has as yet published her extremely worthwhile research).
The largest number of related papers in the present study is 9.
One hundred and fifty-three authors (47%) produced a single related paper.
The full table follows:
The fact that 41% of the original researchers have not published papers relating to their original research could lead funding authorities to question the extent to which the research programmes which they sponsored were worthwhile undertaking in the first place.
If the primary purpose of the thesis is to add to knowledge, then failure to publish suggests that nothing new has been added.
If, however, the primary purpose is to train scientists, then the criteria used to select candidates might in future be based on peer review of the departments, and a personal assessment of those candidates, rather than on the putative scientific value of the projects submitted for consideration.
Given that such a view is unlikely to be acceptable to the scientific community, it is suggested that the funding authorities should give consideration to the fundamental purposes underlying Ph D research, and to output measures of the value of such work to the community.
Since publication is one such measure, and one which is relatively easy to determine, a study of the factors leading to non-publication is of potential value to funding bodies.
Some of the factors are described in Section 3.7, which deals with productivity in general.
3.4 Journal of First Publication.
Sixty-eight of the authors published their first related paper in the Scottish Journal of Geology.
This represents nearly 21% of the total.
Nature published 11%; the full journal rankings are presented in the following table:
Fourteen journals published a total of 2 thesis-related papers each, and 40 Journals published one paper each.
Of the high-ranking journals, Nature is a general scientific journal, and could not be considered a ‘core’ geological journal.
The distribution shows a scattering pattern consistent with Bradford's Law of Scattering, with 50% of the total papers being published in 5 journals, the next 5 journals containing 25%.
One rearrangement of Bradford's Law predicts that 50% of the literature of a subject will be contained in ‘n’ journals, 50% of the remainder in 2n, with successive remainders forming an arithmetic series.
(Useful recent summaries of Bradford's Law and other bibliometric distributions are given by Soyibo and Aiyepeku, and by Bookstein).
A chart of the distribution is reproduced as Figure 8.
A very small number of journals publish the bulk of the output from Ph D theses in Scottish geology.
Two-thirds of such derived papers are published in just eight journals.
Excluding Nature, which publishes papers in all of the sciences, this core set of journals is specifically geological, but not specifically Scottish, apart from SJG.
3.5 Changes with time
The list of journals was examined by date of publication, to see if there were any trends in journals publishing theses authors’ initial scientific contributions.
This is charted as Figure 9, Journal of First Publication.
It is clear that the relative positions of Geological Magazine and Proceedings of the Geologists Association have declined in the proportion of thesis-related material published, and that the Scottish Journal of Geology became the primary vehicle for first publication of research results derived from Ph D theses in Scottish geology as soon as it began publishing in 1965.
There is no measurable trend in the proportion publishing in specialist journals or in other ‘one-off’ publications, such as conference proceedings and books.
About one-fifth of all theses result in papers which are on subjects considered inappropriate for the ‘core’ journals.
In the nineteenth century, and in the early years of the twentieth century, there was a high output of geological publication in the form of irregular monographic serials (Menard).
Later, at least in the United States, State and Federal Geological Surveys published a proportionally greater number of papers.
Thus the 1927 study by Wentworth & Apfel, and the 1931 study by Gross & Woodford, both of which listed the journals most frequently used by American geologists, contain relatively small numbers of journals which still occupy the same high standing in the profession today.
(Although Haner found in 1985 that citations of US Geological Survey journals averaged 16% of all citations in seven American geological journals).
Similarly in Britain, the early literature consisted of learned, academic books, which later gave way to the many systematic publications of the Geological Survey, only now superseded by research published in commercial scientific journals.
Craig, conducting a survey of 30 Scottish geologists, found that one-third of the papers considered most important in geology were major reviews, rather than primary research papers.
The abundance of such papers, estimated by the American Geological Institute, was at that time (1969) between two and five per cent of the geological literature, whereas their impact on readers was about ten times higher.
3.6 Correlation of University and Journal.
The following tables attempt to show correlations between the researcher's university and the journal which first publishes his or her research.
(The tables relate only to those universities which have produced more than 10 theses on Scottish geology).
This journal was founded in 1965 by the geological societies of Edinburgh and Glasgow, each of which had published their own series of Transactions in previous years.
The quality of papers published in both Transactions was extremely varied, sometimes containing ‘classic’ papers by professional geologists (e.g. Tyrell on igneous petrology, Read on migmatisation) in the same volume as casual observations by amateurs, reports of meetings and excursions, and committee proceedings.
The Councils of both Societies, in agreeing to support the publication of the new journal, took a conscious decision that it should contain only papers of the highest quality, and that papers from Scotland's universities, and papers on Scottish geology, should form the major part of the publication, although there has always been scope for the publication of papers on other areas, including some important theoretical papers.
It is hardly surprising, therefore, that the Scottish universities feature so prominently in the above list, and that Liverpool and London, which have long-standing links with Scottish geological research, have published large numbers of papers in this journal.
Edinburgh, Oxford, Cambridge and Durham published most ‘first’ related papers in Nature.
On examination of the papers, it would appear that many of these Nature papers are geophysical in subject.
This aspect will be discussed further in Chapter 6.
This journal has a long and distinguished history, publishing mainly shorter papers on a wide spread of subjects.
Liverpool and Glasgow published in this journal preferentially.
Sheffield, Cambridge, Liverpool and London, appear to prefer to publish first in this Journal.
The Geological Society of London is the largest geological society in the UK, and its journal, through its antecedent titles, can claim to be the world's oldest geological journal.
Its subject coverage is mainstream geology, and its geographical interests are world-wide.
The editorial policies admit of no bias towards publishing papers on the geology of the British Isles, and so the high proportion of papers on Scottish geology reflects the intrinsic interest of the subject.
Mineralogy is a rather specialist sub-field within the earth sciences, dealing with the description of minerals.
London is the major university for mineralogical studies on Scottish rocks, whereas Oxford and Cambridge, both of which have Departments of Mineralogy, tend to research in other geographical areas.
London's students published extensively in this Journal, but the proportion has declined with time, as the Association's rôle has changed.
It seems now to be less concerned with the publication of primary research results, and more involved with papers which reflect the interests of the membership, which includes undergraduates, teachers, and lay members.
The data can also be sorted by university, and journal, to show differences in publication patterns.
The following table ranks the major journals (publishing five or more of the researchers’ first related papers), within each of the major research centres in Scottish geology.
The Scottish Journal of Geology is the highest ranking journal for publication of researchers’ first papers within the Scottish universities, and it is also the highest ranked at Liverpool University, and the Colleges of the University of Wales.
It is the second-ranked journal in London.
In contrast, it is one of the lowest-ranked of the major journals at Durham, and Sheffield's students have not yet published any first papers derived from Ph D research in it.
Nature is the highest-ranked journal at Cambridge, Durham, Newcastle and Oxford.
Edinburgh, London and Oxford have the largest amount of subject spread within the listed journals.
Each of these universities has produced published research in geography, geology, palaeontology, and geophysics.
This reflects the overall size of these departments, and the fact that all of them appear to have the resources to cover all of the earth science sub-disciplines in depth.
Geophysics is a strongly featured subfield in Durham, and palaeontology at Newcastle.
The small number of first papers published in high-ranking journals by Dundee and Strathclyde universities suggests either that both departments place relatively limited importance on publication in such journals, or that the work itself was not suitable for publication in them.
In view of the numbers of theses produced by both universities, it seems that the latter hypothesis is the more likely.
Unsuitability might mean that these universities are researching in areas not covered by the mainstream journals, but inspection of the thesis titles does not support this.
This data, together with the data on productivity described below, suggests that the research work carried out in the geology departments of these universities is of a lower standard than that of the other Scottish universities.
3.7 Productivity
3.7.1 Publications
One hundred researchers (18%) have not, as yet, published any papers since the completion of their theses.
Defining categories as Unproductive (Total References = 0); Low productivity (1-5 papers within 5 years of completion); Medium productivity (6-15 papers within 5 years of completion); and High productivity (16 or more papers within 5 years) without being judgemental (there are, after all, many factors involved), it is possible to determine which Universities have produced the most productive, and which the least productive, researchers.
Productivity varies widely, one researcher having produced more than 100 papers, with 77 (14%) publishing a single paper, and 105 (19%) writing more than 20.
This Table (Table 13) is also reproduced graphically as Figure 10 using 100% stacked bars (chosen to make proportional comparisons easier).
Cambridge produces the highest proportion of Highly-productive researchers in the field, whereas Aberdeen, Newcastle, Dundee, St Andrews and Strathclyde produce the highest proportion of Unproductive and Low-productivity researchers.
As Hagstrom has stated, publications are the most important predictors of departmental prestige.
Whilst peers may not read everything written in their field, they do at least know who is writing.
Craig in his 1969 study, found that, in an experiment conducted in three Scottish geological departments, 76% of papers were read by title only, whereas only 4% of the papers were read in full.
Crane, however, argues that affiliation to a prestigious university is more likely to lead to recognition for a scientist than higher productivity.
The above data suggests that there is a positive correlation between the prestige of a university and the productivity of its researchers.
Gaston came to similar conclusions in a study of peer review, although he cautioned that the relationship between productivity and recognition is not straightforward.
The complication here is that the total time period is more than 20 years, and obviously the earlier workers will have had time to publish many more papers than those finishing their studies in recent years, but the dataset is so large that such effects will be the same for all universities, i.e. they will be self-cancelling.
Cole and Meyer found that early productivity is a good rough predictor of later productivity.
It is therefore likely that Unproductive and Low-Productivity researchers will remain so throughout their scientific careers, and that the Highly-Productive earth scientists from Cambridge will continue to publish more papers than average in the course of their work.
Figures for productivity based on the average number of publications per researcher per year within universities were derived from the database.
The results, ranked in ascending order, are as follows:
Oxford, Cambridge, and Durham researchers tend to be more prolific than the others.
These results can be cross-tabulated with the journal ranking lists in Tables 11a to 11f, to show that the high productivity correlates with the ranking of the journals in which such students first publish their results.
Dundee, Aberdeen and Strathclyde show both low average total productivity, and a smaller proportion of first papers published in highly-ranked journals within the field.
Cambridge and Oxford show both high total productivity and high levels of achieving publication in the major journals.
It is at first sight difficult to account for the anomalous position of Birmingham, which has a rather high productivity score, but whose proportion of first papers in the core journal set is low.
On examination, it appears that some of the first papers were published in specialist journals, none of which appears in the highly-ranked journal set.
This suggests that Birmingham's interests are focussed to some extent on specialist sub-fields, which are proportionally poorly represented in the set of all the journals on earth sciences.
For example, whilst many of the papers published in Scottish Journal of Geology are geochemical in nature, the core set of journals in geochemistry may well not contain it, and so researchers may well choose to publish in the core set for their sub-field, rather than the core set for Scottish geology.
Oxford, Durham, Cambridge, Newcastle and Edinburgh (in that order) publish high proportions of first papers in Nature, and these universities are also amongst the highest scoring in terms of productivity.
Speculations on the reasons for such a correlation include the following possibilities:
1.
these universities may have higher intake standards for research workers;
2.
their supervision and training methods result in higher pressure to publish;
3.
the research topics lend themselves to publication in Nature rather than to other journals;
4.
the university departments concerned may be perceived by the journal's referees to have higher status than others; or,
5.
some combination of the above factors makes them different from the rest.
Menard says that a typical rate for productive scientists is three papers per year.
It is not clear, however, whether he was referring to his own (earth science) field, or to an average value for all the sciences.
In a whole career, he states that:
‘a specialist in a slow sub-field…is required to write 20 papers to qualify as an ordinarily productive scientist, and more than 80 to be considered prolific’
Abelson regards a reasonable rate of publication for an established investigator as an annual rate of two to three papers, rising to four or five when ‘a hot field is discovered’.
The 550 researchers in the present study published a total of 6490 papers over the total period covered.
This produces an average of 11.8 papers per researcher, but because the papers were published over different time periods, an average annual publication rate cannot be calculated from this figure.
Additionally, most published publication counts refer to active practitioners, rather than to Ph D students, many of whom cease to be active in the subject field of their training.
For the 448 researchers who have published papers traced in the bibliography, i.e. excluding those who have not published any papers indexed in this source, the average annual publication rate is 1.06 papers per year; this figure being obtained by averaging the values of ‘References per year’ in the database.
Lotka's Law relates the numbers of authors, f, to the numbers of papers they publish, y, to establish productivity figures.
A simple plot of f against y is reproduced as Figure 11.
(Three authors publishing more than 100 papers each have been omitted from this graph).
Plotting log(f) vs. log(y) should produce a straight line graph (Bookstein).
In the present case, when this was attempted using the figures for total publications by thesis authors in the present study, Figure 12 was obtained.
The scatter at the high end — small numbers of authors publishing large numbers of papers — is so large that a straight line cannot be fitted to this graph with any degree of confidence.
Restricting the data to the related papers listed in Table 9 does, however, produce a straight-line curve, Figure 13.
This suggests that Lotka's Law has limitations at the extremes, but since the Law is related to Normal Distribution statistics, this should perhaps have been expected.
The extremes of a statistical distribution represent unpredictably rare individual events, which have very low values of statistical probability.
Most productivity measures, such as Lotka's Law, depend on size-frequency distributions (Hubert), based on numbers of authors.
Hubert has suggested that a rank-frequency model, based on ranked tables of authors according to their productivity, should give results which are independent of the total size of the population sampled.
In the present study, it has not been possible to create equal size-classes of productivity values, for the purposes of preparing such rankings.
(An alternative expression of Lotka's Law derived by Kyvik is that the number of scientists producing n papers is proportional to 1/n.
Applying this variant would reduce the scatter at the high end, since the values of log (1/n) would be approximately half those of log (1/n), but the scatter is still too large to permit an unequivocal statement that the data fits a Lotka distribution).
3.7.2 Reasons for low productivity
Most researchers complete a Ph D and then go on to take up full-time employment.
For those who move to teaching posts in universities, their research time, and their access to libraries and other facilities, often enables them to rewrite their thesis research into a form suitable for journal publication relatively quickly, and to then have it published.
In 1986, however, only 31% of all newly qualified Ph D graduates took up university employment (Anderson), and the boom period for academic jobs was around 1965, when 53% of all such researchers found employment in universities, so that it may be that the majority of successful Ph D researchers over the period have not had access to those facilities which would have helped them to publish.
Craig argues that a thesis should be succinctly written in the form of a scientific paper, so that it can be published without delay, after refereeing.
(His views derived from his experience in two roles, as a Professor of Geology at Edinburgh University, and as the editor of scientific journals).
Such a situation could only come about if researchers are encouraged to at least prepare for publication, if not to actually publish, papers on their research whilst they are still in the environs of the university.
If it is left until later, the chances are that external pressures will reduce the possibilities of publication.
3.7.2.1 Career moves
For those researchers going into industry, or moving abroad, becoming unemployed, taking career breaks for family reasons, or going into unrelated fields, the situation is much more difficult.
The pressures of a full-time job, and the lack of availability of research facilities such as libraries, computers, personal contacts with academics, as described above, inevitably result in some degree of non-publication of thesis research.
Some of the returns from Taylor's questionnaire drew attention to these problems, one in particular reporting that another year of full-time work would be required to bring the thesis work up to standard and up to date.
Scientists in the academic community achieve recognition, advancement, and success in attracting funding by publication, whereas some of those working in industry or defence are neither encouraged nor expected to contribute to the publicly available literature (Gilbert 1978).
Whilst geological studies were employed during the last War, in surveys of landing beaches, roadway planning, water supply, bridges etc., the number of geologists involved was very small, and the situation today is unlikely to be greatly different, although for security reasons the numbers are not published.
Industrial geologists, however, form a larger part of the pool of geological manpower.
Many are involved in hydrocarbon (oil and gas) exploration and development; a number in coal geology; whilst many others are involved in other mineral extraction industries.
Even if such geologists are still employed in areas related to their university research, there can be commercial pressures to publish.
Where commercial advantage is possible, patents are normally the means by which such information becomes publicly available, albeit in a form not typical of conventional publication in scientific papers.
If geologists in industry are slow to publish, relative to academic geologists, then in most cases the reason will be pressure of work.
The fact that so many do publish, as evidenced by the numbers of papers in the Bulletin of the American Association of Petroleum Geologists, or Geophysical Prospecting, indicates the close ties between their current work, and the need to advance their careers by publishing papers related to that work, rather than to their previous research.
For those moving to different countries, there is also the problem of lack of access to the study area — so important for checking findings.
The University Grants Committee said in 1987 that there are 200 new earth science Ph D students each year in the UK, and that 50 of these students were from overseas.
It would be unrealistic to expect the majority of researchers from overseas to maintain their UK research interests when they return to their country of origin, or move elsewhere, as many of them do, to the extent that they would wish to complete a paper or papers based on their UK findings.
A large proportion of our researchers are therefore unlikely to make major contributions to the literature of their research area.
It is wholly admirable that this country can provide research facilities and educational expertise to overseas students, but the value of their work to this country may consist solely of the funding which they bring with them, the esteem in which they hold this country's institutions when they have returned home, and their subsequent contacts and consultancies.
It is suggested that such students should be encouraged to publish during the tenure of their studentships, so that new findings may be incorporated quickly and permanently into the literature of the subject.
Within Scotland, the largest proportions of overseas researchers on Scottish geology are in Strathclyde and Dundee, and it may very well be that the difficulties such researchers experience in publishing their results account in part for the low productivity of these departments compared to those in other universities.
3.7.2.2 Rejections
Undoubtedly, however, some papers are written and subsequently rejected by the editors of journals as being of an insufficiently high standard.
Papers published in this country are generally refereed anonymously, and many editors are reluctant to publish acceptance rates for papers submitted to their journals.
Assuming, however, that since the highest-ranked journal for the publication of Scottish geological research is the Scottish Journal of Geology (SJG), then that journal's rejected papers do contain some derived from thesis research.
Discussion with the publisher (Grant, D., pers. comm.) revealed that, of almost 1000 papers submitted since 1964, 72% had been published.
This is, by any standard, a very high rate of acceptance.
On the other hand, for a non-specialist journal such as Nature, the average figure is closer to 10% acceptance (Maddox, J., pers. comm.), with the proviso that some subject areas, such as the earth sciences, have higher acceptance rates than others.
The American journal Science, which in many ways occupies a similar position to Nature, has an acceptance rate of 18% (Abelson).
The prime reason for non-acceptance is given as the cost of publishing, which in 1990 was approximately $1000 per page.
MacRae states that high institutionalization of the ranking criteria in a given discipline may be inferred from low rejection rates.
Thus, in the case of Scottish geology, we are probably considering a very rigid and tightly circumscribed subject area, within which research programmes lead to publication in a very limited number of journals.
Rejected manuscripts are often re-submitted to different journals, and Abelson, who was editor of Science for 23 years, found that 85% of such papers, rejected by Science, appeared elsewhere within two years.
It is suspected that such a high figure would only apply to non-specialist journals such as Nature and Science, which rapidly report results at the forefront of science, and that the rejected papers were later accepted by specialist journals publishing less urgent research.
The average rejection rate per journal could be used as a weighting factor in assessing the impact of a particular thesis, or indeed paper, but it would be difficult to be totally certain that the comparison criteria had objective validity.
Because of the differences in objectives, content, specialisation, publication frequency, readership and circulation sizes, among other factors, it would not be valid to compare measures of acceptance rates between Nature and the Scottish Journal of Geology to infer the relative impacts of papers published in these two journals.
To return to the theses, even in the case of the 68 thesis-derived first papers appearing in SJG, this is still under 10% of the total content of the journal over the time period.
It is felt that this is too small a sample to give a meaningful impact weighting factor derived in this manner, since, if the rejection figure for thesis-derived papers is the same as for all papers, this would only amount to two or three papers (27% of 10%).
Impact factors for citation measures will be discussed in Chapter 5.
3.7.3 Non-related publications
Six thousand, four hundred and ninety papers had been published by the thesis authors up to the end of 1987.
Of these, 621 were related to their theses (nearly 10%).
One hundred and twenty-two researchers have published papers which are not related to their Ph D theses.
This is ‘% of the total number of researchers.
It would be reasonable to assume that such researchers had adopted new research interests, had changed occupations, or had moved to different localities.
In all of these cases, the failure to publish the results of their research would be due to changes of circumstance which are quite understandable.
It could be argued, however, that if a Ph D really is expected to be in part a contribution to knowledge, then this factor should be built into the system, so that the information gathered in such a costly fashion should be published in some form before completion, as is expected in some other European countries, such as Germany and the Netherlands.
Sir Peter Swinnerton-Dyer, Chairman of the UGC, said in 1983 that:
‘…there are many Ph Ds whose working career has borne little relation to the subject of their thesis, however potent the contribution of research training has been to their intellectual and practical development.’
3.7.4 Non-publication
One hundred and two researchers (18.5%) published no papers at all(or at least none were recorded in the bibliographies searched) in the period between 1960 and 1987.
The following table shows the proportions of non-publishing researchers at the universities which have a major interest in Scottish geology.
In the cases of Newcastle, Strathclyde, Aberdeen and Dundee geology departments, more than one-third of the students who have undertaken Ph D research in Scottish geology have not published any papers, related or otherwise, in the time period under review.
This output measure suggests that there are factors operating in these departments which are very different from those operating in Durham, Oxford, Birmingham, Wales, and Cambridge, all of which have produced less than 10% of Unproductive researchers.
Differences in research funding, project selection, resources and their allocation and management, intake standards, supervision, training and assessment standards, and emphasis on publication, are factors which may be affecting productivity.
3.7.5 Non-submission.
Anderson states that 42% of students supported by the Science and Engineering Research Council (SERC) on three-year studentships fail to submit a thesis within four years.
This has led the funding bodies (SERC, NERC, Agricultural and Medical Research Councils) to introduce a sanctions policy, whereby departments will be penalized, by the withholding of research grants, where more than a given proportion of their students fail to submit theses.
Following criticisms by Hicks and Skea among others, that the system discriminated unfairly against small departments, in particular those with less than five students undertaking Ph D research, NERC has recently announced (Anon 1990b) its intention to introduce a weighting factor which takes departmental size into account.
Each department will be assigned a factor describing the risk of being unfairly sanctioned, which varies according to the numbers of studentships, which it will then combine with a measure assessing the department's performance against a target rate of 70% submissions within four years (for full-time students).
This new methodology appears fair and reasonable, and easy to calculate.
Since the proposal was published in November 1990, there has not been sufficient time to assess the reactions of the earth science departments funded by NERC to it.
It has not been possible to determine the non-submission rate for Scottish geology, but discussions with senior staff suggest that the rate is not as high as in other disciplines.
Further work should provide quantitative statistics.
3.7.6 Productivity — Summary
Almost one-fifth of the sample have failed to publish any papers on any subject after completion of their Ph D, and another fifth have not published anything related to their research areas.
These figures are for those researchers actually finishing their work and submitting a successful thesis, and they do not include those who failed to complete their research, or who failed to reach the required standard for the granting of the Ph D degree.
At some stage a funding body has assessed the potential worth of a project, and research grants have been made available for it, but the lack of incentive to publish, or the difficulties encountered in preparing work for publication, have resulted in the fact that two-fifths of the work has not been made use of by the scientific community, except possibly through consultations of the original theses,(which will be discussed in Chapter 4).
The 41% of theses which do not lead to publication compares with Hand's 38% for entomology.
Hayes draws attention to the importance of the American Ph D programme in creating an environment that encourages publication.
If the rates for non-publication in entomology and in the present study are so similar, then extrapolation to other scientific disciplines within the UK university system suggests that far too little importance is attached to the dissemination of research results in this country by the bodies funding such research.
3.8 Delays.
Sixty-three per cent of papers derived from theses in chemistry were published in the year following the deposit of the theses, according to Bottle.
He further states that in agricultural science, the mean publication delay was 12 months.
Delay figures extracted from the present databases showed that in 82 cases,(25%), related papers were published before the date of completion of the thesis.
The modal value is one year after completion (48 theses — 11%), which is also very close to the mean value of 1.3 years.
This proportion is lower than that in chemistry, and reflects a slightly larger spread of values about the mode in geology.
The histogram (Figure 14) follows a Normal Distribution, with a Standard Deviation () of 2.9.
Eighty-two per cent of the papers are published within one standard deviation on either side of the mean.
For comparison, Hand used a nine-year period, with four years on either side of the thesis year.
The current study shows that Hand is likely to have retrieved the vast majority of derived papers, and it is suggested that studies in other subject fields would be statistically safe in limiting themselves to similar time periods.
Hay & Maddock, in their study of theses on human geography, found that the modal value was 0, i.e. the largest number of thesis-derived papers were published in the actual year of thesis deposit.
Those theses with related papers being published several years before submission were presented for the degree of D Sc, which, as previously described, is granted on the basis of a scientist's record of published work in a subject field.
The following table shows differences in average delay between universities.
There appears to be no correlation between productivity and publication delays across universities, indeed some of the low-productivity departments have smaller average delays than some highly productive centres.
It is more likely that delays are specific to the journals to which papers are submitted, and that if there are differences in publishing ‘behaviour’ between departments (See 3.6 above), then these are probably the major factors influencing delays.
Society and other academic journals tend to have longer periods between acceptance of their papers and publication than commercial journals.
Commercial journals, particularly the weeklies and monthlies, can take rapid decisions, and have a faster turn-round time.
Science, for example, has an average publication delay period of 14 weeks (Abelson).
The one anomalous department in Table 16 is Sheffield, where the mean value is negative, i.e. more researchers publish before completion of their theses.
The reasons could perhaps only be determined by interview, as supervisor pressure may well be the factor operating here.
Increasing publication delays encourage the proliferation of journal titles because of the frustration of scientists, due in some part to their increasing need to demonstrate productivity through publication in order to attract funding.
If there is sufficient agreement amongst members of specialist interest groups (’ invisible colleges’) that delays in publication within their fields are at unacceptable levels, then commercial publishers are generally willing to establish new journals which will reduce overall delays by increasing the total numbers of papers published.
If journals become too large, they may split, in a process called twigging, to produce new specialist journals.
Garfield has described twigging as the inexorable result of realignments in the organization of disciplines.
Geology as a whole has experienced literature growth in line with the other sciences.
The development of new sub-fields by division due to increased specialisation, and by the merging of fields to produce multi-disciplinary studies, has resulted in the publication of new journals which reflect the changes in the ways in which the science has developed.
The Journal of the Geological Society published less than 300 pages annually until 1956, but by 1985 the same journal was publishing 1200 pages per year (Lebas).
(The page size was constant during this period, but changed, along with the frequency of issue, after that year).
The literature of Scottish geology, however, whilst it has grown in terms of numbers of papers, has not resulted in any increase in the numbers of journals devoted to it (except for the Scottish Journal of Geology), but has grown by taking up more space in existing journals, and by expanding into areas covered by new, multidisciplinary journals, such as Precambrian Research, Chemical Geology, Tectonophysics, and similar publications.
The pressures to publish in science have led to the publication of series of fragmentary reports on research (Abelson) and to the production of new journals to contain such reports, which have been termed the ‘least publishable units’.
Averaging delay statistics over the same four equal time periods used in Chapter 2, Table 3, provides clear evidence for a reduction in publication delays in recent years.
Attention has already been drawn to one of the objectives in establishing the Scottish Journal of Geology in 1965, which was the rapid publication of results of research in Scottish geology carried out in universities, so that this may account in part for the halving of the average delay period after 1965, but subsequent reductions must be due to other factors.
Pressure to publish is accepted as a normal feature of research work, but publication of Ph D results before or very soon after completion of the thesis has increased considerably in the period after 1977.
Changes in research management and research funding are the likeliest causes of the changes in publication patterns.
Chapter 4.
Consultation measures.
4.1 Thesis deposit.
University regulations on the deposit of copies of theses vary considerably, even within single countries such as Britain.
Most insist on between one and four bound copies being provided by the candidate being examined.
Some require one bound copy for deposit in the university library, plus an additional copy which may be unbound, for the purpose of examination.
Others require two bound copies, one each for the main university library and the departmental library.
At Strathclyde, two bound copies are required, both of which are for deposit in the main library.
There is normally no restriction on the maximum number of copies a candidate may produce, but he or she will normally make at least one personal copy, in additional to those supplied to the university in fulfilment of degree requirements.
Authors may present additional copies of theses to external co-sponsoring bodies, or to bodies which have rendered substantial assistance with some aspect of the research.
No consultation records will exist for any such additional copies.
British Standard BS 4821 recommends that two copies of each thesis should be deposited in the library of the accepting institution, of which one will be for archival purposes, and the other for inter-lending, subject to appropriate safeguards.
4.2 Access to theses.
Generally, university libraries are seen as the primary repositories for such material, and in many cases, the regulations on access are drawn up by the library authorities, and ratified by the university governing body.
The manner in which libraries deal with the theses in their custody thus has a bearing on the uses to which the research contained in these works is put.
If access is uncontrolled and unsupervised, the likelihood of plagiarism is increased, particularly if an author has not published the results of his or her work.
In a recent case, Oxford University stripped a graduate of his doctorate, because a tribunal found that a large part of his thesis was similar to one borrowed from the library of another university.
Over 50 per cent of the thesis was the same, or nearly the same, as the original (Anon 1990a).
Whilst it is not suggested that such behaviour is common, the temptation to copy, or at least to fail to acknowledge the other thesis as a source, is made stronger by the knowledge that such unscrupulous acts are very difficult to detect, because the original works, if unpublished, may only be known to the researchers and to their supervisors.
The deposit of a thesis in a library gives no guarantee of copyright protection.
Conversely, if restrictions on access and use are too draconian, this may discourage potential beneficiaries of the research from attempting consultations through the library system.
Discussions with individual scientists have revealed that in such cases, informal contacts between supervisors or departments have resulted in the creation of a network of unofficial and informal loan arrangements, totally outwith the control of the libraries concerned.
Sensible policies on access, together with good systems of bibliographic control, to publicise the existence and contents of theses, are in the interests of the university libraries, the departments, and the individual researchers.
The situation in Romania, as described by Baleanu and Bugnariu, is that copies of all Romanian theses are deposited with the (single) Central University Library, which then publishes an abstracting bulletin giving summaries of the contents.
The system was designed to prevent plagiarism, and to establish copyright over the thesis contents.
Within the much more diverse and non-centralised British university system, such central control would be unacceptable, but the less rigid system which has evolved here, whilst allowing individual universities considerable flexibility in access and loan facilities, at least ensures a reasonable measure of bibliographic control.
The rigidity of the system operating in the United States, imposed by private enterprise (Taylor) through the publication of Dissertation Abstracts International, which practically eliminated the formerly widespread practice of using theses as an exchange medium between universities, is unlikely to occur here, because of the smaller potential market.
(This exchange system enabled some universities to establish very large collections of theses, but it was very costly, since it depended on the production of multiple copies of theses, and the practise was only operating in a small number of American universities by the start of Worl War II.
After the war, concern over the decline in thesis use led Tate in 1953 to propose that abstracts of theses, and other means of locating published dissertations, should be made available from a central bibliographic source.
This led to the publication of Dissertation Abstracts).
The complexity of the French doctorate degree system has previously been mentioned (Tuiller), and their system for the deposit and use of theses is similarly complex.
Vitoux has described the establishment of microfilm thesis depository libraries at Lille, Grenoble, and Clermont-Ferrand, according to the subject fields covered.
These libraries offer a copy service similar to that offered in the UK by the British Library (BLDSC).
Scientific theses are recorded in the Bulletin 401 series of the Centre national de la recherche scientifique.
Hay & Maddock note that in the United Kingdom there is no statutory obligation to notify theses to any central body, and Urquhart said in 1971 that it was often more difficult to obtain sight of a British doctoral thesis than it would be to obtain copies of theses emanating from European and North American Universities.
Whilst the situation has improved greatly in the UK, in large measure due to the efforts of the British Library, Aslib, and the Standing Conference of National and University Libraries (SCONUL), there are, regrettably, still some British universities which cling to restrictive practices with regard to the consultation and loan of theses.
It is a matter of concern to many librarians and researchers that some of these universities, such as Cambridge, hold numbers of high quality theses, containing unpublished work, to which researchers can only gain access by personally visiting the individual university libraries.
The current protocols on access to and inter-lending of theses in Britain were developed by SCONUL, and they are printed in each issue of Aslib's Index to Theses.
All British universities allow access to theses for consultation purposes, although some universities may place embargoes on access for a five-year period, either to allow the author to publish, or for reasons of commercial sensitivity.
Some allow photocopying, and inter-lending to other libraries.
The majority of British universities now send copies of their theses to the British Library (BLDSC) for microfilming.
Inter-library loan requests are made direct to BLDSC for the loan of film copies of such theses.
A recent BLDSC proposal, reported by Ince, may result in BLDSC selling copies of theses to requesters, possibly with a royalty being paid to each source university.
Direct access to university libraries is still required for those theses deposited before the individual university began participating in the BLDSC microfilming scheme, and for the very small number of UK universities which do not take part in that scheme.
4.3 Bibliographic control
Copies of all theses sent to BLDSC for microfilming are indexed and listed each month in British Reports Translations and Theses (BRTT).
Online access to the complete file is available through the SIGLE database on BLAISE.
In addition, Aslib's quarterly publication Index to Theses now provides abstracts of all theses notified to it by the universities.
In the present study, both sources were used to identify theses, and it was found that, whilst there were areas of non-overlap between them in particular years, over the whole period there were no gaps in coverage of either.
For example, a 1979 thesis listed in BRTT but not in the 1979 edition of the Aslib Index, would be listed in the 1980 edition.
Similarly, a thesis listed in the Aslib Index but not in BRTT that year, would appear in the following year's volume.
It is possible that the editors of both publications cross-check to ensure this result.
All theses contain abstracts which summarise their contents, but in the past, Aslib's Index to Theses was just an index — by author and subject — to the theses notified to it.
Copies of the thesis abstract, which is an integral part of each thesis, were sent to Aslib by the universities, and such abstracts were made available on demand.
The change to regular publication of these abstracts in Index to Theses from 1988 onwards is a significant improvement in bibliographical control of UK theses and it may have an effect on the way in which theses are used.
Researchers may, for example, find sufficient information in the abstract to determine whether or not they require to see the original thesis, assuming that they regularly scan issues, or have the contents made known to them by their library or information service.
This may result in the reduced borrowing of irrelevant theses on the one hand, but on the other hand, information on the existence of relevant theses could result in their increased use in the communication process.
This is particularly important in subject fields which have poor bibliographic control of thesis literature.
British geology has good control, through the publication of the Laming list and its earlier editions, whilst Scottish geology has the Rolfe and Will lists.
The situation in other fields is very different.
In taxonomic botany, for instance, research is carried out in many institutions world-wide, rather than within national frontiers.
Communication of research in progress is largely a matter of informal international personal contacts, rather than through publication of lists of completed theses.
This may account for the fact that thesis citations in systematic botany accounted for only 5% of the total citations in a recent study (Delendick).
The ‘invisible college’ system operates to the satisfaction of participants, and there does not seem to be any pressure for increased formalisation, particularly along national lines.
Whilst the system may suit individual researchers, it can give librarians problems in tracing and borrowing theses produced in other countries.
A recent example from the Royal Botanic Garden Edinburgh Library may serve to illustrate the potential difficulties.
A member of staff requested a thesis written by a Spanish researcher, who was funded by a Spanish university, but who had undertaken her research on plant specimens in the Herbarium of an institution in Germany, and elsewhere.
The German Herbarium did not have a copy of the thesis, but they did advise that the botanist had moved to the United States after completion of her doctorate degree.
The Spanish university was unwilling to lend their copy of the thesis directly.
Correspondence in three languages resulted in a decision to borrow the thesis directly from the author, by-passing the normal international inter-library loan channels.
This may be an extreme example, but subject fields which lack good bibliographical control of thesis literature, or whose research is conducted transnationally, are likely to exhibit similar problems.
Bottle states that
‘It is because the bibliography of theses is organized by country of origin rather than by subject that they are not more widely used.’
Many scientists study physical forces, particles, molecules, organisms or other entities for which geographical or geopolitical boundaries are irrelevant.
Studies of these entities can be conducted by Ph D students in any country, and the theses describing the results of such research will be written in the language of the researcher, and deposited within the particular system of bibliographic control which has evolved in that country.
In the case of such research, the difficulties of obtaining bibliographic information and arranging access may combine with language problems and the costs of obtaining translations to reduce the use of theses originating outwith the requester's country.
The current study, restricted to the geology of a single country, has identified four relevant theses from American universities during the period, but no attempt has been made to search for theses on Scottish geology produced in France, Germany, or any other country, because it is felt that:
a)
it would be necessary to check the national thesis bibliographies of all other countries, and
b)
the numbers of such other theses are likely to be very small in relation to the number produced in UK universities.
4.4 Consultation Records.
Most universities have regulations as to who may or may not consult or borrow theses, for how long, and how such material must be treated in the borrowing library.
Common to nearly all such regulations is the requirement that the consulter or borrower must sign a statement recognising the rights of the university and/or the author, in matters of copyright of the content of the thesis.
There exists, then, a widespread method of recording such consultations, but hitherto such information has never been made use of, except as an evidential, archival document attached to the thesis.
It was decided to check the loan records of as many as possible of the theses, to see if any of the data on thesis usage could be of value in assessing the quality of the research, as a measure independent of publication and citation figures.
4.5.
Methodology.
For those universities producing the largest numbers of theses, it was considered that personal visits to their libraries for examination of the consultation records was desirable, so as also to study storage conditions, ease of access, and to discuss regulations on access, loan, and copying with the relevant library staff.
In other cases, because of the distances involved, letters were written to the libraries requesting photocopies of the loan records for listed theses.
In most cases, such libraries responded fully and rapidly.
Regrettably, some could not do so, the commonest reason being that ‘Such records are not retained’; or ‘Our records are in a bit of a mess at the moment’.
Only one university librarian refused to co-operate on grounds of principle.
This is regrettable, because this university (St Andrews) is a major contributor to Scottish geological research, and it would have been desirable to utilise measures of consultation in conjunction with the public domain data on publication productivity and citations, to determine overall levels of use of its theses.
Dundee, a university whose publishing and citation counts were low, felt that their consultation records were not in a proper state for the derivation of meaningful statistics.
Happily, such conditions did not apply to the other universities checked.
Signatures were mostly readable, but where this was not possible, it was noted as ‘Indecipherable’.
Similarly, the consulter's institution was usually requested on the forms, and has been recorded wherever possible.
The database constructed from these records has fields for consulter, thesis number, consulter's institution, year of first consultation, and frequency of consultation, for those consulting the same thesis more than once.
4.5.1 Edinburgh University.
Theses in Edinburgh University Library are the responsibility of the Special Collections Librarian, who maintains the set within the Main Library.
Access to the Stack is not permitted, but theses can be requested at the service desk for delivery to the Reading Room or study carrel.
Of the 94 Edinburgh theses in the present study 15 were not found in the Main Library, however.
Departmental libraries have had some degree of autonomy in the past, and copies of theses could be found in the departmental libraries in Geology (for geology, geochemistry, palaeontology, mineralogy, and geophysics) and Geography (physical geography, geomorphology, soils, etc.).
These other departments are situated on two sites which are each a mile or so from the Main Library, and about two miles from each other.
In some cases, copies were held in both locations, i.e. the Main and departmental libraries, but this was not always the case.
In general, the Departmental collections were more complete, but less well supervised.
Within the Main Library, all consultations had to be recorded by signature of the declaration form at the front of each thesis, but this was not rigorously enforced in the departmental libraries, largely due to staff shortages which precluded adequate supervision.
In addition, declaration forms were missing in some cases in the departmental libraries, or older forms had been torn off and replaced by new forms when full rather than being retained, thus losing the evidential value of the forms.
Departmental copies had frequently been lent to outside researchers directly, rather than through the main library, which in fact operates a ‘no external loans’ policy in respect of theses.
These libraries had been used as a means to circumvent a restrictive loan policy applied in the main library, which clearly lacked support from the scientific or library staff within the departments.
Of the 94 theses checked, 19 had no consultation records attached.
Eleven theses, for which declaration forms were present and in order, recorded no consultations.
This represents fifteen per cent of those who had consultation records.
4.5.2 Glasgow University.
The set of theses consulted here was in the main university library.
This is the set used for inter-library loans, as well as for internal consultation.
Written application had been made in advance, and, except for four theses on loan, all had been collected together for this study either within the thesis area or in the thesis collection area of the Stack, to which access was permitted on this occasion.
Staff were unfailingly helpful, friendly and professional, and took a professional interest in the research.
Seven theses recorded no consultations, which represents 14% of those with checkable records.
4.5.3 Strathclyde University.
Written application for consultation had been made in advance, but despite this, only five of the thirteen Strathclyde theses were ready for inspection on the appointed day.
Staff appeared not to care about the unavailable theses, and it took considerable effort to persuade them to check the whereabouts of the missing ones.
Two were unaccounted for eventually, and it was presumed that they were on loan.
Subsequent use of the theses was unsupervised, and it appeared that enforcement of the regulations was not a high priority.
Nine of the theses recorded no consultations (82%), only two in fact registering usage.
This is a much lower level of use than either Edinburgh or Glasgow, but in view of the standard of service observed on this occasion, it is impossible to say whether this usage figure represents lower demand, or merely laxity in control.
It will be recalled from discussion of Table 1, Expenditure on libraries and computing, that Strathclyde had the second lowest expenditure per student on libraries in 1986-87.
If the standard of service observed on this occasion is general, it may be that this reflects the low priority given to library expenditure in this university.
4.5.4.
Aberdeen University
Written application was made for photocopies of declarations.
Of the 33 theses studied, five forms reported no usage (15%).
This figure is similar to that already found for Edinburgh and Glasgow.
4.5.5 Imperial College.
During the course of a visit to London in 1986, funded partially by the Clough Fund of Edinburgh Geological Society, the departmental collection in the Imperial College Library was studied.
This set of theses is intended for departmental use only, but evidence of use for inter-institutional loans was found on some of the declaration forms, as in the case of the Edinburgh University departmental collection.
The main set of London University theses for inter-library loan use is housed in the Senate House Library, but access was not possible at the time of the visit.
Declarations were missing from 15 of the 40 theses, and ten recorded no consultations (40%).
4.5.6 Other universities
Leeds University library only held records for the period from 1982 to 1986.
Earlier records ‘are stored away somewhere’ but the library staff did not have time to search for them.
Individually signed forms were required for all inter-library loans.
No forms for internal consultations were supplied.
Two of the theses had no loan or consultation records, and three theses recorded no consultations (43%).
Liverpool supplied records for 31 theses, three others being unavailable for unspecified reasons.
Seven were found to have no copyright declaration, only internal loan stamps, which at least demonstrated usage.
Six others recorded no usage (19%).
Newcastle supplied copies of ten forms.
Eight others recorded no usage (44%).
Reading supplied declarations for all eight of its relevant theses.
All recorded usage.
Most had ‘No Photocopying’ notices attached, and one was unavailable for inter-library loan.
Sheffield recorded five theses which were not consulted (28%), Birmingham one (6%), and Durham 6 (29%).
4.5.7 British Library Document Supply Centre (BLDSC)
During a three-day visit to BLDSC at Boston Spa, the Thesis Declaration forms were manually scanned for records of loans of the theses.
These records are kept for a two-year period only, within which time some 40,000 issues are made.
Forms are stored in separate boxes according to their accession (’ D’) numbers; thus all of the D 21,000 series were in one box, and the D ‘, 000s were in the next one, and so on.
Within boxes, the forms were not kept in order, and so for this reason the search was carried out by inspecting the thesis titles, as well as by searching for individual ‘D’ numbers (which were recorded in the Rolfe and Will lists).
In this way four new ‘D’ numbers for theses previously lacking them were recovered.
At the time of this visit (1986), BLDSC were seeking the support of the Universities, via the Committee of Vice-Chancellors and Principals (CVCP), for a proposal to dispense with their Copyright Declaration Form.
Many universities believe that the declaration of copyright contained within the actual thesis is sufficient protection of copyright, and that the completion of the BLDSC declaration form for thesis loans should be phased out.
There was general, but not unanimous agreement with this proposal, with the result that most of the theses now appearing in BRTT now have a ‘DX’ prefix.
No declaration is necessary for loans of such theses.
Whilst librarians have been saved some paperwork, statistics of use for individual theses will now be impossible to obtain from BLDSC, and the present type of research methodology will no longer be practicable.
According to BLDSC staff, however, the present study is the only one to have attempted to make use of the forms in this way to determine loan frequencies for individual theses.
Internally, the BLDSC counts the forms annually for statistical analyses, but makes no more detailed use of them.
A general impression was that the number of loans of theses on the physical sciences and technology was less than those on the Arts, Social Sciences, Theology, and other non-science subjects.
A tentative hypothesis is that this relates to real differences in the means by which knowledge is disseminated in the scientific and non-scientific disciplines — the large numbers of scientific journals as compared to those in the arts, and the pressures on the scientific community to publish at all costs.
This hypothesis could not be tested in the course of the present study, unfortunately, but it remains an interesting question which merits attention in the future.
The present search was concerned with those theses with identifiable ‘D’ numbers — 142 in total — of which 139 were from the Will listing.
This represents 26% of the total data set.
Ninety-four of these theses had not been borrowed from BLDSC in the two-year period (66%).
In other words, one third of BLDSC's theses on Scottish geology were borrowed within a two-year period.
It would have been extremely interesting to repeat this exercise for a different two-year period, to see if any trends were apparent, but for the reasons already reported, such research can no longer be carried out.
It is possible, for example, that a large proportion of loans are for the most recently deposited theses; alternatively, it could be that some theses are more often requested than others, and that loan records for such theses would be found within different time periods.
Thirteen of the theses had been borrowed more than once, and one particular thesis had been borrowed six times.
In 1979, BLDSC were acquiring 10,000 new theses each year (including non-British theses), and received approximately 50 requests per week for theses (Urquhart, C.).
There is a very small overlap, in that some consultations were recorded both in the individual universities and by inter-library loan through BLDSC.
These were mostly internal consultations of the original documents within the faculty.
4.5.8 British Geological Survey (BGS) Library
Declaration forms on theses borrowed by BGS’ Edinburgh Library during the course of the study were checked.
In some cases, these loans were of theses which had already been checked, but there were some new records, and some for which access had not otherwise been possible.
In some cases, the BGS libraries had obtained copies of theses from the authors by purchase or gift, and no loan records were available for such copies.
4.6 Analysis of consultation records
For 307 of the theses (56%), consultation records have been collected.
This is here designated as data set C (for Consultation).
This is a reasonable sample, and since it contains large and small departments, Scottish and English universities, and departments active in several sub-fields, it is considered representative.
Cautious extrapolation to the whole data set has therefore been undertaken, where possible, subject to caveats in particular instances.
A total of 1186 consultations are recorded, of which 970 consulters (659 individuals) had decipherable signatures.
These names were added to the CONSULT database.
The average consultation rate per thesis is 3.86.
Of the 307 theses in data set C, 230 (75%) have been consulted at least once.
Seventy-seven of the theses had never been consulted, or if they had, no consultations had been recorded (25%).
Failure to record consultations is probably fairly widespread, and so this proportion is likely to be characteristic of the total.
In other words, one quarter of the theses are probably never consulted after completion.
As has been reported above, individual non-consultation rates vary considerably between universities, the range being from zero to ninety-three per cent.
It is felt that inter-university comparisons cannot be made from the data obtained here, because of the different conditions of use in different libraries, and so the data will only be used here in aggregation.
Twenty-four theses from data set C recorded no consultations, but had been cited at least once.
Nine of these citations were self-citations, so that fifteen theses were cited, but had no record of consultations.
Clearly, consultations were of copies other than those checked.
Six theses in this category were from Imperial College, and it would be reasonable to suggest that the copies consulted, and subsequently cited by authors other than the thesis authors, were from London University's main library, where the set of theses for inter-library loan is kept.
Four were from Edinburgh, and possibly resulted from consultation of copies borrowed outwith the normal inter-library loan system.
4.6.1 Increase in consultation rate.
The first consultation date recorded is 1964.
Initially, few consultations were recorded, but the numbers doubled in 1972, and increased steadily from that date.
Rolfe's first thesis listing was published at the end of 1970, and it would not be unreasonable to suggest that the numbers of consultations increased due to the availability of this new bibliographical source.
Between 1964 and 1970, the average number of recorded consultations is about 2 per annum.
Since 1971, the average number has increased to approximately 58 per annum.
The rate is currently over 70 per annum.
A graph of this data (Figure 15) shows this marked increase.
Individual peaks reflect increased consultations in the year following the publication of each of the Rolfe and Will thesis lists.
This is clear evidence of increased use of the thesis literature as a result of good bibliographical control.
The Scottish Journal of Geology, by publishing lists of completed research theses, has contributed significantly to communication in geology, as a secondary source, as well as a primary source of research papers.
4.6.2 Readership
As stated earlier, comparative studies of consultations of theses accepted by different universities have not been carried out, due to the large variations in consultation protocols between libraries, and the incomplete nature of the records.
Comparisons of thesis reading behaviour of staff and students affiliated to different universities are valid, however, since these are spread over all of the theses in data set C. The affiliation records of most of the 970 consultations were extracted from the declaration forms and put into the CONSULT database.
Only 55 of the records,(6%), lacked such data.
The largest single body of readers was from BGS.
British Geological Survey staff consulted 106 theses (11% of all readers).
This may be accounted for by recalling that the Survey's function is to prepare and maintain the geological map of the United Kingdom (including offshore areas).
The original base mapping was carried out for most of Scotland between 1865 and the start of the First World War.
Re-mapping of economically important areas was carried out during and after the War, and much of the subsequent work has had an economic focus, restricted in the main to the highly populated Midland Valley of Scotland, which, perhaps not surprisingly, contains the country's major economic mineral deposits — coal, oil-shale, fireclay, and bulk minerals, such as roadstone, building stone, limestone for cement and agriculture.
In other words, there has been no systematic re-mapping of the economically less important Highland and Southern Upland areas, since the turn of the century.
Since then, techniques such as seismic surveys, mechanised geochemical analysis, and isotopic research, have become available, and the theoretical framework of research in these geologically interesting areas has provided the potential for a great deal of re-interpretation, some of it of a fundamental nature, contributing to theoretical developments in geology.
The Survey itself lacks the funding to underpin complete systematic re-mapping, but it can and does make use of information gained in the course of university research, in the pursuit of its refinement and maintenance of the map, and in pursuing research of strategic or economic significance.
One profitable approach, arising out of the close contacts which the Survey maintains with universities, is in its readiness to host conferences and seminars relating to particular major research fronts, during the course of which young researchers, who have not yet completed Ph Ds, can meet and discuss problems with senior geologists from the Survey, and from other universities.
Thus completed theses on Scottish geology are borrowed by BGS through BLDSC as soon as their existence is made known through published sources and informal contacts.
Other research council consultations were identified, but at lower levels.
These included British Antarctic Survey (NERC), Institute of Terrestrial Ecology (NERC), and the Nature Conservancy Council.
Of those universities who also support Ph D research in Scottish geology, Edinburgh's students and staff have consulted 100 of the theses in data set C. For the major universities researching in the field, the numbers of thesis borrowers from particular universities are in proportion (ratio nearly 1:1) to the numbers of Ph D theses produced in these universities.
The numbers become disproportionate in those universities producing small numbers of Scottish Ph Ds.
Thus consultations by Reading's affiliates are in a ratio of 6:1 to the numbers of Scottish Ph Ds produced.
It is suggested that the bulk of such borrowings are by staff who have intrinsic interests in Scottish geology, rather than by students working in related areas.
Such staff are spread throughout UK departments, and hence their borrowings and consultations may be in proportion to their own numbers, rather than to the numbers of successful Scottish geology Ph D students they supervise.
The range of possible interpretations of these ratios is quite wide, however, and could provide material for further research.
Unambiguous categorization of the users into staff, students, and others would be a useful first step.
4.6.3 Thesis authors as thesis users.
A comparison of the names of authors in THESES and consulters in CONSULT databases shows the proportion of readers who are also researchers.
One hundred and twenty-two consulters (18.5%) used other theses before completion of their own work.
In other words, something like one-fifth of Ph D researchers read other theses whilst carrying out their own research.
This is in line with the statement in Meadows that ‘most thesis borrowings were made by current Ph D students’.
The reasons for this type of consultation behaviour are, in the absence of interviews, speculative.
Clearly, there is a desire to make sure that their research has not been carried out earlier by other researchers.
In the case of mapping theses, it is logical to assume that researchers would be interested in adjacent areas, or in areas within the same major structural or stratigraphic units.
Geochemists are likely to be interested in tectonic controls on their analyses, which would be found in stratigraphic theses on their areas.
Conversely, structural geologists are concerned with geophysical surveys.
The tendency for current research to make use of multi-disciplinary approaches is increasing, although theses themselves tend to concentrate on smaller units of research.
From conversations with research students, one common factor in their use of theses is the desire to see ‘how other people have written up their work’.
Supervisors have generally encouraged their students to read other theses, in preparation for their own efforts.
The UGC Earth Science Review found that many research students learn as much from each other as they do from the academic staff.
4.6.4 Frequency of consultation
Eight hundred and sixty-nine of the consulters (90%), consulted particular theses once only; seventy-seven consulters (8%) needed two consultations; two consulters borrowed a thesis six times.
Since most theses are lent for a period of one month, it could be that most borrowers are able to digest the contents of theses within this period, but, due to the widespread availability of photocopiers, it is suspected that the regulations on thesis copying are frequently broken.
Some researchers with whom discussions have been held admit to copying theses obtained on inter-library loan, and justify such behaviour by saying that ‘it'll be all right as long as I don't publish’.
4.6.5 Reasons for consultation
Theses are used, according to Parker & Turley:
1.
To supplement subject information found from other sources;
2.
To obtain a deep theoretical approach to a subject;
3.
To get more detail where the work was later published in a journal article.
The present study suggests that often the thesis is the only source, and that the theoretical, synthetic approach in geology most often derives from the mature researcher (often the supervisor).
The third point is valid, however, since theses in geology often contain large quantities of raw data, unpublishable in conventional form.
The same situation also applies in chemistry.
Hughes established that 36% of the single thesis which she studied was unpublished because it consisted of raw analytical data.
LeBas, commenting on the problem posed by the need to support arguments in papers by reference to large sets of analytical geochemical data, mentions the BLDSC ‘Supplementary Publication’ programme as an intermediate data collection somewhere between the conventional journal and the large, national, source (non-bibliographic) databases.
Sets of unpublished data associated with particular papers are held centrally by BLDSC, and are available for borrowing.
This reduces the size of the published paper, but it ensures that copies of evidential data are available to the relatively small number of readers who will require access to them.
Wood says that reviews of previous work, and negative results, never get published elsewhere.
Few (if any) earth science review theses are produced, with the possible exception of the small number of D Sc theses, and in the course of the present work, no theses reporting negative results were found, apart from those recording false starts in methodology, or theoretical preconceptions not supported by field evidence, and subsequently modified.
If consultation is the only means by which such information is disseminated, then the communication process in science is extremely inefficient, and that research may be repeated due to the absence of published negative results.
If the geological community, which, despite being very well supplied with bibliographical data on research theses, only makes direct use of one quarter of such works, then it is likely that in other subject areas which are less well supported bibliographically, levels of thesis use will be even lower.
This situation has been discussed by Taylor, who suggested that there may be a complex relationship between the general form of the thesis and its perception by users as a potential information source.
From discussions, it appears that many active researchers view other theses in the light of their own.
Perceptions of the quality of their own early work tend to decline as they attain seniority and experience, and they may well attach less significance to the value of other theses to their own work.
Faced with the difficulties of tracing theses, borrowing them, and then extracting the relevant data from them, it is perhaps surprising that the views expressed by one interviewee, that it would probably be cheaper to find a new student and to repeat the research, are not more widely held.
In some cases within the present study the very close correspondence in the titles of some pairs of theses originating in the same university at different times (e.g. see numbers 156 and 347), suggests that such repetition may have occurred.
Chapter 5
Citation Measures.
5.1 Reasons for citing.
Recognition through citation is one of the principal rewards in science (Merton 1973).
By publishing research, the scientist is in fact giving away his intellectual property, but if his paper influences others, they, in citing it, will ensure the future security of the original author's ownership of that intellectual property.
The greater the influence, the more the security.
In addition to security, the author being cited receives public and peer group recognition, and the communion between citer and cited represents the sharing aspect of scientific research.
It is therefore not surprising that authors attach great importance to their citation by others.
A citation may be made ‘in praise, in scorn, or as a basis for further work’, according to Schaefer, in a summary of the citation process as it affects biological science.
Weinstock has listed fourteen of the possible motives authors have for citing the work of others.
They are:
1.
To give credit to related work.
2.
To pay homage to pioneers.
3.
To identify methodology, techniques and equipment
4.
To list background reading material.
5.
To supply corrections to earlier work.
6.
To criticise earlier work.
7.
To substantiate claims of priority, etc.
8.
To alert readers to forthcoming work (…
In press)
9.
To provide leads to poorly documented work.
10.
To authenticate basic data (constants, etc.)
11.
To identify the original publication in which the idea or concept was first discussed.
12.
To identify original work on eponymous concepts.
(e.g. the term ‘natural selection’ had been used by others before Darwin supplied the concept which the term now implies).
13.
To disclaim the work or ideas of others.
14.
To dispute the priority claims of others.
To Weinstock's list could be added:
To impress readers with the extent of the researcher's background reading.
To imply connectedness (knowing the right people) by including as many pers. comm. references as possible.
To bulk up the reference list by including citations to work never read, and often cribbed from other researcher's Reference Lists.
(This factor accounts for the perpetuation of a large proportion of inaccurate and incorrect references, as any librarian working on inter-library loans will testify).
Several factors influence an author's decision to cite another.
If an author is unaware of another's work, or of its relevance, it will not be cited.
Sandison finds that the probability of citation will be halved by the transfer of library material to the Reserve Stock shelves, which may be at some distance from the main library shelving, or which may have to be fetched from remote stores.
Library access policies thus have some influence on citing behaviour.
Some themes may require support by a citation, as unsupported ideas may appear to have no connections to previous work, or to the theoretical framework of the subject.
Unsupported ideas thus tend to lend themselves to easy dismissal, or to non-citation (which is a form of editorial comment).
Author's interests differ, and so papers may be cited for very different reasons.
Every citation count is a ratio of citations per citable items, as each author, in preparing his list of references, may not include all of the relevant citations, and may also exercise editorial control over what is included, and what is left out.
Sandison draws attention to the citation of methodological papers, which are cited according to their utility, rather than their novelty or intellectual value (See Weinstock, above).
Erroneous and incompetent work attracts citations of contradiction.
Citer motivation was also studied by Brooks.
By interviewing 20 researchers, he found seven major motives (all of which are already in Weinstock's list above), but this research revealed that motives were seldom used singly.
In more than 70% of his interviews, researchers said that their citations had motives which were combinations of two or more of the factors Brooks had identified.
In particular, he found that many researchers admitted to giving cited works positive and negative credit simultaneously in the same reference, a finding which supports the contention advanced by MacRoberts & MacRoberts (1984) that authors dissemble to diffuse the impact of negative references.
More theoretical models of citation typology are described by Moravcsik & Murugesan, Chubin & Moitra, and by Murugesan & Moravcsik.
The dichotomous partitions of categories enumerated by the first authors are:
1.
Conceptual or Operational
2.
Organic or Perfunctory
3.
Evolutionary or Juxtapositional
4.
Confirmative or Negational.
They draw attention to the difference between redundant and perfunctory citations in their later paper.
The Chubin & Moitra model again uses dichotomous branching to derive six classes of citations: basic, subsidiary, additional, perfunctory,(all affirmative); partial and total (both negational).
The problem with these models is that they are inductive in nature: they derive from analysis of a set of data which may, or may not, be characteristic of the whole universe of discourse.
A single citation which cannot be satisfactorily classified using either taxonomic scheme would negate the validity of the whole edifice, necessitating the erection of new classes for exceptions, extensions, and other data which does not fit the theoretical parameters.
Such situations are commonly found in other taxonomic disciplines, such as zoology and botany.
It is not certain that a schema which is valid for the classification of physical entities will be capable of application to epistemological studies.
Analysis on these lines often has a basis in lexical studies (the Chubin & Moitra paper suggests subject analysis of reference contents from titles cited), and since metaphor plays such an important part in descriptions of the citation process (Cronin 1981), there is a danger that the models may be descriptive of a meta-reality which does not truly model the actual use of citations by authors and readers.
Citation practices differ significantly from field to field (Moed et al).
These authors also found differences with time, suggesting that the maximum number of citations to a paper will be in the 3rd year after its publication.
Fussler, in an attempt to analyse the importance of journals in physics and chemistry before the advent of the Science Citation Index, selected a single ‘key’ journal in each specialty, and listed references in three sample years spaced at twenty-year intervals.
He found that, on the evidence of time delays between publication and citation, there was a marked trend towards the use of more recent literature.
Ghoshi suggests that, in a journal publishing results at the forefront of science, such as Nature, the latency period between publication of a paper, and its citation by other authors, will depend on the liveliness of the subject, as will the frequency of citation.
Citation latency of theses is discussed below, in Section 5.3.1
Lawani 1977 has drawn attention to the significance of citations to science in the following terms:
‘…a high quality paper is not likely to be ignored,[but]we cannot recognize the beginning of any important advancement in science until [it]has been acknowledged.’
In an attempt to assess the possibility of using citation counts as a measure of research quality, Lindsey has summarised the significance of citation counts in scientometric studies:
‘if the work occurring in a given field is leading to a cumulative body of knowledge, then reference trails among the work of the contributors will be left in the form of citations.’
5.2 Limitations of citation analysis.
In Section 3.1, the weaknesses of simple citation measures have been described.
These have been drawn together by Cronin in the course of a paper looking for epistemological foundations and rigour in the application and value of citation measures.
This essay is an amplification of an earlier discussion published in 1981.
The frequent use of metaphor by authors describing the use of citation counts as a basis for value judgements is seen as reflecting the resistance of the citation process to standardisation.
The citation process has not been explained simply because it has been described.
A major critique of quantitative measures of communication is provided by Edge.
He restricts himself to historical studies, and derives an active research network, measured by such parameters as citation, co-citation, trusted assessorship, co-authorship, apprenticeship, and other informal communication methods.
He casts doubts on the validity of the use of quantitative measures to describe an actuality which is sometimes non-systematic, non-rational, and subjective.
Citation and co-citation approaches often introduce bias into measures, and central influences are often not cited, because they are taken for granted; they become an assumed part of the research paradigm, just as the all-pervading cosmic background black-body radiation is a palimpsest of the universe's original Big Bang.
Few workers in particle physics, for example, will now cite Einstein's original papers on special relativity, although the concepts first elucidated by Einstein are part of the theoretical framework within which particle physics is studied.
In a recent letter to the Journal of Documentation, Smith lists eleven drawbacks to the use of citation analysis as research indicators.
They are:
1.
Citation counts are carried out by unskilled operators.
2.
There are differences between ISI products, e.g. the 1980-84 cumulation contains 500,000 additional references not included in the annual volumes.
3.
The 1980-84 cumulation contains corrigenda which are not included in the annual volumes.
4.
Citation analysis perpetuates systematic errors, such as incorrect references.
5.
Many journals are not included in SCI.
6.
Sensitive and commercial contracted research is usually not published.
7.
Joint-authored papers are only cited under the first author.
[This would have led to difficulties in checking citations to related papers in the present study].
8.
Non-controversial works produce lower citation frequencies than disputed or erroneous papers.
[One of the most highly cited papers in ethology is Sir Solly Zuckerman's study of the behaviour of a baboon colony in London Zoo in 1932.
Almost all of the papers which cite it use it as an example of how primate behavioural research should not be carried out].
9 Methodological papers receive a spuriously high citation count.
10 Different forms of publication have different citation patterns.
Patents, for example, always have lower scores.
[This may also be true of theses].
11 The use of citation counts in performance assessment may influence citing behaviour.
Bad practices include multiple publication of papers in several forms by unscrupulous publishers; the serial publication of minimal pieces of information [the ‘least publishable unit']; self-citation, and mutual citation.
MacRoberts and MacRoberts 1986 list similar limitations to the use of citations, and suggest some others.
Basic assumptions and background knowledge are not referenced.
This is not a new suggestion, but there are considerable practical difficulties, let alone theoretical considerations, in not including such material.
There is unlikely to be a consensus definition of the boundaries between background knowledge and the specific issues addressed in individual papers.
Since much of our ‘intellectual debt’ to the originators of ideas is filtered by reading their ideas in the works of others, it is difficult to acknowledge the extent to which the originators have influenced our thinking.
The use of the ‘covering citation’ is described by the MacRoberts as parsimonious citing, because the mention of the cited paper is used as a substitute for an explanation of the ideas contained in that cited paper.
Cited works may be used without consultation, or may be used without their having had any real influence on the ideas contained in the paper.
Informal influences in a paper may be expressed only as ‘pers. comm.’ citations, although they may be more significant than many of the published works formally cited.
The presence of a reference is not a marker of influence, nor is the absence of a reference evidence that it is uninfluential.
The authors conclude their paper with a self-analysis:
‘After completing this paper [MacRoberts & MacRoberts 1986], we analyzed it.
Not more than 20% of the influence is captured by the references.
Also, the work that most influenced us is not mentioned because it is unknown to the intended audience, and thus would not be persuasively valuable or symbolically meaningful.
In fact, because it is not known, it might detract from the paper's persuasiveness.’
This is an important anecdotal insight into one aspect of citer motivation.
If the most significant work influencing an author is not cited by him, because of his perception of the possible effect of the citation on the judgmental faculties of the paper's readership, then this calls into question one of the most fundamental precepts of bibliometrics: that the existence of a citation is an acknowledgement of influence, and it also breaks the audit trail by which published knowledge can be referred back to its origination.
It is uncertain, however, that the motives ascribed to themselves by MacRoberts and MacRoberts are common to others.
Discrepancies in citations have already been discussed in relation to the bibliographic tracing of thesis authors’ published papers in Chapter 3.
Moed & Vriens found that more than 9% of the 4500 papers in their study had at least one discrepancy in their citations.
They suggest that where citation errors are perpetuated, it is likely that authors have taken their reference lists from the lists of others, without checking, or without consulting, the works cited.
Fundamental issues in epistemology have also raised questions concerning the limitations of citation analysis.
Paradigm shifts are not usually detected by citation studies, because of the anomalous publication of ‘delayed-action’ papers (Lindsey),(Garfield's ‘sleepers).
Thus Mendel's paper on the inherited characteristics of peas, published in an obscure journal in what is now part of Czechoslovakia, was uncited for many years, but the ideas contained within it are now an integral part of the genetics paradigm.
An earth science example is the publication of Wegener's theory of continental drift in 1912.
The paper was dismissed and then ignored until, in the early 1960s, the crucial geophysical evidence supporting Wegener's theory led to a rapid paradigm shift in the earth sciences.
Stewart presents a revealing citation analysis of the plate tectonic paradigm, in which he shows that the peak of citations to Wegener's paper occurred sixty years after its publication, and the peak of citations to du Toit's later defence of Wegener came thirty-two years after its publication, in the same year as the Wegener peak.
Comparison of the contents of the first two editions of Craig's ‘Geology of Scotland’, published in 1965 and 1983, reveals just how completely and all-pervasively this change took place over a very short period of time.
The third edition, to be published in 1991 contains much that is new or refined from the second, but it is written wholly within the plate tectonic theoretical framework, and reveals no paradigm change from the second edition.
Lindsey also finds that citation counts favour the scientist doing work in the mainstream or dominant paradigm.
His other criticisms are that citation counts are unable to distinguish quality among methodological contributions.
A mere listing is a judgement-free statement, whereas the paper may contain negative assessments of the cited paper.
He found an excessive weighting towards popularized science in the citations he studied, but it could be argued that his sample was too small, or was otherwise unrepresentative.
Most citations in scholarly journals are to scholarly papers, and citations to popular works are rare.
Within academic circles, to cite a popular work, other than to condemn it, is sometimes seen as an admission that the author is a ‘lightweight’ or a populist, and there is considerable peer pressure not to include such citations.
The development of knowledge, argues Lindsey, is characterized by the critical assessment and analysis of conflicting possibilities, to which aspect of science citation counts are insensitive.
He lists five fundamental limitations of citation analysis:
1.
Citation counts are sensitive to fads, foibles, and popular trends.
2.
Their distribution restricts their utility to separating extremes.
3.
They are not sensitive to the ethical and moral dimensions of quality.
4.
They assume objective political neutrality.
5.
They are part of an elitist model of science, in that they underestimate the contribution of applied scientists to the whole.
The reader may question, in the light of all of the above criticisms and suggested limitations, the objective validity of citation analysis.
It is in fact the case that, provided the analyst is aware of the theoretical and methodological imperfections and limitations of the techniques, and takes these into account, citation analysis has provided science with a very powerful tool for investigating its own internal communication processes.
It provides a metric, imperfect though it may be, for studies of the way in which scientists interact in the course of their work, and through that for research into the more fundamental issues underlying the growth and development of scientific thought.
5.3 Citations of the theses.
The Science Citation Index (SCI) lists citations of multi-authored publications only under the first-named author.
In searching for publications this will give a skewed result for those supervisors who always name themselves as the first author in multi-authored works.
Since the citation counts here refer only to the thesis itself, and not to derived publications, this particular difficulty has not been encountered, but a citation count on derived publications would have given inaccurate results, as shown in the earlier discussion on joint publication of papers related to research topics.
Two hundred and sixty-nine authors (49% of the total) received one or more citations of their theses in the Science Citation Index (SCI).
One hundred and four of the authors (39% of those cited) received a single citation.
(Price 1979 quotes a figure of nearly 73% of papers receiving only one citation.
Clearly, there is a large difference between citations to papers and to theses).
The most frequently cited thesis is number 206, which was cited 11 times.
It is noteworthy that this author has not as yet published any papers relating to his thesis, and so authors wishing to refer to his work have no choice but to cite the original thesis.
Four authors received 10 citations; one had published no related papers, but the others had written one, two, and three related papers respectively.
Considering the Hay & Maddock results for human geography, where the authors found that 40% of social scientists rarely refer to theses, and 29% do not use them at all, it will be apparent that geological theses form a significant element in the communication process, since almost half of them are cited.
Bottle reports that 41% of a sample of papers on chemistry contained citations to the thesis of one or more of the authors of the papers, or other references to that author's thesis, such as the paper being ‘in partial fulfilment of the requirements of the Ph D degree’.
He went on to compare the thesis title with the title of the paper, to determine whether a relationship might exist.
He concludes that theses occupy a distinctive but peripheral position in the information transfer chain.
This will be discussed further in Chapter 6.
To assess the relative numbers of thesis citations to publication citations, it may be possible to extrapolate from Haner's study of government information contained in seven core journals in American geology.
She found 774 citations to theses, out of 25,527 total citations (3%).
If her figures are also valid for the geological research theses of other countries, then it would appear that geological theses are less often cited than are those on chemistry, as reported by Bottle.
5.3.1 Latency period for thesis citations
The delay periods between the submission of the thesis and its first citation recorded in the Science Citation Index (defined here as the citation latency period) were plotted as a histogram (Figure 16), to show the distribution of delays, which cover almost all values between 0 and 24 years.
The modal value for the delay period is two years, compared to the modal value of one year between submission and publication.
If a self-citation (see 5.4) was, in the majority of cases, the first citation, it would be expected that these two values would be identical, because the first citation of the thesis would be in the author's first related published paper.
Since they are not identical, this unexpected result suggests that citations by others occur before the majority of self-citations.
It could be that a researcher's first paper takes longer to be accepted and published than do papers by established scientists who have had access to the research data of their more junior colleagues.
In her study of the chemical literature, Brown found that the peak of citations to published papers occurred two years after publication, and formed a Poisson distribution.
Margolis, in a similar study, found that there was an initial build-up of citations which occurred until the third year after publication.
The thesis latency distribution was measured to determine whether or not it fitted the conditions required for a Poisson distribution,(the coefficient of dispersion should approach unity), but it did not.
The mean was approximately 4, and the variance 11, giving a coefficient of dispersion of nearly 3.
Poisson distributions generally reflect the probability of rare events, but the distribution of thesis data more closely fitted a binomial distribution.
(All statistical formulae etc are from Sokal & Rohlf).
Binomial distributions deal with a fixed population, each of whose members may possess only one of two possible elements (the thesis is either cited in one year, or it is not), and the successive values of these elements are not dependent on the previous values (a citation in one year does not imply a lack of citation in a following year).
The average delay over the whole period is 4.8 years, but if the data are split into the two time periods represented in the Rolfe & Will lists, it is found that the average delay for the 1960-1976 period is 8.8 years, whereas the average for 1976-83 is 1.9 years.
It is difficult to account for this difference in latency periods, but one contributory factor may be the better bibliographical control of the subject field, as described earlier, which results in increased consultations soon after the theses are deposited.
Such consultations, together with the decrease in publication delays, will lead to a reduction of the latency period, because there is now a higher probability that the thesis, or papers derived from it, will be read and subsequently cited, but there may also be other factors involved.
If the sub-field is tightly circumscribed, and localised geographically, then the bulk of citations may occur within a limited set of co-citing core journals.
If there have been changes in the journal coverage of the Science Citation Index over the period, such that some members of this limited set were not scanned prior to 1970, say, then such earlier theses would show a lower frequency of citations in general, and the first citations of an author's thesis could be missed, thus artificially increasing the average latency period.
5.3.2 Citation currency period
The citation currency period for each cited thesis is here defined as the difference (in years) between the year of the last recorded citation, and that of the first.
It is a measure of the length of time during which citations to theses are found in the literature.
The major limitation of the measure is that it is theoretically open-ended — it is not possible to say that there will be no further citations to a particular thesis in the future.
In practice, however, provided that the period scanned is long enough, the majority of citations to each thesis will be recorded.
For those theses who have only one recorded citation, the citation period is zero, as it is for those theses whose citations all fall within a single year.
The maximum period was found to be twenty years (two cases), as recorded in Table 18.
The distribution of citation period is also shown graphically as Figure 17.
This is another binomial distribution, with a maximum value which includes spreads of one and two years.
5.3.3 Coverage of SCI
The Journal Citation Review (JCR) only lists those journals which are cited by another at least six times in one year.
(Summers).
The initial selection choice will thus influence any skew or bias in the journals contained in the database.
Checking the Source Index of SCI showed that the Scottish Journal of Geology (SJG)(the most highly favoured journal in the field for publication of research results) was not scanned by SCI until 1970.
It is therefore possible, if the arguments presented above for a small, co-citing cluster of journals in Scottish geology excluded from SCI's Source Index are valid, that many citations will have been missed.
Cawkell had earlier drawn attention to the fact that important ‘local’ journals may not appear in JCR or in citation maps.
Indeed, Garfield said in 1979 that the tail of the distribution for ranked citation data from one specialty will most likely contain the highly cited core journals from other specialties.
Earlier discussion of the statistical behaviour of extreme values in the tails of distributions has shown that they are unreliable predictors of the behaviour of large samples, and if the core set of journals for Scottish geology is in the tail, then extreme caution must be used in interpreting SCI data, particularly from the early theses in the present study.
In the case of geology, the biggest circulation journals, which are likely to yield the most highly cited papers, are American.
Citations to the Scottish Journal of Geology, and to the Transactions of the Royal Society of Edinburgh, are not likely to feature very highly in any ranked list.
In their 1968 study of the frequency of use of British scientific journals, as measured by requests to the British Library, Martyn & Gilchrist found that Nature was the highest ranked journal, and the highest ranked earth science journal was Journal of Petrology (ranking one hundred and fifteenth).
Transactions of the Royal Society of Edinburgh, one of the major journals for Scottish geology, was ranked in two hundred and eighty-ninth place.
The Scottish Journal of Geology was unlisted.
Matter and Broms, in their critique of the Science Citation Index (SCI), said that:
‘This Index only works well in some natural science fields and on American soil, and only in ‘normal science’ areas.
On new American or European subject areas it works very poorly.’
They draw the conclusion that SCI is used in ways other than Garfield intended, and that many find keyword subject searching easier than citation searches.
Narin (1976) concurs with these views, finding that there are ‘distinct limitations when one attempts to use it [SCI]for the more specialised literatures of the smaller countries’.
A possible way round this problem has been suggested by Sen and others.
By counting the cited items in journals and finding the proportion of such citations not recorded in SCI, it is possible to calculate backwards to determine the impact factor for non-SCI journals.
5.3.4 Other thesis citation measures.
Reference has been made above to citation peaks — the period during which the largest number of citations is recorded.
Unfortunately, it was impossible to make such measurements on individual theses in the present study, because of the small numbers of citations involved.
When a thesis receives one citation in each of five separate years, it is impossible to assign a peak.
Similarly, some theses showed equal multiple citations in different years, which again precludes determining a single peak.
Another possible measure was the average number of citations within the citation period.
This would have been a correlate of the impact value of the thesis, since it would have indicated the level of acknowledgement of the content of the thesis by the same or other authors.
This again was impossible to calculate for those theses which had received only one citation.
Yet a further central measure would have been the average numbers of citations in the period since the year of deposit of the thesis.
On checking the data, it was clear that this would have been inaccurate, since it would have excluded citations not covered by the Science Citation Index (SCI) for the period before 1970.
Some such early theses record no citations before the 1980s, which is an extremely unlikely situation.
It is more probable that they were cited soon after deposit, but that the coverage of SCI at this time did not extend to those journals in which the citations occurred.
If the citation currency period expired before SCI journal coverage was extended, citations to these early theses would never be recorded.
5.4 Self-citations.
Of the total of 680 citations, 196 (29%) are self-citations, including multiple self-citations.
One hundred and thirteen authors (21%) cited their own theses at least once; sixty-five of them self-citing only once.
One author cited his own thesis seven times, out of a total of 10 citations, and two authors cited themselves six times — one of whom provided all of his total citation count.
On 49 occasions (77 citations, 11%), the self-citations are the only citations.
Earle & Vickery found self-citation (of papers) in 52% of the geological papers which they studied, compared to 70% for science as a whole.
It would appear then that self-citation of theses is not nearly as common as self-citation of publications, and even in the case of publications, geology has a lower incidence of self-citation.
In general, it would be true to say that most authors, once they have published their major research findings, feel no need to cite the ‘raw’ thesis upon which their initial publications are based.
The view expressed by Lawani & Bayer, that self-citations are used as an ego-enhancement, cannot be tested in the present case, and should be rejected in the absence of evidence, because it is essential for an author to be able to refer back to the unpublished parts of theses.
In this instance, self-citations to theses are of a different nature to self-citations of published papers.
5.5 Other citing behaviour.
One Scottish geologist volunteered the information that he and a friend had agreed always to cite each other 's work in their papers.
This behaviour is part of the ‘cronyism’ in scientific research referred to by Narin.
Quantitative measures of its effect are hard to come by, but it is possible that some co-citation clusters may be subject to this form of coupling distortion.
Oromaner suggests that materials for different types of audience have differing citation patterns.
Some geological citations refer to abstracts from papers delivered at conferences and meetings; some refer to excursion reports, and some to geological guidebooks.
The information contained in such sources is not used in the same way as that in a formally refereed and conventionally published journal article, and citations of such sources may be omitted.
Unfortunately, because of their omission from citation, the role of such ephemeral, non-rigorous, or incomplete data in the communication process in geology does not lend itself to citation analysis.
The only way in which such communication could be measured would be by questionnaire.
In the present study, this problem does not arise, because of the restriction to citations of a single type of material — theses.
There are differences in citing patterns between highly cited papers and less-cited papers.
Aversa found two citing patterns.
The first group were highly cited in the first year after publication, and declined thereafter.
The second group reached a citation peak some years after publication.
Highly cited papers tended to age more slowly (i.e. maintained significant citation counts for longer periods) than less-cited papers.
Cluster analysis revealed a clear bimodal pattern differentiating the two sets of citation patterns.
The relative frequencies of citations may be inaccurate, if allowance is not made for the growth of the literature.
The reasons for the occurrence of highly cited papers have been discussed by Oppenheim & Renn.
They found that 40% of highly cited papers were cited for historical reasons, but 60% were still actively being used.
Each cited paper is referred to between 1.05 and 1.15 times on average in every paper that actually cites it.
Citations to theses peak, as earlier demonstrated, in the second year after deposit, and the rate of citation decreases rather rapidly (although the spread of citations may extend up to twenty years after thesis deposit).
The decrease in citation rate is probably due to the publication of derived papers, which may largely obviate the need to cite the original thesis as time goes on.
5.6 Citation frequency
5.6.1 Non-citations
Failures to cite relevant papers have been studied by several authors.
Price, in his 1965 study of networks of scientific papers, derived an average figure for uncitedness of 35%.
In a similar study Cawkell found an uncitedness figure of 64%.
Cawkell's study related to acoustics, but Price's work does not refer directly to any particular subject field, so that it is not possible to be sure that like is being compared with like.
In a study of a non-specialist journal — Nature — Ghoshi found that only 7.3% of his Nature papers were uncited after 8 years.
The average uncitedness in any one year was 48.6%.
Of his twenty-four uncited articles, three were editorial leaders, and twenty-one were letters.
Commenting on the poor quality of bibliographies in published papers, Kochen concludes that failures to cite are due to:
1.
No attempt to search the literature
2.
Searches carried out inefficiently
3.
Relevant documents were available, but were not read
4.
The documents were retrieved and looked at but not cited because:
a)
The searcher was careless
b)
The omission was deliberate, because the paper was not worth citing
c)
The searcher did not understand the paper
d)
The searcher had dishonourable motives.
Some authors, including Kochen, have proposed the construction of expert systems for bibliographic control of specialist literatures.
It has been estimated that 10% of the scientific literature is never cited (Price 1965).
Stern found that articles with fewer authors and fewer references are at an increased risk of being uncited, with the numbers of references being the most significant determinant.
One of his intriguing findings is that a larger proportion of uncited articles are published in the higher priced journals.
Regrettably, in a field which is becoming increasingly litigious, when authors who criticise in print the prices certain publishers charge for their journals have been sued by these publishers, it is difficult to see how further research along these lines could be published with equanimity.
In the case of failures to cite theses in the present study, it is suggested that bibliographical control of Scottish geology theses is at a level such that the literature is easily searched, and that failure to do so is unlikely.
Errors in searching are possible only if the searcher chooses the wrong subject heading in the published lists; this too is regarded as an unlikely event.
(Discussion of subject definition, as part of the information transfer process, is deferred to Chapter 6).
Difficulty in gaining access to a particular thesis is possible, as described earlier, but for most of the theses, availability is not a major issue.
For those theses which were read, and were subsequently not cited, Kochen's fourth alternative contains some of the possible reasons for non-citation, but there may be others, and it is not possible to choose between them from the evidence currently available.
Of the 550 theses in the present study, 281 (51%) had not been cited in the Science Citation Index by the end of 1987.
The distribution of uncited theses is as follows:
Sheffield, Glasgow, Strathclyde, Newcastle and Dundee have the highest proportions of uncited authors; Oxford, Cambridge, St Andrews and Edinburgh have the lowest.
5.6.2 Highly cited theses.
The following table lists universities which have produced highly cited theses, i.e. those which have received five or more citations.
Wales, Strathclyde, Birmingham and Edinburgh have produced, proportionally, more highly cited theses, whereas London, Newcastle and Sheffield have produced no highly-cited theses.
Sheffield and Newcastle also appear in the list of those universities producing proportionally more uncited theses.
They are therefore simultaneously producing larger proportions of theses which are ignored by other workers, and smaller numbers of theses which external researchers have considered worthy of citing.
It has been suggested by Bruer in his study of medical education literature that, in the case of published papers, 56% of those papers which were highly rated were also highly cited, and that 60% of the highly cited papers were in the highly rated class.
In a similar study, Lawani & Bayer found that 14% of the highly rated papers in their study of cancer research were not highly rated by peers, and that only 2.3% of their highly rated papers were never cited.
If there are similarities between theses and publications, it is likely therefore that these highly cited theses would also be rated highly by the authors’ peers.
5.7 Citation counts and research policy
In a study of citation analysis and scientific productivity, Lawani suggested that the techniques of citation analysis would be particularly appropriate in ascertaining the relative quality of the productivity of large groups, and much less in judging individuals.
The range of possible scientometric measures involving the use of citation counts in association with other factors is large, but the field is so fluid at present that many recent papers suggest new combinations of factors, whereas there is often no theoretical basis for these measures.
Various authors produce tables to show that their measures correlate with research performance or productivity in particular areas, but there is no agreement on a ‘best-fit’ measure; they are used to measure different entities, such as national performance differences, output per unit of funding, subject differences, and so on; and they are often of limited predictive value to policy makers.
One measure which is relatively easy to make is the citation rate per paper (Martin & Irvine 1983).
One of the problems with this measure is that because different journals may have different average numbers of references per paper, a count of citations may not reflect the impact of that paper.
A paper published in Nature, for example, will contain a very small number of references, each of which can be regarded as highly influential on the authors, because that journal limits the number of references per paper.
Papers published in other journals which have no such limitation may contain many more references, some of which will have had considerable influence on the authors, and others whose influence is slight.
Thus the Nature citations will be more focussed, or coupled, to the paper citing them, and the others will have a more diffuse relationship.
The Top Decile Performance is a citation measure which has been derived by Narin 1987 to evaluate research programs.
It is defined as the percent of an institute's papers which are amongst the more highly cited 10% of papers in a field.
The advantages of using this measure are that it is independent of the subfield, and of the year of citation.
Using it, Narin finds no evidence whatsoever for economies of scale in the production of papers.
In other words, the larger institutions do not publish more highly cited papers, proportionally, than smaller ones.
Braun, Glanzel and Schubert 1989a have devised an alternative scientometric indicator based on citations — the Relative Citation Rate (RCR)— by which they assess the relative contribution of scientists from a given country to the expected average citation rate (citation impact value) of the journals in which they publish.
The RCR is the ratio of the observed citation rate to the expected citation rate.
Calculations of the expected citation rate are derived from the mean citation rate per paper calculated for each journal.
Thus if an issue of a journal contains six papers, with a total of 240 references in that issue, the expected citation rate is 40 references per paper.
The products of the number of papers in a given subject field and from a given country, and the mean citation rate calculated for each journal are summed by journal and compared with the observed citation rate.
Braun, Glanzel and Schubert 1989b found, in their study of the validity of bibliometrics to assessments of British science, that
‘The annual changes of any of the [bibliometric]indicators considered had no statistical significance, and no trend distinguishable from the effect of random fluctuations could be observed’.
5.8 Peer Review
The Universities Funding Council, in its Report on the 1989 Research Assessment Exercise says that its assessment process was one of ‘informed peer review’.
Advisory groups and panels were asked to assess and rate research quality, but no guidance was given on how to identify or recognize quality.
‘the exercise assumed that academics would know what they were looking for’.
This further supports earlier argument that quality is non-parametric.
That the UFC so clearly mistrusted publication data has been discussed earlier, but they failed to support their preferred method of assessment — peer review — with any objective measures or guidelines.
Peer review is used by the (American) National Science Foundation (NSF), which equates in some respects to the UK Research Councils, in their peer review Proposal Evaluation Criteria, as described by Weinberg (1989).
They take into account:
1
Research performance competence
2
Intrinsic merit
3
Utility or relevance, and
4
Structural effects.
Peer review has been critically examined by Chubin and Hackett, in a study of data derived from NSF and National Institute of Health (NIH) procedures for reviewing grant proposals in the United States.
Peer review serves three functions:
(1)
Ensuring that scientists are accountable for the public funds they receive;
(2)
preserving the professional autonomy of the scientific community; and
(3)
certifying the soundness of new developments in science and technology.
There is a danger, according to Chubin and Hackett, that because peer review uses self-referential standards, this could lead to tautological definitions of quality.
Sixty percent of their respondents believed that reviewers are reluctant to support unorthodox or high-risk research, and nearly 40% felt that an ‘Old Boy Network’ controlled the grant review system.
There was, however, a strong correlation between the success of grant applicants and their satisfaction with the system.
The authors argue for greater public participation in debates on the merits of scientific initiatives, once the American public has become more ‘science-literate’.
American reviewers also found evidence of fraud and misrepresentation in peer review assessments (Crawford & Stucki), in similar conditions to those already commented on in the UFC Report, and, in keeping with their greater use of information technology, Crawford & Stucki found that online communications and fax machines were contributory factors.
Abelson also suggests that fax machines aid the establishment and working of ‘invisible colleges’.
It has been suggested by Irvine and Martin that the concentration of large research programmes in smaller numbers of centralised laboratories poses problems for peer review, in that, in some disciplines there will be no disinterested peers to provide independent judgements.
The peers will all be in similar (or even the same) large research centres.
The authors also say that peer review is ineffective as a mechanism for restructuring scientific activity.
Despite their criticism, peer review is the method most commonly used within the Research Councils for evaluating the scientific contributions of their own staff, in addition to using it for the evaluation of research proposals.
They appoint Visiting Groups within disciplines to assess the value of particular scientific research programmes and groups of workers.
Within NERC, the major funding body for earth science research in UK universities as well as in its own institutions, several Visiting Groups have looked at the work of most sections of the British Geological Survey (BGS), often evaluating it in the light of concurrent university research.
As a result of such visits, restructuring in various forms, from the cosmetic to the fundamental, has been frequent within BGS since the mid-1970s.
The uncertainties and frustration caused by multiple restructuring arising out of a process of frequent and sometimes inconsistent peer review exercises have led to a lack of cohesion in research objectives, low staff morale, and low scientific output (in terms of papers).
The need for periodic assessment is not disputed, particularly if it is directed towards known and widely accepted objectives, but the mechanisms by which such assessments are carried out should be clearly formulated in advance, and communicated to those to be assessed.
Assessors must be trusted and accepted by those whose work is being examined, otherwise communication problems are likely to diminish the validity and worth of the final assessment.
In particular, if an assessor is not accepted as a peer by those assessed, then the information needed for objective evaluation may be withheld, distorted, or presented in a manner which can lead to unbalanced views and impaired judgements.
Personality factors also enter into the equation; some assessors being known in advance to favour certain lines of enquiry over others, or simply to dislike or to mistrust other individual researchers.
Trust and objectivity are therefore essential to the peer review process.
Mullins first used the term ‘trusted assessorship’ to refer to friendly criticism, and the subject was expanded by Chubin, who suggested that the study of acknowledgements in papers could lead to measurement of the effects of trusted assessorship.
By checking acknowledgments in papers for co-authorship, academic origins, past and present employment, and citation frequency, it would be possible to establish the existence of networks of trusted assessors.
Such networks, operating between research groups, could, in theory, modify the actual content of research.
As Gilbert has pointed out, however, trusted assessorship will not pick up isolates.
The totally original, offbeat research proposal, particularly in the fundamental, or non-applied research field, has no chance whatsoever of attracting sufficient peer group support to attract funding.
As will be seen in Chapter 6, however, some of these isolates have been responsible for many of the revolutionary advances in scientific knowledge.
Cole & Cole (1967) studied the possible correlation of quantity of output of 120 physicists (publications, citations, number of awards) with the perceived quality of their work, as determined by peer assessment, to see if the reward system in science favoured highly productive researchers, or those who produced high quality research.
They hypothesized that citation of a paper was a correlate of its quality.
By questionnaire, and by checking awards and other honours in published sources, they were able to rank the physicists, and established that there was indeed a high correlation between the numbers of citations and the rankings established by peers.
The correlation with numbers of published papers was less certain, although, in general, the high producers tend to publish the more consequential research.
They also found an interesting pattern in regard to early citations.
The more citations their earlier work received, the more often they continued being productive.
This may be a form of behavioural reinforcement operating on the personal motivation of the researcher.
By contrast, Virgo, using statistical methods, finds a low correlation between citation counts and reviewer judgement.
The coefficient of correlation she derives is 0.37.
(For a correlation to be established statistically, the coefficient should approach a value of unity).
The Times Higher Education Supplement has carried out a number of peer reviews of UK University Departments over the years.
Its 1985 Review (Anon, 1985), based on the canvassed views of Heads of Department, revealed that:
‘Geology produced the first ever unanimous verdict in a peer review.
The 14 departmental heads…all agreed that Cambridge was top for research.’
The rankings are as follows:
Leeds, Leicester, and the Open University geology departments do not feature very highly in relation to Scottish geology, but Cambridge, Oxford, Edinburgh and Durham score well in most of the bibliometric indicators studied here.
Imperial College was at one time very active in Scottish geology, but, since the death of Professor Watson, and the retirement of her husband, Professor Sutton, interest in Scottish research has diminished here, although the College remains one of the UK's major institutions in geological research.
The present study therefore does show that studies of publications, citations and consultations can produce results which are comparable with the less formal techniques of peer review.
If used in combination with the financial and management data which research units now collect, bibliometric techniques represent more rigorous, objective, methods of assessment than peer review alone can provide.
The costs of gathering the initial data are relatively small in relation to the costs of the research itself.
In a review which in some respects reads like a premature obituary, Turney describes the current (1990) situation with regard to the place of peer review in funding UK science.
Strategic initiatives, evidenced by proposals to the Science and Engineering Research Council (SERC) Science Board, grew from nothing to take up almost one third of total grants between 1982 and 1986.
The emphasis in government policy on research with potential application, and on industrial exploitability, also creates unease.
Although ministers now stress that they recognize the importance of backing basic research without strings, the suspicion still lingers that decisions are shifting towards short-term payoffs.
Finally there is a worry that the new pressures make peer review more conservative in the selection of projects.
Martin and Irvine 1983 recognise three problems with peer evaluation, and suggest ways of overcoming these problems.
The perceived implication for the self, in undertaking assessments, can be limited by using a large sample, preferably more than 25%.
The subjectivity of the assessment can be reduced by the use of verbal surveys, such as questionnaires not restricted to numerical measures; and the dangers of providing conformist assessments can be overcome by the assurance of confidentiality, and by checks for systematic variations.
5.9 Alternatives to citation measures
The impact measures listed by Anderson include, publication counts, citations, and the number and value of grants raised in support of research.
His output measures include completion rates, career profiles, and studies of manpower output.
In a study of the research output of UK universities, Irvine used an Activity Index, a technique developed by Carpenter & Narin; defined as the percentage of a university's total published output within each research field, divided by the overall percentage of all university-originated papers in that field; and a Total Influence measure, defined as the product of the numbers of papers, their average influence (impact factor), and the percentage of papers with influence.
He found that there was a strongly differentiated hierarchy of performance across institutions.
Research excellence in concentrated in certain institutions across a broad range of fields.
Indicators of the impacts of science need to be broadened to include training and networks, as well as direct knowledge transfer, according to Pavitt.
The influence of a particular piece of research may be transmitted by personal contact, or through media other than publications, and the quantification of such informal communications presents researchers with some rather intractable problems.
5.9.1.
Impact factor.
Garfield 1972 and 1973 suggested assessing the importance of publications by assigning weightings according to the journal in which the papers appeared.
He found that the use of this weighting factor gave a better indicator of quality than the numbers of citations or of the numbers of papers published.
The formal definition of impact factor, from Journal Citation Reports (JCR) 1977 (Garfield 1977) is that it is
‘a measure of the frequency with which the ‘average cited article’ in a journal has been cited in a particular year.
The JCR impact factor is basically a ratio between citations and citable items published’.
Impact factors vary from year to year (Nieuwenhuysen & Rousseau).
The random effect of such variations can be assigned upper and lower bounds, based on a Poisson distribution model.
The confidence limits for assessing likely changes in impact factor from year to year can also be assigned (Nieuwenhuysen 1989).
5.9.2 Reprints
Swales uses the case of the reprint request in a study of language and scientific communication.
Tens of millions of reprint requests are mailed each year, the authors having identified the existence of the papers from secondary sources.
He states that networks of ‘discourse communities’ form around the readership of particular journals.
This is similar to the ‘invisible college’ concept identified by several authors.
The reasons for using reprint requests rather than obtaining photocopies by using inter-library loan services relate to the much better print quality found in reprints (they should be as good as the original printing); the speed of response compared to library services; and the establishment of personal contacts.
It can be very flattering to receive such requests, and they may make a difference to the author's perception of the requester.
Thus the personal influence of a reprint request may be rather larger than that of an acknowledgment in the form of a citation.
New technological developments may change the value of reprints in the near future.
Abelson regards the use of ‘Fax’ machines as an aid to the working of invisible colleges, due to the rapid transmission, and the potential for much higher image quality.
Craig says that 15-20% of reprints will be used.
This is much higher than articles in a journal, where some of the more esoteric papers will be interest to perhaps no more than four or five readers world-wide.
Most of these reprints will have been requested by the prospective user, and others will have been sent by authors who recognise that user as being involved within the same specialism, and so such higher use is not unexpected.
5.9.3 Measures used in combination
Many authors have suggested that single measures of input or output should not be used in evaluating research groups, institutions, or nations.
Most agree that measures used in combination provide much more reliable indicators of performance.
Thus Irvine & Martin advise the use of converging partial indicators, which they list as:
Publication totals — the overall production of a research group — which tends to favour larger groups.
The number of papers per researcher, or per dollar — a measure of output in relation to input.
The average number of citations per paper (impact factor).
Peer rankings of groups.
The distribution of highly cited papers — which can identify those groups responsible for key discoveries.
Citation totals — the large numbers of incremental additions to the sum of human knowledge.
Narin attempted to determine the significance of relationships between the research event, the funding mechanism, and the location of the performer.
He found that support mechanisms and institutional settings are not key factors affecting research advance.
He suggests, however, that research screening procedures, which are a form of peer review, result in the choice of high impact research, as determined by citation frequencies.
Combination measures of thesis consultation, publication, and citation, are reported here:
Thirty-two theses from data set C (10%) received no citations, produced no related publications, and were not consulted.
They are referred to here as ‘unproductive theses’.
(Hand used the same term to refer to those theses from which no related papers were derived).
Strathclyde and Newcastle appear to be radically different from all of the others in this Table, in that more than 60% of their unconsulted theses have never been cited, and the results contained in them have not yet been published by their authors.
It will be recalled that Newcastle and Sheffield were also the universities which produced most uncited theses, and fewest highly-cited theses.
If such low citations were offset by high publication rates for thesis-derived research, then they should have achieved higher rankings in the table above.
That they have figured so low in the rankings indicates that the citation measures do reflect assessments of the worth of the theses themselves, rather than the information contained in those theses which might have appeared in published form.
London, Edinburgh and Birmingham have produced the lowest proportions of such under-utilised research.
This again correlates with the citation data for these universities, indicating that the research produced in these universities has been used in some measure by other workers, who have acknowledged that use by citations.
Caution is required in the interpretation of these figures, however, since no consultation figures for Dundee, St Andrews, Oxford, Cambridge, etc, are available, as described in Chapter 4.
Chapter 6.
The Communication Process in Science
6.1 Epistemology — the study of knowledge structures
Communication in science can take place at different levels of complexity or integration of informational elements; data transfer is the most basic level, comprising the exchange of information on fundamental parameters, such as numerical or analytical data; the descriptive level involves the transfer of data in a descriptive context; and at the idea transfer level, deductions, interpretations and predictions are made from data and descriptions earlier acquired, and from background knowledge and experience.
Comparisons with computers can be used for the data transfer elements of this process, modelling the flow of sequential current variations along circuits, and also for the transfer of information, in the form of structured data (i.e. the computer program) which interacts with the information processing elements of the communicating machines.
At the idea transfer level, machines have not yet demonstrated unequivocally the ability to process concepts in the way that human consciousness processes thought.
It is argued by some workers in artificial intelligence (such as Boden), drawing analogies from neurophysiology, that consciousness is a function of the degree of complexity and connectedness of networks — neural or artificial — but this view has been strongly criticised by Penrose as simplistic and lacking the necessary objective evidence.
The rapid advances in this field suggest that computational analogues of human reasoning abilities will become increasingly difficult to distinguish from the real thing, and if a mechanistic view of biological systems is taken, this in itself may provide sufficient proof of the ability of non-biological systems to develop the ability to process ideas and communicate concepts.
Auditory, visual, and tactile processes can be used for the transmission of information in the form of signals, as a simple type of communication, but the communication processes discussed here will be limited to those used in the idea transfer process, and more particularly to those used in the growth and development of scientific knowledge.
The transfer of ideas between scientists, disregarding for the moment the nature of the medium used for exchange, can be described either as personal or as formal.
Personal communications are either verbal or written (including electronic), and are one-to-one or one-to-many.
The many-to-many mapping of the process cannot occur, because the human thought process is sequential in nature (one thought at a time), and only one idea at a time can be transferred.
(In another sense, however, human thought processes draw information from a large number of non-sequential context-free data stores, assembling such information by associative processes in a manner similar to those being developed in hypertext-based systems.)
Thus a seminar, in which a number of speakers exchange ideas and information, is still a one-to-many mapping, because only one idea at a time is capable of being absorbed by each individual recipient.
Similarly, conferences, where several speakers address many delegates, are also one-to-many, because the speakers act sequentially in the communication process.
The possibility offered by rapid electronic communication across networks has led to some other new ways of collaborating in science, through bulletin boards and other e-mail techniques, some of which are direct analogues of personal communication and others resemble publication pathways.
Computer-supported collaborative workgroups, on scattered sites, can interactively work on the development of major projects, such as Computer Aided Software Engineering (CASE), or international engineering design projects, such as the European Fighter Aircraft (EFA), in an online environment.
Image capturing and processing techniques have enabled some North Sea platform designers to use electronic communication techniques for virtually instantaneous updating of multiple copies of design ‘drawings’ at scattered sites, thus saving very large amounts of money.
These electronic techniques are one-to-many (or sequentially one-to-many) in nature.
The teaching environment is normally one-to-many also, but in the case of research, the processes are often one-to-one, between researcher and supervisor, in both directions.
In the case of written communication, the personal type is one-to-one, as represented by letters.
The formal written communication process in science is a one-to-many mapping, and is carried out by means of the publication of information and ideas.
In the present study, the thesis has been treated as a quasi-formal entity, which possesses enough attributes of the formal to enable comparisons to be drawn with fully formal conventional publications, such as journal articles, but which also possesses some elements of informal, personal communication, in that it can be regarded as the fulfilment of a one-to-one contract between the researcher and the university.
To the extent that it is used in many countries as part of the process by which scientists communicate, and through which scientific knowledge grows, it will be treated here as equivalent to the formal.
Caution should be exercised in attempting to generalise too widely from the conclusions developed here, because of international differences in definition, content, and use, of the research thesis.
Science has a cumulative structure (Kuhn), with later work building on earlier scholarship.
It advances by means of a series of revolutionary transformations and incremental advances.
The problem is that such transformations are seldom perceived whilst they are occurring; they are usually identified long after the event.
In Kuhn's view, periods of ‘normal’ science culminate in a crisis, when too many problems find no solution within the prevailing paradigm.
The paradigm is a disciplinary matrix consisting of symbolic generalizations, metaphysical models, values, preferred instrumental methods, and exemplars.
During the crisis, there is a ‘Gestalt switch’, which results in a period of ‘revolutionary’ science leading to the acceptance of a new paradigm.
The views of Kuhn, Laudan, and Lakatos will be discussed with reference to the plate tectonic approach to the earth sciences in Section 6.8.2.
6.2 Communication media
Before the publication ofthe Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society communication in science was primarily carried out by means of networks of correspondents.
Letters were written either on a one-to-one basis, or, by circulating copies to network members, as one-to-many communications.
Network members were in many cases members of one or several scientific societies, each of which held regular lecture meetings, and more informal discussions.
Such societies have increased in number and diversity, as the numbers of scientists have increased, and their meetings are still used for the early communication of research results.
In many cases, such conferences consist of delegates reading papers which have been, or will be, prepared for publication.
The one-to-one feedback from such readings is a valuable aid for the revision of papers.
The formal environment within which this form of communication takes place; the circulation of preprints or abstracts prior to conferences; the peer review involved in the selection of speakers and topics; and the public nature of the talks, all ensure that this form of oral presentation is a much more structured and circumscribed communication than a mere conversation.
The intellectual property contained in the paper is communicated to an audience, but its ownership is clearly attributed to the author, and accepted by that audience.
The very formality of the conference medium ensures that ideas can be freely communicated on such occasions without risk of losing ownership of the intellectual property.
Within geology, there are other communication media, such as excursion guides and reports of meetings.
These are usually un-refereed publications of limited circulation, containing only factual data, and where the level of interpretation and intellectual content is small.
The geological map can also, at one level, be regarded as a medium for communicating only factual data (it answers the closed question ‘What is the nature of the rocks in a particular area?’), but the intellectual processes under-pinning the presentation of geological information in this form are of a much higher order.
The map represents an interpretation of the results of fieldwork sampling within a theoretical framework — the geological paradigm.
Generally, the scale of the map is functionally related to the sampling density.
Large-scale maps can incorporate data obtained by dense sampling of small areas, whereas small-scale maps of offshore areas reflect the much lower sampling density possible is such areas.
(The United States Geological Survey definition of a small-scale map is one at a scale of 1:250,000 or smaller, and a large-scale map is one at 1:25,000 or larger.
In Britain, the detailed fieldwork maps at 1:10,560 are large-scale, the one-inch or 1:50,000 published maps are intermediate scale, and the offshore maps are small-scale).
The most formal level of communication in science is carried out through the medium of the scientific journal.
Textbooks are not a primary vehicle for the reporting of research results, except for those books which are compilations of the research papers presented at conferences.
All of the books containing material related to the theses in the present study are such compilations.
The numbers involved are small in relation to the numbers of scientific papers published in journals.
There are approximately 5,000 earth science journals published world-wide, with occasional earth science papers appearing in a further 1,000 non-specialist journals (author's estimates).
Government publications, particularly publications of government-sponsored geological survey organizations, represent a significant proportion of earth science publications, as Haner has shown.
She states that ‘geology and botany are unique among the sciences as both fields rely upon major government agencies to provide fundamental research information’.
Her study relates to citations of government publications in American journals, and thus her results may not be strictly comparable to the UK situation.
The major serial publications of the United States Geological Survey (USGS) are the Bulletin, and the Professional Papers, each of which contain externally-refereed papers of comparable standard to any non-government publications.
In Britain, whilst the British Geological Survey (BGS) was, in the past, a major publisher of high-quality journals, it currently publishes most of its textual (i.e. non-cartographic) material in the form of a Report series, which (until 1988 at least) was not externally refereed.
In physics, Midorikawa argues that the most preferred medium for communication is the journal, but that in subfields in which large experimental or observational devices are used, the use of reports, and letter journals, is going to increase.
Information theory can provide a highly selective measure of the contributions that authors and journals make to communication (Shaw).
In an experimental study, Shaw found no relationship between the most communicative authors and the most communicative journals.
It appears that highly productive authors will not necessarily publish in those journals which have the highest circulation, and which hence are presumed to be those used for those papers which an author wishes to reach the largest possible readership.
An author's choice of communication medium is dependant on the audience with which he wishes to communicate.
6.3 The research community
Scientific research does not take place in isolation; the communities within which new discoveries take place, and among whose members these discoveries are communicated, are recognisable social groups.
There is a great deal of variation in the size and composition of such groups.
At the highest level, all those involved in any form of scientific activity share a fundamental Weltanschauung, a philosophical world-view within which a scientific approach is perceived as worthwhile.
Particular societal memberships are smaller, more rigid groupings, which may be discipline based, e.g. the Palaeontological Association; national disciplinary, e.g. the Geological Society of America; national non-disciplinary, e.g. the British Association for the Advancement of Science; or local, e.g. the Geological Society of Glasgow.
Universities themselves are manifestly communities, within which there are a number of sub-communities involved in science.
The teaching community is composed of the body of students and lecturers within a subject field; the research community is the group of staff, post-doctoral, and post-graduate research workers; and the smallest communicating unit is the seminar group, which usually consists of the group of post-graduate students who regularly give formal presentations and discussion sessions on the state of their current research to their research supervisors, and other interested individuals.
It is here contended that this last group, forming a close network of interdependent and inter-communicating people working at the leading edge of science at a time of rapid personal and scientific development may be a highly significant unit for the establishment of contacts in later careers, and for the promulgation of paradigm shifts in science.
The larger departments, with their larger seminar groups, may have an inherent advantage in this respect over the smaller units.
Information can flow freely between members, as a result of the personal contacts established within these groups.
Influences can similarly be established, leading to the possibility of future collaboration, or at least information exchange programmes.
Common paradigms derived in these groups can diffuse rapidly as groups mature and disperse.
Thus radical ideas can be tested in conversation with close colleagues, whereas the proponents would be less likely to risk criticism by advancing speculations, or ideas which are not fully formed, in a public forum.
These seminar groups lead to the establishment of ‘invisible colleges’, based on the broad similarity of approach which can develop in a single large department.
This phenomenon is the basis for identifiable diffuse networks, such as the ‘Cambridge school of molecular biologists’, or the Lewisian geologists trained at Imperial College.
Many present-day ‘old boy networks’ are descendants of these seminar groups.
As can be established by analysis of the affiliations of those most closely involved in the development of the plate tectonic paradigm, helpfully listed by Stewart, many of the major players were based in Cambridge,(or had studied or lectured there), and in the Scripps Institution of Oceanography in San Diego, California.
The Cambridge group consisted of staff, graduate researchers, and post-doctoral workers.
This was a large multi-disciplinary group of interacting, communicating earth scientists, competing with, but also sharing experimental results with, the American institutions.
Meadows notes that informal communication networks are much stronger, and more tightly integrated, in science than they are in the social sciences.
Within science itself there are disciplinary differences; thus high-energy physics is now concentrated into a small number of very expensive, internationally-funded and operated, research centres.
The communication processes operating in these environments are characterised by a high degree of open-ness within the research centres, coupled with a desire to withhold significant research results from similar research centres elsewhere until the public release of such information can ensure that priority will be accorded to those making the announcement.
There is co-operation in information exchange between such centres, but there is also competition for peer recognition, which in turn affects research funding decisions for these very expensive facilities.
In the more descriptive natural sciences, such competition is either not found, or is not so evident, and the informal communication networks in taxonomic botany, for example, are usually open, widespread, and international.
The synonymy of ‘specialty’, enumerated by Chubin shows the close links between the social and the disciplinary aspects of scientific communities, or, as Smith puts it, ‘there is a certain amount of congruence between documental and social structures.’
Chubin's list includes:
social circle, research area, community, cluster, network, problem area, problem domain, cognitive region, invisible college, sub-discipline, subfield, coherent group, paradigm group, theory group, and school of thought.
The directed nature of communication within scientific communities is dependant on the range of communication media available within that community.
‘We communicate with whom we want by publishing in certain literatures.’
(Chubin)
Geology, like many other sciences, contains several sub-disciplines, each of which makes use of particular communication media.
It is within these subject subdivisions that research communities operate, although synthetic studies involving several sub-disciplines are frequently published.
The research communities within which Ph D theses are written are almost all sub-discipline-based, and an analysis of the sub-disciplines within Scottish geology demonstrates the changes in emphasis on individual sub-disciplines, and the appropriateness of these sub-disciplines to particular areas.
(According to LeGrand, ‘localism’ in geology, i.e. concentration of research on a particular area, is a type of specialization).
6.4 Subject Analysis of Scottish earth science theses.
The subject headings under which theses have been categorised in the Rolfe, Will, and Laming lists may be used to assess the relative importance of different sub-disciplines in the earth sciences over the period studied.
It is important to note, however, that the categories used in the Rolfe and Will lists may have been assigned for reasons of literary expediency, rather than as the result of rigorous classification.
If there are only one or two sedimentological theses in one year, the list compiler may have chosen to combine this category with that for stratigraphy.
The Laming list is classified, however.
Theses are assigned exclusively to a single category in all of the above lists.
The only major difference in categories between the Rolfe and Will lists is Will's use of ‘Quaternary Geology’.
Definitions of the major terms used in these lists, based on the American Geological Institute's ‘Glossary of geology, 3rd ed. are:
Structural geology
: the branch of geology which deals with the form, arrangement, and internal structure of the rocks.
(Tectonics deals with broader regional or historical phases).
Metamorphic geology
: the geology of rocks which have undergone alterations at depth in response to changes in pressure, temperature, and chemical conditions.
Stratigraphy
: the science of rock strata.
Sedimentology
: the scientific study of sedimentary rocks.
Quaternary geology
: the geology of the period which began two to three million years ago, and which contained the last major planetary ice age.
Geomorphology
: the classification, description, and development of landforms.
Soils
: the science of the unconsolidated material overlying the rocks.
Petrology
: the origin, occurrence, structure and history of rocks.
Mineralogy
: the study of minerals.
Applied geology
: the application of geological research to human activity.
Geochemistry
: the distribution and amounts of chemical elements in rocks.
Geophysics
: study of the Earth by quantitative physical methods.
Palaeontology
: the study of life in past geological time.
Geochronology
: the study of time in relation to the history of the Earth.
The numbers of palaeontological theses are very constant, running at 3 or 4 per year, every year, for over 20 years.
Geophysical studies in Scotland are also fairly constant, averaging 3 per year over the whole period, although since 1977, the average is 5 per year.
Geochemistry has been categorised on its own at some times, but has been combined with Petrology, or with Mineralogy and Petrology, at other times.
Geochronology, as a separate sub-discipline, only appears in Rolfe's second list.
The sub-discipline, if such it is, can be regarded as an aspect of stratigraphy, although it makes use of geochemical and geophysical techniques.
Mineralogy is another fairly constant sub-discipline, but it is difficult to use the term unambiguously, since there are mineralogical aspects to petrology and geochemistry.
Some theses clearly belong in a clearly defined sub-discipline, but in other cases, distinctions are blurred, and assignment to one or other category may be arbitrary.
The category for General, Structural and Metamorphic Geology is found in all lists.
It is the heading used as a catch-all, for some of the multidisciplinary theses characteristic of work in Scotland, and for others which fit into no other clearly defined category.
Structural studies within and across chronostratigraphic boundaries are often carried out by means of geochemical, isotope geochemical, or other analyses of rocks collected in the course of fieldwork, during which field relations between mappable rock units will have been recorded.
The thesis may thus have elements of several different sub-disciplines within it, and its categorisation may again be arbitrary.
On average, seven theses per year were assigned to this heading by Rolfe and Will.
The term Geochemistry has been used less consistently, and so comparisons between different periods cannot be attempted.
Applied Geology was first used as a category by Rolfe in 1975-77 list, and formed almost one-seventh of the total numbers of theses in the 1984-85 list, probably reflecting changes in research priorities relating to the funding situation.
It is, as suggested earlier, becoming clear that support for applied research is more attractive to funding bodies than support for fundamental research.
The Laming list, which covers the period from 1974 to 1984, is arranged chronologically, and indexes theses under regional, geological age, and sub-discipline headings.
Within sub-disciplines, the theses are arranged geographically and by geological age, so that the numbers of Scottish theses within his subject headings can be extracted.
In the Laming list, theses may be listed under more than one heading, and so the total figures represent the total numbers of sub-discipline headings assigned to Scottish theses, rather than the numbers of theses.
The geographical classification uses the same sub-divisions as those used by the British Geological Survey for its regional geology handbooks.
The Laming subject headings are, in some cases, more detailed than those used by Rolfe and Will, although elsewhere they are identical.
Thus geophysics and geochemistry are not subdivided.
Geochemistry, sedimentology, and structural geology are the largest categories for Scottish geological theses.
A subject analysis of theses whose first related paper was published in the general journal Nature, reveals the following proportions:
Geophysics represents 10% of the 700 theses included in the full Rolfe and Will lists, and so clearly geophysical papers have a disproportionately greater chance of being published in this journal than research on general or structural geology.
This may be due to the greater paradigmatic influence of geophysical research on the other earth sciences.
Geophysical studies tend also to lead to regional syntheses over substantial areas, and their topicality is another facet of their total influence.
Publication in a high-impact factor journal such as Nature represents an acknowledgment that the work is at the cutting edge of science, and that it has made a significant contribution to that science.
Works on areal geology, mineralogy, and the applied earth sciences may be valuable in their own way, but the information they contain is used in a different way, and by different readers, from that in geophysics.
It may be that those universities which are very strong in geophysical research, such as Edinburgh, Cambridge, and Durham, have the influence in the earth sciences which they do, because much of their research work is published in a journal which is more influential than the core earth science journals.
6.4.1 Regional analysis.
The Laming list, being sorted on three different keys, lends itself to more detailed regional analysis.
It is possible to determine the most appropriate sub-disciplinary research method for each area, or at least those techniques most often used.
It may be that this analysis could show universities those regions where particular methodologies, previously untried, may yield useful new information.
The Scottish geographical headings in the Laming list are:
Offshore [Scottish areas only]
All of Scotland
Grampian Highlands
Midland Valley
Northern Highlands, plus Orkney and Shetland
Southern Uplands
Western Isles
Cross-correlation with Laming's subject divisions produces the following breakdown:
In Offshore areas, geophysical techniques predominate.
This reflects the large areas involved, the difficulties and costs of sampling rocks and sedimentary deposits at depth, and the present lack of a requirement for more large-scale studies of small areas.
Micropalaeontological studies on recovered core samples have been used for stratigraphical studies on behalf of petroleum exploration companies.
No single sub-discipline is suitable for regional studies.
This is due to the heterogeneity and complexity of Scotland's geology.
No one technique could possibly give results which would characterise Scotland as a whole.
Synthetic studies are seldom carried out as Ph D research, but are generally published by experienced scientists, and may utilise the work of several post-graduate researchers.
In the Western Isles, the total number of theses is much higher, and the diversity of research techniques is much larger.
Geochemistry is the sub-discipline most used for research, with igneous, structural and geophysical studies on Scotland's oldest metamorphic rocks, and her youngest volcanoes, still yielding new information, and forming unique training grounds in geological field techniques.
Palaeontological studies only relate to the very small areas of sedimentary cover over certain parts of the crystalline basement in this region.
Structural and geochemical studies are of the greatest value in the Northern Highlands.
This area is characterised by large tracts of metamorphosed stratiform rocks of sedimentary origin, containing smaller areas of metamorphosed igneous intrusions and volcanic suites.
The structural complexity here is as great as anywhere in the world, with the surface features forming the end point of a series of chemical and physical transformations and movements of the rocks at depth under the influences of high pressures and moderate temperatures.
The area is large, reflected by the numbers of research studies.
Geomorphological and Quaternary studies of the glacial history of the Grampian Highlands have always been major research interests within Scottish universities.
The area also contains important sedimentary sequences, and the metamorphic rocks of the Dalradian Super-Group at the Highland Boundary.
Sedimentological studies of the Carboniferous rocks of the Midland Valley, together with their older Lower Palaeozoic inliers, form the largest single concentration of research effort in this region.
The numbers of theses in this area are lower than for areas further north.
It is suggested that there is scope for further geophysical and geochemical studies within the Midland Valley region.
A variety of techniques have been applied to the complex structural and stratigraphic regimes which have affected the Lower Palaeozoic rocks of the Southern Uplands.
The numbers of studies of this area are lower than those of more northerly tracts, and this should suggest that further work in a variety of sub-disciplines be carried out here.
Menard suggests that the terminology of subfield terms is very fluid in evolving areas, thus a term such as‘sea-floor spreading’ was used in indexes, etc. when first discovered, but the concept was rapidly subsumed under the term ‘plate tectonics’, when the underlying mechanism which caused the spreading of oceanic crust at mid-ocean ridges was discovered.
In the present study, the terminology used in indexes has remained very constant over the whole period, but words used in thesis titles have reflected paradigm shifts, both within sub-disciplines and in the larger subject area.
‘Molasse’ and ‘flysch’were terms used frequently to describe sedimentation in different sedimentary regimes, deriving from sedimentological models based on a static, pre-Continental Drift, picture of the planet, and a system of vertical tectonics forming the ‘geosynclinal’concept (Dott).
Many sedimentological theses now use the terms ‘fore-arc sedimentation’, ‘back-arc basins’, and ‘accretionary prisms’ to refer directly to the plate-tectonic environments of deposition of such sediments.
Accretionary wedges and listric faulting are characteristic of plate collisional conditions, and these terms now occur frequently in theses.
Subduction zones, where oceanic plates descend under continental ones, and obduction zones, where spreading centres are concealed beneath sedimentary cover, are of considerable interest, not least because ophiolite sequences formed in obduction zones have given rise to economically significant concentrations of metallic minerals.
The use of particular terms in thesis titles proclaims not just that the author is a member of a particular sub-discipline group, but that he or she is a member at a particular time, characterised by terms rooted in the paradigms then current (Dott).
It is important to distinguish between such lexical analysis of uncontrolled terms in thesis titles,(which has not been carried out in any detail in the present study but which is one of the factors analysed in a paper in preparation by the author), and the subject classification carried out by Rolfe, Will and in the Laming list.
Subject indexing is generally carried out by those familiar with the discipline definitions, for reasons connected with the publication of classified bibliographies, or for the arrangement of documents in libraries, information centres, catalogues and databases.
It is an attempt to partition the intellectual content of a subject area so that individual elements can be mapped to recognisable and clearly defined sub-areas.
If sufficiently detailed subject headings are assigned to each document in a collection, then there is a high probability that most of the documents relevant to an enquiry will be retrieved in any online search, but only those documents which match the search terms exactly will be recalled.
Those documents indexed under related, but not exactly matching, terms, will not be recalled.
The precision of the match depends on the depth of indexing.
Conversely, if subject heading terms are too broad, a search will produce high recall, but subject scatter will reduce the proportion of relevant documents in the retrieved sample.
Most subject indexing procedures have to try to reconcile such factors, so as to achieve the optimum balance of relevance and recall appropriate to the particular scheme.
For example, Tenopir found that Georef assigns more subject headings for each publication than GeoArchive, and so has higher recall, but this does not mean that searches will produce more irrelevant items.
The higher subject indexing density ensures that relevance is also high.
Relevance is, however, a complex notion, which Regazzi regards as inconsistently defined and applied.
The perceived value of documents depends on the purposes of the users.
He argues that experienced judges attached great significance to their previous knowledge of the work of individual authors in assessing the relevance of papers to their own line of enquiry.
In the case of the published thesis lists, the subject headings are all very broad, and precision in searching is not catered for, so relevance is low.
They are, in effect, sub-fields, or sub-disciplines, rather than classificatory terms.
6.5 Co-citations, and the ‘research front’.
A fundamentally different analytical method is to use the concept of bibliographical coupling to construct clusters of co-citing journals.
The concept derives from the theoretical premise that any two papers which both cite a third paper must be related, or coupled, to each other, as well as to that third paper.
The strength of coupling between two papers is shown by the number of shared citations in the reference lists of these papers (Smith).
The concept was introduced in Small, and refined in Small and Griffith.
The theoretical framework for co-citation analysis is described by Griffith and others.
Context co-citation is used to map specialisms by clustering words used in titles of text.
Such an analysis of the thesis titles is in preparation by the present author.
By mapping networks of co-citing papers, and noting the journals within which such networks are published, it is possible to derive a list of the most important journals in a subject, without having any detailed knowledge of the subject field.
This technique, known as journal-to-journal co-citation, can thus be applied across a variety of subjects.
Author co-citation analysis is used to identify clusters of authors and the associations between them.
In the context of the present study, analysis of citing authors would have provided evidence for the existence, size, and institutional affiliations, of social groups of scientists.
Stewart, Hagstrom & Small produced hill models of the major clusters of papers in plate tectonics using author co-citation methods.
A recent series of papers on author co-citation analysis, published in Volume 41, No. 6 of the Journal of the American Society for Information Science in 1990, allows for an overview of this extremely useful technique.
Coward and others used their analysis of the clusters to define what they term the ‘research front’, which is the set of core journals modelling the current state of active research in a subject field.
Thus Carpenter and Narin found that patterns of citation from one journal to another could be used to generate clusters of journals which could be identified as groups.
They identified two key clusters in chemistry; a general and organic chemistry cluster, and a physical chemistry cluster.
In molecular biology they found a general molecular biology cluster, and a biochemistry cluster, indicating two separate groups of researchers approaching the subject from two separate specialisms, and publishing their results in two distinct sets of journals.
It could be argued that interviews with competent librarians and subject specialists in these fields, or even examination of the holdings lists of specialist libraries in these subjects, would have produced exactly the same journal lists as have been arrived at by co-citation analysis, at a much lower cost.
Such interviews have been conducted by Cawkell, as checks on the validity of the coupling data which he has derived by inspection of the ‘citing journal package’.
Hicks describes some of the limitations of co-citation measures as being the delayed inception of clusters, and inconsistent definitions of subject and keyword terms.
Most of the seminal papers which give rise to paradigm shifts, and the creation of new journals to publish new subjects or combinations of subjects, are first published in the core journal set for the earlier research front, and the clusters which define the new research front may not include the journal which first published the paper which led to its inception.
This is an illogical situation, and suggests that co-citation work lacks fundamental theoretical under-pinning.
Using online databases may not be the best method for assessing research activity.
Persson has shown that in many cases, the database coverage is often not long enough to show major changes in science.
Hicks also points out that mis-spelt names may account for 20-50% of all errors in citations.
This factor has already been alluded to in earlier discussions on bibliographies, and on citation analysis in general.
There are, she states, clear differences between experimental and theoretical papers (compare this with the differences between ‘ephemeral’ and ‘classical’papers as described by Kohut).
The high cost, and the need for technical expertise in guiding policy makers are other factors which, in her view, seriously limit the wider application of the method.
Perhaps the most ambitious application of co-citation techniques is described by Small and Sweeney, where ‘clustering of clusters’ leads, after four iterations, to an overall map of science.
The research front concept may well have epistemological worth, but its definition in terms of journal co-citation clusters lacks philosophical rigour.
There is a logical gap between the idea that there is a leading edge in scientific activity, and the view that a set of journals can model that leading edge.
Journals can and do change, and their contents may at one period reflect the leading edge, whilst in another they may become review journals, or more ephemeral in nature.
Metaphorically speaking, the research front is a frozen moment in time; a snapshot of the state of a growing, changing, organic entity at a precise instant, seen from a single viewpoint.
With hindsight, such viewpoints may be seen as irrelevant, off-centre, or temporary.
Metaphor is not a substitute for logical argument based on the consistent application of valid concepts.
6.6 Half-life, obsolescence
The term ‘half-life’ is borrowed from the physics of nuclear decay.
The half-life is defined as the period during which half the number of atoms of an isotope will have undergone at least one disintegration.
It is an exponential function, relating the time (T) to the radioactive decay constant for that isotope (lambda) by the expression
T = (ln2) /lambda
Strictly speaking, the application of the term to bibliometrics is as a metaphor, with a number of different definitions.
The two situations are not logically comparable, since in the physical world, each nuclide which disintegrates is permanently lost from the sample, whereas in the case of documents, the original collection does not decrease when an element is sampled by citation.
However, the term has convenience, and an intuitive validity with a number of authors, when the context is suitably defined.
Definitions of the term ‘half-life’ are extremely varied, and there is no consensus.
Line equates the apparent half-life with the median citation age, the period during which the largest number of citations to a particular paper is received.
As described earlier, it has not been possible to measure this peak in the case of citations to Scottish geological theses, because of the small numbers of individual citations recorded, and because of the large spread of the citation period for these works.
Midorikawa calculates half-life on the basis that it is the period during which the numbers of citations from a journal, j, is half of the total found in a particular annual volume of that journal.
Defining half-life as the time during which one-half of all the currently active literature in a subject field was published, Burton and Kebler discovered a bimodal distribution of half-lives, or two patterns of literatures of different half-lives, leading to their classification of literatures as either classical or ephemeral, depending on the half-life patterns observed.
The literatures of stable sciences show longer half-lives than those undergoing major changes in content and techniques.
By cumulating citation percentages within decades, the authors deduce that they require a mathematical function containing two exponential terms to describe data.
The values of each of the exponents vary independently of the other, to produce half-life curves of markedly different shapes.
(The same conclusions were reached by Meadows, who found similar two-exponent curves in a study of citation decay half-life.
He found that geophysical literature had a half-life of less than three years).
Certain journals contain abnormally or unexpectedly high proportions of classic references, and hence need longer storage.
The half-life of the chemical literature, as measured by Brown was estimated to be 9.3 years, which is in reasonable agreement with Burton and Kebler.
Geology, mathematics, and botany clearly represent ‘classical’ sciences, in which older literature remains current for longer periods than ‘ephemeral’subjects such as engineering and physics, which rely much more heavily on the most recent literature.
Other studies, notably by Cozzens have produced subject analyses similar to Burton & Kebler.
She used the ‘immediacy effect’ concept, adumbrated by Price 1965, to find the percentage of references in a field to literature published within the last five years.
She too found that mathematics, geology and botany were strongly classical, engineering and physics were strongly ephemeral, and chemistry and physiology are mixed.
Many obsolescence measures have been derived to assist librarians in calculating shelf space allocation for journals.
Brookes introduced the concept of ‘periodical utility’, which he defined as the number of references a paper could be expected to attract in its particular library context during the period it remained in the library.
The Brookes model for aging was tested by Griffith and others, who used the Journal Citation Reports as a base.
They found that a journal used as an archive ages slowly, whereas one supporting a research front ages quickly.
They determined aging rates by eye, using semi-log paper.
An interesting finding was that ‘the larger journals age the literature faster, and age their own literature fastest of all.’
That is, the papers published in these journals reach a their citation peak very quickly, and there is then a rapid decline in citation frequency.
These journals represent the centres of distinctive, effective information processing communities.
There may also be national differences in literature use.
Thus Lawani found that French agronomists cite older literature (more than 15 years old) to a larger extent than do American agronomists.
Avramescu describes an ‘immediacy effect’, whereby recent literature is more highly cited than older literature.
He derives a family of surge-wave-shaped curves, according to the different types of citation frequency found in the literature, from a mathematical equation.
The position and height of the surge are determined by the relative importance of recent and older literature in different disciplines.
Within earth science literature, the most important obsolescence study to date is that by Kohut.
The citation patterns again show a bimodal distribution, with two median half-lives.
He emphasises the importance of the historical value of older literature in palaeontology, compared to the pattern shown in geophysics.
The half-life for geophysics was found to be 12 years; for general geology 13 years, and that for palaeontology was 25 years.
‘Conservatism is an attribute of fields that are substantially descriptive in methodology.’
He found that the annual output of U.S. geoscience literature increased by a factor of 10.3 in 70 years, and that the overall growth was exponential, but that the relative output of journals changes with time.
The literature of sub-fields is contained in broadly-based journals until ‘critical mass’ is reached, leading to the creation of new journals by twigging.
The factor most often cited in achieving critical mass is often the perceived publication delay.
6.7 The nature of scientific discovery.
Scientific discovery is a concept rather easier to intuit than to define.
It is clearly related to learning, but whereas learning is a matter of accepting and understanding ideas which others have already promulgated, scientific discovery involves the acceptance and understanding of ideas which have not occurred to others, or which have not been published by others.
It involves also the realisation that the new understanding is new; that no other person shares this new knowledge.
This novel mental position, akin in some respects to the Zen ‘satori’(enlightenment) or to other mystical experiences, is followed by a desire to share the novelty with others.
This is particularly true within the social structures of science, where the sharing of knowledge enhances the esteem in which the sharer is held.
It may be an incremental addition to the sum of human knowledge, or a fundamental and radical change in the way in which the universe is viewed; the personal revelatory experience of scientific discovery is its own reward, and it forms a major motivating force for many researchers.
Woolgar, in a study based on the growth and development of pulsar research in astronomy, contends that scientific discovery can best be portrayed in terms of a process with an indefinite beginning and end.
He sees discovery as an instantaneous revelation or sudden perception.
The discovery process has been described by Francis Crick, co-discoverer of the structure of DNA, and of the resulting ‘genetic code’ in the following terms:
‘It is not easy to convey, unless one has experienced it, the dramatic feeling of sudden enlightenment that floods the mind when the right idea finally clicks into place.’
As Crick points out, however, the right idea can only fit in to a mind which is trained, and predisposed to accept that idea.
The self-evaluating character of science, without which new insights would assume the same significance as flights of fancy, are defined by van Raan as ‘cognitive evaluation’.
It is not enough to have a new idea; the discoverer has to know the field within which the new idea is to be applied, so that he can evaluate its significance, and test the worth of the new insight.
Essentially, the evaluation is context-sensitive.
The nature of the discovery process can vary also, depending on the nature of the research activity.
If the research is a problem-solving exercise, the satisfaction achieved in solving that problem may be in proportion to the perceived size of the problem.
Resolving the question of whether palaeocurrent flow in Torridonian Scotland was predominantly westerly or northerly is important to those interested in Scotland's geological history, but has less external interest than the solution of the genetic code problem had for all biologists.
Discovery, as a result of serendipity, or as the culmination of a goal-directed activity, may lead to insight, as opposed to the solution of a particular problem.
The nature of scientific discovery is as varied as the nature of science itself.
As Law has said:
‘For some, science is something you do in a laboratory, something you talk about, and something you get excited about.
For others, science is what they write, and what they read in journals.’
6.8 Scientific growth
Statistics of the growth of science can be used in support of a variety of objectives, from library stocking rates to the determination of national science policy.
The parameters used to measure growth must therefore be chosen to be representative, characteristic, reliable, and objective.
The number of scientists, globally, nationally, and within subject fields, can be estimated from employment figures, society memberships, and statistical demographic sampling.
Figures derived in this way may be unreliable — they may, for example, include both active and inactive practitioners, and there may be problems in definition of ‘scientist’ according to the discipline and/or the nationality.
Some medical practitioners undertake research: should such people be categorised as doctors or scientists?
The numbers of science graduates leaving universities can be estimated, but this may not reflect the number of people going on to take up careers in science.
The expenditure on science is another possible measure of growth, either nationally, or as numbers of research grants.
These too may be unrepresentative, since very expensive ‘big science’ projects make disproportionate demands on funding, and scientists cannot be defined simply as those people in receipt of research grants.
Returning to Menard's definition of science as ‘the content of these [scientific]journals’, the scientific literature itself can be measured in a number of ways, and growth in literature is often considered to be concomitant with growth in the subject.
The difficulty with many bibliometric studies is their lack of theoretical rigour, as Gilbert and Woolgar have pointed out.
They argue for the development of theoretical models, upon which hypothesis testing can be carried out.
Thus Price's work is criticised because of its failure to accurately predict growth rates.
A ‘description-prediction’ approach, based on metaphor, or the use of heuristic techniques without theoretical under-pinning, may produce highly approximate, or even inaccurate predictions.
The correspondence between bibliometric models and scientific influence may not be general, although Bookstein, shows that some regularities in growth processes in economics, science, and other fields, fit well with equations describing bibliometric distributions.
Law has pointed out that
‘those who are generally felt to be of high status locate science less in the journals than in their own and other peoples’ heads’.
The number of scientists capable of contributing to the advance of scientific knowledge is a linear function of the total number of people entering science (Cole & Meyer).
Thus, in periods when the number of scientists is increasing, the potential for growth of the scientific literature is high.
6.8.1 Growth measured by literature
Sub-fields in geology are characterised by differences in techniques, survey methods, and entities studied.
Descriptive studies, such as palaeontology, generally do not make use of technological or analytical tools, whereas geochemistry and geophysics require heavy investment in technologies which change rapidly.
Geophysics is capable of providing information on a regional scale, whereas geochemistry deals with events at the molecular level.
It would not be surprising therefore if publication rates were found to vary between sub-fields.
Menard has used this data to construct diagrams showing the relevant growth rates in sub-fields, as shown by publication rates.
The ‘slow growth’ fields include palaeontology, where the doubling rate (the time taken for the number of papers to double) is 35 years, whereas rapidly changing research areas such as marine geology and geophysics may double every five years.
He suggests that the persistent subfields are abnormal.
‘The mere fact that a subfield is identifiable for a century virtually guarantees that it is dormant, and science that doubles every 15 years is not’.
According to Craig, the length of useful life of geological papers varies according to their subfield.
Thus, geochemical data is valid for 15-20 years, structural data for about 15 years, palaeontological papers for 20 to 40 years, and petrological work lasts between 10 and 20 years.
In the case of theses in Scottish geology, the numbers of geophysics theses in the 9-academic year period between 1960 and 1968 was 10.
In the next 9-year period to 1977, the number had increased to 23.
By contrast, palaeontology had increased over the same periods, from 14 to 25, not quite doubling.
Doubling periods have been measured for other sciences; thus May determined that mathematical literature doubles every 28 years.
(In a later paper, May established that 21 % of articles contained duplication of earlier published results, and 43% were classified as ‘trivia’.)
Hall describes how indicators of geoscience research can lead to the creation of an index which can be used to gauge the rate, level of development, and impact, of a particular field.
His figures for the rate of accumulation of geoscience literature are quoted from Menard.
He derives figures for literature growth by a time-series analysis.
The rate is proportional to the derivative of the cumulative number of publications in a field, from the time of its origin.
Long-term literature doubles in 7.5 years, and the growth of the literature parallels the growth of industry.
The increase in the numbers of scientific papers being published has exercised many authors over the years.
Within geology, Craig has argued for stricter refereeing, more interventionist editing, and the publication of shorter papers.
The numbers of units of publishable information are likely to continue to increase, however, due to the increased numbers of scientists, and the pressure on them to produce measurable output.
It seems likely that librarians, bibliographers, and the scientists themselves, will have to live with increased quantities of publications for the foreseeable future, and should instead develop their critical faculties and use other techniques for evaluating the worthwhile, and rejecting the worthless.
As Margolis pointed out, in an age of literature inflation, the more papers are written, the less they count for, and the greater the pressure to produce more.
The development of new technologies for information storage and retrieval, however vigorously their advantages are touted by salespersons and lobbyists, has not significantly reduced the amount of paper going into libraries, and being read by scientists.
The scientific journal, printed on paper, has been an integral part of our culture for three hundred years.
Developments in information technology, including electronic publication, and devices for rapid access to large information stores, produce products which require the use of technology as an intermediary between the user and the required information, in a way which differs (to date at least) from the interface between a reader and the printed page.
Some readers exhibit conservatism over the adoption of new information technology, and many librarians, faced with the problem of the need for archival storage of scientific data — an intrinsic feature of the nature and use of geological and botanical literature, for example— and knowing the costs incurred in data conversion as each new technological advance occurs, will choose to retain paper, and postpone decisions on technology.
The author recalls using card-readers to execute simple sorting routines in the mid-1960s, but such machines are found today only in museums.
Much of the data contained in these early systems will have been converted to paper tape, then magnetic tape, and today to hard-disks on personal computers, at each stage accruing data conversion costs.
The development of ‘platform-independent’ software for databases, knowledge-based systems, and hypertext, offers possible solutions to the storage problems, but the interface problems, being subjective, may be much harder to solve.
6.8.2 Models for the growth of science
Publications, as extrinsic manifestations of the scientific communication process, have been described in earlier sections.
Models of the intrinsic factors involved in the processes by which scientific knowledge grows and develops can be broadly classified into two types — diffusion models, and step-wise models.
Gilbert, for example, says:
‘It is assumed that scientific knowledge grows in a series of discrete steps, each corresponding with a specific advance which can be precisely located in time’.
This statement is a concise description of the step-wise model, but if knowledge is viewed as a continuum, then impressions of discrete steps are functions of the scale of the overview.
Physical forces appear to act on bodies in a smooth way, but below the molecular level, the actions are clearly quantised.
The quanta are individually so small that their interactions, statistically averaged, appear continuous.
Even diffusion processes, which appear smooth, are the result of quantised molecular energy exchanges — all physical processes are quantum processes.
The knowledge model, if it can be mapped to the physical world, must itself comprise discrete quantities, varying in a quantised (step-wise) manner.
The quantum model in physics contains the possibility that individual quanta can be at different energy levels.
The same attribute can be modelled in scientific knowledge.
Ideas can add to knowledge in an accretionary manner, or in a revolutionary, paradigm-shifting way, depending on their influence.
The influence can be large (high-energy) or small (low-energy).
Revolutionary ideas in science, such as the idea of evolution by natural selection; quantum physics itself; plate tectonics, or the genetic code, can occur through the action of single, high-influence ideas, or through the summation of numbers of small, accretionary pieces of evidence.
The revolution is seen as a transition to a higher, stable energy state, which will last until the next major advance of knowledge.
Some authorities agree with Cole & Cole, when they say that
‘it is not the great mass of publications (each constituting but a minor increment to the sum of human knowledge) which contribute most to scientific progress, but a small number of key papers, each of which has a very great impact on the advance of knowledge…only a very few elite scientists produce work that becomes the base for future discoveries.’
but there are areas in which the accumulation of accretionary increments of knowledge may lead to theoretical transformations by building revolutionary, multi-disciplinary syntheses.
Research processes vary between and within discipline; most really significant advances in knowledge come about through the application of several techniques.
Thus Nadel describes a multi-phased scientific growth model in superconductivity between 1930 and 1964, in which theoretical advances alternated with experimental advances.
(Truly revolutionary changes in this field have taken place very recently, since the publication of Nadel's paper, through the discovery of near-room-temperature superconductivity in synthetic metal/ceramic alloys).
An analogous change took place recently in DNA research.
The discovery of the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) has produced profound changes in the cheap availability of DNA sequences, and seems likely to promote major theoretical advances on the basis of an experimental advance.
Publication of research findings as single, small steps leads to individual ‘knowledge claims’, by publication, some of which are incorporated into accepted knowledge (Gilbert), but the largest theoretical advances seem to occur as the result of the application of several small steps, possibly involving different sub-disciplines in the research process.
Some of the different research process models are listed by Weiss in her paper on the influence of social science research on public policy.
There is a knowledge-driven model, by which basic research leads to applied research, to development, and to applications; a problem-solving model, where problem research leads via a decision-making process to a goal (which is the solution of the problem).
The interactive model is based on a rather amorphous communal pool of ideas and opinions.
In this model, growth is undirected, and research is a matter of taking soundings, by questionnaire.
(It is difficult to compare such opinion-sounding with experimentally-derived research results).
In the political model, a stance is taken, research is carried out, and another stance results.
The tactical model leads from a political position to pseudo-research, where facts are ignored because they might tend to obscure argument.
The enlightenment model is a diffusion process, which ensures the adoption of policy by the accretionary effect of influence.
Finally, she lists the intellectual pursuit model, which is self-directed and self-motivated by intellectual curiosity.
The factors involved in social science research may be different from those involved in the physical sciences; indeed some physical scientists question whether or not the ‘social sciences’ are truly scientific.
Some of Weiss’ processes appear to be operating in the hard-science fields also, but there are differences.
One cannot imagine, for example, a geophysicist ignoring the results of his seismic surveys because they got in the way of his theories, and yet Weiss says that this sort of possibility exists in bad or unscrupulous social science research.
In general, discoveries in geology follow a cyclical descriptive-inductive pattern, by which fieldwork leads to theoretical advances, which suggest further fieldwork and so on .
The example of the development of today's plate tectonic model of the Earth follows this pattern.
In 1912, a geophysicist, Wegener, published a book in which he proposed the theory that continents had moved over the surface of the earth.
His theory was developed to account for the ‘fit’ of the southern hemisphere continents, and the existence of clearly related fossil organisms found in continents which are today widely separated.
At the time, descriptive geology could ignore or deny such a theory, by postulating the existence of land bridges and sea-level changes which permitted the movement of organisms between continents.
In the absence of theoretical explanations for the underlying mechanisms of continental movement, both views were propounded, but neither could be proved.
The theoretical advance demanded further physical evidence which simply could not be collected with the technology then available to researchers.
Hess conducted oceanic seismic surveys (within the brand-new science of marine geophysics) and postulated that the mid-oceanic ridges which he had discovered were the sites for rising convection currents in the Earth's mantle.
His results were published in 1960.
This led to heat-flow measurements which were in line with theory.
The discovery of mirror-image patterns of magnetic field reversal in rocks on the seabed off Iceland by Vine & Matthews reported in Nature in 1963, combined with the earlier theoretical ideas and led to the concept of sea-floor spreading.
Earthquake evidence refined the concepts, together with ocean-floor drilling, analysing material recovered by classical geological and palaeontological techniques, until the unifying concept of plate tectonics resulted.
This revolutionised almost all aspects of the earth sciences, and provided a mechanism for the older concept of continental drift, which was, until the 1960s, an often-dismissed peripheral idea.
(In today's political and economic climate, it is unlikely that research proposals based on the work of an obscure German geologist (Wegener) supported only by an even more obscure South African theoretician (Du Toit) would have any chance of getting an ‘A’ rating from a Research Council).
The ideas are so well accepted now that, whilst the intellectual debts owed to Hess, and to Vine & Matthews, are still acknowledged in passing in modern geological textbooks, their crucial early papers on the subject are seldom specifically cited.
Their ideas have been assimilated into the mainstream of the science.
The process has been described by Garfield as ‘obliteration by incorporation’.
The processes involved in the transformation of the earth sciences world-view are documented in recent studies by Legrand and Stewart.
Legrand draws attention to the phenomenon of ‘localism’ in the earth sciences, whereby the southern continental fit was appreciated by researchers trained in, or working in, the southern hemisphere, and resisted by European and North American scientists.
In this connection, evidence for continental movements of considerable antiquity has been found in Scotland, but only with the advantage of hindsight.
The plate tectonic paradigm could not have been constructed from evidence derived solely from Scottish research.
Legrand's view of the transformation of the Earth science model in the twentieth century is self-confessedly based on the view of Laudan, that research is guided by a number of competing ‘research traditions’, rather than a single paradigm.
The aim is to maximise the number of solved problems while minimizing the number of conceptual problems and anomalies.
Anomalies are important in evaluating rivals and in bringing about scientific change.
Stewart's view of the plate tectonic upheaval () has a Kuhnian perspective, although he concedes that the pre-revolutionary period was characterised by multiple, discipline-based paradigms.
The model proposed by Lakatos, that scientists work in rival ‘Research Programmes’, each of which has a hard core of unchangeable and unchallengeable general assumptions, can show up those programmes which are progressive or stagnating, according to how well novel facts can be confirmed, or if the programme is purely reactive.
The historical pattern by which some theoretical concepts in geology were constructed is described by Rudwick in his masterly work on the introduction of the concept of the Devonian geological System in the nineteenth century.
Social factors such as class; place of residence; ideological background; membership of societies; alliances between geologists for good or bad motives; professionalism and amateurism; patronage; and religion, allied themselves to personality factors such as vanity; obstinacy; honesty (or the lack of it); innate curiosity and intellectual capacity, to create a complex and wholly consistent scenario for the advancement of the science.
It was not a simple matter of carrying out fieldwork, thinking about the results, publishing them, and waiting for peer review to ensure the next research grant.
Nor is it so today, but that is often the situation perceived by the outsider.
Meadows has stated that in the 19th century, local geological studies represented worthwhile research in their own right; but in the 20th century, local studies have increasingly become acceptable to professionals only if they incorporate, and reflect on, the wider geological picture.
Amateurs, on the other hand, have continued to pursue local studies in the old way.
6.8.3 Specific models
In a series of papers, Goffman presents an epidemiological model for scientific communication.
The knowledge world is seen as being equivalent to a population, and the spread of an idea through that population is described as following the same pattern as the spread of an infectious disease through that population.
By performing Markov chain analysis on bibliometric data on the field of symbolic logic, Goffman derived curves which represented the growth of major concepts, and the oscillation of research activity.
Goffman's curves fitted very well to those derived by differential equations validated in epidemiology.
The stages through which an idea passes are summed up by Goffman & Harmon as: initiation, growth, acceptance, incorporation, non-attribution and decline.
The process was summed up elegantly, although without differential equations, by Crane, when she stated that:
‘there is some evidence that the diffusion of a scientific innovation is a fashion-like process in which influence is transmitted through steadily expanding networks of scientists.
Thus it is plausible to view science as an enormous cluster of innovations, of which the most successful are diffused by means of a contagion process that produces a logistic curve in all facets of scientific activity.’
A logistic curve is one in which the rate of increase of a population is a function of the size of the initial population.
It is an S-shaped curve (See Meadows), which shows increasing growth at first, then slows down and finally tends asymptotically to approach a maximum.
Great care must be exercised in deciding whether or not data fits a logistic curve.
Hagstom suggests that many curves labelled as ‘logistic’ may in fact be either linear or exponential.
For this reason, Meadows prefers to use the term ‘S-shaped curve’ to avoid possible misunderstandings.
A number of other models have been suggested for the development of scientific knowledge, but these models are measuring the concomitants of scientific growth — the manpower, costs, publications, citations, etc — and none has so far been developed to fully describe the growth of knowledge itself, although Goffman's work seems to have some predictive value.
6.9 The thesis in the knowledge model
To the extent that a thesis is regarded as an original contribution to knowledge, the thesis is normally an author's first knowledge claim; an assertion of ownership of the intellectual property contained in it.
The contents must reach an acceptable academic standard, as a contractual condition of the award of the qualification, and the standard must be agreed by internal and external examiners — a form of peer review.
Thereafter, unless encouragement is given to publish the new knowledge, its role in the scientific communication process is as an item in a list, or in a subject bibliography, if that subject area recognises the value of thesis contributions.
The fate of the knowledge is dependant on the particular subject area, and on the awareness of putative consultants.
It is true that the writing-up of a thesis may be its author's first, and most difficult, exercise in scientific communication, and it is written at a time when the author may be scientifically immature, and lacking the communication skills which will develop later.
It is also true that very few research theses contain material which radically alters the world of knowledge.
None of the theses in the present study appear to have any paradigmatic effects on geology, but many have had accretionary effects, with evidence fitting into major syntheses, such as Craig's ‘Geology of Scotland’,(3rd ed, 1991), and cited in that source.
It is suggested, however, that the absorption of ideas and intellectual stimulation whilst undertaking Ph D research are major formative influences on the careers of scientists.
Whilst their major contributions may be made later, careful analyses of the research theses written by major contributors to scientific advances can often reveal the underlying intellectual qualities which, applied to important issues, resulted in fundamental shifts in the way the world is viewed.
Chapter 7
Conclusions
7.1 Purposes.
There is no clear agreement on the purposes for which research theses are written.
The writing of an extensive dissertation, with arguments put forward and defended, may demonstrate the writer's possession of intellectual abilities, erudition in scholarship, and the attainment of proficiency in research techniques or methodology at a very advanced level, but it does not, of itself, prove that the researcher has made an original contribution to knowledge.
The acid test of originality is the judgement by editorial peer review that a paper related to or derived from the research is worthy of publication in the subject literature.
Confirmation of influence is provided by subsequent citation of that paper.
There are, however, clear differences between earth science departments in the proportions of published papers derived from Ph D research.
Some departments achieve very high publication figures, whereas others turn out large numbers of unproductive researchers.
The Research Councils, and other funding bodies, who have rated the research proposals of potential Ph D candidates highly in competition with many others, have not as yet insisted upon the communication of research results by publication, although this would have provided an objective assessment of the worth of the research.
It is suggested that universities should actively encourage preparation of papers for publication during the research period, as is the case in some universities, in some countries, and should provide assistance by teaching the requisite communication skills, if necessary, as an integral part of research training.
Research Councils could easily and cheaply monitor this part of the research programme by the online searching of bibliographic databases.
7.2 Peer review.
The peer review methods adopted by the Research Councils in the evaluation of research proposals were designed to provide for a fair distribution of national R & D funding,(which some consider to be inadequate at present).
In the earth sciences this has resulted in decisions to reduce the number of departments offering Ph D degrees, and to concentrate funding in the remaining centres, which are thought to be centres of excellence.
This favours those departments which have been successful in the past, but does not help those others which wish to expand or to improve their standards, and it fails to allow for the creation of new departments.
Inter-disciplinary studies, which fall between Research Council areas, or committee boundaries within Councils, have received inadequate attention, as a recent ABRC Report admits.
7.3 Research environment.
It is suggested that spending on support services, such as libraries and computing, has a bearing on the quality of research work carried out in individual universities.
Further research in this area should be carried out.
Departmental research programmes, with several researchers working on different aspects of a single large problem, may lead to improvements in efficiency through sharing the costs of overheads, and should also decrease each researcher's isolation by improving internal communication.
The strengthening of seminar groups raises the possibility that these multidisciplinary programmes might facilitate the spread of paradigm shifts in the earth sciences; and should also be used as an underpinning structure for project-based research in applied earth sciences.
7.4 Scottish studies.
Only two per cent of successful UK Ph D researchers between 1960 and 1983 were earth scientists.
Fifteen per cent of these earth scientists worked in Scotland, whereas Scotland only has nine per cent of the UK population.
The reasons for this higher proportion than might be expected demographically are partly ‘localist’(specialism in an area is a distinct class of subject partition), but also because of the strength of indigenous departments in national terms, and the applicability of Scottish research to problems elsewhere.
7.5 Joint authorship.
Joint authorship in an author's first paper may be justifiable on grounds of inexperience, but the Science Citation Index (SCI) policy of indexing under the first author only will fail to identify the output of Ph D research if the researcher is not named first.
The practice in some departments whereby supervisors put their own name first deprives Ph D authors of recognition by citation, and may delay or hinder those following up known current research programmes.
Conversely, supervisors may feel that their contributions to published papers are undervalued if their citation frequencies do not reflect their influence on research programmes.
If the SCI was to change its policy and cite all authors of joint papers, the problem would not arise.
Nearly half of the first papers derived from Ph D research in the present study are jointly authored, and in nearly half of these cases, the thesis author is not the first author.
7.6 Publications.
Sixty per cent of authors published papers related to their thesis.
Of these, nearly half produced only a single related paper.
The average was 1.8 papers per thesis.
Some journals publish proportionally more of the output of particular departments than others, and conversely the spread of preferred journals within individual departments shows marked differences.
The overall productivity between departments shows significant differences in the publishing behaviour of successful Ph D graduates.
There is a positive correlation between the perceived prestige of a department and the productivity of its researchers.
There is also a high correlation between productivity and publication in highly-ranked journals.
Nearly one-fifth of the researchers failed to produce any papers whatsoever after completing their research, and there are significant differences between universities in the proportions of unproductive researchers.
The mean delay between thesis completion and first publication is about one year.
The average delay periods have reduced considerably in recent years, and a larger proportion of researchers publish before completion of their research, possibly reflecting increasing pressure to produce measurable, quantitative results from research in order to influence funding bodies.
7.7 Thesis access.
The work of SCONUL in improving access to theses has been of considerable benefit in the communication of research results, but some work still remains.
The funding bodies could, if they wished, insist on the deposit of a thesis copy in the British Library Document Supply Centre (BLDSC) as a condition of receiving a research grant.
This would bring those few universities currently outside the BLDSC scheme into it very quickly.
Consultation procedures within individual university libraries vary considerably, but in total, some three-quarters of all theses in the present study have been consulted.
Good bibliographical control of Scottish geological thesis through the publication of thesis lists has had a significant impact on thesis consultation and use.
It is suggested that there is scope for further research on the usage of theses borrowed from BLDSC.
In view of the amount of information in theses which is never published (negative results, raw data, speculation, historical surveys, bibliographies), there is finally no substitute for thesis consultation.
The microfilm copies currently available for loan from BLDSC are used extensively, but the costs of producing and storing them are increasing, and the British Library is investigating the possibility of selling copies, in a manner similar to Dissertation Abstracts (Ince).
Professor Clayton, of the University of East Anglia (pers. comm.), suggests that this will increase the use made of theses, by making paper copies more readily available.
7.8 Citations.
Half of the theses were cited in the Science Citation Index, with just under thirty per cent of these being self-citations.
It would be logical to expect an author to cite his thesis in his first related paper, so that readers could refer back to the original source.
A few authors make multiple self-citations to their theses, presumably out of a desire for bibliographic completeness.
It is noteworthy in this regard that cumulative sciences, such as descriptive geology, tend to contain papers with very long reference lists, whereas the more theoretical disciplines, such as geophysics, focus on a smaller number of critical references.
Citation measures of the proportions of highly cited authors within departments have been combined with proportions of uncited authors to show departmental influence.
Inverse ranking correlation between departmental output and citation frequencies shows that some departments produced large numbers of theses which were ignored by peers, whilst simultaneously producing small numbers of highly cited influential theses.
This dual negative combination may indicate a lower standard of research conducted in these departments.
7.9 Productivity.
Some ten per cent of theses in the present study are regarded as unproductive in that their authors failed to publish related papers; the original theses were never consulted, and the theses have never been cited.
This combination of partial indicators clearly identifies those universities which produce most unproductive theses, and could be used by funding bodies in establishing objective criteria for departmental evaluation.
The larger departments have produced the most influential, paradigm-shifting, fundamental research, possibly related to the stimulation afforded by multi-disciplinary communication between active researchers working in an environment conducive to research.
7.10 Sub-disciplines.
There has been a tendency in recent years for the amount of applied research in the earth sciences to increase, although not noticeably at the expense of the fieldwork-based areal studies.
Geophysical studies and Quaternary research have a greater than average chance of publication in the journal Nature, probably related to the paradigmatic nature of the former, and the human impact and immediacy of the latter.
7.11 Co-citation.
Journal-to-journal co-citation analysis would not have added much to the journal list analysis described in Chapter 3, because of the small number of journals involved, and the ease of identifying core journals by simple counts.
Author co-citation analysis would not have been appropriate in the case of theses, but title-word co-citation could provide a useful tool for identifying specialist departments and multi-researcher programmes.
It could also be used in other subject fields, which currently lack specialist thesis listings, to generate maps of research activity.
7.12 ‘Obsolescence’.
Earth science papers have a very long period of use, compared to physics or engineering, but there is variation between sub-disciplines.
Geophysical papers have a much shorter ‘half-life’ than palaeontological papers.
Citations to actual theses generally reflect long periods of current influence, with some theses continuing to be cited up to twenty years after their deposit.
7.13 Ph D research.
Ph D research may not in itself produce the major theoretical advances in science, but the personal developmental effects may, if carried out in centres of excellence, combine with good training to produce scientists capable of making such advances.
Training in communication skills, particularly the writing of scientific papers, should ensure that research results become more widely available to the scientific community as a whole.