

THE POPE AND THE PAPACY
THE FORMING OF INNOCENT III'S PERSONALITY: INFLUENCES AND EDUCATION
Political imagery expressed in pictures, in elaborate ceremonial and in official narrative sources is the public face of government.
From an early date the imperial palaces at Constantinople incorporated decorative schemes that emphasized and glorified imperial power and dominion.
According to the historian Eusebius, when the Emperor Constantine (c. 280–337) became a Christian in the early fourth century, his triumph over the enemies of the Church, represented as a dragon, was depicted in a scene at the entrance to the imperial palace which showed him trampling upon the beast.
The papacy used similar techniques and by the ninth century, perhaps even before, pictorial schemes were found in the papal palace and in the basilica at the Lateran.
Round the walls of the palace of St John Lateran in Rome, the main residence of the medieval popes, and in the great church or basilica itself, were series of paintings and mosaics that depicted the history of the papacy, an institution that was already very ancient in 1198 when Innocent III became pope.
The twelfth-century papacy was rooted in a distant and revered past.
The papacy had been born in the ancient world and owed many of its traditions, as well as its administrative functions, to late imperial Rome.
The popes, as bishops of Rome, had a "genealogy" going back to the first pope, the apostle Peter.
As in a great Jesse window, the ancestry of the pope could be portrayed descending from  the apostle to whom Christ had said "Thou art Peter and upon this rock I will build my Church" .
Scenes of triumph in the papacy's long struggle for political and spiritual dominion were presented in pictures that made contemporary and future generations aware of past landmarks in its eventful history.
Among the themes familiar to visitors to the Lateran in the twelfth century were three which were doubtless familiar to Pope Innocent III.
The first was the Legend of St Sylvester and the Donation of Constantine, the second the triumph of the legitimate popes over the anti-popes of the early twelfth century, and the third the settlement of the Investiture Contest.
All had a marked influence on the papacy's outlook and development.
It is not important to be concerned with the historical veracity of these statements (for in any case they were often added to, touched up and re-interpreted) but with the impact that they had.
They were a political statement, providing an account of the past and also a programme for the future.
The late fifth-century Legend of St Sylvester was represented in the portico or main entrance of the medieval Lateran basilica which had been the church of the Emperor Constantine.
Here were shown Sylvester I (bishop of Rome from 314 to 335) triumphing over the dragon (symbolizing the enemies of the Church), baptizing the Emperor Constantine, and receiving the "Donation" from him.
According to the Legend — the propaganda of a papacy that by this time was endeavouring to assert its independence of the emperor — on the eighth day after his conversion, the Emperor Constantine divested himself of the imperial symbols, prostrated himself before Pope  Sylvester and laid down his crown.
Sylvester, however, refused to wear the imperial crown above his clerical tonsure (by this gesture perhaps accentuating the superiority of his priestly office).
So Constantine actually placed the imperial crown, the phrygium, on the pope's head.
The Legend also proclaimed that Constantine had recognized the unique spiritual status of the Roman see, confirming the primacy of Rome and of the see of St Peter over the four patriarchates of Antioch, Constantinople, Alexandria and Jerusalem.
The forged document, the so-called "Donation of Constantine" , which was drawn up before the mid-eighth century, when the papacy was anxious to use and control the Frankish leaders, claimed that Constantine had given his imperial palace of the Lateran and dominion over "the city of Rome and all the places, cities and provinces of Italy and the West" to Pope Sylvester, handing the pope his imperial insignia and symbols — the lance, sceptre, orb, imperial standards, purple-scarlet mantle, imperial pallium and tunic.
So began the long history of the temporal power of the pope, of the pope's control of the Western empire, of papal monarchical powers and of the Papal State, the territories of the pope that survived until 1870.
The Donation also claimed that the Emperor Constantine on ceremonial occasions had performed the office of strator (leading the horse) and strepa (holding the stirrup) for the pope, signifying an almost feudal servility.
Later the Emperor Frederick I (Barbarossa) was to maintain that this ceremony had gone out of use and he refused to perform the office for the English pope, Adrian IV, at Sutri in 1155.
But, after he had been persuaded by the princes, he later performed it.
He may well have seen the picture in the great series of paintings in Pope Innocent II's (1130–43) new rooms at the Lateran.
Perhaps this is one of the most vivid examples we have of the effect of the pictorial image on the medieval mind.
The eighth-century forger of the Donation, doubtless working within the papal circle, and assisted by later papal propagandists and artists, had provided a most effective story.
The second series of pictures showed the triumph of the true popes over the anti-popes.
These pictures were to be found in the Audience Hall of Pope Calixtus II (pope from 1119 to 1124) at the Lateran.
They were known to several medieval writers, including the mid-twelfth century Norman bishop and controversialist, Arnulf of Lisieux.
Based upon the iconography of the Roman Empire and of the late Byzantine emperors, the scene showed the anti-pope, Gregory VIII (1118–21), under the foot of Pope Calixtus, the victor, who is trampling his victim in a way reminiscent of the victorious emperors of the past.
The Emperor Henry V stands to Calixtus's left.
A series of anti-popes, usually candidates of the German emperor for the papal throne, had almost threatened the existence of the medieval papacy and had brought the papacy to a low state in the twelfth century.
For not only was the papacy's practical influence severely circumscribed by schism, and the development of its governmental powers halted, but no theory of papal power could be developed with two contenders for St Peter's chair.
The unseemly scene on the death of Pope Adrian IV in 1159, when, on the election of the chancellor, Roland, as Pope Alexander III, the anti-pope, Octavian (Victor IV) tore the scarlet papal mantle from the shoulders of Alexander and attempted to carry it off, is recorded by Alexander's biographer, Boso.
Furthermore, it was Victor IV who drove Alexander from the city of Rome, represented by Boso as the true pope's "kingdom" .
The issues of anti-popes and schisms were still very much alive in the late twelfth century.
The third most momentous event in papal history, which would have meant much to Innocent III and to all visitors to the Lateran, was the great struggle for dominion between the pope and the emperor, known as the Investiture Contest.
The big scroll in the frieze between Pope Calixtus II and the Emperor Henry V contained the first words of the text of the Concordat of Worms of 1122, with the rest of the text to be found elsewhere in the hall.
Made in the  reign of Calixtus, it was obviously seen fitting that it should end the series of pictures of the popes involved in the struggle.
For the Concordat, in theory at least, brought to a close the Investiture Contest of the twelfth century.
To understand the meaning of the Investiture Contest for the men of the early twelfth century, prior to the pontificate of Innocent III and his successors, we have to remember that the issues were not settled in the way which we now know to have been the outcome.
The Concordat, described as "the best negotiated settlement in Western history" , confirmed the German emperor's renunciation of investiture of bishops with the ring and the crozier and the pope's concession that episcopal elections should be held in the presence of the king.
But the contest between the two rulers or super-powers was of much deeper significance, amounting to a total re-assessment of Christian society and its government.
Investiture was the symbolic part of a struggle behind which there were fundamentally different views about the whole ordering of society and about who was the divinely appointed agent for that purpose.
It concerned the source of power and its correct agents and was an investigation into the moral justification for the exercise of political authority.
It had repercussions throughout Europe.
The message of these pictorial images was reflected in Innocent III's speech or sermons.
On the occasion of the feast of St Sylvester, 31 December, the pope preached a sermon in which he chose to point out that Pope Sylvester was "sublime" because he had both regal (or royal) power and pontifical (or priestly) power.
It was the Emperor Constantine who had given Pope Sylvester the whole kingdom of the West and had attempted to give him the crown.
As a sign of his imperial power the pope used the regnum (the tiara) and as a symbol of his pontifical power he used the mitre.
Innocent's views of Sylvester's position reflected his ideas of his own office as a dual one, for which the Old Testament figure of Melchizedek, the priest and the king, was the prototype.
He was "priest…according to the order of Melchizedek" (Psalm 110: 4), and vicar of Him who was "king of kings and lord of lords" (Revelation 19: 16).
The  towering figure of Melchizedek, the priest and the king, and therefore the embodiment of power, was much loved by Innocent, who in his writings constantly returned to the dual aspect of Melchizedek's powers, which were combined, he argued, in the person of the pope.
The use of the colourful example of Melchizedek fitted well into Innocent's conception of the pope as "vicar of Christ" , for Christ, too, was both king and priest ( "rex" and "sacerdos" ).
Sylvester was also, says Innocent, the vicar of Christ and successor of St Peter.
Innocent was consecrated pope on the feast of St Peter's Chair or Throne (22 February), which was for him deeply symbolic.
His sermon on the primacy of Peter (which mirrored exactly what he had said on the subject in a tract written before he became pope, "De primatu Romani pontificis" ) explored the authority by which the pope governed, the Petrine commission.
Christ had entrusted the government of His Church to St Peter and his successors in the words, "Thou art Peter and upon this rock I will build my Church" (Matthew 16: 18) and "I will give to thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven and whatsoever thou shalt bind upon earth, it shall be bound also in heaven" (Matthew 16: 19).
Only to St Peter had the plenitude of power thus been given.
Christ had constituted the primacy of Peter and of his successors who were "sublime" in power, constant in the faith, shepherds of the flock.
 "I have set thee over the nations" , as the prophet Jeremiah says (Jeremiah 1: 10) and as Innocent quotes.
The pope was thus successor of St Peter, between God and man, inferior to God but above man, St Peter's vicar, but also, as Innocent now claims, "vicar of Christ" , as St Peter had been, rather than vicar of St Peter.
As we have seen, he had applied this conception, too, to his predecessor, Sylvester.
The idea of the pope exercising the vicariate of Christ had been expressed by Pope Adrian IV some forty years before: "we who, although unworthy, act on behalf of Christ on earth" .
It originated probably with St Bernard in the late 1140s or early 1150s in his address to the first Cistercian pope, Eugenius III, whom he calls "vicar" and "vicar of Christ" , but it had only been employed domestically within papal circles before Innocent's time.
Innocent was the first pope to proclaim publicly that he was the vicar of Christ — a title that had been used previously of themselves by the Byzantine emperors and by the Emperor Henry III (d. 1056).
Under Innocent it was to become commonplace in the official correspondence of the curia.
The implications of the vicariate of Christ and Innocent's conception of his office are at the heart of an understanding of both his view of the past and his view of his role.
As a Roman, the pictorial imagery of the historic papacy surrounded him.
His mental imagery, on the other hand, reflected influences from wider sources and to understand this we need to examine what is known about the relatively young pope — he was 37 or 38 — elected to the chair of St Peter in January 1198, whose reign later generations came to see as "the apogee of the medieval papacy" .
Fortunately we have the Gesta (or "Acts of the Pope" ), composed for posterity by a close contemporary (possibly even, it has been argued, by the pope himself).
From this splendid source we know important facts about his parentage, background and education.
He was born Lothar dei Conti of Segni in 1160 or 1161 during the long reign of Pope Alexander III.
Maternal influence did not much interest contemporaries usually, unless some obvious connection could be established, or possibly where the connections on the distaff side were more impressive and influential.
This was the case with Innocent's mother, Claricia Scotti (Romani de Scotta), from the Roman family to which Pope Clement III (1187–91) belonged.
Lothar owed his first promotion to his uncle, Pope Clement III.
Claricia Scotti had married into the Contis of Segni, small landowners in the Anagni region to the south-east of Rome.
According to a source from Viterbo, Lothar was born at Gavignano near Segni.
The  Conti family house still survives at the top of the ridge on which the little hill town is built: it has extensive views across to Segni and also to Anagni.
Lothar received his earliest education in Rome, probably at the Benedictine abbey of St Andrea al Celio where his teacher was Peter Ismael.
This suggests that he was already intended for a career in the Church.
He may have been the second, or a younger, son.
He had a brother, Richard, who was later to play an important part in the family's advancement in Rome, being destined to take over the running of the Conti estates in the Romagna.
A son who might rise in the Roman priestly hierarchy was essential to family and dynastic interests.
Paris
Paris was the intellectual magnet of the mid-twelfth century — the place where a dynamic and promising young man would wish to be.
Sons of the Roman aristocracy, eager to pursue careers in the curia found their way early on to the Paris schools.
Between the 1150s and the 1180s connections between the curia and Paris were built up as the studium, or university, began to form.
Romans, and even some men from southern Italy, were attracted to Paris as the intellectual centre of Europe at this time.
Previous popes had been in France, and the teaching of the school of St Victor in Paris and of Peter Abelard was known to them, but Innocent III may have been the first pope to have studied at the Paris schools.
(He is certainly the first pope for whom we have direct evidence that he had been at a centre of learning.)
Other members of the curia also by the late twelfth century had been nurtured on Parisian ideas and Lothar himself later promoted some of his fellow  scholars to high office in the Church.
By the time that Lothar arrived in Paris, probably in the 1180s, perhaps earlier, the theology taught there was no longer the speculative, probing theology of Peter Abelard (which was perhaps the reputation that had brought him there in the first place), but had become more concerned with practical issues and doctrine.
Among his teachers were Peter the Chanter, Peter of Poitiers, who commented on the Sentences of Peter Lombard (as well as producing his own Five Books of Sentences before 1170), Melior of Pisa and Peter of Corbeil.
Peter of Corbeil was a theologian who lectured on scripture and was famous as a preacher.
He was considered an original thinker, linking the old twelfth-century theological ideas with the new interests of the thirteenth.
Lothar remained grateful to him, praising his knowledge and, as pope, conferring benefices on him.
Peter of Corbeil was recommended for a prebend in York, given the bishopric of Cambrai in 1199 and then translated to the archbishopric of Sens in 1200.
Traces of Parisian teaching are to be found in some of Innocent's letters, with their biblical quotations and scholastic distinctions.
Prior to Theology, he may have pursued an Arts course when he was a young man.
He retained an affection for Paris and a gratitude for the intellectual advantages that it had given him to which he later referred as pope.
During this period we know no more about him.
But more is heard of his colleagues, Stephen Langton and Robert of Courson.
The Englishman, Stephen Langton, from Lincolnshire, was to become the foremost biblical scholar of his day and was to stay and teach in Paris.
Both he and Robert of Courson, another Englishman, were made cardinals by Innocent.
Langton was to be promoted archbishop of Canterbury by Innocent and so began the long quarrel between the Holy See and King John.
Courson, whose interests were in moral theology, was, as legate, responsible for the University of Paris's first statutes in 1215.
He seems to have been an influence on Innocent and we are almost surely not far from the mark in imagining  long discussions between the three on theology and politics.
It may have been during his time at Paris that the young Lothar, perhaps in the company of these two and other students, visited the shrine of St Thomas Becket at Canterbury.
Chance evidence from one chronicle records that he stayed at the Benedictine abbey of Andres in the Pas de Calais on his way before crossing the Channel.
Pope Alexander III had canonized Thomas in 1173, while the papal court was at Segni, the home town of Lothar's family, the Conti.
The canonization of Becket may have made a lasting impression on the future pope Innocent, at the time a boy of twelve or thirteen.
Certainly the Becket conflict had wider repercussions than an insular struggle between English king and archbishop and the principles and arguments in the quarrel were widely discussed, for there were deeper issues relative to the nature of authority.
Whether Innocent was ever tempted to stay in Paris and to teach, like his fellow student Stephen Langton, we do not know.
To his time as cardinal we owe some theological treatises.
Despite the fame (at least in the medieval world) of Innocent III's "De miseria conditionis humane" or "De contemptu mundi" , there is nothing very inspiring about it.
Plentiful quotations from the Bible and from the Fathers show a competence but nothing more.
There are also citations of Peter Lombard's Sentences, of Peter of Poitiers' Sentences, and of Ovid's Ars Amatoria (possibly taken from Peter the Chanter's Verbum Abbreviatum), perhaps showing the influence of his teachers.
He also cites Lucan, Claudian, Horace, Ovid, Josephus, Pope Gregory the Great's Dialogues and certain common medieval myths and stories.
There is little evident originality.
For that we have to look elsewhere.
It has recently been called to our attention that Innocent added the notion of the Church of purgatory to the Church militant (the Church on earth) and the Church triumphant (the Church in heaven), championing the idea of three armies that acted through fire, combat and praise.
The Church of purgatory was the "suffering" Church and the dead for Innocent existed only  through and for the living.
This he argued in a sermon delivered on All Saints' Day.
There are, too, certain other ideas that scholars are now examining.
Further research may demonstrate that he had some knowledge of science and of medicine.
He was, it seems, interested in the prolongation of life; but the picture of the sheer gloom of human existence expressed in "De Contemptu" — which apparently so appealed to contemporaries — does little to enthral the modern reader.
Rather it takes us a step away from understanding him.
The other tracts which were written by Lothar before he became pope show a pastoral concern, an interest in almsgiving, in sin, in penance, in the sacrament of marriage and in the priestly office ( "De sacro altaris mysterio" ): perhaps what one might expect of a Paris theologian of this period.
The "Misery of the Human Condition" was to have been followed by a treatise on "The Dignity of the Human Condition" , which was never written, presumably because of Lothar's election as pope.
The cardinal bishop of Porto and St Rufina, to whom the "De miseria" is dedicated, was Peter Gallocia, created cardinal in 1190 by Pope Clement III.
He, too, came from a Roman family and perhaps in some way had been the patron of the young cardinal deacon of SS.
Sergio and Bacco as Lothar then was.
He was a diplomat of standing, carrying out negotiations with the Emperor Henry VI and with the Byzantine emperor in Constantinople.
According to the English chronicler, Roger of Howden, he aspired to the papacy on the death of Pope Celestine III in 1198.
Was Lothar, perhaps, dedicating his work to the man he saw as the likely next pope?
We do not know.
The statement of his biographer (Gesta cap.
2) that Lothar shone above his contemporaries in philosophy and theology is symptomatic of the Gesta's generally eulogistic approach.
It is impossible to know how far Lothar's own personal interests and inclinations determined general policy, but the proceedings of the great general council of  the Lateran which was to be held near the end of the pontificate were well in line with what he and others had absorbed on pastoral care at Paris in the last quarter of the twelfth century.
The "De missarum mysteriis" of c. 1195 shows Cardinal Lothar as something of a biblical scholar, teasing out meanings from texts that accentuated the pope's particular primacy as successor to St Peter.
Paris had given him the intellectual edge and the authority to do this.
In discussing the Petrine texts, Innocent showed his indebtedness to Paris influences — to the school of St Victor, to Robert of Courson and to Peter Comestor.
We do not know how long he stayed in Paris — it could have been as long as a decade.
Parisian influences remained strong throughout his life.
However, he was also imbued with papal influences that came to him no doubt from his Roman and "papal" background, from Pope Gregory VII and from St Bernard in his tremendously important address to Eugenius III.
It was not that what he said was startlingly new, for it was based on a long tradition, but his particular talent and novelty was that he managed to combine biblical exegesis with growing papal ideology, to induce the texts to mean something of relevance to his leadership of society.
Bologna
Lothar of Segni's legal education remains something of a puzzle.
The Gesta clearly states (though very briefly) that he studied at the great law university of Bologna.
This must have been in the two years between the autumn or summer of 1187, when he left Paris, and September 1189, by which time he had been created a cardinal deacon by his relative, Pope Clement III.
Pope Gregory VIII (the  former chancellor, Albert de Morra, who had contacts with France), who enjoyed only a ten-week pontificate, had already made him a subdeacon between October and December 1187.
This appointment, the lowest rung on the Church's ladder, would not, however, have prevented him from undertaking a period of study at Bologna.
The subdeacon's duties were to prepare the bread and wine and the vessels for the mass and to chant the Epistle.
It may have been during this period that he was supported by a canonry in St Peter's, to which he later referred as pope.
Until recently, it had been assumed that the greatest of the medieval pope—lawyers was a pupil of the renowned Master Huguccio of Pisa, teaching in Bologna at this time, whose Summa on the Decretum of Gratian was well-known and whose teaching, linking theology with canonistics, the science of the Church's law, attracted students.
Although the evidence for Lothar's having studied under Huguccio is far from conclusive, the overwhelming weight of the pope's own utterances, turn of mind and passionate interest in law seem to endorse the statement of the Gesta that he did indeed study at Bologna.
Moreover the statement which follows this, namely that he was learned in both human and divine law, as his letters, registers and decretals demonstrate, must preclude Pennington's doubts that he studied law and, most especially, his suggestion that a bright young man would have gone to Bologna at this time to study anything other than law.
(He makes the half-hearted suggestion of Lothar's having studied notarial arts.)
During his pontificate Innocent chose to surround himself with lawyers.
Perhaps if he had not been created a cardinal deacon he would have stayed in Bologna longer.
In any case, length of stay does not predetermine his competence.
At Bologna in the late 1180s Lothar may have made the acquaintance among his fellow students of Peter Collivaccinus  of Benevento, and others, who were later to be important in the legal developments of his pontificate, collecting papal legal decisions or decretals.
In sum, it remains extremely likely in view of the pope's keen interest in the law that Lothar did study at Bologna.
However, it is unlikely that he is to be identified with Lothar, colleague of the great Romanist Pillius, whom the convent of Canterbury sought to enlist in June or July 1187 in the course of their great struggle with the archbishop.
Lothar's (and later Innocent's) knowledge of Roman law is uncertain.
He does not cite Roman law sources very often, but he had a practical turn of mind and was active in curial business and administration.
Contrary to older views — which saw him as out of favour in papal government under Celestine III (from the Boboni family)— he signs most of the papal privileges in the seven years between 1191 and 1197.
While his passion for theology seems to have pre-occupied him mainly during his period as a cardinal, he would not have been the first to have changed the direction of his interests when more practical challenges came his way.
ELECTION
Lothar of Segni was elected pope on 8 January 1198.
He succeeded two Roman popes and a long line of Italians.
Only Calixtus II, who was French, and Adrian IV, who was English, broke the sequence of Italians during the twelfth century.
He also succeeded a pope, Celestine III, who was 85 at the time of his election and therefore over ninety at the time of his death.
Celestine had maintained power through an inner caucus of some seven to ten cardinals, a group that did not include the young Lothar, cardinal deacon of SS.
Sergio and Bacco.
Lothar's biographer in the Gesta makes the point that following Celestine's death he did not immediately join the cardinals assembled in the Septizonium, but attended first the exequies, or funeral  rites, for the dead pope, which were taking place in the Lateran basilica.
In the Septizonium, an ancient Roman temple at the south-east corner of the Palatine, which had long since been annexed for other uses, safe from outside interference and imperial troops, for it was still possible for emperors to attempt to interfere with elections, the election commenced after each cardinal had celebrated mass and all of them had exchanged the kiss of peace.
Examiners were then chosen to scrutinize the sealed votes and note them down.
Apparently Lothar received a majority on the first ballot, but not the two-thirds majority made necessary by the constitution "Licet de vitanda" of the Third Lateran Council of 1179.
This constitution, which had its origins in Roman law, made no distinction among the ranks of the cardinals (i.e. whether bishop, priest or deacon) as to voting rights and allowed an election even if only a small number of the whole college were present, provided there was the necessary majority.
By this time, too, the citizens of Rome had been excluded from papal elections; they had formed an important pressure group in the past.
Even more important, the emperor's participation, which had accounted for the selection of many eleventh-century popes (and anti-popes) had been totally rejected by 1179.
With the introduction of the two-thirds rule, the old principle of "the greater and saner [or most weighty]part" disappeared from papal elections.
The implementation of the constitution of 1179 saved the Church from the double elections and schisms which had dogged Alexander III's and previous reigns.
The new principle of a two-thirds majority of those present, as it were a head count — without discriminating between them as to worth, age and weightiness — was undoubtedly responsible for Lothar's election.
He was almost certainly not the candidate of the saner part.
Their candidate was probably the cardinal  priest of St Prisca, John of St Paul, one of the previous ruling caucus.
The old pope, Celestine III, had attempted to secure his succession before his death, offering to abdicate in John of St Paul's favour.
There may have been some support for him among the cardinals, but they were not prepared to act in concert and several now put themselves forward.
The two-thirds majority of only those who were present meant that the views of legates and those absent from the curia on business at the time of the death of a pope carried no weight in the election of a successor.
(It was not until the 1939 conclave that all the cardinals were present at a papal election, due as one observer put it to "the advance of medicine and transport" .)
The views of the absentees were not canvassed or taken into account.
Nineteen to twenty cardinals appear to have taken part in the election of Lothar.
We know that there were three other nominations but not whom two of them were, assuming the third to have been John of St Paul.
The two unknown cardinals may have been the diplomats and curial heavyweights, Peter Gallocia, cardinal bishop of Porto and St Rufina (to whom Lothar had dedicated his book) and Octavian, cardinal bishop of Ostia, a powerful Roman, both of whom had opposed Celestine's favoured candidate.
The English chronicler, Roger of Howden, who was in Rome at the time, saw both of them as papabile and ambitious for the papal throne.
He is not always reliable, but he may well be correct when he mentions that there were other candidates, including John of Salerno, cardinal priest of St Stefano in Celiomonte (who he says withdrew from the second ballot), and possibly Jordan of Fossanova, former abbot of Ceccano, cardinal priest of St Pudenziana, and Gratian, cardinal deacon of SS.
Cosmas and Damian, a lawyer and nephew of the earlier pope Eugenius III.
The latter two cardinals had considerable experience abroad.
The discussion that is recorded about Lothar's age suggests that some were at first not too keen to elect a pope in his thirties who, on recent record, might last for half a century.
On the other hand, the pressing need for a dynamic pope to exploit the political vacuum left by the unexpected death of the Emperor Henry VI and the advantages of a third Roman pope in a row may have won over the opposition — and there may have been those impressed by his vigorous views on the papacy's role.
Or perhaps he was the compromise candidate who got in because neither of the two senior cardinal bishops was acceptable to the other party's supporters.
As soon as the election was completed and announced in the words "St Peter elects Lothar pope" , three doves flew into the place where the cardinals were assembled and when Lothar was singled out from the others the whitest of them settled on his right shoulder.
It was also revealed in a vision that the future pope should take the Church as his wife, and more such visions were experienced but, says the biographer, he refrains from recounting them because Lothar did not like such phenomena to be reported.
The new pope was given the name Innocent by the archdeacon and invested with the scarlet mantle which signified his pontificate.
He was then led to the high altar where he prostrated himself while the chant "Te Deum laudamus" was sung.
After receiving the kiss of peace from the other electors, the new pope was escorted to St John Lateran, the church of the bishop of Rome.
There, within the portico of the basilica, the curious ceremony of seating the pope in the marble chair, called the sedes stercoria, took place, from which he was lifted to signify being raised from "the dust and the dung" .
Within the Lateran palace itself, a further ceremony with two seats of porphyry (one of St Peter and one of St Paul) signified the double apostolic foundation and the jurisdictional and magisterial power of the pope, demonstrated by his half lying and half sitting across the two.
Physical possession was taken of every room in the palace and a straight staff was handed to the new pope as well as the keys of the basilica and of the palace.
He had assumed his lordship like any other feudal lord.
He received the homage of the members of his household before going to pray at the oratory of St Laurence, which was  filled with relics of the saints, and finally retiring to his private apartments.
CORONATION
The height of the symbolism and ritual in the process of making a new pope was reached in the ceremony of consecration, coronation and enthronement.
This exhibited in an outward and visible form the power of the papacy as it had developed by the late twelfth century.
This ceremony was witnessed by the members of the pope's entourage, his erstwhile colleagues among the cardinals, with their attendants, and the clergy and people of Rome, plus those visiting the Holy City.
It must be seen, as it undoubtedly was by contemporaries, as the constituent part in the ultimate making of the pope, the shafting of eternal power down to St Peter's successor.
The pope, as St Peter's heir and bishop of Rome, needed episcopal orders — the highest orders of the Church which gave the bishop power to ordain priests, confirm members of the Church and bless the holy oils which were used for ordinations and for the sick.
As Lothar was still only in the lower clerical orders, those of the deacon, he had to be ordained priest, which could only take place on the ember days, so accordingly the ceremonies were delayed until Saturday and Sunday 21/22 February, six weeks after the election.
On the Saturday he was ordained a priest and on the following morning, appropriately the feast of St Peter's Chair, the full ceremonial began in St Peter's, when Innocent, anointed with the holy oils by Octavian, cardinal bishop of Ostia, was consecrated a bishop.
The archdeacon, in traditional role, gave the pope the pallium (the narrow strip of  lamb's wool worn over the shoulders), the symbol of the fullness of power of the pontifical office.
Thus robed, the pope proceeded to the altar and celebrated mass, during which the Laudes were chanted.
The heart of the ceremony — and the singular feature of the splendid but awesome occasion — was the enthronement.
The new pope was enthroned in the most sacred place in the basilica of St Peter, in front of the confessio or altar of St Peter, close to the mortal remains of the apostle to whom Christ had committed the government of His Church on earth.
No medieval emperor — even the greatest and most powerful — was ever enthroned, and this distinguishing feature of papal ceremonial underlined the pope's uniqueness.
Now the new pope, Innocent, was escorted to the front of the basilica where on a platform in full view of the people, he was crowned with the tiara, the senior deacon (i.e. the archdeacon) removing the mitre from the pope's head and replacing it with the tiara.
The tiara was in essence a white cap, having two bands at the back like a mitre, but it had incorporated in it a coronet round the lower rim to which was added a second coronet under Pope Boniface VIII at the end of the thirteenth century, symbolizing sacerdotal and regal powers.
It is first heard of at the coronation of Pope Nicholas II in 1059, when it appears that because the mitre had passed into general use by bishops (and even by princes) the pope's own headgear had to undergo change to become distinctive and exclusive to the pope.
Seated on the chair or cathedra of St Peter, the pope now received the kiss of peace — the ceremony of proskynesis, where, starting with the youngest, the cardinals advanced to kiss his feet.
Then began the ceremony of circumventing the city.
Mounted on a white horse and crowned with the tiara, the pope, accompanied by high-ranking church officials, the cardinals and abbots, the civil officers, the prefect and the senator of Rome, the nobles, and the consuls and rectors  of the papal cities processed through the whole city from St Peter's to the Lateran so that the new pope might be seen by the people.
The procession stopped at various points along the route for the new pope to receive the homage of the people and to distribute alms; the clergy swinging thuribles of incense and the people laden with palms and flowers, singing hymns and canticles.
After acclamations before the Lateran Palace, like those that had already taken place in front of St Peter's, the new pope went up to the principal part of the palace, called the Leonine presbyterium, and later celebrated with a banquet.
THE CITY OF ROME
Rome, unlike Avignon (and, indeed, many other cities) was inconveniently placed for easy relations with most of Europe and cut off from the north-west, where the papacy's influence was strongest, by the great mountain range of the Alps.
However, because of its history and position as the see of St Peter and the imperial city, Rome was without challenge or rival.
Other cities where papal government might have settled were on important trade routes which might have added to the pope's powers and security: but Rome remained the favoured city of the popes and, in spite of all the difficulties of controlling the city, the senate and the people, the popes were prepared to suffer all sorts of indignities in order to stay in Rome.
 "Vanquished by the power of symbolism" , as Le Goff puts it, and disposing of all practical considerations, the fourteenth-century popes returned from what they saw as their "Babylonish captivity" to their impractical papal capital of Rome.
They were as obsessed with Rome, its apostle and his shrine, as their twelfth- and thirteenth-century predecessors had been.
The aim of every pope was to control the city of Rome.
The popes regarded the city as the capital of their duchy.
But in fact many of the twelfth-century popes spent years in exile and between 1162 and 1188 Rome was only possessed by the papacy at intervals.
It has been estimated that the pope was compulsorily absent for more than half the  century between 1099 and 1198 and for a total of 67 years in the next century (1198–1304).
Although there may have been surviving some notion of the tradition of ordered government from the ancient world, in actuality Rome had no strong, centralized government since classical times.
Popes and emperors disputed the city and the citizens attempted to assert the right to rule themselves.
There was a remarkable lack of trade, except in antiques.
So rich was the legacy of the ancients that the fund of spoil has lasted into our own times.
In the 1150s Bishop Henry of Winchester was described as buying up statues all over Rome which he had shipped back to England.
And Abbot Suger of St Denis thought of bringing back ancient Roman columns from Diocletian's baths to use in the construction of his new abbey church outside Paris.
The Vassaletti family were busy exporting marble columns throughout the century and everywhere in Rome great pieces of marble were put to base uses, such as meat and fish slabs.
The Roman marmorarii (marble-cutters, sculptors, mosaic workers) next to the calcarii (the lime-burners) were the worst enemies of ancient Roman monuments, destroying them for materials, but the fund of material was plentiful and out of their pillaging emerged some of the great works of art of the thirteenth century.
There had begun to emerge, too, before the pontificate of Innocent III, a new feeling for preservation and pride in the past.
In 1162 the senate of Rome made great efforts to preserve the column of Trajan for the Roman people and visitors to Rome were beginning to admire the great classical monuments of the past — the Arch of Constantine, the Pantheon and the statue of Venus.
Guide books from the mid-twelfth century to "The Wonders of Rome" (Mirabilia Urbis Rome) began to pay attention to the pagan monuments and were not just guides to the tombs of the martyrs and the saints.
 "The Wonders" or "Marvels" was the basic guide book, immensely popular, which everybody read and to which they  added their own impressions.
Master Gregorius, in his Marvels of Rome, written possibly during Innocent's lifetime, mentions only three churches.
His interest is unashamedly antiquarian and he condemns the iconoclasm of the early Christians, proving himself a true product of the twelfth-century Renaissance.
There was virtually no industry in medieval Rome.
The first craft guild, the guild of agriculturists, had been formed in the 1030s.
By the mid-thirteenth century they were still the leading guild, although the drapers were now also important.
It is true that there were bankers but their reputation for unpleasantness encouraged the popes to turn elsewhere for loans.
Rome, in short, lived on its past simply by being a capital city.
It produced little, but relied on its tourist industry; most of its citizens were shopkeepers and guides.
Bankers and tourism may be seen as signs of economic insecurity.
Food shortages were not uncommon and Innocent himself provided communal restaurants and founded hospitals.
Rome had probably more than the average number of beggars.
What economic security there might be depended on a strong overlordship.
This, by the very nature of the papacy, was bound to be lacking, for the papacy was not an hereditary dynasty.
The nightmare of the lack of a known heir, which brought many feudal dynasties into disastrous situations, was ever present within the papal court.
The uncertain overlordship of Rome, whether of the emperor or of the pope, allowed the senate to develop within certain limits.
The senate, however, consisted of more members of the nobility than of the emerging burgher class, for their economic situation was not strong enough to enable them to develop as they did in the cities of northern Italy and elsewhere in Europe.
The popes had to come to terms with the nobles and those who came from the noble families of the city naturally built up their  own families and factions in order to survive.
Most popes also sought to control the senate by making the key officials their liegemen and placing reliable men (often their relatives — but sometimes kith rather than kin) in key positions.
Immediately after Innocent's election, the senator, Scottus Paparonis, resigned, which paved the way for the nomination of a successor who swore fealty to the pope.
Also one of the new pope's first actions, taken on the day after his consecration, was to extract an oath of obedience from the prefect of Rome.
Peter, who was in office, was accepted and confirmed as prefect, but on condition that he would govern according to Innocent's orders.
When a new pope was elected it was customary for him to give presents (the donativum) to the chief citizens.
Pope Adrian IV paid to ensure friendly relations; Pope Lucius III refused.
Innocent, however, did this with a difference, using the occasion to ask the chief citizens for an oath of obedience in return.
So from the first he attempted to make himself master of the city — a prelude to an active policy not only to control Rome but to restore the Papal State to its old frontiers.
Pope Clement III had repossessed the city in 1188 and made the senate his vassals, but Pope Celestine III, an Orsini, had been more or less confined to the city.
Surrounded by imperial possessions and troops he had to be content to remain active only within its walls.
He was old and somewhat irresolute and indecisive.
The death of the Emperor Henry VI in September 1197, leaving a son of two, came too late for the ageing Celestine to reap the benefit, although he immediately began to re-assert papal claims to the Patrimony, the duchy, the March and Tuscany, now fallen into imperial hands.
With Innocent the picture changed completely.
He was an opportunist and the opportunity presented itself.
He leapt into action.
Within a year of his accession, the old boundaries of the Papal State from Radicofani in the north to Ceprano in the south were no longer merely theoretical.
The Patrimony of St Peter had been restored and even enlarged, and papal control was to be extended even further before Innocent's death.
THE FAMILY
Rome was a city of warring families who sought to control the senate and the senators and, of course, the pope himself.
For this reason (among others) families directed at least one son into the Church.
A position at the papal court brought influence within the city and in a two-way process popes created cardinals from among the Roman baronage.
The great families of the city were distributed in certain quarters.
From the 1200s onwards Lothar's family, the Conti of Segni, occupied the west slope of the Viminal and the area behind the forum of Nerva and they had property and influence in the rione Monti, where the Colonna and the Frangipani were also settled.
A family stronghold in Rome was essential.
In all probability, as cardinal deacon of SS.
Sergio and Bacco, Lothar had begun the process of establishing his control in the diaconate, the area round his church.
As was customary, on his appointment as cardinal (and within two years), he rebuilt the cardinalate church which adjoined the Arch of Septimius Severus in the Forum.
He restored the crypt and the basilica, constructed a new elevated high altar, for which he provided a baldacchino and furnishings, and renewed the roof.
And after his elevation to the papacy, he built a colonnaded portico out of his income as cardinal.
Most important of all his buildings was the Tor' dei Conti, begun for his family immediately after his election as pope in 1198.
This great tower loomed over Rome — as indeed it still does although halved by a later earthquake — dominating the Capitol, the Colosseum, the Quirinal and the route from the Lateran to St Peter's, and was described by one chronicler as touching the clouds.
The great  families of Rome had fortified towers or residences from which they might control the main routes in and out of the city.
In 1199 there were two towers on top of the Arch of Septimius Severus, one of which, the southern, belonged to the church of SS.
Sergio and Bacco.
There was also a tower on top of the aqueduct that dominated the approach to the Lateran palace — in the hands of a great Roman family, the Annibaldi — which Innocent ordered to be removed.
The roads to the Lateran from the west and the north were controlled by another family, the Frangipani.
Innocent's own construction of a fortified residence at the Vatican, on the Mons Saccorum, must be seen as a conscious effort to build a power base away from the Lateran (sometimes called "the winter palace" of the pope), where the Conti were vulnerable.
The Roman residence of the pope from the time of the Emperor Constantine had always been the Lateran and before Innocent's time there was only a temporary residence at St Peter's.
Possibly started very early on by Pope Symmachus, it had been added to by Pope Eugenius III in the twelfth century.
It was used when urban disturbances in the centre of Rome forced flight from the Lateran and when a lengthy liturgical occasion demanded it.
Innocent's building at the Vatican was fortified with towers and an encircling wall and was meant for longer residence.
It looked no doubt much like other fortified noble houses of the period in Rome, although it was perhaps more lavishly decorated.
Clustering round the Cortile del Papagallo, were chapel, chamber, bakery, wine cellar, kitchen and smithy, and houses for the chancellor, treasurer and almoner.
For the basilica itself, he devised an elaborate apse with a great mosaic that described St Peter's as "the Mother of Churches" .
The tower in the east wing of the ancient palace is Innocent's construction, but the surviving decorations all date from Pope Nicholas III's additions in the late thirteenth century.
While most popes spent out for prestige and show, they reserved considerable sums for strategic buildings.
The pope's brother, Richard, played an important role in Roman and papal politics.
He it was who was associated with the Tor' dei Conti — whose construction had depended on funds provided by Innocent — presumably as its castellan.
The family's alliance with the Annibaldi through the marriage of the pope's sister with Peter Annibaldi, seneschal of the pope from 1202 and senator of Rome, brought the Conti to the height of their power not only in the city but also in controlling an extensive area of the Campagna, the region to the south and east of Rome.
It was part of a carefully constructed plan to give the family an estate beyond the Liris.
The Conti family held on to Sora after the election of Innocent's successor, Honorius III, who wished to retain their loyalty and allowed them to keep it in return for payment, but lost the territory back to the Regno after a successful campaign by Frederick II in 1221.
The children of Richard included three sons, the third of whom, Stephen, was promoted cardinal deacon of St Adriano by his uncle in 1216.
The other two, Paul and John, became respectively lords of Valmontone and Poli in the Campagna.
Piece by piece, the Conti estates, insignificant at first, were added to by purchase.
Non-diocesan property was acquired in the Campagna.
Valmontone — the castle with its lands, the palace and houses — was purchased in 1207 and ten days later Manases did homage for the fief to the papal chamberlain, Stephen of Fossanova.
Valmontone was just within the diocese of Segni.
The castle of Poli, which dominated the north of the Campagna, and its fiefs were slowly taken over.
Richard himself spent money on fortifying Poli and was always ready with subsidies to support friends and allies.
In the year 1208 Sora (in the Regno to the east of  Rome) and the title of count were conferred on Richard Conti by the king of Sicily's representative, and on 6 October Richard tendered the oath of vassalage to the pope at Ferentino for all the territories he had acquired and investiture was made with the gilded chalice (per cuppam deauratam).
The transaction had taken place in the great Cistercian abbey of Fossanova which, due to its important position, Innocent was always very careful to treat with much favour.
It has been noted that the only letters in which the phrase "de fratrum nostrorum consilio" ( "with the approval of our brothers" i.e. the cardinals) is consistently used under Innocent are those dealing with the government of the Patrimony of St Peter where the great cardinalate families had their influence.
Further relatives were enlisted in the service of the pope in the Papal State.
In the Campagna and Marittima, Lando da Montelungo, a cousin, was made rector from c.
January 1199.
In Tuscany, Stephen de Romano Carzolus, another relative, served from 30 June 1203, succeeding a cardinal, aided by the prefect.
Another relative and rector of the Patrimony was James, son of John Odoline, a cousin, and count of Andria, who had been papal marshal and commander of Innocent's troops in Sicily in 1200–1201, to whom he granted the fortress of Ninfa on the southern border.
Among the cardinals, Hugolinus, one of Innocent's closest confidants and later Pope Gregory IX, is now generally agreed to have been related to him in the third degree.
Octavian, another relative, followed Innocent in the old Conti church of SS.
Sergio and Bacco from 1206: he had filled the important office of papal chamberlain.
Stephen, the pope's nephew and Richard's son, has already been mentioned and John, cardinal deacon of St Maria in Cosmedin from 1200 was related — possibly another nephew.
Thus Innocent made four of his relatives cardinals, as opposed to Celestine's creation of only one.
We need now to look more closely at the central government of the Church.
THE PAPAL CURIA
The structure of papal government was broadly comparable with that of some contemporary secular kingdoms.
Like them, it was based originally upon the household, and the household continued to have significance even after the formation of other less personal structures.
The household institutions of chapel, chancery and chamber formed the curia of the early twelfth century.
The chapel had important liturgical and ceremonial duties to perform.
The chancery dealt with official communications.
The chamber ran the papal finances.
The pope's court had from very early times exercised judicial powers of extreme significance.
The idea of the curia as a supreme court had been considerably developed by the late twelfth century, with developments in Rome, though the pope might still hear cases within the household.
The main offices of government were based at the Lateran by Innocent's time.
The chancery, or writing office, was in existence probably almost from the beginning of the papacy, certainly by the third century.
It was modelled closely on the old Imperial chancery, using notaries, who were first employed to record the deeds of the early martyrs and the decrees of councils.
By the late eighth to early ninth century, there are some original documents, but not many.
With the accession of popes from north of the Alps, the chancery began to travel with the pope and was "freed" from ancient imperial and more especially from Roman influences, adopting the Caroline minuscule in its letters.
The chancery was immensely important to an active pope for it was mainly through its products that people came to know the pope's thoughts and will.
It may be that more surviving documents for Innocent's pontificate than for previous pontificates reflects greater activity, but we cannot prove that.
However, to understand Innocent's reign we must not lose sight of the chancery and its  activities.
Innocent's chancery — which was to bear quite a heavy weight of governmental responsibility during the pontificate — appears to have been run personally and autocratically by the pope.
The services of Cardinal Cencius Savelli, who had run the chancery under Pope Celestine III (and incidentally the chamber) were not retained by Innocent.
The chancellor's duties were to oversee the issue of all curial correspondence.
He is unlikely to have supervised personally the drawing up of every document — he had staff for that — but he did have the duty of dating the solemn privileges which were issued.
These splendid and costly documents began to decline very dramatically in numbers between the late twelfth and early thirteenth century, as more serviceable and cheaper documents came to replace them.
They required for authentication the subscriptions or signatures of the cardinals, the token signature of the pope and an elaborate dating clause by the chancellor.
Finally, the leaden seal, the bulla, was attached to the document by the bullator (normally a lay-brother from the abbey of Fossanova).
If the document was a letter of grace or a privilege, conferring rights or possessions, the bulla was hung on red and yellow plaited silk strings, but if a mandate or order, plain and undyed hemp was used.
The chancellor was, by the nature of his office, very close to the reigning pope.
There were extremely important secret and confidential documents to be drawn up.
They were drafted individually, as opposed to many letters that used common forms, most likely by the chancellor himself or by a very senior notary, and were sent closed, which meant that the bulla and the cords were used not just to authenticate document but to close and seal it up.
Innocent had only one chancellor so styled, his relative, John, cardinal deacon of St Maria in Cosmedin, who used the title from 1205 until his death in 1213.
Presumably he would have continued in the office for the whole of the pontificate, had he not died before it ended.
Innocent also had an "acting chancellor" in his second pontifical year, from 1199 to 1200, Rainald, a papal notary, but he was sent to be archbishop of Acerenza.
Otherwise he used notaries.
While chancellors were usually cardinals, the notaries were not.
Only John of Ferentino, who acted for Innocent as a  notary when subdeacon, was made a cardinal but he was not given the title of chancellor.
THE COLLEGE OF CARDINALS
The Reform movement of the eleventh century was behind the building up of the college of cardinals and its privileges.
The cardinals from the fifth century, with their Roman titular churches, provided the weekly liturgical ministry for the basilicas with cemeteries.
From the eighth century these duties were attended to in the Lateran by seven bishops from the nearby dioceses and in four other basilicas by the priests of the titular churches, now increased to twenty-eight.
Cardinal deacons were added to their number; and by Paschal II's reign (1099–1118) there were seven bishops (later reduced in number), twenty-eight priests and eighteen deacons.
A strong esprit de corps was developing.
The cardinals began to think of themselves as the hinges on which the universal Church turned, a comparison that had already been made by Pope Leo IX (1048–54) and by Cardinal Deusdedit in the 1080s.
During the thirteenth century their privileges, dignities and revenues increased.
They had the revenues from their cardinalate churches in Rome and in the case of the cardinal bishops from their bishoprics.
As the papacy's powers increased so did the cardinals' revenues, for they were involved in general administration and often legal duties and would expect gifts and payments for services.
The cardinals' households were mini papal curias.
Petitioners came to them; careers were sought in them.
The cardinals joined in all the rapidly growing administrative and judicial functions of the papal court.
They sat to hear cases in the papal consistory which under Innocent III met three times in each week.
Many cases were delegated to them to hear on their own.
They filled the administrative offices for the pope.
Some were sent as legates or ambassadors, others served as papal chancellor, papal chamberlain or papal vicar, administering the Papal State.
They were protectors of the religious orders and preachers of the crusade, the  pope's natural advisers, though he was by no means obliged to listen to their advice or follow their counsel.
They had special status and legal protection and there were prescribed penalties for those attacking or injuring them.
They were not granted their later symbol of dignity, the red hat, until Innocent IV's reign.
Romans predominated in the college of cardinals under both Celestine III and Innocent III.
One contrast, however, was that of the thirty-two cardinals created by Innocent nearly 50 per cent were masters (men who had been at universities).
At his election Celestine III had inherited a college with only twelve masters out of a college of thirty-five.
Fractionally more monks were favoured by Innocent (especially Cistercians), and the "external" cardinals, those with permanent commissions outside Rome, declined in number.
Innocent had only two "outsider" cardinals: Gerard de Sessa, elect of Novara (1210), Albano (1211) and then Milan, and Anselm, archbishop of Naples.
Although Innocent gave his college an international flavour and outlook with the appointment of such men as Stephen Langton, Robert of Courson and Peter of Corbeil, the solid Roman basis, supported by cardinals from the neighbourhood of Rome, remained intact from 1198 to 1216.
And, indeed, the number of non-Italians dwindled from possibly six (two or three French, two English, one Spanish) to three (one Spanish, one English and one probably southern French).
Even the "outer" Italians were few in number — one each from Vercelli, Milan, Viterbo, Benevento and Capua.
Maleczek has shown that from Innocent's sixth year in office, 1203–4, as the reign progressed, the pope worked more and more with a smaller group of cardinals, of whom the key members were Hugolinus, Pelagius and Guala, and there was less consultation of the whole college.
This came to create a rift between insiders and outsiders.
CONCLUSION
Innocent's view of government was both traditional and monarchic.
By traditional I mean that it was founded on a  growing interpretation of the past, not that tradition was swallowed hook, line and sinker — indeed, in some cases it was turned upside down— but always it was referred to, re-explained.
It was a re-working of the past that was partly theological.
By monarchic I mean that the pope had an authority and duty to rule and to direct as the representative of the ultimate ruler, and that he exercised power in a monarchic way.
He had, as had most strong popes, a clear idea of what he thought the past signified.
First and foremost, the Donation of Constantine, whereby the emperor had transferred temporal government to the popes, was not forgotten.
Its message was all around him.
It explained the pope's temporal power over the city of Rome and the surrounding areas.
It also explained the primacy of the Western bishopric of St Peter over Constantinople and the eastern Mediterranean sees.
However much the Donation had been perfected and refined by the twelfth century to fit into other papal arguments, there still remained the basic problem not so much as to the origin of power as to its descent.
To Innocent it seemed that his political power in general came from Christ.
He did not use the Donation in his arguments to restore to the papacy command over the Papal State — his policy of recuperatio — but the diplomas of Carolingian and later emperors.
This can hardly be to deny the emperor's gift but is certainly the action of a realist, to whom arguments from later, and perhaps what was seen to be better, evidence, are important.
He was never in any doubt, however, that obedience of lay rulers, including the emperor, was to him.
By the Petrine commission the pope had been given the power to rule.
Elaborated by his belief in the Vicariate of Christ and in both the priestly and the monarchic powers of Melchizedek, he seemed in no doubt as to the "plenitude" of the pope's powers.
In terms of active, practical government and politics, however, it was the Investiture Contest that had already begun to change the face of European government.
Europe, emerging in the late eleventh century, after an era of wars and invasions during the "Dark Ages" , to a period of relative peace, began to look towards more settled forms of government.
In this climate, it was realized that there was a corrupting element in the exercise of power, so the idea that it was the ruler's duty to exercise authority on behalf of God and of the people began to be re-emphasized.
The Carolingians had accentuated the importance of rulership as the ministry of God (the ministerium Dei).
Rulership was a trust — a trust from God.
Successful missionizing activities and the extending of the boundaries and powers of states led secular authorities to an examination of the sources of power and to its exercise.
It cannot be doubted that the Western emperors were, like the popes, sincere in their desire to exercise power justly.
The Emperor Henry III had been responsible for the appointment of Pope Leo IX (1048–54), the great reforming pope, to whom Pope Gregory VII (Hildebrand, 1073–85) owed so much.
The emperors, indeed, had saved the papacy in the period before Hildebrand.
The emperor Henry IV was no less sincere in his outlook than Gregory VII and he was no out-and-out secularist.
He accepted that emperorship was responsible and that he was answerable to a higher power.
But it was theocratic kingship that was the foundation of his policy and his rulership rather than a kingship or emperorship that looked to the pope for sanction and direction.
He was king by the grace of God, not of the pope: indeed, the vicar of God.
The national church organization had long been accepted in central Europe: bishops were the crown's natural advisers, the crown's civil servants.
Bishoprics were in the royal gift and, as sizeable landed endowments, they were like fiefs.
It was hardly surprising that kings wanted solemn oaths from their servants, the bishops, that they looked upon bishoprics as income and that, in line with the symbolic ceremonies of society, they expected to "invest" their appointees and to receive from them solemn oaths of fidelity.
The popes accepted that no bishops should be appointed without royal permission.
But the national church organization, which the papacy had encouraged, brought with it lay investiture, the giving to the bishop of the ring and staff and the performance of homage to the ruler.
Furthermore, the use of  powerful and wealthy nobles and kings as missionizers had led to proprietary churches and monasteries, that is to churches which were built and financed or "owned" by laymen who might make their own appointments.
There was no real victor from the Investiture Contest.
The pope died in exile; the emperor had been "humbled" at Canossa; and other rulers, the Normans, had been brought to prominence by the papacy.
But it left a legacy — a positive one.
In the long term it committed the papacy to active government.
Popes were no longer content to see political leadership taken from them.
The pope has control over the kingdom and kingdoms of this world.
He can "bind and make loose" .
He also has access to that other kingdom; he can open the doors of heaven.
 "My kingdom is not of this world" was not regarded as releasing the pope from an active role in government, though it did express the great moral fervour that fuelled the late eleventh- and early twelfth-century reforms — especially in the attack on clerical marriage and in the drive to rid the Church of unchaste priests and to control the proprietary church system (secular theocracy).
Pope Gregory VII had given the Church an undisputed leadership.
His claim that all power proceeded from God was made loud and clear.
It marked the end of the possibility of an attitude of withdrawal for the papacy.
The world was to be converted by the priesthood.
The emphasis on the role of the priest and the claim of the pope to depose an unworthy emperor were two aspects of Gregory's pontificate that had a marked influence on Innocent.
The clergy were integral to government at all levels.
Their moral probity and reform, if necessary, was, therefore, imperative.
The Church must be purified in its new, active role.
The question as to whether an unchaste priest might celebrate the mass became important.
The Church must be pure, as government must be pure.
For Gregory, mass celebrated by an unchaste priest was invalidated.
Here Innocent's views diverged from Gregory's.
Undoubtedly influenced by the theology taught at Paris by the end of the twelfth century, he maintained that unchaste behaviour by the priest did not invalidate his orders.
But both men agreed implicitly on the unique importance of the priesthood and the priestly function.
Gregory's declaration, known as the Dictatus Pape, of 1075, enshrined the clause that stated that the pope had power to depose an unworthy emperor.
 "It is permitted to the pope to depose emperors" .
The pope, too, alone, can depose bishops and move them from see to see.
Such tenets involved the papacy in action.
Active government was not in doubt by the end of the twelfth century as the papacy's programme.
Canon law was the statement of how society was to be governed and here Innocent's monarchic views are clearly shown.
Certain decretals or rulings of Innocent III illustrate the pope's clear conceptions of rulership and his relationship with earthly rulers, emperors and kings.
The decretal letter "Solite" , addressed to Alexis, the emperor of Constantinople, outlined the pope's function as an adviser of monarchs.
It was, said Innocent, his duty to exhort and advise rulers.
Alexis is at fault in ranking imperial power and dignity higher than sacerdotal power, but the power of the priesthood descends from God and not from kings.
"I am writing not to denigrate you but to help you…
It would be as well if you listened to my advice".
In the decretal "Novit ille" , written to the archbishops and bishops of France, Innocent declared how much he has the interests of King Philip Augustus and his kingdom at heart and how wrong it would be to assume that he had any intentions that were harmful to the French king's jurisdictional powers.
He has the right not to judge in feudal (or state) matters but in "matters of sin" .
This should not be taken as an affront to Philip's power and prestige.
According to the Emperor Valentinian all matters should be submitted to the Holy See, but we only claim the right to judge in disputed matters.
The king of France should, therefore, submit to his right to intervene.
As pope he may judge in a matter of broken oaths, an imperfectly observed treaty and a breach of the peace.
The letter, "Per venerabilem" , was written to William, count of Montpellier.
In it, Pope Innocent refused the legitimization of the count's sons.
By showing the authority of the apostolic see to judge in such matters the pope therefore showed his authority to decide on rulers.
He gave detailed, legal reasons why William's request was refused while Philip Augustus's had been granted, but it was the very act of authority that mattered.
Innocent was claiming, therefore, the right to intervene in kingdoms.
A king's marriage and the legitimization of heirs might well be "reasons of sin" that allowed the pope to intervene.
Or it might be the breaking of an oath or the refusal to accept the decrees of Rome, as with King John.
He might also, quite obviously, direct the activities of bishops throughout the Church, translate them and control them.
The pope's claims to decide on appeal were witnessed most clearly in the Canterbury election.
The elections of the monk Reginald and later of the king's candidate, John de Gray, were clearly uncanonical, and the electors being at Rome, the election of Langton was quite correct.
Stephen Langton, however, was consecrated by Innocent at Rome without the king's assent, so that, although Innocent had acted within canonical rules, the king felt threatened by this election outside his court, to which he had not given his consent.
To John this seemed likely to be a precedent.
He had to resist it.
It is a perfect illustration of Innocent's monarchic and autocratic instincts.
Chance had played into his hands.
Innocent was in no doubt as to the proper roles of kings and emperors.
They were there to assist the papacy in its work of extending the Christian religion and maintaining a just society.
With the adoption of Christianity by kings and their subjects had come the conception of the "Christian ruler" , for Christ had been the "King of the Jews" and the society of the Old Testament was a kingly and patriarchal one.
The king was not merely a tribal chieftain and warlord, ravaging and conquering, he was a representative of Christ, "the king" , on earth.
The Old Testament kings had been warriors and conquerors, smiting their enemies, but they had also been vehicles through whom the law of God was interpreted and enforced.
The Christian emperor and king was seen as a man born or elected to duties and obligations towards God and his subjects, as well as a man with rights and privileges.
He had power, but he had to be responsible in the exercise of it.
The most solemn of his duties were to keep the peace, to spread Christianity and to declare the law.
The sacring of emperors, kings and bishops signified an acceptance that as Christian rulers they governed subject to eternal or divine laws.
The crown, the mitre, the sword  of justice, the ring, the sceptre, the rod and the bishop's staff symbolized pastoral and judicial powers.
Coronation became important in the acceptance of an emperor or a king and coronation or, more importantly, the prior consecration could only be performed by a high ecclesiastic, the pope or certain specified archbishops.
The popes saw the emperors as their lieutenants.
From the coronation of Charlemagne, king of the Franks, as emperor, by the pope on Christmas Day 800, the emperorship was removed to the West.
The elaborate ceremonial and the oaths of kingship were spreading throughout the Christian West.
In 787 the son of Offa, king of Mercia, was consecrated.
The coronation oath of Edgar is recorded for 973: he swore first "that God's Church and all Christian people of my realm shall enjoy true peace; second, that I forbid to all ranks of men robbery and all wrongful deeds; third, that I urge and command justice and mercy in all judgements" — pious words, perhaps, but solemn and binding, and made at the bidding of Archbishop Dunstan and laid on the altar at Bath.
It was in essence this same three-fold promise of the Anglo-Saxons that was used for coronations throughout the thirteenth century in England: King Richard I at his first coronation in 1189 swore "to maintain peace and honour and to reverence the Church, to annul any evil laws, and to make and maintain good laws" .
There can be little doubt that such sentiments reinforced the laws or dooms that were proclaimed by early kings in England and reminded the king of his Christian obligations and duties.
We cannot be certain of the precise significance of the separate parts of the royal insignia — the  sword, the ring, the sceptre and the rod.
All were used at the time of the Edgar "Ordo" .
The sword appears to have been to defend the Holy Church, the sceptre to signify royal power and the rod to symbolize virtue and equity.
Three swords and two sceptres were carried before the English king at his coronation in 1189: the sceptre with the cross probably signifying power and justice, the sceptre with the dove, equity and mercy, while the three swords may have been associated singly with authority, mercy and justice.
The essence of what the popes required of the emperors and how they saw the imperial office is enshrined in the imperial oaths taken at the time of coronation and in the prayer at the conferment of the sword.
The imperial oaths were composed in the pope's curia.
The first was probably written and used in the ninth century.
By the time of the coronation of the Emperor Otto I in 962, when a new order of service had appeared, the chrism (that is, the oil mixed with balm) was no longer applied on the head, to symbolize directive powers, but between the shoulders.
It was thus made clear that there was no connection with the consecration of bishops who were anointed on their heads.
Anointing the shoulders or arms was to symbolize the emperor's protective and defensive role.
By the middle of the twelfth century, a revised order introduced a solemn oath which was taken on the gospels.
And when Innocent came to crown the Emperor Otto IV in 1209 he introduced a new oath in which he incorporated a pledge to conserve the pope's possessions and laws.
(No doubt the pope had in mind previous imperial aggression in the Papal State.)
Otto promised this before God and before St Peter, as his predecessors had done.
Even more indicative of Innocent's intentions were the changes made to the prayer at the conferment of the sword.
The sword had first been conferred in 823: it was the symbol of the emperor's role as defender of the Church, to maintain justice and wipe out iniquity.
Previously, the emperor had received the sword from God; now he received it, after it had rested (like the pallium  used for the investiture of archbishops) on the body of St Peter, from the hands of the pope ( "however unworthy" , as Innocent said), not from God but from his vicar.
As the pope strapped the sword round the emperor's waist, he reminded the emperor that the saints had conquered kingdoms not by the sword but by faith.
In Innocent's view, too, there was a clear distinction between royal and episcopal rites, between the anointing of the king and of the priest.
He tried, though perhaps without much success, to restrict the use of chrism to bishops, and, making a further distinction between royal and episcopal consecration, he ordered that kings, like emperors, were to be anointed only on the arms or shoulders and hands, not on the head.
For Innocent, the vicar of Christ, the commission to St Peter to govern meant implementation of the aims of his predecessors as he understood them.
He sincerely hoped to be able to establish the rule of Christ on earth with the help of the Christian emperor, an emperor who could be approved and crowned only by the pope.
POLITICS, POWER AND PROPAGANDA
POLITICS
Politically, fate dealt Innocent III an extraordinarily good hand.
In September 1197 the Emperor Henry VI had died at the age of 32, leaving an heir who was little more than a baby.
Just as Napoleon in 1804, Henry VI might well in time have had Europe at his feet.
His dream of uniting Germany and Italy was based in reality from the time of his marriage to Constance, heiress to the kingdom of Sicily, whose kings ruled over both the island and the southern part of Italy known as the Regno.
Nor was the Staufen plan to incorporate France in this empire — which is outlined in the Annals of Marbach — beyond the realms of possibility.
Henry VI had the subjection of the southern kingdom of Aragon within his sights, and King Richard I of England, who dominated more than half of modern France, had become his quasi-vassal.
The Staufen claim to imperial suzerainty over England, too, was not entirely unrealistic either at this time.
The Imperial chronicler speaks of "the whole world" as being the emperor's long-term view of his dominion.
Dominion over western Europe was far from impossible for such a man as Henry VI.
But Henry's sudden death put an end (at least temporarily) to such imperial  aspirations and caused a power vacuum.
According to the historian Ranke, the real heir to the Emperor Henry VI was not his son, the future Frederick II, but Pope Innocent III; he, in fact, was echoing the words of a contemporary writer, Gervase of Tilbury, who called Innocent "the true emperor" (verus imperator).
Immediately the rumours of Henry's illness began, rebellion broke out in the Rhineland and as soon as they were confirmed there was plundering of the imperial estates.
The obvious trustee of the empire was Henry's younger brother, Philip of Swabia, who was on his way to Sicily to conduct the two-year-old child, Frederick, Henry's heir, back to Germany for his coronation, when news came to the party at Montefiascone, to the north of Rome, that Henry was in fact dead.
As early as 1196 Henry, a ruler of very considerable foresight, had prepared for the succession.
His constitutional plan had been to secure the election of his son, the young Frederick, as king, but as soon as the emperor was known to be dead the wisdom of upholding the election of so young an heir was questioned.
Some of the princes of Germany doubted the validity of the election on the grounds that Frederick had not been baptized at the time and he had only been elected, they said, out of fear for his father.
Philip of Swabia acted with the greatest propriety.
He proposed a regency council to uphold the validity of Frederick's election until the heir should come of age.
He had no intention of assuming the emperorship himself.
Powerful forces, however, that disliked the Staufen family influence were now unleashed.
Many of the imperial electors wished to be free from Staufen domination, but they had no constructive plans beyond this goal.
Some, disregarding their oaths, favoured the election of the king of France, Philip Augustus; others were prepared to support the candidature of King Richard I of England.
In their opposition they were united only by one common interest — a desire to bring about the fall of the Staufer.
The most powerful feudal lord in Germany, Adolf, archbishop of Cologne — the last to take the oath to the young Frederick and the first to break it — wanted Richard I. The diocese had strong ties with England and there were important commercial considerations.
The archbishop of Trier convoked a meeting at Andernach, under the presidency of Archbishop Adolf of Cologne, to elect a new king.
The obvious choice of the opposition was the Count Palatine Henry, a Welf, but he was on crusade and so Duke Bernard of Saxony was considered and elected.
Bernard, however, refused the offer and the assembly invited King Richard I of England.
Philip of Swabia, meanwhile, was maintaining the illegality of the meeting on the grounds that there was a legitimate heir, that oaths had been taken to that heir by all the princes and that, furthermore, few of them had been present at Andernach.
A Diet was called for March 1198 at Cologne.
At about this point Philip and his advisers decided that the best way to preserve the crown for Frederick — in view of the failure of the regency council to control the princes — was for Philip to take it himself until his nephew came of age.
On 1 March 1198 the Cologne assembly met.
Here Richard I's envoys announced that the king would not stand — they had been ordered to vote for the Count Palatine Henry (whose support Richard wanted in his struggle against the French king) but he still had not returned.
Meanwhile, at Erfurt, many of the princes and the archbishops of Mecklenburg and Salzburg and the bishops of Merseburg, Worms and Bamberg proceeded to designate Philip as imperial defender until Frederick came of age.
They were on weak ground, for there were no precedents for this, and on 8 March the Cologne assembly, now meeting at Mulhouse, divested Philip of this title and denied the validity of his election, saying that it had been carried out in an unusual place and that the count Palatine and the archbishop of Mainz had been absent.
Duke Berthold of Zähringen was now put up as the candidate of the Welfs because he appeared a man of means and was well known for his hostility to the Staufer.
But Adolf of Cologne and his supporters, who disliked Philip even more than the young Frederick, had made a miscalculation and chosen a thoroughly bad lot.
Duke Berthold sent neither the expected money nor the troops for which he had been asked nor the hostages, nor did he turn up.
He had changed sides.
The new Welf candidate was Otto, brother of the count Palatine Henry, a man who knew nothing of imperial affairs.
Born about 1182 in Normandy, the son of a German father (Henry the Lion) and an Aquitanian mother, he had been much in the company of his uncle, King Richard I, who created him count of Poitou at the age of fourteen.
From Poitou he ravaged French territories.
He was glib in tongue, lavish in promises, big in size and somewhat stupid.
He was elected king at Cologne on 9 June 1198.
Just over a week later his forces marched on Aachen (Aix-la-Chapelle) which fell on 12 July and there the archbishop of Cologne, Adolf, anointed and crowned Otto.
The strength of the Welf party lay on the lower Rhine and in the Netherlands and especially in the support of Cologne and of its archbishop, for Cologne had strong trading ties with England.
(The archbishop of Trier did not attend the coronation.)
The imperial schism had begun.
Philip had already shown himself as king at Worms on 5 April 1198.
He had the considerable advantage of possessing the imperial insignia and he began to style himself "Rex Romanorum et semper Augustus" — the imperial designation.
In September 1198 his election was repeated at Mainz and on the 8th he was crowned by the archbishop of Tarentaise, Aimo, not as he should have been by the archbishop of Mainz — recognized as the crowning archbishop from the tenth century — who was absent on crusade.
Philip had been slow to move and he had gained little by coronation by such a lowly archbishop as Tarentaise — Trier, Salzburg, Bremen and Magdeburg were all unavailable.
Furthermore, the coronation church was at Aachen not Mainz.
The imperial schism had already become a question of European concern, sparking off a network of alliances and  counter-alliances only to be matched by those of later eighteenth- and nineteenth-century Europe.
Richard I and Philip Augustus of France were at war at the time: the connection between Richard and Otto, supported by Count Baldwin of Flanders and Archbishop Adolf of Cologne, pushed Philip Augustus to the support of Philip of Swabia.
Negotiations with the papacy by both parties were in train and the bishops and princes changed sides like rich men throwing off old clothes.
Already in November 1197 Philip had approached Pope Celestine III to bring to an end his excommunication, and before his consecration, Innocent III had empowered Philip's envoy, the bishop of Sutri, and the abbot of San Anastasio to absolve Philip, provided he released the abbot of Salerno before his absolution and took an oath to obey the mandates of the Church.
By the time the legates arrived, however, they were dealing with a king, not a duke, and the bishop of Sutri was satisfied with a general promise from Philip rather than a formal oath and he absolved Philip secretly.
Innocent maintained that Philip should have gone to Rome for absolution but for the moment he let the matter rest.
He was playing his cards very close to his chest.
Monaco de Villa, a Milanese, who had been at Otto's coronation, was employed in a dual role between the two courts and through him Innocent probably conveyed his conditions for accepting Otto.
Although Innocent had recognized Philip there were now signs that he had begun to favour Otto.
Even Otto knew that without papal support he could not survive.
By the spring of 1199, however, Otto's cause had begun to wane.
Henry of Colden returned from the Crusade to help Philip, and Richard I, Otto's main supporter, died on 6 April 1199.
The archbishop of Cologne had second thoughts on the wisdom of helping Otto, for with Richard's death no more money was coming from England, commercial interests suffered and the Rhine and Lotharingian supporters were hard hit.
In the spring and early summer the archbishops of Bremen and of Magdeburg and the bishop of Osnabruck went over to Philip.
The Declaration of Speyer of 28 May 1199, the great Staufen protest, was despatched to Innocent.
It was an impressive political statement that the electors had elected someone who had the right to be emperor.
Only a formal act of the pope was seen  as necessary to crown him.
The pope could not reject him.
The Staufen ideology, in which imperial election was purely a formality, is clearly stated.
 "We will come to Rome and you will crown our lord Philip" .
At this point in the narrative we need to turn to the remarkable Register concerning the imperial question (Regestum super negotio Romani imperii or RNI), a secret register opened by the papal curia between August and September 1199, but containing entries going back to 3 May.
This register of letters deals with the transactions over the imperial question and contains copies of some incoming letters (including the above) as well as the highly secret ones being sent out.
Meanwhile the curia maintained the general register for all the other business of the pontificate and hands of the same scribes are found in both the main register and the RNI.
The RNI was devised as an aide-mémoire probably to serve the needs of the pope himself and his innermost circle of advisers.
It is a deliberate selection of letters to illustrate a theme.
Texts of letters were reduced and adjusted.
There are marginal comments and addresses for quick reference.
Most significant of all there is an interruption in registration in 1206 when things were not progressing well for Innocent.
Then in August 1208, when Innocent had found his way to the point where he wished to be in the dispute, the significant letters of 1205–6 were entered up.
The register opens some three weeks before the Declaration of Speyer of May 1199 had been drawn up.
The Declaration was, however, drafted at the end of January at Nuremberg and the curia may well have had advance knowledge of the text.
Certainly by the spring of 1199 the pope realized that a major political affair was developing.
His position — the position, indeed, to which he clung throughout the long controversy — is made clear in his reply to the Staufer and in the early letters of the register.
The pope should have been called upon to act as arbiter in  the dispute, as he alone has regal and sacerdotal powers.
He is also vicar of Christ.
Kings had been instituted to repress evil-doers and the emperor is the "protector" of Christendom whom the pope needs to implement Christian aims.
It follows that the pope should arbitrate between claimants to the emperorship.
But only Otto had in fact approached Innocent (who did not wish to make a judgment in the matter from which there was no return).
He also wished to be satisfied on certain counts as to the suitability of the candidates.
The Staufer understood the pope's reply as a sharp refusal.
Furthermore, they had no intention of requesting arbitration.
It appears that Innocent in November to December 1199 was badly informed as to the power of Otto's party.
Contrary to the truth, he believed that the parties were equally matched and that Otto, after Richard I's death, was firmly in the saddle.
In fact the Welfs could not get their letters through Philip's lines and Philip was much stronger than Otto militarily and as time wore on attracting more of the princes to his cause.
Innocent's main hope at this point was to bring Otto and Philip to a truce and he had, on 3 May 1199, commissioned Archbishop Conrad of Mainz to bring this about.
Conrad, who had remained faithful to his oath to Frederick, achieved a six-month truce and the setting up of a tribunal, consisting of eight princes from each side, which was to meet under his presidency between Andernach and Coblenz on 28 July 1200.
What was decided there was to be binding on all.
Otto's letter to the pope (asking Innocent to influence the sixteen princes in their decision), which is included in the RNI, is the only evidence we have of communications between Otto and the pope before 1200.
The curia was taken aback by this letter.
That the princes should decide the fate of the empire — and that Innocent should bring influence to bear upon them — went right against the pope's ideas.
He and his advisers were so dismayed as to misread the letter, for the reply makes it clear that they understood the meeting of the princes to have taken place already.
Conrad was accordingly taken to task for not reporting to Rome and was (wrongly) reproved for taking part in the assembly.
A special commissary, Egidius, was sent by the pope to keep an eye on Conrad.
Innocent's letters of the summer and autumn 1200 (to all the princes of Germany, to Philip Augustus, to King John and to the duke of Brabant and his wife) did not hide his preference for Otto.
The Staufen party and Conrad of Mainz, seeing where Innocent's feelings lay, lost interest in further tribunals.
The pope's intention now was for a diet of princes to be convoked — to be chaired by a papal legate.
On Christmas Day 1200 one of the most remarkable political statements in the history of medieval papacy and empire was drawn up in a secret consistory of the pope and cardinals.
Under the three headings of (1) what is legally admissible (2) what is morally admissible and (3) what is politically right and proper, the three candidates, Otto, Philip and Frederick, are considered.
Otto is dealt with in five lines and the fact that a majority of the princes had elected Philip is glossed over.
It takes three pages to demolish Philip.
The reasons against Philip are later (and probably less honestly) stated to be his own guilt and actions rather than his Staufen ancestry.
Innocent's sense of history breaks through in every line.
The position of Frederick, the young heir, shows the political sensitivity, realism and acumen of the pope, for he says that when Frederick grows up, if he sees that he has been deprived of the empire by the Roman Church he will attack the Church.
The secret consistory decided to send Guido, cardinal bishop of Preneste, who was to be joined by Octavian, cardinal bishop of Ostia (described as "holding the first place in the Roman Church after us" ), at present acting as legate in France, and the pope's own emissary, Master Philip the notary, to be present at a council to decide the imperial succession.
And on 5 January 1201 Innocent addressed all the secular and ecclesiastical princes of Germany to this end.
The Roman pontiff's unique powers as mediator are stressed.
But by 1 March all semblance of the princes deciding the matter, with the help of the  pope's legates, had disappeared, for on this day the papal chancery addressed Otto as "illustrious king" and announced him emperor elect.
What then had happened between 5 January and 1 March 1201 and why had Innocent declared for Otto before the council?
The answer lies in the secret register.
The papal envoy, Egidius, began the journey home after the death of Archbishop Conrad of Mainz — and, incidentally, after a double election to the see of Mainz of a Staufen candidate and of a Welf candidate.
Egidius arrived in Rome with up-to-date and reliable news on the political situation in Germany, reporting how badly things were going for Otto, after Cardinal Guido and Master Philip had left.
Although Innocent had wished the council and the princes to be brought to the point of declaring for Otto, the news, as related by Egidius, was so bad for the Welfs that he felt forced to intervene and declare for Otto at once.
Accordingly the full weight of the curial machine was now brought into play.
Letters 32 to 49 of the RNI were all written on 1 March with the express purpose of pulling out every stop in favour of Otto with the crowned heads of Europe, and especially with the kings of England and of France.
Pressure was put upon both John and Philip Augustus.
The pope did not hesitate to point out to John the advantages of seeing Otto as emperor and to Philip Augustus, the threat that a Staufen emperor would present to France if Germany was united with Sicily.
Before the end of the year, he was also prepared to make a concession to Philip Augustus and legitimize his heirs — Philip's bigamous wife had conveniently died — to encourage Philip towards the support of Otto.
Events proceeded fast.
On 8 June 1201 at Neuss Otto took the oath to the pope and the Roman Church.
On 3 July 1201 he was crowned at Cologne.
The reports of Master Philip and of Cardinal Guido of Preneste were made to the pope.
Guido's is more cautious — he sensed that the bishops of the empire were still dazed by the pope's action in recognizing Otto.
The solidarity of the ecclesiastical  princes was essential in view of the fact that the secular princes were still mainly with Philip.
In September 1201 Philip of Swabia's followers gathered at Bamberg.
Although Philip was excommunicated all followed his invitation and the assembly had the semblance of an imperial diet.
It was reported that an oath of allegiance was taken here to Philip.
And it may have been here that a Staufen protest to the pope was drawn up.
This questioned the conduct of Guido, the cardinal bishop of Preneste — probably a device not to offend the pope personally — who had, they said, intervened either as elector or as judge, neither of which role was acceptable to them.
The Staufer maintained that they accepted the magisterial primacy of the Roman Church — the pope's power to approve and anoint the emperor — but they challenged the jurisdictional primacy, namely the pope's claim to appoint the emperor.
Accordingly they petitioned the pope to anoint Philip.
The letter reached Innocent early in 1202.
At about this time King Philip Augustus of France directed a letter of protest against the promotion of Otto.
The king's advisers were shrewd enough to turn the pope's language against him.
Whereas Innocent, in his letter of March 1201, had promised that he would guarantee France against any encroachment by Otto, so Philip was prepared to guarantee that Philip of Swabia, if elected, would do no harm to Innocent.
Innocent's reply to Philip of Swabia's supporters, addressed to Duke Berthold of Zähringen, declared that Guido of Preneste had acted neither as an elector nor as a judge but merely as a reporter (denunciator) on the qualities of Philip as a person unworthy.
He repeated that it was the right of the pope to inspect and crown, absolved all from their oaths to Philip and again exhorted all the princes to adhere or go over to the support of Otto.
The Staufer were far from satisfied with this reply, which one chronicler reports on as containing many absurd and untrue things, "multa absurda et quedam falsa" .
Innocent began now to concentrate on the imperial bishops and on securing practical support for Otto, who in turn was exhorted to assume a manly attitude and in short "to live up to " the title to which he had been called.
Under the barrage of letters from the curia, few had the courage to remain loyal to Philip.
A series of archbishops and bishops were brought to Rome and "carpeted" .
The archbishop of Besançon was summoned through the bishop of Langres (an intentional slight) for allowing papal messengers to be captured; the bishop of Speyer on the same grounds and also for sending one messenger to the gallows; the archbishop of Tarentaise for crowning Philip; and the bishop of Passau, who had probably been the draughtsman of the Staufen protest, had a long series of charges brought against him — he had not delivered two million marks to the king of Hungary, he had not paid back the money given him by Richard I for his release — indeed, his crimes were so great, the letter said, that he could have been punished without trial.
The final blow for Philip was the defection of his chancellor, Conrad, bishop of Würzburg.
No other bishop could have done so much harm to Philip as Conrad.
Worse was to come.
Before Conrad had received the pope's letter, following his overtures to him, he was slain on 6 December 1202 and the body severely mutilated.
His blood-soaked clothes were shown to Philip who broke down and wept and ordered the erection of a cross, but rumour spread that Philip was implicated in the murder.
Public opinion swung against Philip.
Innocent did not associate Philip with the murder, but relentlessly sought the true murderers who were finally brought to justice in Rome in April 1203 and sent to the Holy Land.
They could not enter the church, were excommunicated and were never to eat meat.
However, the damage to Philip had been done.
Less than six months later Philip was confined to his own estates.
Philip himself now began to understand Innocent better.
He sent a messenger, a monk, Otto of Salem, to Rome to sound out Innocent.
Informal negotiations began between the two parties and in May 1203 Philip was prepared to make concessions — not a single  secular prince was to be found among the names of the signatories.
The concessions included no word about the overlordship of north Italy, the Papal State and Sicily, whose integrity Innocent wanted assured.
In September 1203 the pope was very ill and his life was despaired of.
None was more despairing than Otto, for if the pope died Otto's position would be immediately weakened.
But Innocent recovered and immediately began to exert control over the bishops.
One by one they were brought to Rome and, as opportunity arose, they were required to take an oath of obedience to the Holy See "super negotio imperii" , "on the matter of the empire" .
But doubt remained among them and many of them continued to think that the legitimately elected king was Philip.
Although by the end of 1203 Otto controlled an area from the French frontier to the Elbe, his cause was by no means won.
Fortune now began to turn in favour of Philip.
At the end of 1204 Otto's brother, the Count Palatine Henry, the landgrave of Thuringia, the king of Bohemia, Adolf, archbishop of Cologne, and the duke of Brabant all went over to Philip, mainly inspired by their own self-interests.
In attempting to understand the imperial question we need to bear in mind the complexity of relations between the princes, especially the lay princes.
Opportunism had long been a characteristic of princes and alliances and changes of allegiance were connected with the patronage to be gained from the emperor.
The princes needed to support the dominant imperial candidate to maintain and enhance their positions.
It was these self-interests that a distant pope was to find difficult to overcome.
Innocent's role as a great spiritual ruler, arbitrating on the candidates for the title, was a weak one if the favoured candidate did not have the necessary allegiance and military support of the princes.
Innocent was beset with problems which he had little chance of solving as the sands constantly shifted and political and economic undercurrents conditioned behaviour.
The "ideal" emperor for the princes and the great cities was one who granted territories and conferred rights and commercial privileges and gave protection.
It was a complicated struggle between Welfs and Staufer and their supporters and also between the rival princes themselves, some of whom were great ecclesiastics as Adolf, archbishop of Cologne.
Archbishop of the second great German province, Cologne, his family had combined the secular and the ecclesiastical princedom for some time.
He it was who by crowning Otto at Aachen had plunged the papacy into trouble.
He was representative of the German bench of bishops as a whole, who were more prepared to be the servants of the emperor than of a distant pope.
A great German temporal prince, he had the outlook of a great secular noble.
His interests lay in power in the imperial court not in the papal court.
So the struggle became to some extent a contest between the German bishops and the pope, and the position of the German bishops in extending the conflict can only be understood if we understand their relationships with the political parties and the rival claimants.
We need now to go back to the death of Archbishop Conrad of Mainz on 20 October 1200.
Mainz was a see where Staufen interests were strong and a majority of the princes elected Lupold, bishop of Worms, a strong adherent of Philip, and a man of few scruples.
The Welfs could not allow such an election to pass unchallenged and a minority elected their own candidate, Siegfried.
The double election brought schism to the diocese of Mainz.
Lupold was never acceptable to the pope (to whom he remained the bishop of Worms who had transferred himself to Mainz without papal licence) and when at the end of 1204 Philip saw hope of victory he made a bad move by sending Lupold to Italy.
Innocent was adamant that Lupold was unacceptable and he made it clear in June 1205, at first secretly and later publicly, that Philip would have to drop Lupold as negotiator.
Meanwhile on 13 March 1205 Innocent ordered Archbishop Siegfried of Mainz and the bishop of Cambrai to excommunicate Adolf, to summon him to Rome and, if he did not start for Rome within four weeks, to depose him.
Four weeks after the pronouncement of the excommunication, Adolf was solemnly deposed in the cathedral of Cologne in the presence of Otto.
A new election was ordered and Bruno, provost of Bonn, a faithful adherent of Otto (who had, indeed, brought notice of Otto's election to Rome) was elected archbishop of Cologne and his election confirmed by the pope on 22 December 1205.
There was now schism  in Cologne as well as Mainz.
Philip offered the pope peace negotiations and, in an important communication of June 1206, he surveyed the imperial dispute from its beginnings, stressing the anarchy in the empire and the motives which had led him to accept the kingship.
He suggested the dismissal of Lupold if Innocent would drop Siegfried.
If he had offended against the Church he was ready to give satisfaction.
 "If you have offended against us, we leave it to your conscience." 
Skilled Staufen drafting (probably following Philip's own sentiments) accentuates the authority of the pope as vicar of Christ and his plenitude of power and petitions for absolution from the sentence of excommunication which Celestine III had imposed.
It was almost the language of the papal chancery itself, but it was asked in such a manner that the pope could not concede.
Innocent needed to be approached as arbiter and he wanted certain guarantees.
The pope was still trying to conjure up support for Otto.
He wrote to King John ordering him to pay money to Otto.
John paid because he needed Otto.
However, by late 1206, it is likely that Innocent sensed that Otto's cause was lost, for in a letter of probably August 1206 to the patriarch of Aquileia, Philip is called princeps and no longer dux, but he proceeded cautiously, aiming to arrive at a point where he might arbitrate between the parties.
This was achieved in January 1208 after the princes, meeting at Augsburg in the autumn of 1207, prevailed upon Philip to go to the pope as arbiter.
A tribunal was decided on in Rome and Philip sent ambassadors to plead his case.
Otto's legates were despatched in May.
All was set for Innocent's arbitration.
But on 21 June 1208 Philip of Swabia was dead, assassinated, apparently for personal reasons, by the count of Bavaria, Otto of Wittelsbach.
Fate had again taken a hand.
Otto was crowned by the pope as the Emperor Otto IV in Rome in October 1209.
By the end of his reign, he had broken all his promises.
While his position had been insecure, in 1201, at Neuss, he had  sworn that he would accept the new frontiers of Innocent III's Papal State.
He had recognized papal rule over the Patrimony (from Radicofani to Ceprano), the duchy of Spoleto, the March of Ancona with the duchy of Ravenna and the Matildine territory, "with other adjacent lands mentioned in many imperial privileges" .
He had, at Neuss, signed the "birth certificate of the Papal State" .
He did not keep his solemn word, renewed at Speyer just before his coronation in 1209, when as a condition of his coronation as emperor he promised to restore Church properties retained by his predecessors.
Otto's conduct, following the conferment of the imperial title, was overbearing and ill-considered.
He succeeded swiftly in offending both the princes and the pope.
He terrified the inhabitants of Staufen Swabia, confiscated fiefs which had been conferred on ecclesiastics and gave them to his Saxon and English supporters.
He repudiated the oath by which he had restored to the Holy See the ecclesiastical rights and privileges enjoyed by the emperors and the kings of Sicily and within a few months of his coronation he began to progress down into Italy.
Acting much like previous aggressive and anti-papal emperors, he granted privileges in the duchy of Spoleto, the March of Ancona and the Matildine lands.
At Pisa in November 1209, he came under the influence of the imperial captains and plans for the invasion of Sicily secured the support of two of the principal north Italian cities, Pisa and Milan.
Otto moved into mainland Sicily and in November 1210 Innocent III excommunicated him.
He had the same aim as all previous emperors — to control the papacy and to re-establish imperial rule in the new Papal State, in time no doubt aiming to unite Italy and Sicily under his imperial crown.
Growing unrest among the German princes was now used by Innocent who suggested a new election.
In September 1210 the archbishop of Mainz, the landgrave of Thuringia, the king of Bohemia, the duke of Austria and the count of Meran had met with king Philip Augustus of France whose interests lay in the defeat of Otto.
Serious  opposition to the new emperor had also begun to emerge in some of the towns of north Italy, especially Cremona.
Otto was counselled by his supporters to return to Germany to maintain his position and to marry Beatrice the daughter of Philip of Swabia to whom he had been betrothed.
This he did on 22 July 1212.
Beatrice died soon after and without producing an heir.
Otto outlived Innocent (dying in 1218) but his cause was lost from 1214.
The princes had begun to look towards the young Frederick, king of Sicily and Henry VI's heir.
He must have appeared as "the man of destiny" , the young saviour, as he entered Constance and progressed down the Rhine in 1212.
As Otto's cause declined, Frederick's star rose, but without the support of the French king, Philip Augustus, and finally Innocent, Frederick might not have triumphed.
In December 1212 Frederick was elected king of the Romans and crowned and anointed in Mainz.
The old Staufen cause had revived, ironically upheld by a French king.
King John of England, desperate for Otto's support during his struggle with the pope and his old natural enemy, the king of France, granted Otto 9000 marks in 1213 but the Welf position was weak.
Careful diplomacy and a wiser man than Otto might have avoided the disaster at the battle of Bouvines in July 1214, where Philip Augustus soundly defeated John and Otto, for the Flemish cities with their economic interests had a natural ally in England and the duke of Brabant and the counts of Flanders, Holland and of Boulogne were played off Philip Augustus.
Frederick's primary aim was the continued expansion of the Staufen house in Germany.
In return for victory over Otto he paid the price—granting lands and conferring and confirming rights and privileges to the princes, bishops and cities of north Italy who needed his patronage.
At Eger, in 1213, Frederick made the same promises to respect the Papal State as Otto had done.
He had thus paid off the princes and the pope.
It is difficult to resist the conclusion that after 1208 Innocent had been outmanoeuvred by certain forces beyond his control.
In his search to act as arbiter and to secure for the papacy the defensor so needed in his ecclesiastical-political programme for Europe he had (as it seemed) changed sides three times, much as the princes themselves.
He had perhaps allowed hatred of the Hohenstaufer to cloud his vision.
Frederick had true imperial blood in his veins as the son of the Emperor Henry VI and the grandson of Barbarossa and he could not allow the narrow strip of fifty miles or so of corridor land to impede his ambitions.
POWER: THE PAPAL STATE, ROME AND SICILY
Political power depends upon economic strength and the size of armies.
It is dependent, too, upon a territorial base.
The pope's territory was the Patrimony of St Peter and the Papal State.
The Patrimony of St Peter was the rather emotive name for the area subject to the pope in the immediate vicinity of Rome where the people held sway.
The duchy of Rome was the papacy's ancient land to which the popes were deemed to have succeeded as the continuators of Byzantine rule and as a result of the Donation of Constantine.
The Papal State, on the other hand, consisted mainly of the "donations" of lands in central Italy made to the papacy by the Frankish emperors.
The donations of Pepin (754) and Charlemagne (774) gave the popes the area of central Italy that had fallen to the Lombards, together with the former exarchate of Ravenna and the provinces of Venice and Istria.
For these, no texts survive.
But for the donations of Louis the Pious in 817 and of Otto I in 962 we ave texts, the Ludovicianum and the Ottonianum, which have been accepted as genuine.
These two documents named places over a very wide area of Italy (the duchy of Rome, Tuscany, the Campagna, the Ravenna exarchate, Pentapolis, Sabina) rather than defined frontiers.
The Ottonianum was confirmed by the Emperor Henry II in 1020.
Later emperors did not regard suzerainty in central Italy as having passed to the popes by these donations.
They had their own imperial interests.
To these very sizeable territories were added the "Matildine" lands, given to the Roman Church by the Countess Matilda of Tuscany in 1102.
She was the sole heiress to a huge complex of imperial fiefs and lands in Tuscany, Emilia and Lombardy.
Ownership was constantly disputed and borders were vague and ill-defined, but Tuscany, Spoleto and Ancona and parts of the Romagna were all in papal sights by the thirteenth century.
The Patrimony of St Peter differed markedly in its development from other states whose national identity was not blurred.
The elective nature of the papacy slowed the development of the Papal State—in away that showed a marked contrast to the development of hereditary monarchies, in England for example.
Not all popes were interested, as we shall see, in the furtherance of political power.
The need to rely on the local aristocracy — common to all rulers — was accentuated by the fact that often the pope was chosen from among their number.
The rise of one family could mean the eclipse of another also eager for power.
At times even Rome itself was dominated by a great senatorial family whom the popes could not control.
And the struggles and factions in Rome were reflected in Latium where the Roman families also held land.
The imperial interventions in papal affairs and in the city's government also halted the development of a controlled state as found elsewhere in Europe at the time.
Finally, the ambiguous powers conceded in the donations left large areas of doubt that were to make political advancement by the popes difficult.
The "idea" of a Papal State had appeared very early, and definitely by the ninth century, but it was with the reform movement of the eleventh and early twelfth century that the notion of an independent Papal State really took hold.
Without a territorial base the papacy could not be independent of imperial and other influences.
If it was not free from unwelcome intervention the papacy could not be active in what it saw as its role.
By the late eleventh century the popes began to regard these lands as a conglomerate, the "lands of St Peter" (terre sancti Petri) while interestingly  the emperors write more vaguely of papal regalia et possessiones.
These lands were in effect Latium, that is, the Campagna, Maritima, Sabina and the county of Tivoli.
The territorial claims of Pope Adrian IV in 1159 were extremely modest, if compared with the Carolingian donations, and much more realistic, for there was a wide gap between nominal overlordship and reality.
Basically Pope Adrian confined his idea of a Papal State to a smallish area, that of the old Byzantine duchy of Rome with the duchy of Spoleto to the east.
The true state must have settled frontiers rather than vague notional territories that many modern historians (Partner, Waley, Laufs) see Innocent III as the founder of the Papal State as distinct from previous popes who were little more than nominal overlords of disparate and scattered lands which they found very difficult to control without imperial help.
At the theoretical centre of the Papal State was the city of Rome.
The maintenance of control over Rome itself was an inspiration of all popes — as old as the history of the papacy.
The residence of the pope in an ancient imperial city had from the first been fragile.
But the pope could not be divorced from the see of St Peter.
As long as he remained bishop of Rome the pope belonged in Rome.
Popes might be — and often were — driven from Rome, but they aspired to be back in the city to which they belonged.
Even imperialist anti-popes tried to reside in the city — and the emperors strove to keep them there.
Roman as well as non-Roman popes, Italian as well as foreigners, all felt that they belonged in Rome.
There in Rome were the bones of St Peter, the apostle to whom Christ had committed His Church.
Innocent commenced his papacy in Rome, but he died in Perugia, a papal town, in the summer months when it was customary for the papal curia to leave Rome.
During 1203-4 he was forced to leave Rome.
Most years he spent some time in Anagni or Segni, his home region; otherwise Rome was his main place of residence.
His first major acts  to subdue the Romans followed in the tradition of the agreements made between Clement II and the senate in 1188 and Celestine III and the senate in 1191.
He exploited a temporary lull in affairs to extract more concessions from the Romans than had hitherto been possible.
He took advantage of the situation that resulted following the death of the Emperor Henry VI, whose troops had been threatening Rome.
For Henry VI's death released anti-imperialist forces, anxious to ward off the imperial regime in Italy.
It was the ancient story of the Romans playing off outside powers, but it was opportune for Innocent.
His second major act was to clear the Papal State of imperial troops and to restore it to its old frontiers.
Such had been the aims of his predecessors, in particular the English pope, Adrian IV.
Innocent had the opportunity and he took it.
He spent from July to October of the first year in the papal towns.
Within a year the imperial governors of Tuscany, Spoleto and Sicily had to flee.
Nor did Innocent change the previous policy of attempting to bolster certain towns.
Of the Tuscan towns, Amelia and Otricoli were the only ones to accept papal domination without a murmur.
Perugia and Todi surrendered some of their independence, but retained the right to their own jurisdiction, appointing their own officers.
Città del Castello, which had a long rivalry with Arezzo, had reason to want papal protection in order to stave off the ambitions of Arezzo.
Viterbo and Orvieto, on the other hand, refused to come to terms with Innocent.
Otherwise, the towns were transferred in many cases from imperial to papal overlordship.
The new Patrimony of St Peter was built up by threats and the exploitation of rivalries.
The imperial governor of the duchy of Spoleto, Conrad of Urslingen, tried to remain governor as vassal of the pope.
Apart from three castles and two towns, Foligno and Terni, sentiment was anti-imperial and pro-pope.
Finally, after Conrad had offered Innocent £100 annually, the service of 200 knights and a cash payment of 10,000 lbs of silver — which the pope could not accept — the duchy was brought peaceably into the Patrimony.
The cities in Ancona came under the  imperial governor.
Markward of Anweiler, who only approached Innocent when the situation was hopeless for him after the formation of a league of cities against imperial domination.
Markward, too, made offer of payment to Innocent, which was not accepted.
He succumbed finally to the two-pronged attack of the papacy and the anti-imperialists, but a number of districts of Ancona never came under Innocent.
To the south of the pope's territories lay the Regno.
The Regno consisted in the twelfth century (and for most of the thirteenth) of two parts: the island of Sicily and the southern half of the Italian peninsular, the mainland.
The peninsular lands incorporated the modern provinces of Calabria, Basilicata (or Lucania), Apulia, Campania, Molise, and the Abruzzi, and the trading city of Gaeta.
Within them was the small papal enclave of Benevento.
The rulers of the Regno were thus of prime interest to the popes.
In 1184 the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa secured the marriage of his son Henry, duke of Swabia, to Constance of Sicily, the heiress of her nephew, King William II, who died childless in 1189.
The situation became even more threatening on the death of the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa in 1190 and the succession of his son, the Emperor Henry VI, now asserting his claims to Sicily through his wife.
The Papal State lay wedged like a nut within a giant imperial nutcracker — a small insecure state set within the imperial towns and communes to the north and the tightly-governed Regno to the south.
Innocent exhibited no change in previous papal policy on Sicily.
As in other instances, the removal of a strong emperor from the scene brought popular revolt against the Empress Constance in Sicily and Innocent reaped the benefit.
Constance wanted to return to the status quo before the illegitimate grandson of Roger II, Tancred, count of Lecce, became king in 1190 (i.e. to the state under King William I and King William II, 1154 to 1189), but her offers concerned only the continental kingdom not the island.
Innocent was determined that she should renounce the rights of the Williams in the island as well.
This he achieved, securing the right for the curia to receive appeals, summon synods and approve bishops.
Again fortune favoured him with the death of the Empress in November  1198 and his wardship of the young Frederick II which allowed him advantages denied to his predecessors, not the least of which was the opportunity to build a stronger Papal State.
By the late twelfth century the Papal State as a separate entity had been long established as a notion even if its boundaries were in a continual state of flux.
Had Innocent III wished — and the evidence is to the contrary — there would have been no going back on previous policy.
The twelfth-century popes were committed to maintaining their temporalities by the Reform movement which was preoccupied with temporal as well as moral rehabilitation, but it was Innocent who brought the Papal State nearer a political reality than it had been before.
The compelling idea of a "free" state (free from the emperor, the senate and people of Rome, and the anti-papal towns of north Italy) lay at the heart of papal territorial ambitions and the monarchical position adopted for the popes by Pope Gregory VII.
The regnum of the pope goes back to the Donation of Constantine and its title deeds to the diplomas of the eighth-, ninth- and tenth-century emperors.
The papal coronation dates from Gregory VII.
The papal banner, the vexillum sancti Petri, goes back to the eleventh century, perhaps to Alexander II (1061–1073).
Like the banners of royalty, it flew on papal castles in the thirteenth century.
The insignia of royalty that had been assumed by the papacy reflected a monarchical form and structure of government.
Reforms and development in the administration followed the pattern in other states.
The chancery had long been conducted as an "imperial" chancery — indeed it was the successor of the late imperial Roman chancery.
Both it and the camera, the financial department, had their origins in the "sacred Lateran palace" (sacrum palatium Lateranense), the palace of a monarch.
Again it is to the Gregorian Reform movement that the development both of the papal curia (comparable with the monarchical courts) and of the papal treasury, or chamber, is due.
The papal curia acted much as the curia regis and the cardinals became primarily officers of state and administrators who  could be used as ambassadors or legates — a position they had reached by the early years of the twelfth century.
The papal camera or treasury owed much to Pope Urban II (1088–1099), who, as a former monk of Cluny, had experience of one of the most advanced organizations of Europe and really established the papal chamber.
 "An impoverished Church could never be a disciplined Church" and the Reform movement concentrated on territorial and economic security.
Once the papacy had taken on board the idea of a territorial state, economic power and independence became all important and along with it its concomitant military power and force.
ECONOMIC STRENGTH
There is no surviving detailed assessment of income for the eleventh-century papacy as there is for the English kings in the great Domesday Book of 1086.
Yet from the sixth century, under Pope Gelasius, there was a polypticus, a register of financial rights recording the revenues of the Church, which was revised by Gregory the Great.
Under Pope Gregory VII, formerly the Archdeacon Hildebrand and as such responsible for the administration of church property, relationships with monarchs and monasteries were developed which bound rulers and institutions to the Holy See.
Such "special relationships" implied payment for protection and support.
Rights and revenues were inextricably mixed and this is reflected in the compilations.
The Gregorian Cardinal Deusdedit's canonical compilation of 1087, concerned with the rights and traditions of the Roman Church, includes a very short section, chapter 149 of Book III, on its temporal possessions, which most likely comes from an earlier compilation.
No further assessment of papal revenues was apparently undertaken until the compilation by Benedict, canon of St Peter's, some half century or so later, which was finished before the death of Innocent II in 1143.
In the 1150s the papal chamberlain, Cardinal Boso, elaborated the statement of the papacy's  financial rights and Cardinal Albinus was at work on a compilation in the 1180s under Lucius II.
But it is the Liber Censuum, compiled in the last quarter of the twelfth century and incorporating many of these earlier texts, by the papal chamberlain, Cencio Savelli — later to follow Innocent III as pope — that provides us with most of what we know about papal finance.
It lists the revenues due to the apostolic see from the patrimonial estates and the tributes and payments from various European secular rulers and religious houses.
The revenue from the Patrimony was the first obvious source of income that the papal chamberlain, whose office dates back to Paschal II (1099–1118), received.
All the usual revenues received by a temporal ruler were exploited — payments from towns and castles, taxes and procurations, and also the income in the shape of rents and the payments from tenants which came from the lands of which the pope was proprietor.
It may be doubted whether these sources were often on the credit side as long as the papacy had to pay out considerable sums to consolidate its position and to enter into compacts and agreements with some of the towns: but a list of revenues and rents from Spoleto in 1198 is not negligible.
The revenue paid to the chamber by states and vassals outside the Patrimony, who were in a feudal relationship with the Holy See — the tribute — was probably more profitable.
King John, for example, undertook a payment of 1000 marks annually to the Roman see from 1213 onwards, when he became a vassal of the Roman Church.
The kings of Aragon and Portugal paid tribute as vassals of the Holy See under Innocent.
Peter of Aragon promised Innocent 250 massenutinae when he committed his kingdom to the pope in 1204.
While the tribute often remained unpaid, as in the case of Sicily, where an annual payment of 30,000 tarims (about £100,000) had been agreed on in Frederick's minority, it  provided a source of income which the political activities of the popes in their dealings with the separate kingdoms suggest was definitely worthwhile.
Obviously, if the pope could collect this, his finances were well in the black.
The ancient payments of Peter's Pence, which had been granted to the popes by early monarchs, were received from England, the Scandinavian kingdoms and Poland.
Any grant of papal support or protection, as Alexander II's support of William the Conqueror's invasion of England in 1066, was likely to lead to a request for a quid pro quo or a reminder of a payment due.
However small they were, such payments must have been thought worth collecting.
Apparently it was the withholding or delay in the payment of Peter's Pence from England that led Pope Alexander II to approve the Norman expedition in 1066.
Soon he asked for payment and William complied.
Originally the tax had been on each house (or chimney) and not a lump sum paid by diocese, and in 1205 Innocent III attempted to get the full amount, seeking Peter's Pence "from each house that smoke comes out of" .
King John forbade the clergy to enact any new decree on the subject.
Innocent made a second attempt in 1214, but was no more successful.
The payment, however, when it was collected, was small — £199 6s. 8d per annum according to the Liber Censuum.
The associated but very different payment of the Census was made by monasteries that had the protection of St Peter's vicar, the pope.
Usually they were very ancient foundations and there were only a handful of such in England.
Such payments accorded the payers with rights of exemption from the interference of bishops and hence were thought worthwhile from the payers' point of view.
They were made all over Europe and yielded the papacy an annual payment (often of an ounce of gold) from each house.
This could not be described as a substantial source of income.
Until the thirteenth century income tax was not tried by the popes.
Such taxes begin with the levies imposed by lay rulers to raise money for the crusades (as the kings of England and France did for the Second and Third Crusades).
Innocent was the first pope to try such a scheme and in  1199 he initiated an income tax on the clergy of one-fortieth of their ecclesiastical income for a year in aid of the Holy Land.
The Fourth Lateran Council, held at the end of his reign, imposed a triennial twentieth for the same purpose.
Customary by the mid-thirteenth century, largely due to Innocent's introduction of such a scheme, such taxes, however, did not bring money into the papal coffers but were granted to the leaders of the crusades, through there was a widespread belief that money collected for the Crusade by Philip the notary was doing exactly that, and in 1202 Innocent ordered an investigation.
Similarly the indults to those who commuted their crusading vows were earmarked for crusading purposes.
The justiciar, Geoffrey FitzPeter, who had taken the cross, was absolved as he was dying in return for a 2000 marks' subsidy for the Holy Land.
Subsidies might be paid in cases of emergency but could not be accounted normal income.
In 1093 Pope Urban II approached the bishops and abbots of Aquitaine, Gascony and Lower Burgundy for financial aid and ejecting an anti-pope from the Lateran.
Pope Lucius III sought aid from Henry II and the clergy of England in 1184 — a request that the clergy agreed to if the king wishes to pay it.
Ten thousand marks were sought from King John as a subsidy for the Holy Land.
Innocent made no such requests for direct financial aid in his imperial dealings, but he was tireless in epistolary exhortations to key figures to support his candidate financially and, of course, with military aid.
King John, for example, was asked for 5000 marks in the support of Otto of Brunswick.
Implicit, too, in Innocent's dealings with the separate kingdoms was the notion that payment was expected as tribute for crowning kings.
Customary gifts to the popes — the hidden income — were made by archbishops, bishops, and abbots on visits to Rome to secure confirmation.
Gifts and legacies, which in  early times had been very large, cannot be assessed very precisely, but are likely to have been considerable.
The papal legate in England in 1213, Nicholas de Romanis, reported that he had not received the 1000 marks left to the pope (nor the 500 left to the cardinals) by the archbishop of York, Geoffrey Plantagenet.
He recommended that the pope should write to Stephen Langton, the executor.
The offerings made at the altars of papal churches were shared by the pope with the assisting clergy.
Innocent III instructed his court not to be importunate over gifts and he attempted to introduce fixed chancery charges, but the gratuities expected by officials were a part of normal life and these the pope could not control.
Walter of Châtillon (fl. c. 1170), in his "Popter Sion non tacebo" , compares the curial advocates with the hounds of Scylla, the chancery with Charibdis, the cardinals with Sirens, the doorkeepers with rocks.
The only protection for the petitioner at the papal court is the Purse.
One historian has written that the criticism was not that the charges were too high, but that there were any at all and has explained the opposition to fixed charges as conservative reaction to a money economy in which one paid for services rendered.
Gratuities formed part of the old, traditional and accepted way of conducting business: set charges were the innovation.
The profits of jurisdiction may well have been outweighed by the costs of the bureaucracy.
The clause among the Fourth Lateran Council decrees that proposed regulated taxes for the churches and provinces of Christendom suggests as much.
It is difficult to answer the question as to whether the papacy may be accounted a financial power of importance on a European level.
Toubert is doubtless correct in his criticism that Pfaff's estimate of the income of the papacy — made on the basis of the Liber Censuum — is in fact inclusive of many "ghost monies" ; compiled over many years, rather than an actual account.
But this record  shows that something like 30,340 imperial shillings were expected in revenue: 3300 from the Patrimony, 5800 from religious institutions, and 21,200, the lion's share, from states and vassals.
Innocent III was not slow in exploiting what was possible.
But his financial activities have the air of an assiduous fund-raiser rather than the representatives of a really wealthy institution.
Taxes on clerical livings, sizeable profits from granting indulgences and the taking of income from benefices when they were vacant — all lay in the future as the mainstay of papal finances.
The papacy's reputation for venality may be more closely related to the difficulties of collecting what was due to it than to the actual amounts of money coming in.
The satire "Novus regnat Salomon" attacks Innocent as the mercenary shepherd who abandons his flock to the wolf and sees "Salomon" as venal, loving not persons but their goods, and the poet Walter von der Vogelweide portrays Innocent as filling his chests with German silver and deplores his efforts to collect money for a crusade against the Albigensians.
Criticisms of the purposes for which the money was raised do not say much about the curia's actual wealth.
Such accusations may not "stick" ; and the suspicion that money collected in England in 1200 for the Holy Land would get no further than Rome may be groundless.
The refrain "Nummus vincit, nummus regnat, nummus imperat" ( "Money conquers, money rules, money governs" ), replacing the coronation chant "Christus vincit, Christus regnat, Christus imperat" , comments on a power where money interests were supposed to rule supreme but it does not indicate wealth.
The pope's strongest card was the one that allowed him to raise money from the separate states and their princes — most of it not long-term income but exceptional grants.
The papacy's moral powers enabled it to look for money throughout the western world.
PAPAL ARMIES
 "Your power is made of words, but our power is real" .
This remark of King Philip the Fair's minister, Flotte, to Pope Boniface VIII may be compared with the scathing words of Mussolini.
 "The Pope, how many divisions has he?" 
But the truth was that the popes employed armies of mercenaries or paid troops and that one of the reasons for raising money was to pay armies.
The importance of a military force was obvious to Pope Gregory VII.
He had not only to take Rome: he had also to retain it.
Similarly he had to secure the papal lands and ensure that the revenues from them reaches the papacy.
Without the existence of a force of this kind there could be no security or economic stability.
Armies were needed, too, by the popes to subject the Roman factions, to resist the Hohenstaufer, to guard the papal palaces and to control the ever unruly Papal State.
Normally feudal grants were made within the Patrimony and the Papal State in return for military service.
The establishment of fortified places in Latium, the papal castles, meant maintaining garrisons in each one.
Both Pope Eugenius III and Pope Adrian IV pursued an active policy of acquiring castles, fortifying them and giving them special status.
While castles might be obtained by purchase, and exchanged to make for a more judicious distribution geographically, they had also to be manned with troops.
During the whole of the thirteenth century the ancient castra specialia of the eleventh to twelfth centuries fulfilled their functions as military as well as administrative centres of the Papal State.
They could not do this without troops.
By the thirteenth century the right of founding a castle, repopulating an existing site and fortifying it was the exclusive privilege of the pope in Latium.
The barons of the Papal State owed military service to the pope, as did the citizens of all the communes.
(And the communes might ask the pope, as they did in 1199, to order out the troops  of a neighbouring town in their defence.)
The demand, however, was sometimes for money in lieu of troops.
The changeover from unpaid feudal armies to professional armies, which was a common phenomenon with secular governments, was also experienced by the papacy in the thirteenth century.
Innocent III employed mercenaries in January 1199 and in 1199–1200, as the Gesta tells us.
They were probably normally Italians.
(Gregory IX, 1227–41, employed French mercenaries.)
The demand for money instead of military service became more frequent.
But already in the early years of his pontificate, before he was master of the enlarged Papal State from Radicofani in the north to Ceprano in the south, mercenaries had been used in the campaign against Markward of Anweiler, who was fighting the imperial cause in Italy between 1199 and 1201; five hundred at one time and possibly as many as 2000.
The rising costs of warfare by the late thirteenth century were a reason for fiscal innovations.
Under Innocent the servitium debitum (feudal military service) played only a small, possibly no part.
In peaceful times this levy might be enough for policing the Papal State, but to stave off imperial claims Innocent used paid troops and relied heavily on diplomatic manoeuvres to gain the support of allies.
Behind whatever economic and military strength the papacy possessed, there existed enormous and immeasurable power as a moral force.
In the pursuit of their aims, the popes could excommunicate recalcitrant members of Christian society, depose unsatisfactory rulers and put sections of the community, indeed whole nations, under sentence of interdict.
Throughout the imperial struggle and in his dealings with the separate kingdoms, Innocent used the weapon of excommunication.
Philip of Swabia was already excommunicate at the opening of the contest over the empire — excommunicated by the late Pope Celestine III — and the fact of his excommunication was to act as a severe encumbrance for it meant not only that the excommunicant was without the sacraments of the Church, it also affected dependants and those who had dealings with him.
It was thus a stage towards the releasing of vassals from the oaths of loyalty and obedience.
The dire result of that was seen with the invasion of England by Prince Louis of France following such a sentence on King John.
It could  act as a severe political deterrent.
Not only were nobles who defected from the support of Otto of Brunswick punished by sentences of excommunication, such as Otto's brother, Henry the count Palatine, and the duke of Brabant in 1204–5, but also the ecclesiastical hierarchy who as temporal as well as spiritual princes might face revolt on their estates as well as censure from ecclesiastics within the diocese or province.
In 1202 Innocent threatened the archbishop of Trier with excommunication.
Archbishop Adolf of Cologne, who had at first supported Otto, was threatened with excommunication.
The logical result of excommunication was deposition, for an excommunicate bishop or king could not rule a diocese or kingdom.
The position was made clear to Adolf in 1205.
He was to be excommunicated by three papal commissioners in the cathedral of Cologne, summoned to Rome and, if he did not start within four weeks, he was to be deposed.
Some of the English chroniclers supposed King John to have been formally deposed by the pope, for the effects were the same.
And how could a Christian king rule if he was banned from the Church?
The power of the pope to depose an unsatisfactory emperor goes back to the Dictatus Pape of Gregory VII — a power which Innocent preferred to see as a right to inspect, approve and crown, but there is little doubt that it was important in the papal moral armoury.
Also coupled with the censure of excommunication was the imposing of an interdict, a sentence that forbade the celebration of the sacraments except to a limited number of religious communities.
In acquiring privileges from the papacy this was very frequently one that was given a very significant place.
A whole kingdom, a whole community and all Christian people, save for a few exceptions, might be put under such a sentence.
Innocent laid an interdict on Norway because of the "royal" policies of its ruler, Sverre, who was resisting papal influence and the reception of the canon law and he reproved the archbishop, Eric, for removing it in 1204, after Sverre had died and the fugitive  bishops had been recalled.
Nearly everybody suffered in such circumstances — not just the ruler.
The interdict imposed upon England by Pope Innocent III in March 1208 lasted until July 1214.
During this time, such services as there were took place behind locked doors.
Babies were not christened, marriages were not properly celebrated, the dead were not buried with the full rites of the Church.
Confirmations and ordinations did not take place — most of the bishops and many of the religious communities were in exile.
Such was the papacy's power to bring a king to his knees.
A similar sentence had been imposed on the King of France, Philip Augustus in 1200, for his failure to comply with the pope's wishes and exile Agnes of Meran and take back Ingeborg as his wife and queen.
Nor did such sentences mean that the wrongdoers were allowed to rot in peace.
The Church could not allow sinners to perish without seeing the evil of their ways.
Censures were pronounced by the pope, sometimes by his legates, who were despatched to bring the curial arm to the spot.
The re-instatement of King John in 1212 by the legates, after his submission to the pope, illustrated the enormous moral power of the thirteenth-century papacy.
Even at the height of its propagandist messages, the Staufen chancery found it difficult to counteract papal arguments, for they were conducted on a supernal plane.
In the last analysis Christian rulers wanted the Church's approval and support and Innocent had gone one further step in identifying himself as the representative of the final arbiter and judge of man.
The emperor, in particular, needed coronation.
It was the symbol of all his earthly power.
And he also strove to gain acceptance and coronation for his son.
What is more it had long been accepted that only the pope could perform this.
POLICY
The policies of Innocent were not negative — nor were they new.
Steeped in the theory of the two powers of the regnum and the sacerdotium, Innocent, in his world view, saw the  need for a strong emperor.
He had an idealized notion of the Christian emperor of the West furthering the Christian message and fighting the enemies of the faith in crusades within Christendom as well as without.
This emperor would be the secular arm of the pope following papal policies: in some ways a simplistic interpretation of the Donation of Constantine, perhaps — the return to an ideal that had never existed.
In concrete terms, however, it was the fear of encirclement of the papacy, should the crown of imperial Germany be united with that of the kingdom of Sicily, that conditioned papal and curial thinking.
Both Celestine III and Innocent and the cardinals (most of whom came from Latium and north and central Italy) were acutely aware of the influence that the emperor could exercise over Rome and the northern Italian cities both from past history and personal experience.
The southern borders of the little Papal State now touched on the lands of the same family.
What is more, at the nearest point, they were only some thirty miles from Rome.
The Emperor Frederick Barbarossa (d. 1190) had established the German monarchy and built up the power of the emperor in the north to a hitherto unparalleled degree.
He controlled the "imperial" towns.
The pacts or concordats of the mid-twelfth century exhibited the popes' worries.
In 1153 Frederick I, by the pact of Constance, promised not to make a truce with the two other groups that threatened the papacy — the Romans and the ruler, Roger of Sicily.
Four years later Pope Adrian IV at the Concordat of Benevento turned the ruler of Sicily, William, into his liegeman.
He stopped all isolationist trends in the Sicilian Church and clearly put it under the papacy.
Henry VI, by his marriage, had now removed all possibility of a "checking" alliance with the rulers of the southern Italian lands.
Both Henry VI and his father had devastated the Roman Patrimony and made the popes their victims.
The provision of a candidate for the imperial throne, who was not identified with previous depredations and who, furthermore, had no territorial claims to the southern Italian lands, was bound to prove attractive to the papacy.
It was Innocent's misfortune that the man chosen was Otto of Brunswick.
Dislike of the Hohenstaufer  blinded the pope to Otto's shallow character.
After the murder of Philip of Swabia and Otto's coronation as Otto IV, he did precisely what previous Staufen monarchs had done.
He attempted to subject the cities and domains of north Italy and Tuscany, asserted his overlordship over Ancona and the Romagna and invaded the Patrimony.
Innocent replied by excommunicating Otto.
In considering Germany, Italy and the empire, Innocent's dream was that Henry VI's son, Frederick, should act in the interests of the Church.
The young Frederick was made a ward of the papacy.
In 1198 Innocent made a concordat with Constance, his mother.
The kingdom of Sicily, it was agreed, belonged to the Roman Church.
Innocent asserted his paternal protection of Frederick and the position of Sicily as a fief of the papacy.
He took advantage of both a feudal and a monarchical position, treating Frederick as a vassal of the papacy as well as emphasizing his papal rights of protecting a minor.
Before the death of the Empress Constance on 27 November 1198, scarcely ten months after Innocent's election, Innocent had been made Frederick's guardian.
He was satisfied to leave the government of Sicily largely to the chancellor, Gauthier de Paléar, bishop of Troja, who stood for Sicilian rights and was anti-German.
More troublesome was the imperial chamberlain, Markward of Anweiler, who wanted to make the southern lands the centre of resistance for the imperialists.
Innocent's attitude towards Frederick is seen at its most raw in the Deliberatio of 1200.
If Frederick, when he comes of age, sees that he has been deprived of the empire by the Roman Church, he will become its implacable enemy.
Papal troops in south Italy could be seen as protecting Frederick II's rights.
Otto's aggressively imperialist policy, wedging the papacy between the "two Italies" , led to his final downfall.
THE SEPARATE KINGDOMS
The imperial schism had its repercussions on the separate kingdoms of Europe with whom the pope kept up a ceaseless round of correspondence, despatching legatine missions in his concern for ensuring Christian rulership and furthering his policies.
Philip of Swabia had restored  the title of king to Ottokar, duke of Bohemia, a fief of the German empire, on his eastern borders, but Ottokar was persuaded by Innocent to desert Philip and declare for Otto of Brunswick.
Both Otto and Innocent confirmed his title in 1207.
There were also other influences affecting the kingdoms on the borders of the Christian world — the Muslim threat, heathenism and heresy.
These we shall need to consider later.
The pope's influence was at its greatest in the papal fiefs, where the kings became his vassals.
Portugal was an apostolic fief from 1179 and soon after his accession Innocent wrote to Sancho I about the payment of the papal dues.
Since he was already a papal vassal Sancho found the powers of the Church difficult to check.
Furthermore, in his policy of building towns and castles, Sancho had encouraged and endowed the religious orders and had rewarded the bishops and monasteries with extensive territories.
Sancho now seized the episcopal estates of the bishop of Porto (against whose oppression the citizens of Porto had risen) and exiled the bishop of Coimbra.
Complaints were made to the pope, although the archbishop of Braga remained loyal to the crown.
The illness of Sancho in 1211 probably accounted for his reconciliation with Rome and with the bishop of Porto and his acceptance of stringent conditions which seriously limited the powers of his successor, Alfonso II, for the Cortes in 1211 had declared all secular law subject to canon law and had freed the clergy from most taxes.
There had been early ties between Aragon (consisting loosely of Aragon, the county of Barcelona and parts of Languedoc and Provence) and the papacy, and in 1204, alarmed by the prospect of the Albigensian Crusade and the effect on his vassals in the Languedoc, Peter II submitted his kingdom to the pope.
The Gesta describes in some detail the journey of Peter to Rome to receive the belt, the symbol of the Christian warrior, and the diadem or crown, the symbol of kingship.
He came by sea with five galleons and established his party, including the archbishop of Arles and the provost of Maguelonne and other clerks and nobles, on an island between Porto and Ostia.
The pope sent cardinals, the senator of Rome and other nobles to escort him to St Peter's and at the monastery of St Pancras the king was anointed by the cardinal bishop of  Porto and crowned by the pope, who gave him the royal insignia.
Then the king returned with the pope to St Peter's and there placed the sceptre and diadem on the altar and received from the pope the papal banner and offered his kingdom to Peter, the prince of the apostles.
In return for his allegiance the king received papal protection for himself and his kingdom, he could be excommunicated only by the pope and any lands conquered from the Muslims were confirmed to the crown.
When Peter died in 1213 the pope took over the wardship of his son, James I, chose his councillors and constituted his government, against the ambitions of Simon de Montfort.
In 1207 the king had authorized the election of bishops without lay intervention.
Of the other Iberian kingdoms, Léon was not subject to Rome, but the marriage of Alfonso IX of Léon to a daughter of Sancho I of Portugal threatened the security of the king of Castile, who obliged Alfonso to separate and to take a Castilian princess, Berengaria, instead.
This allowed Innocent in 1199 to intervene, as he was asked for a dispensation.
Innocent's imposition of an interdict was parried by the archbishop of Toledo who argued that such a sentence would only encourage heresy and the Muslims, but Innocent did not stop trying to break the marriage.
Berengaria promised to leave Alfonso in 1204 and the pope legitimized the children.
The pope's jurisdiction over marriage had allowed his intervention and approval of a king and his heirs.
Navarre, squeezed between two great Catholic and papalist neighbours, Aragon and Castile, was a prey to the interference of both.
When Alfonso VIII of Castile invaded Navarre in 1200 there was no protest from the papacy, intent on supporting the strongest royal house in the crusade against the Muslims.
The kingdom of Sicily became a fief of the Roman Church during the minority of Frederick.
All government came under the supervision of the pope and the wardship of Frederick fell to Innocent.
This was fortuitous for Innocent, as was King John's submission to the pope and his surrender of the kingdoms of England and Ireland to Innocent as his feudal lord in 1213.
John's long struggle  against Innocent's interference in the appointment of Stephen Langton as archbishop of Canterbury had been superseded by a struggle against the baronage — his own vassals.
In his acceptance of the pope's lordship, John ensured the protection of the monarchy and of the succession.
John received the support of Innocent against the Magna Carta which the pope annulled in August 1215, suspending Langton and summoning him as a participant to answer at Rome.
He also secured the succession of his heir a minor, the young Henry III.
Royal government was to be protected by the despatch of legates to England and the strictures of the Church would not harm John.
Furthermore, the kingdom would be protected by the pope.
France was virtually the only kingdom of central Europe to hold out against papal influence.
The territorial rivalry between the Angevins and the French accounted for the dividing lines between the imperial candidates and the alliances and counter-alliances.
Angevin interests lay in the support of the Welfs as the strongest power in north Germany, who might help them to maintain the crumbling Angevin empire.
French interests, on the other hand, were to see the break-up of that empire and King Philip Augustus, therefore, supported the Staufen cause and the candidature of Philip of Swabia.
Philip Augustus's marriage to Ingeborg of Denmark had been made in the hope that the Danish king, who was pro-Welf would support him against the English.
Its failure and Philip's subsequent marriage in 1196 to Agnes daughter of the count of Meran — a Rhinelander and supporter of Philip of Swabia after 1198 — had accounted for the presence of a legate in France at Innocent's accession.
Innocent's main aims were to win the support of Philip for Otto and to enforce the marriage law.
He brought out all the papal arguments and the curial forces from legates to censures, but while he obtained acknowledgement of his final authority in matrimonial matters, he made little other headway.
He needed Philip  more than Philip needed him.
With the acquisition of Normandy from its Angevin rulers in 1204, Philip's position was strengthened.
Innocent unsuccessfully called upon the French king in 1208, after the murder of his legate, Peter of Castelnau, to lead a crusade against the southern French heretics.
Then, in 1210, after Otto had revived the old imperial policies in Italy and had begun to oppress the Church, Innocent turned once more to Philip Augustus.
At Bouvines in 1214, the French overcame the joint Anglo-Welf forces: the old Angevin empire was never to be restored and Otto died almost landless in 1218.
Innocent had not controlled French aspirations but he had made it clear that he saw himself as the arbiter of Europe and John's cession of his kingdom in 1213 considerably strengthened the pope's hand.
Not only was the pope desirous of peace in Europe and settlement of the imperial question, but he was also concerned with establishing a truce between the two kings so that a new crusade might be advanced.
In eastern Europe the kingdom of Hungary had early and direct relations with the papacy, for the Arpad, the holy Stephen, had been crowned king with insignia given by the pope in the year 1000.
Hungary was particularly important to the papacy and to the development of papal influence.
Placed between between East and West, its missionizing role was important in bringing further territories under the Latin Church rather than the Greek.
It also commanded the route the crusaders took to the East.
The Magyars had expansionist aims and by the thirteenth century they had missionized much territory and brought Croatia within their kingdom.
They were the leading power in eastern Europe; Serbia had a client-prince and a marriage alliance had been made between King Imre of Hungary's sister and the Byzantine emperor.
They had further expansionist aims towards Serbia, Bosnia and Bulgaria.
It was their own particular relationship with the papacy that allowed precisely those territories that they were seeking to control to open negotiations with the pope.
The Kulin of the Bosnians, fearful of a Magyar attack, submitted to the pope, and the Serbians looked to Hungary, Bulgaria and the papacy for support.
It was Bulgarian policy that greatly threatened Hungary.
Johannitsa  of Bulgaria, who styled himself emperor of the Bulgarians and Wallachians, wanted support for his regime against both Hungary and the Byzantine empire.
He saw an opportunity in negotiation with the curia.
The curia, for its part, saw obvious advantages in the possibility of bestowing a crown on Johannitsa and extending its influence towards the Eastern Church at Constantinople, possibly even in time bringing the Byzantine Church under the papacy.
Johannitsa threatened the pope with accepting coronation from the patriarch of Constantinople: in 1203 Johannitsa submitted to the Holy See, the legate bestowed the pallium on the archbishop of Trnovo as primate and in November 1204 crowned Johannitsa king of the Bulgars and Wallachians.
The Hungarians had good reason to feel aggrieved, particularly when, despite papal guarantees, the crusaders destroyed Zara in 1204, and because they had remained firm in their support, together with the neighbouring king of Bohemia, for Otto of Brunswick.
But from the pope's point of view the boundaries of his influence had been extended by the coronation of Johannitsa and the influence of the patriarch of Constantinople and the Greek Church decreased.
PROPAGANDA, INFORMATION AND DIPLOMACY
In the history of papal propaganda, the reign of Innocent III is important.
The chancery was used as a propaganda machine perhaps as never before.
Before 1198 we have only very fragmentary papal registers (and hence statements) and so far as is known no forerunner of the very precious Regestum super negotio Romani imperii.
The chancery was a public relations office, a press office and a private office all in one.
Its letters were like official communications combined with television documentaries and newspaper reports.
At least some 6,000 letters are likely to have been issued during Innocent III's reign.
Potthast gives the figure of 5,316.
To this figure may be added further discoveries and letters for the years where the register is lost or imperfect, as in the third and fourth years.
We cannot know the pope's part in the composition of the letters.
Pennington believes that the style and content of some preclude any other authorship.
The letters of the first two years form a remarkable "political" testimony.
Though we cannot imagine that Innocent wrote all these, he appears to have had a close relationship with his chancery.
I do not think that it can be doubted either that he wrote, i.e. dictated, a fair number of the letters in the RNI.
The letters contain a plethora of arguments, analogies, syllogisms, symbolic phrases and quotes, mainly from the Bible and from the Old Testament in particular.
The Ecclesia, meaning the whole Christian world, the "congregatio fidelium" of Hugh of St Victor, was the body politic for Innocent, the whole Christian people.
Most of the arguments were not new.
The Petrine commission, the vicariate of Christ (Adrian IV ep.
15 "Christi vices in terris agimus" ), the pope as king and priest "after the order of Melchizedek" — all have their roots in the past.
Even the plenitude of power is the natural extension of previous arguments.
If the message was not new, the persistency and urgency with which it was repeated was.
Obviously no one recipient could experience the full range of papal arguments.
But a random selection of the massive output of the chancery shows all the stops pulled out of the papal organ: the reminder to the papal judge, acting by delegation in a distant province of the Church, that he will need to answer for his actions before the Supreme Judge, the care with which letters seeking advice are answered (Eustace of Ely), the terrible missives which reached King John and other miscreants and recalcitrants.
Letters exhorted, corrected and broadcast excommunications.
They found their way into all parts of Europe and all were trumpets of power.
The letters alone, however, could only achieve a limited amount.
Crucial to the success of diplomatic missions were first the quality of the ambassadors and secondly the political intelligence.
The normal process, as seen during Innocent's pontificate, was for messengers, often close confidants of the pope, but in minor offices, to be sent in the first instance — then to be followed by negotiators of the highest rank.
For example, in dealing with Bulgaria and Hungary, the pope's chaplain, John of Casamari, who had considerable local knowledge, was sent in the first instance, to be followed by the "big guns" , Cardinal Leo Brancaleone, a legate with full powers.
In the imperial affair the first person to act on behalf of the pope was Monaco de Villa, a Milanese, who had been appointed by Otto as plenipotentiary to deal with the pope.
Innocent certainly knew the position of Monaco and it was through him probably that the pope made known his conditions for the acceptance of Otto.
Monaco also had several demands to make of Otto and was present at his coronation on 12 July 1198, possibly to seek that the Lombard cities should be free from imperial encroachments.
Such officials were used so that if anything went wrong the papal see would be entirely free from reproach.
The first legate to enter the scene was Cardinal Peter of Capua whose task was to transform the peace between Philip Augustus and Richard I in late 1198.
Shortage of information was apparent in May 1199.
In July 1200 Conrad of Mainz was taken to task for not having sent report to Rome about plans for the tribunal to decide on an emperor.
About the same time a papal envoy, Egidius, was despatched to gain news, followed by Cardinal Guido of Preneste, the pope's personal representative.
On 5 January 1201 Philip, the notary, and Cardinal Guido were sent: they had gone before Egidius returned with the news that things were going very badly for Otto.
In August to September 1200 the legate Octavian, a trusted curialist, was empowered to release King John from his obligations and also to deal with Philip Augustus and Ingeborg: he was particularly charged with getting Philip Augustus to Otto's side.
On 3 July 1202, Master Philip, the notary, reported on Otto's coronation at Cologne.
Early in 1202 secret negotiations had already begun between Otto and Innocent.
Later in the year, after the Staufen protest against Guido of Preneste, messengers and letters of the pope  were captured.
Conrad of Speyer was charged with executing one messenger and detaining others.
From what we know when the information did come through, it was sometimes partial and often faulty.
In Innocent's dealings with Hungary and Bulgaria, Innocent's diplomacy has been found wanting as a result of this.
News did not get through to Innocent at the time of the preparations for the Fourth Crusade: sometimes the news might be deliberately withheld.
Sometimes, too, information was deliberately falsified, misrepresented, touched up or omitted or withheld from the pope, as by the emissaries of Baldwin IX of Flanders.
Baldwin, following the conclusion of certain pacts with Philip Augustus, sought to extricate himself from the possible threat of excommunication and interdict on his lands which he had accepted at the time of the agreement if certain conditions were not fulfilled.
Accordingly he took advantage of a new pope to address the curia for favourable letters.
These were issued by Innocent's officials without a full investigation of the facts.
Much business took place at second hand, and by delegates, and the curia was not anxious to investigate every case on the spot.
It was, therefore, open to misrepresentation and special pleading, to accepting what it was told by the party that secured or took the initiative.
Maximum use might be made by supplicants and petitioners of the distance between them and Rome.
The success of a diplomatic mission depends as much as anything on the quality of the information.
The sources of information were the letters, the legates and the local churchmen — all fragile.
The news might well be outdated by the time it reached the curia, messengers and even legates might be seized, as Cardinal Leo was by King Imre of Hungary, and the curial instructions might well be outdated when they reached their target.
Unless full powers were given to the pope's ambassadors their success was likely to be qualified — without telephones, "hotlines" , faxes, they could not speedily refer to the centre.
Without ciphers and diplomatic bags, espionage and counter-espionage  actions were likely to be circumscribed.
Much depended in the last resort, too, on the power with which the negotiators went to the negotiating table, what goodwill there was between parties and what the strength of the bargaining power was.
CONCLUSION
The reasons for Innocent III's political actions lay firmly in the past.
 "Higher than man but lower than God" , the pope, if judged by his political programme, appears an arch conservative.
The policies are not new but based on previous papal actions and inspirations.
In dealing with Rome, the Papal State and the emperors, Innocent appears as a restorer and a continuator, but an extremely aggressive restorer, it must be said.
The traditional view of the emperor as the protector and defender of the Roman Church and of the regalia of St Peter, as expressed in the emperor's oath, remained an essential element in Innocent's thought.
There was never any question of dispensing with the services of an emperor.
Innocent wanted a strong emperor but one who could be controlled.
He was an arch-conservative, indeed, striving and planning for an imperium that would promote both the papacy and Christianity.
Innocent's aims during the imperial schism (which, it must be remembered, that he had in no way engendered) were to decide between rival candidates — to arbitrate between them as equal powers, not to judge.
His insistence on arbitration rather than on judgment may be argued to have prolonged the contest but it was in line with past experience.
Yet it took ten years for the pope to arrive at the point he had desired in 1199, where he could treat the parties as equals, the one and the other, alterum et alterum as he says, and make his decision in Rome.
What then did Innocent gain from the long struggle?
First and foremost he had made it clear that the decision in the imperial affair as to who was the "suitable" (idoneus) ruler must rest in his hands.
Secondly, he may be said to have challenged and broken the enhanced idea of empire, albeit with the help of circumstances.
For Frederick II at Eger in 1213 (as had Otto at Neuss), repudiated the whole imperial programme and the ambitions of his father, Henry VI, renouncing claims to all the land between Radicofani and Ceprano, the March of Ancona, the duchy of Spoleto, the Matildine lands, the county of Bertinoro, the exarchate of Ravenna, Pentapolis and the Massa Trabaria.
He had agreed to the separation of the emperorship from the kingdom of Sicily.
Who in 1216, when Innocent died, could have predicted that the agreements would be torn up and that the popes would face another onslaught from an unreliable and unprincipled emperor?
Innocent had misjudged the character of Otto, as he later admitted in a letter to Philip Augustus: "If only, dearest son, I had known the character of Otto who now calls himself Emperor, as well as you…
It is with shame that I write this to you who so well prophesied what has come to pass".
An observer at the end of Innocent's reign, from the facts in front of him, could not have pronounced Innocent other than successful.
He had created the reality of a Papal State and had laid secure foundations for his successors, barring the breaking of solemn oaths and international agreements.
What would happen was by no means certain in 1216.
Thirdly, again helped by circumstances, he had to some extent ended the hereditary principle as applying to the emperorship.
Henceforth it would revert to an elected emperorship.
Peace had been restored between the Ecclesia and the Imperium.
Whether Innocent could have achieved his ends earlier or by better means must in the final analysis be a matter of opinion.
His policy was consistent, unwavering, conservative.
In the long term the papacy had shown itself a "Western" power to be reckoned with in diplomatic and monarchical terms — a power, what is more, that claimed to be able to decide between states on their moral actions, ratione peccati.
Like all other powers the papacy was intent on reducing the rights of its neighbours.
On the other side, what did Innocent or the papacy lose in the long struggle?
The notion that the papacy should be above politics would have made no sense to the people of  the medieval world.
The papacy's purpose and raison d'être was to missionize and convert, to spread the Gospel and all that the Church stood for.
Attitudes to the crusades, the re-gaining of the Holy Places, the Eastern Empire of Constantinople and the Greek Orthodox Church were all conditioned by the curia's ancient policy and purpose of missionizing and converting.
It remains to look at Innocent's expansionist views towards the Eastern Church and Palestine, but they were grounded in age-old desires to re-unite Christendom and secure the Holy Places from the infidel.
At times in the prolonged imperial affair the pope may have looked close to losing face but the overall purpose of curial policy was never weakened nor diminished.
It has been argued that the spiritual prestige of the papacy was tarnished by its use of temporal strength to achieve its ends, but that is in many ways a modern concept.
In the opinion, however, of the contemporary poet, Walter von der Vogelweide, the civil war that engulfed his land was prolonged by the pope in order to weaken the empire.
He complains, too, that the church party resorted to excommunication to achieve its temporal goals.
But what other censures could it impose?
The main criticism is that the papacy should not be concerned with temporal matters at all.
It denies the purpose of the Church in this world.
According to Walter, the angels in heaven cried out "Alas!" three times when the Donation of Constantine was made.
Such an attitude explains the attractions of the Friars and other contemporary groups who embraced poverty in their search for salvation and a return to what was held to be the simplicity of the "primitive" Church; but it was remote from the active role of the papacy from the eleventh century onwards, committed to achieving its aims through government, diplomacy and the law.
LAW AND SOCIETY
DECLARATION AND FORMATION OF THE LAW
The power of the medieval papacy was upheld by the law.
Popes made law from early times.
Those popes who are generally considered to have been most influential and powerful had decidedly legal aims: their political theory was developed within the law.
Gregory VII's vision was of a society where the pope controlled the emperor, the clergy and the laity.
From this pontificate come, not surprisingly, important collections of church, or canon, law.
Alexander III has been seen as a great lawyer pope: he made pronouncements, gave judgments and held a council for the whole Church in which the law was defined.
He developed the central court as the hub of a widespread system of justice.
His decisions were collected and publicized.
At this time lawyers became important in key positions within the Church (and within the states and separate kingdoms).
Developing bureaucracies needed lawyers as administrators and the developing universities became the power-houses of legal science, providing the intellectual comment, scholarship and informed criticism necessary for the formulation and conduct of policy.
We must now consider more closely the pope's relationship with the law and where Innocent stands in its development.
It was firmly established from the time of Gregory VII that the pope had the exclusive power to issue new law in case of necessity (Dictatus Pape c.7)— to put forward new decrees and remedies against new excesses and to dispense from or mitigate the law in some cases.
From this grew the notion that the pope had the power not simply to explain and interpret the law, but to make it, whether by word of mouth in councils or by letter.
Here the pope had the advantage over the emperor for, with the removal of the empire to the West, Roman law ceased to be declared and the Roman law dried up as a living law.
Canon law, on the other hand, was the clay with which the pope could mould society.
The power to bind and to loose had been granted to the Prince of the Apostles, St Peter, by Christ Himself.
Through St Peter it descended to his successors, the popes.
COUNCILS: THE FOURTH LATERAN COUNCIL
Papal declaration of the canon law could take place with or without consultation.
It could be made by a public declaration in a large meeting, such as a council, or in the comparative privacy of the pope's household, perhaps in the dictation of a letter.
Most early law was declared in councils of the Church and notaries were officially charged with the copying down of the decrees or acts.
Those popes who have been seen by posterity as the great lawyers held councils and declared the law: Innocent II summoned the Second Lateran Council in 1139, Alexander III held the Third Lateran Council in 1179.
Innocent III himself by the bull "Vineam Domini" of April 1213 summoned a great council to meet at the Lateran in Rome on 1 November 1215 to be known as the Fourth Lateran Council.
The letter of summons declared the pope's aims — the calling of a new crusade for the recovery of the Holy Land and the reform of the universal Church.
Innocent moved within  the framework of the old doctrine that only a general council could declare or pronounce on the faith (Isidore of Seville), establish doctrine and condemn heresies.
Berengar of Tours (d. 1088) and Peter Abelard had been denounced for their opinions in councils of the Church.
Similarly, the Fourth Lateran Council, in its second decree, condemned the teaching of Joachim of Fiore (namely that there were four persons in the Trinity), as expounded in his book against Peter Lombard, and went on to define the duties of secular rulers and of bishops to fight heresy in their kingdoms and dioceses.
Innocent's council was to emphasize the importance of the crusade against the infidel and the importance of a new era of evangelization.
This council was the first to summon lay representatives: proctors arrived on behalf of Frederick II of Sicily, the emperor of Constantinople and the kings of France, England, Hungary, Jerusalem, Cyprus and Aragon.
King John had not been invited because he was under sentence of excommunication — he did not, therefore, legally exist — but when the council finally took place five proctors represented the king of England, three of whom were clerics, the archbishop of Bordeaux, the archbishop of Dublin and the king's chancellor, Richard Marsh, and two laymen, John Marshal and Geoffrey Lutterel.
Baronial proctors were invited because Innocent wished to settle the differences between the king and the barons to clear the way for full-scale support from the English baronage for his crusade but there is no evidence that any were sent.
The count of Toulouse was present to answer charges of heresy and so to protect himself and his lands against Simon de Montfort.
It was widely rumoured (by Welf sources) that the pope would rally again to the support of the ex-Emperor Otto IV (still excommunicated) against the claims of Frederick II, in spite of the treacherous behaviour of Otto towards the papacy.
In fact he declared for Frederick.
The treatment of the problems of the emperorship and of the political state of kingdoms, such as England, and comtés, such as Toulouse, showed the pope as a world leader in a novel way.
There may have been little or no discussion of these issues, even among the higher clerics and ecclesiastical advisers, but Innocent was too polished a performer not to realize the public relations advantages of pronouncement in a general council.
It is unlikely that there were discussions with laymen.
These groups were brought in to witness decisions.
The Fourth Lateran Council was the first oecumenical council of the medieval period where the two orders, clerical and lay, were summoned, but they were there essentially to witness declarations of the faith, not to treat.
It would be a misconception to think that the royal persons (or their representatives) or the addition of some lower clergy admitted new groups of people into the discussion.
This council, however, served as a model for other papal councils of the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries in its innovatory inclusion of other groups besides the bishops.
When the Emperor Frederick II appealed to the cardinals to convoke a general council of prelates and other faithful in Christ to judge him, he must have had in mind Innocent's council of nearly a quarter of a century earlier.
Pope Innocent IV's great council at Lyons in 1245 summoned kings as well as prelates.
Thus, although Innocent III's Lateran Council with its inclusion of a wider section of the clergy and some lay people appeared nearer to the conciliarist, Conrad of Gelnhauser's, definition of a general council at the time of the Great Schism in 1381, there was no notion of power-sharing.
Nor had Innocent any intention of allowing himself the humiliation of Lateran I where the council defeated the pope.
While it is true that lay people were involved as well as bishops, they were hardly as yet the necessary representatives of the separate estates which came later to be associated with a wider view of government and representation.
The summons of wider groups, because matters affecting the common good were at stake, in no way diluted Innocent's conceptions of the role of the clergy and of the laity, of bishops and of lower clergy, of kings and of lesser laymen, nor of his own position in leading the Ecclesia or "congregation of the faithful" .
The pope may deliberate with certain sections of the clergy and laity but he alone decides and these groups are used  as "rubber stamps" to endorse the proceedings.
It is this idea of the universal Church which is a seed of the conciliar movement (when the Church sought to rule itself through councils).
But it is no more than a seed in 1215.
Nothing was further from Innocent's mind than power-sharing.
Only on account of sin, amounting to spiritual fornication, or heresy, can the pope be judged by the whole Church, as Innocent stated in a sermon.
It is ironic that the conciliarist idea of power-sharing, buttressed during the fourteenth century by arguments taken from Aristotle, turned upside down the papal stance as expressed by Innocent III.
Not much is known about the course of the Council, although there are two surviving eye-witness accounts, one of which describes all the razzmatazz of a great occasion — crowds, the pope on a dais, festivities, the day-long ceremony of the re-dedication of St Maria in Trastevere, the processions with flags, flares and lights.
The Council met first on 11 November 1215, following mass celebrated by the pope at dawn with only the cardinals, archbishops and bishops present.
After an appropriate opening, it was addressed by the pope, but so great was the crowd that one reporter could not hear the content of the speech and there appear to have been several fatal accidents in the crush.
One bishop, perhaps Bishop Matthew of Amalfi, was suffocated, and the pope commissioned a marble tomb for him.
There were two further sessions on 20 and 30 November.
The particular business can be briefly summarized as filling the vacant patriarchate of Constantinople, hearing the primatial claims of the archbishop of Toledo and dealing with the heresy in the lands of the count of Toulouse.
There were also the matters of the recalcitrance of the English baronage, following the condemnation by  the pope of Magna Carta on 24 August 1215, and the recognition of the Emperor Frederick II to be considered.
Only the decrees of the Council are preserved, seventy-one in all, and nearly all of them became incorporated in the Church's authoritative collection of the canon law compiled in 1234.
There are no minutes or other official reports and nothing about their drafting.
Many issues and proposals must have been discussed: we know of one proposal, that of Cardinal Robert of Courson for compulsory poor relief, which was rejected.
There is some evidence of the pope's personal position on several issues — his reluctance to declare the count of Toulouse excommunicate, his care to see that Simon de Montfort was given only the wardship of the count's lands, and his snubbing of Archbishop Siegfried of Mainz for his inopportune intervention, three times ordering him to sit down.
Innocent did not want the recognition of Frederick II to turn into a full-scale debate on the imperial title (which Siegfried's interruption threatened), though he was careful to allow Otto's party to be heard in what was rapidly becoming a shouting-match between Otto's supporters and Frederick's representatives.
There is also evidence that there was disagreement in the Council on the recognition of certain religious groups.
We shall need to consider this matter later when we examine the new religious movements, but decree no. 13 forbade the foundation of further new congregations.
In future those seeking a religious life were to enter an already established and approved order.
It would seem that there were forces at work that wanted to check Innocent in his recognition of lay orders and new organizations.
There can be no doubt that there was disagreement in the Council on this matter of recognition and that the older orders, the Benedictines, Augustinians and Cistercians, put pressure on the pope.
But it appears that the pope may have overruled the Council on this, using his plenitude of power.
According to some sources, it was at this time that the pope recognized the Franciscans and announced this to the Council.
The recognition does not, however, find a place among the decrees.
If it did take  place, it would have necessitated direct and personal papal action, because the group of followers of Francis of Assisi did not fulfil the requirements of the canon law.
Among other things, they had no fixed income, which was a definite stipulation, and were thus a definite threat to the older orders.
It is very unlikely that Francis had been summoned to Rome: much more likely that he brought himself there seeing the opportunity of such a gathering.
Almost certainly there would have been lobbying and wheeler-dealing, meetings and get-togethers behind the scenes.
Various religious were in Rome for other reasons, such as Thomas of Marlborough, whom we shall meet later, and Richard, prior of Dunstable, a smallish and not very significant Augustinian house.
They had their own purposes.
Most of them required or sought the help of the pope or his standing officers and courts.
Innocent must have been beset with petitions and business from all and sundry.
As one example, we know that it was at this time that he took the opportunity to fill the vacant see of York since the canons were present and thus he could postulate and consecrate Walter Gray.
Although all the northern sees (York, Durham, and Carlisle) were vacant, most of the English bishops were present — the archbishop of Canterbury, the bishops of Rochester, Lincoln, Coventry, Exeter, Chichester, Worcester and the bishops-elect of Ely and Norwich.
Two of the bishops from Wales, the bishops of Llandaff and St Davids, attended.
The bishops were, of course, the persons whom the pope intended to carry out and enforce the decrees of the Council.
The lesser representatives were there, too, for the same purpose.
The pope also probably intended the introduction of a taxation scheme which would have involved contributions from all cathedral chapters and major religious houses.
It came to nothing.
It is well to bear in mind the intention behind the summonses of medieval gatherings.
To take the example of the English parliaments, they were wider groups, summoned to approve taxation, not to discuss.
Only considerably later were the Commons to aspire to comment and participate in any other sense.
Those who took the decisions at the Fourth Lateran Council were a very small group of cardinals close to the pope and, on occasion, the pope himself, alone.
The pope needed the cooperation of kings and barons for the coming Crusade, and of the bishops for implementation of the decrees concerning the faith and the reform of morals.
The wider Church was there to bear witness to what happened.
Even the cardinals' corporate powers lay in the future in 1215.
DECRETALS
Much of the law of the Church was not declared or made in councils but consisted of the statements or utterances of the popes which were known as decretals (later encyclicals).
These pronouncements were not necessarily written down and so they might be carried off into oblivion by the winds of time.
Even if they were noted, they might not survive for longer than the solution of the particular case or point.
But with more declaration of the law by the pope there came to be a demand, particularly among judges and scholars, for compendiums or collections of these decisions, for the canon law was, like English common law, a case law or law built upon precedent.
What the pope had decided on one occasion would be applicable in a similar instance.
Decretal letters, in answer to queries about particular legal points, came to be the major source of declaration during the twelfth century, more numerous than the decrees of councils but not so easily disseminated for use.
The spread of the papacy's judicial activities made decretals more and more necessary.
But, before delegation of cases to local judges could take place on a wide scale, there needed to be a manual of existing canon law as recognized in the West.
The first great collection or book to have a widespread circulation was the Decretum, which has long gone under the name of Gratian, and which was made in Bologna in the early 1140s.
This collection aimed not only at bringing together all earlier decisions and pronouncements of importance by the pope, many of them in early councils, but also at reconciling conflicting judgments.
The author or authors wanted to resolve apparent contradictions in order to make the law more usable and accessible.
It was thus not just an ordinary collection of laws, as other previous collections had been, such as those  of Burchard of Worms (1012) and Ivo of Chartres (1091), but the beginning of the whole critical study of the canon law, the science of canonistics, indeed, of jurisprudence.
What made this work possible at this particular time was the wind of change that was sweeping across Europe.
Everywhere there was a new spirit of intellectual enquiry, a spirit that was to be associated not with the old monasteries but with new centres of learning and of study in the towns and connected more with secular masters than with monks.
The excitement of the intellectual revolution produced some great minds and some important discoveries.
New texts were discovered, in particular of the classic Roman law, the Digest.
New methods of work were developed, in particular the dialectical method of the "Sic et non" of the French master, Peter Abelard.
Combining the new technique with the scientific system of the Roman law, Gratian and his school were able to provide the Church with what came to be the first part of its corpus of official law.
Although this text was in no way officially commissioned, it was to be the fount of the canon law.
The general assumption of Gratian and his collaborators (ironically they may well have been monks working with him in the Camaldolese monastery in Bologna and not the new secular law clerks of the future) was that the contradictions in the early canon law were only superficial or apparent.
They could be reconciled by argument.
The Decretum provided the Church with its basic laws, consisting of 101 distinctions and thirty-six "causes" (each with their questions and canons, or chapters).
They covered the whole range of the law as so far pronounced.
Not only did this great book provide the Western Christian world with its "moral" code, it also introduced canonistic scholarship.
From now on popes would be surrounded by men who would comment on their every dictum.
The science of the canon law had been born.
BOLOGNA: THE LAW SCHOOL AND PRODUCTIONS
Bologna was the greatest of the law "schools" by the middle of the twelfth century, unrivalled by the older schools of law at Rome, Pavia and Ravenna.
At this date schools still meant places where masters of repute might be found, but the masters might well move on to other cities taking their pupils with them.
It was rather the reputation of the individual master that brought the students than the particular location or city.
But things were changing.
At Bologna, it seems that both laws — the Roman or civil law, much used by the emperor, and the canon law, the law of the Church and of the papacy — were being taught by this date.
The Roman law system is historically the most important and influential of all the historic legal systems.
Unquestionably it was ancient Rome's greatest legacy to the medieval world, greater probably even than its literature and its poetry.
In the years between 300 and 550 there was much work of codification and it began to take shape under Theodosius the Great in the Western Empire in 438.
The northern parts of the empire were, however, under customary laws still, and it was in the Eastern Empire under the Emperor Justinian that most of the advances were made.
In 534 the emperor codified the law.
The new Corpus Iuris Civilis, or Body of the Civil Law, as it came to be called by later commentators, consisted of four books.
The first, the Digest, was the classical Roman private law of the jurists.
The second, the Code, consisted of the imperial constitutions and edicts.
The third, the "Institutes" , was an officially commissioned text-book of Roman law, while the fourth book, the Novels, consisted of Justinian's own laws.
It was the Church, and more specifically the papacy, as Ullmann pointed out, that from the mid-eighth century kept the Roman law alive in the West by its own transmission and absorption of Roman law and Roman law principles of government, and in particular in the imperial idea which the papacy began to foster from the end of that century.
With the transfer of the empire to the West, when the pope crowned the Frankish King Charlemagne as emperor on Christmas Day 800, Roman law's future was  assured in those more rural and agrarian parts of Europe within the empire where it had not already penetrated.
And the German emperors, the successors of Charlemagne, saw the advantages of Roman law to themselves in spreading their control.
This was especially so under the tenth-century Saxon, Otto III, so weakening the customary and native law.
What is more, the cultivation of the idea of emperorship brought with it a renewed interest in the rich sources of the Roman law.
While the Roman law had perhaps never died out in the north Italian cities and was studied in the early eleventh century at Pavia, where the great lawyer, Lanfranc, archbishop of Canterbury under William the Conqueror, taught for a while, an interest in the texts of Justinian was not widely aroused until the discovery of a manuscript of the Digest in c. 1070.
The fiery and provocative pontificate of Pope Gregory VII may well have inspired the search which brought this manuscript to light.
Gregory's programme of radical reform depended upon the law and a renewed interest in legal study and declaration provided the impetus which sparked off the legal renaissance of the twelfth century.
The emperors, too, and their advisers badly needed legal texts to reinforce their position as rulers.
However that may be — and the question of which side made use of them first may well remain unsolved — the Roman law provided the necessary structure for the growing canon law and its study, canonistics; and it also provided the German emperorship with some possible answers to the canonist onslaught.
Between 1100 and 1200, when popes and emperors, locked in a power conflict, were both fortified by the lawyers, it was Bologna that provided the think-tank for both the combatants, papalists and imperialists.
For in Bologna the study of the canon law and of the Roman law flourished together as nowhere else in medieval Europe.
Bologna owed its prominence mainly to this fact that both laws were studied there.
It had received an influx of lawyers from Rome when the Normans had taken the city in 1084.
Geographically it was placed on the crossroads of Europe, to the north of the Apennines, between emperor and pope, on the main roads from Milan, Verona and Padua and accessible to Ravenna and Venice, and thus  linked with the Adriatic.
Many entered Rome by way of Bologna.
This position put its schools in the forefront and made it the leading school of Europe from the 1140s, until Paris began to take the lead in theology and philosophy (but never in law) in the 1180s.
But while the canon lawyers were protected and enjoyed immunities as clerics, the civilians were open to exploitation and their numbers began to show a dramatic fall until the Emperor Frederick I intervened in 1158 to grant them certain immunities from taxes and tolls — much as the clerics already had — and their own jurisdiction.
Both emperor and pope protected the law students of Bologna from the avaricious citizens.
Bolognese lawyers were so important to both the papal and imperial parties in supplying them with lawyers to staff their governments and administrations that they were given special protection.
Bologna's own position among the great cities of northern Italy also affected the study of the law.
Like other cities, it bargained with the emperor and also favoured the pope when it suited.
It gained the right from the emperor in 1116 to keep half the fine for infringing imperial rights.
The city joined the Lombard leagues in 1167 and in 1185, seeing that to its advantage.
It also had an advanced government: podestà, consuls, commune, fighting forces and cavalry.
There were many notaries and much business in the city.
Bologna was rich and had the usual rivalries with neighbours, most intensively with Modena, its arch-enemy.
It extended its powers over smaller towns and communes, such as Nonantola, and allied itself with others.
But it could not do without its law students who brought business and fame and brilliance to the town.
Most strikingly, in 1213, the five teachers of law were ordered to take an oath of loyalty to the city.
They were to swear not to leave Bologna and not to teach the students elsewhere.
The city's prestige depended on them.
The schools themselves could never have flourished so significantly without the presence in the town (at roughly the same time as Gratian) of the great father-figure of the Roman law school, Irnerius, and the group of glossators or  commentators who gathered under him.
Nothing was of more significance in the intellectual and institutional development of medieval Europe, indeed of modern Europe, than the rediscovery of the Roman law texts in the eleventh century.
Perhaps the reason for the discovery was the increasingly legalistic papacy that had emerged.
The desire to "discover" useful texts sometimes led to forgeries, as the False Decretals.
Once discovered, the law led to ceaseless activity and the interchanges between both systems, the cross-fertilization, that brought a renewed vigour to both laws.
Power contests were often set in a legal framework.
At the heart of this was Bologna, the pope and the emperor.
After the publication of Gratian's Decretum and its wide dissemination, which is illustrated by the large number of manuscripts in different medieval libraries and individually owned by various bishops and scholars, not only could more detailed work be undertaken but it initiated a new epoch in interest in the declaration of law by the pope.
This was partly induced or caused by the development of courts at a distance from the curia but directly under the pope.
More and more decretals were issued and they needed both collecting and sifting.
Here the schools and particularly Bologna and its students, as well as the judges scattered throughout Europe, began to take an interest.
These additions were first added to working copies of the Decretum in the 1150s and 1160s, but by the 1170s they had become far too numerous and had to be placed in separate books.
These were doubtless satisfactory for the individuals who had collected them and for a short period of time, until perhaps superseded by rulings that were seen to be more appropriate.
But for wider and easier use system was needed and the need was becoming ever more pressing.
It was increasingly imperative to have books which brought rulings on the same subject together under one heading, such as marriage.
Furthermore, the decretal letter might deal with more than one point.
Innocent's reply to an enquiring letter from Bishop Eustace of Ely, who was requesting clarification and help on a number of problems in order to act as a papal judge delegate, did exactly this.
The pope answered twelve different legal points.
To be useful, therefore, the letter needed dissecting and the  different points putting under separate and appropriate headings (as came to be done in this particular instance).
Bernard of Pavia's Compilatio Prima of 1190 first assembled material in this way for general use, dividing the texts into five main sections:(1) ordination and ecclesiastical offices;(2) judicial organization and civil cases;(3) matters affecting the clergy;(4) marriage; and (5) criminal procedure.
It was not a collection so much as a systematized compilation and its arrangement came to influence all further compilations of importance.
A continuation of this, the Collectio Sangermanensis, took the material up to the beginning of Innocent III's pontificate.
The first collection of Innocent's own decretals, or legal rulings, was that by Rainer of Pomposa.
Dedicated to a papal chaplain, John, priest and monk, perhaps of Pomposa, it had not been commissioned by the pope but was a private collection of decisions of the pope's first four years.
It had forty titles (different from the classifications of Bernard of Pavia, therefore) and it dissected the letters, by putting the same decretal under different titles according to context.
Historically Rainer is very valuable because there are several extremely important legal decisions of Innocent III which would not have survived but for Rainer's collection.
These include the famous letter "Solite" to the Eastern Emperor Alexis of Constantinople and a letter of 1200 addressed to the archbishop of Canterbury and concerning Bishop Mauger, which we shall have occasion to discuss later.
Among the canonist collectors and commentators at Bologna (and probably also in Rome from time to time) were the Englishmen, Gilbert and Alan, whose importance in canon law scholarship has been recognized only in recent years.
They had presumably been drawn to Bologna as students and had stayed there to carve themselves out a teaching or professional career.
Gilbert, whose collection appeared in 1203–4, based his compilation on the model of Bernard of Pavia's Five Books.
His motive was to supplement Bernard with the more recent decretals that had been issued.
Ninety-six of the 258 chapters came from Innocent's pronouncements (sixty-four decretals).
The pope, however, denied issuing some of the decretals attributed to him by Gilbert, and others in this collection, coming from Innocent's two predecessors, were incorrectly attributed to Innocent.
In 1206 came Alan's collection of Six Books.
While Gilbert had inserted some new titles, Alan added a completely new book dealing with sacramental law.
Alan included a high proportion of Innocent's rulings (345 chapters out of 484) and 314 of his chapters found their way into later collections, being seen as important and useful.
Some of these rulings (as in Gilbert's collection) came from sections of the papal registers that no longer survive (particularly from the lost fourth year) and some of the chapters (as with Gilbert's) Innocent denied ever having issued.
There were, too, some new titles of significance, such as unfaithfulness in marriage and right of dower.
The source of these collections was said to be the papal registers.
These were all private collections, as was that of Bernard of Compostella, the Compilatio Romana, covering the first ten years of Innocent's pontificate to February 1208.
Bernard, who was staying at the curia at the time, submitted his work to Innocent for approval, but permission was refused by the pope, who again denied having issued some of the decretals.
The collection, however, was welcomed in Bologna, and was doubtless used, but its use was short-lived because in 1210 an official collection of Innocent's decretals was published.
Peter Beneventanus Collivaccinus' Collection, known as the Compilatio Tertia, was both approved and commended by the pope to the masters and scholars of Bologna for use "as much in judgments as in the schools" .
Master Peter was a papal subdeacon and notary and had access to the papal registers so that the pope felt confident that the collection might be used, as he put it, "without any scruple of doubt" .
It is even possible that Innocent commissioned this collection.
The worry that the law in text-books for students, which might be unofficial, might be applied in the decision of cases in court is well-expressed in the letter "Pastoralis" addressed to the bishop of Ely, where the pope gives voice to his concern about the use of forged decretals.
The official compilation was of moment because it ensured that certain general claims of the papacy, and the specific reasons for these claims, were not lost sight of in the later history of the papacy.
Following Peter's collection, there were two more unofficial collections for the pontificate.
Between 1210 and 1215 John of Wales made a new compilation out of Gilbert and Alan's work (which came, therefore, to be called the Compilatio Secunda, though in fact it followed the Compilatio Tertia) and in 1216 came the last private collection of the reign, the Compilatio Quarta of John the Teuton.
This included the decretals of the last six years of Innocent, together with the extremely important decrees of the Fourth Lateran Council.
For some reason, perhaps because an official collection had already been issued, the work was coolly received in Bologna and it was little "glossed" or commented on by canonists, and it was said that Innocent had again refused his official imprimatur.
The impressive activity of the collectors of legal decisions in Innocent III's eighteen-year pontificate bears witness to the pope's energy in his court and his zest for settling issues.
The immediate impact of the decisions and the context in which they were made belong to the realm of government.
What is significant, however, is the pope's determination to see that only valid decisions circulated.
It is for this reason that approval of collections was refused in some cases.
The only source that the pope could unquestionably approve was his own registers.
Early collectors had in many cases got decretals wherever they could find them.
Frequently judges delegate appended them to their manuals.
But this pope was concerned with veracity and uniformity.
He was also concerned in the correct teaching of the law at Bologna.
The importance for the future of these collections was twofold.
Firstly, official collections came to supersede entirely the old private ones and, secondly, from these four collections (together with one of Innocent's successor, Pope Honorius III) the second great compendium of canon law came to be formed.
This was the Decretales, commissioned by Pope Gregory IX (the former Cardinal Hugolinus), one of Innocent III's most trusted advisers among the cardinals.
The work carried out by Raymond of Pennaforte was called the Liber Extra, being seen as an extra or additional volume to Gratian's Decretum.
When it was issued in 1234, with full papal approval, it was addressed to the masters and scholars of Bologna.
Although it clearly superseded the Five Compilations (all  previous collections now being declared null and void) it obviously included much of the law found there.
It became the second great text and was to last as an authoritative collection for all Roman Catholics until the revision of the canon law in 1918 and the publication of the Codex.
CLERKS AND LAYMEN
If a distinction between laws — the law of the State and the law of the Church — was blurred in most men's minds, the distinction between the clergy and the laity was not.
The exclusion of the lay influence from top to bottom had taken place before Innocent III's time.
The laity now played no part in papal elections, laymen were excluded from the investiture of bishops and lay ownership of churches had been diminished and changed.
Clerks had particular privileges in society and were as a group apart.
This is not, of course, to say that an impecunious clerk or curate was of equal status with a great lay lord, duke or count, or that a simple peasant woman had the rights of a noble lady, for medieval society was a stratified, or hierarchical, one, in which power was conceived as coming downwards from God to His spiritual and temporal vice-gerents: popes, emperors, kings and bishops.
Authority descended from above: it did not arise from the will of the majority of the people below.
But the clergy had specific rights that were denied to lay people, even if influential landowners.
The priest dealt with the Lord's body.
No lay person ever claimed that dignity.
In terms of legal status the clerk had first of all the right to have his case tried only before a church court — the "privilege of the forum" .
This privilege proceeded logically from the bishop's (or other prelate's) power of correction.
Beneficed clergy (those who had parishes) were subject to their bishop, monks to their abbots, and bishops to their archbishops, and they, in turn, to the pope.
Correction by one's superiors is integral to most forms of organization: in a hierarchical society it is accentuated.
A multiplicity of jurisdictions, dependent in part on where one lived, meant that a man might be subject to different courts for different reasons.
A peasant would be  subject to the manorial court, i.e. his landlord, for misdemeanours within the manor, encroaching on other people's lands, brawling, fighting — all the usual "neighbourly" conflicts.
(In some cases, the landlord might be an ecclesiastic of importance, the bishop of Winchester, say, or the abbot of Bury St Edmunds, and the same applied here.)
For offences against the moral code, the Church in the person of the parson was the confessor and imposed the penalty, though if the behaviour was particularly offensive (e.g. adultery) or pernicious (e.g. heresy, witchcraft), then it would be brought before the archdeacon or the bishop to hear in his court.
Where blood was shed, the secular courts of the land came more and more to take an interest.
In England, the king's court had come to claim "pleas of the Crown" — murder, gross felony — from the shire courts, which, by the end of the twelfth century, were mainly left to deal with debt and some land disputes within the county.
There was a sharp distinction between the "free" and the "unfree" .
The unfree did not exist legally and could not plead in a court.
Freemen, on the other hand, took part in certain decisions, within the manor and county court, whereas the unfree did not.
Only a person of non-servile status might be ordained a clerk or become a monk or nun.
Benefit of clergy was the exemption claimed by the clergy from lay or secular jurisdiction in certain criminal cases.
The issue of "criminous clerks" began to be discussed during the early twelfth century, and by the 1150s in England, there was some acceptance that such men could be tried only by an ecclesiastical tribunal.
A spectacular twelfth-century case was that of Osbert, archdeacon of York, accused of murdering his archbishop, William, by administering poison to the chalice.
It forcibly illustrates the principles currently at issue.
The case began before King Stephen, in front of whom Osbert denied the charge and claimed "benefit of clergy" , saying that because of his clerical status he was not subject to the king's jurisdiction but only to that of the Church.
The archbishop of Canterbury, Theobald, well aware of the claims of the canon law, "succeeded in recalling the case to the judgment of the Church with much difficulty and by strong pressure, to the indignation of the king and all his nobles" , as Theobald's secretary  noted.
The point had been successfully made that such a case belonged to the Church's jurisdiction, not to the Crown's.
Most difficult to resolve in the struggle for jurisdiction over clerks who were charged with crimes was whether they could be tried twice, as clause three of the royal Constitutions of Clarendon (1164) outlined, first in the king's court and then in the church court, and whether, if found guilty, they should be handed over to a civil court for the passing of the sentence.
This was a matter of extreme concern — with its many implications, for both jurisdictions of Church and State.
It was the spearhead of the contest between King Henry II and his archbishop of Canterbury, Thomas Becket.
In fact the murder of Thomas Becket by four knights of the king of England in his own cathedral in 1170, sealed the fate of the royal position.
Though concessions were made to royal justice over the forest laws and in cases concerning land, the church courts' competence over marriage and legitimacy cases and wills was henceforth assured as was the notion of "benefit of clergy" .
The brilliant and enigmatic figure of Becket had brought England and its Church into closer association with Europe and with the papacy.
The tragic event of his murder ensured an increased papal influence over England.
Becket had, indeed, died for the liberty of the Church, if by that we mean an acceptance of the universal law of the Church and the freedom of the church courts to try certain cases and exercise jurisdiction over the clergy as a separate caste.
If the clergy had privileges, they also had commensurate duties.
Very high among Innocent III's ambitions was the improvement of the parish clergy.
The parish priest baptized the babies into the Christian faith.
He brought the children to the bishop for confirmation.
He heard confessions of sins by his parishioners and gave absolution as he saw fit, enjoining a suitable penance.
He witnessed the marriages, gave the last rites and buried the dead; and, most important of all, he administered the sacrament of the mass.
All these activities are vividly depicted in the  great seven-sacrament fonts of East Anglia and in the stained glass of All Saints', North Street, York.
The parson's high social standing in the community remained until recent times.
Because he was literate, it was he who helped with the drawing up of wills or testaments, and, in more recent times, it was he who wrote references or testimonials and signed applications for passports.
But clerks were human and were open to the temptations of life.
Some of them hankered after the company of women, had wives in all but name, and found pleasure in fashionable clothing, drink, revelry and hunting.
Innocent's ideal was the sober, clean-living clerk, assiduous in his duties of counselling and caring for his flock, bringing it the word and flesh of God.
To be a man apart, he must not be distracted by the frivolities of the world and he must be educated.
All this the pope had learned in Paris and he believed passionately in his mission of improvement.
Most prejudicial to the reputation of the Church was the sin of simony, the buying of something of spiritual value for money, such as ecclesiastical office or advancement, or charging for ordaining a clerk or for the performance of any other spiritual service.
According to the bishop of Worcester, in 1198, it was widespread in his diocese.
Examples of simoniacal practices (and numerous mandates to deal with the problem) abound in the papal registers.
Councils, too, such as the Paris councils held by the legate Robert of Courson in 1212 and 1213 legislated repeatedly against priests who sold their services.
Hardly less damaging for the Church was clerical incontinency, which sometimes led to the son succeeding the father in a benefice or parish, as reported in the diocese of Worcester at this time, "so dishonouring ecclesiastical dignity and the canon law" .
The long struggle by popes and bishops for celibacy among the clergy was not over by Innocent's pontificate.
All over Europe it remained the one really  insoluble problem and archbishops and bishops from Lund and Tournai in the north to Arles in the south of France and Gniezno in the east were ordered to deprive incontinent priests of their benefices and stop clerical benefices being transferred from father to son.
The Second Lateran Council (1139) had declared the marriage of clerks (both priests and deacons) unlawful and invalid.
Local councils of the pontificate, such as that held at Dioclea in 1199, to reform the Dalmatian and Serbian Church repeated the condemnation, demanding the celibacy of priests.
However, the difficulty of enforcing the regulations in more remote communities and villages can be appreciated.
The priest had to be denounced by his parishioners; many with concubines would have escaped challenge.
The married priest might be more obvious to the archdeacon on his visitation or inspection and to the rural deans in charge of the groups of parishes; the unmarried concubinist could well escape justice.
In the succession of sons to their fathers' benefices, reform would have depended on the bishops and, of course, the clergy themselves.
The bishop had the power and duty of examining the clerk before he allowed the candidate to have the benefice and to become a parish priest.
Innocent's reforming programme targeted both the bishops and the clergy.
The bishops were to look for exactly these deficiencies; synods were to be held; the clergy were to be better educated, responsible and not ignorant.
A master in each cathedral was to instruct the clerks, presumably also in the law (Lateran Council can.
11).
In the general improvement of the clergy, canon 18 of the Fourth Lateran Council declared that henceforth clergy were not to take part in the pronouncement of the death penalty, to fight or duel, or to perform surgery which involved cutting or burning.
They were not to be concerned in any way with the shedding of blood.
Innocent had already shown himself against clergy being involved in the ordeal and the duel — the two survivals of superstitious methods of proof.
The ancient method of  trial by ordeal demanded that the accused submit himself to the test of fire or of water.
Carrying hot metal, or tripping blindfold between red-hot plough shares, or plunging the arm in boiling water were the usual tests, though the accused might be flung into a pond to see whether he sank or not, or forced to eat an ounce of bread or cheese to see if it stuck in the gullet!
It was the priest who examined the wound after three days to see whether it had healed.
If not, the accused was pronounced guilty and the priest might, therefore, be associated with a sentence of death.
The Lateran decree had an immediate and lasting effect on the English Common Law for the king soon ordered his travelling justices to suspend the practice in trials and to use other methods of proof.
The long association of the priest with the ordeal, which took place after the accused had communicated or taken part in the eucharist, must have blurred the distinction between earthly and supernatural justice.
Ordeals had taken place in or close to churches — the chronicler, Eadmer, writes in the early twelfth century of ordeals being conducted in the baptistery at the east end of Canterbury cathedral where former archbishops were buried — and so confused the ecclesiastical and the secular law, the law of the Church and the law of the State.
MARRIAGE
The way in which the canon law affected most people was in the control of marriage.
The Church made the law on marriage — who might marry and with whom and what constituted a marriage.
Marriage was forbidden to priests and to professed religious.
For lay people, until the Fourth Lateran Council, marriage was forbidden within the seventh degree, i.e. of any persons closer in relationship than sixth cousins.
The council revised the prohibited degrees to extend as far as third cousins (common great-great-grandparents).
The law of affinity, as defined by the popes, most obviously affected the political marriage-makers, the  aristocracy.
Sometimes to claim too close a relationship became the way of getting rid of a wife, particularly if she had not produced male children.
There were also major political reasons that might affect the making and breaking of alliances.
When the first wife of Philip Augustus, king of France, died in 1193, the king decided to marry Ingeborg, daughter of the Danish king, hoping for support against King Richard I of England.
The Danish king, however, was not prepared to furnish this, so Philip exacted a large dowry and then proceeded to obtain a sentence of divorce.
Consanguinity was alleged and Philip decided to re-marry quickly to ensure that the clerical sentence of divorce would be irrevocable.
He married Agnes of Meran, from the Rhineland, whose father was a Staufen supporter.
On Innocent's accession as pope, Philip Augustus was ordered to take back Ingeborg as his wife, under threat of excommunication.
Innocent wanted support in the imperial crisis.
In May 1201 Philip capitulated and formally took back Ingeborg (though he actually put her in prison and restored Agnes to the court).
Agnes, however, died soon after and Philip wanted the legitimization of his and Agnes's two children.
The children were duly legitimized in a bull of August 1201 because the pope wanted the support of Philip Augustus.
The unfortunate Ingeborg remained a pawn in the game of world politics.
In 1210 Philip tried to marry the daughter of the landgrave of Thuringia, but by 1213 he decided to take back Ingeborg again because of his plan of conquering England.
In deciding the case of legitimization, Innocent claimed the authority of the apostolic see to pass judgment on the legitimacy of heirs and in the decretal "Per venerabilem" he outlined this right and duty in rejecting the petition of count William of Montpellier.
Innocent had also made it plain that he was the final authority in matrimonial affairs.
That legitimacy belonged to the spiritual jurisdiction could not really be contested by lay powers because no one could dispute the Church's power over marriage.
But it came very close to affecting lay rights and particularly, of course, rights of succession and inheritance of land.
The canon law held that the subsequent marriage between two parties, if valid, legitimized the children.
This position, however, was never accepted by the English baronage.
The lengthy, complicated and interesting case of Richard of Anstey (of some two generations before Innocent III's time) shows how it was already accepted that the Crown could have no jurisdiction over the solemn sacrament of marriage, though at this stage the canon law of marriage and what actually constituted a legal marriage was extremely fluid.
Richard of Anstey was the nephew of William de Sackville.
The Sackvilles were considerable landowners and so quite an inheritance was at stake — enough at any rate to turn Richard into the classic professional litigant before both lay and ecclesiastical courts.
William de Sackville had contracted, or promised, to marry Albreda de Tresgoz, but he had in fact married Adelizia de Vere and they had a daughter, Mabel.
For some reason, William sought to get rid of Adelizia and he began a case against her in the church courts which ended in a declaration by Pope Innocent II that his first contractual marriage was binding.
It appears that William on his deathbed confessed that he had indulged in a fraud in getting his marriage to Adelizia nullified and at the eleventh hour did all that he could for Mabel's succession as his heir.
Mabel, whose mother came from the wealthy de Veres, had by the time of her father's death married into the Francheville family, and she was not the sort of woman to throw away her rightful inheritance without a struggle.
Before the king's court, she, her husband and her mother, Adelizia, maintained that the claim of a daughter was greater than that of a nephew.
The case came to hinge on the legitimacy of Mabel because of William's first contracted marriage and so to be a matter for the church courts.
Richard, as he saw it, tired of being "cheated of his just claim by the shiftiness of a woman" , spared no expense — such was the prize to be gained — and in the end he was successful.
As it so happened the decision of Pope Innocent II that Mabel was illegitimate, because of her father's first contractual marriage, was later superseded by the judgment of Pope Alexander III that the children of annulled marriages, which had been made "in the presence of the church" (i.e. in good faith and in public), were to be regarded as legitimate.
Mabel was the unfortunate victim of the changing marriage law, of the greed of her cousin and of Henry II's restoration of law and order.
Without those factors her peaceful possession of her father's properties would have continued.
Once the Church had decided that Mabel was illegitimate, the king's court granted Richard the inheritance.
THE POPE AS JUDGE: LAW COURTS
From earliest times the pope's court acted as the centre of justice, the "seat of justice" as Pope Innocent II had called it.
The centralization of papal government, which was a feature from Gregory VII's pontificate onwards, depended on the building up of the curia and the use of the cardinals in the administration and as advisers.
This was household government and justice could be dispensed wherever the pope was.
Important cases concerning metropolitans and bishops came before the pope and justice was administered by him in person.
Innocent III spent some months outside Rome, but this did not stop him doing justice.
But the really significant judicial development that had taken place in the twelfth century was the staggering innovation of papal judges delegate.
The pope's tribunal was the highest tribunal for all, but why should this tribunal not be extended in practice by the delegation of cases that came to it from all over Europe to judges, acting on behalf of the pope, in the countries from which the appeals came?
The advantages were that local judges could be used, first of all to enquire on the pope's behalf, but  quite soon to decide the case as well.
In this way recourse to the papal courts was encouraged, the pope was seen as the final judge and the delegate judges could be kept in touch with the latest legal developments by the terms of the mandate or letter of instruction.
The whole system forged bonds between the churches, made for standardization and improvement in the hearing of cases and increased the importance of the pope at the centre.
The author of the Gesta of Pope Innocent sets the scene (XLIC—XLII):
In public, three times a week, he held a solemn consistory — which had previously fallen into disuse — in which he deputed the examination of lesser cases to others, while the major ones he dealt with himself so subtly and wisely that all wondered at his precision and skill and many educated and legally-learned men came to the Roman Church to hear him and they learnt more in his consistories than they had learnt in the schools, especially when they heard him give sentence.
He argued so acutely and convincingly that each party hoped for victory when it heard him arguing on its behalf and there was no advocate who appeared before him who did not greatly fear his cross-examination and interventions.
But he was just in passing sentence so that he would not accept money nor shrink from the right way; and these sentences he gave after careful deliberation with much maturity of judgment.
On account of this, very many cases from all over the world began to be brought to his audience so that he concluded several major cases in his time which were started long before.
Immediately after his promotion, the archbishops of Compostella and Braga came personally into his presence in a case which had been going on between them concerning seven bishoprics.
This case was so complex and difficult that it filled many books of written record and there was so much opposing evidence that it was difficult to get at the truth, but he at last clarified everything and settled it with such skill and wisdom that all commended his extreme cleverness.
At this time, too, he carefully examined and brilliantly settled the old quarrel concerning the metropolitan church of Britanny between Tours and  Dol, which although it had been judged many times by his predecessors would never have been brought to a final settlement but for him.
He also brought to an end, but not without difficulty, the suit which had begun between the archbishop and the chapter of Canterbury over the church of Lambeth, which the same archbishop, against the will of the chapter, had built and endowed with many and substantial rents, instituting canons regular in it — noble men, powerful and educated.
The king and the archbishop, indeed, had agreed upon this between themselves.
But the chapter, having no protector after God unless it be the Roman pontiff, asserted that for a certainty unless he had that church demolished the metropolitical dignity would, for the most part, be transferred to it.
Indeed, after the lord pope had heard sufficient arguments from both parties, he decreed with the authority of the apostolic see that the same archbishop should demolish the church at his own expense, revoking completely everything that had been done in this matter.
When the archbishop heard this he pretended that the king would not allow it to be done; the pope, fired with the zeal of justice, ordered the archbishop in virtue of the obedience owed to him, not to delay longer in carrying this out or he would find himself suspended from his priestly office and his suffragans released from obedience to him.
And so, at length, how ever much the king and the archbishop grumbled and complained, what he ordered was implemented completely.
Innocent played an important part in many of the legal causes célébres of his pontificate.
We have detailed accounts of the hearing of some of these cases and they, as much as anything, reinforce the opinion that Innocent himself was a very considerable lawyer.
An unusually detailed account survives of the fortunes of the ancient and revered Benedictine abbey of Evesham in Worcestershire in a case against their local bishop, the bishop of Worcester, as to his jurisdictional rights over them and whether he had the right to inspect them.
At first some of the monks were loath to enter on a long and expensive case before the pope, but they had among their number a man of mature  years, called Thomas of Marlborough, who had been at the schools of Paris and who had taught at Oxford.
He was an outspoken opponent of episcopal pretensions and a staunch upholder of what he believed to be the ancient rights of the monastery of Evesham.
Accordingly when Bishop Mauger attempted to visit them in 1202, both parties, bishop and monks, believing in the rightness of their positions, appealed to the pope, and the abbey also appealed to the archbishop of Canterbury for tuition, or protection of this appeal, while matters were pending.
Only in Rome did both parties feel they could get a final judgment that would be respected.
In the first rounds, judges delegate were appointed by the pope to examine the immediate question — who possessed the jurisdiction at the moment — and to make a temporary decision.
The main case as to the long-term or lawful ownership was to be sent for the pope to decide when the judges had examined witnesses and collected the evidence.
When these details arrived in Rome the task of going over them was assigned to a senior lawyer or papal auditor, Benedict cardinal priest of St Susanna.
The two papal judgments issued in the course of this famous suit concerning the exemption of the abbey from the jurisdiction of the diocesan and the position of the abbey's churches in the Vale of Evesham between 1202 and 1206 attracted the attention of the decretal collectors.
The sentence over the exemption of the abbey was given by the pope himself in his consistory and Thomas of Marlborough, who had appeared as proctor for the abbey, fainted for joy.
His case had rested in part on forged documents, though what these documents contained was not without authority, and the pope's arguments concerned prescription or the power conferred by ancient right.
For the hearing a posse of lawyers appeared for both sides, but Thomas, at the time of his deepest depression over the outcome of the suit, comforted himself that he had secured the best lawyers that money could buy before his opponents had managed to secure them.
He had also taken the precaution of seeking legal advice in Bologna, where he remained for six months, attending lectures daily in canon and Roman law.
On returning to Rome, Thomas went again to the curia and the pope informed him that the case would begin in  three days' time.
Thomas, as he himself reports, was known as "the Evesham proctor" by the pope and the whole curia, and there is a hint here of his familiarity with the curia.
The case opened with very long and complicated arguments by Master Robert of Clipstone, proctor of the bishop, and Thomas was quick to note that the pope soon became bored by the lengthy statement of the facts by Robert, and told him roundly "to get to the point" .
The supplementary case concerning the jurisdiction over the churches of the Vale brought also a quick retort from the pope when poor Master Robert attempted to argue that prescription had no power against episcopal rights.
 "When you learned that" , said Innocent, "you and your masters must have drunk too much English beer" .
Thomas's view of the pope as the dispenser of justice and of the cardinals as influential advisers within the papal circle accords with other accounts of the period.
The pope's comment that one could never lack for advocates in Rome, his advice to Thomas to go to Bologna and his own interest and concern in the details of hearings present a picture of Rome and a papal court alive with lawyers and those interested in the law.
CONCLUSION
During Innocent's pontificate great strides were made in the development of the delegated judicial system.
Clearly the availability of judgments and recent canons and books on procedure made a difference to the judges.
The pope's ardent desire for clarification and decision made it possible for judges to be used who were not always the bishops, in close contact with Rome, but abbots and other ecclesiastical officials.
Many of Innocent's decretals concerned the administration of this system and some of the clauses of the Fourth Lateran Council bore witness to the growing precision and influence of these courts.
To begin a case the petitioner needed to go to the curia to get a mandate to judges at home or he could send a proctor.
Thomas of Marlborough took about forty days to get himself to Rome, riding fast and wearing out horses on the way.
His hurried  journey allows us to estimate a more usual journey as taking about six to eight weeks.
Once the mandate was procured the petitioner, or the proctor, left for home or the letter was entrusted to a messenger.
Sealed with the papal leaden seal, the bulla or bull, it was the authority for the judges' actions, outlining any specific points which needed to be brought to their attention, informing them in some cases of the law and declaring their actual powers.
Many mandates were, like the English royal judicial writs, of a stock type.
Once the messenger reached his destination he delivered the mandate to the judges who then proceeded to summon the parties to appear on a stated day at a stated place.
As the benches were composed of various judges there were no settled places for their courts.
The judges usually used the church of one of their number for the place of hearing and they often chose places that were towns or centres.
The parties might be represented by proctors.
The judges examined both the evidence of witnesses and written documentation, the procedure being based on the Roman civil procedure.
The plaintiff or petitioner drew up a series of charges for the defendant to answer and refute, but the burden of proof was on the plaintiff.
Very frequently judges sought to bring the parties to an amicable settlement (which was more likely to be observed) rather than to pass an outright sentence.
The advantages of a settlement by a delegated court were an up-to-date judgment and enforcement.
But it would be idle to pretend that there were not frivolous appeals and attempts by parties to delay and frustrate justice and to be obstructive if it suited them, when litigants learned how to "play" the courts to their advantage.
However, for the most part it was a civilized system which got to the truth and settled many cases fairly and without chicanery.
We cannot know how many cases concerned ordinary people and their marriages, wills and so forth, rather than the ceaseless disputes concerning monastic income and the well-documented cases about elections and jurisdictional powers.
The surviving evidence is weighted very heavily towards the property cases (as one would expect), but delegated courts impinged on many people's lives in one way or another.
At the heart of the system was the pope, industrious in clarification and in civilizing procedure.
He  accentuated the importance of evidence and, in particular, the depositions of sworn witnesses (and he introduced the same stringency in canonization cases).
Many of Innocent's pronouncements on written record, on the appeal procedure (the case to be returned to the former judges if the objection proved unreasonable and the appellant to be condemned to pay the costs), and on intermediary judgments jostled with other decisions among the decrees of the Lateran Council.
Others, on the judge delegate courts, found their way through the Five Compilations into the Decretales of 1234.
Innocent, by his actions and definitions, had extended and improved the work of the courts.
He had held a great council which, in turn, encouraged the holding of local synods, and he had sent out legates and nuncios on the Church's mission.
He had extended earlier papal ambitions as the means arose.
Above all, in his role as final judge and lawgiver, he had shown himself to be an exponent of definition and codification.
The authority of the law was his guiding principle.
Upholding the law was an active, not a passive, activity.
The banning of the ordeal symbolized a triumph for rational argument over the old magical formulas.
The Church might have magical powers but for Innocent they had no part in the legal process.
Law meant the right ordering of society on earth and it reflected Divine Law.
AUTHORITY AND PROTEST: THE CHRISTIAN LIFE
THE CRISIS OF THE CHURCH
Historically the two personalities of Pope Innocent III and St Francis of Assisi may be seen as in marked contrast — Innocent representing an authoritative papacy, Francis searching for the roots of the simple apostolic life of the early Church.
We have, on the one hand, the career ecclesiastic, the planner and man of an essentially legalistic mind, and, on the other, the religious enthusiast who takes no thought for the morrow, preferring to trust in divine power and provision.
Was it possible that the desire to return to the Vita Apostolica, the simple life of prayer, personal austerity and poverty was reconcilable with the Petrine commission and all the pomp and authority that suggested?
In the upper church of the great friary at Assisi is a fresco by Giotto (Ambrogio Bordone 1267–1337), showing Innocent's dream.
A sleeping pope, in an elaborately curtained bedchamber, attired in the red mantle and the tiara, witnesses the bare-footed Francis, clad in a rough brown garment, holding up the tremendous weight of a marble-pillared church, decorated with a Cosmati frieze and surmounted  by a tower of five storeys.
The church is leaning dangerously.
The painting is based on the story recounted in Brother Thomas of Celano's Second Life of St Francis completed in 1247.
Franciscan legend thus presented the faithful a generation later with Francis as the allegorical saviour of the universal Church.
To understand the challenge to the papacy that this scene represents, we need to look at the structure of the traditional Church and also at popular religion at the beginning of the thirteenth century.
The Roman Church under the papacy was the established Church of most of western Europe and parts of eastern Europe.
Long before Innocent III it had asserted its primacy over the patriarchates of Constantinople, Alexandria, Antioch and Jerusalem.
The Petrine commission had given Rome its authority, and although there was resistance and limitation to its eastern aspirations, Rome as the see of St Peter dominated the West.
In structure the Western Church was hierarchical, with the pope at the apex, assisted in the Church at large by the archbishops of the provinces and the bishops of their dioceses.
By the thirteenth century archdeacons acted as lieutenants of the bishops within the separate dioceses or sees.
In 1198 the established central "Church" at Rome was well on the way to becoming a vast, governmental machine.
In Rome itself the cardinals administered their own churches according to their orders of bishop, priest or deacon and they acted also within the pope's household as officers such as chancellor and chamberlain.
They had become increasingly important, too, as legates and representatives or envoys of the pope, sent to deal with the problems of local churches and to hold councils.
The pope's household was fast developing into defined administrative and judicial offices.
Although the "offices" might be peripatetic, going outside Rome with the pope, and although the pope might still play a dominant personal part, only a total reversal of policy — an annihilation of the authority the papacy had set itself to achieve during the previous 150 years — could have stemmed the march towards authority and central administrative offices.
Innocent had been brought up within the structure of the Roman Church.
As a cardinal deacon, he became part of the papal "civil" service, acting on occasion as auditor of lawsuits and witnessing administrative acts of the curia.
He was a "pastor" within the established framework, devoting his attention to his cardinalate church and writing his theological works.
He was not a great spiritual leader, as was Francis.
He had not, however, lost sight of the Church's Christian mission to evangelize and declare the faith and his early pre-occupation with pastoral duties and the care of souls did not leave him.
This is the programmatic message of many of his letters and of his summons to the Council.
While his approach was one of conservative conformity on the whole, in line with previous papal policy, he was not a man to overlook an opportunity to extend the Roman Church's influence.
The simple and almost revolutionary message of Francis had the fortune to reach the ears and attention of a pope of spiritual vision who, while not able to fill that role himself, recognized the strength and power that might be harnessed to both the papal curia and the Church as a whole.
It is difficult to speak of popular religion or to define it in a satisfactory way, because it included an amalgam of magic and superstition, belief and doubt, the pagan and the Christian.
The Church had struggled against the continuation of certain pagan practices.
But it had by no means won on every point.
Our knowledge of the persistence of paganism and the practice of magic is limited.
It depends on chronicles, on the evidence of laws, and on the decrees of councils that are mainly later than the Fourth Lateran.
Until the detailed investigative sources and court records that begin to appear in the reformed diocesan administration of the fourteenth century, we are almost totally in the dark.
But it is certain that superstitious practices and pagan activities  had not died out.
Laws of Canute of 1020x1022 state: "It is heathen practice if one worships idols, namely if one worships heathen gods and the sun or the moon, fire or flood, wells or stones or any kind of forest trees, or if one practises witchcraft or encompasses death by any means, either by sacrifice or divination, or takes any part in such delusions." 
The London Council of 1074x1075 decreed excommunication for magic and the statutes of Canterbury I 1213x1214 decreed penalties for priests who sacrificed to demons and practised magic.
Councils of the mid-thirteenth century in England continued legislating against the worship of wells and springs, stones and trees, spells and superstitions, and penalties were provided.
Offenders were to be denied the sacrament by the local priest.
The chroniclers entered the world of witches and spirits and handed on the sort of stories that circulated.
William of Malmesbury is our source for the tale of the witch of Berkeley who served the Devil as a sorceress and who was carried off by him from her tomb in spite of the efforts of her family and the priest.
Her body had been sewn in a stag's skin and the stone coffin sealed with lead and iron and bound with a heavy chain.
Demons broke their way into the locked church, where priests were incanting psalms round her body and the Devil called her up from her coffin and bore her away.
The chronicler William of Newburgh was disposed to believe that King Sverre of Norway had brought about the destruction of King Magnus's fleet in 1186 by invoking the Devil.
Gervase of Tilbury, writing about 1214, has stories of people who fly at night, of witches who enter houses and have intercourse with sleeping men, who steal infants, and who take the form of animals, especially cats and wolves, at will.
Thirteenth-century sermons illustrate the mixture of credulity, ignorance and superstition that permeated popular belief.
Magic was close to miracles and some magic was not harmful.
Whether it was a pagan god, or a Christian saint, or some superstitious ceremony that brought rain, did not matter to most people provided the rain came.
The primitive instincts described in the extraordinary ceremonies of "beating" the saints, undertaken in some monasteries in order to "encourage" them to provide what was required, show the psychological difficulties of dealing with saints.
They were there to be beseeched and entreated for their protection and aid in adversity, but what if they failed?
If monks could act in such a way, tormenting relics, it was hardly surprising that ordinary people resorted to spells and superstitious practices.
Chinks of light into medieval beliefs are sometimes provided in accounts of miracles.
Fairies appear in the account of the sanctity of Wulfstan of Worcester.
When the sources improve there is evidence of pagan practices persisting.
Bishop Buckingham in the fourteenth century tried to stamp out old superstitious usages and pagan practices in his diocese of Lincoln, according to entries in his register.
There were local differences between the practice of the different churches long after there was a semblance of conformity and orthodoxy.
Differences between the practice of Rome and the practice of separate, national churches could never be entirely removed.
There was always a diversity of practice — as there still is — in religious attitudes, customs and modes of worship.
Popular devotion tended to be non-conformist — in contrast to the liturgy (official devotion).
However, as kingdoms became settled and the Gregorian reform began to give greater prominence to centralization, councils and legates — in short to uniformity and a unifying law — so there were more difficulties in  incorporating a wide variety of practices within a centralized system.
While outer differences did not matter much, deeper causes of conflict might exist and already there had been the disastrous schism on doctrinal grounds between the Church of the East and the Church of the West.
How in general, then, did the separate churches, at a distance from Rome, and the majority of people, know what accepted belief was?
The answer lies in the provision of a structured Church and in the definition of what constituted heretical belief.
First and foremost in importance to the structure were the bishops.
Over four hundred bishops from all the dioceses of the Western Church were present at the Lateran for the Council of 1215.
Most, if not all of them, would have visited the papal curia before this, on business, on pilgrimage or for confirmation of their appointments.
The burden of implementing papal decisions and the decisions of councils fell directly upon the bishops.
The pope as the premier bishop was there to settle their differences and to support and encourage.
Through the bishops, with their lands, wealth, and judicial tribunals, the whole system of a centralized Church was made to work.
They had influence in the imperial and royal courts: they were the pope's permanent delegates.
Their attitudes and reactions were just as important to the papacy as those of archbishops and monarchs.
During the Becket quarrel, when their support was split between king and archbishop, their crucial and ambivalent position was shown.
In the final analysis the majority accepted the authority of the pope.
Similarly in the imperial crisis the dual allegiance of the bishops was tested up to(and in some cases beyond) breaking point.
Innocent sought definite controls over the episcopacy: for if in theory bishops were the pope's natural supporters, in practice their allegiance to the Crown might be more pressing.
Elections of bishops took place in the royal court in England with the king deciding the number of electors.
Free election was a fiction and the king's candidate very rarely failed to win.
Innocent's chances of intervention  rested on his insistence on confirmation of the elected candidate, on the right of appeal to him if misconduct of the election was alleged and on election in his own papal court if both parties brought the case before him.
Papal confirmation seems rarely to have been sought before 1198.
Under Richard I only two new bishops from the province of Canterbury sought papal approval, Savaric of Bath in 1192 and Philip of Poitou, elected to Durham in 1197.
Innocent insisted on upholding the canon law on election — if an election went against canon law it was ipso facto invalid — and he used every possible opportunity to exercise his right of approval.
The right of appeal depended on reference being made to the pope.
Such was the case of Mauger, bishop-elect of Worcester, the royal candidate and physician, who was illegitimate.
Innocent "postulated" Mauger, i.e. using his plenitude of power, he personally nominated him as bishop, dispensing him from his impediment.
He had thus made the point, while accepting the royal candidate, that the power of confirmation (which was increasingly insisted upon) lay with the pope alone.
These were the men who formed the main links between the papal curia and the Church at large and who were charged with the maintenance of orthodoxy in their dioceses.
It was their duty to stamp out unacceptable practices — witchcraft, magic, and pagan superstitions.
St Hugh, bishop of Lincoln from 1185 to 1200, put an end to offerings at streams at Berkhampstead, Wycombe and elsewhere.
The bishops' pre-occupation, too, was with structured administration, which the registers of their activities begin to record from the thirteenth century.
They gave licences for religious foundations in their dioceses, for private chapels for the nobility and for clergy from elsewhere to preach.
They held their own diocesan synods, ordained clergy, confirmed children and heard certain cases in their courts.
By visitation of the monastic and parish churches within their dioceses, the bishops heard what was going on.
St Hugh, making a visitation of the religious houses in his diocese, came to the nunnery of Godstow, and seeing the tomb of Henry II's mistress, Fair Rosamund, before the high altar, ordered its removal outside the church.
While the bishops were very much at the heart of Innocent's system of church government there were papal expedients that Innocent used quite extensively that minimized their power.
By the sending out of legates, papal representatives with very exalted powers, and by the appointment of judges delegate and the encouraging of litigants and petitioners to bring their cases to the papal curia, the bishops' powers were kept firmly to the pastoral side.
Centralization acted against permanent devolution to the diocesans.
Also, the pope might claim the settlement of certain cases, the dispensations and the final decisions.
He could overrule, as it were, by sending "public" preachers, for example to preach a crusade and, most important, he could build up the power of the monasteries by granting or confirming exemption from the diocesan.
The relationship between the popes and the religious houses could be used to papal advantage.
The religious houses fitted neatly into the papal hierarchical structure.
Some of the ancient abbeys, such as St Albans and Bury St Edmunds in England, were exempt from the visitation of the local bishop and answerable only to the pope.
Others had particular, more limited, exemptions granted to them by the pope.
All Cluniac abbeys and priories were directly subject to the abbot of Cluny and to the pope and did not come under the supervision of the diocesan.
With the Cistercians (reformed Benedictines) the diocesans were restricted in influence.
Exemptions from paying tithes and from visitation were granted to the Order, for the Cistercians had their own developed machinery of the general chapter which met annually at Cîteaux to ensure the maintenance of the rule.
There was a supra-national network.
Cistercian houses were related in filiations and were subject to visitation by the abbot of the mother house.
A further indication of the hierarchical structure of the monastic order of monks and nuns is the growth of rules.
The Rule of St Benedict of the sixth century was a code  written by Benedict for the use of his own monks.
It is patriarchal and envisaged no links between the separate monasteries.
The Carta Caritatis ( "Charter of Charity" ) of the Cistercians on the other hand, was not a rule in the sense of a code of conduct (as was St Benedict's Rule) but a fundamental redaction of monastic law which was approved by the pope.
The future pattern for a new religious order was to be papal approval and a definite rule.
The first Cistercians were men who sought to return to the simplicity of Benedict's Rule and to its strict observance which they argued had been altered out of all recognition by the Cluniacs who spent much of the day in a long and elaborate round of services in choir.
The monk's daily routine was to be restored to one of manual labour, study and prayer in equal parts.
His obedience to the abbot was paramount.
But such was the success of the Cistercians in attracting recruits that, according to one chronicler, "The world threatened to become one vast Cîteaux" .
And in escaping from the world to remote places and using lay brothers to find a vocation in tilling the soil, the Order was soon transformed into a wealthy economic organization.
Ironically, too, the towering figure of Bernard, abbot of the Cistercian house at Clairvaux, radically changed the role of the Cistercians.
Largely due to Bernard, they were to come to the forefront of politics and to find a place within the papal court.
There were Cistercian bishops and by 1145 there was a Cistercian pope, Eugenius III.
It was for him that St Bernard wrote his famous tract on papal power.
Bernard, indeed, does not envisage a renunciation of power, rather he counsels a careful exercise of it.
Bernard paints a picture of a pope harassed by worldly affairs and commends the example of Pope Gregory the Great, who, while the city was besieged by the barbarians, found time to sit down and write a commentary on Ezekiel.
He counsels leisure and reflection.
And, in one of the most remarkable pieces of writing on papal power, he extols the unique authority of Peter and his successors, who are entrusted with "the government of the whole world" .
It seemed impossible to reconcile the ideal of the simple  monastic life with a great religious order, just as it seemed impossible for the papacy to exercise leadership without becoming an autocratic bureaucracy.
In the halls of power Cistercians became papal confessors and were used by the popes as legates and preachers.
The Cistercians were the papacy's missionary storm-troops of the twelfth to thirteenth century as the Jesuits were to become at the time of the counter-Reformation.
There were Cistercian cardinals at the curia directing and Cistercians on all the fringes of Europe converting and preaching.
Critical of the establishment at the beginning, though never of the episcopacy as such, the Cistercians had a system that was as hierarchical as the papacy.
Criticisms of the excessive organizational structure of the Church and of its wealth were both anti-hierarchical and anti-clerical.
The curia was often denounced for its venality and appetite for money, as the "Gospel according to the marks of silver" of the twelfth-century Carmina Burana shows.
Nor was the pope immune from criticism and the new pope, Innocent, is described by one writer as caring only for worldly goods.
According to the extremely anti-clerical and anti-papal poet, Walter von der Vogelweide, while priests ate chicken and drank wine, laymen fasted and went hungry.
Such opinions were not of themselves particularly harmful.
They were expressions sometimes of pique and envy and sometimes of an essential regenerative process that caused a return to a stricter and more austere way of life and observance.
Provided the role of the priest was not disputed — as the essential and sole provider of the sacrament of the holy communion at the mass — the essence of the Church was not threatened.
What part the laity could play in the Church and how far they felt alienated is for discussion later.
But the anti-clerical and anti-hierarchical sentiments, unless they undermined the faith and declared doctrine (so far as it was understood), were not in themselves heretical.
The heretic was someone who quarrelled with the fundamental teaching of the  Christian Church, not someone who criticized the trappings of religion.
There is absolutely no doubt that the Church was becoming more authoritative, autocratic and legalistic in the twelfth century, and this continued under Innocent.
The process of canonization, which in early times had been very informal and by acclamation, became regulated under the Church's supervision and Innocent stressed that only the pope had the authority to declare a saint, "for the confirmation of the Catholic faith and the confusion of heresy" , as he said.
There were four canonizations during his pontificate.
The process for Cunegunda, the wife of the emperor Henry II (who himself had been canonized by Eugenius III), had begun under Celestine III.
Innocent declared her a saint in April 1200, acting out of "the plenitude of his power" , after a fresh application was made.
This bull was to serve as a model for the letters canonizing Gilbert of Sempringham and Wulfstan of Worcester in January 1202 and in May 1203.
For both these canonizations there survive the evidence of witnesses.
Innocent had insisted that the application should be accompanied by the depositions of sworn witnesses and that some of the witnesses should appear in person at the curia.
Gone was the old public acclamation.
Now, instead, a careful and legalistic "process" had been introduced.
Another example of the tightening of papal authority concerned relics.
It was decreed that no new relics were to be venerated unless approved by the pope and the sale of relics was forbidden.
Many flooded on to the market after the Sack of Constantinople in 1204.
This authority of  the pope was matched by high-lighting the role of the clergy and minimizing that of the laity, especially in the administration of the sacraments.
While baptism was the main sacrament that could be performed by lay persons, the Church counselled the clergy to check that it had been properly performed.
By the thirteenth century, as far as marriage was concerned, church authorities were insisting on the importance of marriage taking place before witnesses in public.
Although the priest played no essential part in the contract, he was increasingly present.
As for confession, which had been allowed to laymen, this was to be undertaken only when the penitent was in mortal danger: the emphasis now was not on contrition but on absolution which could only be given by a priest.
So what had been licit and reasonably commonplace practices were now forbidden and became exceptional.
After the Lateran Council all men over fifteen and women over twelve were to confess annually to their own priest (permission was needed for confession to another) and were to take communion each Easter.
The increasing exclusion of the laity from an active role within the Church gave them a feeling of alienation and doubtless accounted for the rise in popularity of sects in which lay persons could play a more positive and meaningful part.
There was growing dissatisfaction with the Church and in particular with the way it was developing in the late twelfth century.
The monastic and papal revival from about the year 1000 had moved the Church away from the laity.
Lay influence was under threat and the laity's rights as patrons were being questioned.
The Catholic clergy became more exclusive as the Gregorian Reform was accomplished.
The up-grading of the priest meant the down-grading of the layman and, as status declined, so criticism began to be voiced against the ecclesiastical hierarchy and against exclusive administration of sacraments by priests as the sole  means of salvation.
Christianity seemed more and more to mean clericalism and once the Second Crusade of 1147 was over the popular religious fervour that had been channelled into it needed a new outlet.
Some groups of the dissatisfied were influenced by the Manichaean teachings which came from the east of Europe after the Second Crusade (1147) and were transmitted along the trade routes to the towns of north Germany and Lombardy.
The Manichaeans, described also as Bogomils, Cathars and Patarenes, believed in equal forces of good and evil.
Hence they were also called Dualists and the Church condemned them accordingly as heretical in their beliefs.
They were less concerned with what was wrong with Christianity: they were totally opposed to it.
But while it would be wrong to minimize the hold of this movement, particularly in the south of France and in the Balkans, and especially between Bulgaria and Constantinople, the major threat to the future of the Church was not from the heretics but from the popular movements that sought to restore the laity's role in the life of the Church.
There were many well-meaning groups, who were not totally at odds with Catholic teaching, but merely wished to follow a different fashion of Christian life and observance.
In particular the lay movement, seeing the ill-life of some priests and the increasing grandeur of the Church, sought to insist on chastity, abstention from luxury and avoidance of meat-eating, and aspired to renounce property, or at least to hold goods in common.
Few of these people — at least at first— questioned the importance of the sacraments, but the quality of the life that was led was very important to them.
Great emphasis was put on preaching, and this preaching advocated in particular a return to what was conceived to have been the "apostolic" way of life.
Followers were prepared to live a life of poverty.
In the climate of the time anyone who appeared strange was suspect of heresy, especially those who voluntarily embraced poverty and wandered about.
They seemed a threat because they looked odd and acted in an odd way.
Reports  from the clergy in some of the affected dioceses show that they were perplexed by the variety and number of the movements emerging at this time.
But what did the Church define as heresy?
Gratian (following the great Father of the Church, St Jerome) in his Decretum, the first widely-used manual of canon law, says that heresy is "perverse dogma" (C xxiv q.3 c.26), i.e. a false and new opinion at variance with established dogma.
But such a definition was in effect very vague and blunt and was notoriously difficult for the Church to apply: it followed that many harmless groups were confused with heretical ones by the authorities in their attempts to control what was going on.
In 1184, fourteen years before Innocent's accession, Lucius III had issued the first curial pronouncement on heresy in the decree "Ad abolendam heresam" .
This defined heresy as any opposition to the Catholic doctrine of the sacraments, but it also specified that any preaching which took place without licence was to be deemed heretical.
It was clear that the curia wished to keep the growing hierocratic structure intact.
Frequent episcopal visitation was ordered in areas where there were suspected heretics, and secular rulers were called upon to assist in this process.
This ruling had been made at a meeting with the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa.
From early times the papacy had allied with the imperial power to condemn the unorthodox.
Heresy provided a threat to civil as well as ecclesiastical order, to political settlement and to peace.
It was also in the interest of secular rulers that Catholic orthodoxy was maintained.
For the Catholic Church, the emperor's role was to persecute and eliminate those whom it defined as heretics.
Innocent decreed in 1200 in the decretal "Vergentis" that heretics were to receive punishment from the lay authorities.
Their goods were to be confiscated and all who protected them were to be pronounced excommunicate.
The response of the secular rulers depended on a wide variety of factors, but mostly it was conditioned by political considerations.
At the beginning of his reign Innocent III bunched together the Cathars, the Patarenes, the Waldensians and "other heretics of different names" , as his predecessor  Alexander III had done.
He grew, however, to see that many of the new movements were not seriously deviationist or dissident.
They wanted quite simply "a return to the Apostolic Life" , a more simple Church and a Church that they could understand.
In some ways one might say that they wanted a life more like that of early monks — embracing poverty, chastity, even obedience.
Their increasing interest in the New Testament and the Life of Christ led them to concentrate on poverty and preaching — which previous authorities had seen to be dangerous.
Before we look at the separate groups and the new pope's treatment of them, more needs to be said about poverty and preaching.