

Helsinki
Pit, pat, well-a-day,
Little Robin flew away;
Where can little Robin be?
Gone into the cherry tree.
NURSERY RHYME
8
Under the armpit of Scandinavia, Finland fits like a gusset; and if this gusset was a piece of rotten calico then it would rip in the ragged shredded way that Finland has done.
The rips are lakes.
They are large and numerous and they contain islands that contain lakes that contain islands until the tatters of the coastline fray into the cold northern sea.
But at this time of year there is no sea.
for miles and miles the shadow of the aeroplane has flitted across hard shiny ice.
It is only when a glimpse of brown forest is seen through the snow that one can be sure that the coast has been crossed.
I saw Signe standing among the red-roofed airport huts even before we landed, and while we taxied in she was running and waving and smiling a gigantic smile.
As we walked towards an ancient Volkswagen she took my arm and rested too heavily upon it and asked if I'd brought her anything from London.
‘Only trouble,’ I said.
She made me get in the driver's side and we followed a Volga police car and did a careful legal speed all the way into town.
‘Did Harvey tell you to meet me?’
I asked.
‘Certainly not,’ said Signe.
‘He doesn't tell me whether to go to meet my friends.
Anyway he is in America.
Conferring.’
‘Conferring about what?’
‘I don't know.
That's what he said.
Conferring.’
She grinned.
‘Turn left here and pull up.’
We entered that same comfortable flat off Siltasaarenk  where I had met Harvey the previous week.
Signe stood behind me and helped me off with my coat.
‘Is this Harvey Newbegin's place?’
‘It is an apartment house that my father bought.
He instal led a mistress here.
The girl was a White Russian of an aristocratic family.
My father loved my mother but this girl Katya he loved foolishly; as she indeed loved him.
Last year my father…’
‘How many fathers do you have?’
I said.
‘I thought he died of a broken heart when the Russians bombed Long Bridge.’
‘That wasn't true about him dying.’
She ran the tip of her tongue along her upper lip as she concentrated.
‘He asked me to circulate the story of his death.
Really, he and Katya…you're not listening.’
‘I can listen and pour a drink at the same time.’
‘He went with this girl Katya who is so beautiful that it would hurt you to touch her…’
‘It wouldn't hurt me to touch her.’
‘You must listen more seriously.
They are living at an address that only I know.
Even my mother thinks they are dead.
They were in a train crash, you see…’
‘It's a little early in the day for a train crash,’ I said.
‘Why don't you take off your overcoat and relax?’
‘You don't believe me.’
‘I do,’ I said.
‘I am your credulous court buffoon and I hang upon every syllable, but how about fixing a cup of coffee?’
When she brought the coffee — elegant little cups on an embroidered tray cloth — she knelt on the floor and put the cups upon the low coffee table.
She was wearing a man's sweater back to front, and under her hair — cut high and short now at the back — there was a triangle of white skin as soft and fresh as a newly broken bread-roll.
I fought down an impulse to kiss it.
‘You have a lovely trapezius,’ I said.
‘Have I?
How nice.’
She said it automatically.
She poured out the coffee and presented it to me like John the Baptist's head.
‘I have a flat in New York,’ she said.
‘It's much nicer than this.
I spend a lot of time in New York.’
‘Really,’ I said.
‘Well, this flat's not mine.’
‘No,’ I said.
‘When your old man and Katya come back…’
‘No, no, no.’
‘You'll spill the coffee,’ I said.
‘You are just being nasty.’
‘I'm sorry.’
‘All right,’ she said.
‘If we are telling stories, we are telling stories.
If we are not telling stories, we tell the truth.’
‘That's a good arrangement.’
‘Do you think a woman should be able to smile with her eyes?’
‘I don't know,’ I said.
‘I've never thought about it.’
‘I think they should.’
She covered her mouth with her hand.
‘You tell me when I'm smiling just from watching my eyes.’
It's not easy to describe Signe, for she left you with a memory out of all relation to her true appearance.
She was strikingly pretty, but her features were not regular.
Her nose was too small to balance her high flat cheekbones, and her mouth was made for a face at least two sizes larger.
When she laughed and giggled it stretched from ear to ear, but half an hour after leaving her you found yourself remembering Harvey's claim that she was the most beautiful girl in the world.
‘Now?’ she said.
‘Now what?’
I said.
‘Am I smiling with my eyes?’
‘To play this game fairly,’ I said, ‘you would need to have a hand that was bigger than your mouth.’
‘Stop it, you are spoiling it.’
‘Don't hit me,’ I said.
‘You're spilling my coffee.’
for two days Signe and I waited for Harvey Newbegin to return.
We saw a gangster film of New York during which Signe kept saying, ‘That's near where I live.’
We had dinner on top of a tall building in Tapiola and looked out across the ice-locked offshore islands.
I almost learned to ski at the cost of a torn jacket and a twisted elbow.
On the evening of the second day we were back in the flat near Long Bridge.
Signe had cooked a fish with a sloppy skill which enabled her to read a pulp magazine and prepare dinner simultaneously without having anything burn or boil over.
When dinner was over she brought a plate of petit fours in silver wrappers and a bottle of schnapps.
‘Have you known Harvey a long time?’
‘I've seen him on and off over the years.’
‘He runs things here, you know.’
‘I didn't know.’
‘Yes.
He's in sole charge in this part of Europe.
He's gone back to New York for a conference.’
‘So you said.’
‘I don't think he's the sort of man who is good at controlling a whole…’
‘Network?’
‘Yes, network.
He's too…emotional.’
‘Really?’
‘Yes.’
She bit into one of the little cakes with her ice-white teeth.
‘He's madly in love with me.
Do you think that's good?’
‘It's OK as far as I'm concerned.’
‘He wants to marry me.’
I remembered all kinds of girls whom Harvey had wanted to marry at some time or other.
‘Well, you're young yet.
I imagine you'll want to think about that for a little while.’
‘He's going to divorce his present wife.’
‘He said that?’
‘No, his analyst told me at a party in New York.’
She folded the silver square of wrapping paper in half and made it into a little boat.
‘Then he's going to marry you?’
‘I don't know,’ she said.
‘There are lots of men in love with me.
I don't think a girl should be rushed into bedding down.’
‘I think they should,’ I said.
‘You're wicked.’
She put the little silver-paper boat on to her fingertip like a hat and wiggled it.
‘He's wicked,’ she said to the finger, and the finger nodded.
‘Harvey's wife is awful.’
‘You are probably a little biased.’
‘No, I'm not biased.
1 know her.
We were all at a party at Mr Midwinter's.
You don't know Mr Midwinter, do you?’
‘No.’
‘He's a dear.
You'll meet him.
He's Harvey's boss.’
She fingered a coffee mark on my shirt.
‘I'll remove that before it stains.
Give me the shirt.
You can borrow one of Harvey's.’
‘OK,’ I said.
‘At this party everyone was wearing really pretty dresses.
You know, with jewels and silver things in their hair and some really great shoes.
All the women had really great shoes.
Sort of that shape.’
She took off her  shoe and put it on the table and modified it with her two index fingers.
‘You can get them in Helsinki now, but at that time…anyway I had only been in New York for a couple of days and I only had the clothes I had taken with me.
You understand.’
‘Sure, it's a real problem.’
‘No, it really is a problem if you are a woman.
Men can have one dark suit and wear it all day and no one will even notice, but women are expected to have the right clothes for lunch and afternoon tea and working in and then have some stunning outfit for evening.
Then next day people think you should have things they haven't seen before.
If you…’
‘You were telling me about a party.’
‘Yes.
Well I'm telling you.
I went to this party at Mr Midwinter's and it's a wonderful house with footmen and things, and I went in just the sort of clothes I'd wear for a party here in Helsinki.
I mean just a friendly little party.
So there in the middle of all these men in tuxedos and women in three-hundred-dollar dresses…’
‘Didn't Harvey tell you what they would be wearing?’
‘No.
You know what he's like.
He daren't go near me when his wife's around.
Anyway I'm standing there like a creep.
Creep?’
‘Creep, yes.
That will do.’
‘Well I'm standing there like a creep in this dress with dots on it.
Dots.
Can you imagine?’
‘Yes.’
‘Mrs Newbegin comes over to me.
She looks like that.’
Signe narrowed her eyes to slits and sucked her cheeks in a grotesque imitation of a girl in a fashion magazine.
‘She's wearing a fabulous black silk sheath dress and satin shoes.
Satin shoes.
She looks me up and down and says, ‘I'm Mr Newbegin's wife.’
Mr Newbegin, She turns to  her friend and says, ‘It's just terrible that Harvey didn't tell her it was formal.
I'm sure she has a dozen really pretty little formals she could have worn.’
She's so patronizing you've no idea.
She's horrid.’
Signe produced a little box and began applying bright green shadow to her eyelids.
She finished, fluttered her lashes at me and smoothed the corduroy dress over her wide hips.
She rested the side of her face against my legs.
‘She's horrid,’ she repeated.
‘Terrible life she leads.’
‘She sounds a bit fierce,’ I said.
‘She's a Leo; fire sign, sun sign.
Lightning and domination.
Pushing.
It's a masculine sign of driving force.
Men Leos are OK, but women Leos tend to push their husbands.
Harvey Newbegin is the same sign as me: Gemini.
Air.
Mercury.
Split twins, passionate, dramatic, vicious, intelligent.
Lots of movement, darting around to avoid trouble.
Terrible with Leo.
Geminis and Leos have an evasive relationship.
It's a bad combination.’
‘But you get on well with Harvey?’
‘Wonderfully.
You've got nice brown arms.
You're an Aquarian.’
‘Have they all got brown arms?’
‘Air sign.
Spirit and mystery.
Always keep a part of themselves back.
They have a high wall around them, more profound than most people, more detached and scientific.
It's my favourite sign, goes well with Gemini.’
She grasped my arm to demonstrate.
Her fingers were slim and feather-like.
She ran them down my arm lightly enough to make me shiver.
She picked up my hand, put my fingertips into her open mouth, twisted my hand and kissed my palm noisily.
‘Do you like that?’
I didn't answer.
She grinned and dropped my hand.
‘When I get married I'm going to keep my name.
What, s your name?
I never can remember.’
‘Dempsey,’ I said.
‘Well if I married you I would want to have the name Signe Laine-Dempsey.’
‘You were just about to tell me what sort of terrible life Mrs Newbegin has.’
Signe pulled a face of distaste.
‘Businessmen.
Horrid wives talking about their husband's cars.
Big business, you know.
It's the women I hate, I quite like older men.’
‘Well, that gives me a chance,’ I said.
‘I'm old enough to be your father.’
‘You are not old enough to be my father,’ she said while tracing a pattern with her thumbnail into the knee of my trousers.
‘Don't do that, there's a good girl.’
‘Why?’
‘Well this is one of my better suits for one thing.’
‘And also it's rather disturbing?’
‘Yes and also it's rather disturbing.’
‘There you are: Geminis do affect Aquarians.’
‘I am old enough to be your father,’ I said to myself as much as to her.
‘I wish you wouldn't keep saying that.
I'm nearly eighteen.’
‘Well in September eighteen and a half years ago,’ I thought for a moment, ‘I had just finished my exams.
I went to Ipswich for a holiday.
There was a company of ATS girls billeted in the same street.’
I paused to think hard.
‘Is your mother a blonde ATS girl with a mole on her right shoulder and a slight lisp?’
Signe giggled.
‘Yes.
I swear it's true.’
She liked my vest at the back of my trousers.
‘You have a very nice back,’ she said.
She ran a finger along  the vertebrae appreciatively.
‘A very nice back.
That's important in a man.’
‘I thought you were going to remove that spot from my shirt,’ I said.
‘That's why I'm sitting here in my vest, remember?’
‘A very nice back,’ she said.
‘I should know, after all my father was one of the most famous osteopaths in the whole of Sweden.’
‘It's a good shirt,’ I said.
‘You needn't wash it, leave it to soak.’
‘Until he was called to set a bone in the back of the Queen of Denmark,’ she said.
‘That's how it all began.’
She squirmed against me and suddenly we were kissing.
Her mouth was clumsy and awkward like a child's good night, and when she spoke the words vibrated inside my mouth.
‘Passionate, dramatic and vicious,’ she said.
‘Gemini and Aquarius are good in conjunction.’
She was still kissing me and kneading my leg skilfully.
‘Oh well,’ I thought.
‘I might as well see if there's anything in this astrology lark.’
9
Harvey flew in the next day.
We went out to meet him at the airport and Signe hugged him and told him how much she'd missed him and how she had cooked all his favourite foods for one vast homecoming meal but she had had an urgent phone call about sickness in the family and the dinner had all burned up so now we must eat in a restaurant.
The story about the dinner was a fantasy, but I envied Harvey his welcome just the same.
She ran across the airport like a newly born antelope unsteady on its legs, and stood with elbows bent and legs apart as though afraid of toppling through her fantasies into womanhood.
The first thing I did was tell Harvey that the eggs and all my baggage had been stolen at the airport, but Harvey Newbegin was in one of his rich-busy-man moods and went bustling around making tutting noises for a couple of days.
He took the idea of the package being stolen with studied anger and said the people concerned ‘really took a flyer.
It was booby-trapped like crazy.’
‘Thanks,’ I said.
‘That would have been nice if the customs had asked me to open it.’
Harvey gave me a heavy-lidded glance.
‘Customs were fixed.’
Then he slammed off into his office.
Any room into which Harvey put his typewriter he called his office.
Harvey spent a lot of time in the office and apart from asking me if I'd spoken to Dawlish — a suggestion which I impassively denied — he didn't say much to me until the  morning of the third day, which was a Tuesday.
Harvey took me out to a sauna club he belonged to.
It was a short drive from the city.
Harvey had always had a mania for showers and baths and he had taken to the sauna ritual with great enthusiasm.
This club was on a small island off the coast; it was reached by a causeway.
There was little to show that we were on an island, for the snow covered everything from horizon to horizon.
The clubhouse was tucked into a line of fir trees, a low building rich with the reds and browns of natural wood.
The snow made horizontal lines of white where it had lodged between the timbers.
We undressed and walked right through the shiny white-tiled shower room where a woman attendant was scrubbing someone with a loofah.
Harvey opened a heavy door.
‘This is the smoke room,’ Harvey said.
‘Typically finnish.’
‘Good,’ I said.
I don't know why I said that.
Inside it was the size and shape of a cattle truck.
Two slotted benches occupied most of the space and they were high up so that you had to sit with neck bent or smash your head against the ceiling.
All the inside surfaces were wood, the fire smoke had blackened them and the heat produced a rich resinous smell of burning pine.
We sat on the bench looking out of the window that was the size of a very large letter-box.
The thermometer was reading over 100° Centigrade, but Harvey had fiddled with the stove and said it would get hot in a moment.
‘That's nice,’ I said.
I felt as if someone was pressing my lungs with a steam-iron.
Through the double glazing the trees were heavy with snow, and when the wind blew handfuls of it away it looked as though the trees were breathing on the cold air.
Harvey said, ‘You've got to understand that we are a  very special little outfit.
That's why I wanted to make sure that you didn't say anything about it to Dawlish.’
I nodded.
‘You didn't say anything to him.
On your honour?’
What a strange medieval mind you have, I thought.
‘On your honour’ is calculated to make me break down and confess.
‘On my honour,’ I said.
‘Good,’ said Harvey.
‘Because New York were giving me hell about employing you and I've gone out on a limb.
You see, we have a special operation coming our way tomorrow.’
It was getting very hot in the room.
Even Harvey — who had a dark complexion — had gone the colour of a boiled lobster.
Outside in the snow two men had climbed out of a Renault van with saws and ropes and were tapping one of the trees.
‘I didn't want to handle it,’ Harvey said.
‘Are you getting too hot?’
‘No, I'm fine.
Why didn't you?’
‘Wrong time of year for one thing.’
He smacked his legs with a birch branch.
The smell of the leaves was suddenly very strong.
I wondered how they preserved branches complete with leaves until this time of year.
‘Oh, there are a thousand reasons why I wanted them to wait.’
‘They wouldn't?’
‘They have their reasons.
They want him in and out within a month at the very outside.
He's a technician taking a look at some technical stuff.
Machinery or something.
It's Pike's brother: you met him?’
‘I see,’ I said.
I didn't see anything except a man tying a rope around the large upper branch of a tree.
‘It's dangerous,’ Harvey said.
Even Harvey was feeling  a little discomfort now.
He was sitting very still and his breathing was shallow.
‘In what way?’
‘These drops.
I hate them.’
‘Drops?’
I said.
I had a nasty little feeling in my inside that was nothing to do with the sauna.
I hoped very much that Harvey didn't mean what I thought he night.
He stood up and went across to the stove.
I watched him dip into a bucket and throw a scoopful of water on to the hot stones of the fire.
He looked up at me.
‘Drop from a plane,’ he said.
‘Parachute into the Soviet Union?’
The man at the base of the tree had begun to operate the electric felling-saw even before the other one began to descend.
‘They don't use a ‘chute.
They drop them from a light plane into snowdrifts.’
‘You had me worried for a minute.’
‘I'm not kidding.
I'm serious,’ Harvey said, and I could see that he was.
The bottom end of the rope was fixed to the back of the van and it took up the slack and held the tree in tension to give the saw ease of movement.
Suddenly I felt the change of temperature.
A thousand pinpricks of scalding steam grew to knife-points and the knives twisted.
I opened my mouth and felt the scalds on the mucous membrane inside my throat.
I closed my mouth and felt as though I had gargled with barbed wire.
Harvey watched me closely.
He said, ‘It's only fifty miles to the coast of the USSR.
If we went high enough to use a ‘chute we'd be picked up on radar immediately after taking off.’
It was still hot, but the pinpoints of scalding water had changed to steam.
My skin was burning.
I avoided looking at the thermometer.
‘What's the difference?’
I asked.
‘If you are really dropping people anywhere along that coast I wouldn't give them forty-eight hours before they are signing a statement for the public prosecutor.
That's the Baltic Military District over there: one of the most sensitive areas in the world.
It's full of missiles, airfields, sub-bases, the lot; and what's more it's full of guards and patrols.’
Harvey squeezed the sweat from his face with the edge of his hand and then he looked at his hand as though trying to tell his own fortune.
He stood up.
‘You're probably right,’ he said.
‘Maybe I've been too long with this screwy outfit; I'm beginning to believe that stuff they are handing out from the New York office.
Let's get out of here, huh?’
But neither of us moved.
Outside the van revved up.
The spine of the tree curved like a man stretching tall after a heavy sleep.
Its arms flicked snow loose in a final fastidious gesture of contempt, and then the whole thing began to tilt.
lt was a slow graceful fall.
There was no sound through the double-glazing.
I watched the tree hit the ground in a cloud of snow.
‘Just like that,’ said Harvey.
‘You're right.
Just like that.’
And I knew that he had been watching the death of the tree too.
Harvey opened the heavy door of the smoke room.
The central room was urgent and noisy like a front-line dressing station.
Old women in white coats were clattering around with loofahs and stainless-steel buckets and throwing water over motionless pink men on slabs.
I followed Harvey outdoors into the snowscape.
We walked naked along the path that led across the ice-covered sea.
Harvey walked along in an envelope of   white steam.
I suppose I did too for I didn't feel even slightly cold.
Harvey dropped through a large hole in the ice.
I followed, and tasted the salty sweet taste of the Baltic.
I opened my eyes under water and saw the ghost-like shape of Harvey against the darkness all around.
for one terrifying moment I fancied what would happen to someone carried under the ice by the current.
Perhaps not another break in the ice for…what?
One hundred miles?
Two hundred miles?
My head bobbed out into the cold dry air.
Harvey's face was near, his fair hair plastered close to the skull like golden syrup.
I noticed a small bald patch on the crown of his head.
I still didn't feel the cold.
‘You're right,’ Harvey said.
‘Right about this hunky we're dropping tomorrow.
The poor bastard is a write-off.’
‘Can't you…’
‘No, no,’ said Harvey.
‘Not even if I wanted to.
Just make sure he doesn't get too close a look at me, that's all I can do.
Self-preservation: the first law of intelligence.’
Harvey swam towards the ladder.
On the shore one of the men was tying a rope to another tree.
I was keen to stay close to Harvey while he made preparations for the dispatch of this agent, but Harvey left the flat before breakfast.
Signe brought me coffee in a pot with a felt cover that had eyes and a nose, then she sat on the edge of my bed holding a silly conversation with the felt cover while I drank my coffee.
‘Harvey's given me a job to do,’ she said, tiring of her game.
‘Really.’
‘Rilly.
All Englishmen say rilly like that.’
‘Give me a break.
I've only been awake three minutes.’
‘Harvey's jealous of us.’
‘Did he find out?’
‘No, it's his Slavic melancholy.’
It was true that Harvey Newbegin's family had come from Russia but there was nothing Slavic about him that anyone but Signe could detect.
‘Did Harvey tell you he was Slavic?’
‘He didn't have to, he has a typical moujik face.
A finn can recognize a Russian at a thousand metres across open sights.
That faint reddish tinge in his fair hair — did you notice that?
And those orange-brown eyes.
Beer-coloured, we say.
Look at my face.
I am a typical Tavastian.
Broad head, broad face, fair complexion, blonde hair, blueish-grey eyes and this funny concave nose I have.’
She stood up.
‘Look at my structure.
Big bones, wide hips.
We are Tavastian people from the south and centre of Finland.
You will see no one like Harvey among us.’
‘It's a great structure.’
‘You say things like that and Harvey will guess.’
‘I don't give a damn what he guesses,’ I said.
She poured me a second cup of coffee.
‘Today he told me to deliver a packet and I was not to tell you.
pooooffffff.
I'll tell you if I want to, he thinks I am a child.
When you have showered and shaved we shall deliver it together.’
Signe drove the old VW carefully — she was a good driver — and insisted upon taking me the prettiest way to Inkeroinen, which meant through the little side roads around Kouvola.
It was a sunny day and the sky was like a new sheet of blotting paper with blue ink tipped into the middle of it.
The road curved and climbed and went through all the antics of a mountain pass to persuade you  that the land wasn't rather flat, and small clumps of trees and farmhouses aided the illusion.
It was lonely, and small groups of children going to school on skis waved to us as we passed.
I had the feeling that Signe hadn't dismissed Harvey's words of caution about me as completely as she professed and I carefully refrained from asking about the parcel.
At Kouvola where the railway line divides, we took the southern road which still follows the railway.
A long train of timber wagons and oil tanks was being shunted around a siding and the locomotive laid a coil of black smoke across the white landscape.
Signe said, ‘What do you think's in the parcel?
It's in the glove compartment.’
‘Hell,’ I said.
‘Let's not waste a wonderful trip talking business.’
‘I want to know.
Tell me what you think.’
I took a small brown-paper parcel from the glove compartment.
‘This?’
‘Money, eh?’
‘It's not the shape of any money I ever saw.’
‘But if I told you that Harvey borrowed two paperback books from me last night.’
‘Got you,’ I said.
If you allowed for the shape of two paper-backs, between them and jutting from the end was a two-inch pack of what could be paper money.
‘Dollar bills.’
‘Could be.’
‘What do you mean ‘could be’?
You know it is.’
‘Yes.’
‘I've got to leave them in a taxi-cab in Inkeroinen.’
Inkeroinen is a scattering of shops and houses clustered around a small railway junction.
The main street looks  like the approach to a village.
In the shops there are refrigerators from West Germany, jazz records and detergents.
Across the road is a small wooden kiosk selling cigarettes and newspapers; the back portion of it is a taxi-divers' den.
Outside there were three bright new taxis.
Signe stopped the VW on the far side of the road and killed the motor.
‘Hand me the packet,’ she said.
‘What will you give me for it?’
I asked.
She looked at her watch for the fourth time in two minutes.
‘My virtue,’ she said.
‘None of us has that any more,’ I said.
She smiled slightly and took the packet.
I watched her walk across the road to the ford taxi.
She opened the rear door and looked in as though looking for something she had mislaid.
When she closed the door again the packet wasn't in her hand.
A white Porsche came along the road from the direction of Kotka.
It was travelling fast and wobbled as it hit the bumpy piece of road under the railway bridge.
It lost speed and pulled up outside the kiosk with a squeal of brakes.
The police highway patrols use white Porsche cars.
I moved into the driving seat and started the motor of Signe's VW.
It was warm and sprang to life immediately.
A policeman got out of the Porsche, putting on his peaked cap as he did so.
Signe saw the policeman just as I pulled away from the kerb.
He touched his peaked hat and began to say something to her.
Along the road behind me came the country bus from Kouvola.
I drove twenty yards ahead so that the bus would not be blocking my way when it stopped at the bus stop, then I stopped and looked back.
On the window of the cabmen's room a hand was wiping a small area of condensation clear.
The police driver of the Porsche got out of the car and  went around Signe to the kiosk.
Signe was not looking towards me.
By all the normal rules I should have pulled away before that, but if the road was clear I could let things get more serious before doing anything, and if it was blocked it was already too late.
A familiar figure got out of the bus and walked straight to the cab rank.
I had no doubts that he was going to pick up the package.
He walked past Signe and both cops.
He climbed into the rear seat of the ford.
The driver of the police car purchased two packets of Kent and threw one pack to his friend who caught it without a pause in his speech to Signe, then saluted, and both policemen got into the Porsche.
The man in the rear seat of the taxi showed no sign of finding the package, but now he leaned across the driver's seat and sounded the horn.
The police car revved up and roared away.
I turned the VW round and pulled up where Signe was standing.
She climbed in.
‘Glad you stayed?’ she smirked.
‘No,’ I said.
‘It was sloppy and unprofessional.
I should have moved away immediately.’
‘You are a coward,’ she said mockingly as she got in beside me.’
‘You're right,’ I said.
‘If they ever have a cowards’ trade union, I'll be the man representing England at the World Congress.’
‘Yes,’ said Signe.
She was still at an age when honour, bravery and loyalty outweigh results.
I wished I hadn't said ‘England’ since I was carrying the Irish passport, but Signe gave no sign of noticing the error.
I drove slowly up the road, not wishing to overtake the white police car.
In my mirror I saw the ford taxi moving up on me fast.
The snow was banked in humps at the roadside but I pulled in as much as I could to let him pass.
The man in the rear of the car wore a roll-brim hat  and smoked a cigar.
He was leaning comfortably into the corner of his seat reading the unmistakable pages of the London Financial Times .
It was Ralph Pike.
I suppose he was worrying whether coppers were taking a nasty drop.
I wondered why Ralph Pike hadn't brought his own packet of eggs to Helsinki, and whether by tomorrow night he wouldn't have another kind of drop to be worried about.
I left Signe and the car at Stockmann's department store.
I wanted to buy some blades and socks, but most of all I wanted to avoid arriving back at the flat at the exact time she did, just in case Harvey should be angry at her disobeying him.
Harvey was at the flat when I got back.
He was kneeling in the middle of the lounge fixing small bulbs to the roof rack of Signe's VW.
‘It's damn cold,’ I said.
‘What about some coffee?’
‘Given reasonable luck it will drop even lower by midnight.
We'll need all the cold we can get if the ice is to be firm enough for the plane to land.’
He expected me to ask questions but I carefully refrained from showing interest.
I wandered into the kitchen and made some coffee.
The blue patch of sky had long since disappeared and as the light faded the snow took on a fluorescent glow.
‘It's not snowing?’
Harvey called.
‘No, not yet.’
‘That's all we need,’ Harvey said.
‘A delay?’
‘This pilot won't delay.
He'll fly through a dish of corned-beef hash.
It's a crack-up out there on the ice that I'm most afraid of.
Sweating it out trying to repair the  plane with the dawn creeping up like thunder-boy, that's no way to earn a living.’
‘You don't have to talk me round,’ I said.
‘I believe you.
‘The passenger arrived owwww.’
Harvey had jabbed his finger with a screwdriver.
He put the finger into his mouth, sucked at it and then waved it around in the air.
‘Wanted to rest up somewhere.’
‘What did you say?’
‘What did I say?
Listen, you talked me into realizing what's going to happen to that cat twenty-four hours from now.
I told him to keep walking till sundown.’
‘He's going to be tired by the time the plane comes.’
‘What do you want me to do?’
Harvey said making it a one-word question.
I pulled a face.
‘Don't go limp on me, boy,’ said Harvey.
‘You are my flavour of the month.
I needed you to point out the facts of life.’
‘Thanks,’ I said.
‘But don't foul it up just to prove I'm right.’
‘Hell.
The guy's got enough dough to buy himself a hotel room to rest up in.’
‘What time does he call here?’
‘Have you got crêpe-de-chine ears?
He doesn't call here.
When the Russkies dig him out of the snow tomorrow he'll say he knows nothing about our operations in Helsinki and I'm going to make sure he's not lying.
He meets us over on the far side of the town at nine thirty P.M.’
‘Supposing he's tired by then?
Supposing he ducks out?’
‘Then I won't be sobbing, buster; that will be just dandy.’
He fixed the last lamp-holder to the roof rack and inspected his wiring.
‘Help me carry this into the hall.
Then we sit and watch TV till nine.’
‘Suits me,’ I said.
‘I can use a little vicarious excitement.’
10
It's a weird feeling to have only a layer of ice between you and the sea; weirder still to drive out across the Baltic in a Volkswagen.
Even Signe had been a little nervous about that, especially with the four of us inside it, for the ice would not last a lot longer.
When we had driven off the land, Signe and Harvey had studied the shrinkage and cracking of the ice at the water's edge and pronounced it safe.
We were four because Ralph Pike was with us now.
He had said hardly anything since we had picked him up at a draughty street corner where the Hanko road leaves Helsinki.
He was wearing a peaked cap of brown leather and a long black overcoat.
He loosened his scarf when he got into the car and I could see the collar of his overalls under the coat.
When we had driven for ten minutes or so across the plain of frozen sea Harvey said, ‘All out.’
It was a dark night.
The ice glowed and the air smelt of putrefaction.
Harvey connected the roof rack to two batteries.
He tested the circuit.
The lights fixed to the roof rack came on, but paper cones prevented them from being visible from the shore line.
I fancied that I could see the lights of Porkkala to the south; west — for the coast bends south along here — but Signe said that it would be too far away.
Harvey took a measure of the wind with a little spinner and then reparked the VW so that the lights would show the pilot the direction of the wind.
He switched off two of the lights to indicate the wind speed.
Ralph Pike asked Harvey if he could smoke.
1 knew how he felt, for in an operation like this nerves take over and you rest so heavily upon the skill of the dispatcher that you ask his permission even to breathe.
‘One last good cigar,’ Ralph pike said to no one, and no one answered.
Harvey looked at his watch and said, ‘Time to get ready.’
I noticed that Harvey had forgotten his resolve not to let Pike get a good look at him and stayed close to him all the time.
Harvey got a piece of canvas out of the front of the car and then pike took his overcoat off and they wrapped the coat into the canvas and strapped it up very tight on a long strap, the other end of which they fixed to the belt of Ralph pike's overalls.
The overalls were very complicated with lots of zip fasteners, and under the arm there was a leather piece that held a long-bladed knife.
Pike took off the peaked cap and tucked it inside his overall which he then zipped up tight to the neck.
Harvey gave him one of those Sorbo-rubber helmets that paratroops wear on practice drops.
Then Harvey walked around Pike, tugging and patting and saying ‘You'll be all right,’ as though to convince himself.
When he was sure everything was exactly as prescribed he got a Pan-Am bag from inside the car.
He rummaged around inside it.
‘I'm ordered to give you these things,’ Harvey said, as though he didn't want to really, but I don't think he meant that — he was just over-keen to do everything by the book.
First he handed over a bundle of Russian paper money that was little bigger than a wad of visiting cards, and some coins jangled.
I heard Harvey say, ‘Gold louis, don't flash them around.’
‘I won't be flashing anything around,’ Pike said angrily.
Harvey just nodded and twisted a silk scarf inside out to demonstrate the map that was printed on the silk  lining.
I would have thought silk a little ostentatious for Russia, but nobody asked my opinion.
Then Harvey gave him a prismatic compass that was designed as an old-fashioned turnip watch (complete with a chain that was used as a measure for distance-judging).
Then they did a countdown on his papers: ‘Army service card,’’ Check,’’former residence card,’’Check,’’Passport,’’Check,’’Working paper,’’Check.’
Then Harvey produced two items from his own pocket.
The first was a plastic ballpoint pen.
Harvey held it up for Pike to see.
‘You know what this is?’
Harvey said.
Ralph Pike said, ‘It's the poison needle.’
Harvey said, ‘Yes,’ very briefly, and handed it over before giving him the little 6.35-mm.
Tula-Korovin automatic that the Russians used to call ‘the nurses’ gun'.
‘Correct and complete?’
Harvey asked.
‘Correct and complete,’ said Ralph Pike, fulfilling some strange ritual.
Signe said, ‘I think I hear it coming.’
We all listened, but it was two full minutes before we heard it.
Suddenly its noise was distinct and loud like a tractor coming over the western horizon.
The low-flying plane stretched its sound full-length across the hard ice.
The navigation lights were switched off but I could see the Cessna Skywagon flying steadily in the cold air.
As it got nearer, the white face of the pilot shone in the glow from his instruments and he waggled the wings in greeting.
It climbed slightly as it neared us — so that he could see the indicator lights on the roof rack of the car, I suppose — then it dipped a wing and dropped abruptly to the ice.
Its long skis struck the ice flat-on and the fuselage rocked on the heavy springs.
The pilot cut the motor and the plane slid towards us with a curious hissing sound.
Harvey said, ‘I've got some sort of virus.’
He  wrapped his scarf tighter.
‘I'm running a temperature.’
lt was almost the first remark he had addressed to me all evening.
He looked at me as though defying argument, wiped his nose, then smacked Ralph Pike gently on the back as a signal to go.
Almost before the aeroplane had stopped moving the pilot was out through the door waving a hand for pike to hurry.
‘Is he all ready?’ the pilot said to Harvey, as if pike couldn't be trusted to speak for himself.
‘Set to go,’ Harvey confirmed.
Ralph pike threw his last unfinished cigar on to the ice.
The pilot said, ‘He could practically walk across tonight.
It's ice all the way.’
‘It's been done,’ said Harvey.
‘All you need is a rubber boat to cross the channels that boats have carved.’
‘I wouldn't trust no rubber boat,’ the pilot said.
He tucked Pike into the front passenger seat and strapped him in.
‘They're just thirty feet wide, that's all,’ said Harvey.
‘But about two wet miles deep,’ said the pilot.
Then he smacked the motor cowling and said, ‘Wagons roll; next stop Moscow.’
We stood back and the motor started with a ripple of yellow fire.
Harvey picked up the cigar butt with a tut tut of annoyance.
‘Let's get out of here,’ he said.
We got into the car but I was still watching the plane.
It hadn't left the ice: an ugly skinny sort of structure that looked decidedly unsuitable for flying.
lt was heading away from me and I could see the twin yellow eyes of its exhaust which dilated as the plane changed its inclination and became airborne.
A gust of wind caught it and it slid towards the ground, but only for a moment or so.
Then it liked a little higher, flattened out and set a course at sub-radar altitude.
Harvey was watching the plane too.
‘Next stop Moscow,’ Harvey repeated sarcastically.
‘He could be right, Harvey,’ I said.
‘The Lubyanka Prison is in Moscow.’
Harvey said, ‘Are you mad at me?’
‘No, why?’
‘When you have second thoughts about the kind of business you're in, you are inclined to bug the nearest person.
Tonight I'm the nearest.’
‘I'm not trying to bug you,’ I said.
‘Good,’ said Harvey.
‘Because even if you are leaving we'll still be working together.’
‘Leaving?’
I said.
‘Don't snow me.
You know that you're leaving.’
‘I don't know what you're talking about.’
‘Well I'm sorry,’ Harvey said.
‘I thought you knew.
The New York office wants you to do a short course.’
‘Really?’
I said.
‘Well I'm not sure about that.’
‘You're kidding.’
‘Harvey,’ I said.
‘I'm not even quite sure who the hell we are working for.’
‘Well, we'll talk about it later,’ Harvey said.
‘And tomorrow perhaps you'll let me have a note of your expenses to date and I'll let you have some money.
Will five hundred and fifty dollars for work to date be OK?’
‘Fine,’ I said.
I wondered if Dawlish would let me keep it.
‘That's plus expenses of course.’
‘Of course.’
As we got to Kämp Hotel on the Esplanade Harvey stopped the car and got out.
‘You two take the car and go on home,’ he said through the window.
‘Where are you going?’
Signe asked from the rear seat.
‘Never mind where I'm going.
You just do as you're told.’
‘Yes, Harvey,’ said Signe.
Then I moved into the driver's seat and we drove on.
I heard her fidgeting with her handbag.
‘What are you doing?’
‘I'm putting cream on my hands,’ she said.
‘That icy wind has made them rough, the hand-cream will soften them.
I bet you can't guess who I saw this afternoon.
See how soft they are now.’
‘Don't put your hands over my eyes while I'm driving, there's a good girl.’
‘The one in the aeroplane.
I let him pick me up at the Marski.
I thought I would tell him how to spend his money.’
‘That cream,’ I said, ‘have you been putting it on your head?’
Signe laughed.
‘Do you know he pays five marks each for his cigars and if they go out he throws them away?’
‘Harvey?’
I asked in surprise.
‘No; that man.
He says they taste bitter if they are relit.’
‘Does he?’
I said.
‘But the money wasn't for him.
That money we left in the taxi.
He had to pay it into a blocked bank account.
You have to be a foreigner to do that; I couldn't do it.’
‘Really?’
I said.
I swerved to avoid a solitary drunk who dreamily crossed the road backwards.
Signe said, ‘That man who just flew off in the aeroplane taught me some words of Latin.’
‘He does that to everyone.’
‘Don't you want to hear them?’
‘Very much.’
‘Amo ut invenio.
That means, ‘I love as I find.’
He  said that all the important things in life are said in Latin.
Is that true?
Do all Englishmen say the most important things in Latin?’
‘Only the ones who don't relight five-mark cigars,’ I said.
‘Amo ut invenio.
I'm going to start saying important things in Latin.’
‘If Harvey finds out, you'd better start saying ‘Please don't blow your stack, Harvey’ in Latin.
You shouldn't have even given a sign all that you recognized that man.
He hadn't even come to rest.’
‘Harvey is a terrible old bear lately.
I hate him.’
A taxi-cab stopped alongside us at the traffic lights.
There was a small-screen TV that some Helsinki taxis fit on to the back of the driving seat.
A couple were necking and smiling and glowing with blue reflected light from the TV.
Signe eyed them enviously.
I watched her face in the rear-view mirror.
‘He's a terrible old bear.
He's teaching me Russian and when I make a mistake with those awful adjectives he goes mad with rage.
He's a bear.’
‘Harvey's all right,’ I said.
‘He's not a bear, he's not a saint; he has moods sometimes, that's all.’
‘Just tell me one other person who has moods like him.
Just tell me.’
‘There's no one that has moods like him.
That's what makes people more interesting than machines; they're all different.’
‘You men.
You hang together.’
The lights changed and I let in the clutch.
There was   no arguing with Signe in her present frame of mind.
‘Who does all the cleaning and cooking and looking after?’ said Signe from the rear seat.
‘Who gets him out of trouble when the New York office is after his blood?’
‘You do,’ I said obediently.
‘Yes,’ she said, ‘I do.’
Her voice went up three tones on the last words, she sniffed loudly and I heard the click of her handbag.
‘And all his money goes back to his wife.’
She sniffed.
‘Does it?’
I said with interest.
She searched her handbag for the handkerchief, lipstick and eye pencil that are necessary parts of a woman's grief.
‘Yes,’ she said.
‘That thirteen thousand dollars…,
‘Thirteen thousand dollars.’
My surprise gave her renewed energy.
‘Yes, that money that I took to the taxi rank this morning.
That was taken by that man and sent to Mrs Newbegin's account in San Antonio, Texas.
Harvey doesn't think I know that — it's a secret — but I have ways of finding out.
The New York office would like to know that little item of information, I'll bet.’
‘Perhaps they would,’ I said.
We had arrived outside the flats.
I switched off the motor and turned round to her.
She was leaning well forward in the rear seat.
Her loose hair swung forward and enclosed her face like a pair of golden doors.
She was wearing the coat with all the buttons and buckles that she had worn the first time I saw her outside Kaama's flat.
‘They would,’ she said.
The sound came from inside the golden orb of hair.
‘And it's not the first money that Harvey has embezzled.’
‘Wait a moment,’ I said gently.
‘You can't throw accusations around without very firm proof of what you  say.’
I waited, wondering if that would provoke her into further disclosures.
‘I'll never throw accusations around,’ Signe sobbed.
‘I love Harvey,’ and little noises came out of the sphere of hair as if a canary was eating a hearty meal of seeds.
‘Come along,’ I said.
‘There's no man in the world
worth crying for.’
She looked up and smiled dutifully through the tears.
I gave her a large handkerchief.
‘Blow,’ I said.
‘I love him.
He's a fool but I would die for him.’
‘Yes,’ I said and she blew her nose.
We all had breakfast together the next morning.
Signe had gone to a lot of trouble to make Harvey feel he was back home in America.
There was a grapefruit, bacon, waffles, maple syrup, cinnamon toast and weak coffee.
Harvey was in a good mood, balancing plates and saying, ‘This is something those Russkies do damn well’ and ‘pip pip.’
I said, ‘Just for your information, Harvey, no Englishman that I have met ever said ‘pip pip’.’
‘Is that eight?’ said Harvey.
‘Well, when I played Englishmen on the stage they said ‘pip pip’ nearly all the time.’
‘On the stage?’
I said.
‘I didn't know you had ever been on the stage.’
‘Well I wasn't really an actor.
I just barn-stormed around after I left college.
I was serious about acting in those days, but the hungrier I got the more my resolution sagged, until a guy I'd known at college talked me into a job with the Defense Department.’
‘I can't imagine you as an actor,’ I said.
‘I can,’ Signe said.
‘He's a cornball from way back.’
It  was easy to recognize whole chunks of Harvey's syntax in Signe's speech.
Harvey smiled.
‘Boy, did we have great times.
We were all so bad.
The only guy who knew what he was doing was the manager, and we used to drive him out of his skull.
Every morning the whole company would drag-arse on to the stage.
He'd say, ‘You're going to work your arses off today, the lot of you.
Because I'm a tyrannous bastard.
The critics are ignorant bastards, the audience mercurial bastards and you are incompetent bastards.
The only legitimate thing around here is the theatre.’
Every morning he said that.
Every morning.
Boy, was I happy in those days.
I didn't know it, that's all.’
‘Aren't you happy now?’
Signe asked in alarm.
‘Sure, hon, sure,’ Harvey put his arm around her and snuggled close.
‘Wipe your face,’ said Signe.
‘You've got peanut butter on your chin.’
‘Romantic broad, ain't she?’
Harvey said.
‘Don't call me a broad,’ said Signe.
She took a playful swipe at his face, but Harvey caught it on the flat of his hand, then she struck at him with the palm of the other hand and they did a pat-a-cake routine.
No matter how much Signe varied the speed, Harvey's hand was up there providing a wall against which her hand smacked, until he snatched his hand away and she toppled into his arms.
Harvey said, ‘We have to talk business, hon, why don't you run downtown and buy those shoes you need?’
He peeled a hundred-mark note from a big roll.
Signe took the money gleefully and ran out of the room shouting, ‘I can take a hint.
I can take a hint,’ and laughing.
Harvey looked at his bankroll, and put it away slowly.
When the door closed Harvey poured more coffee for us both, and said, ‘This has been a spectator sport for you so far, but now you are going to join the men.’
‘What does that entail?’
I said.
‘Circumcision?’
Harvey said, ‘All our operations are programmed on computers.
Each stage of the operation is recorded on a tape machine and each operator reports the end of each stage to that machine and the machine will — providing all the agents on that scheme have also reported in — tell you the next stage.’
‘You mean you're working for a calculating machine?’
‘We call it the Brain,’ said Harvey.
‘That's how we can be so sure that no slip-ups occur.
The machine correlates the reports of all the agents and then relays the next set of instructions.
Each agent has a telephone number.
He phones that number and obeys the recorded instructions he receives.
If the message contains the word ‘Secure’, that means the words following make up the introductory identification of someone who will contact him and give him orders.
for instance: if you phone the number and the tape machine says, ‘Take a plane to Leningrad.
Secure.
The face of the city has changed.’
That means you fly to Leningrad and stick around for orders from someone who will introduce himself with the words, ‘The face of the city has changed.’
‘I've got it,’ I said.
‘Good, because those were exactly the orders for both of us this morning.
We both go.
When the next stage is complete you will be phoning and getting your own instructions.
Don't tell me what they are.
In fact, don't tell anyone.’
‘OK.’
Harvey passed me two New York numbers on the Hanover exchange.
‘Remember those numbers, then burn  that paper.
The second number is for emergencies and I do mean emergencies, not running low on Kleenex.
And always call collect.
The phone charges can't be drawn on your expenses.
Leningrad and Riga
There was a little man,
and he had a little gun,
And his bullets were made of lead, lead, lead;
He went to the brook,
and shot a little duck,
Right through the middle of the head, head, head.
NURSERY RHYME
11
Leningrad is the halfway house between Asia and the Arctic.
Normally it takes about six days to arrange a visit, even if you cable both ways.
Harvey, however, had some way of speeding things, and we got the Aeroflot Ilyushin 18B evening flight from Helsinki just two days later.
A Zim motor-car took us from the airport to the Europe Hotel which is just off the Nevsky prospekt, the wide main street of Leningrad.
Inside the hotel it looked as though the nine-hundred-day siege of World War Two was still going on.
Pieces of broken plaster-board, old doors, tarpaulins and coils of rope had to be negotiated before we could get to the desk clerk.
Harvey said he still had a temperature and must have something to eat before he went to bed.
The desk clerk was a worried, grey-haired man with steel-rimmed glasses and a medal.
He showed us into the buffet, and waitresses brought vodka and red caviare and stared at us in that curious but not impolite way that so many people do in Russia.
From the buffet we could see the restaurant where a ten-piece dance band was playing ‘Mambo italiano’ and about thirty couples danced various improvisations on the Western dances according to whether they came from Leningrad, peking, or East Berlin, where the TV picks up the Western stations.
Harvey insisted that he must have coffee as well as brandy, and although the big Espresso machine had been cleaned and stopped the plump waitress went off to fix some for us.
Harvey said that if he had the thermometer that was in  his baggage he could show me whether he was il or not, and that then I wouldn't think it was so funny.
I helped myself to some more red caviare and that wonderful dark sour bread, and watched the cashier noisily adding the takings on an abacus.
Two waiters came into the buffet arguing, and then noticed that it wasn't empty and went out again.
Then a very tall man in an overcoat and an astrakhan hat came in.
He walked across to our table.
‘I notice,’ he said in good English, ‘that you have been so bold as to ask for food at this late hour.
Are you discussing business, or may I join you?’
‘Sit down,’ Harvey said, and he made a flick of the finger and said, ‘Mr Dempsey from Eire, and my name's Newbegin.
I'm American.’
‘Ah,’ said the man in that open-mouthed way that Italians express polite surprise, ‘my name is Fragolli.
I am Italian.
A little more of the same,’ he said to the waitress who had come to the table with Harvey's coffee and was watching Signor fragolli with close interest.
He made a circular motion with closed fingers.
The girl nodded and smiled.
‘Stolichnaya,’ he called after her.
‘Is the only vodka I will drink,’ he explained to us.
‘Hey Mambo.
Mambo italiano’, he sang quietly to the music.
‘You here on business?’
Harvey asked.
‘Business yes.
I have been two hundred miles south of Moscow.
You think here it is Russia in winter, but I have been in my frozen villages; you have no idea.
I sell to the purchasing committees of the many regions.
four days of negotiations to make a deal, always the same amount of time.
They make an offer, we argue, then we discuss.
I make a price, they say it is too much.
I explain that a lower price will exploit my workers.
They examine the figures again.
I modify a part of the specification.
On  the fourth day we agree.
They keep to their agreements exactly.
They never default on a payment.
It is a pleasure once agreement is reached.’
The waitress arrived with a flask of vodka and more red caviare.
Signor fragolli was a large man with a deeply lined muscular face and a large hooked nose like a Roman Emperor.
He opened a white smile in his dark sun-bronzed face and tapped a knife against the silver champagne bucket in time to the music.
‘What do you sell?’
Harvey said.
He stopped tapping and groped into his black briefcase.
‘This,’ he said.
He was holding a lady's girdle and he swivelled it like moving hips.
The suspender clips rattled.
‘This I like,’ said Harvey.
We arranged lunch the next day.
Signor fragolli would meet us at one thirty P.M. outside the Central Naval Museum, which he insisted upon calling the Stock Exchange.
The Museum is on the eastern spit of one of the hundred islands that make up the city of Leningrad, and the spit links two of its six hundred and twenty bridges.
Here the River Neva is at its incredible widest, and the cold wind screams across the ice to the Peter and Paul fortress.
The Italian was a moment or so late, smiling and bowing apologies.
He led the way down the slope to the river, now frozen solid from here to the north bank.
Once upon the ice the distance to Kirovsky Bridge seemed even vaster.
We followed the well-marked paths across the ice.
A woman in a heavy coat, head-scarf and fur-lined boots stood patiently holding a string which ran down through a circular hole in the ice.
A small boy with her brandished a plastic gun and made banging sounds at us, but the woman admonished him and smiled at us.
She had caught no fish, or perhaps she had thrown them back.
When we were well past her  Signor fragolli said, ‘The face of the city has certainly changed.
Have you got it?’
‘Yes,’ Harvey said.
I noticed he kept his head bent downward, for even out here on the ice a parabolic reflector microphone could pick us up.
‘I hope you haven't broken any of them?’
‘No.
I've been very careful,’ Harvey said.
That was all I needed to feel sure that Harvey had the half-dozen eggs that were stolen from me at London Airport.
I said nothing.
They were going to be surprised when they looked more closely at those canteen eggs.
Harvey and fragolli both carried identical black briefcases.
‘Change bags at lunch,’ said Fragolli.
He gave a great peal of laughter with lots of teeth flashing.
I suppose that was to fool anyone watching us from the river bank.
‘One of you,’ he said, still smiling, ‘is going to Riga.’
‘Dempsey will go,’ said Harvey.
‘I must stay here.’
Fragolli said, ‘I don't care which.’
He changed his position as we walked so that he could be closer to me.
‘You go to Latvia tomorrow.
The 392 flight to Riga at two fifty P.M. Stay at Hotel Riga.
You will be contacted.’
He turned to Harvey.
‘You've put his photo on the Brain index?’
‘Yes,’ said Harvey.
‘Good,’ said Fragolli.
‘The person meeting you will know what you look like.’
‘But I won't know what they look like?’
‘Exactly,’ said fragolli.
‘Is safer that way.’
‘Not for me it's not,’ I said.
‘I don't like the idea of my snapshots being found on one of your layabouts.’
Harvey said, ‘There won't be any pictures floating about.
The man who will contact you will probably be the aeroplane passenger.’
‘What do you want me to do?’
I asked.
‘Apply splints and bandages?’
Harvey said, ‘The sooner you get it through your head that this organization doesn't make slip-ups the sooner you can relax and stop bugging me.’
Perhaps he said that for the benefit of Signor fragolli, so I just said, ‘OK.’
fragolli said, ‘You are going to have to commit two thousand words to memory.
Can you do that?’
‘Not verbatim,’ I said, ‘not every word exactly.’
‘No,’ said fragolli.
‘Only the formulas — quite short ones — need be verbatim.’
‘I can do that,’ I said.
I wondered how they would arrange my visa for Riga, but I didn't ask.
We reached the ice-locked boat.
It was a great slab-sided craft with lots of wooden balconies and curtained windows.
We picked our way through crates of beer and lemonade, and a man yelled ‘Tovarich’ at us in a rather threatening way.
‘Tovarich,’ he yelled again.
Fragolli said, ‘It's because we haven't left our coats with him.
It's not cultured to enter anywhere in an overcoat.’
The floating restaurant had the same equipment that every other restaurant had.
The cutlery was from the same state factory and had the same design and so did the plates, the menu, and the waiters.
We ate piroshky and bouillon and fragolli told us what sort of morning he had had negotiating the sale of girdles.
‘You have no idea what remarkable minds the Russians have, cautious and devious perhaps, but clever yes.
I sell my goods in many western countries, but these Russians…’
He hissed at his fingertips to demonstrate  his admiration, and his voice became low and conspiratorial.
‘We make a deal.
Other customers just give me a number and a date; eight thousand girdles model 6a in these sizes for this delivery date.
The Russians, no.
They want this suspender clip to be one inch lower, they want this seam double sewn.’
‘Tricky,’ said Harvey.
‘Yes,’ said fragolli.
‘By changing the specification they ensure that those garments are made specially for them.
Elastic deteriorates, you see.
They don't want garments that have been months in the warehouse.
Clever capitalist minds they have.’
‘Capitalist?’
‘Certainly.
Those old ladies selling bunches of flowers on the Nevsky Prospekt?
Now, no militiaman says anything to them, even though it is against the law.
But to sell those flowers long ago, it could be a dangerous thing to do.
If I could give one of those women a supply of girdles…’
He stopped.
‘I have calculated that selling the girdles at normal price — and in Leningrad this day I could get double the normal price at least— but at normal price I could still retire at the end of one day's work.
This country is hungry for consumer goods just as Europe was about 1946.’
‘So why don't you do just that?’ said Harvey.
Fragolli crossed the first two fingers of each hand in the universal Russian sign for prison and everything connected with it.
‘Things will become easier,’ said Harvey.
‘You will soon be selling your girdles; all you can make.’
Fragolli said, ‘There is a saying in Leningrad that a pessimist is a man who says that things were bad in the past, things are still bad, things will always be bad.
An  optimist says, things were bad in the past, are still bad, but nothing can be worse than this.’
‘So why do they put up with it?’
‘When a baby is born in this country he is swaddled.
Swaddled from neck to toe, like a log of wood.
When you unwrap him to wash, he cries.
He cries because the control and restraint has been removed.
He is free.
He is alarmed.
So he is soon swaddled up again, and mentally he stays swaddled up until he dies.’
‘They don't do that swaddling so much nowadays,’ said Harvey.
Fragolli said, ‘Look at this waitress, for instance.
She just cannot buy proper foundation garments.
She has no proper brassière or girdle.’
‘I like it like that,’ Harvey said.
‘I like my broads buttocked both sides.’
‘Non non no,’ said fragolli.
‘I want to put foundation garments on to every pretty woman in Leningrad.’
Harvey said, ‘My ambition is exactly the reverse.’
Fragolli laughed.
Harvey dropped his piroshky into the soup and broke it up with the spoon.
Fragolli said, ‘The Russian style.
You eat your piroshky in Russian style.’
‘My father was a Russian,’ said Harvey.
‘Newbegin is not a Russian name.’
Harvey laughed.
‘It is the word ‘new’ and the word ‘begin’.
My father used it when he came to America for a new start in life.’
‘I understand,’ said fragolli.
‘I meet many Americans.’
He lowered his voice.
‘To tell you the truth, my company is forty-nine per cent owned by an American company.
The Russians do not like to do business with American  companies so this is convenient arrangement for all concerned.’
‘Russians are realists,’ Harvey said.
‘They are realists,’ pronounced fragolli, and he too dropped a piroshky into his soup.’
Harvey and I left fragolli after lunch.
Harvey said, ‘Relax.
I didn't really send your photo to Riga.
I've got my own system for identification but I'm not telling that fragolli anything.’
‘What's your system?’
‘They have television telephones in this crazy country.
I have a call booked for Riga for three o'clock.
We'll go now and take a look at this guy you are going to contact; it's a heap better than smudgy little photos.’
Harvey and I took a cab to Pavlov Street.
Number 12a is a small building that looks as if it might house an unskilled worker with a large family.
It is really the public video trunk call office.
We knocked at the door, and a woman let us in.
She parked a pencil in her hair, looked at her wristwatch, compared that with the wall clock, asked us what time we thought it was, then we all went to a small room that housed a phone and an old-fashioned-looking twelve-inch TV set.
We sat down and Harvey picked up the telephone.
The woman turned a dial on the TV set and the screen flashed blue.
Harvey said ‘Hello’ four times, then suddenly he was talking to a bald-headed man who seemed to have four overcoats on at once.
Harvey said, ‘This is Mr Dempsey, he's coming to see you tomorrow and he'll be staying at the Hotel Riga.’
The man on the TV screen said, ‘It's cold here in Riga.
Bring plenty of sweaters.’
Then he said would I move a little bit to the right so that he could see me because the edges of the picture distort.
Then the man in Riga asked  if it was cold in Leningrad, and we said yes it was, and the man in Riga said you had to expect it now, and that the Riga Hotel was modern and well heated as long as it wasn't damp.
Harvey said how much he had enjoyed his last visit to Riga, and how sorry he was that he wouldn't be going there, and the man at the other end said that Leningrad was one of the most wonderful towns in the world.
Then Harvey said yes Leningrad was wonderful, and how it was called the Venice of the North on account of how wonderful it was.
The man at the other end said yes, and how did Mr Dempsey like it, and I said it was wonderful but I hadn't ever heard anyone call Venice the Leningrad of the South, and then there was a silence.
I had spoilt the magic of the moment.
That was when the little woman with the pencil in her hair came in and said that was the end of the time unless we wanted to extend it.
Harvey said no we didn't, and then the man in Riga said good-bye, and we said good-bye, so the man in Riga said it again and was still saying it when he melted.
I was alone that last evening in Leningrad.
I went to the Maly Opera Theatre that night and saw Verdi's Otello , and with the voices still occupying my mind I decided to take a subway down the Nevsky and have a drink at the Astoria.
I went down the steps at the sign of the big neon M. I put a five-copeck piece into the automatic entrance which won't prevent non-payers travelling but buses in order to embarrass them.
A man in a fur hat, long black leather coat, white shirt and silver tie got into the carriage.
I wondered if he had enjoyed the opera.
I smiled at him and he nodded back without smiling.
I reached for a packet of Gauloises, tore open the corner and offered them to him.
‘No,’ he said.
‘No thank you.’
‘You are a cigar-smoker, Comrade-Colonel?’
I said.
‘Yes,’ said the man, ‘but in our subway we…’
‘Of course,’ I said.
I put the packet away.
I didn't want to break the law.
‘I don't want to break the law,’ I said.
The man smiled but I was serious.
The train rattled along and we both hung on to the straps looking at each other.
He was a heavy muscular man of about sixty.
He had a round face that hadn't done much smiling until middle age, and an uptilted nose that perhaps had been busted and reset by a plumber.
His eyes were small black sentries that marched up and down, and his hands were bunches of bananas unsold over the week-end.
I said, ‘I am getting off here and walking to the Astoria, where I will drink one hundred grams of port wine.
I will listen to the band playing American dance music for perhaps twenty minutes, then I will walk back to the Hotel Europe.’
He nodded and did not follow me as I got off the train.
I did exactly as I had promised.
Less than half an hour later I left the front entrance of the Astoria and walked down the dark side street.
When it's daylight in Leningrad and the buses and lorries are roaring along the wide Nevsky, and African delegates are being toasted at multi-course lunches at the Astoria, then it's easy to see Leningrad as the birthplace of Communism.
But when it's dark and the moon glints on the Peter and Paul fortress, and two out of every three street lights are extinguished for economy so that the puddles and newly fallen snow are discovered only by an errant foot, then it is once again St Petersburg, and Dostoevsky is hump-backed in a slum behind Sennaya Square, and Pushkin is dying after his duel and saying ‘Good-bye, my friends’ to his rows of books.
Behind me I heard a slow-moving car.
It was a large Zis — a car used only by government officials.
The driver flashed the lights and the car drew alongside.
The door opened, blocking my forward movement.
from the back seat the voice of the colonel I had seen in the subway said, ‘Won't you get in, English?’
I got into the rear seat and the colonel closed the door.
There was a lot of cigar smoke.
‘So we meet again, Colonel Stok?’
I said like they say it in films.
‘Oleg.’
‘So we meet again, Oleg?’
‘Yes.’
He gave an order to the driver, who switched off the car motor.
‘You are enjoying our Russian winter?’
Stok stared at me.
His head looked like that of a statue that someone had found and rolled home so that all the delicate parts had broken off.
‘Yes,’ I said, ‘I'm enjoying the Russian winter.
Are you?’
Stok tugged at his fleshy chin.
‘We have a saying in my country, ‘for him who stands at the top of the tower there is no other season but winter.’
‘Yes.’
I said, although I still don't understand what that proverb means.
‘You are involving yourself with a particularly foolish and headstrong group of trouble-makers.
I think they are exploiting you.
When I move against them do not expect me to treat you differently from the way I treat them.
It may be that you are investigating these evil people on behalf of your government, or it may be that you are ordered to co-operate with them.
They are trouble-makers, English; but they will find that I am more expert at making trouble than they are.’
‘I believe you,’ I said.
‘But in my experience there  aren't many evil people around.
Just ill-informed, misguided and ignorant ones.’
Colonel Stok said, ‘In Russia our people are not
‘There are many people who think that water has no taste,’ I said, ‘because we were born with it in our mouths and it's been there ever since.’
Stok didn't reply.
‘Hotel Yevropeiskaya,’ he shouted to the driver.
The car moved.
‘We will take you to your hotel,’ he said to me.
‘It is not a good night for walking.’
I didn't argue.
If it wasn't a good night for walking Stok would know.
12
There are fifteen Republics in the Soviet Union.
Each one constitutes a separate ethnic unit, has a self-sufficient economy, a flag, a Supreme Soviet, a council of ministers and, most important, is placed between the area we call Russia and the world outside.
The three Baltic Republics are Estonia, Lithuania and Latvia.
They huddle close and drink at the trough of the Baltic along with Sweden and Finland.
I caught the Aeroflot 392 flight from Leningrad to Riga.
It left at two fifty P.M. and was crowded with people in heavy coats and fur hats who changed their mind constantly about leaving their outer clothing in the small wardrobe at the front of the cabin.
There was some confusion about the seat numbering: two women with armfuls of overcoats and a crying baby had the same seat ticket that I had.
This was sorted out by a ravishingly beautiful air hostess who distributed boiled sweets to all concerned and reprimanded a tovarich for smoking.
The plane climbed across the smoky suburbs of Leningrad and over the Elektroaila plant.
Brick suburbs gave way to big wooden houses, then single-storey houses which became more and more isolated until there was nothing but grizzled, frozen marsh.
Winter had closed the eyelids of the land and the snow that covered it was ill-fitting and dingy like a second-hand shroud.
Under the starboard wing slowly moved Lake Peipus, scene of Alexander Nevsky's great battle when the Knights of the Teutonic Order probed too far eastwards and went, complete with horses and heavy armour, through the ice crust and into the deep black water.
The trimly uniformed stewardess — definitely wearing Western foundation garments — brought a Cellophane envelope for leaky fountain pens and a plastic cup of fizzy lemonade.
I smiled at her, and she jammed a copy of Pravda into my hand, her smile still ticking over.
Below us the landscape shone in great brown-and-white patterns like the coat of a well-groomed piebald horse.
We began the descent above the Gulf of Riga and dropped towards the military airport.
In the seat in front two passengers recognized the farm where they lived and wanted me to see it too.
We nodded, smiled and pointed down while a dual -seat jet fighter screamed off the runway in a climb that indicated that the instructor was pushing the buttons.
The stewardess said, ‘You come from London?’
She offered me a tray of boiled sweets.
I took one, and thanked her.
‘I know a poem about London,’ she said.
‘I know a limerick about Riga,’ I said.
She nodded and passed on.
The plane came down for a smooth landing amid the radar gear.
The Hotel Riga is built on the site of the old Hotel Rome, just across the street from the opera house.
The pavements were crowded with women sweeping snow and fur-hatted soldiers in padded fatigue coats and dirty boots.
All the while long lines of lorries trundled along the streets as if it was 1945 and the retreating Wehrmacht only a couple of miles away.
The dual language signs — in Latvian and Russian — heightened the illusion.
As fast as the street-cleaners worked, more snow swept down upon the street, shining like tracer bullets on the dark winter  air.
I turned away from the window and sank down upon the bed.
I went to sleep that afternoon fully dressed, and I didn't wake up until seven forty-five P.M. I washed and changed my clothes, and walked through the old part of the city with its strange, crouch-backed, medieval buildings, like a Hollywood set built for Garbo.
I walked as far as the castle, where the tram tracks jut out towards the far bank of the Daugava River to show where the bridge was torn away from under them.
I picked my way through the narrow streets where the old bent buildings leaned together for warmth.
I wasn't followed.
I suppose my shadow calculated that I would soon come in off the streets, or perhaps he was using the opportunity to go through my baggage.
By comparison with the cold cobbled alleys, the hotel restaurant was a scene of throbbing gaiety.
A small orchestra was playing ‘Lights of Moscow’ and the waiters were clattering metal dishes and semaphoring with table napkins, and there was the air of subdued hysteria that you get in a big theatre when the orchestra is tuning up.
A waiter smiled and ushered me to a corner table marked with a reserved sign that said ‘Intourist only’, and gave me the English-language menu.
It was bent and stained.
The restaurant was like many of its kind throughout the Soviet Union, although perhaps better cared for than most.
The parquet was shined, the table-cloths starched and the waiters had clean shirts.
At a table near the window sat a delegation of Africans, and another table nearer to the dance floor had South-East Asian faces that nodded every time their Russian host spoke.
Here and there sat groups of army officers in baggy trousers and boots, with enamel medals on their chests.
Each time the music began half a dozen unsteady men wandered through  the restaurant asking the women to dance.
More often than not the women declined, but this did not discourage the tipsy men.
I ordered red caviare and black bread and butter and two hundred grams of vodka.
I ate slowly and watched the dance floor.
I tried to guess which of the women were the Russian wives of men stationed here and which were Latvian girls.
An unkempt man with a torn shirt-collar and a large bundle sat down opposite me.
He asked me for a light and I offered him one of my Gauloises.
He inspected it carefully, thanked me and lit it.
He asked me if I was English, and 1 told him Irish.
He told me that this was not a good time of the year to see Riga.
June, he said, was the time to come here.
He ordered another two hundred grams of vodka.
One of the army officers at the next table called across to my companion, ‘Businessman?’
He leaned over to me.
‘They want pineapples,’ he said.
‘Is that so?’
I said.
‘Yes,’ he said, ‘and I have the best ones in town.’
We watched one of the army officers get to his feet.
He was a short fair-haired man with gold epaulettes and the black flashes of the tank units.
The other officers were teasing him, but he did not smile.
He walked across the restaurant to the long table near the dance floor, where the delegation sat.
He clicked his heels and bowed briefly towards a beautiful Eurasian girl.
She got up and they completed a rather formal foxtrot amid the strange gyrations of the more experimental couples.
After the dance he escorted her back to the rest of the delegation, and returned across the floor to us.
He whispered something into the ear of my dishevelled companion, who produced a bundle wrapped in old copies of Pravda .
It was a large pineapple.
Roubles changed hands.
My companion winked at me.
‘Are pineapples difficult to get in your country?’
I watched the officer present the pineapple to the girl.
‘Not as far as I know,’ I said.
‘Why can you get them when no one else can?’
He put an index finger alongside his nose.
‘I fly them up from Djakarta,’ he said.
‘I'm an Aeroflot pilot.’
The band played ‘When the Saints Go Marching In’.
‘This is my favourite song,’ said the man from Aeroflot.
‘I shall find a girl to dance with.’
He indicated dancing by making a stirring motion with his index finger and nearly knocking the vodka flask over, and then he lurched off towards the music.
‘Guard my pineapples,’ he called.
‘Yes,’ I said.
Latvia — or at least Riga — is more sophisticated than Leningrad or Moscow.
If you ask for breakfast in your room they have difficulty in understanding the idea, but they will do it.
A suggestion like that in Leningrad is subversive.
In Riga the waitresses wear clean uniforms with white starched caps in the Mrs Beeton tradition; in Leningrad they wear greasy black suits.
So when, late that night as I was just about to go to bed, I heard a discreet knock at the door, I was not amazed to find a waiter in a claw-hammer coat pulling a heavily laden food trolley into my room.
‘I didn't order anything,’ I said.
His broad back just kept coming through the door as if he was laying a cable.
Once inside he turned and smiled.
‘I didn't know you could get KGB men from room service,’ I said.
Colonel Stok said, ‘I would be obliged if you would   speak more quietly.’
He went across to the wash-basin, picked up a drinking-glass and, putting the top of it against the wall, applied his ear to the base.
I held up a bottle of Long John that I had brought from Helsinki.
Stok looked at me blankly — still listening through the wall — and nodded.
By the time I walked across to him Stok had the glass in the drinking position.
The evening suit was not a good fit and he looked as though he was part of a Marx brothers film.
He said, ‘Within the next hour you will receive a phone call.’
Stok sipped his drink and waited as though he expected a round of applause.
‘Is that what you call revolutionary consciousness?’
Stok looked at me calmly, trying to read the small print in my eyes.
‘Yes,’ he said finally, ‘revolutionary consciousness.’
He tugged one end of his bow tie and the knot came undone.
The tie tumbled down his shirt-front like a little cascade of ink.
Stok proceeded with his prediction, ‘Within an hour you will receive a phone call.
It will arrange a meeting somewhere along the Komsomol Boulevard, probably near the October Bridge.
If you attend that meeting I shall be forced to treat you as I shall treat the others.
However, I advise you strongly not to go because you will be in danger.’
‘Danger from whom?’
Colonel Stok was as big as an old oak wardrobe.
Maybe some of the carving had got damaged in transit, but he was as firm and heavy as ever.
He walked across the floor and, although he caused little sound, the whole room vibrated with his weight.
‘Not from me or any of my men,’ Stok said.
‘I promise you that.’
Stok drank the whisky in one gulp.
‘You think that these other people you mentioned will do me harm?’
Stok took off his evening-dress jacket and put it over a hanger that was lying on my open suitcase.
‘I think they will,’ said Stok, ‘I think they will do you harm.’
He arranged the coat on the hanger, wrenched at his wing-collar and unclipped the shirt-stud.
The starched front of his shirt parted with a clatter, he dropped the handful of studs into an ashtray and kicked off his black patent-leather shoes.
He flexed his toes on the carpet.
‘My feet,’ he said.
‘I suppose a young man like you wouldn't understand what pleasure it gives me to remove tight shoes?’
He arched one foot like a cat's back, and said, ‘Aahh.’
‘And that's momentary interest,’ I said.
Stock said nothing for a moment, then he looked through me and said, ‘I touched Lenin.
I stood beside him in Vosstaniye Square in July 1920 — the second congress — I touched him.
So don't use Lenin's words to me.
Momentary interest.’
Stok crossed his arms across his face and began to pull his shirt off, and his words were lost beneath the white cotton.
Beneath his shirt was a khaki singlet.
Stok's face emerged flushed and smiling.
‘Do you know the words of the poet Burns?’
He hung his trousers on a hanger.
He wore long underwear and elastic suspenders held his socks.
‘I know ‘To a Haggis’,’ I said.
Stok nodded.
‘I read a lot of Burns,’ he said.
‘You should read him more.
You would learn a lot.
‘We labour soon, we labour late, to feed the titled knave, man.’
Burns understood.
The man who taught me English could recite Burns by the hour.’
Stok went across to the window and looked through the side of the curtain like they do in gangster films.
‘Aren't you going to offer me another drink?’ he asked.
I poured a slug of whisky into the glass.
Stok drained it without even a pause to say thanks.
‘That's better,’ was all he said.
He walked across to the food trolley, and removed the starched cloth with a flourish.
Instead of metal serving-dishes there was an officer's uniform laid out there, complete with peaked cap and well-shined high boots.
Stok reached for his riding breeches, buttoned himself into them, tucked his shirt in, then walked across to where I was sitting.
He flexed his toes again.
‘You wonder why I am warning you, instead of rounding you all up?
Well, I'll tell you.
If I round up all these criminals and trouble-makers, no one will say, ‘What a clever man is Colonel Stok to grab these people before they could cause our country trouble.’
They will say, ‘Look how many subversives have been working under the very nose of Colonel Stok.’
You understand this, English, we have known each other before.
My desire is that these criminals leave my district and abandon their fantastic dreams.’
Stok tied his tie, using all the muscles of his fingers as though it was made of metal instead of cloth.
He slipped into his coat and shook his arms to make his shirt cuffs appear.
‘What fantastic dreams do they have?’
I asked.
Stok pinched the big knot with his fingers.
Then he poured himself another drink.
‘Don't try to make a fool of me, English.’
, I just want to know.’
‘They think that the Soviet Union is on the verge of  overthrowing its tyrannical overlords.
They think the people walking on the street out there are dreaming of the moment when they can become capitalist serfs again.
They think that we all lie awake dreaming of going to America.
They think they can distribute pamphlets and gold and a vast army of monarchists will materialize overnight.
That's what I call fantastic dreams.
You understand?’
‘Yes,’ I said.
Stok put on his uniform cap and a thigh-length padded jacket of the sort that Russian troops wear as fatigue dress when it's very cold.
There were now no badges of rank to be seen.
He walked across to the window, and producing a knife ran it round the paper sealing strip, then opened it.
He opened the outer window as well, and stepped out on to the fire escape.
‘Thank you for the use of your room,’ said Stok.
‘One good turn deserves another,’ I said.
He held up his whisky.
‘You speak the truth,’ said Stok.
‘Well, do as you wish.
It's a free country.’
He drank, and I took his glass.
‘You mustn't believe all you read in Pravda ,’ I said.
Stok walked down into the darkness.
I poured myself a drink and sipped it.
I wondered what to do.
There was no question of contacting Dawlish.
I wasn't so concerned with Midwinter's security but it would take ages to phone New York.
perhaps Midwinter had already out-thought Stok.
I didn't think so.
Stok was something no computer could deal with; perhaps that's what I liked about him.
13
One hour ten minutes after Stok left the phone rang.
‘The hell with you,’ I said to the phone, but after the third or fourth ring I answered it.
The phone said, ‘Western clothes.
Secure; two extra shirts.
Komsomol Boulevard near October Bridge.’
‘I'm staying right here,’ I said.
‘I'm sick.’
‘That's all,’ said the phone.
‘Don't wait for me,’ I said.
I replaced the receiver and said it again.
I walked across to the bedside table and poured myself a large, large shot of whisky.
The hell with them all.
An operation like this must be a write-off, the odds against it were too great to make it worth pursuing.
But I didn't drink the whisky.
I sniffed it and whispered an obscene word to it, then I put on my coat and overshoes and walked out of the hotel.
I walked through 17th June Square, and the Domsky Cathedral was shiny with moonlight and snow.
Parked outside the Polytechnic there were two small taxi-vans that are hired at ten copecks per kilometre.
Near by were two men talking.
Each was taking an unnatural interest in a view beyond his companion's shoulder.
One of the men called to me in German as I passed them.
‘Do you want to sell any Western clothes?’
It was the bald man I had spoken with on the video trunk-call screen.
‘1 have a couple of extra shirts,’ I said.
‘Woollen ones.
I could sell those if it's permitted.’
‘Good,’ said the man.
He opened the door of one of  the taxi-vans.
I got in.
The driver revved up enthusiastically and turned on to the October Bidge.
On the far bank the sky was red, for the heavy industry of the Lenin region doesn't close down at midnight.
On the river bank a huge sign said, ‘The Baltic Sea is a Sea of Peace.’
The van was crowded with men in damp overcoats, and their weight made it difficult to control over the hard bumpy ice.
The wipers began to wheeze as the snowflakes built up into hard wedges of ice, and some of the men in the back were stamping feet on the floor of the van trying to improve their circulation.
No one spoke.
The headlights of the taxi-van behind us flashed as it hit bumps in the road and the interior lit up the faces of the men in the van with me.
The bald man popped a clove of garlic into his mouth.
‘You like garlic?’ he asked, breathing it over me.
‘Not second-hand,’ I said.
‘I have a cold,’ said the bald man.
All Russians believe that garlic cures the common cold.
I picked at a crust of ice that condensation had formed upon the window.
The whole world was white: a great canvas backdrop untouched by paint.
Here and there a faint pencil line indicated where a line of trees or a valley would one day appear.
And all the time the snow fell; not once but many times, scooped up by the wind and hurled back in huge opaque whirlpools that obliterated even the pencil lines.
We drove for an hour.
In the tiny villages just one or two lights still burned.
Twice we nearly drove into a horse and cart and we passed three lorries.
When we finally stopped the van behind slid on the hard ice and narrowly missed colliding with us.
We were in open country.
‘Get out,’ said the bald man.
I opened the door and wind flicked against my exposed flesh like steel-tipped  whips.
The two vans parked under the trees.
The bald man offered me a cigarette.
‘You're an American?’ he said.
‘Yes,’ I agreed.
There was no point in providing him with facts.
‘I'm a Pole,’ he said.
‘So is my son there.’
He pointed towards the driver.
In Latvia Roman Catholics refer to themselves as Poles.
‘The others are Russians,’ he said, ‘I don't like Russians.’
I nodded.
The bald man leaned closer and spoke very quietly.
‘You, me and my son are the only ones working for Midwinter.
The others are…’
He made that sign of two fingers laid across two fingers.
It meant prison bars.
‘Criminals?’
I asked.
I shivered from the cold.
He sucked at his cigarette and then wet his lips distastefully.
‘Businessmen,’ he said.
‘That's the arrangement.’
‘What is?’
‘An Army lorry is due along this road in a few minutes.
We'll wreck it.
They take the contents, we take the documents.’
‘What are the contents?’
‘Rations.
food and drink.
No one here ever steals anything but food or drink.
They're the only things that you can dispose of without a permit.’
He laughed garlic at me.
‘What documents?’
I asked.
‘The ration strengths?’
‘That's right,’ said the bald man.
‘Best way to check the man-power of the units along the coast here.’
He threw the stub of his cigarette into the snow and walked into the centre of the roadway.
I followed him.
Two men were staring at the road.
The bald man extended a toe and slid it experiment ally across the glassy surface of ice.
They had melted the snow with a little water from the car radiators and now it was freezing into a mirror of ice.
‘The lorry will be helpless on it,’ said the bald man.
Some of his confidence rubbed off on me.
Just for one moment it all seemed possible.
I'd like to see those ration strengths, perhaps it would go well.
I pulled my scarf tighter and shivered; who was I kidding? from the top of the rise a torch flashed twice.
‘Now,’ said the bald man.
‘It will have to do.’
He tapped the ice with his toe.
‘The lorry is coming.’
We all crouched behind the trees.
I could hear a heavy lorry in low gear.
‘You don't think we can do it,’ whispered the bald man.
‘You're damn right, I don't,’ I said.
‘We'll show you.
Clean, cheap, fast and not a firearm in the vicinity.’
I nodded.
The bald man looked around to make sure that none of the ‘businessmen’ were in earshot.
‘You tell Midwinter,’ he said, ‘not to send them any guns.
It's the promise of guns that makes them co-operate with Midwinter.
If they ever got guns…’
He smiled.
The reflected light from the snow underlit his face.
His nose was red but his grin was tired, like a clown without greasepaint.
Behind his head the lights of the lorry were flashing as it bumped over the hard ridges of ice.
There was something nightmarish about the slow approach of the lorry.
I could help these lunatics or I could fight them on behalf of Stok; neither of those ideas appealed to me.
I thought of all the warm beds that I could have been in and I kneaded my fingers that were going numb with cold.
The lorry changed into a lower gear as it reached the final slope.
The driver must have seen the prepared patch of ice reflected in the moonlight, for I saw his white face lean close to the windscreen.
The front wheels began to slip, and then the rear wheels hit  the ice patch and they too began to spin.
The lorry stopped.
The driver revved the motor but that only made things worse.
The lorry slid sideways across the road.
Eight of the men came running out of the trees and heaved at the sides of the lorry.
It moved slowly towards the drainage ditch.
The driver gunned the motor but that only threw off sprays of fine snow, and the motor howled until I thought it would burst.
The lorry tipped gently into the ditch and wedged there, its offside front wheel clear of the ground.
With appalling crudity they had disabled the lorry.
The engine stopped and for a moment there was the silence that can only exist in a forest.
Then there was a clang as the driver opened the door and climbed down.
He showed no surprise.
His arms were raised above his head but not raised so far that he showed any fear either.
Someone brushed a hand across him for a gun, but finding none pushed him to one side.
They began to untie the canvas at the rear of the lorry.
There was a sudden sound of compacted ice falling from the underside of the lorry and some of the men looked startled.
The soldier grinned and reached for a half-smoked cigarette behind the earflap of his fur hat.
His movements were slow but his eyes were quick.
I threw him my matches.
He lit the cigarette, keeping both his hands high and visible.
When the canvas was open one of the men climbed inside.
‘That's Ivan,’ said the bald man, ‘he's a dangerous bastard.’
There was a glow from a flashlight and Ivan's voice read off the markings on the boxes.
The bald man translated his words to me.
There was a babble of Russian.
‘Dried milk,’ said the bald man.
More Russian: ‘Tea,’ said the man ‘and a sack of fresh lemons.’
More Russian: ‘Excrement,’ said the man, ‘he has found a  machine-gun.’
He leaped over the tailboard of the lorry like greased lightning.
It didn't need a Russian scholar to understand that the bald man was claiming that the documents and the guns were for him, only food and drink for the ‘businessmen’.
They both jumped down from the lorry, they were still arguing loudly.
Ivan was carrying the machine-gun.
He began to prod the bald man with the barrel of it.
They stood swearing at each other, both aware that everyone was watching.
The bald man said, ‘The Americans see what you do.’
He pointed at me.
‘There will be no more money from the Americans.’
Ivan grinned and stroked the gun.
The bald man repeated his threat.
I wished he would shut up.
It seemed like a good argument for eliminating me.
The other men were standing well to one side expecting violence and the soldier finished his cigarette and put his hands into his pockets instead of holding them high.
The bald man screamed loudly at Ivan.
They were both standing very still and the snow built a lace-like pattern over them.
for one moment it seemed that the bald man would carry the situation through by sheer force of character.
But he didn't.
He aimed a swift blow at the gun.
It wasn't swift enough.
A burst of fire cut the bald man in two at point-blank range and propelled him headlong into the ditch like a blow from a sledge-hammer.
Ivan fired again, short experimental bursts as if he'd got a new power-drill from the Christmas tree.
The magazine ended and there was only a faint click from the trigger mechanism.
The smoke drifted on the air and the sound echoed like a football rattle across the silent snow.
Only the bald man's foot was visible over the ditch.
Ivan lifted the sling of the gun and slipped it over his head.
He wore it like a sommelier's key, an order of merit or a symbol of kingship.
from his  pocket he produced a new magazine.
He fitted it with care.
No one spoke; they began to unload the cases from the lorry.
They made the driver help them, but I stood to one side stamping my feet to keep warm and watching the horizon with keen interest.
Two heavy bombers moved across the sky at about ten thousand feet.
Ivan brought me a battered metal box from the driver's cab.
He opened the lid to show me a batch of dirty, dog-eared cards inside.
He gave me a flamboyant salute.
I smiled.
He smiled too, and stabbed me in the gut with the gun-barrel hard enough to make me suck in my breath.
He still smiled.
His friends called to him, they had finished transferring the boxes from the lorry to the two taxi-vans.
I could see no reason for keeping me alive.
So I smiled nervously and slammed him in the mouth with the metal box, trying to kick him in the groin as he sagged, but his heavy overcoat protected him well.
1 held the metal box and chopped at him with the side of my hand, but it struck the sharp metal of the gun and I felt the flesh tear as one round fired.
The men scattered and the bullet whined away into the snowflakes.
Ivan backed away from me.
I kicked at his leg but almost overbalanced.
Ivan smiled.
There was blood on his mouth but he kept smiling because he had the machine-gun.
Boy-wonder karate expert, I thought, and I hoped that my sister would get the hill and the record collection; some of the Goodman discs were valuable.
That was when the soldier hit Ivan with a tyre lever.
Ivan toppled towards me, creaking like a rusty hinge.
I ran.
I didn't look behind.
I blundered through the dark forest bumping into tree trunks and stumbling over roots.
The Russian soldier was just ahead of me. from the road came the sounds of men shouting and then a long burst  of machine-gun fire.
The soldier dropped.
I went flat.
There was more firing and I could hear chips of wood being torn from the trees.
I crawled over to the soldier.
His eyes were closed.
The gun fired again.
It seemed closer.
The forest was dark and low upon me, and only the gunfire gave me any sense of direction.
I remained still.
There was more shouting, and about twenty yards to my left a man ran noisily.
More shooting, then there was no movement.
I guessed it was the bald man's son.
I had cut my hand on the gun: it wasn't bleeding much but the little finger was bent sideways and I couldn't move it.
I wrapped a clean handkerchief round it.
It was black under the trees and a white mist of dislodged snow hung close to the ground.
It was quiet.
I prodded the inert soldier, but he seemed pretty dead so I got to my feet and moved slowly and quietly away from the noise and excitement.
I walked almost to the edge of the forest, then I heard the voice.
Something was moving through the trees.
Something larger than a man.
Something much larger than a man.
I stared into the gloom.
The noise of breaking twigs stopped but the breathing continued.
It wasn't human breathing.
I hugged a tree-trunk, and became as thin as a Blue Gillette.
The large breathing thing out there began to speak.
The voice was metallic and resonant.
It spoke Russian.
It came nearer, still speaking and almost invisible: a white-cloaked cavalry officer on a horse.
‘Approach carefully,’ said a metallic voice, ‘they have guns.’
‘Yes, sir,’ said the rider.
He was speaking into a two-way radio-phone.
Through the trees I could see the valley.
A large cavalry patrol moved across it stage by stage like bedbugs  across a clean sheet.
I put the metal box containing the army ration-strengths down on the ground.
The horseman was watching me, he switched off the radio and nudged his horse closer.
The leather creaked but the hooves were silent in the snow.
Built into the saddle was a small Doppler radar set.
Above his head the aerial sang gently in the cold wind and the screen shone blue in the rider's face.
It was not a pleasant face.
He moved his heels slightly and the horse edged towards me like a police horse controlling a crowd.
I pushed against its hard muscles, the nerves twitched under the smooth coat.
The icy metal of the stirrup stuck to my fingers and the sour breath of the horse was hot upon my face.
The rider swung his map-case away from his thigh and opened his revolver holster.
I knew a few useful words of Russian.
‘Don't shoot,’ I called.
The horse, reluctant to hurt me, fidgeted and kicked up clods of snow, but the rider urged him nearer until the pistol was inches from my face.
He raised the gun and without hurry brought it down upon my skull.
The horse shied a little and the butt cleaved into the side of my head, almost taking my ear off.
My vision went red and I groped towards the stirrup and stuck to the icy metal.
frost-bite, I thought, then the gun butt came down more accurately and everything split into two like a badly adjusted range-finder, and I slid into the black snow.
14
I moved very slowly out of unconsciousness — not into consciousness, but into delirium.
My hand was as large as a football and throbbed with a pain that extended to the shoulder blade.
All was dark except for a tiny glimmer of red light.
Was it a tiny light close to a gigantic light far away?
I tried to move, but the pain from my hand was overwhelming.
I lapsed into unconsciousness.
Many times I moved from one state to the other until I mustered the strength to cling to the twilight zone without slipping back into darkness.
Upon me rested heavy cold weights and under me was a smooth, curved surface like the bottom of a gargantuan test-tube.
I ran my good hand across the surface.
The weights moved, tumbling over me like a cold sack of potatoes, and I eased my head round them in order to breathe.
Near to my face a human hand was moving.
The hand was attached to an arm and the arm belonged to one of the weights.
The hand moved slowly nearer to the edge of a blanket that was over us.
It moved slowly and almost imperceptibly, its finger and thumb poised greedily, ready to grip the frayed edge.
It was a bath I was in.
The hand continued to move.
A large stained bath-tub.
The hand moved faster, passed the blanket-edge and stopped, bobbing gently in space like a mascot hanging from a car-mirror.
It was a dead hand, waving a tiny, posthumous good-bye.
Two dead bodies were heaped upon me.
I wondered if this was the pipeline to hell.
I moved slowly letting the two dead men slide under  me.
One was the bald-headed man and the other was his son.
I climbed over the dead bodies and looked around the washroom; my eyes had grown used to the dim red emergency lights by now.
Cisterns were belching and gurgling near by and a tap on the wall dripped into a bucket with a deep musical note.
There were three washbasins fixed to the far wall; over the centre one was a pocket mirror one corner of which had broken and swung away on the screw to live a life of its own.
There was a sudden noise of a toilet flushing.
The door of a WC opened and a soldier emerged, buckling his belt.
He stared and came slowly towards me.
He had trouble fixing his belt-buckle but his eyes did not leave mine.
As he neared me his steps became more deliberate until he was in slow motion.
I was stretched full-length upon the bodies, my battered hand resting on the rim of the tub.
The soldier looked at my swollen hand and then back at my face.
His skin was dark and his eyes bright and moist.
An Armenian perhaps.
He held his trouser-front with one hand and with the other he reached forward to prod me.
Had he prodded any other part of my anatomy I would not have yelled.
My hand was lacerated, deformed, and bulbous with pus.
I screamed.
The soldier leaped away, crossing himself and gibbering; some ancient prayer, perhaps, or a magic sign.
His back thudded against the wall and he scraped along it towards the door, still giddy with fear.
As he got to the door he snatched his eyes away and blundered through the doorway.
His unbuckled trousers slid and tripped him headlong into the corridor outside.
I heard him scramble to his feet and his metal-tipped boots took him down the stone corridor at better than the track record.
Very slowly I took my weight on the good hand and slid my feet over the rim of the tub.
I had aches in muscles I never knew I owned.
from a standing position the bathroom was even colder and smellier than it had looked before.
I went across to the dripping tap and held my swollen hand under the cold running water.
I splashed more over my face.
It looks therapeutic in movies but it made me feel worse than ever.
My hand hurt just as much and now I was shivering with cold.
I tried to turn the tap off but it still dripped.
I staggered across to the washbasins.
I looked in the mirror.
I don't know what I expected to see, but as always when you have a tooth out or get kicked half to death the change in appearance is nowhere like commensurate with the pain.
I touched my swollen lips and my ears and had a roll-call of my limbs, but apart from my hand, an incipient black eye and a few abrasions there wasn't much evidence of my encounter with Russian free enterprise and Soviet cavalry.
I was ill.
I was in pain.
I was frightened.
Upon all there was the overwhelming pall of failure.
I stared at myself and wondered what I was doing there.
I didn't identify with the tired, frightened failure that stared back at me from the mirror.
I wondered if Harvey had arranged the whole thing, betrayed me to Stok.
Perhaps Signe had told him that we had made love.
That was the sort of thing she would delight in saying, but would Harvey believe her?
Yes he would.
Or perhaps London had betrayed me. lt had been done before, it would be done again.
Who was responsible?
I wanted to know.
If this was how it was going to end I wanted to know.
The responsibility for failure rests upon the one who fails.
I failed.
I shivered and reached for the hot taps but changed my mind.
The basin was spattered with bright, fresh blood.
A dirty hand-towel had blood on it.
Splashes of it  had hit the wall behind the basin and there were three oval blots of it on the floor.
It was bright and shiny, very fresh and not at all like tomato ketchup.
I tried to be sick in the toilet, but even that I failed to do.
I sat down.
I shivered.
Psycho-shock, I told myself, a way to soften you up for interrogation.
Psycho-shock, having you regain consciousness piled under corpses, don't succumb; but I continued to shiver.
In the corridor there were orders given and monosyllabic assents.
Colonel Stok swung the door open with a crash.
He was shirtless, a great hairy muscular figure with bad scarring on his upper arms.
He was dabbing at his face with a large wad of cotton wool.
‘I always do it,’ he said.
‘I cut myself when I am shaving.
Sometimes I think I will go back to using my father's razor.’
Stok leaned towards the mirror and bared his teeth at his reflection.
‘I still have some of my own teeth,’ he said.
He prodded his teeth.
‘I have a good man — a good dentist — these state dentists are no good.
It's better to have a private dentist.’
Blobs of blood had reappeared on his chin.
‘They take an interest in you, private dentists.’
Stok seemed to be speaking only to his own scrubby reflection in the pockmarked mirror, so 1 said nothing.
He tore small pieces of cotton wool off the wad and stuck them to his face with blood, while singing ‘The Motherland hears, the Motherland knows’ in a scratchy basso.
When he was satisfied with the blood-staunching, Stok turned round to me.
‘So you did not heed my advice.’
I said nothing, and Stok walked across and looked down upon me.
‘Wee, sleekit, cow'rin’, tim'rous beastie,
O what a panic's in thy breastie!


Thou need na start awa' sae hasty,
Wi' bickering brattle.’
Stok quoted it with an excellent Highland accent, ‘Robert Burns,’ pronounced Stok,’‘To a Mouse’.’
I still didn't say anything, but I had my eyes open and I looked at Stok calmly.
‘Are you not going to speak?’ said Stok mockingly.
I said,
‘Fair fa’ your honest sonsie face,
Great chieftain o' the puddin'-race.
Robert Burns, ‘To a Haggis’.
Stok joined in the last three words as I said them, and then he laughed So loud that I thought he would shake some of the cracked tiles off the wall.
‘To a Haggis’,’ he said again, the tears of delight welled in his eyes.
He was still laughing and saying ‘To a Haggis’ when the guard came to take me downstairs and lock me up.
Stok's temporary office was at the end of a long corridor lined with dusty panes of glass that almost permitted you to see beyond them into the honeycomb of bureaucracy.
One door had ‘Health Bureau’ stuck on to its glass panel in raised letters.
Parts of some letters had been chipped away, but a careful paint job had cured them.
Inside the office there were midget desks and a huge plans chest and a poster about putting fires out and another that showed two wooden-faced men and artificial respiration.
Beyond this opened a small glass-sided cubicle from which a senior clerk could watch for frivolity among the underlings.
Stok was sitting there speaking to a telephone that looked like a prop from The Young Mister Edison .
My clothes had been dried and rough-ironed.
They had  that smell of coarse soap that is asendemic to Russia as the smell of Gauloises and garlic to Paris.
I sat in a small easy chair, the stiff clothes seeking out the bruises and abrasions of the night, my hand throbbing with pain.
Stok replaced his phone.
His uniform was clean and pressed and his buttons were shiny.
Behind him through the thin curtains the sky was beginning to grow dark.
I must have been unconscious a long time.
The guards saluted.
Stok pulled a small chair close, and rested his big shiny jackbooted feet upon it, then he lit a cigar and threw a cigar and matches to me.
The two guards watched this with surprise.
Stok said ‘Spasibo,’ to the guards, and they said ‘Tovarich polkovnik Stok’to him and withdrew.
‘Smoke it,’ said Stok.
‘Don't smell it.’
‘If it's just the same to you,’ I said, ‘I'll do both.’
‘Cuban.
Excellent,’ said Stok.
Then we spent five minutes blowing cigar smoke at each other, until Stok said, ‘Lenin didn't smoke, hated flowers, never had a soft chair in his office, had only the simplest food, liked reading Turgenev and always had his watch fifteen minutes slow.
I am not like that.
I like all things that grow from the soil.
The first thing 1 demand when I move into a new office is one soft chair for myself and another for my visitors.
I like rich bourgeois food on the rare occasions that I have it.
I don't much like Turgenev — I think the death of Bazarov in Fathers and Sons is unconvincing and unfair to the reader — and I always have my watch fifteen minutes fast.
As for smoking, there are nights when it's been friend, fire and food to me.
Many such nights.’
I smoked and nodded and watched him.
The small pimples of cotton wool were still stuck to his bright new chin but his eyes were dark and old and tired.
‘Exciting friends you have,’ said Stok.
‘Gay, temperamental and devoted to private enterprise.’
He smiled.
I shrugged.
Suddenly Stok said, ‘They tried to kill you.
fifteen of them.
We arrested ten, including two that died.
Why did they try to kill you?
Have you been meddling with someone's girlfriend?’
‘I thought you had spent all night asking them.’
‘I have.
I know why they tried to kill you.
I just wondered if you did.’
‘I'll always welcome a second opinion.’
‘Your old friend Newbegin wants you dead and out of the way.’
‘Why?’
‘You were sent to spy on Newbegin and he doesn't like it.’
‘You don't believe that?’
‘No interrogation I conduct ends until I get a story that I believe.’
Stok opened a brown dossier and looked at it in silence, then closed it again.
‘Trash,’ said Stok.
‘The people I arrested last night are trash.’
‘What does that mean?’
‘It means they are anti-social elements.
Delinquents.
They are not even people with political errors.
Trash.’
There was a tap at the door and a young officer came in.
He addressed Stok by his rank alone — usually a sign of friendship in the Soviet Army — put another limp file of papers upon the desk, and then whispered into Stok's ear.
Stok's expression was unchanging, but I had an idea he was working hard to keep it so.
Finally Stok nodded and the Guards major stood to one side of the desk.
Stok opened the file and signed the corners of eight sheets of paper.
Then from the back of the file he took six more sheets of paper, perused them hurriedly and  then signed those too.
He spoke slowly to the papers which were still receiving his attention.
‘Ten men were taken into custody and we require…’ he turned the pages without haste ‘…thirty-five sheets of paper covered with reasons and thirty signatures from four different police authorities.
I am buried under the paper-work.
And do you know,’ he leaned across the table staring at me and tapping the open file softly with his huge fingers, ‘if tomorrow I decide to release one of them, there will be over three times as much paper-work.’
Stok laughed a hoarse laugh as though the prisoners had pulled that trick upon him and he wanted to show that he didn't mind.
‘Things are tough all over,’ I said.
‘Yes,’ said Stok.
He drew on his cigar carefully, then waved it at the major.
‘Guards Major Nogin.
GRU,’ Stok explained.
The major looked surprised at being introduced to a prisoner, but he played along with it.
‘The major has just become the father of an eight-pound boy,’ Stok said, and then there was a lot of soft rapid Russian, which was probably Stok wising the major up on me and my department.
Then Stok gave Major Nogin a cigar, and the major smiled at both of us and left the room.
‘He is a nice fellow for a GRU officer,’ said Stok.
I smiled.
Stok said, ‘Baltic Military District GRU are handling the whole thing.
The District Military Council sent me over to the Area Military Commissariat as an adviser, but these young men don't want an old man's advice.
They have handled the people that NTS sent here, and they can quite well handle these new people.’
Stok gave   an angry flick of his gigantic fist.
‘We don't send men into other countries to interfere with their internal affairs, why should you send your criminals here?’
I said, ‘What about the suppression of the Budapest rebellion?’
Stok shouted, ‘What about the Bay of Pigs?
What about Suez?
Tell the truth, English, the thing that sticks in your throat is that we were successful and you were not.’
‘Yes,’ I agreed wearily, ‘you are successful and we are not.’
‘Modern victories are not won by movements of armies, but by imperceptible change of molecules.
Victories must be won inside the hearts of men.’
‘I prefer my victories inside their heads,’ I said.
‘Come along, English.
We soldiers must not talk politics.
Our job is to take the stupid and impossible fantasies of our politicians and try to make them work in terms of flesh and blood.’
Stok stood up and put his hands on the small of his back and threw his head back like a man in pain.
‘I am tired,’ he said.
‘I'm half dead,’ I told him.
He took my arm.
‘Come along then, we'll support each other.’
‘I'm hungry,’ I said.
‘Of course you are, and so am I. Let's go somewhere civilized and have a meal.’
He looked at his wristwatch.
‘But I must be back by nine-thirty.
Tonight Moscow will inevitably take its revenge.’
‘What are you talking about?’
‘football,’ said Stok.
‘Tonight on television.’
The Luna Café on Soviet Boulevard faces the gardens and the old Liberation monument that had been built  there several régimes back and — so it is said — was something of a milestone in municipal graft.
Already there was a small queue of young people at the café door, for this was Saturday night and the boys had put on their one-hundred-and-thirty-rouble English wool suits and the girls had fifty-rouble pointed shoes wrapped in a parcel, for they were far too valuable to wear out on the icy streets.
Everyone stood aside for the barrel-like KGB colonel in full uniform and his scruffy civilian companion.
We got a small table near the orchestra, which was faking jazz music from their memories and short-wave radio.
Stok took the menu.
‘What about port wine?’ he asked.
‘I prefer vodka.’
A lot of vodka might numb the pain in my hand.
‘They don't sell vodka,’ said Stok.
‘This is a nice cultural place.’
He had chosen a seat that faced towards the door, and he watched the young couples entering.
The dance floor was crowded.
‘When I was a young man,’ said Stok, ‘we had a song called ‘When Tears fall a Rose will Grow’.
Do you know that song?’
‘No.’
Stok ordered two glasses of port wine.
The waitress looked at the marks on my face and at Stok's uniform.
Her face was kind but rigid.
‘If it was true then this would be a land of roses.
You have a word meaning unlucky people?’
‘Losers.’
‘Ah, that's a good word.
Well this is a land of losers.
It's a land where doom hangs upon the air like poison gas.
You have no idea of what awful things have happened here.
The Latvians had fascists who were more vicious than even the Germans.
In Bikernieki forest they killed 46,500 civilians.
In Dreilini forest, five kilometres east of  here, they killed 13,000.
In the Zolotaya Gorka, 38,000 were murdered.’
While Stok was talking I had seen a familiar figure enter the door.
He had left his outer clothes downstairs and he wore his cheap Latvian suit with its wide trouser bottoms as though it was from Savile Row.
He sat down on the far side of the room and I caught only a brief view of him through the dancers, but it was undoubtedly Ralph Pike still at large.
‘…the old, the pregnant, the lame,’ Stok said.
‘They killed them all, sometimes with the most terrifying and prolonged torture.
The Germans were so pleased to find such enthusiastic murderers that they used Riga as a clearing house for people they wanted killed.
They sent them here in train loads from Germany, Holland, Czechoslovakia, Austria, france, from all over Europe, because the Latvian-recruited SS units were the most efficient killers.’
Ralph Pike suddenly saw me.
He didn't make any sort of sign of recognition, but he gulped his drink with urgency.
‘…we have dossiers on hundreds of such Latvians.
War criminals now living in Canada, America, New Zealand and all over the world.
You would imagine that people guilty of such terror would remain quiet and be thankful that they have escaped justice, but no.
These scum are the foremost trouble-makers.
Your friend there is such a person as I describe: a war criminal with more murders of children than I would care to name upon his conscience.
He thinks his crimes are forgotten, but our memories are not so short.’
Ralph Pike had taken on a strange rigidity.
I glimpsed him only through dancing couples.
He leaned back in his seat, casually turning his head to take in the whole room.
Two tables to his left I recognized the handsome young Guards major who had just become a father.
‘You wouldn't think that he was like that,’ Stok said.
‘He looks so respectable, so bourgeois.’
Pike was staring at me and at Stok's uniformed back.
‘He's wondering whether to kill himself,’ Stok said.
‘Is he?’
I said.
‘Don't worry, he won't.
People like him are not losers.
They're survivors, professional survivors.
Even on the gallows such men would not bite a poison pellet.’
The dancers opened and my eyes met Pike's.
He was holding his glass of port wine and swallowing hard.
The music was a vintage piece of Victor Herbert, ‘Sweet summer breeze, whispering trees.’
‘Warn him,’ Stok said.
‘Warn your comrade he's in danger.
You must have a pre-arranged signal and I'd like to see it in action.’
‘Who is it you are talking about?’
‘Very good,’ said Stok admiringly.
Pike had noticed Guards Major Nogin now.
Stok waved to the waitress and said, ‘Two more port wines.’
I said, ‘If you are going to arrest him, do it.
Don't play cat and mouse like a sadist.’
Stok said, ‘He killed over two hundred people.
Six of my men taken prisoner in 1945 were tortured by this man personally.’
Stok's face had gone rigid and he didn't look like himself, just as those mathematically accurate waxworks never look like the people they portray.
‘Do you think he should go free?’
Stok said.
I said, ‘I happen to be in custody, remember?’
Stok shook his head in disagreement.
‘You are a casualty, not a prisoner.
Now answer my question.’
Stok's mouth was tense with hatred, he could hardly force the words through it.
‘Take a hold on yourself,’ I said.
‘I could walk across there and kill him very slowly,’ Stok said.
‘Very slowly, just as he killed them.’
Major Nogin was looking expectantly towards our table and Ralph Pike couldn't take his eyes off the major.
He knew that he was just awaiting Stok's signal.
‘You'd better get a grip of yourself,’ I said.
‘Major Nogin is awaiting orders.’
The music played.
Stars shining softly above;
Roses in bloom, waked perfume,
Sleepy birds dreaming of love.
Pike was talking to a waitress and gripping her wrist very tightly.
It was impossible to witness Pike's terror without identifying with it.
The waitress stepped back from him and wrenched her arm free.
Ralph Pike was positively radiating doom by now and in a country like Latvia such radiations are quickly picked up.
I wondered if fike had a Latin tag for this moment; perhaps bis peccare in bello non licet — in war two blunders aren't permitted.
Stok said, ‘Do you seriously and honestly tell me that such a man should go free?
Truth now.’
‘What's truth,’ I said, ‘except a universal error?’
Stok's huge hand leaned across the table and tapped my chest.
‘Shooting is too good for him,’ Stok said.
The music played, ‘Safe in your arms, far from alarms.’
I said, ‘You've done your piece and said it nicely.’
I brushed his hand away.
‘You've made sure that I am seen talking to you at the time of this man's arrest in a public place.
You will now release me: the resulting implication being that I bought my freedom at the expense  of his.
My organization will write me off as unreliable.’
I nursed my hand.
It was swollen now like a blue boxing glove.
‘Are you frightened?’ asked Stok, without delighting in it.
Perhaps he was being sympathetic.
I said, ‘I'm so afraid that the motor areas are taking over; but at least reflex actions are true to oneself, which is more than I can say for blind hatred.’
And that's when I waved at the Guards major Nogin and set in motion the arrest of Ralph Pike.
Daylight shall come but in vain,
Tenderly pressed close to your breast,
Kiss me, kiss me again.
New York
Now he acts the Grenadier,
Calling for a pot of beer.
Where's his money?
He's forgot:
Get him gone; drunken sot.
NURSERY RHYME
15
There are three styles in cities.
There are river cities — London and Paris — and waterfront cities like Chicago, Beirut and Havana; and there are island cities.
Stockholm and Venice are island cities.
So are Helsinki and Leningrad, and so is Manhattan that sparkled in the dust like a wet finger dipped into the caster sugar of electricity.
The plane dropped a wing towards Brooklyn and the dark water of Jamaica Bay and nosed gently down the traffic pattern of Kennedy Airport.
Kennedy Airport is the keyhole of America.
You peer into it and glimpse the shiny well-oiled pieces, the bright machine-finished gleaming metal; it's clean and safe and operates smoothly.
It's a great keyhole.
I got off the Air India jet spitting betel nut and nursing a swollen hand.
The airport was crowded with hurrying people, men in stetsons or tartan jackets, men carrying suits in bright polythene bags.
I found myself hurrying ton, until I realized that I had no destination: I wondered how many people around me had fallen into the same trap.
A woman with all her baggage and a raucous infant in a wire buggy wheeled it over my foot, and a woman in a yellow overall rushed out of a shop yelling, ‘Did you just buy a Scrabble game?’
‘No.’
‘You forgot your instructions,’ she said.
‘They didn't enclose the instructions.’
The loudspeaker was calling, ‘Skycap to the information centre.’
The woman in the yellow overall said, ‘It's not like you didn't pay for it.
A Scrabble game is complicated.’
‘I didn't buy it,’ I said.
A lady with a lot of packages marked ‘Shannon duty-free shop’ said, ‘I'd just love chicken-burger and French fries.
I haven't had real good French fries since I left San Francisco.’
The woman with the Scrabble game rules waved them in the air.
‘Unless you know how to use it,’ she sighed, ‘a Scrabble game is just a boxful of junk.’
‘Yes,’ I said.
I turned away from her.
‘It's not like you didn't pay for it,’ she said again.
The lady with the duty-free packages said, ‘Not even in Paris.
Not real good French fries.’
A man in an Air India uniform said, ‘Are you Mr Dempsey?
Air India passenger?’
A transistor radio was playing so loud that he had to shout.
I nodded.
He looked at my passport, then handed over a large envelope.
Inside there was three hundred dollars in bills, two dollars in small change sealed into a plastic bag labelled ‘small money’, and a thick bundle of political literature.
One pamphlet said that eighty per cent of all US psychiatrists were Russian, educated in Russia and paid by the Communists to indoctrinate Americans.
As a first step they tend to make sexual attacks on their female patients.
Another booklet said that the mental health programme was a Communist-Jewish conspiracy to brain-wash the USA.
Two booklets said that the president of the USA was a Communist and suggested that I should ‘…buy a gun now and form a secret minuteman team’.
The last thing was a bright blue bumper-sticker, ‘Are you a Commie without knowing it?’
I stuffed the whole wad back into the envelope and phoned the Brain.
The metallic voice said, ‘No instructions.
Call tomorrow at  this same time.
Have you read the literature?
Record your reply then ring off.’
‘I read it,’ 1 said.
It was all very well for Dawlish to tell me to take orders from the Brain, he didn't have to obey them.
I threw my baggage into a battered cab.
‘Washington Square,’ I said.
‘Tunnel or bridge?’ said the driver.
‘I always ask ‘em.
Tunnel or bridge?’
‘Bridge,’ I said.
‘Let's keep the East River where we can see it.’
‘You bet,’ said the driver.
‘Six bucks.’
‘Could we find a doctor somewhere on the way in?’
I asked him.
‘I think I've got a broken finger.’
‘You're British aintcha, fella, well I'll tell ya sumpin.
Just one thing dough don't buy ya in this town, fella; total silence.
Know what I mean?
Total silence.’
‘I know what you mean,’ I said.
‘Total silence.’
I joined the cast of the relentless 3D movie that calls itself Manhattan, where it's always night and they keep the lights on to prove it.
I prefer to arrive in New York at night, to lower myself into the city gradually, like getting into a bathful of very hot water.
The rusty taxi-cab clattered down the spine of the city and the driver told me what was wrong with Cuba, and we went past the silent skyscrapers, kosher pizzerias, glass-fronted banks, bagel factories, polish gymnasiums with belt-vibrators for rent, pharmacies selling love-potions and roach-killers, and all-night supermarkets where frail young men were buying canned rattlesnake.
New York, New York; where the enterprise is free if nothing else is.
From my hotel at the foot of fifth Avenue I made short forays into the neon between soaking my cuts, counting my abrasions and nursing anxiety to sleep.
On  the third night in New York I settled down to watch one of those TV programmes where relaxed, informal chatter had been perfected by hours of intensive rehearsal.
Outside I could hear rain falling upon the fire-escape and bouncing back against the window.
I closed the window tight and turned up the heat.
I seemed to have spent most of my life in hotel rooms where room service wanted money in advance and the roller towels were fixed with a padlock.
Now I had graduated to the Birmingham-rug and Dufy-print circuit, but I wondered what I had sacrificed to do it.
I had few friends.
I stayed well clear of the sort of people who thought I had a dead-end job in the Civil Service, and those who knew what the job was stayed clear of me.
I poured myself a drink.
On the TV a man in an open convertible was saying, ‘It's sunny and hot here in Florida.
Why not fly down tonight?
You can take twenty-four months to pay.’
My broken finger hurt like hell.
I soaked it in hot water and antiseptic and I drank a little more whisky.
By the time the phone rang I was well beneath the label.
‘Stage Delicatessen,’ the voice on the phone said.
‘Eight three four, seventh.
Immediate.
Secure.
Are you waiting to go in?’
I wondered what would happen if I ignored the call or pretended it wasn't me, but I had a strong feeling that they knew it was me.
I had a feeling that if I had been somewhere in the midst of a mob at Madison Square Garden they would have sill got that metallic voice to talk to me.
So I put my head under a cold shower and climbed into my raincoat and the doorman whistled up a cab for the Stage Delicatessen.
The schlock-shops were afire with sale signs and smiling suckers, and the cops were buttoned tight and growling.
A man in a blue poplin raincoat was standing outside the Delicatessen  waving a bundle of show-biz newspapers.
He ignored the code introduction.
‘OK slim,’ he said as I arrived.
‘Let's go.’
I said, ‘I'm going nowhere till I've had a hot pastranu sandwich.’
We crowded into a mêlée like the Eton Wall Game.
We both had a sandwich, the man in the blue raincoat saying ‘We'd better make it snappy’ between every bite.
Waiting for us was a black ford falcon with a DPL (diplomats') licence plate.
We got in and the Negro driver gunned it away without a word.
He passed Columbus Circle.
Blue raincoat buried himself into an article headlined ‘Bliz Boffs Borscht Biz’ and chewed on a toothpick.
The car radio was saying, ‘…
New Jersey Turnpike traffic moderate, Lincoln Tunnel, heavy.
Route twenty-two moderate, Holland Tunnel moderate.
folks this is the time of year to think about buying a new car…’
The driver tuned to another station.
‘Where are we heading?’
I asked.
The blue raincoat said, ‘You follow your orders, feller.
I'll follow mine, right?’
The driver said nothing, but we were in Broadway and the seventies and still heading north.
Suddenly the driver turned left and pulled up before one of those little medieval castles on the West Side.
that are owned by people who like to stare tall buildings in the toenails.
The car stopped.
The chauffeur reached for the car phone.
‘Let's go, bud,’ said blue raincoat.
He stuffed the bundle of papers into his pocket and pulled a face, as if the toothpick was causing him some sort of pain.
‘The old man's as touchy as sweating gelignite tonight,’ he said.
The bottom half of the building was towers, balconies and metal grilles, and the top half was very Hemish merchant.
He didn't ring the bell so we just stood there looking at the massive door.
‘What are we waiting for?’
I asked.
‘Won't they lower the drawbridge?’
The blue raincoat looked at me like he was mapping the course of my jugular vein.
There was a lot of chain-rattling, then the door opened with a faint bus.
Blue raincoat pointed at the open door, then went back to the car.
The driver and blue raincoat waited until I entered, then they drove away south.
Maybe they were going for another pastrami sandwich.
The fittings and furnishings inside the old house were old.
In America that either means you made it, or you just got off the boat.
Just in case there should be any mistake about it, these old items were spot-lit by Swedish lamps.
The door had been opened by some sort of electric release, but two Negro footmen in grey silk — complete with stockings — stood inside the door and said, ‘Good evening, sir,’ in unison.
A tall man walked into the hall to greet me.
He was dressed in a red coat, cut-away from chest to knee, with long yellow lapels that became a cape collar.
His breeches were made of white shiny silk and so was his waistcoat.
His hair was white and powdered and long enough to be tied in a small black silk bow.
It was the uniform of an eighteenth-century soldier.
I followed him along the marble hall.
Through a doorway to the right I saw two more soldiers opening a crate of champagne with their bayonets.
I was ushered into a high-ceilinged room dark with oak panelling.
There was a long refectory table round which sat seven young men, all in the same red-coat uniform.
They were drinking from pewter tankards.
Their hair was uniformly white and long.
A young girl in a long, low-cut dress with a sash and apron sat on a settle beyond the table.
The whole  scene looked like something soaked off a box of chocolates.
The man who had shown me in reached a pewter tankard down from the Welsh dresser and filled it with champagne.
He handed me the tankard and said, ‘I won't be a minute.’
‘Take your time,’ I said.
The door at the far end opened and a girl in a similar serving-wench dress but of silk and with a richly embroidered apron came in carrying a small cardboard box.
Mozart waked through the door.
The girl with the box said, ‘Has he broken his hand?’
The first wench said, ‘Not yet,’ and the second wench tittered.
One of the soldiers said, ‘A new boy,’ and waved a thumb at me over his shoulder.
‘He's come to talk with the General.’
He said it like I had aisle seats for the Day of Judgement.
The wench with the box said, ‘Welcome to the Revolutionary War.’
A couple of the soldiers grinned.
I swilled down the half-pint of champagne as if it was bitter lemon.
She said, ‘Where you from?’
‘I'm from Sci-fi Anonymous,’ I said.
‘I'm selling subscriptions to the twentieth century.’
‘Sounds awful,’ she said.
Then the first soldier returned and said, ‘The General will see you now,’ with awesome regard for the word ‘General’.
He reached a cocked hat from the Welsh dresser and put it on carefully.
I said, ‘Do you think I should pipeclay my alligator shoes?’ but he just led the way into the hall and up the stairs.
The music was louder here.
It was the second movement of the Mozart A Major Concerto.
The soldier walked ahead of me, holding his sword in his left hand so that it didn't clatter against the stairs.
At the top, a long red-carpeted corridor was lit by antique oil lamps.
We  walked past three doors, then he opened the next and showed me into the study.
There was an inlaid desk upon which silver ornaments had been placed with that carefully posed look that photos in House and Garden have.
On one wall there were ancient documents — some merely signatures — framed in modest elegance, but apart from that the walls were plain.
If that's what you call walls lined in silk.
there was a communicating door in one corner of the room and from behind it came the third movement of the Mozart, which was working itself up to that frantic minor-key Turkish routine which I've never thought a good enough ending for such a great beginning; but then that complaint went for just about everything in my life.
The music ended, there was applause and then the door opened.
Another one of these antique soldier boys came into the room and said, ‘General Midwinter,’ and both the red-coats went into a state of paralysed rigidity.
The applause continued.
Midwinter came into the frame of the door and turned back to the room beyond to clap gently with his white-gloved hands.
He was speaking to someone and beyond them I could see a brightly lit room with vast chandeliers and women in white dresses.
from the dark study it was like glimpsing daylight through a manhole.
‘This way,’ the General said.
He was a tiny man, dapper and neat like most small men, and he wore a gold-encrusted eighteenth-century English general's uniform with its complex aiguillette and thigh-length boots.
He pointed with his general's baton and said, ‘This way, men,’ again.
His voice was soft but with a hard mechanical edge like a speak-your-weight machine, and he said ‘men’ like his friends said ‘General’.
The General tucked the baton under his armpit and  clapped his hands softly as the small orchestra walked through his study.
When the last violin and cello had disappeared the General switched on the desk light and settled down behind his tidy desk.
He rearranged a couple of silver paperweights and brushed his long white hair with his hand.
A large emerald ring flashed a spot of light into a dark corner of the room.
He motioned me to a chair and said, ‘Tell me about yourself, boy.’
I said, ‘Can we cut the crowd scene?’ and he said, ‘Sure; beat it, you two.’
The two sentries saluted and left the room.
General Midwinter said, ‘What's your phone number?’
I said, ‘I'm at One fifth Avenue, that's Spring 7–7000.’
‘Five million, nine hundred and twenty-nine thousand,’ said Midwinter.
‘That's the square of it.
The square root of it is two hundred and seventy-seven point four nine.
I can do that with any number you name,’ he said.
‘So could my father; it's a knack, I guess.’
‘Is that why they made you a general?’
I asked.
‘They made me a general 'cause I'm old.
Old age is an incurable disease, see.
people think they ought to do something for you.
Me they made a general.
OK?’
He winked at me and then scowled as though he had thought better of it.
‘It's OK with me.’
‘Good.’
The word carried a certain amount of menace.
Midwinter leaned forward and the harsh cross-lighting emphasized his age.
His flesh was soft; a badly-fitting mask that around the eyes showed a moist pink edge.
The yellow skin freckled brown shone like the well-fingered ivories of a bar-room piano.
His white-gloved hands played possum on the desk-top until one of them walked across to the baton, picked it up and hit the desk-top a sharp blow.
‘They told me you were belligerent,’ said Midwinter.
‘I said I didn't mind 'cause I'm a little belligerent myself.’
‘Looks like neither of us is going to grow out of it.’
‘In your case, I'm not so sure.’
He tapped the baton on the desk and dropped it with a loud clatter.
‘When you see the set-up we have — not only here but throughout the world — you will join us all right.’
The soft white animal-like hand picked up the baton again.
‘You are a probationer.
This is a symbol of the faith we have in you.’
He picked up one of those brown shiny golf-balls that I had seen at Pike's and rolled it across the desk to me.
I picked it up and looked at it.
‘Inside that sphere is a sample of American soil — the soil of freedom.
I hope you will treasure that piece of soil, remain true to it; a symbol of the simple faith of a free people rooted in a free soil.’
He tapped the desk as though it was all there in a diagram that I should have already looked at.
‘When you come back from training, then we will have tested you, then we will be trusting you.’
‘Suppose you decide that you won't be trusting me?’
‘Then you won't be coming back,’ Midwinter wheezed.
‘Then perhaps it's me that should be mistrusting you,’ I said.
‘No, no, no,’ said Midwinter in a fatherly voice.
‘I like you.
You will find that I am the one person you can always trust.
Come to me, confide in me.
I am the one person you can trust around here.
Always trust a financier because he is investing the stuff that counts.
If you pay money to an artist how can you tell if he's going to be famous a couple of years from now?
You submit yourself to a doctor; well, who knows how many guys he's slaughtered?
It's strictly between him and the AMA.
An architect: maybe he had a smart assistant last year; you may end up with the dumbest heap of concrete you ever saw.
But a financier: when he lays it on the line it's going to be portraits of presidents cashable in solid US any place on the globe.
So don't ever say a financier doesn't measure up; he's the only one who does.’
One of the soft white animals had gone to sleep and the other went across the desk to sniff at it.
‘Get me?’ said Midwinter.
‘Got you,’ I said.
Midwinter nodded and wheezed a wheezy laugh.
‘Let me tell you something, son,’ he said.
‘Making a lot of money is no fun.
When you get rich you find that the rich are soft and stupid and want to talk about parties for their daughters.
Your old friends — your real friends — don't want to see you any more.
Poor people don't want a millionaire among them reminding them of some way in which they failed to make it.
So it's lonely being a rich old man.
Lonely.’
The animal with an emerald on its leg tugged at Midwinter's sleeve-lace and picked up the baton again and staggered about with it.
I said, ‘Poor old rich men are something of a cliché, aren't they?’
Midwinter said, ‘I got nothing against clichés, son.
It's the quickest method of communication yet invented, but I get you.
You think I'm a lonely old man looking for a tomb in a history book.
I love.
It's as easy as that.
I love, I love my country.
Get me?’
The animal with the baton smacked the sleeping animal in time to Midwinter's staccato pronouncements. from the next room 1 heard a riff of a clarinet and toot of a trombone.
‘Get me?’
Midwinter said again.
‘Yes.’
I said quietly.
‘No,’ said Midwinter.
His voice was loud but without animosity.
He leaned across the desk and looked at his hands and the baton and at me, and then he winked.
When he spoke again it was a low persuasive tone.
‘You  don't understand the kind of love I have for this great country we live in.
Love's not built that way — my way — any more.
These days love is marriage and its compensation is alimony or success.
Love these days is bravery under fire and the compensation is medals and fame.
Love is public duty or a political donation and the compensation is a pension or maybe an embassy.
Love is some dame you left back in St Louis or a fast haul in the back seat of an automobile.’
One of the white animals tapped his waistcoat.
‘My love is nothing like that.
My love is this great company of brave young men who are proud to make their country strong.
I love my country and my token is to make the thing I love strong.
Get me, boy?
Get me?’
He was agitated.
‘Yes, sir,’ I said very loud.
The baton waved in the air.
‘Strong,’ said Midwinter, and the animal with the baton smashed the sleeping animal in the belly and there was a terrible noise of splintering wood.
One leg kicked convulsively and the sleeping animal died with its feet in the air.
‘I knew you'd get me,’ Midwinter said.
‘I knew,’ and he picked up his poor dead broken hand and removed the white glove.
The wooden fingers of his false left hand were bent and damaged and he turned it slowly under the light.
My own swollen hand seemed to hurt even more as I watched him.
The door opened after a brief tap and the wench with the cardboard box came in.
The dance band began to play ‘Smoke gets in your eyes.’
Midwinter was still looking at the revolting hand.
She bent over and kissed Midwinter on the cheek.
‘You promised,’ she said reproachfully.
from somewhere across the city came the lonely scream of a police car.
‘They don't make them strong enough,’ said Midwinter.
He had lost the intensity that his love had generated and was in a post-coital triste.
She kissed  him again and said, ‘You mustn't get over-excited.’
She turned to me.
‘He gets over-excited,’ she explained.
She rolled back the sleeve to reveal the place where the false hand fitted to the arm.
Midwinter waved his baton at me.
‘I like you,’ he said.
‘Go and have a swell time at our fancy-dress party.
We'll talk some more tomorrow.
We can fix you a costume if you feel conspicuous in your street clothes.’
He winked again as if it was his way of dismissing visitors.
‘No thanks,’ I said.
‘Uniforms bring me out in a rash.’
That house was one of the few places where I preferred to be different from the others.
I moved out among the Nell Gwynnes with cast-iron facials and the Redcoats who rode a Jaguar unafraid.
The chips were down, the levels were split and the Scotch trickled over the rocks.
Harvey was there in a red-coat uniform, smiling and doing his neat little dances and pretending to drop plates and saving them at the last minute, and the girls were saying ‘Ooo’ and slyly studying each other 's hairdos and shoes.
I stood watching Harvey, trying to get beyond his moods to the man underneath.
His timing was exact: even when he moved in a clumsy way he never knocked anything over.
He was the sort of fielder who never runs but is always there when the ball lands.
His eyes were clear but his white wig was askew.
I felt sure that he was more than a little drunk, but his voice never slurred or changed from that flat resonance that makes so many Americans sound as though they are speaking over a loud-hailer.
Harvey spotted me on the rim of his audience.
‘You old son of a bitch,’ he said in a relaxed idle way, and he leaned forward and grabbed my arm to be sure I wasn't an hallucination.
‘'Bout time you smiled, you miserable  old swine.
You look drunk,’ he said.
He flagged a waiter down and grabbed two drinks from the silver tray.
The waiter began to move away.
‘Stay right there,’ Harvey said.
‘Stand there stood, like a real waiter should.’
Harvey insisted that I drink three gigantic martinis before he released the waiter.
Harvey watched me down the drinks and he downed three just to keep me company.
‘Now let's go,’ he said, dragging me towards the door.
‘The only thing worth having at these crazy pantomimes is the booze.’
Harvey grabbed two more drinks for good measure, then did a little dance.
The band saw him and picked up the rhythm.
It was all that — or more than — Harvey needed.
The dancers cleared a path as he did a Gene Kelly, relaxed and skilful right there in the middle of the dance floor.
As he drank from the two glasses so he was able to strut wider and leap higher, until with the glasses empty he was spinning and soft-shoe shuffling, and the dancers had stopped dancing and were finger-clicking and hand-clapping and the atmosphere built like a house of cards, thin and precarious but high and beautiful.
The enthusiasm spread to the band, the drummer steadied him and the trumpet urged him to attempt and complete stances beyond his normal skills.
The ESP boys would say that it was the telepathic radiations of the audience that enabled Harvey to do that dance.
Certainly they were all rooting for him and just as certainly Harvey responded, and he did things that night that would have attracted a talent scout from the Bolshoi.
When the band sensed that Harvey was growing tired they moved him towards a finale and spread a musical carpet and drew a musical curtain and the trumpet milked the applause.
Harvey stood there grinning and flushed and the waiter stepped forward with another great silver tray with just  two drinks on it, and some wag took down a piece of greenery and formed it into a crown and the soldiers drew their swords and provided an arch under which Harvey walked.
He went out on to the balcony and the applause was still echoing around the ballroom.
Harvey said, ‘Hey, they like us.
You're not bad,’ which was nonsense because all I had done was follow Harvey's steps and fake pauses when they became too difficult to follow.
Harvey grinned and said, ‘I knew three of those big martinis would do it.
I know you only too well.’
The rain had stopped.
The balcony was cool and the night was dark as far as Broadway, where a slab of writhing electricity changed the colour of all the window panes on the other side of the street.
Harvey produced a couple of cigars and we looked at the glow above the dark city and smoked, and Harvey said, ‘It's a millionaire's toy,’ and I said, ‘Yes, with eight million working parts.’
‘Working parts,’ said Harvey.
‘Yes.’
The street below was empty except for a girl walking along sobbing quietly and a boy behind her trying to explain.
‘They wouldn't have killed you,’ Harvey said.
‘Rough you up a little, yes; but they would never have killed you.
It was Stok that made it dangerous by sending that cavalry patrol to pick them up.’
‘Better a devil you know than a devil you don't,’ I said.
Below on the street the sobbing girl let the boy comfort her, then behind us there was a click from the balcony door.
The serving wench who had been carrying the General's spare hand in a cardboard box stepped out on to the balcony to join us.
‘Harvey darling,’ she said in that same reproachful tone she had used on General Midwinter.
‘What's wrong, honey?’
Harvey said.
‘Won't the General lend you his plane?’
‘You know,’ said the girl.
‘I came out of the study with the General and there you are cutting up, Harvey.
Don't you understand how terrible it makes me feel?’
‘No,’ said Harvey.
‘It makes me feel terrible.
Embarrassed, Harvey: that's how it makes me feel.’
Harvey screwed up his eyes and stared at her.
‘You know something, honey?’ he said.
‘Drinking makes you very beautiful.’
‘I haven't been drinking, Harvey,’ she said patiently, as if this was a dialogue they had been through many times before.
‘No,’ said Harvey triumphantly.
‘But I have.’
‘If your marriage means nothing to you, Harvey,’ she said, ‘then your self-respect should.
I'll be ready to go home in fifteen minutes.’
Then she swept away, skilfully rustling her long dress for maximum effect.
‘My wife,’ said Harvey in explanation.
‘Yes,’ I said.
‘One of these days I'll wire up her electric toothbrush…’
He stopped.
It was a joke, I suppose, but he didn't grin.
‘She spies on me.
Do you know that?
My own wife spies on me.
To hear her talk you'd think I was the hired help.
To hear her talk you'd think that guy Midwinter was the right hand of God.’
‘That's what you'd think if you hear anyone around here talk about Midwinter.’
‘Right.
These punks think he's MacArthur, George Washington, Davy Crockett and Jim Bowie all rolled into one.’
‘But you don't?’
‘I didn't say that.
I think he's a great man.
Seriously.
A really great man and a powerful man.
Midwinter will never be the president of the United States but he will be close to the President.
When the forces of conservatism take control of this country then Midwinter will be the power behind the throne…and man I do mean the throne.’
Harvey smiled.
‘But he doesn't trust anyone.
He doesn't trust anyone.’
‘That's a common failing among people in our business.’
‘Aw, but this guy taps phones, intercepts mail, checks up on friends and relatives.
He even puts agents in to spy on his own staff.
That's pretty crummy, wouldn't you say?’
‘All I'd say is, why are you so sure that this balcony isn't bugged?’
‘I'm not sure, but I'm too drunk to give a good goddamn is all.’
Harvey suddenly thought of something else.
‘Tell me something, you bastard,’ he said.
‘Why did you change over the eggs in that package?’
‘I told you, Harvey, the package of eggs was stolen from my baggage on the way to London Airport.’
‘Tell me about that again.’
‘I already told you.
It was the same man who followed me from the doctor's surgery.
full face.
Black horn-rimmed spectacles.
Medium height.’
Harvey said, ‘You said projecting ears, bad teeth, long hair, sounded like an Englishman who wanted to be taken for a Yank, bad breath.
You gave me a long description.’
‘That's right, the horn-rimmed spectacles were adapted to make his ears project.
He was an American who put flat Cockney vowel-sounds into his American accent to sound like an Englishman assuming an American accent.
He used a hair-piece to cover a bald patch on top of his head.
(It didn't come near the hair line so if he hadn't kept tapping it no one would have noticed it.)
He blacked out a couple of his front teeth with stage cosmetics and made his breath smell with chemical — oldest trick in the business to prevent people looking you in the face close to.
He stole the baggage after it had been through customs.’
I paused.
Harvey was grinning.
‘Yes,’ he said.
‘It was me.’
I went on.
‘I'd say he was a transit airline passenger on a refuelling stop who got off his aeroplane, changed into a pair of overalls in the toilet, drove off with a van-load of baggage, took what he wanted and was back on his plane well within the time his flight was called, to continue his journey without even going through customs.
Not bad for someone who had just barn-stormed around after leaving college.’
Harvey laughed and said, ‘Elevator shoes, contact lenses to change the eye colour, dirtied fingernails and a trace of colouring on the lips to make the face seem pale.
You forgot all those.’
Harvey stared down at his toes and watched them while they did a little dance.
‘You think you are a pretty smart bastard, don't you?’
Harvey said.
He was still looking down and still doing a little dance.
I didn't answer.
‘A pretty smart bastard.’
Harvey split the words into syllables and made each syllable a step in his dance, then he changed the accents round and danced the same remark again.
He zinged an end to his dance with one foot high in the air.
He turned his face to me.
‘You made sure your prediction about Pike came out OK, didn't you?
You're like these dames who see two knives crossed on the table, then start a row  to prove it's a bad sign.
Pike gets burned.
You have a nice chat with Stok?’
I think Harvey wanted me to hit him.
Whether he wanted to be hurt and suffer, or an excuse to hit me back, I don't know, but I'm sure he wanted me to hit him.
Harvey said, ‘You were having a nice chat about Turgenev.
You knew that Stok wouldn't harm you.
As far as he's concerned you are a representative of the UK Government.
If he cracks down on you, London would crack down on all the fringe people who go in and out of the Soviet network there.
No; providing you are reasonably discreet you are safe anywhere in Russia.
That's what makes me sick: you laughing and chatting with Stok while our boy was sitting there petrified.’
I said, ‘Stok's OK compared with some of the people I work with, let alone compared with the people I work against.
Stok knows which side he's on.
So do I. That's why we can talk.’
‘Stok is a bloodthirsty ruthless bastard.’
‘So are we all,’ I said.
‘Ruthless and doomed.’
‘Maybe you should have walked over to Pike and told him that.
Half of us are ruthless and the other half are doomed.
You should have told Pike which half he belonged to.’
‘We are all half ruthless and all half doomed.’
‘You're drunk,’ said Harvey, ‘or you wouldn't be so corny.’
The balcony door was open.
I looked through it to see why the music had stopped.
General Midwinter was in front of the band smiling benignly at the closely packed guests and holding his gloved hand high as if he was auctioning it.
The guests were silenced.
‘We interrupt your pleasure for a brief prayer,’ said Midwinter; he bowed his head and so did everyone.
‘Dear Heavenly father,’ Midwinter intoned.
‘Help us to awaken our beloved country to its great danger.
Help us to cleanse it and hold it safe from the Godless forces of Communism that surround it and threaten it from within.
In Jesus's name we ask it.
Amen.’
The guests said Amen.
I looked at Harvey, but he was staring at his feet which twitched for another little dance.
I eased my Way through the crowds that were watching Midwinter climb down from the platform.
Mercy Newbegin pushed past me.
‘How does Harvey know what I said to General Midwinter?’ she asked me as she passed.
I shrugged.
How the hell did he know what I'd said to Colonel Stok?
Next morning my phone rang at nine forty-five.
I had a headache.
A voice that called me ‘old boy’ suggested that I ‘toddle over the road and meet me in Greenwich Village at the corner of Bleeker Street and MacDougal.
I'll be wearing a green tweed overcoat and a brown felt hat.’
I'll bet, I thought, with a small Union Jack flying from the crown of it.
So I walked across Washington Square and along MacDougal where there are coffee houses for rich vagrants.
The black chairs and marble tables were silent and empty and men in white aprons were sweeping the floors, carrying ice and emptying the garbage.
Two kids were playing draughts with Coca-Cola caps on the steps of an art-jewellery studio.
A dozen stray cats were asleep under a Con Edison awning and so were two winos.
I stopped at the corner of Bleeker Street.
It was a bright cold day with a freezing wind blowing on the cross-town streets.
There was no sign of anyone resembling the tweedy man that phoned.
Outside Perazzo's Funeral Church there was an old-style funeral.
There were six black Fleetwoods with Negro chauffeurs, and flower arrangements as big as allotments.
Three men in black overcoats and dark glasses were fussing around the long cars and a small crowd had gathered to weep and wonder.
I watched the first of the Fleetwoods roar away with headlights shining and felt a nudge in the kidneys and heard a soft voice.
‘Don't turn round, old fruit.
No point in both of us knowing what I look like.
Billet-doux from the old firm.
Lots of luck and all that, don't you know.’
He paused.
‘Fascinating people, eh?
Carries great status a fine funeral, you know.’
I said, ‘I'll bear that in mind.’
‘That's the spirit.
You'll love the Village.
fascinating.
I live here.
Wouldn't live anywhere else.
Love the Village.
fascinating people, eh?’
He prodded my ribs with something that turned out to be a manilla envelope.
‘Yes,’ I said.
I gripped the envelope.
He moved away and I heard a murmur of protest as he trod on feet and pushed ribs to move back through the sightseers.
I gave him two or three minutes to disappear, then drifted away as the last hearse disappeared.
A sign on the wall said, ‘Live and trade in the Village’.
I walked past it and headed north to have breakfast.
In Washington Square a camera crew were measuring the width of the arch and being important.
It was one of those days when police academy cadets were controlling the traffic and miles of brightly coloured taxi-cabs slithered very slowly up the avenue of graceful skyscrapers like banded snakes between jungle trees.
On Eighth Street the wind was liking discarded newspapers like wounded pigeons.
The sky was low and pregnant with rain which would fall as soon as the wind dropped.
Even now the air was damp with the threat of it.
I went into the Cookery coffee shop.
I got a seat near the window and ordered Canadian bacon and a pot of coffee.
At the next table a group of kids in white cricket pullovers and sneakers were arguing about who ordered two lots of french toast.
A middle-aged woman passed along the street on roller skates, and across the road a fat man was fixing a notice, ‘Only a few days to go.
Accountant will do your tax forms $5.’
He felt the first dabs of  rain, and held out his palm to inspect the circles of water as though they might be gold or a map of the city.
I opened the manilla envelope that the Englishman had given me.
There were four letters addressed to me at my London flat.
Jean had opened them.
One was the Military Historical Society Bulletin, two were receipted bills for gas and phone, Jean had paid them.
The fourth was a letter from the landlord about making too much noise late at night.
Me, that is, not my landlord.
There was also a note from Jean.
The note from Jean said:
Dawlish passed the January expenses OK so you were right after all, you clever thing.
Your washing-up lady left a message that she was three weeks in arrears and she was going to see her brother in Brighton — whatever that means — anyway I took it out of the petty cash and paid her.
You forgot to stop the milk.
Mr Dawlish says I should tell you that the Pike brothers are both Latvians but hold British passports.
They have been members of some very dodgy Latvian old-pais club but nothing else is known.
No form etc. of course.
They are a very clever family the Pikes, they all hold medical qualifications, but Ralph Pike (the younger one, who took a trip you know where) has biochemical qualifications too.
He was probably sent there to take a look at some local biochemical machines because even a quick glance would be very revealing to an expert, and Ralph Pike is an expert.
We are sure this end that the Pikes wouldn't be a party to exporting the virus to (or in even the slightest way aiding) the place you've just been.
On the contrary, politically they are as far right as it's possible to go without failing off the edge.
I can't do much to answer your queries about Kaama.
He knew that there was a group of people interested in selling a stolen virus.
He decided that they were British (for no reason that we yet know).
He had a rudimentary training in science and probably offered to look at the virus and given an opinion as to its value in order to gain information.
That's why he was in a white jacket (I remember that you said he looked like a  phoney dentist in a toothpaste ad).
The post mortem now states quite categorically that he was not killed by any sort of missile (the open window must have been a red herring).
He was killed by a needle-like instrument (punctured wound the report says, but it was four and a quarter inches deep) going into his kidney, renal artery, peritoneum and loop of jejunem.
This seems to suggest an assailant unknown to him coming up behind him with a weapon in the right hand, holding him round the neck with the left arm (fabric traces in the teeth) to prevent him shouting.
‘A skilful piece of placing,’ the Helsinki path, lab. said.
We haven't mentioned eggs to the Central Criminal Police in Helsinki but the Security Police are getting interested and we may have to give them at least some explanation of the raw egg on Kaarna's body.
Did you get your clean laundry?
I told them it was urgent, but I don't think your van does you on Tuesdays.
I divided some of those files into sub-files and we have got rid of quite a bit of it now so you needn't be frightened of coming back to week-end working.
Mr Dawlish told me to give you a summary of the virus.
(It's enclosed.)
It's a bit fourth-form biology, but then you were a little fourth-form biology yourself the inst time I saw you.
All my love darling
, JEAN
A blue flimsy attached to the letter said,
This is to tell you about those raw eggs on Kaarna and in the box from Pike.
Viruses have a regular geometric shape.
They are bigger than protein molecules but smaller than bacteria.
They cause polio, smallpox, foot-and-mouth, ‘flu, cattle diseases, plant diseases, sore throats and cancer.
New ones are discovered every week.
They attack man, plants, bacteria and animals.
Some viruses attack bacteria, others attack body cells.
They live in a host cell which they invade.
It is a medical problem to attack the virus without attacking the normal cells.
When the virus takes over a cell it takes over the master-plan or system of instruction of that cell and the cell is thereafter directed to reproduce itself with the virus already in command.
Transport of the virus
The virus lives at body heat — 37°C. — and can be reared in a fertile hen's egg.
Candle the egg to see which way it is sitting, trepan the egg, inject virus into the yolk via the hyaline membrane (tough white skin), replace shell section.
The particular virus in which we are interested is an anti-virus virus.
It enters the body by droplet infection — e.g. nasal passage — stimulates the reticulo-endothelial system to produce an amino-acid complex like interferon.
This attacks the growth of other viruses by attacking the foreign nucleic acid before it gets into the cell.
I hope this is of some use to you.
It took me four hours at a boffin-house and lasted through two sherries, three bottles of wine, a little brandy and a proposal (of marriage).
Bring some records.
How about Coltrane, Kirk & Rollins?
JEAN
I sipped my coffee.
I wondered whether they were using my secretary Jean to do the work of other departments.
I wondered if they passed that Trade Union (positive vetting) file over to someone else or whether they were keeping it for my return.
None of those public-school boys would be able to do that job with the instinct that I would be able to bring to it.
Yet some of the people concerned would be people I was at school with; and in any case it would cal 1 upon questions and allegiances that I had continuously pushed into the rear recesses of my mind.
I dreaded that file landing on my desk, and yet to make clear how much I wished to avoid it would…
I was deep into a descending spiral when I heard a tap at the window against which I was sitting.
It was pouring with rain now, but standing right there on the shiny Eighth Street pavement was Signe.
She was standing there crammed full of enthusiasm and energy like a bomb on a short fuse.
Her skin was tanned and freckled like a brown farm egg.
When she smiled that big smile with her slightly too big mouth and too many very white teeth it was as if the explosion was starting to blow the top of her head off.
Rain was bouncing off the street like corn-stubble and Signe's hair was plastered against her head  like a pot of mustard that someone had poured over her.
She wore a man's yellow oilskin coat that was many sizes too big for her and the rain made it even shinier, flashing there like a neon sign advertising gold.
She tapped on the glass again.
Several customers looked at Signe and made soft noises of approval.
I beckoned her to come in and have coffee, but she shook her head and tapped on the glass again and mouthed the words, ‘I want you,’ like a trapped goldfish.
I left two dollars and a half-eaten bacon sandwich on the table and walked out into the street.
Signe wrapped her yellow oilskin arms around my neck and planted a kiss on me.
Her sharp nose was icy cold and her face wet with rain.
She was bubbling over with words and explanations and kept pumping my arm and staring at my face as though she couldn't believe it was really me.
She said, ‘Did you go to General Midwinter's fancy-dress party last night?
Was it wonderful?
Don't tell me if it was, I couldn't bear it.
I wanted to go.
Did you see General Midwinter?
Isn't he marvellous?
Did you see Harvey?
We're finished, Harvey and me.
Harvey and I. His wife was there, wasn't she?
Did they have champagne?
I love champagne.
Will you buy champagne if I cook dinner tonight?
Just the two of us.
Don't you adore that house?
Did you dance?
Was the band good?
What was Mercy Newbegin wearing?
Was everyone in costume?
What time did it finish?
Did they have oysters?
I adore oysters.
I'll get oysters for us tonight.
Oysters and champagne.
Isn't Mercy Newbegin awful?
Did you get to speaking with her?
Isn't she awful?
What was she wearing?
What sort of shoes?
Did they dance the paul Jones?
I hate all women.
Except two that you don't know.
I didn't go because Harvey and I are through.
And also I didn't want to see that Mercy Newbegin.
Also I didn't  have any proper shoes.’
She stopped.
She looked up at me and said, ‘I didn't think I'd ever see you again.
You don't hate me, do you?’
‘Why should I?’
‘Well, I'm always weeping on your shoulder.
Men don't like that.
Especially hearing about other men.
It's natural.
I wouldn't want you to tell me about your love affairs.’
‘Wouldn't you?’
I said.
‘I was just going to tell you about my love affairs.’
‘Were you truly?’ she said with a flattering amount of alarm in her voice.
‘I'm just teasing,’ I said.
‘Good,’ she said.
‘I don't want you to have any women in your life except me.’
I was surprised.
‘I'm surprised,’ I said.
‘I'm zipreezed,’ Signe mocked.
‘You're getting very wet.
Shall I try and get a cab?’
‘No, no, no,’ she said.
‘I live on Eighth Street and I like walking in the rain.’
‘So do I.’
‘Do you really?’
‘On account of my father who was a Saudi-Arabian rain maker.’
Signe's hand squeezed mine.
‘He broke his heart when his village got connected to the mains.’
Signe looked up into my eyes.
‘How terrible.
Tell me about it.’
I told her.
Signe's apartment was in a small block built over a row of shops.
The hallway was bleak and one window was broken.
Signe lived on the first floor.
Her hall was papered with straw paper and there was a strange set of horns upon which Signe hung her yellow oilskin coat.
She tapped it.
‘Hang up your coat, plastic elk horns.’
‘I didn't know you hunted the great plastic elk.’
‘It was there when I moved in.
Horrible, isn't it?’
She swished her fingertips through her hair and sent a spray of water over me.
‘Take it easy,’ I said.
‘I once gave away a dog that did that.’
‘I'm sorry,’ she said.
‘I forgot you English hate water.’
She disappeared into the bathroom and reappeared with her head under an enormous towel which she kneaded sensuously.
‘This way,’ the towel said.
She led me into the kind of large room that Americans call studios.
It was papered in white and gold.
On the walls were small pieces of wood that I later learned were the sculptures of one of Signe's ex-boyfriends.
Highly polished floorboards peeped around the white carpets, the curtains were ruffled and there were white shades with bobbles.
On the floor there were three whodunit paperbacks and a copy of The Village Voice with face-powder spilled on it.
It was easy to spot the big-city items that Signe had added to the furnished apartment.
There were a couple of fairground signs from Third Avenue antique shops, a polar-bear rug and two huge basketwork chairs that looked like witch-doctors in full gear and creaked when sat upon.
Signe leaped across the room like a rubber kangaroo and landed flat upon the sofa.
She bounced and cuddled herself into half a dozen bright scatter cushions.
‘My apartment,’ she yelled.
‘Mine, mine, mine.’
‘Yes,’ I said.
‘Sit down.
I'll make you some coffee.’
‘I abandoned a perfectly good bacon sandwich,’ I said.
‘Poo on your bacon sandwich.
I shall make you something delicious.’
‘What?’
I said suspiciously.
‘I'll see what's in the ice-box.
Sit down and stop looking so English.’
‘How do the English look?’
I asked.
I had ceased protesting that I was Irish.
‘Embarrassed,’ she giggled.
‘Too many elbows and too many feet.’
I moved a pair of cotton slacks, a brasaière, a housecoat, a page of a letter in finnish, a jar of Pond's cold cream, some roll-on deodorant and a half-full cup of cold coffee in order to sit on the basketwork chair.
‘Ah, there it is,’ Signe said, coming back into the room and taking the cold coffee from me.
‘Do you take sugar and cream?’
‘Cream, no sugar.’
I dried my trouser legs in front of the fire until Signe returned with a toasted ham sandwich and coffee.
‘I'm through with Harvey,’ she said.
‘You're steaming.’
‘I always steam when I'm alone with girls.
What happened?’
‘I couldn't put up with him.
Those moods.
One moment he's all smiles, the next moment he snaps my head off.’
‘That's right.
That's what he does all right.
He does it to me.’
‘He even does it to Midwinter.
They are getting fed up with him too.’
‘Who?’
‘The organization.
Our organization.
Even they are fed up with his moods.’
‘It doesn't make him less efficient,’ I said.
‘It does if everyone hates him, doesn't it?’
‘Yes it does, I suppose.’
‘He told me he would kill you.
That's why I was so frightened for you.’
‘It's nice to know someone was,’ I said.
‘But why would Harvey kill me?’
‘You know why.’
‘No, I don't know why.’
‘You don't have to shout at me.’
‘No, I don't know why.’
‘Why couldn't you say it quietly the first time?
It's because you are checking up on him.’
‘You don't believe that?’
‘I do believe it.
You overplay your part.
You're always pretending you don't know who General Midwinter is and you don't know what the organization is.
No one could be as ignorant as you pretend to be.’
She waited for me to reply.
‘That gives me a chance to be a villain or a fool,’ I said.
Signe agreed.
I said, ‘Harvey thinks I am employed by Midwinter to check up on him?’
Signe pursed her lips at me.
‘Kiss, kiss,’ she said.
I went across to her and kissed her.
‘Do you call that a kiss?’ she said.
‘Make it do for now,’ I said.
‘General Midwinter says you are to move in here with me.
‘You are lying again, Signe.’
‘No, truly.
He doesn't like using hotel switchboards to transmit orders.
The Midwinter organization pays the rent for both my apartments — New York and Helsinki — so I can't argue when they send me guests.
I've prepared for you.
Come and see.’
I went into the bedroom.
There was a double bed with flowered sheets, and on the pillows a pair of pyjamas and a négligé.
‘Our boudoir,’ said Signe.
She opened a wardrobe and swept back the hangers to make room for my non-existent dozen suits.
I opened a cupboard and about fifty pairs of  Signe's shoes fell over me.
Signe clapped her hands and laughed.
‘I love shoes,’ she said.
‘I love shoes.’
She picked up the shoes in armfuls and stacked them away with obsessional care, keeping the toes carefully in line.
When she spoke it was to the shoes.
‘You will stay?’ she said anxiously.
‘I get awfully frightened at night.
The cats knock the garbage cans over and last week someone got into the front hall and smashed the mirror and the door.
That's why it looks so awful down there.
The police caught him, but his mother came round next day in a Jaguar and paid the landlord three hundred dollars not to prosecute.
You will stay, won't you?’
She wrapped her arms around me and sought my spine with her fingertips.
‘I wouldn't want you to be frightened at night,’ I said.
I went back to the hotel to collect my baggage, a quarter-full bottle of whisky, two paperback books —The Thirty Years War by Wedgwood and The Complete Guide to New York City — one worsted suit, four cotton oxfords, socks and underwear in one small fibre-board case.
The phone rang.
The same metallic voice spoke.
‘You will move into Miss Laine's apartment today,’ the voice said.
‘You will be going south for training within a few days.
If you require money record an affirmative now.’
‘I need money,’ I said.
‘Only machines don't need it.’
This time 1 rang off before the machine did.
It was an idyllic week-end.
Midwinter didn't call.
Harvey didn't try to kill me — as far as I know — and Signe and I wandered around Greenwich Village gawking and scoffing, eating and shopping and arguing without malice.
On a Saturday the Village is crowded: girls with dirty hair and men with pink pants and poodles.
Shops full of rude paintings, rustic sandals, cut-price records, any tie in the window 80 c.’ primitive jewellery and cold  storage in our own vaults $2 up.
frantic electric signs were ticking like wire brushes and the trumpet call of police sirens played a counter-melody to the bass gear-boxes of ancient buses.
On the corner a girl selling the Catholic Worker gave a cigarette to Socialism What It Means .
The sun, incandescent orange, dropped slowly on to pier 56 and made the buttes of mid-town Manhattan shine like fool's gold.
We had dinner in the Village: a french restaurant where the provençal dressing is warm ketchup, and it's all candlelight and striped aprons and waiters with waxed moustaches who talk like Maurice Chevalier.
‘Ow iz zat for madame et monsieur?’ the waiter said and left without waiting for a reply.
I said, ‘Evryzink is what we call in my countree zipreezingly ockay.’
Signe seemed very happy and my pleasure was watching her.
She wore a white dress that made her shoulders look even more tanned than they were.
Her hair gleamed like a hastily polished brass pot, its tiny dents reddish brown.
Her eyes were dark and carefully made darker but her lips were without lipstick and her face had only the merest dusting of powder.
‘I'm glad you talked me out of Poetry and Jazz.’
‘So am I,’ I said.
‘A nice restaurant or a settee is the best place to spend an evening.’
‘That's it,’ I said.
‘I met Harvey in a restaurant,’ she mused.
‘I was with a nice boy.
I wanted the sugar and rather than wait for the waiter to return or ask this boy to get it, I asked Harvey for the sugar.
Harvey was all alone.
I said, can I have the sugar and he picked up a knife from the table-top and pretended to carve his heart out, put it in the  sugar bowl and presented it to me.
I thought he was fun but I didn't take much notice especially since this boy I was with was angry.
The next moment the waiter came back to Harvey carrying a little cake with twenty-six candles — all alight — he put it down in front of Harvey and Harvey sang — quite loudly all by himself — Harvey sang ‘Happy Birthday to Me’ all through.
Then everyone there clapped and people sent him drinks and we all got talking.’
‘What then?’
‘We had a love affair.
Frantic.
for those first few weeks we couldn't keep our eyes off each other.
Couldn't keep our hands off each other.
And talk.
Obsessively.
Staring at each other while having dinner or being at a party, then go home, go to bed and talk.
Talk, make love a little.
Talk, talk as though you can tell each other everything you've ever done or seen or said or thought.
I can't tell you how I love when I love.
I'd just look into Harvey's eyes and there was a silent scream that drained me, like I had a baby inside me, that never stopped sobbing.
It was great but it ends.
It always ends.’
‘Does it?’
She smiled.
‘lt does when you are in love with a moody crackpot like Harvey.
Let's forget him.
Let's talk about you.
They'll send you for training to San Antonio, Texas.
Can I visit you there?’
‘You know more about it than I do,’ I said.
‘Sure, come and see me.’
‘Three weeks from tonight.
Nine thirty.
There's a Club on Houston Street.
They have to call it a club or they're not allowed to serve hard liquor.
If I write it down will you be sure to be there?’
‘I'll be there,’ I said.
‘That will be wonderful.
Now let's order champagne.
Pol Roger ‘55.
I will pay for it.’
‘You don't have to pay,’ I said and ordered it.
‘I love champagne.’
‘So you keep saying.
How about moving on to something else, shoes for instance.’
‘You are fishing.
I'll tell you what else I like.’
She thought deeply.
‘Champagne, hot scented baths, Sibelius, tiny kittens, very, very, very expensive underwear that you hardly know you're wearing, and skiing at night and going into the big stores on fifth Avenue and trying on all the three-hundred-dollar dresses and shoes and then saying that I don't like any of them — I do that quite often — and…’
She wet her lips with her tongue to indicate deep thought ‘…and always having a man madly in love with me — because that gives you confidence when you're mixing with people — and I like outsmarting men who try to outsmart me.’
‘Quite a list.’
The waiter brought the champagne and thumped it around in a bucket of ice to persuade us that it hadn't come out of the refrigerator.
It went pop, and Signe leaned forward into the candlelight so that all the customers could see her, and sipped at the champagne and narrowed her eyes at me in a gesture of passion that she had seen in some bad film.
I cranked the handle of an old-time movie camera and Signe sipped her champagne and the waiter said, ‘Izzz evryzink all right, madame?’ and Signe started coughing.
San Antonio
He loves me, he don't,
He'll have me, he won't,
He would if he could,
But he can't, so he don't.
NURSERY RHYME
17
I was the sole passenger.
I left New York in Midwinter's Jet-star.
The weather bureau was predicting light rain and snow flurries and the cirrus was thickening, but over San Antonio, Texas, three and a half hours later, the night was crystal clear.
The landscape was green.
The trees were dense with leaves.
The air clung like a warm face-cloth.
Men moved in the leisurely evening warmth like alligators across a mud-flat.
I loosened my shirt collar and watched a couple of generals being saluted by their chauffeurs.
On the seats there was a tall man in stetson and jeans and a Mexican girl listening to a Spanish station on her transistor radio and flipping the gatefold of Playboy .
‘You looking for Colonel Newbegin?’ called the man in the stetson.
He hadn't moved a muscle.
‘Yes,’ I said.
He stretched himself lazily and picked up my case.
On his shoulder a silk patch read, ‘Midwinter. facts for freedom.’
‘Let's go,’ he said.
He rolled a cigarette across the width of his mouth without using his hands.
I followed him.
I'd follow anyone who can do that.
Harvey was sitting in an olive-drab station-wagon.
Across the front of it was painted ‘Keep your distance’ in mirror writing.
We drove through the humid night and things flew into the beam of the headlights.
We headed north — away from the city on US 281 as far as State Highway 46.
At Bergheim — three houses and a gas station — we turned on to one of those narrow tracks that  don't even get a farm road numeral.
The driver took the road carefully as it dipped and turned, and forded rivers that shone like a newly tarred road and roared and pounded against the floor.
Large animals, drinking, bounded back into the undergrowth, blinded by our lights.
At one curve in the road the driver stopped and flashed his main beams.
A torch flashed.
We drove slowly to where a sentry stood.
He shone his hand-lamp into the car and then, without speaking, opened the gate across a side road.
In the flow of the headlights I read the notice, ‘Department of Agriculture Experimental Station.
Animal traps dangerous to you are set in this area.
Proceed no further.’
Then there was a skull and cross-bones and the word ‘Danger’ very large.
The signs were repeated every ten yards.
We drove two hundred yards and then the driver switched a dashboard control marked ‘garage doors’ which sent a radio recognition signal to the second compound.
The sentry there came out and flashed his lamp around, and then we entered a high steel-mesh fence that said ‘Department of Agriculture.
YOU are in danger.
Do not move.
Shout for assistance, there is a game warden near to you.
Danger 600 volts.’
The signs were illuminated by spot-lights which marked the fence-lines for miles in each direction.
‘Welcome to Texas,’ said Harvey.
The Brain was three buildings that looked single-storey from outside but they went deep into the rocky hillside.
Tinted glass filtered the bright morning sunlight and powered swivel shutters excluded it at will.
Harvey was dressed in a khaki uniform with colonel's insignia on the collar.
On his sleeve there was a red facts for freedom patch.
We walked past the Brain along a chalky white cart-track.
Here and there on the hillside I could see sheep and goats grazing among the wild flowers and stunted trees.
High above a trio of hawks faltered on the rising air and the only sound was the scraping of insects.
Harvey said, ‘All Midwinter personnel come here for training in intelligence work.
Some are management development students, they are between twenty-eight and thirty-six years old and they stay here for fifteen weeks.
Some are Advanced Management students between thirty-seven and fifty.
Their course lasts thirteen weeks.
At least eight per cent of them have previous intelligence experience, although we do recruit direct from other commercial organizations (especially ones that Midwinter has an interest in) and sometimes even from college.
They learn staightforward administration applied to intelligence work.
We show them some of the dirty ticks, but it's pretty elementary because none of those boys are likely to be used in any sort of field work.
They don't get much more out of it than they would from reading a James Bond paperback, but it makes them understand a few of the problems the field men face.
So that one day when they are sitting on their fat butts in frankfurt or Langley and some poor guy's written seven point nine two centimetre automatic rifle instead of seven point nine two millimetre, they won't want to fire him for bad writing.
Jesus it's hot.
Well that's the gut course, so they are called gut-men.
The Operations students — the field men — are called spitballs around here.
There's a spitball course going through now, you'll join it for a couple of days.’
Harvey scrambled up some roughly cut foot-holds, held on to a gnarled grey tree and offered me his other  hand.
At first sight this was like English countryside, but close to where you could see the baked cracked topsoil, the dead convoluted trees, bleached stones like animal skulls and huge pear cactus in bright yellow flower, close to the land was hard, dry and pitiless.
footnotes omitted
Harvey helped me up and pointed to a concrete runway just below us.
‘That's the strip.
We call that Longhorn Valley, so that's Longhorn Strip.
We can't get a large plane in there of course, but it's useful having our own field sometimes.’
He looked at his watch.
‘The hill we are on is called Loving Alto.
Alto is Mex for a bald-top hill and Loving was an old trail boss who first named it.’
Harvey sank down into the parched grass.
On the hillside facing us I could see four turkey vultures scavenging in the carcass of a raccoon.
‘Gee it's good to feel that hot sun,’ said Harvey.
A line of furry caterpillars played follow my leader across the path.
Harvey looked at his watch.
‘Above where the river shines,’ he said.
Out of the drone of insect life around us I could distinguish the sound of an aeroplane engine.
I followed his pointed finger and saw the plane, not very high above the horizon.
‘He'll hang out the laundry right across the valley,’ Harvey said.
Almost as he said it a parachute inflated under the plane.
‘First the conduction officer,’ said Harvey.
‘That gives the other students confidence.
Now they go.’
Six parachutes puffed like Indian smoke-signals across the sky.
‘They're going nicely,’ he said.
‘They'll be right on target.
We do three daylight drops, two at night.
The instructors are US Army Special Warfare Centre people from fort Bragg.
Really tough.’
‘That's nice,’ I said.
We watched the men bundle up their parachutes and move off through the dense undergrowth, chopping at it with jungle machetes.
Now and again there was a tiny puff of smoke and the smack  of a hand-grenade or a burst of machine-gun fire.
It didn't seem my sort of thing at all and I gave Harvey a glance to indicate it.
‘You'll enjoy it,’ Harvey said.
He walked on.
‘Down in the valley they say they found dinosaur tracks…’
‘Freeze.
Freeze,’ a shrill voice sang out.
I froze and so did Harvey.
It took me a full minute to recognize the soldier in the bush.
He had a tough tanned face and clear eyes.
He wore a mottled camouflage jacket and a lightweight stetson and carried an automatic rifle.
He moved slowly and cautiously through the dead roots and broken timber.
‘Newbegin and student Dempsey of the new intake,’ Harvey said.
The man with the rifle said, ‘Remove your index tag real slow.
Put it on the ground and back up.’
We removed the tags from our shirt fronts, put them on the ground and stepped backward.
The sentry picked up the tags, stared at the photos and at our faces.
‘Colonel Newbegin, sing out your number backwards.’
Harvey said, ‘308334003 AS/90.’
I said, ‘I don't have the slightest idea.’
‘He's today's intake,’ Harvey said.
‘Didn't 1 tell you?’
‘I suppose that's OK then,’ said the guard grudgingly.
‘I've seen you around before, Colonel Newbegin sir.’
The sentry brought the cards to us.
I said, ‘What kind of gun do you call that?’
‘The AR10,’ said Harvey.
‘Fairchild Aviation Armalite Division developed it, using aluminium and foamed plastics.
Seven hundred rounds per, at two and three-quarter thousand f.p.s.
Quite a baby, weighs nothing.’
He turned to the sentry.
‘Let him feel the weight of it.’
The sentry passed it to me.
‘Eight pounds.
fantastic?’
‘Fantastic.’
‘Twenty-round magazines using seven point six two NATO cartridge.
See the new-type flash suppressor.
It's quite a baby the AR 10.’
Harvey took it and swung it round experimentally.
His face tightened, his teeth bit into his lower lip.
‘Raise ‘em,’ he yelled.
We didn't move fast enough.
‘Raise 'em I said.
Get your goddamn pinkies grabbing cloud.’
He turned upon the sentry.
‘Hit dirt,’ he said.
‘Twenty press-ups.
Twenty.
Count ‘em.
Not you, stupid,’ he said to me.
‘You didn't turn over your gun.’
The sentry looked mournful.
He was a Mexican boy about eighteen years old.
They were employed around the compound as permanent sentries.
‘Twenty press-ups,’ Harvey said again.
‘Harvey,’ I said.
‘Let it go.
It's too hot for playing at Belsen.’
Harvey looked doubtful, but he let me take the gun from him.
‘Here, kid,’ I said and threw it to him.
The sentry took advantage of the pause to slip away into the undergrowth.
‘You shouldn't have done that,’ Harvey said resentfully.
‘Come on, Harvey.
You're the pleasure-loving, all-laughing boy who is successful by accident.
This pursuit of efficiency isn't your speed at all.’
‘Perhaps you are right,’ said Harvey.
Then he raised his voice.
‘Now from here you can see the buildings more clearly.
See how the three largest buildings surround the little flat windowless one.
Kind of arrogant that little building looks, doesn't it?
That's where we are going now.
We call that the Brain.
The other buildings are schoolrooms and a gymnasium for the spitballs and gut-men.
Those walkways join the three buildings together because we sometimes have cosmics here.
That is to say, students whose faces we don't want the other students to see.’
‘Man in the iron mask,’ I said.
‘Right,’ said Harvey.
‘Next stop the Bastille.’
The only part of the Brain building above ground level was a reception hall.
The outer doors were as heavy as those in a bank vault and inside the air was clean, dry and quite cold.
To the left there was a long line of cubicles with coloured doors and large numeral on each.
Two uniformed men sat inside an armour-glass fishbowl in the centre of the floor.
Inside the turret there were twelve small TV screens by means of which the guards monitored the approaches to the building and knew when to open the electric door.
I could see the tiny figures of Harvey and myself moving on two of the screens as we walked across the floor.
It was white, and so gave optimum visibility on the screen.
‘Go ahead,’ the second guard said.
Harvey took off his identity tag and inserted it into a machine like a railway station weighing machine upon which he stepped.
Harvey explained: ‘The identity tags are changed every week.
The metal strip at the side of the card holds an electrical charge — like a piece of recording tape; this machine reads that, to make sure it's of the current pattern, while at the same time photographing me and my tag and weighing me.
If one of those things doesn't t ally with the record of me on the machine, then the doors will lock — including the doors to the elevators — and alarms will sound in about twenty places on the compound as well as in New York.’
The guard said, ‘Cubicles twenty-one and twenty.’
‘What now, Harvey?’
I said.
‘You go in the cubicle — it's quite large — undress and  step into the shower.
The shower will stop automatically and warm air blowers will dry you off.
You will then change into a set of white overalls which are made of paper.
Leave all your belongings in the clothes you take off, the door will automatically lock behind you.
Don't keep your wristwatch on because the last doorway you step through will be a counter.
The smallest item will trip it and start an uproar, so don't forget anything.
Your glasses and keys you put through a small slot.
You'll see the notice about it.’
‘In three languages?’
I asked.
‘Eight,’ said Harvey.
Harvey and I came out the other side looking like a couple of spooks.
‘The whole building,’ Harvey explained, ‘is sealed and dust-free.’
We entered an elevator and went down.
‘Stand stil,’ said a sign on the wall opposite the elevator exit.
Harvey said, ‘That's a TV monitor.
The guard at the entrance can watch who is moving from floor to floor.’
We stood still.
Harvey picked up a green phone and said, ‘Visit 382 on pink level.’
The sign flashed the word ‘Cleared’.
We went down a long corridor to a door bearing a sign ‘Latvia pilot operation’.
Inside there were long banks of computers making a low musical noise like a child's spinning top.
‘These are operational,’ Harvey said.
‘Riga is the pilot operation, that's why we are watching it so closely.
These machines are programming our operation there.
Each and every act of every agent comes out of this machine.’
Harvey told me how each part of the computer was named after a section of the human brain: the Medulla, Pons and Midbrain.
He showed me how the items of  information called ‘neurons’ were filtered by the ‘synapses’.
I said yes to everything, but to me machines tend to look alike.
Harvey led me to a room which he unlocked with a key.
It was a large room with a dozen or more men pushing switches and loading reels of tape into grey machines.
Some of the men wore earphones with dangling plugs which they occasionally plugged into a machine, nodding professionally like doctors sounding a chest.
‘Nu think,’ said Harvey.
He pointed at a row of eight doors along the far wall.
‘It's an indoctrination laboratory.’
‘Go into number four,’ said one of the attendants.
‘We're going to steam him in a couple of minutes.’
Inside the door number four was a light-lock and beyond it a dark cubicle like a flight-deck of a large airliner.
There was a curious smell of spice in the room.
A man sat in a low leather bucket seat and watched a TV screen.
Some pictures were in colour and some were black and white.
Some of the pictures were stills, some were movie.
There was a picture of a village street, the houses were battered clapboard and there were a lot of horses around.
On another TV screen at the side there was an endless stream of associative words in Russian script and Latvian: horse, house, people, street.
They were stream-of-consciousness words, Harvey explained later, a constant enrichment of the students' vocabulary.
Over a loudspeaker came a voice speaking Latvian, but Harvey handed me earphones that carried an English translation.
‘…until you were sixteen,’ the commentary was saying.
‘Then your uncle Manfred arrived.
He was a soldier.’
A photo of Manfred came on the screen.
‘That's how Uncle Manfred looked in 1939 when you were sixteen.
You saw him again in 1946.
He looked like this.
You saw him for the last time in 1959.
He looked like  this.
Now I'm going to stream Uncle Manfred's life for you, but before I do here are some questions.’
The associative screen stopped its flow of words.
‘These two bottles on the screen, what do they contain?’
‘Green top is yoghurt, silver top is milk,’ said the student.
‘Good.’
The bottles disappeared and a street scene appeared.
‘What is the name of this cinema and what was showing there at Easter week-end?’
‘I never go to the cinema,’ said the student.
‘Very well,’ said the commentator, ‘but you must have noticed the posters.
Isn't this where you line up for the tram coming home from work?’
There was a long pause.
‘I'm sorry,’ said the student.
‘We'll have to do local geography again,’ said the commentator.
‘We'll leave it for now and stream Uncle Manfred a few times.’
Pictures of a man were flashed upon the screen in rapid succession.
They were in chronological order and I saw him grow older before my eyes.
The lines on his face and the slope of his eyes varied as the pictures changed.
It was an uncanny thing to watch.
I shivered.
Harvey noticed me.
‘That's right,’ he said.
‘That's how it makes me feel.
Mind you, that's just a short sequence they are streaming.
Later they will stream longer and longer episodes, until a whole life whistles past in about three minutes.
It goes right into the subconscious of course; no memorizing involved.’
‘Again,’ said the voice, and the screen showed the whole stream of pictures through again.
‘In five days,’ said Harvey when we were outside the cubicle, ‘we can indoctrinate a man so that he really believes his cover story better than he believes his own memory.
By the time that man gets to Riga he will know  his way around the town and every detail of his life from the day his father gave him a light-brown teddy-bear, to the movie show he watched last night.
He doesn't need to remember facts and figures, he actually sees the things and people of his cover-story life.
We photograph special set-ups, his motor cycle, his dog, we use actors to make a movie of his relatives sitting in the rooms where he grew up.
We show him photos and a movie of his home town when he was a kid.
By the time they leave here no one could crack them, they believe their own cover story, they are schizophrenic.
Did you notice the smell in there?
It's always the same temperature and humidity and has that scent so that the mind is conditioned by environment.’
Harvey stepped up to a door marked ‘Recreation’.
‘What about a little recreation?’ he asked.
‘This is where we keep the curvy blonde.’
I said, ‘I knew this was science fiction.’
‘By the time those indoctrination students have done their training they deserve a break,’ said Harvey.
‘They just stay here twenty-four hours per day talking nothing but the language of their region from the minute they wake up, till the time they go to bed in those tiny cubicles over there.
Even then they don't get a break, because they are woken suddenly at night and asked questions in some language they are not supposed to speak.
If they even look like they are going to answer they get an automatic extra twelve hours.
They learn fast, believe me.
They learn fast.’
Inside the recreation room there was a bar-counter with coffee, doughnuts, iced milk, hot soup, Alka Seltzer, bread and a toaster.
Harvey poured two glasses of milk and put two doughnuts on to paper plates.
We sat in fibre-glass easy chairs.
There were a dozen magazines, a  TV set, four telephones — one red one marked ‘emergency’— and a small illuminated panel which gave a current weather report.
‘Low today 70° Downtown San Antonio 79° Humidity 92% Pressure 29.6 partly cloudy, Wind from South-East at 12 m.p.h.’
There was no blonde except for a lady on the TV who was showing us Saniflush in the new unbreakable plastic bottle.
‘It's complicated, eh?’
Harvey asked between bites on the doughnut.
‘That's the understatement of the year,’ I said.
‘Cost over a billion dollars,’ Harvey said.
‘Over a billion.
The old man — General Midwinter — has got a private suite at seven floors below ground level.
I'm not allowed to show you in there but that's quite a terrific place too.
He even has a swimming pool there.
The pumps that change the water in that pool cost three thousand dollars each.
It's fantastic; the lighting is arranged so that you'd think it was daylight down there.
He can see the surrounding country on colour TV if he wants to.
Really fantastic; sixteen guest bedrooms, each with a bathroom as large as my sitting-room.’
‘It's nice to know that when he survives World War Three he'll have guests.’
‘I'd sooner be a crisp than survive.
I had four months on permanent duty here.
I went out of my mind.’
‘Yes,’ I said.
‘I don't want to bore you,’ Harvey said, ‘but you should understand that these heaps of wire can practically think — linear programming — which means that instead of going through all the alternatives they have a hunch which is the right one.
What's more, almost none of them work by binary notation — the normal method for computers — because that's just yes/no stuff.
(If you can only store yeses and noes it takes seven punch holes to record the  number ninety-nine.)
These machines use tiny chips of ceramic which store electricity.
They store any amount from one to nine.
That's why — for what it does — this whole set-up is so small.’
‘Yes,’ I said.
We finished our milk.
‘Back to the salt mines,’ said Harvey, standing up.
‘And if you want to do me a real favour, stop saying yes, for Christ's sake.’
Harvey went through two doors and down a moving staircase.
‘This is what we call the Corpus Callosum; it's the most complex computer in existence today.
The machines in this building cost over a hundred million dollars to develop and the machine equipment and construction set Midwinter back nearly as much again.
These operators are all college graduates with postgraduate qualifications in either maths or a similar subject.’
We walked through a small data room.
Operators were using punch machines and then transferring the results on to tape.
Two men were standing under a no-smoking notice trying to hide a burning cigarette, and one college graduate with a postgraduate qualification was sitting under a sign that said ‘Think Tall’ reading an illustrated journal called Voodoo monsters invade earth .
‘You saw the operational machines,’ said Harvey.
‘They are working on the Latvia project.
If the Latvia project is successful, then the total resources of the Brain will come into use.’
He paused before a locked door marked ‘Main Project’.
Two guards stood outside, khaki-clad and motionless like shop-window dummies.
They exchanged code words with Harvey, then each of them opened his shirt and fished out a small key on a neck-chain.
There were three key-holes marked, Alpha, Beta and Kappa.
Harvey produced a key for the third and a red light came on over each lock.
Harvey opened the door.
This room  was gigantic: like the hangar deck of an aircraft carrier.
The banks of computer machines stretched away into the distance and there were only a few dim lights glowing.
Our footsteps echoed as though there were other people walking to meet us from the far end.
The machines were only ticking over.
‘Non operational’ the plastic ticket said.
Over the banks of machines were signs: ‘District 21 including Odessa’.
‘District 34 as far as environs of Kursk’, ‘Moscow Central and dispersed centres of Government whatever their location’, ‘Coastal Zone 40’.
The machines hummed and snick-snicked as if they had been warned to keep their voices down.
The thin oil that coated each vital component, the enamel and metal tapes were warm enough to aromatize the air as fast as the air-conditioning changed it.
The smell was sobering and efficient like ether and antiseptic, as though this was the casualty ward of a vast hospital run by machines.
‘This operation in Latvia,’ I found myself speaking in a whisper, ‘what is it doing that these machines will do for the rest of Russia?’
‘Usual thing,’ said Harvey.
‘Sabotage of communications, cache of arms, instruction in guerilla warfare, preparation of landing fields and drop zones, clandestine radio, beach reconnaissance, underwater demolition, contact with snips and aircraft, then G-2 work for the military.
Usual stuff.’
‘Usual stuff?’
I said.
‘If that's usual stuff, for God's sake don't ever try to surprise me.
This is total war looking for a place to wage!’
‘Stop worrying,’ said Harvey.
‘It's solely for Midwinter.
Three-dimensional chess, that's how to look at it.
Three-dimensional chess for a millionaire.’
‘Fool's mate,’ I said.
18
Harvey lived with his wife and two children a few miles outside town on the road to Laredo and the Mexican border.
I drove through the city instead of round the loop.
It's not a typical American town, not one of those low modern places with chrome and neon and glass; the Alamo City is beat-up, chewed at the edges and in need of paint.
I passed the second-hand clothes shops and the sign that said ‘Used books and guns’ on Commerce Street.
The Texans share the town with Mexicans, and they share it with soldiers.
It was seven P.M.; already military police were sniffing around the clubs and bars of what Texans call ‘occupied Mexico’.
Out on the far side of the town signs were jammed down the highway: Liquors, Drugs, Breakfast all day, Speed radar control, Watch for deer roaming at night, Exit, fasten seat belt, Mexiteria; all you eat $.10, Hot Pizza to go, Gas, Regular 25.9, Tomatoes 35c.
I watched for the gas station on Harvey's map and turned off on to an unmade road that kicked up stones against the underside of the Rambler and laid a film of dust across the tinted windscreen.
There were whole fields of dead tree-stumps here, like a World-War-One battlefield.
In places the topsoil had broken, revealing bleached stones that were luminous in the fading light.
A long way ahead of me, on a narrow farm road, were half a dozen cows.
A man in a pick-up truck slammed his hand against the door and shouted ‘wow-wow’.
The sound was louder than the bus of cars along the highway I had left.
My tyres rumbled across a cattle  grating; I watched for a marker board of the Screw Worm Quarantine Line.
I turned there and followed the twin scars that marked the track to the house.
The slope was covered with white and yellow wild flowers, and near to the house was a cluster of small trees.
The house was narrow, transparent and bright with yellow light.
One end was supported on steel legs and the other end bit into the rock.
Under the high side there was a grey Buick that I had seen Harvey driving and a long black Lincoln Continental that looked like the President of the United States had come over for pizza and beer.
Harvey waved from the balcony and dropped ice cubes into a large glass.
There was a scent of wild flowers and grass cooling after a hot day.
Harvey's two kids were chasing around the trees in their pyjamas.
Mercy Newbegin called to the kids, ‘C'mon now; time for bed,’ and there were more Indian war whoops and whistles and cries of ‘Another five minutes, Mom, huh?’
Mercy Newbegin said, ‘OK, but exactly five now.’
She came through into the sitting-room where I was nursing a martini.
The house had a simple luxury.
It was little more than a glass-sided army hut, but there was plenty of mahogany, ebony and zebra skin, and a tall cone of polished copper in the centre of the floor became a fireplace at the touch of a switch.
Harvey was lounging full length across the sheepskin seats that followed the wall around the corner.
Mercy sat down next to him.
‘Did you see the Brain?’
Mercy asked me.
She was wearing lacy raw silk pyjamas like people wear in drink advertisements.
‘Did he see it,’ Harvey said.
‘He had the full transfers — between-airports-taxes-tips-and-porters-included-plan-A tour.
And he took it like a hero.’
Mercy said, ‘I don't know why you have to speak like that, Harvey.
Surely you're interested in the way the Brain works.
It's your job after all.’
Harvey grunted.
Mercy called, ‘Are you children in bed yet?’
There was a jumble of children's voices, then the smaller child looked round the door.
‘Is Simon in here, Daddy?’
Harvey said, ‘No I don't believe so.
Simon's the cat,’ he explained to me.
‘He was a war profiteer.’
The child said, ‘He wasn't, Daddy.’
Harvey said, ‘He was, Hank, your mother and I weren't going to tell you.’
Harvey turned to me.
‘During the Korean war see, this cat…’
Hank said, ‘No he was not,’ very loudly; he was angry and pleased both at once.
Harvey said very reasonably, ‘Then why does he go around wearing that ankle-length overcoat with the astrakhan collar?
And smoking cigars.
And smoking cigars.
Explain that if you can.’
Hank said, ‘He wasn't a war profiteer, Daddy.
Simon doesn't smoke cigars.’
Harvey said, ‘Not when you are around maybe, but when he goes across to see the Wilsons’ cat…’
Mercy said, ‘Cut it out, Harvey.
You'll give my children a complex before you're through.’
Harvey said, ‘Your mother doesn't want you to know about Simon's cigars.’
Mercy said, ‘Come along, Hank.
Bath time.’
She marched him out.
I could hear the child saying, ‘Candy cigars, Mommy, or real ones?’
Harvey said, ‘Mercy's got a kind of thing about, the old man — Midwinter — she feels she has to support him.
You know what I mean?’
‘He seems to rely on her,’ I said.
‘You mean his hand.
He's a showman, Midwinter.
Never lose sight of that.
He's a pitchman from way back.’
Mercy Newbegin came back into the room and closed the sliding door.
‘There are times when you make me scream, Harvey,’ she said.
‘So scream, honey,’ Harvey said.
‘You know more ways to fold up my marriage than any other man living.’
‘Well, that's only right, honey, I'm your husband.
What is it you need, a little more romance?’
‘I need a good deal less.’
Harvey said to me, ‘Women are never romantic.
Only men are romantic.’
Mercy said, ‘It's a little difficult for a woman to be romantic about her husband's amours.’
She smiled and poured Harvey another drink.
The tension was gone.
Mercy smoothed Harvey's hair.
‘I went to a sale today, honey.’
‘Buy anything?’
‘Well they had this sale of nylons twenty-eight cents below what I usually pay.
Two women tore the nylons I was wearing — really good ones — another dragged a baby carriage across my ninety-dollar shoes.
Net gain: one dollar sixty-eight.
Net loss: one pair of two-dollar nylons and one pair of ninety-dollar shoes.’
The screen slid back.
Hank said, ‘I'm washed, Mommy.’
Mercy said, ‘Say good-night quickly then.’
Hank said, ‘Simon wasn't really a war profiteer, was he, Daddy?’
‘No, son, of course, he wasn't,’ Harvey said in a kindly tone.
‘He was just doing his bit towards victory.’
Harvey turned to me suddenly.
‘We have another cat named Boswell: a labour leader.
He's organized every cat in the  neighbourhood except Simon.
Boy is he ever a crook.
He takes more kick-backs than…’
Hank got very excited.
He yelled, ‘He's not, Daddy.
He's not, Daddy.
He's not, he's not, he's not…’
Mercy picked Hank up and put him over her shoulder.
‘Off to bed,’ she said.
Hank yelled, ‘You'll give me a complex, Daddy, before you're through.’
Dinner was set on the patio.
from this end of the house — the end on legs — there was a magnificent view.
Through the cleavage of two low hills the lights of San Antonio rippled in the warm rising air.
Harvey said, ‘I'm a city-boy, but this cow-country has a lot of magic.
Imagine great herds of long-horns — perhaps three thousand head — walking across that landscape north, to where there was plenty of money and an appetite for beef.
This was the starting point for those cattle drives.
Tough guys like Charles Goodnight, John Chisholm and Oliver Loving pioneered routes to the railheads at Cheyenne, Dodge City, Ellsworth and Abilene.
You know what sort of journey that would be?’
‘I've no idea,’ I said.
‘I did a trip along the Goodnight Train to fort Sumner, then took the Loving Train to Cheyenne.
That was in 1946.
I bought a war-surplus jeep and followed the Pecos River just like Loving did.
from here to Cheyenne is nine hundred miles as the crow flies, the trail is nearer fourteen hundred.
I took it real slow.
I did it in ten days, but in 1867 Loving took three months to do it.
Rustlers, outlaws, storms that had rivers breaking their banks, Indians, droughts.
These trail bosses…’
‘Is Harvey playing cowboys and Indians again?’
Mercy said.
‘Help me with the trolley, Harvey.’
‘It's interesting,’ I said.
‘Don't let him hear you say that,’ she said, ‘or he'll get his guns out and demonstrate the ‘Border spin’and the ‘Road Agent's shift’.’
‘The Border shift and the Road Agent's spin,’ Harvey corrected wearily.
‘Get it right.’
We sat down and Harvey speared fried chicken on to the three plates.
‘Yes sir,’ he said.
‘The end of the trail was little old Dodge where Earp would challenge any man wearing his plough-handles north of the railroad tracks.’
‘Look what you're doing, Harvey.
Serve the food properly or let me do it.’
Harvey said, ‘Yes mam.
The kinda hombres who'd raise hell and put a plank under it…’
‘You haven't opened the wine, Harvey.
The chicken will be cold if you don't stop it.’
‘Let me open the wine,’ I said.
‘I wish you would, Mr Dempsey.
Harvey gets so excited sometimes.
He's just like a big chid.
But I love him.’
I opened the wine carefully; it was a very fine Chamberlin.
‘Quite a wine,’ I said.
‘We made sure it was a good one.
Harvey said you knew about Burgundies.’
‘I said he liked them,’ Harvey corrected.
‘What's the difference?’ said Mercy without wishing an answer.
Mercy Newbegin was a good-looking woman who looked even better in the light of the flickering candles.
Her frame was small, her arms looked frail and very white against the raw silk.
Women would say she had ‘good bones’.
Her skin was tight across her ivory face and although one suspected that the tautness was maintained by a beauty parlour, it didn't lessen the harmony of the  face, in which brown eyes seemed bigger than they really were, like a sun at sunset.
She was a silk-and-satin girl; it was hard to imagine her in denim and cotton.
‘Doesn't that General Midwinter have style?’ she said.
‘He has his own train.
He has houses in Paris, London, frankfurt and Hawaii.
They say the servants prepare food and set his table every day in each of these houses just in case he arrives.
Isn't that something?
And the plane — you came down in it — did you ever know anyone with two four-motor jet planes for private use?’
‘No,’ I said.
‘It makes me discontented, the life he lives.
Here I am stuck in Texas for weeks on end.
The droughts make the chiggers unbearable and the floods bring out the rattlesnakes and copperheads…’
‘Grab some chicken,’ Harvey said, ‘while it's still hot.’
Mercy handled the porcelain and silver with her elegant hands and measured out the wild rice and caesar salad.
Mercy gave me a chance to stare deep into her limpid brown eyes.
‘I'll bet even your Queen doesn't have two four-motor jet planes for her private use.
One of them with interior décor of a nineteenth-century sailing clipper.
Even your Queen…’
‘You'd better not get into a hassle with this guy,’ Harvey interrupted.
‘Maybe he doesn't know a squeeze play from a loud foul, but once he senses he's being got at he can be a vicious SOB.’
Mercy gave me a smile made of homogenized gossamer, ‘I'm sure it's not true.’
‘That's just the two of us then,’ I said and Harvey laughed.
‘You British are such clever losers,’ Mercy said.
‘It comes with practice,’ I said.
‘Let me tell you about this guy,’ said Harvey pointing a  thumb at me.
‘The first time I ever saw him was in frankfurt.
He was sitting in a new white Jensen sports car that was covered in mud, with a sensational blonde, sensational.
He was wearing very old clothes, smoking a Gauloise cigarette and listening to a Beethoven quartet on the car radio, and I thought, ‘Oh boy, just how many ways can you be a snob simultaneously.’
Well this guy…’ he paused for a moment to remember the name I was using, ‘well this guy Dempsey knew.’
‘I can never remember names,’ Mercy said.
‘I remember when I was at college men would phone me and I wouldn't have any idea who they were.
So I would say, ‘What kind of car do you have now?’ and that would help me to remember.
lt would also help me to decide whether I should go out with them.’
Mercy laughed delicately.
‘Husbands are a by-product of marriage,’ said Harvey.
‘A waste product,’ corrected Mercy Newbegin.
She laughed and touched Harvey's arm to show that she didn't mean it.
‘I keep telling Harvey to sell that Buick.
Can you imagine what people think, with him in a Buick?
Especially with General Midwinter thinking so highly of him.
A Buick just isn't us, Harvey.’
‘It isn't you, you mean,’ said Harvey.
‘You could go to work in my Lincoln,’ said Mercy.
‘That has style.’
‘I like the Buick,’ said Harvey.
‘Harvey is so anxious that we live on his income.
Why, it's so foolish.
It's sinful pride.
I've told him: sinful pride and it's me and my children who suffer.’
‘You don't suffer,’ Harvey said.
‘You still buy your Mainbocher dresses, you still have your horses…’
‘On Long Island,’ said Mercy.
‘I don't have them here.’
‘So you go home to Long Island once a month,’ said Harvey.
‘You go to St Moritz every February, Paris for the Spring collections, you are in Venice in June, at Ascot in July…’
‘With my money, darling.
I don't take it out of your housekeeping.’
She laughed.
She had perfectly proportioned features and perfectly proportioned hands and feet and small even teeth that flashed as she smiled.
When the conversation deserved to be punctuated she threw back her head and gave a perfectly proportioned peal of carefully modulated laughter.
She turned to me, ‘I don't take it out of his housekeeping,’ she said and laughed again.
19
At six forty-five the following morning my visit to the Brain began in earnest.
In the mess hall I had orange juice, cereal, ham and eggs and coffee.
There was scarcely any time for a cigarette before we were hustled over to the equipment store.
We each got six khaki shirts and pants, one belt, one knife with knuckle-duster handle, socks and sets of underwear and a lightweight stetson.
We changed into these outfits and assembled in classroom IB at seven forty-five A.M. Each uniform shirt had a large red shoulder patch with a white grid like three capital fs jammed together.
On my shirt Harvey had arranged that I wore the word ‘observer’, which meant I was able to remember a prior appointment when the going got rough.
The badge meant ‘facts for freedom’, the instructor explained.
He was a crew-cut Harvard man with sleeves rolled up and collar buttoned down.
Around the room there were signs that said ‘Think Tall’.
Every classroom had at least one of those signs in it.
The foreign students spent a lot of time having the meaning of that slogan explained to them.
I don't know if they ever fully understood it.
I didn't.
In other parts of the building there were signs saying ‘50% of the USA is Communist dominated’, ‘Pornography and titillation are the weapons of Communism’ and ‘Without you the USA will become a province of a world-wide Soviet system’.
Neither the instructors nor the other students knew anyone's real name, or even what they were giving as their name.
We were given numbers.
The first nine days  of instruction (there were no days off —‘Communism doesn't stand down on Sundays’) were devoted to desk learning.
Geography, with special attention to the disposition of the Communist bloc and the free World.
History of the Communist party, Marxism, Leninism, Stalinism, Materialism inside the USSR.
Class Structure of foreign countries.
Strength of Communist Party in various foreign countries.
On the tenth day eight of the men on my course went to spend three days studying photography, four did locks and keys and seven went to study Roman Catholicism.
(They were agents who would find their work easier if they posed as Catholics.)
The rest of us had a series of lectures on Russian and Latvian etiquette, literature, architecture, religion and recognition of uniforms and fighting vehicles of the Soviet Army.
We were then given a simple exam which consisted of crossing out stupid answers in order to leave the least stupid one.
On the fourteenth day we moved to a different section of the training building.
This was to be Active Training.
I nursed my damaged finger, and showed it to anyone who wanted me to join in the rough stuff.
Each course had a ‘conduction officer’ who stayed with it all through the training.
The training included knife work, cliff-climbing, gun-firing, plastic explosive, railway-destruction, night exercises, map-reading and five parachute drops: three by daylight and two at night.
Apart from a Negro and a brace of Bavarians all the students were on the best side of thirty and they could run rings round us older men who saw only dubious advantages in agents who could run, jump and do forward rolls.
I had three days of Active Training.
I had strained a muscle in my back, one of my toes looked septic, my finger was worse, and I was fairly certain that one of my  jacket crowns was loose.
Mind you, I'm always fairly certain that one of my jacket crowns is loose.
I was probing around with my tongue and trying to decide about this when the phone by my bed rang.
It was Signe calling from downtown San Antonio.
‘You won't forget our dinner date tonight?’
‘Of course not,’ I said, although I had forgotten.
‘The Burnt Potato Club at nine thirty.
We'll have a drink and decide where to go.
Right?’
‘Right.’
The Burnt Potato is a bar on Houston Street, in downtown San Antonio.
Outside there is a scrollwork of pink neon that says ‘Striptease.
Show now on.
Twelve girls’.
In the doorway there is a royal flush of girlie-pictures.
I opened the door.
The long room was dark, but a tiny light behind the bar showed the bartender which shot-glass held a full measure.
I took a seat at the bar and a girl with sequin nipples nearly trod on my hand.
The music ended and the girl took a bow and disappeared behind some plastic curtains.
The barman said, ‘S'it gonbee?’ and I ordered a Jack Daniels.
There were two girls near the juke-box but neither was Signe.
My drink came, and a girl's head came through the plastic curtains and shouted, ‘Nineteen jay’ to one of the girls at the juke-box.
The record player moved convulsively and loud beat music began.
The stripper gyrated slowly upon the tiny square of painted hardboard at the end of the bar.
She unzipped her dress and hung it decorously on a coat-hanger.
Then she removed her underwear without overbalancing — a feat for which she was applauded — and did a mammary swivelling walk along the bar-top.
I moved my hand away.
The rhythm and movement  became more orgiastic until both ended in a sudden breathless silence.
Another girl stepped out.
The bartender said, ‘What you think of the show?’
He gave me my drink and a membership card.
I said, ‘It's like eating chocolate with the wrapper still on.’
‘That's the trouble,’ said the bartender.
He nodded.
I said, ‘Did you have a blonde girl in here about nine thirty?’
‘Hey is your name Dempsey?’
‘Yes,’ I said.
He passed me a note that was propped behind a bottle of Long John.
The note said, ‘Urgent Sachmeyer's’, then there was an address over in the Mexican sector near the expressway.
It was written in lipstick.
As I put the note in my pocket the door swung open and two military policemen came into the bar.
Their white caps and batons shone in the soft light reflected from the stripper's flesh.
They watched the girl for a moment, walked softly behind the row of men at the bar, then slid gently and silently into the street.
‘Your doll?’ asked the bartender.
He didn't wait for a reply.
‘Great doll.’
‘Yes,’ I said.
‘See my name is Callaghan from the old country,’ he said.
‘Yes,’ I said.
‘Well I'm going to move along now.’
‘She's a joker that girl of yours.
Her friend came in and said ‘Reach for the sky’ and pretended he had a gun and she played along with him right up to the time they left together.
He was making all kinds of gags too.
She wrote that note while pretending to look in her handbag.
They're real crazy friends, your friends.
I like a sense of humour.
You can't get along without it.
Especially in my job.
Why take just the other day…hey, you didn't finish your Jack Daniels.’
The address Signe had written was south of Milam Square.
Behind the Banana and produce Company a derelict building was a-flutter with torn posters, ‘first choice for District Judge Papa Schwartz’, ‘Re-elect Sanders to legislature’, ‘free parking for funeral Home’.
The streets were jammed tight with narrow shop fronts and grimy cafés.
Religious statuettes and rat-traps shared a shop-window with dog-eared movie magazines and loaded dice.
I found the shop I wanted; an open Bible and a quote from it in Spanish written across the glass in white-wash.
A large plastic sign in the doorway said ‘Sachmeyer.
Dentist.
First floor up.
Go up.’
I went up.
There was a big plain-fronted wooden door with a sign that said ‘Come in’.
It was locked.
I felt along the ledge at the top of the door and sure enough the key was there.
I let myself in.
The first room was a waiting-room, a ramshackle place where grey stuffing oozed from knife slashes across the plastic seats.
I went into the surgery.
It was a large room, with two windows, which flashed with neon from the sign outside.
The neon sign made little clicks as it changed colour.
In the alternate pink and blue light I saw trays full of forceps and scalers, mouth lamps, mirrors and drills and two trolleys with more of them.
There was an X-ray machine, rolls of cotton wool balanced upon the water-heater, matrix holders and impression trays, and small glass shelves smiling with false teeth.
There was a huge adjustable chair with one of those disc lamps above it.
In the dentist chair there was a man.
His body slumped lifelessly like a torn rag doll.
His head had slipped out of the supports and his hands almost touched the floor.
He was a large man with a hooked nose and a deep-lined, worried-looking face.
From his mouth crawled a long, dead centipede of dried blood.
He was pink and then blue and then pink and then blue.
A  motor-cycle cop with his siren on went roaring along the elevated expressway that was level with the surgery window.
The siren died away into the hot distant night.
I went close to the body.
In the lapel there was an enamel badge with the FFF symbol.
I don't know how long I remained staring at him but I was disturbed by the noise of voices in the waiting-room.
I picked up a dental chisel and resolved to sell my life dearly.
‘Liam.
Is that you, darling?’
It was Signe's voice.
‘Yes,’ I said, hoarsely.
‘What are you doing in the dark, dearest?’ she said, swinging into the room and switching all the lights on.
Harvey was right behind her.
‘We were waiting for you downstairs,’ he said.
‘Didn't expect you would prefer it up here with the molars.’
He laughed as though that was a particularly witty thing to say.
There was another man behind Harvey who took off his jacket and slipped into a white coat.
‘I don't think I'd better join you,’ he said in a heavy German accent.
‘This fellow will be coming round any moment now.’
Signe said, ‘Look at Liam's face.’
‘Thought you'd discovered a vile plot?’
Harvey asked flippantly.
‘Dr Sachmeyer does the teeth of the American students at the Brain,’ Signe said.
‘You can spot a man's nationality from looking at his dental work.
Dr Sachmeyer has to give them European mouths.’
‘I'm starved,’ said Harvey.
‘Shall we have Chinese food or Mexican?
Git along.’
He pointed his fingers like pistols and Signe raised her hands.
‘Dinner on me,’ said Harvey.
‘Maverick limey has negotiated the hell-fire of the Brain and the almighty trail-boss Midwinter has summoned him for a special assignment.’
‘What sort of assignment?’
I asked.
‘Assignment Danger.
Da-da-da-di-da-da,’ said Harvey, imitating the opening chords of a TV serial.
‘What kind of danger?’
I asked although I had already decided that Harvey was a little drunk.
‘Being with the duchess,’ said Harvey, indicating Signe who struck him playfully.
I had the idea that they had been quarrelling and hadn't quite made it up.
‘That's the kind of danger I can handle,’ I said.
Harvey's hunger got the better of him only fifty yards down the street and even though Signe was keen to go downtown Harvey had his way.
It was a wide-open Mexican restaurant where the menu was painted across the window.
The TV high in the corner was tuned to KWEX and the Spanish commentator was getting as frantic as the fighters.
Below the screen, oblivious of the carnage, sat a group of downtowners radiating Guerlain and Old Spice and mixing with real people.
Harvey ordered the complex Mexican food and it arrived promptly.
Harvey was clowning around pretending to be a gunman, which was his way of being sarcastic to me.
Signe was being reserved and held my arm tightly all the time, as though she was frightened of Harvey.
‘What are you fidgeting around for?’
Harvey asked her.
‘It's so hot in here.
Do you think I could go to the powder room and take off my girdle?’ she said.
‘Go ahead,’ said Harvey.
‘Have a good time,’ but Signe didn't move.
She was staring at me.
The word ‘girdle’ solved a problem.
The man in the dentist's chair was the hook-nosed girdle salesman, Fragolli, who had been our contact in Leningrad.
He didn't know anything about America.
How could he possibly  have American dentistry?
Harvey and Signe had hustled me out of there too quickly.
‘That's right,’ I said midway through a mouthful of frijoles.
‘You two have been kidding me.’
I got up from the table.
Signe grabbed my arm tightly.
‘Don't leave,’ she said.
‘You both lied,’ I said.
Signe looked at me with a wide-eyed look of sadness.
‘Stay here,’ she said and touched my fingers and stroked them.
The TV boxers jabbed and parried.
‘No,’ I said.
She liked my hand and put the fingertips into her soft half-open mouth.
I pulled my hand away from her.
One of the men at the corner table was saying ‘…name of an island where the most potent forces of nature were first revealed to man; that's why they call the swimsuit a bikini,’ and the downtowners all laughed.
I hurried into the street.
Lighted shops painted yellow patches on the pavement and huddles of men stood here and there talking, arguing and gambling.
The shop lights illuminated them as though they were valuable items on display in a museum.
There was a curious all-enveloping blueness that nights in the tropics have, and on the air was the sweet smell of cumin and hot chilli.
I hurried back the way we had come, splashing through the puddles of yellow light and past a shop full of tiny blue boxers fighting a vicious sient war.
I brushed through a group of Mexicans and broke into a run.
Past the Bible in the window I swung into the doorway of Sachmeyer's and up the stairs.
At the waiting-room door there was a man in shirt-sleeves fanning himself with a straw hat.
Under his arm was a heavy shoulder-holster and behind him in the doorway stood a  policeman in blue shirt, bow tie, white crash helmet and riding breeches.
‘What's the hurry?’ said the tall cop.
‘What's going on?’
I said.
To a policeman an immediate answer is a sure sign of guilt.
The man with the straw hat put it on his head and produced a lighted cigar from nowhere.
He inhaled.
‘Dead punk in the dentist's chair.
Now you answer one o’ mine.
Who in the name of Christ are you?’
A siren grew very loud.
There was a yelp of tyres outside.
‘I'm an English reporter,’ I said.
‘I'm gathering local colour.’
Two more cops came clattering up the stairs with drawn guns.
The switched-off siren was taking a long time to die.
One of the cops behind me on the stairs put an armlock on me.
The detective with the cigar spoke in the same unhurried voice.
‘Take this guy down to the station house.
Show him a little local colour.
Maybe he'll tell you how he gets to know about murders in the city before you do.’
‘It's just local colour I'm after,’ I said.
‘Not contusions.’
The blades of the airmen were still making a very low groan.
The detective said, ‘Take it easy with the limey, we don't want Scotland Yard horning in on the case.’
All the policemen laughed loudly.
That detective must have been at least a captain.
The prowl-car boys handed me downstairs and gave me the hands-flat-against-the-roof-of-the-car routine while they frisked me.
I stared into the blinding glare of the revolving light.
Behind me I heard Harvey's voice say, ‘Hello, Bernie,’ and the voice of the detective said, ‘Hi, Harv.’
They were both being very relaxed.
A bumper sticker on the police car said, ‘Your safety: our business.’
Harvey said, ‘This is one of our boys, Bernie.
The General wants me to send him to New York tonight.’
The cop finished frisking me and said, ‘Get in the car.’
The detective said, ‘If the General's gonna be responsible for him…see I might wanna see him again.’
‘Sure sure sure,’ said Harvey.
‘Listen, I've been with him for nearly three hours, Bern.’
‘OK,’ said the detective.
‘But you are kinda running up a backlog in my favour account.’
‘Yeah, I know, Bernie.
I'll talk to the General 'bout that.’
‘Do that,’ said the detective.
I was glad that it was so near election time.
He shouted to the two cops to turn me over to Harvey.
‘Come back and finish your frijoles,’ said Harvey.
‘That's how people get indigestion, jumping around like that in the middle of the meal.’
‘It isn't indigestion I'm frightened of,’ I said