

CHAPTER 5
Lear's Years of Misery
EDWARD LEAR, famous for his watercolour landscapes and nonsense rhymes, began his career at the age of 16 under a cloud of poverty and insecurity as a draughtsman to the Zoological Society.
With a hopeless head for finance and a desperate desire to befriend, Lear was only too willing to receive the attentions of John Gould, then in his mid-20s, and to initiate him into the secrets of the new technique of lithography and the art of ornithological illustration.
It was Lear's example that provided the impetus for the Goulds' first publication, and it was Lear who later transformed Gould's static and unimaginative style into the confident and innovative work that characterised his second and all subsequent publications.
Towards the end of the century, however, when Edward Lear was living out his last years in Italy, a sick, embittered, and lonely old man, he was to regret his early generosity, and to resent the relationship that had evolved from it.
On hearing of Gould's death, Lear remembered, ‘He was one I never liked really, for in spite of a certain jollity or  bonhomie , he was a harsh and violent man.
At the Zoological S. at 33 Bruton St. — at Hullmandels — at Broad St. ever the same persevering hardworking toiler in his own (ornithological) line,— but ever as unfeeling for those about him.
In the earliest phase of his bird-drawing he owed everything to his excellent wife, & to myself,— without whose help in drawing he had done nothing.
Edward Lear was born in 1812, the penultimate of 21 children, at Highgate, North London.
His mother surrendered his upbringing to a sister, Ann, 22 years Edward's senior.
Lear was always to suffer from this apparent rejection.
What little is known of his early life is cloaked in melodrama  and make-believe, but it appears that his family, once prosperous but fallen on hard times in Lear's early years, sold up and went their separate ways.
Lear moved with Ann to lodgings in Upper North Street, off the Gray's Inn Road.
Lear was a lonely, awkward boy, frightened by depression, the deaths of four of his sisters, and frequent attacks epilepsy, which he referred to in his ignorance as ‘The Morbids’ and ‘The Terrible Demon’.
He found relief from his fears and inadequacies in a world of fantasy and art.
In particular he made a study of natural history, especially of birds, with which he felt a strange affinity.
Many of his later nonsense rhymes, concocted for the amusement of his patron's, Lord Derby's, grandchildren, owed their inspiration to Lear's fantastical obsession with birds, and their similarity, both in behaviour and appearance, to people he knew.
Lear was educated by his sisters, Ann and Sarah, both talented artists, who also taught him to draw.
He later recalled the days spent in the ‘painting room’ immersed in his father's collection of books and pictures as the happiest of his life.
He copied, among others, all the animal plates in Buffon's Histoire Naturelle.
It was through his sister Sarah that Lear gained a practical introduction to the world of illustration, and to the Zoological Society.
When he was still only 15, on a visit to Arundel to visit his sister he met Mrs Godfrey Wentworth, whose father was an amateur zoologist and friend of Prideaux John Selby.
Shortly afterwards Lear was contributing drawings (one was of the now-extinct Great Auk, which Lear later copied with great success for Gould but was inaccurately attributed to ‘J & e Gould’) for two volumes of Selby's & Jardine's Illustrations of British Ornithology.
He was also recruited to produce drawings for wood-engravings for the Zoo's own visitors' guidebook entitled The Gardens and Menagerie of the Zoological Society Delineated.
Lear was an artist of considerable talent.
He had made his way in his early teens ‘colouring prints, screens, fans’ and ‘making morbid  disease drawings, for hospitals and certain doctors of physic’.
But he benefitted as well from the instruction of the Zoological Society's draughtsman, William Harvey, who had once been a student of Bewick.
Harvey's team of illustrators were encouraged to enliven their work in the dramatic, almost irreverent, Bewick style, to rebel against the static poses and solid profiles of previous zoological illustration.
The menagerie of the Zoological Society provided the perfect opportunity to observe subjects alive and vigorously kicking, and the tiny woodcuts of the Society's guidebook vibrate with squawking, flapping, screeching birds drawn as never before attempted in a British work of its kind.
The impact of the book, however, was severely limited by its size.
The woodcuts are only a few inches square, and defy the artists' desire for detail and extravagance.
Audubon, at the other end of the scale, had shown in his vast, colourful engravings of birds, the enormous scope for ornithological illustration.
His work broke all the conventions of size, style, and technique; his imagination lifted textbook material to the level of a flamboyant, romantic art and set a brave new standard for subsequent bird illustrators.
Inspired by the challenging example of Audubon, his working experience under William Harvey, and the living birds at the Zoological Gardens, Lear decided to embark on his own publication.
While still working on the second volume of the Society's guidebook, at a meeting of the Zoological Society on 16 June 1830, he applied to undertake a series of drawings of the parrot collection.
In 1831, at the age of 19, he began the publication of his Illustrations of the Family, of Psittacidae or Parrots.
He chose for his format the imperial folio size (22 x 16½in/59 x 42cm) considerably smaller than Audubon's double elephant, but still affording him the chance to draw most of his subjects life-size.
Like Audubon, Lear did not plan for accompanying text: this was to be a purely  pictorial study of a single species.
Lear was captivated by the extraordinary and extrovert family of parrots.
His drawings are lively, original, and amusing.
Typically, he drew as much from the personality of each bird as from the relative characteristics of a particular species.
Some of his birds look mischievous, others furious or rebellious, some even forlorn.
They twist on their perches in positions never before seen in life-size British bird illustration, their eyes betraying a sense of character created by the artist's pen.
Lear, however, as he constantly complained, had not had training as an engraver; and, in an effort to find a medium that would serve his publication without drawing excessively on his limited resources, he turned to the novel technique of lithography.
As a means of reproducing plates in illustrated texts, lithography had not been in use for even a decade.
The printing method had been developed by Charles Hullmandel, who later printed Lear's lithographs, and, ultimately, most of Gould's 3,000 plates.
Lithography had many advantages over the difficult and complicated processes of copper and steel engraving, and even over the woodcut.
The lithographic stone is made of a slab of almost pure limestone, which easily absorbs grease.
The image is drawn on to the stone with a fine wax pencil or crayon, which attracts the oily ink used in the printing process.
After the wax image is washed with the ink, and the excess ink wiped off, a sheet of paper is pressed to the stone, which  transfers the ink from the wax lines to the paper.
The image that appears on the paper is a mirror-image of the original drawing done on the stone.
The technique needs, compared with the alternative methods, little formal training.
The lithographer can draw on a regular piece of paper with the same facility that he can with a pencil or brush.
It gives him a far freer hand than other techniques in the description of long, curving lines, which are, for example, difficult to execute with a stylus on metal.
Most importantly for Lear, lithography cut out the need for, and the expense of, the middlemen or professional draughtsmen, who all too often destroyed the artistry of a drawing by their clinical interpretation.
For the first time, the marks made by the artist could be accurately and directly reproduced on to plates.
Once the basic outline of the artist's sketches were reproduced, it was up to a team of colourists, some obviously better than others, to colour the 200 or so copies of each plate.
They would work repeatedly from a prototype provided by the artist, and, although their work varied, the process produced, at a time when the popularity of the English watercolourists was at its height, the closest thing to an original watercolour that a printed book could offer.
Only a few lithographic works had been produced before Lear tried the technique.
Hullmandel's Twenty-four views of Italy was published in 1818 and was followed shortly by one of the first attempts to use lithography for zoological illustration.
William Swainson's Zoological Illustrations, which contained 182 plates, 70 of them of birds, was published between 1820 and 1823.
But Swainson does not seem to have taken advantage of the ease and freedom which the new technique could afford.
His birds are drawn in a style very similar to the engraved figures of his previous books, with the same intricate detail and self-conscious avoidance of any steeply curving strokes.
The birds are mostly static, and still shown in profile — a single figure on each page with no background.
The size of Swainson's plates also failed to make the best use of the lithographic process: they are as small as regular engravings, with the size of the bird in most considerably reduced.
It was therefore left to Lear to realise the full potential of lithography, and to revolutionise bird illustration in the process.
When Hullmandel published his treatise The Art of Drawing on Stone in 1824, the possibilities of lithography were better advertised (although Hullmandel was careful not to describe the actual printing process, so that artists would have to come to him for that service), and Lear was one of the very first to be attracted to the technique.
Lear set himself up in his lodgings with the necessary lithographic paraphernalia as well as the heavy stones, which he would carry from Gray's Inn Road to Hullmandel's printing shop in Great Marlborough Street  as soon as they were completed.
As he wrote to a friend:
‘Should you come to town, I am sorry that I cannot offer you a home pro tempore — pro trumpery indeed it would be, if I did not make any such offer — for unless you occupied the grate as a seat — I see no probability of your finding any rest consonant with the safety of my parrots — seeing, that of the six chairs I possess — 5 are at present occupied with lithographic prints:— the whole of my exalted & delightful upper tenement in fact overflows with them, and for the last 12 months I have so moved — thought — looked at,— & existed among parrots — that should any transmigration take place at my decease I am sure my soul would be very uncomfortable in anything but one of the psittacidae.’
It was a brave undertaking for a young man of 18 to attempt to publish, illustrate, and distribute an expensive and novel zoological work alone.
Not only was the Psittacidae the first volume ever to concentrate on a single species, it was, as Lear himself maintained, ‘the first complete volume of coloured drawings of birds on so large a scale published in England, as far as I know — unless Audubon's were previously engraved.’
The large folio size was particularly appropriate for the new technique of lithography, which, with its wide range of tones and the subtlety of its lines, was best suited to large, bold designs.
Lear must have received considerable encouragement from the Fellows of the Zoological Society, just as Gould had after him; not to mention the contacts necessary to recruit his 175 subscribers.
He was able to make use of parrots not only in the Society's collection, but in the vast private menageries of Lord Stanley, who was then president of both the Zoological and Linnean Societies, and who would later become Lear's principal patron; and in the collections of Sir Henry Halford, ‘the eel-backed baronet’ and physician to George IV and William IV; of Lady Mountcharles; and of Vigors himself, who was a neighbour of Lear's at Chester Terrace.
When live specimens were not available, Lear prevailed upon the extensive collections of the famous dealer in skins, Mr Leadbeater of Brewer Street, Golden Square, and, of course, the Society's own preserver, John Gould.
Lear's Psittacidae began to be issued in parts containing three or four plates each from 1 November 1830.
From the outset, they were critically acclaimed.
On the strength of the first two parts Lear was recommended for an Associateship of the Linnean Society on 2 November 1830 by Vigors, Thomas Bell, and Edward T. Bennett.
William Swainson in particular congratulated him in an enthusiastic letter, written from his house in  St Alban's:
‘Sir, I received yesterday, with great pleasure the numbers of your beautiful work.
To repeat my recorded opinion of it, as a whole, is unnecessary but there are two plates which more especially deserve the highest praise; they are the New Holland Palaeornis, and the red and yellow macaw.
The latter is in my estimation equal to any figure ever painted by Barraband or Audubon, for grace of design, perspective, or anatomical accuracy.
I am so particularly pleased with these, that I should feel much gratified by possessing a duplicate copy of each.
They will then be framed, as fit companions in my drawing-room to hang by the side of a pair by my friend Audubon.
Of course I can easily perceive when you have been obliged to form your ideas from stuffed specimens.
Had I an opportunity I should have great pleasure in giving you a few hints on this subject which might not be useless.
Let me suggest that when you want ‘relief’ for a white bird, the leaves should be coloured: the cold, ‘drawing’aspect which the plates have would then be removed.’
Encouragement of this kind alone, however, was not enough to keep the ambitious project afloat.
The world of publishing was a ferocious one, and for Lear — a gullible young man with little or no business acumen, and with an expensive project on his hands,— it was to prove ruinous.
Even later in his career when he was drawing master to the Queen, and published a book of nonsense, a travel book, a volume of landscape drawings and numerous natural history illustrations, Lear made a profit of only £100.
To Gould, though, Lear's enterprise had distinct possibilities.
Gould was immediately attracted to the art of lithography for the same reasons as Lear — the relative inexpensiveness of production and the lack of training required — but he also saw great potential for Lear's large-size format and colourful plates, which could, Gould thought, if properly promoted and well managed, prove extremely lucrative.
Moreover, if the plates were accompanied by a descriptive text, giving information about the nature and habits of each species figured, the production might appeal to a broader and more conventional audience.
A letterpress accompanying the illustrations would give the work a scientific legitimacy that Audubon's work as well as Lear's had lacked.
Gould launched immediately into the fray, and his first part of the Century appeared less than two months after the first two parts of Lear's Parrots.
The almost simultaneous appearance of the two lithographed  publications detracted from the dramatic importance of Lear's initiative.
It was Gould, not Lear, who was given credit for the concept of an illustrated ornithological work of this nature.
The Proceedings of the Royal Society completely overlooked Lear's beautiful Parrots when it decided that, ‘The so-called Century of Birds from the Himalaya Mountains’ was ‘by far the most accurately illustrated work on foreign ornithology that had been issued up to that period.’
'In size’, it remarked, ‘the Century rivalled the folios of Le Vaillant [sic], but far surpassed them in excellence of the plates.’
Gould approached Lear with an appeal to help his wife master the art of lithography, although the direct influence of Lear's style is not apparent in Gould's plates until Lear began to work on them himself.
Lear only sought employment under the Gould regime when he had been forced to abandon the Parrots, and the Goulds were about to start on their second publication.
Lear himself, however, was aware of the debt that Gould's first publication owed to his initiative.
The Psittacidae, he always claimed, was ‘the first book of the kind drawn on stone in England of so large a size, &…one which led to all Mr Gould's improvements.’
It soon became painfully apparent, however, that of the two publications by Lear and Gould, only one would prove financially viable.
While it must have been galling for Lear, Gould took pains to ingratiate himself with the young artist, and Lear all too easily complied.
In a letter to Charles Empson, the Newcastle bookseller, dated 1 October 1831, when he was eight parts into the Parrots, and Gould, who had overtaken him by this time, was already ten parts into his own publication, Lear complains:
‘My reasons for so soon destroying my drawings were these; though I dare say that they don't appear so rational to any one but myself: I was obliged to limit the work — in order to get more subscribers — & to erase the drawings — because the expense is considerable for keeping them on, & I have pretty great difficulty in paying my monthly charges,— for to pay colourer & printer monthly I am obstinately pre-possessed — since I had rather be at the bottom of the River Thames — than be one week in debt — be it never so small.
— For me — who at the age of 14 & a half, was turned out into the world, literally without a farthing — & with nought to look to for a living but his own exertions, you may easily suppose this a necessary prejudice — & indeed — the  tardy paying of many of my subscribers — renders it but too difficult to procure food — & pay for publishing, at once.
— With Mr. Gould all this is very different — he has sufficient to live on, whether his subscribers pay or not, & can well afford the innumerable little expenses  of printing — but for poor I — I have just nine and twenty times resolved to give up Parrots & all — & should certainly have done so — had not my good genius with vast reluctance just 9 & 20 times set me a going again.’
In the same long letter Lear considers the relationship developing between himself and Gould:
I am glad you like Mr. Gould:— he has been always very obliging to me — although I never knew him till lately: Mrs. G. appears an exceedingly pleasant & amiable woman.
To —‘is he at all like you?’— I must say — No — very categorically: setting aside personal appearances — he being stout — & good looking,— & I being ensiform,(speaking botanically,) that is — lanky — & considerably ugly,— we are, as far as I can judge — very opposite.
— I believe I am anything but candid: in fact — I am naturally suspicious — & exceedingly reserved, the first good quality arises from my having seen plenty of the evil part of the world from my youth up — the second from being but very little used to company or society — for — excepting Mr. Yarrell —(whom Mrs. Hewitson & Atkinson know,)— to whom I go to study bones & muscles — I don't know a single person in all London to visit intimately.’
Eventually Lear could no longer sustain the psychological and financial burden of continuing his publication alone.
By the time he had completed his forty-second plate he was forced to face up to his inadequacies as a business man.
Lear had managed to attract 175 subscribers for the Parrots but had not the temperament or the means to press them for payment.
Gould, in marked contrast, had managed to enlist 298 subscribers for his Himalayan Birds, all of whom were successfully pursued by the efficient and persistent Mr Prince.
With a great deal of relief, but surely not a  little regret, Lear surrendered the copyright of his magnificent lithographs to the hands of John Gould.
As Lear told Sir William Jardine on 23 January 1834:
‘Respecting my Parrots, there is much to say:— no more numbers will be published by me — the 12th — which you have, being the last.
Their publication was a speculation which — so far as it made me known & procured me employment in Zoological drawing — answered my expectations — but in matters of money occasioned me considerable loss.
I originally intended to have figured all the Psittacidae — but I stopped in time; neither will there be —(from me) any letterpress.
Concerning the request you make that I would allow these being copied — I have no power either to refuse or comply — since I have sold all right in the volume to Mr. Gould.
He purchased of me — the copies left on my hands — and he alone is to be applied to on the point you wish answered.’
Gould's plans to finish the work himself, in which Lear originally had intended to include every known member of the parrot genus, never materialised.
Whether Lear was disappointed is unknown, but certainly Gould realised that he could profit more from starting a completely new project under his own name than by finishing someone else's.
Gould was satisfied with simply selling off the remaining numbers he had bought off Lear.
Meanwhile, as the Century was nearing completion, Gould was at pains to predict the most popular subject possible for his next publication.
In a letter of 17 April 1832 he wrote to Jardine:
‘You will perceive by the accompanying prospectus that I have commenced another work of much greater magnitude [than the Century]; for my own part I should have been more anxious to have gone on with unfigured foreign birds and by that means have added so much the more interest to the science of ornithology, but the greater number of the subscribers to my other work not paying attention to birds generally but limiting themselves to those of our own country, they have frequently reiterated their request that I should commence a similar work on the Birds of ['this country’ crossed out]Europe and this has been the only motive for my undertaking so laborious a task.’
There was evidently some dilemma in Gould's mind as to whether a work on the birds of Europe or just the birds of Britain would prove most lucrative.
He decided in favour of the former, but was careful to satisfy nationalistic sentiment in his prospectus by confirming that 15 of the 20 plates in each part ‘will be devoted to the representation of British Birds, and five to those of the European continent.’
Robert Havell Jnr, the London engraver as usual, reported this development to his client Audubon:
‘Gould has just issued a prospectus and as soon as I have one I will send it to you, announcing a work on English birds…his conceit leads him beyond common sense.,
Although there had been countless works already produced on the European  theme, it was a subject that Gould realised would be forever popular among the amateur naturalists and bird-fanciers of Britain.
A work on the birds of Europe might be of limited scientific value, as Gould himself confessed — it could hardly uncover any startling revelations — but it would be bound to attract the crucial number of subscribers.
Audubon, however, was outraged: ‘Here there are at present three Works publishing on the Birds of Europe’, he wrote to his friend Rev. Bachman, from London in 1835,’— one by Mr Gould and the others by no one knows who — at least I do not know — Works on the Birds of all the World are innumerable — Cheap as dirt and more dirty than dirt…’
But it was precisely Gould's unshakeable commonsense, which Havell had so reviled, that was beginning to antagonise the rival American camp, and it was with exasperation that they watched Gould set off for Europe on a reconnoitring trip for his second publication.
Gould took the opportunity of taking Lear with him on this ornithological grand tour, and at some point managed to enlist him to work on the Birds of Europe with Mrs Gould.
It was an agreement that Lear was to regret bitterly in later years.
In 1832 work on the Birds of Europe began.
Over the next five years, until its completion, Lear produced 62 of the total 448 plates.
In volume Lear's contribution may not have been prolific, but its impact was revelatory.
Lear's participation transformed the work of Mrs Gould, which in the Himalayan Birds was little more than a continuation of eighteenth-century productions, into dynamic and expressive works of art.
Like an ornithological Michaelangelo he propelled her limited sense of perspective into the third dimension.
He encouraged movement, vigour, and a sense of character in her birds; he instilled an idea of composition in which the subject related to its background, instead of perching in mid-air like a cardboard cut-out.
He introduced a sense of subtlety and freedom into her drawings where previously she had only mimicked the technique applied to etching or engraving.
There is no doubt that Edward Lear was the first person to understand the art of lithography, and to use it to its fullest potential.
It was a legacy that granted the fabled works of Gould their success, and took them into the forefront of nineteenth-century illustration.
Despite these dramatic improvements, not surprisingly Mrs Gould's work falls well short of the plates by Lear.
His birds are immediately recognisable, full of character and confidence.
Mrs Gould's birds are pictured in less adventurous and often more awkward postures, sometimes regressing to the anatomical inaccuracies and stiffness of her previous work.
Certainly, Lear chose the most charismatic subjects for his plates — the owls, eagles, cranes, pelicans, geese, swans and flamingos that became  familiar in his nonsense rhymes — and left the less-dramatic little perching birds, such as the thrushes, robins, and wrens to Mrs Gould.
Lear's birds fill the page, stalking warily or glowering protectively over a half-dead prey; his eagle owl, perhaps the most famous of all, glares menacingly from the shadows of twilight, its great yellow eyes mirrored by a lull moon.
Never before, or perhaps since, have birds been portrayed with such vitality, dexterity, and accuracy.
The versatility of Lear's lithographic technique gave the art of bird-drawing a new delicacy of form and texture.
Lear showed the sheen of strong flight-feathers, as well as the soft down of the breast; he made the feathers around the neck look ruffled by the wind, and characterised the unique texture of feathers on the feet.
Where the technique of etching fell woefully short, he discovered, the art of lithography excelled.
Despite the beauty of Lear's plates, the young artist felt his work for Gould a great strain.
He had begun in 1833 to work also on 10 plates for Gould's Monograph of Toucans, a single volume of 34 plates on a single species similar to Lear's own original Parrot publication, and which was to finish in the same year, 1835, as the Birds of Europe.
Lear was now working mostly from the menagerie at Knowsley Hall, where he was enjoying the congenial nature of Lord Derby's patronage, and entertaining the Lord's grandchildren.
He was also contributing drawings for a number of other zoological works, including Selby's and Jardine's Illustrations of British Ornithology and Jardine's Naturalist's Library.
The pressure from London, however, was unrelenting: ‘Gould has been so clamorous lately’, Lear wrote to Jardine, ‘at my not having done any Birds of Europe for him, that I must do a batch for him without further delay.’
In a letter to Gould a few months later, Lear, with  characteristic self-pity, excuses his poor output:
Knowsley Hall
31st Oct. 1836
hail — snow — frost — & desolation.
Dear Gould,
I got your letter last evening, as I was about to write to you: thank you for it:— I wanted to know how you were going on.
As for your replying I never expect that, as I know how busy you are always…
To your numerous enquiries, I must answer rather briefly, for I have so bad a cold as to be half blind: add to which so bad a cough & sore throat, that if they  dont go I shall be in town much sooner than I expected…my eyes are so sadly worse, that no bird under an Ostrich shall I soon be able to do.
I am staying to finish what I had promised Lord Derby I would do before I went away, & shall, I imagine, be home by the end of November, when I shall be most happy to set about anything that you please…
Lear was beginning to find the strain of lithography —‘this lampblack & grease work’, as he later called it — intolerable, and had made up his mind to become a landscape painter.
His worsening eyesight and declining health certainly heralded this decision, but the constraints of working for someone as particular and demanding as Gould could not have helped.
‘Lord!
Lord!
How cross you used to be if a goose's feather's weren't drawn straight!’,
Lear later wrote to his former employer from the safety of Rome.
In 1863, in a note written on a rare visit to England from his self-imposed exile in warmer climes, Lear apologises to Gould for not visiting him because, ‘all my daylight hours have gone in the service of the old Enemy — Lithography.’
If Lear was unhappy working on the Birds of Europe, Gould is unlikely to have been aware of it, or paid him much notice.
Gould's time was too precious and his ambition too overriding to allow him a thought for artistic temperament.
With unswerving determination, Gould kept his sights on the completion of his publication to the exclusion of all else.
‘Mr Gould pursued his onerous task with an intensity of purpose which resulted in complete success’, recorded The Times about the completion of Birds of Europe in August 1837.
‘Its reception’, continued the article, ‘equalled his most sanguine hopes, and its spirited and able author had the happiness to find his labours not unrewarded.’
In short, it was a sell-out.
The Westminster Review round the evolution of Gould's work since his last publication quite remarkable, and Charles Wood, in his Ornithological Guide considered ‘the plates in fidelity of delineation and beauty of execution are unrivalled’.
The Athenaeum saw the Birds of Europe as Gould's first serious ornithological work, while the Analyst revelled in discovering a work fit to rival the foreign competition.
Finally, the eminent ornithologist Charles Lucien Bonaparte agreed that Audubon's supremacy had at last been eclipsed.
‘The merit of Mr. Audubon's work yields only to the size of his book,’ he said, ‘while Mr. Gould's work on the Birds of Europe, inferior in size to that of Mr. Audubon's, is the most beautiful work on Ornithology that has ever appeared in this or any other country.’
Typically, however, there is hardly a word in all the reviews on the labours of Mrs Gould, or on the revolutionary influence of Edward Lear.
Only those who had any idea of the inside story recognised the scale of Mrs Gould's contribution.
Audubon, who clearly visited Gould sometime in  April 1835 wrote to Bachman:
‘I have agreed to exchange a copy of my Work with Mr. Gould, for his publications — and have by me 13 Nos of his Birds of Europe etc.
I have also purchased a monograph of Parrots from a Mr Lear — When you and I are old men — how pleasing it will be to us to look at these together to quiz them all, and pass our We to upon them!
Mr. Gould is a man of great industry…his Wife makes his drawings on stone — she is a plain fine woman, and although these works are not quite up to Nature, both deserve great credit.’
There is no mention of Lear's work on Birds; everywhere, in the press in particular, a veil seems to have been cast over Lear's contribution.
Worse, two of Lear's plates, of the ptarmigan and the peregrine falcon, are cited as proving John Gould to be ‘the first delineator of ornithology of the day’.
Lear was also subject at the hands of his employer to even more glaring misacknowledgements: in what could generously be described as an insensitive oversight, four of the plates in Birds, are referred to at the bottom of the page as being ‘drawn from Nature and on Stone by J & E Gould’, while the style of the bird and the signature on the drawing itself are patently Lear's.
And, where Lear's plates are accurately acknowledged, they are awarded only a cursory ‘E. Lear del. et lith.’
In addition, some of Lear's lithographs were copied for the Penny Magazine where they illustrate articles referring to ‘Gould's birds’, but do not mention Lear.
Lear drew more than the short straw on the Birds of Europe.
At best Gould was callous and ungenerous in ensuring that he did not receive the praise he deserved; at worst he was deliberately playing on Lear's weakness, and jealously guarding the limelight for his most ambitious publication to date.
Sadly, Lear's contribution to both the Birds of Europe and the Toucans was forgotten during his lifetime.
It seems that Gould was determined to blackball his talented, but temporary, artist.
Prince later wrote to Gould when he was in Australia, complaining that Alfred Newton had been ‘far, far too complimentary’ about Lear's part in the publication, ‘particularly when we know that most of the subscribers are of the opinion that his plates are almost the only exceptionable part of your work.’
How Prince could have known the thoughts of almost three hundred people is difficult to imagine, but it was not an opinion held by John Edward Gray of the British Museum, nor of Lord Derby.
‘I have just received your Portfolio of MS drawings quite safely,’ wrote the former to the latter in January 1844; ‘I quite agree with  you that they are not to be compared in finish with Lear's, though generally accurate, but then Lear was a Man both for manners in Society & Skill in his Profession not to be easily found or replaced.’
Joseph Wolf, the eminent artist who worked for Gould about 20 years later, had his own thoughts on the matter.
In his opinion, scientists rarely could distinguish between good, mediocre, or bad art.
‘There have been very few among all my acquaintances among naturalists,’ he said, ‘who could appreciate a drawing if it were ever so well done; and sometimes the better it was done, the less they liked it…’
When, eventually, Lear was forced through ill health and exhaustion to exchange England and ‘the old Enemy, lithography’ for a life of watercolour painting in Rome, he was desperate to keep in touch with old acquaintances.
He seemed to be haunted by a fear of being forgotten by his friends and Gould became one of the many objects of an obsessive correspondence.
Lear's letters to Gould in the years after they parted company were long, funny, warm and chatty; but they were also the letters of a nostalgic and lonely expatriate.
Time and again Lear tried to tempt Gould to visit him in Rome; always he pleaded for a letter: ‘I am anxious to hear from you…;
I beg you will write to me after you get this’; ‘Pray send a line…as I should like to know how you are going on,— as I don't forget I have owed sundry dinners to your lithographic birds.’
None of Gould's answers has survived, but they clearly fell well short of Lear's hopes.
‘I was always a bad correspondent,’ berated Lear, ‘but surely you are still more unconscientious, for when I do write, you answer me by a short scrawl — only one word of which out of every 2d can I decipher, & I have kept your last and only epistle to see if I can't sell it as an ancient hieroglyphic.’
Gould, however, was probably the last person Lear should have expected to engage in a chatty, long correspondence.
Virtually all Gould's letters, even those to his children, are brief and matter-of-fact.
He had little time for flippancy or gossip, let alone the nostalgic ramblings of an ex-employee.
It is difficult to imagine the sense of kinship between the two men which Lear implies in his letters to Gould.
There could scarcely have been two people more different from each other in character: the one motivated by a keen sense of order, rationality, and discipline; the other driven by his emotions and whimsical fancy.
Where Gould was shrewd, cautious, even cunning, Lear was gullible, naive, and often incompetent.
What Lear revered in Gould — his remarkable business sense and financial efficiency — Gould probably found exasperatingly lacking in Lear.
In the beginning, one feels, Lear must have been relieved and excited to  find someone with as equally compelling an interest in birds as himself.
But there was no sentimentality in Gould's attitude to birds, and he was, for the times, extraordinarily misanthropomorphic in his descriptions of them.
His was the discipline and the drive of the scientist; Lear was first and foremost an artist.
If Mrs Gould could bridge the gap with a foot in both camps, the two men must inevitably have begun to polarise themselves from one another.
Gould's self-confidence and his clarity of purpose moreover were anathema to Lear, whose life was buffeted by self-doubt and a scepticism verging on paranoia.
Lear may have been volatile and moody — and one can imagine the difficulty Gould faced if he criticised a drawing — but he was capable of great emotional generosity and open-heartedness.
Gould, on the other hand, was reticent, rarely emotional, and often insensitive.
Lear must have found this side of Gould the most frustrating and hurtful; he could not understand someone who did not think people were important.
Time and again Lear's long, witty, and entrancing letters were responded to, if at all, by what Lear called ‘a nasty abortion of a note’.
But Gould did not have time to fuel his friendships, unless they were of some direct advantage to his work.
And Lear took his own inability to captivate Gould as a personal failure.
Years of being dismissed by Gould while Lear was lonely and homesick in Rome eventually took their toll, and finally he turned against one of the friends he had been trying most persuasively to woo.
The famous trip to Europe, which Lear had constantly referred to in his letters as if it were an experience which united him with the great ornithologist, became the bitter disappointment of a friendship manqué.
Lear was doubtless unhappy during much of the time he worked for Gould; he was also constantly unwell, often in desperate financial straits, and had been finding lithography an increasing strain on his eyesight and his nerves.
Gould could not be blamed for all of this.
Lear's bitterness stems as much from the consequences of his own self-deception in regard to his relationship with Gould, as Gould's insensitivity.
Isolated in a foreign country, and longing for all that had once been familiar, if not at the time congenial, to him, it was easy for Lear to expect of Gould what he could never give.
Finally, Lear resigned himself to Gould's impenetrable isolation, and, in a letter written in 1863, came as close as he could to an objective description of his former employer and erstwhile friend: ‘A more singularly offensive mannered man than G. hardly can be: but the queer fellow means well, tho's more of an Egotist than can be described.’
It was an opinion that not a few of Gould's associates would have shared.
CHAPTER 6
A Dram-Bottle from Darwin
BEFORE THE END of his mammoth production Birds of Europe and his Monograph of Toucans ever came into view, Gould began planning his next major project.
He had been receiving an extraordinary number of new birds from Elizabeth's brothers, Stephen and Charles Coxen, who had emigrated to Australia some years before.
It was clear from their reports that much of this strange and exciting land had barely been explored, let alone ravaged by the ubiquitous ornithological collector.
As Gould rightly assumed, vast areas of terra incognita held enormous possibilities for new and exotic species.
Australia beckoned to him like an uncut diamond.
On 2 November 1836, a year before the last part of Birds was published, Gould wrote to Jardine of his latest ambition: ‘Would not a work on the Birds of Australia be  interesting ?
I have a great number of new and interesting species to make known etc. but have an idea of making it my next illustrative work.
I have even some serious intention of visiting the colony for two years for the purpose of making observations etc.
I have several plates of my new species already drawn and coloured, and will some day take an opportunity of letting you see them.,
Expeditions to the far-flung corners of the world in search of scientific novelties were in vogue that season as they had never been before.
Exactly a month earlier, a ship had docked at Falmouth after a five-year voyage surveying for His Majesty's Government.
It had successfully conducted its official task of charting the South American coast, of assessing potential harbours, transport systems, and inland waterways around the world.
It had also returned loaded with magnificent botanical, zoological, and geological collections for the Crown.
One man on the voyage had drawn particular publicity during his absence abroad.
He had been taken on in an unofficial capacity as Captain's companion, but, like everyone else on board, from ship's surgeon to midshipman, he had made the best of this great opportunity by gathering remarkable collections of insects, plants, birds, and fossils.
Barrels containing the dried, wrapped, skinned, and pickled specimens of this private collection were dispatched regularly back home to John Henslow, Professor of Botany at St John's College, Cambridge.
Long before the expedition returned, it was Henslow who began to spread the word that these collections were indeed something to write home about.
By the time HMS Beagle reached her final port, Charles Darwin had been elevated from obscurity to the status of reputed naturalist.
As yet, though, there was no indication that this particular voyage of the Beagle was to be considered as one of the most important events of all time.
It encouraged other energetic young scientists to engage in similar expeditions, and it showed armchair naturalists that the opportunities available to the man in the field far outweighed the advantages of staying at home.
For the time being, however, the impact of the voyage was limited to the kudos of returning  laden with booty and important information about new trade routes.
John Gould was no doubt spurred on by the success of Darwin, Captain FitzRoy, and the Beagle's other collectors, and undertook an expedition of his own to Australia.
He knew that firsthand experience and observations could prove invaluable in collating, describing, and illustrating a definitive work on Australian birds.
He, more than any other ornithologist, knew what to look for and would be able, with the help of a few hand-picked collectors, to assemble a substantial collection in a fraction of the time it would take should he stay home and await specimens sent by less reliable amateurs.
What Gould had never fully recognised, until the rapturous reception of the Beagle's return, was the international acclaim attached to this kind of voyage, which could, it seemed, make a hero out of anyone.
Naturalists of any repute were soon expected to go on expeditions, and those who did not were criticised for their lack of field experience.
For Gould, eager to shake off the connotations of his previous post as museum curator, and besieged by allegations of being an ‘indoor naturalist’, a sojourn spent collecting in the southern hemisphere would silence even his most vociferous opponents.
When Darwin delivered his collection of birds and mammals to the Zoological Society for identification three months after his arrival back in England, Gould probably welcomed the opportunity of finding out more  about the voyage, particularly the month or so Darwin spent in Australia and Tasmania.
Gould would also have angled for contacts who might help him with his prospective expedition.
It could have been Darwin himself who introduced Dr Benjamin Bynoe, the Beagle's surgeon, to Gould.
During the next voyage of the Beagle, Bynoe contributed a number of new finds for the ornithologist's work on the Birds of Australia.
Gould probably never imagined that his meeting with Darwin would be one of the most significant events in scientific history; that what he was to uncover in Darwin's bag of birds was to spark off the theory of evolution.
‘I must not omit to tell you,’ wrote Gould nonchalantly in a letter to Jardine on 16 January 1837, ‘that Mr Darwin's Collection of Birds (made during the late survey under Capn FitzRoy) are exceedingly fine; they are placed in my hands to describe; some of the forms are very singular particularly those from the Gallipagos [sic].
I have one family of ground Finches in which there are 12 or 14 species all new.’
For it was Gould who showed Darwin his first evidence of the possible transmutation of species.
The very specimens to which Gould refers so casually in his letter, particularly those which came to be known as ‘Darwin's finches’, were to spark off one of the most controversial theories of all time.
It was Gould, not Darwin, who identified them.
Contrary to popular myth Darwin was not thunderstruck by the theory of evolution during his voyage on the Beagle.
The revelation came, if it can be accorded to any single event, when he was back in England, reviewing his collections with one of the best ornithologists in the country.
As a naturalist, the young Charles Darwin was far from fully qualified.
He was expecting to become a country parson on his return to Britain, and was only assigned to the Beagle expedition through the recommendations of professor Henslow, his mentor.
The position of Captain's companion had been offered to at least four people before Henslow suggested Darwin as a possibility.
Darwin, as his mentor suggested, made the most of his time abroad, compiling copious notes about the geography, geology and wildlife he saw.
The heretical ideas that were to label Darwin as ‘the man who killed the Creator’ could not have been further from his thoughts.
Midway through the voyage he wrote to a friend, ‘I often conjecture what will become of me; my wishes would certainly make me a clergyman.’
Darwin, by the time he reached the Galapagos Islands, was not in a particularly receptive or philosophical frame of mind.
The Beagle was nearing its fifth and final year and Darwin was tired, homesick and chronically sea-sick.
The last leg of the expedition was proving more than a trial for the young naturalist.
The entries in his diary for Tahiti, New Zealand, and South Africa are little more than dutiful records, lacking enthusiasm  and inspiration.
The Beagle stayed only five weeks in the Galapagos.
Isolated in the middle of the pacific Ocean, 3,200 miles from Tahiti, and with a sea-crossing of almost a month stretching out before him to the next port of call, Darwin's stay in this inhospitable volcanic outcrop must have been one of the lowest points for him on the entire trip.
That he managed to summon enough energy to make any collections at all during his stay is something of a miracle; had he been more thorough and punctilious in his methods he would have saved history, as well as himself, a lot of time and trouble when it came to corroborating the theories that were to bring him such fame, and infamy, many years later.
Captain FitzRoy was also getting on Darwin's nerves by this time.
Four years at the Captain's table were taking their toll.
The two men, the former a steadfast Tory, the latter a dedicated Whig, had crossed swords on several occasions.
The Galapagos gave rise to one particular dispute between the two men — one which was to prove, much later — to be at the core of the problem of evolution.
FitzRoy had been struck by the peculiar appearance of a group of brownish-black birds living in the islands that resembled finches.
He noticed that some had beaks that seemed to be perfectly created for the needs of the locality.
The cactus finch, for example, has a long beak designed to feed on the flowers of the prickly-pear cactus; while its remarkable mangrove cousin uses its beak to manipulate twigs to extract insects from deep within the bark of trees.
FitzRoy immediately guessed that what he saw was a new species.
He assumed, however, that rather than evolving over the ages to suit their environment, they had been ‘ready-made’ by God to the perfect design needed for where He placed them.
Darwin was not quite so orthodox in his interpretation.
From his study of geology he knew that the world was much older than Archbishop Ussher's absurd calculation.
He could see, moreover, that the Galapagos were much younger than the continent around which he had been travelling.
The natural inhabitants of the Galapagos then, must have somehow strayed across from South America, and colonised the archipelago by chance.
And their strange adaptations, such as the finches' beaks, must be a response to the new and strange environment in which they found themselves.
There was nothing too outrageous in this conclusion.
Adaptation as a concept was perfectly acceptable to the nineteenth-century naturalist — they had, after all, had plenty of opportunity to observe the changes that an English climate wrought on the coats and plumage, as well as the size, of live birds and animals brought from hot countries.
Moreover, the cross  breeding of domestic animals and livestock had long since proved that such changes could be artificially induced.
But adaptation was considered only ever to be superficial.
It might result in a variety of a certain species, but it could never result in a completely new species.
Man and the environment might be able to create a variety, but only God could create a species.
Accordingly, all the species on earth had changed only superficially, if at all, since they were placed there by God in the beginning.
Darwin's conclusion then, in direct contrast to that of his even more orthodox Captain, was that the Galapagos finches could only be varieties, and were therefore not worth collecting carefully.
There were other extraordinary, dramatic examples of transmutation that Darwin encountered on his voyage and overlooked, quite apart from those found in the Galapagos.
One bird that was shot in Patagonia was almost consigned to the digestive tracts of the Beagle crew before Darwin realised it might hold some scientific significance, and should be preserved for identification back in London.
It, too, eventually became a vital piece in the evolutionary jigsaw that Darwin was to assemble with the help of John Gould at the Zoological Society.
Darwin had heard reports from the native Gouchos in Patagonia of a very rare ostrich-like bird, which they called ‘Avestruz Petise’.
He tells the bizarre story of its discovery in his account of The Voyage of the Beagle (1839).
‘When at Fort Desire, in Patagonia (lat 48’), Mr Martens shot an ostrich; and I looked at it, forgetting at the moment, in the most unaccountable manner, the whole subject of the petise, and thought it was a two-third grown one of the common sort.
The bird was cooked and eaten before my memory returned.
Fortunately the head, neck, legs, wings, many of the larger feathers, and a large part of the skin, had been preserved.
From these a very nearly perfect specimen has been put together, and is now exhibited in the museum of the Zoological Society.
Mr Gould, who in describing this new species did me the honour of calling it after my name, states, that besides the smaller size and different colour of the plumage, the beak is of considerably less proportional dimensions than in the common Rhea; that the tarsi are covered with differently-shaped scales, and that they are feathered six inches beneath the knee.
In this respect, and in the broader feathers of the wing, this bird perhaps shows more affinity to the gallinaceous family than any other of the Struthionidae.’
It is impossible to imagine such an accident ever happening to the meticulous and super-observant John Gould, but Darwin was no ornithologist, and, as a naturalist, he had had little training in the disciplines of collecting or identification.
He was an enthusiastic amateur playing a professional's part.
Like the little half-eaten ostrich so expertly reconstructed by Gould back in England, much of what Darwin had seen on the voyage had to be reassessed and re-evaluated after the event.
Only as Darwin began to form his theories did he realise the error of his ways on board the Beagle.
Much of the evidence that he later used to support his arguments had to be provided from collections other than his own, including that of his servant.
There is only one suggestion in his Ornithological Notes, written on board the Beagle after his visit to the Galapagos, that Darwin was significantly puzzled by the species he found there.
While he was cataloguing his mocking birds, Darwin remarks:
‘I have specimens from four of the larger islands…
The specimens from Chatham and Albermale [sic]lsd. appear to be the same; but the other two are different.
In each  Islad. each kind is exclusively found: habits of all are distinguishable…
When I see these Islands in sight of each other, & possessed of but a scanty stock of animals, tenanted by these birds, but slightly differing in structure & filling the same place in Nature, I must suspect they are only varieties.
The only fact of a similar kind of which I am aware, is the constant asserted difference — between the wolf-like Fox of East & West Falkland  Islds. — If there is the slightest foundations for these remarks the zoology of Archipelagos — will be well worth examining; for such facts [would —(inserted)]undermine the stability of species.’
But it by no means establishes that he was beginning to question the stability of species.
Quite possibly he was simply trying to prove it right.
In any case, we hear no more of Darwin's tentative thoughts on the subject for the rest of the journey.
Like the finches, the Galapagos mocking birds, Darwin concluded, must only be varieties of the species.
When Charles Darwin delivered his boxes to the Zoological Society on 4 January 1837, he could barely have imagined the excitement they would generate among the Fellows.
The Society's naturalists immediately began work on the identification of the unusual collection, and only six days later, at the next regular scientific meeting, they were able to announce a number of exciting discoveries.
The Morning Herald, as well as two other newspapers, and the Athenaeum, carried the story:.
‘ZOOLOGICAL SOCIETY — The ordinary meeting was held on 
Tuesday evening; W. B. Scott, Esq, in the Chair.
On the table was part of an extensive collection of mammalia and birds, brought over by Mr Darwin, who accompanied the Beagle in its late surveying expedition in the capacity of Naturalist, and at his own expense, a free passage only being allowed by the Government.
Of the former there were 80, and of the latter 450 specimens, including about 150 species, many of which are new to the European collections…
Several species of the mammalia were explained by Mr. Reid, amongst which was a new variety of Felis [cat], named F. Darwinnia, with several opossums.
Mr. Gould likewise described 11 species of the birds brought by Mr Darwin from the Gallapagos [sic]Islands, all of which were new forms, none being previously known in this country.’
These 11 species of birds identified by Gould were none other than the Galapagos finches.
Ironically, the observations of Captain FitzRoy, the orthodox Creationist, had been proved right.
It was a remarkable discovery on Gould's part, given that, apart from their extraordinary beaks, many of the finches simply did not resemble finches.
The little birds had assumed the roles of birds that were absent from the area.
They had fulfilled various ecological niches which were occupied on the American continents by other birds.
Small wonder then, that the inexperienced eye of Charles Darwin mistook the warbler finch for a ‘wren’ or a warbler, and the cactus finch for a member of the oriole and black-bird family.
In fact, Darwin initially distinguished only six of Gould's eventual 13 separate forms as members of the finch family.
As yet, however, there was no indication from the accounts available to Gould that these different species of finch depended for their characteristics on their different localities.
The labels which Darwin had attached to them did not say where the specimens were found; he simply had not had any reason at the time to think that geography was important.
It was only when Gould declared on 28 February 1837, that Darwin's island specimens of the Galapagos mocking bird differed so profoundly that they had to be categorised as three completely distinct species, that the alarm bells began to ring.
Fortunately, because Darwin had noted where the mocking birds could be found, it was possible to show that each new species was confined to its own island.
Shortly after Gould's publication of this information, Darwin moved to London to be closer to what was proving to be a hotbed of scientific activity.
Darwin was beginning to realise that the naturalists at the Zoological Society might need more information than he had provided in his notes.
Previously Gould had been making other extraordinary discoveries  from Darwin's collection.
On 24 January he identified six new species of birds of prey — two of which came from the Galapagos.
On 14 February he named two new species of goatsucker, a new species of kingfisher, and two new swallows, one of which,(Hirundo concolor) came from the Galapagos.
Ultimately, Gould was to name 25 of Darwin's 26 Galapagos land birds as new and endemic; and three of the 11 water birds, usually expected to have a far wider geographical distribution, as belonging exclusively to the Galapagos.
Clearly this bare volcanic archipelago was proving to be, as Darwin later described it, ‘a little world within itself.’
It was not until after Darwin's meeting with Gould at the Zoological Society to discuss the ornithological collection in early March, however, that the penny finally dropped.
Among Darwin's papers at Cambridge University Library there is an extraordinary sheet of paper that bears testimony to this historical visit.
It is covered with a hasty scrawl in Darwin's hand.
On both sides is the word ‘Galapagos’, scribbled in pencil vertically over the text.
The piece of paper records a list of all the new species identified by Gould from the Galapagos, with, alongside them, notes about their alliance with species on the American continent.
Although Darwin had guessed that the Galapagos birds originated from there, because the Galapagos were so young, it was not something of which he could be certain.
Gould however, with his intimate knowledge of South and North American bird species, immediately saw the connection.
The order of the list of land birds is almost exactly the same as appears in Darwin's 1839 Journal of the Voyage of the Beagle, so these notes must have been used by Darwin as the basis for his subsequent publication.
From the very first entry at the top of the list it is clear that this discussion was to be for Darwin revelatory.
The first word ‘Buteo?’— refers to Gould's classification of Darwin's Galapagos hawk.
Darwin, from his observations of the bird's feeding habits and its tameness alone had assumed it belonged to the Caracaras or Polyborus family.
Unaware of these observations however, Gould had identified it, physiologically, as a member of the Buteos.
Both were, in a sense, right, although Darwin initially was  sceptical .
He wrote at the top of his list ‘Buteo’ with a question mark.
Gould, though, having had from Darwin's eyewitness account of the bird's behaviour, subsequently agreed that the Galapagos hawk shared  characteristics of both the Polyborus and the Buteos.
It was an observation which was to emerge again among the germinating ideas and jottings of Darwin's first notebook on The Transmutation of Species.
Finally, in the second edition of his journal of Researches, the observation emerged fully fledged as testimony to Darwin's theory of convergent behavioural evolution.
On the other side of this extraordinary piece of paper, written sideways at the bottom of the page, is a list of Gould's names for Darwin's finches.
Three notes, written horizontally have been added.
The first remarks, ‘26 true land birds, all new except one: rallus’.
Underneath it a second note reads, ‘Capt FitzRoy Parrot beaked finch comes from James Island’.
The third is written in pencil and partially erased.
It reads, ‘No specimens [or species]from James Island’.
This is the very first time that Darwin associates geography with biology.
The two notes referring to James Island suggest that he has just started to identify different species by their specific island localities.
Gould and Darwin must have discussed not only the alliance between the species in the Galapagos and the species on the continents, but the reliance of the Galapagos species for their individual characteristics on their particular environment.
The theory of the adaptation of species had just taken seed.
This single sheet of paper, though, tells us even more about the dramatic meeting between Gould and Darwin than the words written on it.
The sheet is of narrow-ruled paper and bears the watermark ‘Reeve Mill 1836’.
It was the kind of notepaper being used at the Zoological Society at the time, and completely unlike anything ever used by Darwin.
On one side, underneath the writing in ink, is a small pencil drawing of an animal.
Apparently, Darwin, calling at the Society on what he expected to be a routine visit, was not equipped with paper.
Stimulated by Gould's remarks, he reached for a piece of paper lying near to hand — presumably one that was being drawn on by one of the zoological draughtsmen working at the Society at the time — and proceeded to write on the reverse side of the drawing.
When he had filled that side, he turned the page over and continued to make notes, completely disregarding the pencil sketch that had been begun.
In the haste of scribbling down Gould's comments, the verbally silent ‘p’ in ‘psittacula’, the twelfth of Darwin's finch species, was left out.
Later Darwin was to refer to this in his pocket journal as the moment of his conversion.
A few days after this impromptu but cataclysmic dialogue, Gould and Darwin presented papers together at the Zoological Society meeting of 14 March on the two species of ostrich Darwin had found in Avestruz in Patagonia.
One was the common ostrich; the other was the smaller ‘petise’ version that Darwin had only just snatched from the jaws of his shipmates.
Gould identified them as distinct and separate species, the latter being new to science.
The following day, Darwin made the first evolutionary entry in his current pocket notebook (known as the ‘Red Notebook’): ‘When we see Avestruz two species.
certainly different, not insensible change.
— yet one is urged to look to common parent? why should two of  the most closely allied species occur in the same country?’
One cannot overestimate the importance of Gould's identifications in establishing foundations for Darwin's subsequent theories, as well as the part they initially played as catalyst.
For there was much speculation and controversy among professional taxonomists at the time about the distinction between a variety and a species.
But Gould succeeded in persuading Darwin that his were the right decisions; upon this rested Darwin's entire case.
If it could be proved that new species had emerged since the creation of the world, then the story of creation would be thrown into doubt.
Creatures were not necessarily placed on the earth in the form in which they appeared now.
Even mankind might have developed from a different species.
And if species did not owe their origins to God, was there a Divine Creator at all?
It might be with these frightening possibilities already in mind that Darwin wished to establish the credibility of these new Galapagos species by publishing an illustrated work on them — before he entered upon the exposition of his theories of evolution.
Gould saw potential of a different kind in Darwin's collection.
Ever keen to have a finger in any promising pie, he urged Darwin to publish as early as January 1837.
Darwin, however, waited until April — after his March meeting with Gould — before deciding to go ahead.
Perhaps because the Galapagos was bound to be an explosive issue, and he was still unsure of his findings, Darwin decided to publish a more general Zoology of the Beagle's voyage on some uniform plan.
Darwin acquired the important stamp of scientific approval for his collection by designating a reputed naturalist to work on each category for publication.
Published eventually in five volumes on fossil mammalia, mammalia, birds, fish, and reptiles, respectively, the Zoology, openly claimed for science some of the many new species that had been named from the Beagle's collection.
Darwin was eager to emphasise the reputation of the scientists who had worked on the descriptions for each volume.
With the weight of these great taxonomists behind him, he could convince the rest of the scientific fraternity of the validity of the new species he had discovered.
Resolving the species/variation question in this way was the first step towards introducing the world to the theory of evolution.
For even he, the most  sceptical perhaps of all, had been persuaded in the end by the professional judgement of the men at the Zoological Society, and most particularly by John Gould.
If Gould was excited by these discoveries, we hear nothing of it.
Certainly he refused to implicate himself in the development of a theory in  which he had played so great a part.
And, while Darwin often made use of Gould's observations on the characteristics and distribution of certain birds in his Origin of Species, Gould never broadcast his role as one of Darwin's sources.
As late as 1864, five years after the appearance of Origin of Species, Alfred Newton remarked to his brother Edward on Gould's extraordinary avoidance of the entire question, ‘It is most amusing to see how anxious he is to avoid committing himself about Darwin's theory.
Of course, he does not care a rap whether it is true or not — but he is dreadfully afraid that by prematurely espousing it he might lose some subscribers, though he acknowledged to me the other day he thought it would be generally accepted before long.’
With his sights firmly set on his own career and the publication of his next work, Gould simply ignored the earthquake rumbling beneath his feet.
He continued with his plans for an expedition to Australia while Darwin was in the process of conceiving one of the most important discoveries in scientific history.
Gould accepted the commission for illustrating the volume on birds for Darwin's Zoology but left before he saw it completed.
ln pages i and ii of the advertisement for this volume, Darwin explains Gould's part in its production and the untimely departure which left Darwin with so many questions still unanswered:
‘When I presented my collection of Birds to the Zoological Society, Mr Gould kindly undertook to furnish me with descriptions of the new species and names of those already known.
This he has performed, but owing to the hurry, consequent on his departure for Australia,— an expedition from which the science of Ornithology will derive such great advantages,— he was compelled to leave some part of his manuscript so far incomplete, that without the possibility of person communication with him, I was left in doubt on some essential points.
Mr. George Robert Gray, the ornithological assistant in the Zoological department of the British Museum, has in the most obliging manner undertaken to obviate this difficulty, by furnishing me with information with respect to some parts of the general arrangement, and likewise on that most intricate subject,— the knowledge of what species have already been described, and the use of proper generic terms…
As some of Mr. Gould's descriptions appeared to me brief, I have enlarged them, but have always endeavoured to retain his specific character; so that, by this means, I trust I shall not throw any obscurity on what he considers the essential character in each case; but at the same time, I hope, that these additional remarks may render the work more complete.
The accompanying illustrations, which are fifty in number, were taken from sketches made by Mr. Gould himself, and executed on stone by Mrs. Gould, with that admirable success, which has attended all her works.’
On several occasions, Darwin had recourse to ask Prince to supply him with information that Gould had not given him.
‘Will you have the kindness to inform me,’ wrote Darwin to Gould's secretary on 21 January 1839, what generic or sub-generic name, Mr Gould has given to the Goat-Suckers of the United States.
— Mr. Gould has left a blank for this name to be put in, in one of his M.S. pages.
— Will you send me an answer by the Bearer, or a line by the 2d post.
— I was very glad to see by the Newspapers that Mr. Gould had arrived safely at Hobart Town.
Yours truly, Chas.
Darwin.’
Joseph Wolf, who later worked as an artist for Gould, once said, ‘to have been in any way associated with Charles Darwin is an event in a man's life.’
Gould it seems was only too eager for the event to be over.
Before leaving for Australia, Gould received a gift from Darwin.
In a letter dated Good Friday, 13 April, 1838, he thanked him for it:
‘My Dear Sir
I received with much pleasure the token of your friendship which you have sent me this morning in the way of [a]dram Bottle and shall treasure it up until I reach the wilds of the beautiful country I anticipate so much pleasure in exploring.
Your Gift will there daily remind me of your friendship and the many pleasing chats we have had in our favourite pursuits.
G Nat History & tc will also be of interest to me as an evidence that our intercourse has been productive of none but the most amicable feelings, that your [two words illegible][eyes the blessing of friends][illegible]
Ever yr J. G.’
The tone of Gould's letter was typically formal and cursory, given the long hours and the revelations they had shared.
But Gould had quite possibly thanked Darwin for the wrong present.
There is no record of a dram-bottle from Darwin ever having been in the family; there is, however, a beautiful silver compass inscribed ‘Mr. Gould from C. Darwin Esq’.
It is amazing, with hindsight, to see the awakening of the theory of evolution dismissed by Gould as nothing more than a number of ‘pleasing chats’; but Gould was not a revolutionary and never claimed to be; his en  tire life and all of his works were designed to get him accepted by society and by science, not rejected by them.
He would not risk all he had so far-gained by advocating a theory as controversial as Darwin's.
If he could see the sense behind Darwin's arguments, it is unlikely that his subscribers would; and it was for their tastes that he catered.
It was far safer politically and economically to sit on the scientific fence.
Gould got what he considered to be the best out of Darwin and the Beagle: he had published a number of scientific papers on the exciting discoveries and new species contained in Darwin's collection, and he had produced another important illustrated work.
He would reap the glory without incurring the criticism.
His departure for Australia came at just about the right time.
CHAPTER 7
Birds of Passage
BY LEAVING FOR AUSTRALIA, Gould was not only side-stepping the wash he had helped to agitate with Darwin; he was preserving for himself a niche which would forever distinguish him from the motley and  profusive competition of all other ornithological illustrators.
England had been swamped in recent years by publications of every sort on birds, and Gould was not the only one to feel the pressure of increasing competition.
‘London is just as I left it,’ railed Audubon resentfully to his friend, the Reverend Bachman, ‘a Vast Artificial area, as well covered with humbug, as are our Fine Lands and old fields with Broom grass.
Swainson has just finished his Birds of Europe…
Yarrell is publishing the British birds quarto size — and about one thousand other  niny tiny Works are in progress to assist in the mass of confusion already scattered over the World.’
Australia, alone, remained unexploited.
Virtually nothing so far had been published on its birds.
Gould knew, long before he ever decided to set sail, that the province of Australia had fallen miraculously into his lap, and that he would be able to publish from the ‘rich ornithological productions’ of this country a series of works which were beyond challenge.
While others might attempt publications on the birds of Europe, or produce monographs based on species preserved in all the great collections, no one had the ability or the connections to tackle Australia.
You are perhaps aware’, wrote Gould grandly to William Swainson in January 1837, ‘that I have two of Mrs Goulds’ brothers in Australia engaged in collecting the natural product of that fine country, nearly the whole of which are consigned to myself and that consequently I possess perhaps greater facilities than most persons for the production of a work of this description.
I think  I shall add at least as many more species as are at present known.’
His boast did not succeed in warning Swainson off what Gould now considered to be his territory.
On 2 May 1839 Prince wrote to Gould in Australia warning him of Swainson's impending visit: ‘Mr. Yarrell has just called and requested me to tell you that Mr Swainson is going to Australia whether to collect or to settle is not known at present but he considered it of importance that you should know it as quickly as possible not that either he or I think it can in any way affect you as you have so good a start and his wonted and well known irregularity of publication will surely militate against him.’
On the strength of the parcels sent back to him by his brothers-in-law, and what Gould described as his ‘own exceedingly rich collection, perhaps the finest extant’, he had already begun to publish a volume entitled A Synopsis of the Birds of Australia and the Adjacent Islands.
This was a small, imperial octavo-size volume containing eventually 73 plates, mainly of just the heads of birds.
It was designed both to whet commercial appetite for the more ambitious ‘large work on the Birds of Australia’, which he had in mind, and to establish the scientific validity of the enterprise.
Certainly it was much more to scientific taste than the huge, glossy volumes Gould had published before.
The synopsis was, as Gould bragged to Jardine, ‘very much approved of’, although Jardine himself still had reservations about the cost of the production and the lavish colouring.
To most people it was only the text that could be found lacking.
‘The figures of the heads are beautifully done,’ noted Selby, ‘[and]are quite sufficient to identify the species,[but]I wish he had added a little more to the letter press as not a single word is said about habits, a description of the plumage alone being given.’
Gould was well aware of the descriptive shortcomings of his synopsis — Mere was simply not enough information available on Australian birds — but, cautious as ever, he needed to prove the strength of the market before committing himself to the ‘grander work in prospect’.
In the event, so encouraging was the reception of his synopsis, so fertile the ground for his proposed work, that Gould was incited to commit an uncharacteristic error of rashness.
Despite announcing the projected two-year trip to the southern hemisphere expressly for this purpose, Gould began to publish the first parts of his Birds of Australia before he had even left.
‘Gould is publishing the Birds of Australia from stuffed Skins’, wrote Audubon contemptuously to Bachman.
It did not take long for Gould to realise that it would have been better to have waited.
The ‘strange and anomalous nature’ of the ‘few extraordinary species’he had before him pickled in spirits or dried as skins confounded  the imagination even of an ornithologist as instinctive as Gould.
He simply had no idea what these strange creatures could look like in the flesh.
Many of the specimens that had found their way back to England only added to the myths circulating in the popular imagination about the fauna of the southern hemisphere.
Birds of paradise skins that had been prepared in the traditional way by natives of Papua New Guinea had had their legs removed; for a considerable time even respectable scientists thought there might be a land where birds never settled.
The kiwi, on the other hand, which was only discovered in 1813, was thought so ludicrous as to be a certain hoax.
With nostrils at the end of a proboscis-like beak, conspicuous ears and unable to fly, it seemed more mammal than bird.
The nocturnal ground parrot, or kakapo, also seemed the stuff of legend: a huge, flightless bird — the largest parrot in the world — which scavenged clumsily on the forest floor.
Such creatures defied all Western ornithological experience, and made the work of illustrating them as they were in life impossible.
There was no alternative for Gould but to suppress the 20 plates he had published, refund his subscribers, and go straightaway to Australia to find out what they looked like.
It had been one of the few mistakes Gould had ever made.
‘You will perceive’, he noted touchily to Jardine, when Jardine implied that the subscribers had borne the cost of the cancellation, ‘that I am a looser [sic]and that to a considerable amount, and not the former subscribers.’
Most of the cancelled parts, of which there were two, were returned, and Gould arranged to give those subscribers the first part of the new series in lieu.
Alternatively, as he explained to Lord Derby, ‘the cancelled parts, may, if you please, be bound together, and entitled Illustrations of Birds from Australia, and from the few copies in the hands of the public, they will some day be of value, though, it is true, more to the Book-Collector, than the Naturalist.’
Gould's unerring commercial nose proved right — today the suppressed parts of Birds of Australia are valued at roughly £40,00.
A copy came up at auction in New York in June 1989 and was sold for $60,000.
But one cannot deny that a more scientific decision would have been to try to make the return of the offending plates obligatory, so that only the accurate, authentic figures were permitted circulation.
However necessary a trip to Australia began to seem, it was not a voyage to be undertaken lightly.
It was only 50 years since the first white settlement had been established at Port Jackson, and, although some semblance of order and ‘civilisation’ existed in the larger towns like Sydney, many of the outposts were still dangerous places to visit.
Melbourne, for example, was a village only five years old.
Reports of escaped convicts and savage blacks were rife, although no doubt exaggerated for the benefits of the pink-cheeked ‘pomegranates’ arriving fresh from England.
Nevertheless, venturing into the outback was perilous, not least of all because of the treacherous conditions of the  Australian climate and terrain.
Very little of the vast continent had been explored.
It was only nine years since Charles Sturt had returned, starving and almost blind, from discovering the Darling and the Murray Rivers; it was to be another five years before he ventured towards the centre of Australia in search of that mythical inland sea.
Many men, natural scientists included, had been lost in the wastes.
Richard Cunningham, a botanist who had been trained at Kew by William Townsend Aiton, elder brother of John Townsend Aiton (who had trained Gould as a gardener at Windsor Castle) had been murdered by Aborigines only a short time before Gould's departure while collecting on an expedition along the Murray River.
John Hutt, Governor of Western Australia, was thrilled that it was to be an Englishman who was to dispel the mists of ornithological obscurity from the continent.
‘I wish other men of science would show themselves as patriotic in their views as yourself,’ he wrote to Gould in 1839.
‘We know nothing of Australia as yet except that it is the land of convicts and kangaroos, & this after 50 years of possession!
Why the French would have had 50 books, folios & sets published by this time.
Indeed foreigners Germans are now anticipating us & we shall learn from them to understand the production of our own country, always excepting the ornithology.’
Others were not so convinced that John Gould, ‘a mere museum man’, was up to the challenge.
Audubon, who had considerable experience of the hardships of field ornithology in the bayous and forests of Louisiana, was particularly sceptical about Gould's ability to survive in the bush.
He told Bachman:
‘Mr. Gould the author of the Birds of Europe is about leaving this country for New Holland, or as it is now called Australia.
— he takes his Wife and Bairns with him, a Waggon the size of a Squatters Cabin and all such apparatus as will imcumber [sic]him not a little— he has never travelled in the Woods, never salted his rump Stakes [sic]with Gun Powder and how he will take to it, will be a ‘sin to Crockett’.
Undaunted, however, by these prospects, Gould set about the preparations for his journey with systematic thoroughness, and, considering the multitude of decisions that had to be made, remarkable clearheadedness.
For example, his decision to employ John Gilbert as his assistant in Australia  was a masterly stroke of  forward planning.
In two years Gould could not possibly hope to cover all the areas he guessed would prove rewarding.
He needed a trustworthy, dedicated, and professional assistant, who he could dispatch to the parts he would not have time to visit personally.
Once again, Gould's ability to pick his team was to prove invaluable.
John Gilbert came from Windsor and, like Gould, had studied as a gardener under John Townsend Aiton.
Gilbert was eight years younger than Gould, but the two must have met earlier, for by 1828, at the age of 16, Gilbert was recruited by Gould to work as a taxidermist at the Zoological Society.
The background of the two colleagues was remarkably similar, and Gilbert, with Gould's assistance, made considerable advances in his career.
By 1835 the London Directory had elevated both Gould and Gilbert from ‘bird & beast stuffers’ to ‘naturalists’.
When Gilbert decided to leave London and apply for the post of curator at the museum of the newly established Natural History Society of Shrewsbury, Gould wrote a glowing letter of recommendation on his behalf.
‘In consequence of the excellent character’ he was given by Gould, Gilbert won the position; he also attracted the attention of one of the Society's honorary curators, the eminent ornithologist and anatomist Thomas Campbell Eyton.
Gilbert began helping Eyton in the preparation of specimens for his private museum in his nearby ancestral home at Eyton, and, when Gilbert decided to leave England as Gould's assistant, Eyton offered to buy Gilbert's personal, ‘ready stuffed’ collection, including 82 birds and an ‘almost perfect skeleton of an armadillo (with the exception of the toenails)’.
However successful Gilbert's career in Shropshire had been, it had not proved as spectacular as Gould's.
When he resumed his post in Gould's employment in preparation for the expedition to Australia, it was in a position of marked subservience.
Despite their common backgrounds, shared interests, and childhood ties, Gould's pre-eminence had swiftly distinguished him beyond social association with his former colleague.
Gould assumed a superior status over his fellow naturalist, not only as his employer but as a new member of the middle-classes.
The tone adopted towards Gilbert by the Gould company was one of patronising authority.
In one of his letters to Gould in Australia, Prince writes, ‘I and Joseph are both much pleased to hear so good a report of Gilbert.
We trust he has seen his error and will become as respectable in his conduct as he is in his abilities.’
Whatever Gould's personal opinion of Gilbert, or whatever his error, his qualifications as a naturalist were undisputed, and singled him out as the ideal candidate for sharing Gould's exploration.
Moreover, Gilbert's  eight years as an animal preserver under Gould at the Zoological Society had familiarised him with Gould's methods, and established a useful channel of communication between the two in the process.
Gilbert's commitment to the Australian project was as self-sacrificing as his employer's.
He had married sometime in 1837 and had one child.
Mrs Gilbert, it appears, died shortly before or during Gilbert's visit to Australia.
Gould's arrangements for his own children were meticulously considered, which must have been of some consolation to his wife, who had dutifully resolved to accompany her husband to Australia.
She was to leave behind three of the youngest children, the last a ‘sickly babe’ born less than six months before their departure; they were to take with them only their eldest son, John Henry, who was by then seven years old, and Mrs Gould's nephew, Henry Coxen, whom the couple had taken on when his father died in 1825.
Their four-year-old son, Charlie, was sent away to school, while Lizzie, aged two, and the baby remained at Broad Street under the care of their grandmother Mrs Coxen.
During her two-year absence Eliza suffered great pangs of homesickness and longing for her children.
The distress of leaving them no doubt contributed to the ‘sudden & severe indisposition of Mrs Gould…which inducing the utmost fears for her safety, rendered it very doubtful up to the last moment whether they would be able to go or not…’
Mrs Coxen was aided in her task of looking after the children by her niece, Mrs Mitchell, who also moved into Broad Street with her husband, who, in turn, was charged with helping to run the house.
Together with Gould's uncle and a William John Martin of Camden Town, Mr Mitchell and Prince were appointed by Gould to act as his attorneys.
Every effort was made by Gould to ensure that his business would run smoothly, efficiently, and with unremitting industry while he was away.
The Gould machine was set like clockwork to continue ticking as methodically for the next two years as it had for the last eight.
And it was on Prince's shoulders that this great burden of sustaining the Gould enterprise was to fall, as Gould ordained:
‘It is my wish that my Clerk Mr. Prince who is well acquainted with my business and affairs and in whom I place great confidence should continue in the management and conduct of the same…to sell and dispose or exchange all or any of my works on Ornithology and specimens of Natural History in the manner I have been accustom to do…to continue or complete as far as practicable the publication of any work or works of mine on Ornithology and to do all other [illegible]by issuing a Prospectus advertising the same…to purchase all  necessary materials articles and things fit and proper for the carrying on of my business…to borrow for a temporary period any money from my Bankers, Messrs Drummond and Company…and if there by any surplus available for the purpose to invest the same in purchase of Stock…to pay the rent and taxes…make up, adjust and settle all and every or any Accounts…[and generally]to do perform and execute all and every or any other acts deeds matters and things whatsoever are necessary to be done in all other my concerns engagements affairs and business whatsoever during my absence from England as fully and effectually to all intents and purposes as I myself might or could do if I were personally present and did the same.’
Although Gould had wound up two of his principal publications by the time he left England — the concluding part 22 of Birds of Europe was scheduled for July 1837, and the third and final part of the Trogons appeared on or before 14 March 1838 — Prince was charged with seeing to the publicity and the production of the plates for Darwin's Zoology of the Beagle, and the printing and colouring of the illustrations for the second part of Icones Avium on the species of Caprimulgidae, or goatsuckers.
One has some sympathy for the loyal, compliant Mr Prince in these days before the Goulds' departure for Australia; even more so than when prince was left behind with all the doubts and pressures of having to act on his master's behalf.
If Gould could be hyperactive and despotic at the best of times, how much more demanding must he have been in preparing for this journey of a lifetime.
Until the last minute Gould was dealing orders nineteen-to-the-dozen.
Six months after Gould had left, prince had not cleared all the ‘Memoranda taken while on board the Parsee’.
Somehow between them, however, they organised letters of introduction to naval captains who were to give Gould and Gilbert free passage whenever possible, to ‘persons of influence’ in general; and to the Governors of South Australia, Western Australia, New South Wales and Van Diemen's Land (now Tasmania).
They assembled dissecting instruments, guns, collecting boxes, preserving bottles, spirits and drying agents; magnifying instruments, clothes and camping equipment; writing and drawing materials; arranged bank drafts, insurance and bills of lading; and engaged two personal servants for the trip.
When the Birds of Australia was finally completed in June 1848, Gould generously and justly acknowledge the vital role his amanuensis had played in running the entire business while he was away.
Prince, he said, ‘has been with me from the commencement of my various works.
I left him in charge of the whole of my affairs during my absence from England, with a perfect conviction that he would zealously exert himself for my interest, and the confidence I reposed in him has been fully realised, not only during my absence, but during the long period of eighteen years.’
Although Gould might have increased his funds through sponsorship, he wisely insisted on remaining independent of any institution, reserving the rewards of his labours for no one but himself.
He had, according to Bowdler Sharpe, amassed a fortune of £17,000 from his publications by the time he left for Australia.
For anyone else this might have seemed ample funds for an expedition, but for Gould, the cautious man of commerce, even this nest-egg had to be used sparingly.
He had, after all, the business and a family to finance back in Broad Street, the cost of amassing and exporting his collections from Australia, and the travel and living expenses of seven people to cover.
Even so, he resisted the temptation of applying for bursaries.
Gilbert in particular was to suffer from Gould's overzealous housekeeping while they were in Australia, but the sacrifice was to prove, for Gould at least, worth every hardship.
Gould resigned from the service of the Zoological Society but agreed to act as a ‘corresponding Member’, so that his letters and discoveries could be read aloud at the meetings and published in the proceedings.
In this way he would, much as Darwin had during the voyage of the Beagle, remain in the public eye all the time he was away.
Quite apart from his own necessities, Gould was beleaguered by requests from acquaintances to deliver letters to people in Sydney, even to trace a young man who had gone to Australia three years earlier and had not been heard of for more than a year.
And of course he was beset by orders and suggestions from other collectors: William Ogilby advised him to collect 6 or 8 specimens of every species, particularly the great red woolly  kangaroo , which were in great demand not only in England but on the Continent as well; Jardine asked for seeds as well as numerous other specified ‘things in spirits’; Thomas Campbell Eyton wanted as many petrels as Gould could capture for a monograph on the Procellaridae.
On 30 April 1838 Gould wrote his last letter to Jardine before he left:
‘I am so busy that my brain is in a complete jumble.
I will however detail a few of my plans.
In the first place I am happy to say I have a most comfortable ship the ‘Parsee’’ although a small one 350 tons Barque with a commodious poop, no steerage passengers and not more than ten or twelve cabin p[assengers].
Messrs. Jordan the owner and the Captain both take an interest in my presents [sic].
The Captain's name is I. McKeller and the mates Murray so you see we cannot do without your countrymen and candidly I shall place my life  in their hands with the utmost confidence.
I have a Stern Cabin eleven feet by twelve principally for the comfort of Mrs. G. and one adjoining of a smaller size.
I have had the former fitted up with Drawers for birds and books in hope to work going along and taking a quantity of birds with me as well as left over plates to cut up for box books etc.
My party consists of Mrs. G. with an attendant a woman who has accompanied Ladies twice to Calcutta, our little boy, two men one as a collector, the other as a servant, and a nephew 14 years old who will settle there; in the next cabin is a Surgeon with his wife and family.
You will say we have every comfort necessary to render so long and tedious a voyage as agreeable [sic]as it can be.
We start in ten days and I firmly rely on the goodness of Providence to grant me a safe and prosperous passage.
If permitted to return in safety I shall never regret the steps I am about to take.
The voyage will certainly be a very expensive one but I doubt not my work will have a great sale in consequence and if so amply repay me for my exertions.
We go direct to Hobart Town.
I have many reasons for visiting Van Diemens Land first — the climate is more like that of England and many of the Birds, I believe only pigeons may visit that island from the Continent, many are local species and others so nearly allied that [only]an inspection of them in a state of nature is possible to ascertain their being specifically different.
From V. D. L. I either go to Fort Philip or Sydney and from there into the interior.
Mrs. Gould's brothers have estates high up in the Hunter just under the Liverpool Range and within five miles of the Menuras.
I then if possible send my assistant to the north of the Island and Swan River.
New Zealand I hope to visit myself probably on my way home as we come round the Horn and thereby circumnavigate the globe!!!
What an age.
May yourself, lady J., and family every blessing and happiness, and believe me to remain
Yours very Sincerely
John Gould’
On 16 May 1838 John Gould and his party set sail from London in the Parsee.
From the moment they left, Gould was in exuberant spirits.
What might have been anticipated by some as a passage of tedious monotony was welcomed by Gould as an opportunity lull of excitement and discovery.
The ship was constantly visited by birds, and as it ventured further and further from home shores, Gould's hopes of seeing new species, or at least species he had never seen alive before, rose to dizzying heights of expectation.
A month into the voyage, Gould wrote to the Chairman of the Scientific Committee of the Zoological Society, brimming over with interest and enthusiasm:
Latt. 14–21.
N. Long.
22–16.
W.
June 20th 1838
My Dear Sir
I feel assured that you as well as many of my scientific friends will be happy to hear that we are thus far safely on our Voyage and that the whole of our party are quite well.
We are now 7 degrees within the tropics and if the trade winds in which we got off Madeira continue we may expect to cross the equator in a week or ten days, about which time our Captn. informs us that we may expect to fall in with some homeward bound vessels which will enable me as well as the rest of our passengers to forward letters to our friends…bad weather had the effect of making us all good sailors and now we are enjoying fine weather and a fair wind.
The past is quite forgotten and we are all cheerful and happy.
During the bad weather we experienced a few disasters and events, but they were of little consequence.
Our head rails were washed away and our water casks drove en masse from side to midships.
I must say that I do not at present find the time at all tedious and I may say scarcely monotonous.
In fact there has been so much to amuse that I have scarcely read a book and have written but little.
There is always some new object presenting itself to view.
Land birds are constantly visiting the ship and the pretty Stormy Petrels are our constant companions while the ocean itself contains an abundance to amuse and gratify one.
The whales of which we saw several in Bay together with grampuses and porpoises are all novelties.
The beautiful floating Moluscas ( Portuguese Men of War!) and the luminous species which bispangle [sic]the water at night are to a lover of Nature all objects of interest, not forgetting the most beautiful of all a Shoal of Flying Fish.’
His letter contained an account of all the birds he had seen: a common goatsucker that flew gracefully round and round the ship for an hour, although it had ‘in all probability passed the night on the wing’; a female yellow wagtail that alighted only for a moment; numerous petrels, five of which he killed for himself, and one for use in Mr Yarrell's work (a History of British Birds); a flight of swallows, and several small turtle doves, which ‘visited the ship [and]went off again immediately’; a kestrel which was killed ‘from off the Rigging’; a short-eared owl which flew on board during  the night, was caught and kept alive for several days; and hundreds of shearwaters, which surrounded the ship off Madeira and the Salvage Rocks.
At times, he wrote, the ship had been  besieged by grampuses and a large shoal of black whales, each about 50 feet long.
Gould's letter to Prince, dispatched shortly after a two-day jaunt into the interior of the island of Tenerife, was apparently no less exhilarating.
‘He writes in high spirits’, prince told Jardine, ‘and appeared to be thoroughly enjoying this ‘new era of his existence’.’
On 18 August Prince replied to Gould's first letter:
‘…we are delighted to find that the Voyage is productive of a high state of enjoyment to yourself and likely to be the means of re-establishing Mrs. Gould's health.
How I envy you your excursion up the mountains of  Teneriffe .
The delight you must experience in the constant change of scene and the daily occurrences of so many objects of the highest interest is beyond our conception…
Mr Darwin asks if you ‘caught any fish?’’…’
The voyage continued on from Tenerife towards the equator, from which point Gould began his researches in earnest.
In another letter read out to the Zoological Society in his absence, but which was written on 10 May 1839, he recalls:
‘We crossed the equator on the 7th of July, having been more than twenty days within the tropics, part of which time our vessel lay becalmed.
This portion of the ocean's surface was also inhabited by storm petrels, but of a distinct species from any I had hitherto observed, and which I believe to be new to science.
These birds, with now and then a solitary Rhynchops and frigate bird (Tachypeles aquilus), were all of the feathered race that I observed in these heated latitudes, a part of the voyage which always hang heavily upon those destined to visit these distant regions; by me, however, it was not so much felt, the monotony being relieved by the occasional occurrence of a whale, whose huge body rolled lazily by; by a shoal of porpoises, which sometimes perform most amusing evolutions, throwing themselves completely out of the water, or gliding through it with astonishing velocity; or by the occasional flight of the beautiful flying fish, when endeavouring to escape from the impetuous rush of the bonito or albacore.
‘On the 20th July we reached the 26th degree of S. Lat., and were visited for the first time by the Cape petrel.
On the 23rd, lat 31 10’ S., long.
24 W., we found ourselves in seas literally teeming with the feathered race.
Independently of an abundance of Cape petrels, two other species and three kinds of albatrosses were observed around us…
A few days after this we commenced running down our longitude, and from this time until we reached the shores of Van Diemen's Land, several species of this family (Procellaridae) were daily in company with the ship.
Whenever a favourable opportunity offered, Captain McKellar obligingly allowed me the use of a boat, and by this means enabled me to collect nearly all the species of this interesting family that we fell in with…’
This was one of the ornithologist's happiest occupations during the sea voyage.
‘My readers will easily imagine,’ he wrote in his Handbook to the Birds of Australia, ‘with what pleasure I descended the ship's side and sallied forth in a little ‘dingy’to procure specimens.’
Nearly 30 species of oceanic birds were obtained by Gould in this manner on the way to Australia.
When the weather was too rough for a good shot, or for Gould to be lowered in a boat to collect his prize, he would stand on deck and fish for his birds with a hook and line.
It was in this manner that, on one extraordinary and memorable occasion, he managed eventually to capture the soft-plumaged petrel:
‘It is a species which will ever live in my memory, from its being the first large petrel I saw after crossing the line, and from a somewhat curious incident that then occurred.
The weather being too boisterous to admit of a boat being lowered, I endeavoured to capture the bird with a hook and line, and the ordinary sea-hooks being too large for the purpose, I was in the act of selecting a hook from my stock of salmon-flies, when a sudden gust of wind blew my hooks, and a piece of parchment ten inches long by six inches wide on which they were lying, overboard into the sea, and I was obliged to give up the attempt for that day; on the next I succeeded in capturing the bird with a hook baited with fat, and the reader may judge of my surprise when on opening the stomach I there found the piece of parchment, so completely uninjured that it was dried and again restored to its original use.,
Not all the birds that Gould caught in this way were subjected to an impromptu autopsy.
Species that were numerous around the boat and which were caught for a cursory examination only’ were released again alive, ‘the  operation’, Gould maintained, giving ‘not the least pain to the bird, the point of the hook merely taking hold in the horny and insensible tip of the beak.’
The black-eyebrowed albatross was a frequent visitor to the Parsee, and gave Gould the chance to try out a crude but innovative experiment — one of the first attempts to tag and monitor a live sea bird.
He ‘caught numerous examples, marked and gave them their liberty, in order to ascertain whether the individuals which were flying round the ship at nightfall, were the same that were similarly engaged at daylight in the morning after a night's run of 120 miles, and which in nearly every instance proved to be the case.’
Altogether, during the outward voyage and the return passage around Cape Horn, Gould, as he described in his introduction to the Birds of Australia, ‘was enabled to obtain nearly forty species of petrel, being the finest collection of Procellaridae ever brought together’, as well as examining and preserving numerous other species that came by chance to hand.
Those which pertained to his projected work on the Birds of Australia he kept, about 20 species in all, surrendering the rest to his friend Eyton, as promised.
Some four months after leaving England, on 18 September 1838 the Parsee docked at Hobart Town, the picturesque capital of Van Diemen's L and.
‘Mr and Mrs Gould are now in the Colony’ proclaimed the Hobart Town Courier, ‘to which they have come at great expense and sacrifice of comfort, purely with the view of making this work [Birds of Australia]still more valuable by taking their drawings from living specimens.
‘Now,’ as the naturalist Tomasso Salvadori commented after his friend's death, ‘arrived the most important moment in Gould's life, and the consequences which it had have never been equalled in the annals of ornithology.’
CHAPTER 8
The Harvest Meets the Sickle
BY THE TIME of Gould's arrival, Hobart Town, which had been founded in the year of Gould's birth, boasted nearly 15,000 inhabitants.
The area's particular attraction was, as Gould had anticipated, its superficial resemblance to England's green and pleasant land.
Familiar West Country names such as Ilfracombe, Dorset, Devonport, Tamar, Launceston, Bridport, Somerset, and Westbury graced the countryside, and the estuary on which Hobart was founded reassuringly recalled the Derwent.
The houses that lined the wide streets were made of brick and roofed in shingle to imitate the homely appearance of slate.
Each stood separately in its own little suburban garden.
Above the town rose the 4,000-foot peak of Mount Wellington, the only vestige of untamed nature.
Around the bay the hills had been cleared, and patches of emerald fields punctuated by tiny white-washed cottages carried the wistful eye back to the countryside of Ireland.
The sea stretched for miles from the prospect of Hobart, populated at closer quarters by the comforting bustle of shipping.
The Gould party settled into accommodation at a Mr Fisher's on Davey Street, unpacked all their belongings and set up their apparatus ready for the invasion of fresh specimens.
Gould lost no time venturing into the field, taking with him on some excursions his nephew Henry, who was understandably thrilled by the prospect of driving bullock carts; his servant James, who he was zealously training in the art of taxidermy; and sometimes his assistant Gilbert.
Gould was helped in his researches by local naturalists like the Reverend Ewing, after whom he later named the native Tasmanian fruit  pigeon and a species of Acanthiza.
Soon Gould was immersed in the business of collecting.
He did not  have far to go to find an enthralling abundance of birds.
Tree swallows had just arrived in Hobart on their annual migrations, and were ‘particularly numerous in the streets’; wood swallows dived among the paddocks and pasturelands on nearby estates; fire-tailed finches and flame-breasted robins were busy nest-building in gardens and orchards —‘I have even taken its nest’, remarked Gould about the latter, ‘from a shelving bank in the streets of Hobart' — while dusky robins perched on garden railings.
ln the parks the eucalypti were alive with lorikeets, and flocks of parakeets chased each other around the streets; while spotted diamond birds clung to the leaves of trees in every enclosure, and yellow-throated honey-eaters crept along branches in the ravines around the town.
Most of Gould's collecting in Van Diemen's Land, however, was done within 80 miles of Hobart, on or around the Derwent River and the fertile Macquairie Plains, where kingfishers, water crakes and crow-shrikes, golden plovers and white-fronted herons, bitterns and black-backed porphyrios were to be found in glorious profusion.
For Elizabeth Gould, however, this ornithological cornucopia right on the doorstep did not hold the same all-encompassing fascination.
She felt the distance from England far more acutely than her preoccupied spouse; her thoughts were with the children, and, even at this early stage, she longed for the voyage home.
In the first letter to her mother that reached England, Eliza wrote home with mixed emotions of excitement and homesickness.
Hobarton.
Oct. 8th 1838
My dear Mother,
We arrived safely on the 19th [18 September according to the Hobart Town Courier]of September in excellent health, and but for the thoughts of those we left behind should also be in good spirits as our prospects here are in many respects cheering.
The country is very fine, teeming with beautiful natural productions, both in the animal and the vegetable kingdom.
Persons to whom we have been introduced are exceedingly kind and John is acquiring a vast fund of information in the ornithological department, which must, I think, prove interesting to the lovers of that science.
We got here just in the right season, and I assure you he has already shown himself a great enemy to the feathered tribe, having shot a great many beautiful birds and robbed various others of their nests and eggs.
Indeed John is so enthusiastic that one cannot be with him without catching some of his zeal in the cause, and I cannot regret our coming, though looking anxiously forward to our return.
Could I be  sure of meeting you all again in health I could be content, but there is the anxiety…
…
I trust we shall be back in two years from the time we left England…
Before long, though, Eliza's melancholia was relieved by the couple's introduction to Sir John and Lady Franklin.
Sir John Franklin, who had been dubbed the ‘Polar Knight’ for his  valiant exploration of the Arctic, had been appointed lieutenant-governor of Van Dieman's Land the previous year.
It was to be another seven years before Franklin returned to his first love as commander of the Erebus on his most famous — and fatal — mission to find the legendary north-west passage from the polar seas to the north Pacific; until then he occupied himself with the social and moral improvement of the colony under his charge.
Sir John was deeply involved in reforming the conditions and prospects of the island's large convict population, and greatly interested in exploring the land and its resources.
He was particularly devoted to the development of culture in the young colony.
Franklin, who was 18 years Gould's senior, had established ‘for the better class of colonists’ a scientific society, the first of its kind in the colonies (and later to become the Royal Society of Hobart Town) and welcomed the ornithologist's arrival with great enthusiasm.
Gould had been given a number of letters of introduction to the veteran explorer from, among others, George Bank, who had accompanied Franklin on one of his Arctic expeditions, and Captain John Washington, secretary of the Royal Geographical Society.
Friendship rapidly developed between Mrs Gould, who was pregnant for the seventh time, and Lady Franklin, who at 46 had no children and was delighted to entertain a young family.
Lady Franklin, a ‘lioness of a woman’ with a lively sense of curiosity and a keen intelligence, devoted much of her time to promoting the visual arts in the infant colony, and took an avid interest in Mrs Gould's work for her husband.
She was as much a proponent of the study of natural history as her husband, and had founded a botanical garden on the banks of the Derwent just outside Hobart.
No doubt Eliza spent hours scouring the beds and walkways for native plants to incorporate in her bird drawings.
In Eliza's fourth letter home to her mother (the third was lost) in which she again expresses her yearning for the children, she also describes her developing attachment to the Franklins, and her husband's first  significant expedition under their auspices:
‘I feel extremely anxious about you, being well aware that this time of  year is most trying in England.
I sometimes picture to myself both you and Mrs. Mitchell suffering from the winter colds and fogs.
My dear little Louisa too is just at a critical age, teething in all probability.
I did not forget the darling's birthday.
Bless their dear little faces.
How I love to recall their looks to my mind's eye…
…
Now for the most important part of my very rambling letter.
As John would say, that is about the birds.
In the first place he has desired me to say he would write but for his constant occupation.
He is now out and as soon as he returns is to accompany Lady Franklin and her party in a vessel round the island as far as Port Davey and Macquarie Harbour, which you may easily see on the map.
I was to have gone also but declined.
John hopes to make there considerable additions to his stores.
He has been already very successful both as regards birds and their nests and eggs; he has a beautiful collection of them.
Before leaving V. D's.
L. he intends sending home a large case of skins, skeletons, eggs, etc.
All persons (or nearly so) to whom we have been introduced have endeavoured to promote our views, and here I must not forget to mention the great kindness we have received from Sir John and Lady Franklin in every way.
We have been frequent visitors at Government House and have been staying also at their cottage, New Norfolk.
I have also been invited to take up my abode at Government House during Lady F's absence at Macquarie.
Sir John, his niece, and some other ladies staying there, Lady F. thought it would be less lonely for me being in lodgings solitary…’
The indomitable Lady Franklin took off with Eliza's husband around the 10 December on his first major exploration of the south and west coasts of Van Diemen's Land.
They left Hobart with a small party on a government schooner bound for port Davey, but got no further than Recherche Bay before being prevented by stormy weather for a fortnight.
Lady Franklin kept a journal during the voyage in which she described Gould's eager attempts to continue bird collecting while they waited, windbound, in the Bay:
Tuesday, December 11th.
Entrance to D'Entrecasteaux's Channel.
‘About 2 o'clock, when within about 4 miles of Green Island, for which we were tacking, Mr. Gould went off in a boat with the hope of reaching it before us, and of finding some penguin's eggs which he is much in want off [sic].
He had landed on the island before and killed penguins, quails, ducks, etc.
On this occasion he did not succeed in  finding any penguin's eggs, but came back with a live penguin, and with the eggs of various gulls.
Some of these were too hard to be blown, in which case he cut with the point of a penknife or of a small knife adapted for the purpose, an oval-shaped piece of the shell out of the side, emptied the egg, and replaced the shell.’
December 12 Research [sic]Bay.
‘Mr. Gould went off in the morning to the Acteon [sic]Islands, which are about a mile distant from each other and at the distance of about 3 or 4 miles from Research Bay.
The soil of them is sandy and much covered with scrub.
He procured there 2 species of parrots he had not yet taken, an albatross, teal, gulls, and the eggs of the latter.’
December 13
‘Messrs. Gould and Gunn set off to-day to the head of the [Recherche]Bay to a plain, which appears to run up many miles into the country the hill called South Cape, which presents towards the bay a steep and particularly denuded surface…
Mr. Gould expected a rich harvest from the appearance of the plain, both as respect [sic]quadrupeds and birds, but it was remarkably destitute.
He brought back, however, the nest of an emu wren, and a parrot which he had not killed before.’
The weather did not relent.
The entire party, even the persistent Mr Gould, was forced to spend an entire day on board ship.
Two days passed, and on Sunday, 16 December, the schooner tried for a second time to get to Fort Davey but was forced back.
Gould was getting impatient.
Lady Franklin wrote: ‘Monday, December 17th.
It blew very hard, but not so much as to prevent Messrs. Gould and Gunn going on shore.
They visited the stream called Catamaran River in the Fort au Nord.’
The following day Gould visited the Catamaran River area again, but by now he was running short of fresh collecting sites and desperate to get back to work in earnest.
By Thursday he was considering aborting the venture altogether and returning to Hobart.
Thursday, December 20th.
‘Mr Gould was worn out by our reverses, regretted the loss of time, and this very afternoon had been declaring with many apologies that he must go back in the Vansittart.
His good humour under his prolonged disappointment had never failed, but his time was precious to him.
When he came to V. D. L. he intended to stop only a month.
How should he get through his work if he went on in this way?
Mr. Gould was to my very great regret in this disposition when Mr. Gunn, Elinor and I embarked again in the evening to visit the shores of that portion of the northern part of Research Bay where La Haye's garden was planted, and where Captain King had discovered signs of coal…
On our return to the schooner we found Mr. Gould no longer firm in his former determination to depart immediately, and on my telling him he must give me his hand in pledge that he would stay here and work longer if necessary, he, after a little hesitation, consented.
As a little compensation I begged Captain King to let us remove either to Bruny, or to Muscle Bay, which would make very little difference when once the wind set in fair, and it was accordingly settled that at daylight we should sail for Muscle Bay.’
For once, Gould's impatience was overruled.
The iron will of Lady Franklin bent the egotistical ornithologist under her sway, and he was forced to capitulate to someone else's wishes.
Despite the promise of great ornithological rewards if he stayed, Gould found it immensely difficult to remain inactive while there was so much work to be done.
Time was weighing heavily upon him.
That evening Gould wrote to his wife describing his frustration at having to wait yet longer in Recherche Bay:
Recherche Bay Thursday Night
20 Decr 38
My Dear Eliza,
Your letter of Sunday last was put into my hands this morning it having taken the Pilot with 5 men 4 days to reach this place so adverse has been the weather, you will therefore see we are still imprizoned [sic]here.
We  endeavored to get round the South West Cape on Sunday morning but was obliged quickly to retrace our steps.
The Cutter Vansittart is here also and will take this letter to town.
I would gladly have availed myself of the opportunity of taking a passage in her myself did I not find by so doing that the party would be entirely broken up and in all probability the trip to the westward abandoned altogether.
I myself would I am sure hereafter regret not visiting this part of V. D. L., and under all circumstances I have agreed with Lady Franklin to wait one week longer after which to return if the wind should not come round to the eastward or northeast, either of these winds would take us to the desired place in a few hours.
We intend shifting our locality tomorrow morning; we are going into South port 15 miles distance from this,(nearer home) this move  is principally on my account for the purpose of affording me a new locality for my rambles.
I have this day killed rather an extraordinary Bird, and one that you will recollect, at least there is every probability of its being the same; you will remember the large Snow White Petrel (a variety of the black species) which followed us nearly all the way from the Cape to Tasman's Head and which I was so desirous of procuring without effecting my purpose.
I have also killed some beautiful albatrosses, petrels, ducks etc. and four nests with full compliment of eggs of the Black Oystercatcher, small and large gulls, a Teal etc. besides a nest with young of the Emu Wren and other minor things.
I am quite well and am happy to say Lady F. is much better and is quite well.
I sincerely trust you are so also and that you are finally established at Government House.
Tell Henry I hope he is good and very attentive to you and it is and will be his place to be your protector! in my absence.
I am sorry you have not heard from Sydney, you cannot be long without letters, if they are not arrived already [letter torn].
The Marian Watson will return immediately.
This is a cold cheerless place and a complete channel house for whaling.
The beach is almost everywhere strewn with their Bones, entire skeletons many of which are still putrid.
You may therefore guess what we find to leeward.
I think I have not more to say.
God bless you my dear Eliza.
J. Gould
Hastily
P.S. I think we left some skeletons in water, if so, tell James to take them out merely and lay them on the table to dry.
They decided to move on to Muscle Bay, which provided Gould with few prizes.
Together with Thomas Smith, assistant police magistrate at South Fort, he explored the bay and an inlet and was later able to report ‘I procured newly-hatched young [of the Black Swan]clothed in greyish white down at South Fort River’.
But scarcely had he begun to investigate these new, if somewhat less adventurous, hunting-grounds, than the entire party was ‘summoned back to Hobarton by Sir John’.
The expedition returned only two weeks after it had left, having never got to see Macquairie, the south coast, or the promising territory around Port Davy.
But the venture had not been a failure.
Gould had procured, as Elizabeth reported to her mother, ‘several species of interesting birds while in  Recherche Bay and has now I believe most of the birds of this colony.’
Gould's impatience and his disappointment stemmed not so much from the fruits of his collecting, but from the frustration of inactivity and the miscarriage of a good project.
He set off again almost as soon as he had returned to Hobart to make up for lost time on an overland expedition to Launceston and George Town, 60 miles from Hobart on the North Coast of the island.
By then the Goulds had received their first batch of letters.
They had been sent on from Sydney by their nephew Henry, who had left for Australia a few weeks earlier to live with his uncle, Stephen Coxen, at Yarrundi in New South Wales.
Among the letters were the first three massive instalments from Prince detailing all the business transactions to date, a letter from Mrs Mitchell, and one for Eliza from Mrs Coxen.
On 3 January, Eliza sat down to reply to her mother:
‘…
Doubtless you are surprised at our being so long here.
John has found much to do which will not require to be again done in N.S.W. I still hope we may not exceed two years in our absence and I think John is as anxious as myself on the subject.
Meantime it gives us great consolation to know that you and our dear children are well.
Do not let them quite forget Momma and Papa if possible.
I sincerely wish you many happy returns of the season which I can scarcely realise as the winter of England, so odd does it seem to have the thermometer at 99 on Xmas day.
I am so very glad to hear that my darlings are all making such splendid improvement.
Do you mean little Louisa's propensity for breaking plates as an example?
Bless her sweet little face!
Who does she grow like?
And my dear little Eliza, is she as pretty as she was?
You may laugh, but she was pretty, at least in my eyes.
And dear good-tempered little Charley…
And now for ourselves and movements, as that is a welcome thing to you I know…
John on Tuesday last set out with Gilbert for Launceston, intending to visit some island in Bass's Straits.
He will be gone about a month and on his return we shall go to Sydney as quickly as we can…
I am during his absence drawing as many native plants as I can, I mean branches of trees, some of which are very pretty.
Henry is staying with me at Government House at present.
Sir John and Lady Frankling are very kind and wish me to feel quite at home…
[John]wished me to say for him everything that was kind to all, especially to his mother, sisters, and Mrs. Cleave and Mrs.  Stuart, also Mr. and Mrs. Mitchell.
He is extremely occupied.
His not writing more frequently is really  excusable , as you would acknowledge could you follow his movements as he slaves about all day in untiring perseverance…’
In a postscript Eliza somewhat enigmatically mentions her pregnancy for the first time:
‘My dear Mother, Mrs Mitchell says, ‘Do let us know if you mean to bring home a little convict.’’
I did not mean to say but perhaps it is better I should, therefore only remark that I will speak on the subject in my next, but do not suffer alarms on my account — I am in better health than I have been for years and I hope to get to Sydney and get comfortably settled in good time…’
Gould meanwhile was some 60 miles north of Hobart in the ‘interior of Van Diemen's Land’ at Spring Hill Inn, his thoughts engrossed in collecting.
Aubdubon's scepticism about Gould's ability to meet the strenuous physical demands of life in the bush proved to be without foundation.
Gould rose to the occasion and, driven by the feverish excitement of a treasure-seeker, surmounted every obstacle Tasmania's chequered geography could throw at him.
On 3 January he shot what he later called the ‘Clinking Currawong’, or Strepera arguta.
With somewhat unconvincing ostentation, given Gould's ignorance of Latin, he describes how he coined the most appropriate name for this unusual species.
Might this, one wonders, be one of the names that Albert Gunther so helpfully supplied Gould with over a chop at the British Museum?
‘Its note is a loud ringing and very peculiar sound, somewhat resembling the worlds Clink, clink, several times repeated, and strongly reminded me of the distant sound of the stroke on a blacksmith's anvil, and hence the term ‘arguta’ appeared to me to be an appropriate specific appellation for this new species.’
Blue-banded grass parakeets abounded in the neighbourhood of Spring Hill, feeding on corn from the margins of cultivated land in flocks larger than Gould had ever seen before; compared with the proliferation of different species around Hobart, however, only a few birds were collected on this overland journey.
The main focus of Gould's attention was the fecund islands to the north-west of Tasmania in Bass's Straits, whence they would travel by ship from George Town.
After a brief stay in Launceston on the upper reaches of the Tamar, where he replenished his stock of shot, powder, and caps, Gould wrote to his wife in Hobart:
George Town, River Tamar
Jany 8th 1839
My Dear Eliza,
We reached this place about ten this morning and are at present wind bound but trust we shall be fairly under way for Flinders tomorrow morning.
Your welcome letter found me at Launceston at which place I remained two days with Mr. Kerr, Captn Friend etc.
I was not so much gratified with the interior of the country as I had anticipated but the people tell me I have seen it in an unfavorable season, in consequence of no rain having fallen for 3 months.
The ground is literally parched and every blade of grass is yellow as sulphur, but independent of this the land in the interior is less rich and the fen of the country less fertile than any country I have ever traveled [sic].
On the whole the roads were good and also the Inns — the latter however are extravagantly high in their charges.
I collected a few birds on the way, among them a splendid Eagle which I killed at Perth.
This place George Town is something like I should think Thenness [?]when that town was first established although the extensive docks of the latter render it now far more different.
I look forward with considerable pleasure to our arrival at Flinders whither I proceed purposely to see the remnants of the inhabitants which once peopled this fine Island over which they were Lords and Masters but now submissive creatures to the wiles of Englishmen.
It will also be an interesting as well as expensive trip to me in other points.
After Flinders you are aware I go to Kings and although I trust it will not be so it might take a month to accomplish the journey (that is if the winds prove contrary) I state this in order that you might not be alarmed in not hearing from me.
You may depend if an opportunity should occur I will not fail to send a letter and I have to request in a [letter torn]fervor that you will post a letter to me at least once a week commencing from Monday next, with all particulars respecting your health etc etc directing them P. Office Launceston until called for, and when I again reach this place I will write immediately.
1 am happy to hear that Henry was drawing and trust he will be attentive to you in every way.
I should say give Sophy a Dollar, and I will think of the men when I return.
I wish you to send by the Launceston coach two clean parts, of course,(nos. one and two) of the Birds of Australia with some prospectuses [intended for Gilbert, who sailing directly to Swan River from Launceston, to take to John Hutt, Governor of Western Australia]which you will address to Captn Friend Post Office Launceston.
You will either get the four nos of the Synopsis from the work room drawing portfolio, in Government House and send them with the larger copy.
You had better get Fisher to plain [sic]a very thin teak board the size of the large books for protection, and a common book cover from the work room will do for the protection of the other side, spreading the four parts of the Synopsis over and sealing the whole in brown paper.
This parcel I wish sent immediately; James can pack it.
Must now conclude trusting my dear that every blessing will attend you and trusting I may find you well when I return — kiss dear Fritz [?]for me and believe me to remain Eliza
Yours ever affectionately
John Gould
The islands of Isabella, Green Island, Flinders, and Waterhouse were to prove a fertile hunting-ground even if not aesthetically pleasing.
‘Nothing could be more sterile and parched than the islands in Bass's Straits’, wrote Gould later, comparing them to the idyllic and verdant plains of the Upper Hunter River in Australia.
His collecting tasks in Bass's Straits were not made easier, either, by the interruptions of the wattled plover, a particularly noisy bird, bent, it seemed, on frustrating all Gould's intentions.
As Gould wrote in his handbook:
‘In some parts of New South Wales this ornamental bird has obtained the name of the Alarm-bird from its rising in the air, flying round and screaming at the approach of an intruder, causing not only all of its own species to follow its example, but every other animal in the district to be on the alert.
This fact I had ample opportunities of verifying on the islands of Bass's Straits, where I had scarcely stepped from the boat before every creature was made acquainted with my presence — no small annoyance to me, whose object was to secure the wary cereopsis and eagle, which with thousands of petrels and many other kinds of water-birds tenant these dreary islands.’
Birds were plentiful, but in many cases not as plentiful as Gould had been led to believe.
The islands were the province of the ‘sealers’ and countless other opportunists intent on making their fortune from the area's abundant ‘natural productions’.
For the first time Gould came up against the devastating effects of unlimited commercial exploitation.
The Cereopsis, or Cape Barren goose, had become an early victim, being prized for its  downy feathers.
‘This is one of the Australian birds’, noted Gould in his Handbook, ‘which particularly attracted the notice of the earlier voyagers to that country, by nearly every one of whom it is mentioned as being very plentiful on all the islands in Bass's Straits, and so tame that it might be easily knocked down with sticks or even captured by hand; during my sojourn in the country I visited many of the localities above mentioned, and found that, so far from being still numerous, it is almost extirpated; I killed a pair on Isabella Island, one of a small group near Flinder's Island, on the 12th January 1839.’
The following day, 13 January 1839, found Gould on Flinder's Island, where he took among other prizes, ‘five newly laid eggs’ of a black swan.
The presence of the black swan in the islands only emphasised for Gould its unnatural absence from the large rivers, such as the Derwent, on mainland Tasmania where it once abounded:
‘In the white man, the Black Swan finds an enemy so deadly, that in many parts where it was formerly numerous it has been almost, if not entirely, extirpated…
One most destructive mode by which vast numbers are destroyed is that of chasing the birds in a boat at the time they shed their primary quill-feathers, when being unable to fly they are soon rowed down and captured; this practice, which is to be much regretted, is usually resorted to for the sake of the beautiful down with which the breasts are clothed, but not unfrequently is mere wantonness.
I have heard of the boats of a whaler entering an estuary and returning to the ship, nearly filled with Black Swans destroyed in this manner.’
The albatrosses too were mercilessly hunted and often left, plucked and dying, where the sealers found them.
In the year before Gould's arrival a thousand albatrosses were killed on Albatross Island alone.
Nothing, however, could compare with the wholesale carnage committed by men among the short-tailed, or sooty, petrel, known to the sealers as the mutton bird.
Despite its relentless slaughter, its numbers were still great enough to excite Gould's astonishment when he visited one of its principal colonies on Green Island.
He was still distressed, however, by the prolific trade in mutton bird feathers, two-and-a-half tons of which could be taken in a season — the produce of roughly 112,000 birds — and which would be sold for about 6d per pound in Launceston.
If Gould was disgusted by the commercial exploits of his fellow white men, he was compensated by the reverence for birds that he discovered among the Aborigines.
His sojourn on Flinders Island became one of the  highlights of his stay in Tasmania.
In all probability he was greeted at the tiny settlement known as The Lagoons by an impromptu ‘corrobery’, just as the missionary James Backhouse had been the year before.
The Aborigines had suffered at the hands of the sealers — many of the women were kidnapped and put to work plucking birds for the feather trade — but they retained their custom of a spontaneous welcome for anyone who put into port on the island.
It is delightful to imagine Gould being invited in among the thatched huts to watch the famous emu dance.
Gould was enthralled by the spirit and customs of the Aborigines, and above all their almost religious respect for nature and its creatures.
He was in many ways far ahead of his compatriots in his attitude to these original occupants of Tasmania.
‘I shall always feel it a bounden duty on my part’, Gould later wrote to Sir William Jardine, ‘to sing their praises for if well treated they are the most harmless kind of creatures imaginable.’
Throughout his travels in the southern hemisphere Gould's behaviour towards the Aborigines is distinguished by a fearless, compassionate, and unbiased recognition of their plight, and a profound respect for their way of life.
The interest in birds that he shared with them transcended all prejudices and the racism rife among the resident colonials.
In turn, many of the Aborigines Gould encountered, and especially those who accompanied him as guides on his collecting expeditions, grew to admire him and to recognise a kindred spirit in the eccentric and enthusiastic white man.
Gould grew to depend on the Aborigines' local knowledge to find birds that were new to the Western world and to learn about their habits.
With uncustomary generosity, he included in his letterpress the Aboriginal name for a species, when he knew it, alongside its Latin and common names.
On his exploration of the islands in Bass's Straits, Gould was assisted by a native servant lent him by Lady Franklin.
‘Tell Lady Franklin,’ Gould instructed his wife in a letter to Hobart, ‘I have her little page with me, he is a most interesting little fellow, throws the spear and waddy with the utmost dexterity and [is]extremely useful to me in the bush, an eye like a hawk discovers birds nests & eggs in a most astonishing manner.’
Unfortunately, the voyage onward from Flinders' Island was curtailed by a horrifying incident that left Gould in a state of shock and unable to continue the expedition.
He wrote to Eliza from George Town before commencing the journey overland back to Hobart, describing what had happened:
Sunday 20th Jany 1838 [1839]
My dear Eliza,
I am now in Capt. Friend's office and have only a short time to  write before the post leaves.
We arrived here yesterday from Flinders at which place I was especially gratified to [word not clear]my acquaintance with the Natives and other things, and I should have left the island with a light heart and proceeded to Kings had [not]a fatal accident happened to one of the men who shot himself dead by  incautiously pulling the gun from the boat with the muzzle toward his chest, the cock of the gun caught the seat of the boat and all was over with the poor fellow in half a minute.
I cannot tell you my Dear Eliza how great a shock I sustained.
I have scarcely been myself since and I almost hate the sight of a gun.
I have given up all idea now of going to Kings and shall make my way across the Island as quickly as I can making a call or two on the way.
The inquest will be held in the morning.
The man had every caution given him not a minute before to be careful with the gun, but his time was come as his poor shipmates say and with that they console themselves…
It must have been with some degree of cautiousness and a heightened sense of responsibility that Gould once more stocked up on shot, caps, and powder on his way back through Launceston for the journey home.
It was in Launceston that Gould took the opportunity of parting company with Gilbert, instructing him to await the arrival in Launceston of the Comet, which would carry him on to the Swan River in Western Australia.
It was a typically ad hoc decision on Gould's part, and Gilbert was forced to continue his journey without recourse to his belongings back in Hobart, and entrusted his trunk to the protection of his employer.
Back once more in the capital after an uneventful overland journey, Gould took a rare moment to sit down and recount his adventures to the expectant household in Broad Street.
Prince reported them faithfully to Sir William Jardine:
London 20 Broad Street, Golden Square
July 20, 1839
Sir,
Sir Philip Egerton having been kind enough to give me a Frank I embrace the opportunity to send you some account of Mr. Gould and his movements, presuming that as you expressed a wish to hear of him from time to time, a letter on this subject might not be devoid of interest.
Our last Letters are dated Hobart Town Feb. 9 up to which time his expedition had been eminently successful; far more so than he could have anticipated; the most liberal assistance had been rendered  him by the Authorities, everything that could facilitate his views being cheerfully accorded: while nothing could exceed the kindness of Sir John and Lady Franklin in whose house he was then residing: in fact so much were they interested in his pursuits that upon more than one occasion they accompanied him in his exploring parties.
They have been over the greater part of Van Diemen's Land and the Islands in Bass's Straits and appear highly gratified with their peregrinations: a government vessel has generally been devoted to their use.
The beauty and novelty of the scenery, the luxuriance of the shrubs and above all the originality of the Natives has astonished them beyond description, and so raised their enthusiasm that they seem scarcely to have felt the labour and fatigue of ascending high mountains or traversing deep glens and ravines, in fact so many wonders in the shape of animal creation have sprung up, as it were before them, that their imaginations have been kept in one continued state of delighted excitement.
The result of his labours during the five months he had been there is a collection consisting of 500 Birds; 100 Skeletons, 60 nests, the eggs of alike [sic]No. of species, and 3 nine gallon Kegs of specimens in spirits…
…
The whole of the party were in excellent health and had well tried each others stamina in walking up mountains etc. etc. but having so many interesting objects in view they had allowed no difficulty or danger to impede their progress.
Typically, Gould's infrequent letters home detailed only his ornithological exploits, much to the dismay of the household, who were desperate to hear news of a more personal nature.
On 2 March 1839, Prince replied with a sense of disappointment to Gould's impersonal letters:
‘On the 7th and 10th of Feb. we recd your Letters of the 25th of Septr and 6th of Oct: They were a source of the highest gratification to us all, but neither Letter was so full or explanatory as we could wish and from the slight mention of Mrs. Gould we are fearful that her health is not much improved.
You do not enter into any details respecting the Voyage, where you are resident etc. in fact I gleaned more information on these points from one of Gilbert's Letters to a friend of his than from all 3 of yours — We are, however, delighted to find your expedition progressing so satisfactorily and anxiously hope it may continue to do so.’
Despite Prince's pleas, there was no improvement in the ornithologist's  communications, and a few months later, in a letter dated 20 May, Prince took the opportunity to berate Gould for his thoughtlessness:
‘…we are of course much gratified to hear of your safety and that your expedition is progressing so prosperously: at the same time the Letter although a long one does not tell us half the things we most wished to know: it does not say ought of your movements, when we may expect you home, how Mrs Gould is, whether your attendants have answered your expectations, how Mastr.
Henry is, or whether Mrs G. has presented you with a little Tasmanian, or likely to do so, a point upon which her mother is so exceedingly anxious that on finding it was not mentioned she sat down and cried with vexation.’
Elizabeth's letters were far more accommodating.
While Gould was away in Bass's Straits she described how she occupied her time without him, painting plants and flowers for later use in the plates, and sketching the bird specimens delivered to her table.
Her pregnancy thankfully gave her a little relief from the enormous output normally expected of her, and her stay with the Franklins was a welcome respite from the boredom and loneliness of being on her own, as she wrote on 9 January:
‘We are very comfortable at Government House and Lady Franklin will not hear of our going from it so long as we remain in town.
By we I mean Henry and I…
Could you see us you would be astonished and I think pleased at the change of life this visit to lady F. affords me.
They give many dinner parties but otherwise live in a very quiet, regular way.
Do not, however, suppose that I am quite idle, though happily for my health it is not requisite to apply so closely as formerly was the case.
Wait a little, there will be enough of it bye and bye and to spare.
Just now during John's absence I find amusement and employment in drawing some of the plants of the colony, which will help to render the work on Birds of Australia more interesting.
All our sketches are much approved of and highly complimented by our friends.
I wish you could hear some of the magnificent speeches that are frequently made us, because I know you like dearly to hear your daughter praised.
But at the end of all I sigh and think if I could but see old England again, and the dear, dear treasures it contains, I would contentedly sit down at my working table and stroke, stroke away to the end of the chapter, that is health permitting.’
These were difficult times for Elizabeth.
She more than anyone else  understood her husband's obsession and his overriding ambition to become Australia's first ornithologist; she even encouraged and implemented his aims.
But she could never hope to participate to the same degree in his excitement and his passion.
The dream that had brought the two of them to the other side of the globe was wedging a distance between them.
Eliza's priorities were as a mother, and if Gould had some sympathy with this, it gave them little ground for compromise.
Eliza was now six months pregnant, and Lady Franklin extended a ‘pressing invitation’ to her to remain at Government House for the rest of her confinement.
Eliza acquiesced, forsaking for the time being the prospect of seeing her brothers in Australia for the comfort and security of staying in Hobart, and yet sad to be losing the company of her husband.
‘John left late last night by the ‘Potentate’ for Sydney, without me, much to my sorrow’, she told her mother on 15 February 1839, ‘though I cannot but admit the propriety of the arrangement.’
Gould left for Sydney, with plans to return in time for the birth, excited and full of anticipation at the prospect of ‘fresh fields’.
His achievements had already exceeded his highest hopes, and he anticipated equal if not greater success from the great continent.
On the day he left, Gould wrote to Captain Washington at the Royal Geographical Society, announcing proudly, ‘I shall have many novelties to add to science as well as to communicate a great deal respecting their habits since I have already obtained the nests and eggs of 60 species not one of which as far as I am aware have been described.’
He had added two new candidates, the Acanthiza ewingi and the Strepera arguta, to the list of native Tasmanian species, making a total of 12, four of which he had already named from specimens sent to him before he left England, and had now succeeded in seeing all of these alive in their native habitat.
Later, in 1855, he was to name a thirteenth Tasmanian species, the scrub tit or Acanthomis magna, from a specimen sent to him by his friend Ronald Gunn.
Gould's experiences so far had encouraged him to expect similar rewards from the next leg of the expedition, and he left Van Diemen's Land in a spirit of optimism and with a light heart.
CHAPTER 9
Adventure in the Newest World
IF TASMANIA COULD BE REGARDED as a microcosm of what to expect from the great continent of Australia, Gould's exhilaration as he sailed towards Sydney could not, understandably, have been higher.
He was not a superstitious man, but even he must have been encouraged by the good omens that visited him while on board the Potentate.
The short, nine-day voyage was accompanied by beautiful weather, and brought with it one of Gould's most elusive and sought-after species of petrel, one that had tantalised him for weeks aboard the Parsee, although the occasion was, as Gould liked to emphasise, as much a result of his own ingenuity as it was of chance or convenience:
‘While engaged in watching the movements of the several species of the great family of Procellaridae, which at one time often and often surrounded the ships that conveyed me round the world, a bright speck would appear on the distant horizon, and, gradually approaching nearer and nearer, at length assumed the form of the White-headed petrel, whose wing-powers far exceed those of any of its congeners; at one moment it would be rising high in the air, at the next sweeping comet-like through the flocks flying around; never, however, approaching the ship sufficiently near for a successful shot, and it was equally wary in avoiding the boat with which I was frequently favoured for the purpose of securing examples of other species; but, to make use of a familiar adage, the most knowing are taken in at last’’; one beautiful morning, the 20th of Feb. 1839, during my passage from Hobart Town to Sydney, when the sea was perfectly calm and of a glassy smoothness, this wanderer of the ocean came in sight  and approached within three hundred yards of the vessel; anxious to attract him still closer, so as to bring him within range, I thought of the following stratagem:— a corked bottle, attached to a long line, was thrown overboard and allowed to drift to the distance of forty or fifty yards, and kept there until the bird favoured us with another visit, while flying around in immense circles; at length his keen eye caught sight of the neck of the bottle (to which a bobbing motion was communicated by sudden jerks of the string), and he at once proceeded to examine more closely what it was that had arrested his attention; during this momentary pause the trigger was pulled, the boat lowered, and the bird was soon in my possession.’
On 24 February 1839 Gould arrived in Sydney.
The town, a jumble of Jekyll-and-Hyde contradictions, did not impress him.
At the time, Sydney was essentially a centre created around a convict population, yet eager to assert its status as the commercial and cultural capital of the continent.
rand public buildings of polished stone blossomed out of a mulch of mud huts and rough timber yards; chain-gangs laboured in the streets to clear tree-stumps and wagon ruts, while ladies paraded by beneath their parasols.
It was a place stoked by both the puritan and the profligate, the missionaries and the military, the drunkards and the degenerates.
Amid the cricket-clubs and colleges, crime was part of everyday life.
Three years before, Darwin had arrived in Sydney proud to be an Englishman and left ‘without sorrow or regret’.
Sydney had some way to go before it was released from the burden of compulsive immigration, and before it could present to the world a face that was uniquely its own.
While Gould's first impressions were not favourable, he was determined, as he wrote to Sir John Franklin, to keep an open mind: ‘The heat and dust of Sydney is extremable neither does the presence of Drunkards which constantly present themselves in the streets add to the interest of this place, time and better acquaintance with the country will however perhaps enable me to speak better of it.’
Preparations for Gould's visit to his brother-in-law's station at Yarrundi had to be made, and it would be at least three days before Gould could escape the streets of Sydney to resume his ‘favourite pursuits’.
During this time he introduced himself to the Governor of New South Wales, who received me most kindly and offered me every assistance’, and paid his respects to Captain Philip Parker King, who had commanded his expedition with Lady Franklin to Recherche Bay the previous December, and who was now resident in Sydney as Port Officer and Superintendent of Government Vessels.
When, later in the year, Lady Franklin found her  self in Sydney, she discussed with Captain King his impressions of their mutual friend, the ornithologist, and made a note in her diary concerning Gould's clumsy attempts at social etiquette: ‘Captn.
King agreed with me as to Mr Gould being an entirely uneducated man — he sd when he came here [to Sydney]he brought verbal introductions from Sir J. to difft. individuals & went up to them & sd.
Sir J. Franklin desires me to give his compliments — he is in very good health & hopes you are the same.’
Whether Gould greeted all of his contacts with a similarly gauche introduction or not, he made the best of his time in Sydney and called on, among others, the missionary Bishop of Australia, William Broughton, and Alexander MacLeay, first President of the Australian Museum at Sydney.
It was in MacLeay's suburban garden that Gould saw his first living wattled talegalla or brush turkey roaming freely among the chickens.
So extraordinary was this bird and so little was known about it, that previously naturalists had been divided as to whether it belonged to the vulture or the gallinaceous race.
Gould was fascinated by its habit of collecting all the rubbish lying around in the shrubberies and borders, and then building a huge incubating mound in the middle of the lawn.
Sadly, the creature drowned itself shortly after his visit by attempting to attack its own reflection in a bucket of water.
Gould also used his time to visit the great Australian explorer Charles Sturt at his home at Varroville outside Sydney.
Sturt was just off to Adelaide with his family to take up the post of Surveyor-General of South Australia, and it was a matter of great good fortune that the two met at all.
As a result, plans were laid for Gould to join Sturt's surveying expedition to the Murray River later that year.
Sturt had already considerable experience of the countryside around Adelaide, having in the previous year explored much of the land to the south of the Murray River, and crossed the Mount Lofty range on his overland expedition from Sydney to Adelaide.
He would have been able to tell Gould about the wealth of unusual birds around Adelaide, and persuade him of the necessity of collecting in the area.
It was to be one of the most adventurous and rewarding expeditions Gould undertook during his stay in Australia.
Gould discovered in this hardy, middle-aged explorer, a man of great charm and great ornithological ability.
While visiting his house, Gould's ever-watchful eye was drawn to a large collection of watercolours painted by Sturt of parrots that he had collected on his various excursions.
Gould offered an enormous sum for them on the spot.
‘But’, as Mrs Napier George Sturt described in her Life of Charles Stun, ‘these paintings had been the delight of Sturt's leisure; he was devoted to ornithology, and had collected the rarer specimens at great trouble and risk, and at no price  would he part with the folio.’
Gould's enthusiasm proved to be the kiss of death, for the collection disappeared without trace shortly after his visit.
‘It was supposed’, wrote Mrs Sturt, ‘that Gould's remarks must have drawn the attention of some dishonest workman to the value of the drawings, for soon afterwards the military chest in which they were left, disappeared and was never again seen.
Natives put upon the scent found military accoutrements and other articles thrown out of the same chest, so that the drawings were clearly the object of the theft.
The fugitives were traced to Sydney.’
The watercolours were never recovered.
The theft did not interfere with the good relations between the two men, however, and Gould, having secured a place on Sturt's forthcoming expedition to South Australia, set off towards the Liverpool Plains, north of Sydney.
His expectations of the bird life were high, and he revelled in the sense of anticipation that gripped him before his  departure .
‘You, Sir,’ he wrote to Sir John Franklin, ‘fully understand this pleasure particularly when one's visits are directed to a fresh field abounding with novelties; if I find my labors as much rewarded here as they have been in V. D. Land, I shall consider myself amply paid.’
Gould's brother-in-law's station, 160 miles from Newcastle on the coast up the Hunter River at Yarrundi, far exceeded Gould's expectations both in size and in beauty.
His homestead was situated on the Dart Brook, a tributary of the Hunter, nine miles from the great mountain chain known as the Liverpool Range.
Since the days when he first settled at Yarrundi to farm sheep and cattle on the fertile Liverpool plains, Stephen Coxen had accumulated a substantial tract of land amounting to about 12,000 acres and about as many head of livestock.
More people had been drawn to the area since Stephen had been there, but the settlement was still small and the opportunities for the adventurous pioneer still great.
Between 1838 and 1839, however, there arrived the first in a series of droughts.
There were to be brief respites from the prolonged drought, one of which Gould was to be most fortunate to encounter, but the settlers were still facing a period of unparalleled hardship.
Many of them were bankrupted and forced to leave their farms.
Eventually Stephen committed suicide in a Sydney hotel, leaving a note that stated, ‘All the means I have in the world is on the table, 23/6d, and this I have borrowed’.
Minutes before the poison he had taken took its final effect, a friend broke into the room to tell Stephen that a government maintenance had been granted him of two guineas a week.
‘Had it come five minutes earlier,’ he said when he heard the news, ‘I might have been saved.
I have taken poison.’
In 1839, though, Stephen was in good spirits.
The drought had not yet  taken a stranglehold, although the landscape looked parched and drier than it had for years.
‘Stephen is doing well,’ wrote Gould to Eliza when he arrived, ‘better certainly than his neighbors.
I find everything realized and more so than was stated.
This is a pretty place far beyond what I anticipated.
His establishments are very extensive and extremely well conducted.
He has his failing however, I am sorry to say, the particulars of which I will explain when we meet.
The drought is becoming very serious, no rain having fallen for nine months, in fact nothing but ruin presents itself.
There is scarcely a blade of green grass in the colony.
I could only have believed what I have seen.
Stephen of course is suffering much but the distress if general.’
Gould had only a couple of weeks to spare here (he had been delayed a week in Maitland on the lower reaches of the Hunter while he waited to meet up with Stephen Coxen), having promised Eliza to forsake his desire to continue collecting, and to return in time for the delivery of their child.
His forays were therefore limited to the area around Yarrundi.
He was joined on most of his hunting expeditions by two Aborigines, Natty and Jemmy, ‘two intelligent and faithful natives of the Yarrundi tribe’, who became extremely attached to Gould and later accompanied him on his most ambitious and successful expedition to the Mokai and Namoi Rivers in December of that year.
Eliza wrote to Mrs Mitchell at Broad Street about Gould's admiration for the Aborigines, and for Natty and Jemmy in particular:
‘My dear Mrs Mitchell,
Perceiving on a  re-perusal of one of Mr Prince's letters that you are all feeling apprehensions of our being in danger from the natives, I hasten to relieve you from that alarm.
I have also participated in your fears during John's absence at Sydney, but as I now believe quite needlessly.
Indeed he considers a prudent man more safe with many of the black tribes than without their protection.
There are, however, some hostile tribes far in the interior, but I trust he has sufficient prudence not to venture within their district.
The tribes which inhabit the Upper Hunter and the adjacent parts of the colony are extremely harmless and well disposed.
Two of them (the men, I mean) became quite fond of John during the short time he was with them, and expressed much regret at his leaving, begging him to come again and to bring his gin, meaning his wife, with him.’
Most of Gould's time on this first brief visit to Yarrundi was spent in pursuit of one particular bird — the Menura or lyre-bird that abounded in the cedar brush on the slopes of the Liverpool Range.
It was a particularly elusive bird — the ‘most shy and difficult to procure’— that Gould had ever come across.
Its striking appearance and unusual habits, however, made it a prize worth concentrating every effort upon.
It was a bird that would appeal to popular sentiment; indeed, Gould advocated its adoption as Australia's national bird, and later used it as a motif on the covers of his Birds of Australia series, showing the male lyre-bird with the beautiful lyre-shaped plumes of its tail raised in courtship.
Gould's determination to possess the lyre-bird took him over some of the roughest terrain around Yarrundi: into precipitous gullies and ravines, through dense woodland and tangled undergrowth, and through, as Gould put it, ‘rugged, hot and suffocating brushes’.
He later recalled his labours in the stifling, drought-stricken bush:
‘Independently of climbing over rocks and fallen stumps of trees, the sportsman has to creep and crawl beneath and among the branches with the utmost caution, taking care only to advance when the bird's attention is occupied in singing, or in scratching up the leaves in search of food; to watch its actions it is necessary to remain perfectly motionless, not venturing to move even in the slightest degree, or it vanishes from sight as if by magic…
None are so efficient in obtaining specimens as the naked black, whose noiseless and gliding steps enable him to steel upon it unheard and unperceived, and with a gun in his hand he rarely allows it to escape, and in many instances, he will even kill it with his own weapons.’
For Gould, accustomed to the European way of shooting birds, of which stealth is rarely a part, the task was not so easy.
His somewhat unorthodox methods are explained in his letterpress for Birds of Australia:’[One]successful mode of procuring specimens is by wearing a tail of a full-plumaged male in the hat, keeping it constantly in motion, and concealing the person among the brushes, when the attention of the bird being arrested by the apparent intrusion of another of its own sex, it will be attracted within the range of the gun…’
When he was not ducking and weaving through the cedar brush with this curious hat on his head, Gould was sitting up at night on the Appletree Flats waiting to ambush a tawny-shouldered podargus or crouching next to a hole in the ground close to Stephen's garden gate waiting for the appearance of an unfamiliar little mouse.
He also devoted a good deal of his investigations to the extraordinary satin bower-bird, a native of the  area and so called for its remarkable habit of building and decorating a sort of stage-set, in which it would perform ritual mating dances.
Gould had seen one of these bowers in the Sydney Museum, which had been presented by his brother-in-law Charles Coxen, and was determined to observe the construction in use in its place of origin:
‘On visiting the cedar-brushes of the Liverpool range, I discovered several of these bowers or playing-places on the ground, under the shelter of the branches of overhanging trees, in the most retired part of the forest…
The interest of this curious bower is much enhanced by the manner in which it is decorated with the most gaily-coloured articles that can be collected, such as the blue tail-feathers of the Rose-hill and Pennantian Parrakeets, bleached bones, the shells of snails, & c some of the feathers are inserted among the twigs, while others with the bones and shells are strewn about near the entrances.
The propensity of these birds to fly off with any attractive object, is so well known to the natives, that they always search the runs for any small missing article that may have been accidentally dropped in the bush.
I myself found at the entrance of one of them a small neatly-worked tomahawk, of an inch and a half in length, together with some slips of blue cotton rags, which the birds had doubtless picked up at a deserted encampment of the natives.’
Although he was never able, despite his ‘utmost endeavours’, to find the actual nest and eggs of the satin bower-birds, the new light he was able to throw on their bower-building habits caused a considerable stir back in England.
The fancy taste for ornaments and trinkets displayed by these peculiar birds appealed to the Victorian dilettante.
Gould organised the shipment of several complete bowers back to London, where they were put on display at the Zoological Society.
The name of John Gould soon became synonymous with the fantastic bower-bird, and gave a new ornithological slant to one of the popular songs of the day: ‘Will you join in the evening and charm us as you ever have done at the piano’, asked Gould of Mrs Owen shortly after his return, ‘…
I shall be most glad to…sing ‘O Come to the Bower’.’
Gould was thrown into a state of feverish excitement by his forays into the Australian bush, and, in a note written ‘after dinner in a great hurry and with a bad pen’, he told Eliza:.
‘I have so much to say that I cannot tell you half in a letter.
You will be happy to hear that I am in excellent health and the colony agrees  with me well.
I have already made an expedition to the Liverpool Range.
On the top of one of the highest peaks I mounted, and had a good view of the plains  below .
The birds are all moulting consequently in a bad state being our excuse, so have killed many other things.
We killed 9 Manura [sic]superba 3 of which I have in brine for dissection, 2 for skeletons, the rest in skin, a pair of which with several other fine birds I intend for Lady Franklin.
Fray give my respects to their Excellencies and remember me kindly to all…’
Gould was clearly reluctant to return to Tasmania so soon, when so many novelties awaited him in and beyond the cedar-brushes of the Liverpool Range.
Begrudgingly, he details his plans, as promised, to return to Hobart, emphasising, perhaps a little unfairly given his wife's condition, the inconvenience this would entail:
‘I intend leaving this the first moment I can for Sydney hence to Hobart Town to see you, although it will verily interfere with my pursuits.
But how I am to get conveyed with my luggage to Maitland neither Stephen or I can devise, three teams of bullocks having left Warra on their way from the plains to this place eight days ago and have not yet arrived.
Warra is 35 miles distant.
When we heard of them last they were cutting down trees for them to feed upon which is very generally adopted.
As to water every river is dried up, and men are constantly employed in sucking wells.
Cattle and sheep are dying in every direction.
All this makes Stephen fretful and peevish as well it might.
We shall contrive some way however to get me down to Maitland town and the end of the week, when I shall make my way to Hobart Town the best way I can.
I trust my dear Eliza you are still well and that you received my letter.
You have my sincere hope and prayers for a safe delivery out of your troubles, and which I fear not will be granted to you, and if I am not with you at the time you will have something to present to me when I do.’
Despite the difficulties of his predicament however, Gould managed to return to Sydney in just over a fortnight after writing his letter to Eliza.
Here, while he waited to embark the Susannah Anne bound for Hobart, he met with the offices from HMS Beagle, then on its third surveying voyage around the world under Commander John C. Wickham.
With his admirable powers of persuasion, and perhaps the Darwin connection, Gould managed to enlist some of the crew: the Commander, Rear-Admiral Stokes, a Mr Dring, and, in particular, Dr Benjamin Bynoe, who promised to surrender to Gould any birds they might collect on the voyage for naming and describing.
Ultimately, Bynoe was to provide some of the most magnificent specimens to be featured in the Birds of Australia, the silvery-crowned friar-bird, the painted finch and the yellow-rumped pardalote among them.
(In a letter to the Zoological Society written on 10 May and read out at the scientific meeting in London on 8 October, Gould described 19 new species, 13 of which he stated he had received from Dr Bynoe of the Beagle.)
Gould was cutting it fine.
He was in Bass's Straits on 16 April but he managed to be in Hobart for the birth of his son on 6 May.
The ‘little Tasmanian’, a ‘prodigious fellow’ according to his mother, was named, appropriately, Franklin Tasman.
If Eliza's mother had suffered anxieties over the birth of her fifth grandchild so far from home, her fears were allayed by a string of reassuring letters sent back to London.
Even Gould wrote to the Broad Street household three days after the event.
Eliza wrote to Mrs Mitchell on 30 May, ‘We are, baby and I, still going on well and getting more strength every day.
Never before have I had so good a time or taken so little medicine.’
Three weeks later Eliza proudly elaborated, ‘Baby, now three months old, is a very fine healthy child…
He is the finest child about here and a great pet with all in the family.’
Despite the relief of a healthy baby and an uncomplicated birth, Eliza was still pitifully homesick for her mother, whom she feared might suffer ‘one of her usual attacks’ over the winter, and for her other children.
‘How are the dear children?’ she asked Mrs Mitchell in a letter of 28 May, ‘Do they appear to retain any recollections of papa and Mamma?
I often please myself with anticipations of our return, picture to myself the joy and greetings when we meet, and I try to fancy the appearance of the dear children — they will be grown out of all knowledge.’
The balls and parties given by the Franklins did little to buoy up her spirits, being, as she described herself, ‘such a shy, reserved being’, and she longed for the quiet, regular family life of home.
Only five days after the birth of his son, Gould was off again, this time to join Sturt in Adelaide for the expedition to the Murray River.
He left Hobart on 11 May, and was in Launceston by 18 May in time to board the Black Woke, together with 820 sheep, five horses and four other passengers, all bound for Adelaide.
Gould's collection up to this time consisted, as the Hobart Town Courier related on 24 May, of ‘about 800 specimens of birds, 70 of quadrupeds (several of which are new), more than 100 specimens preserved whole in spirits, and the nest[s] and eggs of above 70  species of birds, together with skeletons of all the principal forms.
Mr Gould,’ the piece continued, ‘has left our shores for Southern [South Australia]and we cannot wish him better success than that which he has hitherto experienced.’
Gould's arrival on 1 June 1849 in the ‘City of Adelaide’ was decorously announced in the South Australian:
‘Mr. Gould, the ornithologist, from London, is at present in Adelaide.
Those who have seen his splendid drawings of the birds of other countries, will rejoice that those of our colony (many of which are exceedingly beautiful, and some of them new) will in turn become subjects for his pencil.’
If Gould had been disappointed by Sydney, he was amazed by Adelaide.
The ‘city’ he saw — which had been founded less than three years earlier — was little more than ‘a chaotic jumble of sheds and mud huts’.
Here and there groups of immigrants, newly arrived from England, Ireland, or Germany, toiled on buildings or felled trees.
Streets and squares had only just been marked out with pegs and twine amid the clutter.
Among the remaining trees, which would one day distinguish themselves in avenues and parks, and over the heads of the labouring workmen rose clouds of parakeets and honey-eaters searching for food.
In the countryside beyond Adelaide, tiny villages were just beginning to emerge, and acres of land were being cultivated for garden plots.
As Gould wrote his impressions to Prince:
‘I wish it were in my power to give you a faithful picture of this famed city of two years standing.
People live in tents, and customs are so different from what they have been used to, that I really wonder how they reconcile themselves to their new mode of life.
On the whole, however, I think South Australia may be considered as flourishing, and its condition will ultimately be prosperous.
The Zoology here, from what I have already seen, is likely to be of a most interesting description, totally different in its nature from that of Sydney, but probably approaching nearer in its character to the productions found beyond the Liverpool range, or what is more properly called the interior of New South Wales.’
Much of the time between Gould's arrival in Adelaide and the departure of Sturt's expedition was spent with Sturt and his family, or Governor Gawler, whose wife was a friend of Lear's, and in exploring the countryside  around the city.
In the space of just three weeks Gould visited the coast between Holdfast Bay and Fort Adelaide, spent several days with James Hawker near the Horseshoe camp on the Onkaparinga, and shot his ‘finest specimens’, of which he was later to rename the Adelaide parakeet ‘in the very streets of the city of Adelaide’.
Blue-bellied, porphyry-crowned musk and little lorikeets also flocked around the town and provided Gould with easy targets.
‘The incessant clamour kept up by multitudes of these birds baffles description’, he noted, ‘…they feed together in perfect amity, and it is not unusual to see two or three species on the same branch.
They are all so remarkably tame, that any number of shots may be fired among them without causing the slightest alarm to any but those that are actually wounded.’
As ever, Gould was not long without amusement.
On 17 June Gould set off with Sturt across the Mount Lofty range towards the Murray River.
Although part of the same expedition, Gould's and Sturt's different objectives led them to work independently.
Gould was provided ‘through the kindness of Col. Gawler, the Governor, and Capt. Sturt; with ‘horses, a cart, and a small company, with the view of reaching the Murray’.
Several commentators have claimed that on this expedition Gould's party was the first ever to reach the great western bend of the Murray overland from Adelaide.
But we cannot be certain that Gould even got as far as the river at all.
He himself says he ‘spent five weeks entirely in the bush in the interior, partly on the ranges and partly on the belts of the Murray’.
Although he had a magnificent view from the top of the Mount Lofty range of the Murray River, winding its course across the flats through a belt of dense dwarf eucalypti, there is no mention of his ever having reached its banks, let alone the remote western bend 100 miles away.
How this rumour came about is uncertain.
Gould might have been disorientated — his record of dates, distances and directions are sometimes unreliable; he might have exaggerated the achievements of his expedition — he would not have been the first explorer to do so; or he might have been misquoted by an over-enthusiastic press.
Whatever the answer, the western bend of the Murray, some 100 miles north-east of Adelaide, was not reached by an overland route until October of that year, when at least two parties, including one from the survey department, are recorded as having made it.
Gould, it appears from his own references, was too busy collecting specimens to engage in an attempt to reach a remote part of the river.
On 26 June he records shooting a wattle-cheeked honeyeater ‘on the ranges near the Upper Torrens’; he ‘killed a Bittern on the 1st July near the Murray, above Gleeson's Station’; collected red throats ‘about forty miles  north of Lake Alexandrina’; spotted a white-eyebrowed pomatorhinus ‘near the bend of the river Murray’(perhaps it was this remark that led some to guess that it was the great west bend to which Gould referred); and shot a pink robin in ‘a deep ravine under Mount Lofty’(this was the last time an example of this species, Petroica rodinogaster was seen in South Australia, although one or two reliable observers said they had seen specimens in the area many years previously).
Apart from the time Gould would have spent stalking, shooting, skinning, and preparing these and a host of other birds, there would have been no possibility of him visiting all these different localities and reaching the west bend of the Murray.
Not only were his carts and equipment a great  encumbrance , but Gould was limited in the amount of ground he could cover by a scarcity of supplies.
Sturt, who would have been able to take a much faster and direct route, only made it as far as the western approaches to the bend, and was so hard-pressed by lack of water that he had to bleed a horse to survive.
Gould's accounts imply that he spent much of the latter part of his expedition, because of a shortage of water, doubling backwards and forwards from the Mount Lofty range to the Murray Scrubs (later known as the Mallee), where most of the interesting birds were to be found:
‘Having with difficulty crossed the range over an entire new country, and penetrated to the centre of the dense Eucalypti scrub alluded to, in which I spent a night and part of two days without water for my horses, I was compelled, much to my regret, to beat a hasty retreat back to the ranges, in the gullies of which I even found difficulty in obtaining water.
During a week's stay under the ranges I made daily visits to this rich arboretum, which would have served me to investigate until this time without exhausting its treasures; but, alas! our provisions failing, we were obliged to re-trace our steps.’
Curtailed in his researches he may have been, but Gould still came away from the parched furnace of the scrubs with some of the rarest novelties yet of his collection and a vast number of specimens of every description.
The black-backed superb warbler, the graceful ptilotis, red throat, white-fronted honey-eater, and chestnut-backed ground thrush all fell to his gun in these few exhausting but rewarding weeks.
‘He has sent home another fine collection of upwards of 500 birds, 40 Quadrupeds etc. the result of 3 months labour in S. Australia’, reported Prince to Jardine on 1 January 1840.
‘His gratification was almost unbounded when on arriving at the Belts of the Murray he found not only numerous new Species but new forms of Birds.
The Botany also of this part of Australia surpassed any  thing he had then seen.
During the expedition which was undertaken in the depth of winter he passed 5 weeks in the bush without seeing a civilised being sleeping occasionally in a Tent, sometimes under a cart but more frequently on the bare ground wrapped in a Kangaroo skin rug still he had not had a cold or the slightest disorder…’
On 28 September 1839, Gould was to tell Jardine directly, ‘I have visited South Australia, a part that has afforded me more novelties than any other I have visited.’
But the expedition also gave Gould a greater insight into the distribution of species over all Australia; it suggested to him, in comparison with his recent knowledge of New South Wales and Van Diemen's Land, which species might be stationary and which dispersed over a greater area.
Sturt, with his unrivalled knowledge of Australian geography and zoology, had much to say on the subject, and his observations must have contributed greatly to Gould's views.
In a letter to Dr Bennett in Sydney from the ‘Upper part of the Torrens’ on 23 June 1839, Gould remarked, ‘Capt. Sturt has just joined me on our way to the Murray…
I am much pleased with my visit to this portion of Australia which will be attended by very important results regarding the Geographical range of species besides many new ones.’
Gould was with the one man who could introduce him most convincingly to the alliances between geography and the native flora and fauna of the continent.
But, despite his experience with Darwin, Gould failed to make any evolutionary observations from Sturt's information.
He was more interested in pinpointing areas where he could find the most new species.
Sturt was convinced, for example, that a vast tract of fertile land, to rival even the prairies and bayous of America, lay undiscovered in central Australia.
His evidence was the migration of the water hen (Tribonyx ventralis), which arrived in enormous numbers in November from somewhere in the north, and returned again after only two or three months.
Later in the year, after the Murray Scrubs expedition, Gould was to find evidence to support this when he explored the Namoi River district in New South Wales.
The sudden appearance of great flocks of harlequin bronzewings in the area led him to wonder, ‘Whence has this fine bird made its appearance?…
May we not reasonably suppose that it had migrated from the central regions of this vast continent, which has yet much in store for future discovery?
The great length of wing which this bird possesses, admirably adapts it for inhabiting such a country as the far interior is generally imagined to be…’
So confident was Sturt that a bountiful Garden of Eden existed somewhere in central Australia that in January 1843 he began to sue for funds for an expedition into the interior.
Finance for the venture was, surprisingly  perhaps, slow in coming.
In May 1843 Gould was given the opportunity to repay Sturt for his generosity towards him while he was in Australia when Sturt appealed for help in generating support for the project in England.
Sturt's own resources were low.
Like many other colonials, the often devastating effects of the climate on local agriculture, and the inordinate expenses of living far from commercial centres had reduced him to impoverishment, but he was also finding little recompense from the government.
‘I am a poorer man by some 200 £ than when I came to the Province’, he told Gould, apologising for his inability to pay his subscription to Birds of Australia, ‘and my salary has been reduced to the lowest figure and is far below what I enjoyed as a private Gentleman.’
Despite this obstacle, Sturt was determined to press ahead with the expedition, and on 19 May he appealed to Gould to exert any pressure he could on Lord Derby to encourage his son, Lord Stanley — who was then Secretary of State for the Colonies — to back the proposal.
As Sturt told Gould:
‘I wrote some six months ago to Lord Stanley, volunteering the general exploration of the Continent.
I forwarded to him an estimate of the probable expence which I calculated at under £4000 with which sum I engaged to organize a party to keep the field for two years.
I stated my views to Lord Stanley as fully as I could, but I fear that the Exchequer is not in a condition to enable him to second my views, 1 think you will do me the credit to say that if any man can organize an Expedition for interior research I can, and that there are few if any here more qualified from experience for such a task.
I had long intended making this proposition to the Secretary of State, but I was urged sooner to it perhaps because I felt that I was reduced in circumstances and thrown from my position in Society, and I hoped by a grand effort to establish a permanent claim on the consideration of Her Majesty's Government.
I did not however communicate with any of my friends in England on the Subject save only Sir Ralph Darling.
If however you hear anything of the matter, urge it as much as you can, and believe me I will leave no unconnected links in my track — and that in two years I will leave but little to be discovered here, if it please Providence to continue to me its wonted care.
I hope you will not consider this is boasting for I am no boaster.
A man has a right to take credit for past success and to attribute it to the real cause.
There is no greater achievement in geographical Research remaining to be done than to lift the veil from before this unpenetrable and mysterious Continent.
As I told you I think I have made observations  which lead me to conclude that there are not only high but fertile lands on the verge of our intertropical Regions, and arguing from the Character of the Ranges here I should not be surprised to find in the more distant parts of the Continent, a Country vying with America in richness of Natural products, and I have very little doubts but that the discoveries to be made would amply repay the government any outlay it might make.
I am writing hurriedly to you but I have thought it right to apprize you of this…
…
What name have you given to the Water Hen which migrates to us yearly — or which did migrate last year and the year before.
It is dark green in plumage on the back with slate colour almost approaching to black below.
It had been seen nine years before at Kangaroo island and in 1840 came to us in thousands — running about the streets and Gardens and into the houses as if it had never seen man before.
Thinking they frequented the Creek I would not allow them to be shot but they bent down my grain and destroyed acres of it, and simultaneously disappeared some months after harvest — Where did they come from where do they go? pray let me hear from you and believe me
Ever most faithfully yours
Chas.
Sturt
May 19th
It was not until 22 April 1844 that Gould passed on Sturt's letter to Lord Derby with a cursory recommendation, and then only, it seems, after Lord Derby had mentioned the subject first.
Gould, particularly where one of his most important and influential subscribers was concerned, felt exceedingly uncomfortable in the role of campaigner.
As he wrote:
‘My Lord, As you mentioned in one of your late letters that Captn.
Sturt was about to proceed upon a new expedition into the interior of Australia I beg to send for your perusal a Letter I have lately received from him and from which you will perceive that he has written to Lord Stanley; as I know no one better fitted for such a purpose than this enterprising and persevering Gentleman I do hope the Government may be disposed to second his views; perhaps, your Lordship, could obtain and favour me with some information on the subject; from the manner in which you referred to him in your Letter I am led to believe that some arrangement has already been made; pray say if such be the case.
At the end of Captn.
Sturt's Letter your Lordship will find some  interesting remarks upon a species of Gallinule to which I have given the name of Tribonyx ventralis and which I shall shortly publish in my work…’
It was late in 1844, a year of severe drought, that Sturt finally got official clearance for the expedition.
He was to discover, after a staggering journey of 19 months and 3,450 miles, during which he came to within 150 miles of the centre of the continent, that no paradise such as he had imagined existed.
Instead he and his men suffered terribly from scorching, thirst, and scurvy, from which one of his officers died.
It was a miracle that any of them survived.
Sturt's Murray Scrubs expedition, restricted though it was in scale and ambition in comparison with the great adventure six years later, also met with limited success.
The parched and exhausted company eventually rendezvoused late in June or early in July in a homestead at Gawler, north of Adelaide.
Mrs Mahoney, who lived there described years later:
‘…an orderly arrived with dispatches for the Governor whom he was told to meet at our house.
Next morning Colonel Gawler arrived with his A.D.C., Mr Gill…
They had missed the track the night before so had to sleep in the bush with but one blanket each.
They had come from the Murray.
Evening brought the rest of the large party, and all dined with us — Captain and Mrs Sturt, Miss Gawler (about my age), and several gentlemen.
Captain Sturt was the great explorer who had discovered the Murray River, and have been some years in New South Wales before coming to Adelaide, where he was Colonial Secretary.
His brother Evelyn came, I remember, one morning soon after on his way to Adelaide, to send back provisions to his party, whom he had left quite out of flour.
Gould, the ornithologist, was with him, and as they had been some days without anything to eat, except what they shot, they enjoyed a good breakfast.
Gould gave me a lesson in skinning and stuffing; or rather preserving.
His wonderful book shows the number of new birds (his wife painted them) he found in Australia, and when with us he was much pleased with a white kangaroo-skin he preserved, the first I had ever seen.’
Gould was perhaps the only member of the expedition fully satisfied with its outcome.
He had reaped bountiful rewards where Sturt had again found his exploratory attempts frustrated.
But time was pressing on, and Gould, who wanted to be back in New South Wales for the breeding season — he had assured Dr Bennett that he would ‘be in Sydney not later  than the middle of Augt’— returned directly to Adelaide.
After a brief visit to Kangaroo Island at the mouth of the Gulf of St Vincent, Gould set sail on 19 July on the Katherine Stewart Forbes, bound once again for Hobart.
His expedition in the Murray Scrubs, then a ‘wilderness, which the foot of white man had seldom trod and which no zoologist had ever explored’, excited the imaginations of all who heard about it.
Tales of his adventures  preceded him.
Gould, however, was only an incidental explorer.
Certainly he had many of the qualities of a Sturt or a Leichhardt: he was energetic and determined, hardy and resilient, and emboldened by an overwhelming sense of curiosity.
But he was not, unlike his colleague Captain Sturt, interested in geography for its own sake: his was not the thrill of covering the distance, but the desire to discover new species, regardless of their place on the map.
Geography played an important part for Gould in identifying and determining the range of species, but as a subject per se it was of little interest.
Gould would have been happy to remain in the same spot if it would continue providing him with novelties.
All the same, he undoubtedly encountered at least some ‘new country’ in his courageous and exhausting explorations in the scrubs; and he was rewarded by having three features in the area — Gould's Mount, Gould's Creek, and Gould's Range — named after him.
His daring and persistence, albeit on a smaller scale than his friend Sturt's, and invested with considerable self-interest, met, in contrast, with unparalleled success.
CHAPTER 10
A Glorious Haul
AFTER A Fortnight in Hobart, where Eliza had been stationed for 11 months, Gould and his retinue packed everything, including Eliza's enumerable drawings, and left for Sydney.
Much of what Gould had collected had been shipped back to London in sealed containers, where it was guarded like Pandora's box until release to the scientific world on his return.
Mr G. has sent many specimens in spirits,’ wrote Prince to Jardine, ‘none of which have been opened as it is his wish that they shall not be shewn to anyone until his return.’
Jardine's concern that this was not necessarily the best procedure, given that the specimens might be subject to decay, proved the case when several of the boxes, which Prince had been forced to break open, were found to contain moths and mildew.
Even Gould's expert methods of preservation, vested as they were with such personal concern, were susceptible to the ravages of nature and a long sea voyage.
Prince wrote to Gould describing the state of one consignment with something of a rebuke for the veteran taxidermist:
‘The case on its arrival was too large to be got upstairs.
I thereupon emptied it, tore it apart, carried it into the Drawing room, put it together again and restored the contents.
How is it you put no camphor or turps into the cases: I have only opened two; one of these was the nest of Cracticus hypoleneus out of which several moths immediately flew…’
Another container was received in an even more chaotic condition:
‘I yesterday got out the Box from the Marianne.
I regret to say that in  consequence of the contents having been packed before they were thoroughly dry they are all in a badly mildewed state, so much so that I shall have to dry each specimen individually and remove the mildew with a brush: the smallest of the two large skins has also lost the whole of the wool or hair from the head; The bottles too not having been properly secured, the spirit has escaped and caused the small boxes to fall to pieces forming an heterogenous mixture of nests, eggs broken and sound, tops, bottoms, and sides of boxes, plants, etc.
The books are also much damaged in their bindings…
Every care shall be taken to prevent accidents from Fire Etc.’
Gould's deepest fears, however, were concerned with the dangers of dispatching his collection back to England unaccompanied.
He passed on his concern in a letter to Prince, who, as the ever-nervous and expectant recipient, was clearly in a state of anguish about it: ‘I regret you should have determined upon embarking any portion of your Property in V.D.L. because from the ignorance of the parties whose names you mention, I fear least they should turn out Sharks and it would be a source of deep mortification to me were you by these means to lose any portion of the advantages you have obtained by years of anxiety and deep mental study.’
Gould's fears were not exaggerated.
Such was the demand for rare and new species of any zoological description, that the colonies abounded with ‘entrepreneurs’ ready to steal a collection if they got the chance.
The only hope for the naturalist was that the stolen specimens might re-surface in Europe, where he could then buy them back.
Part of Gould's collection sent from Sydney shortly after his first visit to New South Wales only narrowly escaped being lost when it turned up in a warehouse that Gould happened to visit in Adelaide.
The following year a consignment sent by his assistant Gilbert, who had remained behind in Australia, fell, much to Gould's dismay, into the wrong hands.
As he wrote to Gilbert on 15 November 1840:
‘You will be vexed to hear that some of the birds said to be in your last package from Sydney were missing: by what I can gather from your list they formed the whole of one of the smaller packages.
This I much regret as it contained some of the most valuable things you had collected viz. the bird you call the Whiteheaded Swallow, all the Cinclosomas etc.
These certainly were not in the box when it arrived in England and I fear were purloined from you either at Perth or Sydney, the tin box where in all probability you intended to put them not being opened at the Docks.
When you write send me your opinion of  this.
If they should come to London they will probably get into the dealers’ hands.
I will look out for them.
As you did at the Swan you will separate your collection sending one portion to me and retaining the other in case of accidents by sea…
But pray be careful what vessel you send them by.
The Box sent by the Herald and which I accidentally found in a warehouse in South Australia was as near being lost as possible.
Always write a letter saying to whom they are consigned in Duplicate.’
However great the risks of parting with one's collection, Gould could not have hoped to carry with him from Hobart the enormous quantities of skins, skeletons, eggs, nests, plants, and seeds he had amassed.
He had no alternative but to trust his fortune to fate and the high seas.
Perhaps for the first time he felt something akin to Eliza's feelings, as he watched his boxes and bottles winched aboard ship and slowly disappear over the horizon.
Gould was torn between the need to preserve his specimens and the desire to keep them a secret.
Eventually reason prevailed, at least on the part of Prince, who requested of Jardine ‘any information’ he could offer for the preservation of Gould's precious collection.
My Thanks are due,’ Prince wrote to Jardine on 7 April 1840, ‘for your instructions respecting the specimens in spirits, which I have since carefully examined, separated and supplied with fresh spirit; many of them I regret to add are much decomposed and I fear some may at last prove useless.’
The voyage from Van Diemen's Land to Sydney on the Mary Ann, with his wife, children, servants, and the remains of his baggage proved to be a ‘tedious and uncomfortable’ one; different by far from Gould's first, joyous, passage to New South Wales six months earlier.
He had, moreover, the trials of business to look forward to before he could get back to work.
In Sydney, while they waited for a steamer to take them up the coast to Newcastle, the Goulds stayed with Dr George Bennett, secretary to the Australian Museum.
Gould spent his time in the city preparing for the final and most ambitious expedition of all his trips in Australia.
‘Nearly a fortnight’, he complained, was spent in Sydney organising his journey to the other side of the Liverpool Range — that remote and tantalising region that had eluded him on his first visit to Yarrundi because he had had to return to his wife in Hobart.
This time he would take Eliza with him all the way to her brother's homestead at Yarrundi, so he could be sure of being in the area for at least three months.
Eliza was under no illusions that this meant they would be spending more time together: ‘John, of course, will  not remain there long,’ she told her mother, ‘but be wandering off in some direction…’.
Gould still intended to do a lot of collecting on the Yarrundi-side of the Liverpool Range, but the main focus of his efforts was to be across the mountains, on the remote plains around the Namoi and Mokai rivers, an area of the interior that few settlers had yet penetrated.
Apart from the forays of his brother-in-law, Charles Coxen, this area had never been explored for birds.
Gould projected the expedition would take about two months.
He was assigned ‘two or three trusty convict servants’ by Sir George Gipps, Governor-in-Chief of New South Wales, together with government ‘tents, and the necessary utensils and materials for leading the life of a bushman’.
Having settled all the necessary arrangements, the couple at last set off from Sydney on 14 September for Newcastle, and the mouth of the Hunter River.
It was Gould's thirty-fifth birthday, although no mention is made of it in Eliza's journal.
Gould wrote, though, to prince, and gave him a few rare but welcome words of encouragement and recognition for all his trouble.
Touchingly, Prince acknowledged the letter almost at once:
No. 25 London, 20 Broad Street
Golden Square.
Feb 5: 1840
Dear Sir,
Your very welcome Letters of the 20th of Aug. and 14th of Septr. reached us on the 23rd and 25th of Jan: they were a joyful relief to us all and were the most acceptable to me since for the first time you acknowledge I have been tried and not found wanting: believe me it will always be my highest gratification to merit the good opinions of every one but of none more than yourself: and the more confidence you repose in me the more strenuous will be my efforts to prove myself worthy of it.
I am delighted to find you have been so successful in your Expedition: I heartily pray you may continue so to the end and safely return to Old England: I am much pleased too at hearing your health has not been affected in the slightest degree: pray be careful and never forget that upon your safety, hinges the welfare of numbers.’
After an uncomfortable night tossing about on board the steamer, on arrival Mrs Gould, her maid Mary, and the baby were lodged at an inn in Newcastle, while Gould took the opportunity of visiting some of the islands in the estuary.
He soon returned, however, to collect Eliza, who, despite her misgivings about leaving the baby, who had been poorly since their stay in Sydney, accompanied her husband for the day to sketch the living bird and plant specimens on Mosquito Island.
In an extract from a journal (the only one to survive from the trip), which Eliza kept during that September, she describes this brief outing at the command of her restless husband:
‘Monday 16th.
John went over to Mosquito Island where he has established James for a few days with a government tent, man and fitting-up.
Came home in evening he says purposely to take me over next morn early.
17th.
Rose at six dressed hastily got some breakfast and had a pleasant row to the island.
found the tent pitched in a cleard [sic]spot in the midst of the bush where nature appeared in her wild luxuriance.
The Immense parasites twining round the trees taking root some of them at the tops of the trees and hanging down to the ground, others surrounding the trees like a crown — heard the bell bird with his incessant ting ting, the coachwhip bird & c. — a heavy shower of rain accompanied by lightning — soon cleared up — every green thing looked more beautiful for its sprinkling.’
The forests on these islands abounded in honey-eaters, regent-birds, satin-birds and wood-pigeons; Mosquito Island was also where Gould saw his first live brush turkey, or wattled talegalla, scratching about on the forest floor.
It also yielded the rare Sphecotheres maxillaris or southern sphecotheres, and a fine specimen of the southern fig bird (Sphecotheres vieillori) among others; and provided Mrs Gould with plenty of ideas for botanical backgrounds.
But it was only a momentary diversion, and the couple hastened up river in the steamer, William I, to the town of Maitland to await the arrival of the bullock carts from Yarrundi.
Here, in the Rose & Thistle Inn, in this prosperous trading-post that was the last port-of-call for traffic from Sydney, Mrs Gould's journal reports a return to the familiar routine: ‘employed all day making drawings’(24 September); ‘drawing all day’; ‘drew all day’; while her labours were relieved by the occasional walk with her husband in the cool air of the early morning or evening:
‘Walked on the race course before breakfast the air balmy and very delightful, great numbers of the blue mountain parrots were making their morning meal on a large kind of the Eucalypti — two of the beautiful Nankeen night herons passed over our heads and we heard  the curious note of the coul [cowl]bird or bald-headed friar — returned with an excellent appetite — drew all day — in the evening John called me to look at the skin of a snake more than six feet long which James shot in the act of ascending a tree — also brought me some beautiful specimens of a climbing plant bearing thick clusters of cream colour blossoms.’
Gould recorded the fortnight waiting for the arrival of Stephen Coxen's bullock train in Maitland as being ‘pleasantly spent in the bushes of the Hunter among the Satin [,]Regent [, &]Cat Birds.’
He also took the opportunity of writing, for the first time, to Sir William Jardine:
Maitland River Hunter
New South Wales
Sept. 28th 1839
Dear Sir William:
You have doubtless heard from time to time some little of my movements on this side of the globe and if I have not written more fully and frequently to my friends in England I trust this will be attributed to the very pressing engagements which have fully occupied my time and mind.
You may readily imagine the extreme gratification I feel in visiting this fine country, teeming as it does with so many interesting and beautiful productions.
My success up to the present time has been greater than I could have anticipated both as regards obtaining much information that is entirely new as well as in bringing together one of the finest collections that has ever been formed.
I have as a matter of course made a point of attending to those particulars which hereto for have been overlooked not only by collecting the birds in their various changes of plumage but by preserving all the principal forms for dissection as well as preparing skeletons of the same…
Mrs Gould who I am happy to say is quite well has been fully occupied in making drawings of the soft parts of the birds together with appropriate plants flowers berries etc. which will be introduced into my work and I trust from the fund of information I shall be enabled to add that the book will not be void of interest especially to all lovers of ornithology…
This is one of the finest climates in the world.
Neither myself or anyone of my party having received an hours illness since our arriving though constantly exposed night and day to the bush in all kinds of weather.
As regards myself I rarely ever tire or find the day too long  though I am constantly walking a circumstance which being considered much to my health being better able to bear fatigue than when last I walked over the hills with you and I found your advice not to take spirits very very judicious.
I find tea to be the best and most satisfying bush drink that can be taken…’
The drays and bullocks Stephen had sent from Yarrundi eventually arrived on 27 September, the ‘tent was struck’ where Gould's men had encamped outside town with all the provisions, and was loaded up on the carts for the long, slow haul back to the reaches of the Upper Hunter.
Gould was to follow two days later.
He was longing, as he told Jardine, to be back among his beloved lyre-birds, by now in the last stages of their extraordinary seasonal plumage.
‘I am sure you would be delighted to spend a week among the Menuras’ Gould wrote immediately.
It being my intention to encamp near their haunts in order if possible to obtain their eggs and learn something of their habits of nidification…
It is a cheerful active bird singing and mocking all the birds of the forest…’
Gould would also be reunited with Natty and Jemmy, who he planned to take on the Namoi expedition.
He described to jardine how indispensable the Aborigines were to his pursuits;
‘I find the natives very useful in assisting being rarely ever without a tribe or a portion of a tribe with me when in their neighbourhood.
They are nearly all excellent and dead shots and are especially fond of shooting.
I frequently give into their hands my best guns and never found them in the slightest degree disposed to take advantage.
I am of course not speaking of those from the interior it is necessary to be more guarded with them particularly those of the Namoi and Juden (?) parts, which I am now about to visit.
I shall then in fact have to stay on the alert.’
On Monday 29 September the Goulds left Maitland by cart for Yarrundi.
News had reached them while they were still in Sydney that the drought that had afflicted the Liverpool Plains earlier in the year had finally broken with abundant rains.
Land prices consequently had risen, and Stephen was suddenly a rich man.
But nothing could have prepared Gould for the transformation he witnessed on the journey back to Yarrundi from Maitland.
Of the drought he had experienced on his last visit, Gould wrote that,’ It is easier for the imagination to conceive than the pen to depict the horrors of so dreadful a visitation.’
Now, following the rains, the wild Australian bush was as meek and hospitable as the English  countryside, with only the incidental reminder of its former ferocity.
‘This part of the country’, wrote Eliza, ‘resembles for miles a succession of parks thickly dotted with tall slender trees of the Eucalypti kind and the ground covered with luxuriant verdure where during the past season not a blade of grass was to be seen the bones of many bullocks which died on their way from the upper Hunter to Maitland rill still remain by the roadside a momento [sic]of the excessive drought.’
night spent on Patrick's Plains.
Gould found he ‘had arrived at a good time, the birds having just commenced breeding’, and was immediately off to resume his researches with Natty and Jemmy in the cedar brushes of the Liverpool Range and on the nearby stretches of the Dart Brook.
Eliza settled in for a four-month stint of painting and drawing.
During this time Gould found more new species: the red-chested quail (Turnix pyrrhothorax), the little eagle (Hieraaetus morphnoides), the black-breasted buzzard (Hamirostra melanosterna) and the red-browed tree-creeper (Climacteris erythrops) among them.
And, thanks to Natty's agile tree-climbing, Gould secured the eggs of numerous birds, including the rare whistling eagle and the spotted-sided finch.
A month later, just before he was about to set off on his journey ‘into the interior by way of Namoi, Gould wrote to Sir John Franklin in Hobart of his progress so far: ‘After spending a fortnight in the lowland brushes I proceeded to the upper districts and the Liverpool ranges whence I have just returned having made several discoveries of new species both of Birds and Quadrupeds, of the latter I believe I have two new kinds of Kangaroo.’
The elusive lyre-bird, though, despite all Gould's efforts, was living up to its reputation.
‘I have not yet succeeded in finding the breeding haunts of the Manura [sic],’ he confessed to Franklin.
Gould never found the nests of the lyre-birds.
Years later, on Gilbert's second visit to the colony, he asked specifically that Gilbert should investigate the ‘nidification of the Menura’.
With regard to the rest of the local ornithology around Yarrundi he was more confident, and in his instructions to Gilbert written on 20 January 1842, he stipulated, ‘The Brushes are not worth hunting for the birds.’
At last, some time in mid-November, Gould was ready to embark upon his Namoi expedition.
‘John is gone across the Liverpool Plains to the Namoi’, wrote Eliza to her mother on 6 December from Yarrundi, ‘he expects to find much to interest him there.
It is particularly unpleasant to us to be so frequently separated, but of course my going with him is out of the question; he will sleep under a tent all the time.’
The party comprised five Europeans (Gould, his servant James Benstead, and the three ‘prisoners  of the Crown’), and, naturally, Natty and Jemmy.
It was to prove the most rewarding of any of Gould's explorations in Australia.
The abundant rains that came in the weeks previous to Gould's arrival had attracted birds in their thousands, some nf which had never been seen in the area before.
The area was crawling with caterpillars, upon which vast flocks of birds — including the beautiful straw-necked ibises — descended, and, in their wake, hundreds of hawks of three or four different species hovered, attracted by the sudden abundance of prey.
Clouds of little-crested parrots and rose-breasted cockatoos swarmed upon the woods that were dotted here and there over the grasslands.
The country beyond the mountain range was completely different from the bushland that bordered the coast and to which Gould had so far been confined.
Here were great plains where grasses of completely different species grew; the woodlands were not tangled, impenetrable forests but sparse copses.
Emus wandered over the open country hooting their hollow cries; and troops of kangaroos, some of them of gigantic size, grazed peacefully in their primitive pastures.
The hinterland of the Liverpool Range in the summer of 1839 was a resplendent, if temporary, Eden.
Sheep-shearers and stock-keepers had also descended on the plains to take advantage of the excellent grazing, and provided Gould with company from time to time on his journey.
It was a time of plenty for everyone; for Gould it was a period of unparalleled excitement and surprises.
By December Gould had crossed the Liverpool Range and set up camp on the banks of the Mokai.
The first memorable and momentous occasion for the ornithologist occurred as he strolled beside the river at sunrise and caught sight of a ‘new and beautiful pigeon’, a bird never before encountered by any of the natives he questioned or any of the stockmen at the out-stations.
The bird, which Gould called the harlequin bronzewing, and which later became known as the flock pigeon, rose from the water beside him and alighted on the ground 40 yards away, just within reach of Gould's expert aim.
He expected it to be the only example of its species on which he would set eyes.
A fortnight later, on the plains of the Namoi, Gould was thrilled to see the same bird in such great numbers that, when Natty drove them up before him, ‘eight fell to a single discharge' of his gun.
The coincidence of the bronzewings' appearance and Gould's arrival did not escape comment by the local Aborigines, who had, like Natty and Jemmy, attached themselves to the strange English bird-man.
‘Both the settlers and the natives assured me’, wrote Gould, ‘that they [the bronzewings]had suddenly arrived, and that they had never before been seen in that part of the country.
The Aborigines who were with me, and of whom I must speak in  the highest praise, for the readiness with which they rendered me their assistance, affirmed, upon learning the nature of my pursuits, that they had come to meet me.’
A week later, Gould described the dramatic and exciting moment when, as he and his companions were returning from hunting kangaroo on a distant part of the Namoi plain, they approached a small group of acacia trees, and he met with the bronzewing once again:
‘Natty suddenly called out, ‘Look massa’; in an instant the air before us seemed literally filled with a dense mass of these birds, which had suddenly rose from under the trees at his exclamation; we had scarcely time to raise our guns before they were seventy or eighty yards off; our united discharge, however, brought down eight additional specimens, all of which being merely winged and fluttering about, attracted the attention of our kangaroo dogs, and it was with the greatest difficulty that they could be prevented from tearing them to pieces; in the midst of the scramble, a kite, with the utmost audacity, came to the attack, and would doubtless, in spite of our presence, have carried off his share, had not the contents of my second barrel stopped his career.
This was the last time I met with the Harlequin Bronzewing.’
Another strange bird had descended in great flocks on the Mokai, much to Gould's delight as only a single specimen had ever been delivered to England prior to 1839, which was in the collection of the Linnean Society.
The warbling grass parakeet or Melopsittacus undulatus was a familiar bird to the Aborigines, who called it the ‘betcherrygah’.
But they had never before known it to come near the Namoi.
There was, once more, only one explanation.
‘The Black fellows of the Upper Hunter told me’, wrote Gould in a letter to E. P. Ramsay in Sydney in 1866, ‘that the little Melopsittacus undulatus had come to meet me, for they had never seen the bird in that district until the year I arrived.’
That December the birds thronged near Gould's encampment near Brezi.
They were breeding in huge numbers in all the hollows of the tall eucalypti that grew on the banks of the Mokai, and fed in flocks of many hundreds upon the grass seeds on the plains, descending in great noisy crowds on the pools by Gould's tents to drink.
In the intense heat of the day most of them fell silent and withdrew into the gum trees, where they disappeared as if by magic among the bright green leaves.
Gould was charmed by these little parrots whose ‘extreme cheerfulness of disposition and sprightliness of manner’ he said ‘render it an especial  favourite with all who have had an opportunity of seeing it alive’.
How great an attraction, he accurately predicted, would the betcherrygah prove in the parlours and drawing-rooms of the great British gentry, if he could just get it home alive.
‘The beauty and interesting nature of this little bird’, Gould wrote, ‘naturally made me anxious to bring home living examples; I accordingly captured about twenty fully fledged birds, and kept them alive for some time; but the difficulties necessarily attendant upon travelling in a new country rendering it impracticable to afford them the attention they required, I regret to say the whole were lost.’
Charles Coxen, however, had managed successfully to raise some of the birds at his homestead on the Feel, and gave Gould four on his return from the Namoi.
Two of these survived the arduous voyage round Cape Horn in the middle of winter and arrived to a grand reception in London.
The tiny parrot was a thrilling novelty, and before long every visitor to the Australian colonies was attempting to catch them and bring them back as souvenirs.
As Gould described to his Victorian reader, as yet unacquainted with this most common and popular of pets.
‘As cage birds they are as interesting as can possibly be imagined; for, independently of their highly ornamental appearance, they differ from all the other members of their family that I am acquainted with, in having a most animated and pleasing song; besides which, they are constantly billing, cooing, and feeding each other, and assuming every possible variety of graceful position.
Their inward warbling song, which cannot be described, is unceasingly poured forth from noon to night, and is even continued throughout the night if they are placed in a room with lights, and where an animated conversation is carried on.’
One can indeed imagine the crescendo of noise in Gould's sitting-room in Broad Street as crowds of visitors, exclaiming with delight, were greeted with  excitable chirps and chatterings from the little betcherrygahs.
The birds added another item to Gould's party repertoire.
Professor Richard Owen's (the eminent anatomist) wife noted in her diary for 27 March 1841: ‘Lord Northampton's evening party.
Richard very tired, and thought he would not go…after some dinner R felt better…
He was glad afterwards he went, for prince Albert was there, and Mr. Gould brought his pretty singing New South Wales parrots.’
Gould and his party swept down the Mokai River to its junction with the Peel River, ransacking the plains for novelties on either side.
On 11 December he shot the first-ever specimen of the crimson chat as he traversed  the forest bordering the River Feel, to the east of the Liverpool Plains.
‘As may be supposed’, he wrote, ‘the sight of a bird of such beauty, which, moreover, was entirely new to me, excited so strong a desire to possess it that scarcely a moment elapsed before it was dead and in my hand.’
He continued down the Namoi for 150 miles towards the Brigalow Scrubs — a distance of 400 miles from the coastline, and the farthest he went into the interior — slaughtering en route a plethora of birds, many of which — the white-backed swallow, the black-eared cuckoo, the yellow-throated miner, the striated grass-wren, the red-backed kingfisher and another bower-bird of the spotted variety to name but a few — were completely new to science.
In these heady days, Gould's greed surpassed even his own bounds and made him capable of an ungentlemanly lack of sportsmanship.
‘Of its mode of nidification’, Gould wrote of the nightjar he found on the lower Namoi, ‘I can speak with confidence having seen many pairs breeding during my rambles in the woods…
In every instance one of the birds was sitting on the eggs and the other perched on a neighbouring bough, both invariably asleep.
That the male participates in the duty of incubation I ascertained by having shot a bird on the nest which on dissection proved to be a male.’
Neither did the square-tailed kite, which Gould found near Scone, receive mercy at the end of Gould's barrel.
‘I met with it’, Gould recalled, ‘in various parts of New South Wales, and on the plains of the interior, still it is by no means abundant, and persons who had long been resident in the colony knew little about it.
I had, however, the good fortune not only to kill the bird myself, but, in one instance, to find its nest, from which I shot a female.’
Gould was in seventh heaven.
As well as finding all about him an array of ornithological novelties of unparalleled beauty and originality, he had discovered a region abounding in extraordinary marsupials: giant kangaroos that could outrun a dog, duck-billed platypi, opossums, koalas, and spiny anteaters.
Not satisfied with the haul of birds that he would bring back to Britain, Gould began to consider collecting marsupials as well.
Here was another subject, he suddenly realised, that was as yet unpublished; a perfect companion work to his proposed Birds of Australia.
If the birds or Australia had not received that degree of attention from the scientific ornithologist which their interest demanded’, he wrote in his preface to Mammals of Australia, ‘I can assert, without fear of contradiction, that its highly curious and interesting Mammals have been still less investigated.
It was not however, until I arrived in the country, and found myself surrounded by objects as strange as if I had been transported to  another planet, that I conceived the idea of devoting a portion of my attention to the mammalian class of its extraordinary fauna.’
Gould could not resist plucking every fruit that Australia held out to him.
In that weird and wonderful land of the interior, under the inspirational guidance of Natty and Jemmy, ‘these children of nature’ as he called them, the mammals too began to captivate the ornithologist's imagination.
For the first time he was tempted to commit scientific adultery.
In his preface he elaborates, almost apologetically, on this process of seduction:
‘Tired by a long and laborious day's walk under a burning sun, I frequently encamped for the night by the side of a river, a natural pond, or a water-hole, and before retiring to rest not unfrequently stretched my weary body on the river's bank; while thus reposing, the surface of the water was often disturbed by the little concentric circles formed by the Ornithorhynchus [duck-billed platypus], or perhaps an Echnidna [anteater]came trotting up towards me.
With such scenes as these continually around me, is it surprising that I should have entertained the idea of collecting examples of the indigenous Mammals of a country whose ornithological productions I had gone out expressly to investigate?…’
Skins and skeletons of mammals, from the giant kangaroo to the tiny kangaroo rat, were hauled on board the groaning bullock carts to join the piles of feathered carcases already stacked away as part of Gould's mammoth collection.
The expedition had been rewarded with trophies beyond his greatest dreams, and he returned to Yarrundi, sometime in mid-January, laden down with booty.
Gould had escaped just in time: a week after his departure a deluge of rain hit the Namoi plains, and the flash-flood that followed wrought havoc on the countryside.
Tragedy struck two settlers, a Lieutenant Lowe and his nephew, who were among those grazing their sheep on the Namoi plains.
Gould had stayed with them in their hut on his way to and from Namoi.
In an extract from the introduction to the Birds of Australia, Gould describes the fate that befell these two men who lived and died at the mercy of the violent and contrary Australian climate:
‘Seven days after my departure from their dwelling heavy rains suddenly set in; the mountain-streams  selled into foaming torrents, filling the deep gullies; the rivers rose, some to the height of forty feet, bearing all before them.
The Namoi having widely overflowed its  banks, rolled along with impetuous fury, sweeping away the huts of the stock-keepers in its course, tearing up trees, and hurrying affrighted men and flocks to destruction.
Before there was time to escape, the hut in which Lieut.
Lowe and his nephew were sojourning was torn up and washed away, and the nephew and two men, overwhelmed by the torrent, sank and perished.
Lieut.
Lowe stripped to swim, and getting on the trunk of an uprooted tree, hoped to be carried down the eddying flood to some part where he could obtain assistance.
But he floated into the midst of a sea of water stretching as far as he could discern on every side around him.
Here he slowly drifted; the rains had ceased, the thermometer was at 10, a glaring sun and a coppery sky were above him; he looked in vain for help, but no prospect of escape animated him, and the hot sun began its dreadful work.
His skin blistered, dried, became parched and hard, like the bark of a tree, and life began to ebb.
At length assistance arrived — it came too late; he was indeed just alive, but died almost immediately.
He was scorched to death.’
Yarrundi, on the other side of the Liverpool Range, was not badly affected by the rains.
Gould's wife had spent the months that he was away over Christmas and New Year patiently labouring over her sketchbooks and specimens, and had a stack of botanical and ornithological drawings to present him with when he returned.
The region finally being exhausted to Gould's satisfaction, the couple returned to Sydney.
They had been in the outback for four months, and during that time it had become clear to Gould that his projected trips to New Zealand, Moreton Bay, and Norfolk Island were unnecessary.
Later Gould was to cross New Zealand off his list altogether.
In a letter to Gilbert dated 16 November, 1840 he wrote: ‘As I find the fauna of New Holland quite distinct and that of New Zealand to belong to an entirely different group of Islands I have determined not to include it in the present work; you will therefore not go there…’
He had been successful ‘beyond his expectations’, and was now the proud possessor of the most ‘glorious haul’ yet to be made by an ornithologist in the field.
He could not wait to see it all back safely in England and to start on his next publication.
‘I am happy to say,’ Gould wrote to Sir John Franklin, with a somewhat exaggerated show of piety and self-restraint, ‘that my last trip to the interior has been productive of much that is interesting, having discovered many novelties both in birds and quadrupeds, my whole journeys in fact to these colonies have been most auspicious ones and I return satisfied and especially thankful for what our  almighty providence has in his infinite goodness allowed me to see.
My next hope is to be spared to publish the results of my enquiries.’
To cover the areas of special interest that Gould had been unable to investigate personally, he had to rely on a network of collectors he had recruited in the course of his travels.
He left behind him in Australia an army of naturalists, both amateur and professional, to whom were assigned a multitude of tasks to increase and perfect his collection.
The house in Broad Street was to be inundated in the years to come with hopeful contributions from naval captains, clergymen, convicts, sheep-farmers, and soldiers, as well as Gould's own specially appointed collectors.
Port Essington, the most remote, dangerous, and perhaps most promising, hunting ground left on his itinerary, and which Gould himself had intended to explore before his triumphant visit to Namoi, was designated to his capable assistant Gilbert, who was staying an extra year in Australia.
Gould had arranged to rendezvous with Gilbert in Sydney before leaving for England, but so eager was he to set sail with his precious cargo that when it seemed Gilbert might have been delayed in Western Australia, he left without seeing him.
Three weeks after the Goulds had sailed in the Kinnear, Gilbert arrived in Sydney, exhausted, penniless, and with a glorious haul of his own — only to be met by a letter of further instructions.
The four-month voyage back to England via the South pacific and Cape Horn was spent much in the same way as the outward voyage.
Time and again Gould was lowered over the side of the ship in a little dinghy at the command of the accommodating Captain, by name, appropriately, of Mallard, where he floated happily for hours among his birds.
Few new species were added to his oceanic collection, but Gould was delighted to spend his time recording again in minute detail his encounters with familiar acquaintances.
Gould arrived home on 18 August proclaiming the triumph of his endeavours to the scientific world.
In his own words he returned with a ‘rich harvest of knowledge’, ‘the finest collection extant’; in the words of prince, ‘His collections of Birds, quadrupeds, nests and eggs are unquestionably the finest that have ever been brought home’.
In a fit of feverish activity Gould proceeded to publish a series of lectures and papers as quickly as he could possibly produce them; on 25 August he exhibited and named at the Zoological Society six new species of kangaroo and presented his information on the bowerbirds; on 8 September he read a paper at a scientific meeting on the extraordinary brush turkey, or Alectura, among a selection of others; on 13 October he gave an account of the Ocellated leipoa; on 10 November he exhibited at the Society 50 of his new Australian birds, which he characterised in subsequent meetings; and so on, until he had presented all his new trophies from both the bird and animal kingdoms to the awestruck Zoological members.
At the same time Gould began to organise the production of the plates and letterpress for Birds of Australia.
Indeed, ‘so much engaged with his Collections and twenty other matters’ was he that he left it to prince to contact his colleagues and subscribers to inform them of the ‘results of his journey’.
When he finally got around to writing to Jardine on 9 September, it was with only a cursory description of his achievements.
‘My collections, I am happy to say’ he wrote, despite his own and prince's fears, ‘have all arrived in safety and I can now scarcely tell how so large a mass was got together in so short a time.’
As a result, he continued, ‘It is quite impossible for me in a letter to give you a detailed account of my proceedings my time being at present fully occupied in unpacking arrangements and other matters.’
So little time had he to spare, indeed, that he declined Jardine's invitation to shoot with him in Scotland, an opportunity he had in the past seldom passed over.
‘Although, God knows’, he said, ‘the poor Birds ought to have a holiday from me for years to come, for I have been incessantly shooting and my own gun was not the only one that waged war upon them.
I have scarcely even been without natives accompanying me who also shoot with facility.’
When he wrote to the Prince of Canino five months later he had a little more time to describe the  achievements of his two years ‘in the wilds of Australia’:
‘The interval spent from my native shores were some of the happiest days of my life…
The results of my journey cannot, I think, but be attended with great advantage to science returning as I have loaded with novelties in every department of zoology; besides much entirely [new]information respecting the habits and economy of the singular forms peculiar to Australia.
Independently of a great number of new Birds I succeeded in procuring the nests and eggs of at least two thirds of the species inhabiting that interesting region.
In Mammalia I have also done much having nearly doubled the before known numbers of species of Kangaroos many of them large and noble animals.
I also procured on my voyage out and home a magnificent Collection of the procellaridae and noted with accuracy the different Lati[tude] and Long.
in which I observed them.
Since my return I have been busily employed in recommencing my work on the Birds of Australia…
If you can procur [sic]me any porters for this, the finest and most perfect work I have yet  attempted, you will be doing me a real kindness; you are aware that neither pains or expense will be spared to render it complete.’
Mrs Gould, happy to be home again and reunited with her children, set to work once more on the lithographic stones at her desk.
Part 1 of Birds of Australia, containing 17 plates, was scheduled for publication on 1 December, less than four-and-a-half months after the Gould's return to England.
The total cost of the expedition had come to roughly £2,00 — half of which Gould was to recoup less than seven years later when he sold his collection of Australian birds for £1,000.
The publication of Birds of Australia proved ample financial reward for his initial outlay.
Figuring a total of 600 plates in seven volumes (of which 328 species were new to science and named by Gould), it was his most expensive production to date.
At £115 (today a first edition set of Birds of Australia is worth in excess of £150,000) 283 subscribers signed up for the privilege of owning a copy.
It was to take eight years to produce the entire series.
Some scientists were dissatisfied with Gould's decision to target such an elitist market.
Swainson was suggesting, even before Gould had returned to England, that he would do better to make his books more generally affordable.
Gould, he said in his book on Taxidermy, was ‘a zealous and very able ornithologist, now travelling in Australia, who has published some valuable, although very expensive works upon birds…
We trust the author will hereafter reprint these expensive volumes in such a form as that they may be accessible to naturalists; and thereby diffuse science, instead of restricting it to those only who are wealthy.’
Eventually Gould was to take Swainson's point, and in 1865 published a Handbook to the Birds of Australia in two more manageable royal octavo volumes, with no illustrations and a revised text.
Gould's Birds of Australia remains the most comprehensive work every produced on the subject.
Comparatively few species have been added to the list of native Australian birds; at least two, the Lord Howe white-eye (Zosterops strenua) and the Norfolk Island parrot (Nestor productus) have become extinct, and at least 20 species are on the verge of extinction or extremely rare.
Gould's vast, lavish, hand-coloured volumes, with copious and detailed descriptions of every bird, provide an historical testimony and database for research, even today.
In the eyes of Australia, Gould has become the ‘Father of Ornithology’.
Gould also made a considerable name for himself at home, finally attaining the scientific status he had yearned for as an ornithologist, on or off the field.
He was now a professional.
In 1843 he was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society, the greatest honour that could be conferred upon a scientist, and one rarely given to a zoologist.
His new-round reputation was also reflected in smart London society flocking to see the latest novelties from Australia — dead and alive — in the ornithologist's house in Broad Street, as well as the number of subscribers willing to pay for his extravagant Australian publications, which would provide him with an income for the next 30 years.
Gould had struck the last ornithological goldmine.