

PART FOUR
WHAT IS THE NIGHT?
…
Untie the winds, and let them fight Against the Churches.
— and now a wood Comes toward Dunsinane.
So shall I, Love.
TWO
When, in the way women will, Groa railed against the Fates that had allowed them to live all this time in golden security and now seemed to have left them, Thorfinn was amused, but not sympathetic.
Looked at sensibly, what he said was quite true.
Nothing stood still.
In the affairs of all the powers on whom their own welfare depended, there were tides and currents as well, sometimes colliding with theirs, sometimes making for peace.
They still exchanged gifts and trade with the Emperor; they still had the interest and friendship of Pope Leo, even though for a year the Pope had been not in Rome but in Germany, caught by the cry for a mediator between attacking Germany and defending Hungary; pressed by the fighting in Italy to beg help against the triumphant Normans.
Still, the Emperor and the Pope were the two greatest forces in the west, and because of them and Thorfinn's comradely relations with Svein of Denmark, because of England's weakness at sea and because of her terror of Norway, neither King Edward nor the House of Godwin was likely that winter (said Thorfinn, with justice) to trouble Scotia.
And without the backing of Wessex, Earl Siward wouldn't now move.
For a vacant Northumbria was not only prey for the sons of Godwin and for Mercia.
There were those among the remaining husbands of the five daughters of Ealdred who would like nothing better than to see Siward perish in an effort to plant a few Anglian soldiers and a bishop in some crumbling old forts in the Lothians.
A message, therefore, of patient good sense had been sent by Thorfinn to Earl Siward, and a request that Bishop Malduin's wife and household should be sent to join the Bishop at Kinrimund, where the King would be pleased to defray their expenses pending an agreement on the sponsorship of the Lothian churches.
As for the Lothian lands in lay possession, Thorfinn's message explained, there certainly seemed to be some confusion as to where the frontiers lay, and to which overlord, if any, the present owners  should pay service and dues.
He proposed to draw up what could be learned of the history of this area, and hoped that the Earl of Northumbria would ask his old men to do the same, when a meeting might be called to their mutual benefit.
In the meantime, said Thorfinn, since the western portion of Lothian adhering to the lands of Strathclyde and Cumbria and the old see of Glasgow had never, as he understood it, been in dispute, he intended to dispose of the land there as he thought best, with such fortifications as he considered necessary to preserve order.
To which effusion Earl Siward of Northumbria made no response whatever, although he must have received it, since Bishop Malduin's wife was with her husband in less than two weeks.
Their words on greeting each other were not recorded.
By then, in any case, Thorfinn was in Scone with Osbern of Eu, drawing maps and discussing strategy.
War-talk for night after night as the lamps burned in the hall, after days spent in sport and hunting and exercise.
War-talk or defence-talk.
It was the same thing.
The young men about Thorfinn were learning Norman-French and listened, their eyes shining, to what Duke William did, and Humphrey, Tancred's son in Apulia, and Count Geoffrey in Anjou.
It was a surprise when, just short of Christmas, Thorfinn decided the weather was good enough to take his wife and personal household north to join his two sons in Orkney.
‘And leave the Normans and their disciples?’ said Groa.
‘You'll never get back.
They'll install King Osbern in Scone come the spring-time.’
‘You can't trust anyone, can you?’
Thorfinn said.
‘There they are in Jerusalem with armed deacons round the True Cross, they say, to stop pilgrims biting bits off when they kiss it.’
He was not disturbed.
He knew, of course, his own power over his men.
And now the Normans would know it.
In a sense, they did not leave the newcomers behind.
There was only one topic, it would seem, in the staging-posts they passed on their way, in the halls of Kineth of Angus and Gillocher of Mar, of Malpedar of Buchan and of Morgund of Moray, before the fires of Hlodver at Dingwall and Odalric of Caithness, and finally at Birsay in their own hall on the shore, with Otkel leaning forward asking questions, and Thorkel Fóstri and Killer-Bardi and the rest sitting silent, listening, with the Earl's sons and his wife.
One topic: William of Normandy.
Because fighting-men are always eager for details about a new fighting-leader, the questions  began, and continued.
And Thorfinn gave to them his considered answers, as ever.
Listening to him, Thorkel Fóstri wondered, as he had at Scone, what Thorfinn thought of this, the first of the next generation of rulers.
Norway, Denmark, the Empire were in the hands of men of Thorfinn's own age, at the height of their vigour.
Such also were most of his friends: Sulien and Alfgar of Mercia, for example.
And Siward of Northumbria, whether counted as kinsman or enemy, must be nearly ten years Thorfinn's senior.
But the sons of Earl Godwin and the sons of Thorfinn's brother Duncan and this young great-nephew of Emma's were the men who would see Europe and perhaps guide it, some of them, through the second half of the century.
William of Normandy, in his mid-twenties, was already married to Matilda, the daughter of Baldwin of Flanders, flouting Pope Leo's injunction, linking him not only to Lille and Bruges and Ghent, but to Tostig, the son of Earl Godwin who had married Judith of Flanders, Matilda's aunt.
In the field, William had shown himself both brave and resourceful.
Somehow he had survived the attempted assassinations, the palace revolutions of his childhood, and was beginning to gather about him men who were willing to gamble their fortune with his, as well as others who were still not committed, and yet others who might, before he grew any stronger, take any chance that presented itself to push their own claims.
He was inventive, in his tactics, in his use of equipment.
He was harsh: his brutality in the taking of Alençon was such that the war against him collapsed and men's lives, you might say, were thereby preserved in the end.
Canute had done that, in his earliest days, when he mutilated the Saxon hostages confided to him.
Then had entered upon a wise and just rule, marked by church endowments and by pilgrimage.
As Thorfinn had done at the start of his reign, in Fife.
And had followed the same pattern afterwards.
It was a standard sequence of conquest, and not confined to pagans.
Only that year, the Emperor had hanged Manichee heretics in Goslar, so Isleifr had told him.
So there was much to admire in William, bastard son of Duke Robert of Normandy, whose ancestors and Thorfinn's were the same.
What Thorkel Fóstri wished he knew was whether Thorfinn admired the new Duke, or whether he felt as he, Thorkel Fóstri, had once felt and still sometimes did, looking on a younger, able, ambitious man with all his future before him.
He wished he knew, because, sooner or later, for the sake of his country, Thorfinn was going to have to choose.
Eventually, they talked themselves out; or at least the talk became overlaid by the preparations for the Christmas feast, only two weeks away, and those matters of business that had been laid aside for the Earl's attention: the visits he had to make, and the people he had to see.
Paul, at seventeen, had begun to take his share in the running of the island under Otkel, and his father the Earl must be shown the results and discuss them; with Erlend, a silent eleven, listening avidly.
There was the building on the island of Birsay to visit, with Bishop Jon to explain the niceties of the church and of the hall, both of which were roofed and full of carpenters attempting to produce a cathedral and a palace in time for the celebration of Yule.
It would have been inconsiderate of the King and his wife to spare them their self-imposed task; to dismiss the sweating craftsmen to their homes to enjoy the feast-time in front of a  longfire with their wives and children, or drinking with the Earl in his comfortable timber hall, well fired and warmly hung, on the opposite shore.
It would have been inconsiderate, and the possibility was not discussed, although Groa, moving from hall to hall with her husband, took the chance to pack a few extra boxes with thick clothes and blankets, and spent a little time during her last call at Orphir studying the crucifix Bishop Jon had pinned over her bed and wondering whether or not it would be Christian to pray for a wind.
Just a small wind; for a small wind was all that was needed to make the passage between the shore and the island of Birsay difficult for a large number of people.
A wind large enough to make it certain that no Yule feast could be held, and small enough to allow the workmen and their womenfolk and the hall people who were over already to cross to the shore and spend Christmas with a clear conscience at home…
It was perhaps less a prayer than a wish, in its final form; but by the time the Queen went to bed that evening, it looked almost as if she had been heard.
That day, Arnór Jarlaskáld had made one of his erratic descents upon Orkney, and the talk in the hall was worth listening to, as was the singing, but it was as well that the women should know when to  leave.
Preparing for bed in the new wing that was not now a new wing, after the fire that seemed so long ago, Groa heard the  chorussing and the laughter, muffled through two walls, and smiled.
In two hours or a little less, it would end, and Thorfinn would come in, a little drunk or more than a little drunk, as he could afford to be only in Caithness and Orkney, and so deliver himself, briefly, into her charge.
God knew she did not want him lowered by doubt, or by pain, or by despair, as Lulach had once seemed to accuse her.
But, now and then, she wanted to be at his side when his mind was still and there was nothing there but the sweetness within the forbidding exterior; and the love.
She awoke to a door banging.
All the doors of the hall and its adjoining chambers were fitted with strong latches, and were closed at night; to find one left loose was unusual.
She lay, half asleep, listening to the blustering wind outside her shutters, and then, satisfied by the sound of steps somewhere outside, and the decisive snap as someone shut and latched the loose door, she went to sleep again.
The next time she woke, it was to the slamming of the same door and the thud of two others further away.
In her own room, the door was still latched, but was rattling, with a rhythm she could hear repeated outside in the strong, irregular fluster of a wind from the east, with the hiss of a roused sea behind it.
The bed beside her was empty, but there were men in the yard: she could see a glimmer of light between the shutters and hear a flotsam of voices now and then, when the wind died.
They would be securing the boats, and perhaps some of the stock, and looking to the hay and peat-stacks.
Orkney lay on the track of the Atlantic winds: every bush in Orkney was wind-pruned; every hill was marked and terraced with wind-stripes.
Everyone knew what to do.
It lacked five days to Christmas, and it might be, with a good wind and a following swell, that they might not have to spend Christmas at Birsay.
She went to sleep, smiling.
The third and last time she was wakened that night, it was by the voice of her husband saying, ‘What it is to have a clear conscience.
My Queen, there is a gale and a high tide coming together, and the general view is that the women and children might be better off up in the hill-houses.’
She surveyed her husband.
She had heard of storms great enough to flood some of the booths near to the shore, but never one that  had thrown more than spray on the walls of the longhouses.
The inland sea at her door might be seven miles across, but it was enclosed on three sides by islands.
Beside her, the lamp suddenly rattled and she felt her hair lift.
Behind Thorfinn, the door slammed shut with a force that made her bed jerk.
He said, ‘Come.’
If he had drunk anything at all, it had left him.
He had a lantern lit by the time she had dressed, wrapping herself last of all in the big, hooded cloak she had brought for Birsay.
He said, ‘Have you a basket?
Take your jewel-box.
And these.’
What he pulled out and flung on the bed were garments of his own: a thick jacket and breeches and boots.
He said, ‘In a high wind, the cloak will pull you over.
Now come.’
At such times, you did not disobey Thorfinn or even talk to him.
She saw the weight he had to exert to drag the door open.
And that was an inner door.
Then she was in the empty hall, with all the candles blown out and only some lamps guttering here and there.
And finally Thorfinn laid hands on the outer door and began to move it, fraction by fraction, as if it were a gravestone, until she could force her way out.
Literally force her way out against a baffle-wall of inimical air that leaned against her, pressing unevenly.
It sucked out the air in her head and her lungs, and she twisted her head sharply, snatching breath from the folds of her cloak.
Then she felt a hand on her elbow and the voice of Bishop Jon said, ‘I'll take-you.’
Then she was battering her way at his side, thrown by her cloak, along the stout southern wall of the building and then hurled free round its corner and sent, propelled by the wind, at a staggering run up the hill that led inland, with Bishop Jon, in leggings and jacket as Thorfinn had been, with his arm locked in hers, acting as drag-anchor and lantern-bearer at once.
She could not look round.
But behind her she could hear, all over the bay, the scraps of men's voices shouting, and the rumble of rollers as the ships were drawn up to safety, and the lowing and bleating of animals being driven uphill.
Once, a dog squealed and went on squealing in pain, and a flying plank, grazing her shoulder, reminded her of what a high wind could do.
They had nearly arrived at the first of the longhouses scattered over the hillside, belonging to the families who stayed in Orphir all the year round and cared for the land and the hall on behalf of the Earl.
Bishop Jon said ‘Sinna and some of your own women are there already.
They will be glad of your company.
And all the men, you understand, will be needed to make things secure.
High tide is at seven in the morning.
It will be dark, which is troublesome, but the wind hasn't been blowing so long.
It may spend itself before the next one.’
He did not remember, perhaps, that she came from Trøndelagen and knew about the sea.
Whether the storm blew itself out quickly or not, the seas it moved took longer to reach their height, and longer, too, to die away.
The next high tide, twelve hours after this one, was the one they had to be afraid of.
The vigil in the longhouses was going to last for a day, and perhaps for part of the next night at least.
He took her to the biggest house, whose womenfolk she knew well.
On the landward side, they had opened a shutter a little and she could see inside.
It was packed with women, young and old, and with children.
She could see Erlend, looking angry.
She said, ‘Have you enough men?’
He stopped, his back to the wind.
‘My lady,’ said Bishop Jon.
‘We have enough men for what is needed down there, but not enough to stand guard over the longhouses; not until after the tide.
All of the houses are in good shape, and there should be no trouble.
But if trouble comes, it's able-bodied people with a head on their shoulders like yourself and your friends that will be needed.’
At the door, she stopped for the last time.
‘It's a south-east wind, isn't it?
What about Deerness and Copinsay and Sandwick?
What about Sanday and Stronsay?
And the Pentland Firth?
Thurso?’
‘Do you think,’ said Bishop Jon, ‘that your husband and his forefathers have never seen storms before and don't know what standing orders to give?
He's just taking precautions.
Arnór will make a verse about it tomorrow.’
Someone had made a pronouncement on it already.
The Gods are never so dangerous as when they wake from sleep.
She opened her mouth and then closed it again, because, whatever she said, he would have a patient answer.
St Columba, too, had been nice to his importunate gardener.
‘Ah, beloved!
‘Tis thou should be lord of this monastery!’
‘Leave it to me,’ said Groa.
‘We'll be all right.
Go and do what you can.
And be careful.’
Then as he turned away, she went to the door already opening for her.
‘I don't see,’ said Paul, ‘why Erlend had to go to the houses.
He's strong.
And he's sensible.’
It was the first time he had spoken to his father since the crisis began, although he had never lost him to sight, not for a moment.
It was the first time that he had seen his father do anything but ride about and talk to people and sail boats and race and jump and swim and lay wagers at horse-fights on feast days and drink.
He was good at sports, and he could handle a boat better than any of the other men's fathers.
But he never seemed to go to war, as other men's fathers did.
He never even settled a quarrel by fighting.
He seemed to like the easy life down there in Alba, or feasting with Popes and with Emperors further south.
People spoke of the great times when he fought sea-battles all over the Sudreyar and further south, in England and Ireland and Wales, but he, Paul, had not been there and didn't remember them.
He didn't remember much of the fighting in Orkney, even, when the man they called Rognvald, who must have been his cousin, was killed.
Men spoke of that as if it was a heroic thing, but it was Thorkel Fóstri, he found, who had done the actual killing, and his father wouldn't speak about it at all.
He was proud of his father, who was an earl and a king, but he wished his father stayed in Orkney all summer, as Otkel did, who had taken his son fighting once, when pirates tried to take over Foula.
Because Earl Thorfinn wasn't there to give permission, Otkel had not taken Paul with him, although Paul had begged.
He had been fourteen years old.
His father had been given Grágás at fourteen, and had gone with Thorkel Fóstri raiding the tribute-lands.
Since then, his father had told both Thorkel and Otkel to take his son Paul with them whenever there was prospect of fighting, but there had never been anything worth speaking of, except an Icelandic trader who hadn't paid his toll and had to be stopped in the Firth, or, once, a small flotilla of ships from Ireland that had fled when they saw them.
He was well trained.
He had had mock fights enough, and some of them pretty dirty.
But he had not been able to show anyone, yet, that he was anything but what his father now was: a rich man who did what he liked because he was King and everyone was polite to him.
It surprised him, therefore, that his father should be here, in the thick of the night and the storm, helping with the heavy, difficult work as well as directing it.
With his height and arm-span, of course, his father had an advantage.
When the horses, being bridled to lead them to safety, panicked and lashed out in the dark, threatening to do worse harm to the buildings than the wind would, it was his father who forced his way between them and dragged out the pair who were causing most trouble.
When the roof of the cooking-stores threatened to blow off, it was his father who held a mat over it, wooden shingles spurting and whirling about him, until the thing could be bound down and weighted.
They lost the spices.
‘Innocent of pepper as Paulinus's cook,’ said his father cheerfully.
‘Most of it up my nose.
Erlend?
He's too light on his feet.
The wind would bowl him over.
He'll be a good man to help the women.’
Which was satisfactory.
Erlend, six years younger, needed someone to speak up for him, sometimes.
His father's face was bleeding a little, and there was more roofing coming down somewhere.
A spray of trotter-bone pegs hit the ground and bounced into the darkness, followed by the crack and snap of thin flags flipping and breaking.
A handful of what he thought was heather thatch caught him in the face, but it wasn't: a corn-stack had been pushed over and some of the netting had burst.
He ran to help and found that, instead of repairing it, men were thrusting what they could into carts, still under its netting.
The carts rocked as they worked.
As soon as they were taken from shelter, they began to slide on locked wheels over the yard, and then to tilt.
The door came off a shed full of tools, and spades, even, were turning over and over; while a flock of rods kept for wattling thrust through the air, cruel as arrows.
One of them put a man's eye out.
It was the first of the really bad injuries, and Paul saw it.
He was looking at the man, screaming without being heard, blood coming from between his fingers, when Paul himself was attacked by something thin and cold and slippery that whipped round his neck and stayed there, tugging, as if it wanted to pull his head off.
He put up his hands and found it was a long strand of seaweed.
Lokki-lines, they called them, the older people.
Seaweed torn from the beach, all that distance away.
There had been shore-foam on the beach yesterday.
The old people had a name for that as well.
The Draug's vomit, they called it.
They said it meant death.
‘Got a new collar?’ his father yelled.
‘Look.
There are some sacks over there that wouldn't go into the barn.
They're well pinned down, but it would be a pity to lose them.
Can you get some of them into the hall?
And the stuff from that shed.
The torf-skeri and shovels.’
He disappeared and Paul, leaning on the wind, began work on the bags.
They were full of wool.
It was hard to hold them and pull the hall-door open, and every time he did it, the row of shields on the wall clapped about, booming like gongs, and the wind-path swept through the rushes grew broader.
They had the malt-sacks in there already, he saw, and heaps of oars, nearly as high as the tapestry.
The fire had roared itself out and the ash in the centre flushed up grey with each entry and lay over everything.
Each time he went out, there was more seaweed flying about, and great handfuls of sand, slapping into your face or your clothes.
One of the sacks was ripped from his arms as he struggled yet again with the hall-door, and the soft tufts of plucked wool, black and brown and light brown and milky, flowered into the air like a dandelion clock and were blown away just as quickly.
His father's voice roared, ‘Leave that!
It's time to go.’
Paul looked round.
There were still a lot of men about, and a few lanterns, so that you could see dimly.
A knot of men came from the shore at a staggering run, carrying another who was crying.
He could see men coming away now, too, from where the ships had been put: the first job, and the heaviest he had shared with his father.
The noise from the shore was much greater: a familiar hiss and booming he had heard often before with a big tide on the make, but muffled now because of the deafening sound of the wind.
He shouted, ‘When are you going?’
‘When the yard is clear,’ his father yelled back.
‘See you up on the hillside.’
‘I'll wait,’ shouted Paul.
He saw his father's palm come up in acceptance, and then his father disappeared again, blundering forcefully into the wind, checking the groups of men coming inwards towards him.
Paul could hear, intermittently, the resonance of his voice through the noise in the throat of the wind, and the roar from the shore that was becoming louder and louder.
How close was the sea?
As a good leader should, his father was making sure that no one was left in its path; that no man, taking a last wistful thought to a neglected fishing-boat or a skiff or a hoard of nets he had forgotten, should dash back and drown for his folly.
But a tide could come quickly, and no one was there now on the rocks to watch it advancing.
It came to Paul that he could watch it advancing from the roof of the hall.
He knew the footholds.
He had often helped with the thatching.
He hurtled round the end of the building, into the cross-draughts and eddies of its sheltered side, and started to climb.
He thought he knew the force of the wind.
He had not observed that, from the gale it had been, it had risen through level after level of violence to a power that no man living on Orkney had ever experienced or was to experience again.
He reached the top of the wall and, lying flat on the thatch, pulled himself quickly upwards until his body lay slanting just under the spine and, by raising himself a fraction, he could look over the roof-tree and down to where the beach lay.
The gale, pouring over the roof, caught him before he had even started to make his next movement.
It lifted him for a moment before it threw him down, so that for a second he saw what he wanted: that the sea had already overrun the beach and the rocks and the shingle and was advancing like a black wall rimmed with white over the slipways and grasslands of Orphir.
He saw men scurrying over the yard, their faces white in the lantern-light, leaning back into the wind with their knees and legs taking the strain as the storm behind tried to bowl them over.
None of them saw him.
The wind grabbed him under the arms and flipped him outwards and back as it had the torn raven banner already.
It was the folds of the banner, lying thick and cold in the shelter below, that saved his life, but not his skull from the blow that deprived him of consciousness.
Paul Thorfinnsson woke to find himself lying, his hair whipping his face, in the arms of someone who was running.
For seventeen, he was big and heavily built, but the man who carried him was so tall and held his weight so easily that there was no doubt who he was.
Only for a moment did he pause and face the buffeting wind with an effort, and Paul recognised in that moment his own struggle with bales of wool before the same door.
Then the door of the Earl's hall slowly yielded, and his father carried him in and laid him on the same bales.
He moved as he was placed there.
His father's voice said sharply, ‘You're awake?
Where are you hurt?’
He did not know himself.
He moved and felt dizzy.
‘My arm.
My shoulder.
I could walk.’
‘It's too late.’
It was.
There was a tapping noise at the shutters, as if someone had thrown a handful of pebbles against them.
He said, ‘The others?’
‘Up the hill.
I told them not to wait; or to come back.’
‘They will,’ said Paul.
They loved his father.
He knew that now, and was proud of it.
‘I told them I'd be safe in the hall.
Whether I found you or not.
Paul.’
‘Yes?’ he said.
The wool was soft under his shoulder.
Out of all Europe, out of the whole kingdom of Alba and Cumbria, out of all Moray and Caithness and the myriad islands of Orkney, his father was here, only here, and alone with himself.
‘Don't worry,’ said Thorfinn.
‘At least, listen.
If the shutters burst, the bales will float for a while, and there will be oars and benches moving about to take hold of.
Do you hear me?’
It hurt to fill his lungs, but he said loudly, ‘Yes!’
The shutters rattled and clattered under another onslaught of stones, and yet another.
The yard must be full of water, the first probing lines running ahead of the oncoming battalions and bringing their debris.
First pebbles, then big, rounded stones from the storm-beach, bounding and pounding against the timber walls and the planks of the shutters.
He sensed that his father had moved away and guessed what he must be doing: fortifying the boards with the heaviest things he could drag: the sack of provisions, the bench-boards, the high chair itself.
The hall became a sounding-board.
Within its shaking beams, there was nothing to be heard and nothing to be felt but the scream and roar of the wind, and the clattering percussion of objects striking the walls and the shutters, and the thunder of water outside, becoming louder and louder under a chattering ground-base of discarded boulders.
Then the main wall of water struck the building, and the shutters burst inwards like reeds, and the salt water rushed white and green into the hall at Orphir, thrusting obstructions aside, while a slap of water, heavy as lead, fell on the thatch and through it, to pour foaming down on the deepening sea on the hall-floor.
The bales under Paul moved, but he was kept from slipping by his father's hand, firm on his good arm.
Behind the King's back he could see the white-flecked water still flooding in; then it dwindled.
He wondered what would have happened if the thatch had opened over their heads.
His father said, ‘All right.
Pressure inside and out.
The walls will stand.’
He could hear him better because the noise was less between waves.
His father made no attempt to mend the wrecked shutters.
His father had been shielding him from the stones coming through.
The bales knocked together again, but the fall from the roof-breach had dwindled, and so had the rush from the windows.
The wind, seizing on the hole in the roof, tugged and groaned, and spewed wet straw down over his hair and into the water.
His father said, ‘Now, that is a problem.
Or we'll have the roof off.’
He spoke as if playing a board-game.
Paul said, ‘The sea?
My Lord?’
His father adjusted the bales, splashing about, and took a grip of his arm again.
A faint radiance, investing what remained of the roof, indicated that, whatever happened, dawn still intended to come.
His father said, ‘Either the sea comes to stay, or it attacks and runs off.
We seem to have been at the end of its reach on this occasion.
I think we'll find that it is drawing back.’
Now, for the first time, he felt the real fiery ache of his arm and his shoulder; but he would not be less nonchalant than his father.
‘There's another high tide this evening,’ he said.
‘Indeed there is,’ Thorfinn said.
‘Well, you can stay for that one if you like.
I'm going to be busy.’
In the cold dawn, with the wind pushing them so that they could hardly face each other, the King and his wife met on the slope above the battered hall.
The sea had receded, and the yard and the grasslands were a wilderness of sand and mud and wriggling fish, of stones and pebbles and seaweed, of driftwood and shellfish.
Half the buildings between the hall and the shore had disappeared.
Thorfinn's face was hollow, as hers was.
Only Erlend, drunk on the night and the excitement, jumped up and down, swinging on his mother's arm.
Thorfinn said, ‘Paul's arm is broken, but he is all right.
They've taken him off to a dry house.
How did you manage?’
‘The roof came off!’
Erlend said.
‘The roof came off a woman's house, and we all helped to save what we could.
The milk-vat ran away.
And I saw a hen get killed.
It got blown against a thatch-stone and got killed.
And her loom fell about and got broken.’
‘They said you were in there with Paul,’ Groa said.
‘He looked after me very well,’ Thorfinn said.
‘But we can't really invite anyone there until we've lifted the codfish out of the tapestries.’
‘How much longer?’ said Groa.
He turned and faced into the wind.
Above, the sun shone: a disc of pale, hazy yellow in a milky grey sky, below which unrolled a waste of glittering white.
Like melting ice, it dazzled the eye.
The sparkle of spray, the glassy mist hanging over the water were pretty enough to taste on the tongue.
Now and then, as they rolled, you could see the flanks of the waves, swollen fawn with sand and with mud, or pale green gorged with half-consumed white.
She said, ‘They say a south-easterly can last for a week.’
‘Taliesin had a riddle,’ he said.
‘Figure who it is, created before the Flood, a mighty creature without flesh, without bone, without veins, without blood, without hands, and without feet…
It will last no longer than you can bear.
That I promise you.’
No one who really knew him would ever let him down, she thought.
But sometimes a man's best would not be quite enough.
She said, ‘Thorfinn.
Where are the rest of the ships?’
And knew, by the fact that he did not turn, that she had guessed right.
‘When I know myself,’ he said, ‘I shall tell you.’
The storm lasted five days, and to ride over Orkney after that was like riding through a great field the day after beggars had left it.
There were no trees to overturn, as happened in Ireland or Moray.
But seaweed and stones lodged in the uprooted bushes that littered the low hills and meadows; beehives were found where they rolled in the bed of a stream; fish lay silver in farmyards, and drowned sheep on the shore.
Dead birds were to be seen everywhere, and live ones, in quarrelling flocks, feeding on the burst stacks and blown seed-corn; stabbing the cheeses that shone in the short winter grass; pecking at the dried skeins of fish; fluttering trapped beneath torn scraps of net.
Three farmsteads were nothing but black, glittering wood and a column of smoke where a vat of fish-oil had overturned into a brazier, or a roasting-fire got out of hand, or a guttering candle caught hangings.
On the west, they said, the waves had ranged a hundred feet high up the cliffs, scouring the bird-ledges clean and breaking through bridges and tunnels of rock where no gap had existed before.
The ships at Sandwick had been lost, Grágás with them.
In the Pentland Firth, they said, the waves had overrun the island of Stroma from end to end, piling fish and wreckage on the top, and destroying the steading and boats of Thorfinn's steward.
At Thurso, the long beach had disappeared into the sea, and the tide  had swept over the grassland behind it, taking twenty drekar and pinnaces with it.
At Birsay, no boat left in the nousts had survived.
The big ships, those drawn up far on the shore, had tumbled together, smashing one another to powder.
The new slipway to the island was broken with rocks, and the tower of its new church, its mortar still wet, had staggered and fallen.
The rest of the fleet was in the Sudreyar, wintering ready for defence or for trade in the spring-time.
For two weeks, while he worked with his people to patch up his earldom, Thorfinn heard no news he could trust.
Then the seas settled a little, and a boat came, carrying a crew he recognised and a Skyeman he knew well, but who would not meet his eye.
Which was how Thorfinn of Orkney and Scotia learned that the wind had achieved what neither Rognvald nor Norway had managed to do.
Two-thirds of his fleet was wrecked or missing.
And until he could replace them, he was crippled.
THREE
It might be supposed that the loss of his ships, with Grágás his flagship among them, was the greatest single blow that a sea-lord such as Thorfinn might receive.
That he appeared to treat it philosophically, as he had accepted and dealt with the reversal in Ireland, the death of the Lady Emma, the restlessness on his southern borders, was therefore partly a matter of pride, but also the mark of what had become his nature.
His Norman guests, from whom he made no effort to conceal what had happened, were inclined, on his return, to admire him for it.
Being Normans, they had spent the winter in relative cheerfulness, bedding women, hunting, and exploring those parts of the country unknown to them, in the absence of the winter wars they were accustomed to.
Against the advice of their hosts, they ventured into regions of mountain and marsh that occasioned difficulties never encountered in the well-drained chalklands of the Pays de Caux, and returned with an altered view of the country in whose service they had placed themselves.
Whereas in Normandy the boundaries between region and region were artificial, imposed by conquest and maintained by fortifications, here they were geographical.
Some areas here were almost empty: settled only by herdsmen and fishermen, and hardly feeding themselves, never mind raising corn to feed others, or a surplus of men to defend themselves.
Other regions were much richer in cropland and pasture, with good timber and fisheries, and there people prospered and multiplied, or had been doing, it was clear, under this King's guidance.
But for the whole country to flourish, the richer regions must yield all they could spare to help feed and develop the poorer; and the manpower, too, must be deployed where it was needed to defend the vulnerable harbours and pirate bases of the north and the west, with all the consequent problems of travel in that wild land of mountain and river.
H
Hugh de Riveire, a man as able as his older cousin Osbern of Eu, considered the changed circumstances over the fire in the privacy of their quarters at Scone, and reached a conclusion.
‘We know the country as a whole can't be wealthy.
Therefore, most of the King's resources must have been bound up in those ships and the various uses he could make of them.
So what now?’
Baldric, well informed through long dealings in Flanders, said drily, ‘You would be surprised what he could do with those ships.
But he still has some left.
And they are expert builders.’
Osbern of Ewias grunted.
‘You've seen what the gales did.
In Orkney, they take extraordinary precautions, and yet look what happened.
Here, everyone was ready for the winter storms, but not for what they got.
It'll be a long, long time before anyone in Orkney or Scotia has the time or the heart for shipbuilding, and if the King's stupid enough to force it on them, they'll defy him, or starve.
On the other hand, he's got money.’
‘That's true,’ said his cousin.
‘He could commission ships: Svein of Denmark has built for him before.
And buy in food, if he has to, and if anyone has a surplus to sell and wants to sell it to him.
But money won't last for ever, and in the meantime, people may have taken their business elsewhere.’
‘So long as he still has silver to pay us with,’ Flodwig said.
‘That he'll find,’ said Osbern of Eu.
‘Until he gets the kingdom on its feet, he's going to need all the allies he can get.’
It was to be a spring, it seemed, of repairs.
In Scotia and in Orkney, the work went on as fast as resources would allow, and more speedily than it might once have done because of the cleared roads and the stations of help that now existed through the newborn network of local churches and local leadership.
In England, the rents torn in the fabric by the departure of the Normans and the return of the Godwin family were being mended also, without overmuch trouble.
Ulf, the bishop whose capabilities had so little impressed Bishop Ealdred, had disappeared from view and been replaced at Dorchester by a Saxon, Wulfwig, who was known to be on good terms with Leofric of Mercia.
The Bishop of London stayed abroad for a while, and then discreetly returned and was found to be in office again, and so effectively that no one troubled to make an issue of it.
The outlawed Archbishop of Canterbury made a successful appeal to the Pope, who at once denounced all those who had taken it upon themselves, without papal advice or authority, to  outlaw an archbishop.
He dispatched a legate to Winchester conveying his reproaches and anger, and excommunicated Stigand, the Bishop of Winchester, whom the King and Earl Godwin had appointed Archbishop of Canterbury in Robert's place.
The appeased Archbishop of Canterbury left the Pope's side and returned to await events in his former abbey of Jumièges, where, unhappily, he was taken ill and subsequently died.
His land in England, together with that of Bishop Ulf's, was divided between Harold, the eldest son of Earl Godwin, and his sister the Queen, who had been retrieved from her convent.
Tostig, the brother of Harold and Edith, was not a beneficiary.
In the absence of any Archbishop of Canterbury other than the excommunicant Stigand, a stream of newly promoted churchmen, including Archbishop Cynsige of York, took themselves to the Continent to be consecrated.
They were lucky if they caught the Pontiff.
After a busy Christmas of bargaining, the Pope had finally traded the temporal claims of Bamberg and Fulda for the town of Benevento among other possessions of the Empire in Italy.
More importantly, Emperor Henry had also agreed to send an army to help throw the Normans, once and for all, out of Apulia.
When the Emperor changed his mind and recalled his forces, the Pope determined to march south without them.
Seven hundred Swabian infantry joined him, raised by Frederic of Lorraine, the Pope's chief lieutenant.
As soon as he began to march south, German mercenaries and then men from the non-Norman states came to offer their services.
Not everyone was a friend of the de Hautevilles.
So mighty was God, there was even a promise of help from the Greeks.
Trailed under the four-pointed flags by anxious English abbots, Pope Leo took time to ratify a bull defining the privileges of the great metropolitan church of Hamburg and Bremen over the Swedes, the Danes, the Finns, the Norwegians, and the Baltic Slavs, and over Orkney, Iceland, and Greenland, to take the place of the Pope in these regions, and to ordain bishops for them, as brought into the fold of Christ.
To Archbishop Adalbert himself, Leo confirmed the honours of the pallium, the use of the Roman mitre, and the privilege of a white horse-cloth and pearl caparisons, as the Pope himself used.
Then he replaced his white-and-gold helmet, caused the horns to be blown, and proceeded south once again with his army.
In Scotia, which had not been mentioned as part of the Archbishop Adalbert's spiritual kingdom, a few members of the  Norman party left at short notice, to be more than replaced in the next week or two by friends and kinsmen who wanted their posts.
Viscount Nigel-Constantine and the elderly Bishop Hugh of Lisieux waited until the agreed time and took ship, with decorum and in an atmosphere of surprising goodwill.
Carl Thorbrandsson went south with the Abbot of Mont St Michel, the late Emma's cousin, who had business to transact in Cornwall.
Both the agreements and the plans drawn up between the King of Scotia and the Normans at the start of the winter began to be implemented, and the camp at Scone became empty.
In the spring, the news arrived that Swegen, the eldest of Earl Godwin's family of seven sons and four daughters, had died on pilgrimage.
In a swift readjustment of his property, Somerset and Berkshire were reunited with the earldom of Wessex, and Oxfordshire and Hereford went to Earl Ralph the King's confused nephew.
Tostig, Earl Godwin's third son, received nothing extra.
In April, Earl Godwin died of a stroke, and his eldest son Harold became Earl of Wessex while Alfgar, son of the Earl of Mercia, was restored to his still-warm earldom of East Anglia.
Tostig, Earl Harold's second brother, was not made noticeably better off; but he did, of course, possess certain lands and was married to Judith of Flanders.
In Ireland, Diarmaid, King of Dublin, made two attacks on Meath along with the King of Ossory, and, noticing that there were few Orkney ships these days in the water and no Orkney attempts at interference, decided it was time to look for some easy weapons and cattle and money, and maybe even a harbour or two.
It was more of a wish than a plan, so that when he observed that all the best places for landing were growing spears instead of whinbushes these days, with Norman helmets, would you believe it, on some of the hillsides, he made a smooth withdrawal without ever getting the axes out.
The levies cheered, and the Normans returned to watching the Irish Sea with one eye and the goings-on in England with the other.
In June, the vast papal army in Italy came into contact with the smaller Norman army, led by the Hauteville half-brothers and their kinsman the Count of Aversa.
The papal army was beaten, and the Pope extracted from the town of Civitate, from which he had witnessed the battle.
The Normans escorted the Pope and his retinue, with care, back to Benevento and detained him there, with care, as their prisoner.
In July, Siward, Earl of Northumbria, sent a small embassy  north to his kinswoman's husband Macbeth of Alba, requesting the courtesy of a meeting to discuss matters of moment between them.
He suggested an open-air site on the boundary-lands, with no more than twelve unarmed men on each side.
Unarmed, to avoid misunderstandings.
Where he thought the boundary-lands might be, he did not indicate.
The time for repairs, it would seem, was about to give way to the time for offence, if not injury.
In the end, they met among the monastery buildings at Melrose, on its river-girt promontory thirty miles inland from Berwick.
The third Abbot of Melrose, founded from Lindisfarne and Iona four hundred years previously, had been St Cuthbert.
Resident in that fact was a potential profit; but it would, clearly, have to be worked for.
The palisaded earthwork that once lay across the neck of the promontory, beside which they foregathered, was beaten half flat; and the huts, once the two parties of principals had made their way inside, were mostly empty and ruinous.
The largest intact building, erected beside the small church, was occupied by three resident monks, a lay servant, and a group of men from Berwick, who, under the supervision of a black-robed clerk, were carrying out and setting up before the building a trestle table with a stool for each end, and a couple of benches.
The table was remarkably clean and had a patina that suggested an acquaintance with money rather than supper-plates.
The sightseers on the banks of the river, who, sensing something afoot, had been gathering for a few hours, dodged about, seeking a view between bushes.
They had already witnessed a spectacle: the sight of the two cousins (Norwegian, surely?
You never saw a black Irishman that height), tall as two abbeys, arriving in cavalcade, one from the north and one on the Roman road from the south, and dismounting and greeting one another.
Then the men-at-arms under the two banners, the King's and the Earl's, had waited outside, and the rest had got round the gate and walked talking inside: the King Macbeth with less meat on him, like a man who fed at sea, and Siward of Northumbria the way he always was, with his chest round as a shield under his tunic, and only his hair and beard greyer than you would think for a man not much past fifty.
Living where they did, everyone could identify Earl Siward's party.
It was more a family, really, than a deputation, excluding the  Bishop, of course: Aethelric of Durham, whom the monks had wanted to disown after that business eight years ago, until he had had to go to Siward and slip him a bit of St Cuthbert's best to get him reinstated.
Aside from the Bishop, it was what you would expect.
Osbern, the oldest son and the hope of the family, if a bit wild as yet.
Siward of Warwickshire his cousin, who was younger and worse, except in front of the old man.
Ligulf of Bamburgh, the Earl's brother-in-law, whom no one crossed at all and even the Earl didn't swear at.
And Forne, merchant of York, who had been a master coiner at Nottingham now for years, and had thought his fortune made, no doubt, when he married the sister of Duncan — King Duncan, the last one to rule Alba and Cumbria.
There was a young boy with him, who would be one of the sons.
The native denizens of the no-man's-land they called Lothian, between the Firth of Forth and Northumberland, then turned their attention to the six figures walking behind Macbeth of Alba, but, except for Bishop Malduin, who was easy to recognise because of his embroidered robes and his doubtful expression, the three middle-aged men and the two young ones were unfamiliar.
The local overlords, the magnates of the neighbourhood, who had spent a frenzied few weeks petitioning and being petitioned by their would-be superiors, had not been invited and therefore sat at home, drinking behind closed doors and not available to enlighten their countrymen.
Thorfinn said, ‘Now that we all know one another, perhaps we should sit down?’ and pulled out a stool at one end of the table for Earl Siward, as a host might, before taking the other end himself.
Tuathal of St Serf's, sitting down on one side with Cormac and Eochaid, saw Lulach smile and shot a brief glance to warn him.
Thorfinn would have his reasons for whatever he did.
But they needn't be underlined.
Already, he thought, Siward had suffered a little in the opening moves.
He had brought with him the Bishop of Durham, which was mandatory, and which of course Thorfinn had matched by bringing Malduin, flashing an expensive ring of unknown provenance.
But of Siward's remaining small group, three were youths, and one of them, Crinan the son of Forne, not only took his name from his grandfather but looked, with his soft brown hair and tranquil gaze, remarkably like Thorfinn's stepfather.
The message was plain.
This is the new generation, who will run Lothian and maybe all Scotia when Macbeth is dead.
If he understood it, Thorfinn gave no sign, greeting Crinan.
On the other hand, Siward could not quite conceal his moment of stillness when Cormac of Dunkeld, bustling up, had drawn forward the boy standing beside him and said, ‘And now, my lord Siward, may I have the pleasure of introducing you again to your nephew.
Maelmuire.
Maelmuire, of course, of Atholl, Duncan's son.
You met him…
Well, after a fashion, you met him ten years ago or so.
He was eight.
If you remember?
I'm sure you wouldn't have known him.
Maelmuire, your uncle.’
Maelmuire, Duncan's youngest son and the only one still in Thorfinn's keeping, whom Siward had already tried to capture once.
And whom, casually, Thorfinn had now brought south from his fastness to greet his uncle.
Maelmuire has nothing to fear from you now, nor have I. What was that you were saying about the next generation — and where and what they would rule?
Oh, yes, one might smile inwardly.
But not openly, yet.
It had been a hot summer, and dust rose from the rough flags as they settled.
Thorfinn, looking down the short length of the table to his wife's cousin opposite, said, ‘I heard about your wife.
I'm sorry.’
He did not specify whether it was the mother of Osbern or the mother of the baby Waltheof who had died.
The omission meant, Tuathal knew, that he had not yet found out.
Like most people of Scandinavian blood, Siward sometimes troubled with gospel-marriages and sometimes didn't.
The property-deals were always carefully documented.
Earl Siward said, ‘I thank you.
I have heard about your ships.
I am sorry.
They are not so simple to replace, are they?
And the work of reproduction less enjoyable.’
‘I can't say,’ said Thorfinn, ‘that I've ever bedded a ship, but I'll take your word for it.
We still seem to have some left.
You wanted to talk about Lothian?’
It was hot.
The sun shone equally on them both: their shadows, enormous and jagged, covered the ground between the table and the eating-house, and waves of heat beat on the tonsures of the Alban priests.
Tuathal, who knew that thoroughness was the secret of success, had long since extracted from Thorkel Fóstri all that he could tell about Earl Siward of Northumbria, and had deduced a good deal more.
The hulking nephew of Kalv Arnason had been only a youth when King Olaf had killed his uncle Ølve at the spring feast at Sparbu and had given to Kalv his uncle's rich widow in gratitude.
Then, Siward's father had submitted to Olaf, but before ten years had gone by, his father had finished his dialogue with Olaf's enemy Canute, tucked the Lapp fur-monopoly under his belt, and shared with Kalv the blows that killed King Olaf at Stiklestad.
The son's reward had been a comfortable living in England, both before and after his father's death.
Siward was probably already one of the richest men in Scandinavian York, as well as a useful war-leader and a forthright advisor to Canute and his heirs by the time it occurred to the Lady Emma that she might do worse than encourage him to take over Northumbria.
There had been no difficulty about that.
Siward had merely killed his wife's uncle, as Carl Thorbrandsson had already killed his wife's father, and had joined thereby the bloody brethren of kinsmen whose lethal manoeuvrings had kept him busy for the twelve years he had now held the earldom.
Did he regret his exile?
Had he envied Kalv, turning his coat so adroitly over and over, and at least buying back some years at Egge?
‘Envy?
He despised Kalv.
Kalv was a fool,’ Thorkel had said.
‘There was only one man he envied.’
‘He hated Thorfinn?
Always?
I suppose he must have done,’ Tuathal had said, thinking aloud.
‘Or the Lady Emma would never have risked making Siward her buffer between the rest of England and Scotia.
But then, what if Siward had tried to take over Scotia?’
‘Twelve years ago?
Against Thorfinn's manpower, and his money, and his fleet?
Even with England and Denmark behind him,’ had said Thorkel Fóstri with scorn, ‘I doubt if he would have got a levy over the Forth.
And England wouldn't have backed him.
Magnús had Norway then, remember, and half a foot in Orkney already through Thorfinn's nephew Rognvald.
England would rather have had Thorfinn in Scotia, I can tell you, than Siward or Norway.’
And that, thought Tuathal, was still true.
Despite Thorfinn's present weakness, it was still, thank God, true.
He had said, ‘And Thorfinn?
He's used to dealing with princes these days.
Does he resent being forced to barter with someone…’
He had paused, having caught Eochaid's eye, to rephrase the question, but Thorkel Fóstri's voice, at its most sardonic, had taken him up.
‘Someone like me, from the barbarous north?
Haven't you noticed yet that Thorfinn is prouder of being Earl of Orkney than he is of ruling Scotia?
He fought for Orkney and won it, against men just like Siward.
His own kind.
He knows them too well to despise them.’
His own kind?
Thorfinn was three-quarters Celt.
They were not his own kind.
Tuathal had said, ‘So it's just another negotiation?
Thorfinn neither likes nor dislikes Kalv's nephew?
I find it hard to believe.’
To which Thorkel Fóstri had answered in a way he had not expected.
‘When did you ever know whether Thorfinn likes or dislikes a man?
He takes them for what they are, and deals with them accordingly.
It's the secret of his success.
You don't fight the sea by getting angry with it, or persuade it to be kinder by loving it.’
The bitterness was plain for all to hear.
Eochaid had got up and left, and he, Tuathal, had asked only one or two questions more.
He was not embarrassed.
It merely appeared to him a paradox worth someone's attention: how a man such as Thorkel described could inspire what Thorkel undoubtedly felt for him.
Prior Tuathal pulled his hood absently over his reddening crown and sat, his chin in the sun, bending his sharp intelligence to the exchange between the Earl and the King by which all his theories were about to be tested.
Siward's shoulders were massive, and his beard sat like a cushion between them.
The hair on his face was untrimmed, and his nose had spread with drinking, but the weather-hard skin was not the skin of a drunkard, and if the hair on his temples was thinning, you could not see it for the leather fillet he wore.
His eyes were bright blue.
He made Thorfinn look like an Arab.
Earl Siward said, ‘You can't blame churchmen for getting it wrong.
We can settle this face to face.
I know your position, and you know mine.
Earl Godwin died, and now young Harold of Wessex sees Welsh and Irish and Norsemen behind every curtain and is looking to Mercia to protect him.
Leofwine's been made Bishop of Lichfield.
Alfgar's cousin Leofric's been given Coventry now as well as Peterborough.
And Alfgar himself, of course, has got East Anglia again, so Mercia stretches from sea to sea south of us both, and cutting us both off from Wessex.’
‘I had noticed as much,’ said Thorfinn.
‘So an alliance against Mercia is what you are proposing?’
Siward said, ‘I'd be a fool if I did, seeing that you and Alfgar have been cultivating each other for thirty years.
You're better off than I am.
You've lost your ships, you've lost your friends in Ireland, you've lost the Lady Emma and the active support of the Pope, but you're still strong enough to stop Harald of Norway from using you as a base, and you're no threat to Wessex so long as you get rid of those Normans.’
‘Ah,’ said Thorfinn.
‘You're proposing that you and Mercia and the Normans and I invade Wessex and drive out the Godwinssons again?
Mercia wouldn't agree to it.
And Duke William, they tell me, is being kept too busy hanging on to his dukedom to worry about the crown he's been promised.’
The Earl dragged his fists back from the table and, opening his shoulders and mouth, stretched his sinews, as if parting Philistine pillars.
Then he exhaled through his nose and laid his fists, with care, back on the table.
‘You feel no call,’ he said, ‘to treat these things seriously?’
‘Not if getting rid of Osbern of Eu is going to be the point at issue,’ Thorfinn said.
‘He's a cousin of William of Normandy,’ said Earl Siward.
His nose had begun to shine in the heat, but his eyes were wide open and calculating.
‘So am I. So are you, probably, in the widest sense.
I could throw them out and replace them with Bretons,’ said Thorfinn.
‘But they are all cousins of Duke William as well.
And would also require land in the Lothians.’
His skin, polished brown below the thin, short-sleeved tunic, showed no change with the heat.
Above one elbow he wore a thick gold band of Norse design that Tuathal had never seen before.
Of his own kind.
A man not incapable of irony, Thorkel Fóstri, it seemed, could not necessarily detect it in somebody else.
Earl Siward drew breath.
Thorfinn forestalled him.
‘I thought — am I wrong?— that you were one of those who voted for Duke William as heir.
In which case you are right: you are worse off than I am.
For whereas my wife's family is discredited, you have just married a daughter into Norway.
Wessex may not trust you or even want you.
What if Mercia and I were to take over Northumbria?’
One of the young men, the son Osbern, glared and turned to his father.
They all had to learn.
Siward's beard relaxed.
He said, ‘I wish you meant it.’
‘It was an interesting thought,’ Thorfinn said.
‘I'll give you another.
I want the land west of Wedale and the south bank of the river Forth to do with as I please.
I also want the rights to all other  churches in the Lothians, now existing and to be established, which are not and have never been in the past dedicated to the shrine of St Cuthbert.
The remaining Lothian lands and the remaining churches you may retain.’
Silence fell.
Even after Tuathal started to breathe, Earl Siward still remained motionless.
Then Siward said, ‘And the Normans?’
Thorfinn said, ‘The land I have described is my land, and I shall place on it whom I please.’
‘Your land?’ said Siward.
‘Your grandfather had Danes and Norwegians attacking both coasts and a Scandinavian earldom threatening to move up from Northumbria.
Your father was dead.
Your grandfather had lost the support of the Orkney fleet.
He had to fight for Lothian.
But after that, there was old age and an incompetent grandson and vassaldom under Canute and then a King of Alba who did half his ruling from Orkney.
What makes it your land?’
‘Take it from me,’ said Thorfinn.
Silence fell, briefly, again.
To look at the six faces opposite was difficult.
One looked from side to side, at the two speakers, or else down at the table or, fleetingly, at one's own side.
The boy Maelmuire, who had started with a high colour like his father Duncan's, had gone very pale.
His first experience of the conflict between two powerful men, tossing between them the idea of war.
Two men who were his own uncles.
Cormac beside him was nervous, Tuathal thought, for the boy's sake.
Eochaid was watching Thorfinn, as if hardly noting what was being said.
And Lulach and Bishop Malduin, sitting side by side, might have belonged to different worlds: the Bishop grave and faintly uneasy, his eyes flickering across the table to the men of York and Durham and Bamburgh whom he must know so well.
And Lulach, his face clear-textured and open, reflecting the sky and the sunlight and an untouched innocence: the innocence, Tuathal had long ago decided, that does not know what responsibility means.
Then a new voice spoke up.
Bishop Aethelric of Durham, in the harsh Saxon they were all using, said, ‘Will my lord King allow me to speak?
You make no claim on the churches of St Cuthbert?’
Thorfinn turned and looked at him.
‘On those east of Wedale and south of the Forth estuary?
No,’ he said.
‘I offer these with their privileges freely to the diocese of Durham.
The remaining churches would be Bishop Malduin's concern.’
‘From Kinrimund?’ said Bishop Aethelric.
‘From whatever part of Alba he wishes to take as his lodging,’ Thorfinn said.
‘I have no quarrel with that,’ said Bishop Aethelric; and glanced at his Earl quickly, and sat back on his bench.
‘And Bishop Malduin?’ said Earl Siward thoughtfully.
Probably because of the heat, Bishop Malduin's face had assumed a motley of different colours, like a majuscule in a saint's gospel-book: blue and pink and yellow and red and a little white, here and there.
He opened his mouth and then said, ‘It seems to me, my lord Earl, my lord King, that the churches of St Cuthbert should be indivisible.
It seems to me an insult to the saint to divide them.’
‘Oh,’ said Thorfinn.
‘You mean I should have offered Dunedin also to Earl Siward?
And the rest of the churches to the north?’
‘No!’ said Bishop Malduin.
‘That is not at all what —’
‘But why not?’ said Ligulf of Bamburgh.
‘The land and the churches both belong to Bernicia.
And how can the rights of churches be divorced from those of the lands they occupy?
How can a farmer in the south of Lothian pay his land-dues to one overlord and his church-dues to another?
The wealthy will train priests of their own, as they do now, and your churches will be empty and useless.
I say the churches belong with the land, and all should be under Durham and York.’
‘Poor Bishop Malduin,’ said Thorfinn gently.
‘Who consecrated Bishop Malduin?’ said Ligulf.
‘When he dies, where will you get your next bishop?
The Pope is a prisoner.
Adalbert of Bremen claims to be spiritual overlord of the Orkneys and Norway: do you want to set a precedent there?’
‘It is a difficulty,’ Thorfinn said.
‘You must feel it yourselves, with one of your archbishops excommunicated, and the other newly appointed and barely back from his own consecration.
He did manage to reach the Pope before the Normans did?’
Siward cleared his throat loudly enough to make Ligulf glance at him and then sit back.
But his voice when he spoke was quite gentle.
‘Archbishop Cynsige has the pallium and the power to consecrate bishops,’ he said.
‘He turns a father's eye, naturally, on Bishop Malduin's work.
But you do not require his services at present, and I see no point in discussing them.
As I understand it, you offer me a fraction of Lothian, and war if I do not accept?’
‘I offer you a division of Lothian that ought to suit us both,’ Thorfinn said.
‘Have you any other suggestion to make?’
‘The limits of the Forth lands?’ said Siward.
‘We have drawings.
You will be shown them,’ said Thorfinn.
‘And the churches Ligulf spoke of?
All the churches in Lothian were St Cuthbert's at one time.’
‘I do not offer you all the churches,’ Thorfinn said.
‘I offer only those which belong to his shrine by reason of direct dedication or association with the saint.
And these are, for that reason, the richest.
The rest will remain, under Bishop Malduin, to be pastors to their flock.’
The Earl Siward of Northumbria lifted his arms from the table and folded them.
‘I do not think,’ he said, ‘that my brother-in-law Ligulf is satisfied.
Or my son or my nephew, who are not used to dealing with ultimatums.’
Thorfinn said, ‘I am not dealing with your brother-in-law, or your son, or your nephew.
Your Bishop seems satisfied.’
‘And so is one of his brothers-in-law,’ said Forne.
‘My son is rather young to speak with authority, but I believe that if his grandfather his namesake were here, he would agree, too.
The proposal has come from Scotia, but might equally have come from this side.
We are both apprehensive of strong forces and we are both under necessity of taking precautions.
We have nothing in common with which to make an alliance except some frontier ground.
Let us each take what we need, if we can agree upon it, and save our fighting-resources for when real danger threatens.’
‘Your wife's father,’ said Thorfinn, ‘always had a high opinion of your good sense even if it didn't save him, in the end, from the rest of your family.
My lord my cousin, have we the basis for an agreement?
In which case we might move into the shade and partake of some wine?’
‘We have,’ said Siward.
He rose.
He said, ‘There was a time, my lord my cousin, when you preferred axes to ink.
I liked you better.’
The boy Crinan and Lulach strolled from the table together.
‘Don't you have a sister called Edith?’ said Lulach.
‘Earl Alfgar has a daughter called Edith.
Three Kings, two Ediths, and the House of the Grey Sandal-hose.
How proud your grandfather Crinan would have been.
Does the sun give you a headache?’
‘I know you're glad to see me back,’ said Thorfinn.
‘But I can't breathe.
What is it?
I wasn't in any danger.’
His wife released him.
‘Of course not.
That's why you meet Siward on the border instead of in the more usual way, such as in one another 's houses.
You heard them outside.
They thought you were lucky to get back as well.’
‘I don't mind,’ said Thorfinn.
‘But, really, assassination wasn't  going to solve anything.
Assassination only works — I don't really have to explain?— when the victim's people were sick of him anyway and ready to let in the new man without overmuch fuss.
Or are you trying to tell me that the mormaers think Siward would laugh at their jokes?’
‘They weren't all that sick of Duncan,’ said Groa critically.
‘But they let you walk in and take his place before they even knew that you never laugh at anything, even if it's funny.’
‘Yes.
Well, I had the whole of north Scotland from the Orkneys to Moray, and Siward has only those bits of Northumbria that Ligulf and the rest haven't written their crosses on.
I knew I wasn't in any danger.
He had to bargain,’ said Thorfinn.
‘I'm surprised Ligulf and the rest let him,’ said Groa.
‘Are you?
Then amuse yourself in the long autumn evenings,’ said Thorfinn, ‘working out what bargain he made with them before he came north.
If the pact even stands till the autumn.’
‘How long do you give it?’ she said.
She wished she hadn't started the conversation.
She was glad she had, because she forgot sometimes how extraordinary he was.
‘Not long.
Long enough to let me do what I need to do in Lothian.
What's wrong?’ he said.
‘I like not being able to breathe.’
FOUR
‘Wait till we start campaigning,’ Osbern of Eu had said to Thorfinn, ‘and then you'll know what it's like to live again.’
A lamentable remark, if you took it seriously, and fit for the Thorfinn of twenty years earlier.
At the time, he had shrugged without answering.
But when the portents continued to gather that autumn, and ruling the kingdom grew further and further from the planned exercise it had been and more like taking a fleet out in freakish, untoward weather, there was a change in Thorfinn as well: the extra swiftness, the finer edge, the sharper zest created by danger.
It struck sparks, flint against steel, from the bright fighting trim of his mercenaries.
The Normans, that summer, began to mesh into the fabric of the new, alert life of the country.
The west-coast defences given a structure and a system of manning, they moved inland to the key sites at crossroads or ford or defile where, usually, there had long been a hill-fort or an earthwork of some kind.
Sometimes they supervised the repair of what they found.
Sometimes they made a new fort, throwing up a ditched mound with a palisade on the crown enclosing a timber citadel, with a defensible yard at its feet.
It could be done in less than a week by men working with vigour, and mostly they did, for their own new lands looked to the forts for protection and warning.
Ewias had performed that service for Osbern, and he did not forget it.
Then, having settled their men and their stewards and their womenfolk, if they had any, they moved eastwards to do the same for themselves and for others along the course of the Forth, and to drift, with an inquisitive eye, through the hills and croplands that lay southwards in Northumbrian hands.
Their seniors attended Thorfinn, moving in rotation, so that he always had Osbern or Ansfred his son or Baldric or Hugh de Riveire or Flodwig or Salomon of the Val de Saire or some combination of these in his company, as was the rule with his mormaers and their leading men.
From wherever they lodged, the  couriers raced in and out, carrying orders and relaying messages.
The wounds left by the gale were sore to mend.
It was well into the summer before the clang of the forge or the thud of mallet and axe meant anything other than repaired houses and fencing and barns: new scythes and spades instead of weapons; new bridges and malt-vats, new sledges and jetties, new creels and baskets and thatching instead of new ships.
Then the land had to be cleared of its debris for the sowing and pasture, and the forests cleared of their tangle, and the journeys made, of necessity, to bring in new seed and new livestock.
By late summer, the nousts and the sheds had been mended in Orkney, and there were keels in them, waiting for the harvest to finish.
The ships that had survived were divided, some to continue with the trade that was their life-blood; the rest thinly spread through the Sudreyar, including Man, where Bishop Hrolf cultivated his souls and his fortifications with equal exuberance and had received from his smith on Holmepatrick, in his scant leisure from illegal coining, a custom-made tunic of chain-mail with the cross of Christ on every ring of it.
Thorfinn sent to Svein of Denmark, who seemed no nearer to ending his war with Harald of Norway, and obtained an undertaking that, if the terms were right, Svein would get him ships somewhere, although not before spring.
After a brief, acid interval, the terms became right and the bargain was struck.
Bishop Jon, after a punishing excursion in Thorfinn's company to Buchan, rode south to Brechin to bathe his feet and get rid of the dust in his throat and found Prior Tuathal from Fife already there, with the Abbot and Malpedar the Mormaer.
Tuathal, it seemed, had come north from the Forth estuary, where a new church to St Serf was being raised beside the traditional shrine of St Kentigern.
‘Indeed,’ said Bishop Jon, ‘'tis to be hoped that the two saintly souls got on well together in life (if so be that they ever met at all, which I take leave to doubt) now that the lord King has made a packet of them, so to speak, for posterity.
He had a good eye for a defensible site, had St Kentigern.’
He lifted one dripping foot from its basin and his servant, kneeling, dried it.
The foot, like Bishop Jon, was large, well formed, and perfectly manicured.
He added, ‘I also hear that Earl Siward has lost no time in equipping all his churches of St Cuthbert with four stout walls, a ditch, and a garrison.
Will you hand me my sandals?
Only God, the cherubim, and the angels were ever meant  by the Lord to be seen with bare feet.
Were you and I walking on clouds, we'd be upsides with them.’
‘In some respects,’ said Prior Tuathal, his pigskin face agreeably blank.
‘A week after the pact, Stow and Melrose filled up with soldiers.
It allowed us to do the same, if we wished, with our churches.’
‘The fountain of rightful possession.
Well, of course,’ said Bishop Jon.
‘And our good friend Bishop Malduin has been helping?’
He nodded, and his body-servant got up and retired.
‘In every way possible,’ Prior Tuathal said.
‘Except, of course, in any direction to do with fortifications or the requirements of war.’
‘The devotion that's in it!’ said Bishop Jon abstractedly.
‘Like Paul the hermit, alone like a bird on his rock, naked except for his hairs.
Although I did hear he had a lad or two with him.
Malduin, that is to say.’
‘Two young Fife men.
That's right.
Fothaid's father was blinded and Cathail's killed in the year King Duncan died.
They've both been brought up in Ireland and the Bishop has taken them into his household.’
‘And their fathers’ lands?’
Bishop Jon enquired.
‘The King apportioned them between the monastery at Kinrimund and the priory at St Serf's until the heirs grew from childhood.
What happens next will be his decision.’
‘Well, does he want a home for the priest, I would take him with pleasure,’ said Bishop Jon, ‘and no doubt you could find room for the other if called on.
D'you still send those terrible cryptograms?’
‘How else would I know what was going on in Cologne?’ said the Prior blandly.
‘I hardly like to suggest,’ said the Bishop.
‘But when my hat is on, you'd hardly notice the notch the Emperor clipped in my ear.
Have you heard the news of the Athelings yet?
King Edward's nephew that was exiled to Hungary?’
Prior Tuathal's clever eyes opened.
‘He's dead?’
‘He's frail, but a good stone's throw from death,’ the Bishop said.
‘His third child, they say, will arrive at any moment, God protect them.
And with the Holy Father a prisoner and the Emperor in uncertain health, the situation of that little family must be arousing a host of eloquent prayers this minute.
And the heir with only two little girls so far, and no great prospect of life.’
‘You've told the King?’
Tuathal said.
‘What did he say?’
‘You could write it without fraying your pen.
Pray for a girl, was all he said, to my recollection.
He had just heard about Baldric and  his party leaving, and was speaking entirely in the vocative.
I left before I found myself dispatched to Teviotdale,’ said Bishop Jon.
‘There is a dangerous rising afoot against Duke William in Normandy, and half my lord Osbern's relatives have gone to the aid of the Duke, the flesh-seeking spears in their hands.
My lord Osbern himself is still here.’
‘Until when?’ said Tuathal.
‘Until, no doubt, he sees who is winning.
I wish him and his friends no evil,’ said Bishop Jon, shaking down his book-satchel and peering into it, ‘but it's a difficult thing to make plans for your country with them sitting there, their heads switching from this shoulder to the other, and so sleek you would think it was a cow that licked them all.
Do you have a prayer for a caementarius on you?
I have to bless this tower before it falls down or the masons perish of liver-rot.’
‘I'm never without one,’ said Tuathal.
‘If I suggest to the King that he spends Christmas at Scone and attends special Masses of Supplication for the continued well-being of his country, would you support me?’
‘He has already proposed it,’ said Bishop Jon.
‘He has, you must agree, a remarkably clear idea of policy, if the topography of God's Kingdom at times eludes him a trifle.
Here is a blessing for bells.
It will do admirably.
Is there a bell?’
‘I'll go and look,’ said Tuathal.
The Masses were held at Christmas, and at Scone instead of the newly finished cathedral at Birsay, for the King did not go to Orkney that winter.
They were held in the open, before a portable altar, and three bishops were present, in gold and crimson and purple and white, as well as all the churchmen who could contrive to be there, and several thousand people from Fife and Angus and Lennox and Strathearn and even further away.
Afterwards, Thorfinn gave a great feast.
Osbern of Eu and his companions attended, in splendid humour because of the good news the King had brought them from Cumbria.
The King had ridden everywhere that autumn, but he had spent longest with Thor and Dunegal and Leofwine in Cumbria, where he had gleaned the first tidings of Duke William's victory against his rebel kinsmen.
Everyone knew that Duke William still had his hands full with Anjou and Aquitaine, but a victory was a victory, and the Normans  drank deeply that Christmas, but not so deeply, as Osbern cheerfully assured his employer, that they would not be able to defend Scotia against anyone who tried to interfere with it.
‘And if Duke William calls?’ had said Thorfinn calmly.
It was the real danger, and it turned Eochaid cold to hear Thorfinn speak of it openly, as if it amused him.
At least the Normans enjoyed the way he dealt with them.
Perhaps they knew, as Thorfinn did, that the Pope was learning Greek, there in his imprisonment in Benevento, so that he could the better engage the help of the Eastern Emperor to throw the Normans out of their new lands in Italy.
If he ever got out.
If the Byzantine Empire would ever bring itself to unite with the Empire of the West.
But Eochaid kept his counsel, as Tuathal did, about everything except what Thorfinn had to know.
Like Tuathal, Eochaid had been in the saddle all autumn, mostly at the King's side, until he had had to return to his own Scone to prepare for this Christmas.
He had made another visit as well, about which he had not told the King.
While in Cumbria, he had obtained leave from Earl Leofric to ride south through Mercia and spend two days in the quiet of Oswestry with Thorfinn's periglour Sulien, who had travelled from Llanbadarn to meet him.
A young man of twenty-one, Sulien had talked music and manuscripts in Moray with Eochaid.
Now, more than twenty years later, the Breton presbyter had lost none of his grace or his repose.
He listened, saying nothing, to all the Prior had to tell him, and, at the end, strolled in silence beside him, his hands lightly clasped at his back.
They had left the church and the low huts behind, and the sun was warm, and the soft air off the hills.
Sulien said, ‘You are concerned about Lothian.
You are right.
But don't mistrust the King's judgement.
Whatever he did or did not do, Earl Siward was going to make trouble in Lothian.
With his kinsmen and the Godwin family hounding him, and Mercia threatening to overwhelm him, he had to extend north, or else clear his rivals out of Northumbria.
And no one was going to help him do that.
What Thorfinn did was earn a breathing-space, and the right to lodge some sort of defence in the area.
Earl Siward can be a nuisance.
But, alone, he can't be a threat to the nation.’
‘I wanted to hear you say that.
And the Normans?’
Sulien smiled, walking still.
‘Do you want my expert opinion?
I don't see much of my homeland, but my brother is married into the  kindred of Osbern of Eu, and I saw Osbern at Ewias.
He's a good fighting-machine, and honest.
I should have invited him, as Thorfinn did, but only time will tell if he was right.
It identifies him with the Norman cause and the Norman heir, which becomes a threat if Duke William is  successful .
On the other hand, if Duke William is successful, Thorfinn has a sponsor as strong as King Canute or the Lady Emma ever was and, one supposes, guaranteed security for Orkney with no Norwegian overlord.
How are matters with his wife's family?’
‘We hear from Denmark from time to time,’ Eochaid said.
‘Finn Arnason holds Halland for King Svein, but his sight is worse, and he is never at court, although he can still fight on shipboard and the young men respect him.
His kinsmen in Norway don't seem to have suffered.
His niece Thora has given Harald an heir, and still shares his bed with the Russian.
His nephew John has married Earl Siward's daughter, but there is no sign of an alliance between Earl Siward and Norway.
It was what Thorfinn feared.’
‘But England and Wessex would never allow it,’ said Sulien.
‘Is Thorfinn afraid?’
There was a long silence.
Then Eochaid said, ‘No.
He is like a man riding a dolphin.’
They walked.
Then Sulien said, ‘But you are afraid.
Of what?’
‘Of fowl-pip,’ said Eochaid.
‘Or a bad harvest.’
Sulien stopped.
‘So he hasn't given in,’ he said.
‘Even after all these years.
Even after all you and I and the others could do.
Even after Rome.
You would think, if you didn't know better, that Lulach was right: that he was the son of the Devil.’
He broke off.
‘He's the son of Earl Sigurd,’ said Eochaid.
‘You're talking about something I've never been told about, and I didn't come here to find out.
Tuathal knows more than I do.
He heard Thorfinn answer the Pope's questions in Rome.
And, despite what he answered, Pope Leo gave him absolution.
He walked barefoot to three shrines, and he returned shriven, and has done more for the church than any King of Alba before him.
Nor could anyone know that he had reservations; that he didn't feel as we all did, treading that ground.
But…’
Sulien began walking, slowly, again.
‘No one can know, but they sense it.
Is that what you are saying?’
Eochaid said, ‘It hardly matters.
Even if he had brought his kingship pure and intact back from Rome and launched a holy crusade such as apostles dream of, two years is not enough to sew a kingdom together.
‘Moray and the north will always be his, and the rest would have joined them in time with no more than what he was offering: equal rule, equal justice, equal worship.
But with the peace breaking, he had to bring in help.
And now old churches are acquiring palisades and fortified towers faster than gospel-books, and new churches appear where a Norman baron sees the need for a fortress.
The mormaers agree with his policy now.
But they are not unshakable.’
‘And the young leaders?’ said Sulien.
‘The men who went to Rome?’
‘For them, Thorfinn can do no wrong,’ Eochaid said.
‘But will the people follow them?
The conduct of the nation means nothing to those who live in day huts.
If Odin does not bring them peace and good harvests, then it is the duty of God and the King.
If either fails, it is the fault of the King, since God is without blemish.
A diverse people in time of hardship need a priest-king.
The English know that.
Edward is anointed with holy oil: he has the power of healing, they say; he loves his chaplains and worships daily, prostrate, where he can be seen.
The Emperor submits to great fasts and to flagellation.’
‘While Thorfinn builds,’ Sulien said.
‘With nothing but common sense in the mortar, and a tongue that can adjust most problems and people to scale, and an arrogance that will not connive at pretence, even if pretence is of the essence of kingship.
There is nothing I can do.’
‘Nothing?’ said Eochaid.
‘Even if Lulach did not exist, there is nothing I can do,’ Sulien said.
‘If you are wise, you will not even say we have met, for he would be troubled for your sake and mine, and he will be troubled by other things soon enough.’
‘We are in good heart,’ said Eochaid.
‘It may pass.
We only need peace, and events may so turn that we receive it.
He may ride his dolphin to shore.
I have never yet seen him lose courage.’
‘He will do his utmost for you,’ Sulien said.
‘You can trust him for that.
He will need you when he turns against Lulach.’
The breeze rattled Eochaid's springing black hair over his ears and pulled at the ends of his lashes.
He said, ‘I'm sorry.
You said —’
‘I said what you thought I said,’ Sulien replied.
‘There will come a day, sooner or later, when he will not want to see Lulach.
Lulach will understand.
But Thorfinn will be at a crossroads he cannot leave without help.’
Eochaid said, ‘If he sent for you, would you come?’
Sulien said, ‘He will not send for me.’
Before the Christmas rinds had been thrown to the pigs, Osbern of Eu had gone, in one of Thorfinn's remaining ships, and twenty men with him, in seas as ready to rob them of life as the war they were joining in Normandy.
For two months, while the fighting swayed back and forth overseas, Bishop Hrolf, released by the same storms from sentinel duty in the islands, took it upon himself to oversee the defences of the more vulnerable parts of the mainland.
He asked everyone who had been to Denmark about the barracks at Trelleborg and Aggersborg and Fyrkat.
He enquired about the uses of ancient hill-forts, and discoursed on the adaptation of antique buildings for military purposes — to wit, the Colosseum in Rome and the amphitheatre at Arles.
He pointed out the aptness of Roman strategic sites for present-day purposes, exemplifying Cramond on the river Forth and Cargill by the river Tay.
He had reason to believe, he said, that the Normans in Herefordshire had made good use of the Roman building-materials ready to hand, and there was no reason why others should not do the same.
He walked all over Lyne picking up blocks of red sandstone ashlar and pointing out the old grooves and cramp-holes.
He found the quarry they came from.
He quoted, to the irritation of his more sensitive colleagues, an Irish poem on the subject of forts:
The fort over against the oak-wood
Once it was Bruidge's, it was Cathal's.
It was Aed's, it was Ailill's,
It was Conaing's, it was Cuiline's,
And it was Maelduin's.
The fort remains after each in its turn
And the Kings asleep in the ground.
There were times when men went and made confessions to Bishop Hrolf, to stop him talking about engineering.
Finally, the only one listening to him was Thorfinn, who listened to everybody, usually while doing other things, disconcertingly, at the same time.
He had good reason, of course.
Olaf of Norway was not the only sea-lord, veteran of countless shipboard battles and raids, to find a straightforward land-conflict beyond him.
And if he required a tutor, Thorfinn could have found none better than the Normans, natives of a crowded, belligerent duchy full of strong young barons fighting for power.
Such was not the condition of Scotia, whose disparate regions, lacking the same resources and manpower, had begun to knit together under a King whose descent embraced them all.
In recent years, all her wars had been frontier battles, fought round her coasts to repel raiders and oust alien settlements.
Of a massive invasion such as England had suffered under Canute and his father from Denmark, or such as Duke William was resisting now from the King of France and Geoffrey of Anjou, Alba had no experience.
That the kindred of Osbern of Eu and the kindred of William fitzOsbern with their friends had succeeded in carrying Duke William to a resounding victory against the invasion of his combined enemies was therefore news of more than ordinary importance.
It came in the spring, when men's minds were occupied more with the new wave of cattle-fever than with wars far overseas.
To that, also, the King had given a great part of his attention, but when, late in the spring, word came of the sighting of ships from Normandy in the Clyde, he left his wife and household at Perth, where they had stayed a full week, and rode with a small retinue westwards to meet them.
He came back without warning, overriding his own harbingers and flashing through the opening gates and straight to the hall, heralded only by the flag streaming above him.
The hall-door slammed.
Groa heard it, emerging from the dairy with her steward.
Of the few men with Thorfinn, she had recognised Osbern of Eu and the Riveire boy, and the sallow face of Gillecrist of Strathclyde.
As the rest of the retinue began to come, straggling, into the yard, Groa dismissed her steward and went to her rooms at the other end of the hall, where Anghared, Ferteth's wife, was sewing stockings and talking to Eochaid's sister Maire, who was teaching one of Sinna's girls how to embroider.
They stopped talking when Groa entered, and she could feel their eyes on her back as she stood at the window, watching.
The yard was full of movement: of boys leading the incoming horses off to the stables, and bringing fresh ones.
More men entered the hall by its main door, and several times someone came out beckoning and stood on the steps, issuing orders.
Three horsemen left, members of the armed household, and someone of greater consequence accompanied by three or four servants on garrons but no pack-mules.
It could have been Tuathal.
Through it all, she could hear, as probably no one else could hear, the ground-bass of Thorfinn's voice through the heavy  timbers in the hall.
Not raised, for that would be unheard of.
But speaking shortly, as in the hunting-field.
She was not needed, so she did not interfere.
A serving-man, sent to the kitchens, reported that they were already busy, having had their instructions, and in due course she and the women attending her ate where they were, in the chamber.
By that time, many more men had arrived, swirling up through the yard to be sucked into the hall, as if it had become the quiet, humming centre of some whirlpool of power.
The yard was still noisy with jangling harness and talk at dusk when the women had gone and the bracket-torches below the fiery sky to the west glowed like running water dyed red.
Much later, when it was dark and the yard was quieter at last, the door from the hall opened, and then her own, and Thorfinn came in.
The anger of his arrival was gone, beaten underfoot by hard work, like men treading cloth in a trough.
There lingered perhaps an echo of grimness, and an echo of something else: an expression she had seen on the faces of men who have just loaded ship for a voyage.
There were no overtones of distress, and none even of weariness, although she was a better judge of these things than most people.
She finished what she was doing, which was pouring wine, and carried a cup to him in silence, since any enquiry seemed pointless.
He waited until she was seated, and then said, ‘Precautions, that's all.
King Edward has let young Malcolm go.
He's been sent north to Northumbria to join his uncle Siward.’
‘Why?’ said Groa:
‘Opinion varies.
Duke William's success?
It looks as if he is going to hold Normandy.
Also, there's news from Quedlinburg through St Omer.
Edward Atheling has a son, heir to the English throne if Edward dies.
And Pope Leo is ill, and not expected to live.’
‘In prison?
He's dying in prison?’ said Groa.
‘No.
He's been freed by the Normans in return for full recognition of all their conquests to date in Italy.
He wrote to Greece: I look forward to the day when by the Eastern and Western Emperors together, this enemy nation will be expelled from the church of Christ and Christianity will be avenged.
But Constantine didn't answer.’
‘All your work,’ said Groa.
‘All your work in Rome.’
‘Oh, there is always work,’ Thorfinn said.
‘Only the picture changes, and one's work must change with it.
We are not dealing  with Emma.
We are dealing with Earl Harold Godwinsson of Wessex, who has quite different ambitions.’
‘Including infanticide?’ said Groa.
‘Does Earl Harold know where Edmund Ironside's new-born grandson is?
Do you know?’
‘What you can be sure of,’ said Thorfinn, eluding the question, ‘is that the Pope and the Emperor Henry both know, and that one is dying while the other enjoys indifferent health and has only a three-year-old son to succeed him.
If I were Harold of Wessex, which I'm glad I'm not, I should send a polite embassy soon, preferably under Bishop Ealdred; to extract the child before someone else has a better idea.
As his guardian, Harold would have fifteen years before the boy became anything to be reckoned with.
And it would encourage Duke William to forget any silly ideas about the succession that King Edward put into his head.’
Groa said, ‘If you were Harold of Wessex I might get some direct answers.
Why has he sent Duncan's eldest son north, after he has been kept at court all these years?
Isn't Malcolm a rival for Siward's earldom?’
‘Nearly everyone you can think of is a rival for Siward's earldom,’ Thorfinn said.
‘But, without a faction behind him, he isn't much danger, although I suppose he could combine in time with a cousin or two.
An outbreak of strife in Northumbria would suit Harold very well, I imagine, especially if Siward got himself killed in the course of it.
They could appoint English-trained Malcolm as Earl and steer him from Wessex.
And if Malcolm got killed, they always have Donald.
An inexhaustible supply of Duncanssons.
What's Maelmuire like?
You've seen more of him than I have.’
She paused, collecting her thoughts and studying his face at the same time.
It gave nothing away.
‘Religious,’ she said.
‘In spite of Cormac, whom he loves.
Nineteen, with a big appetite and nice manners: Cormac again.
Takes a long time to learn anything new, but perseveres.
All his friends are younger than he is.
He doesn't like girls, but is fond of reading and has to be summoned by relays of hand-bells from his chief joy, the herb-garden.’
‘He doesn't like single girls.
What about you?’
Thorfinn said.
‘We are friends,’ Groa said.
She searched his face again with her eyes.
‘The tact did not pass unnoticed.
Why should this topic matter?
You talked about everything else as you usually do.
Why should I feel Maelmuire is important?’
‘I don't know Duncan's other sons,’ Thorfinn said.
‘That's all.
Stop trying to think.
You'll grow wrinkles.’
It was said with no expectation of diverting her, and she paid no attention accordingly.
She said, ‘So the precautions are in case Siward decides to promote Malcolm as King in your place?
Is that likely?’
‘No,’ said Thorfinn.
‘Or not very.
We have, I admit, been less vulnerable in the past than we are now, but Northumbria alone could never expect to overrun Alba.
And Siward knows that the moment he steps from his chair, a family friend will do his best to replace him.
If Siward had been strong, Harold of Wessex would never have sent Malcolm to him.
Harold wants Northumbria for the Godwin family, not an inflated Siward or a Scotia so weak that Norway could step in and settle there.’
‘But you are sending round to put everyone on his guard, just in case.
In the spring, when they're busy,’ said Groa.
‘It'll take their minds off the cattle-fever,’ said Thorfinn.
‘Cease to concern yourself.
My herb-garden, like Maelmuire's, is being looked after by others.
My sage will flourish without you: my pennyroyal and rue, my mint and poppy and southernwood, my parsley and radishes.
Like Strabo's gladioli and lilies and roses, I keep you for sweetness’ sake only.’
She smiled at him, accepting the love and the irony both, and allowed him to end the discussion.
So it was serious, whatever it was.
And, for the first time, he was not going to tell her.
He went to Kinrimund at the end of the month, on the heels of two silly clashes between troops from the new church-fortresses in Lothian and their opposite numbers in the property of St Cuthbert.
The results might have been worse: a number of cattle lost from one side to the other, some barns and carts burned, and half a dozen women held hostage and returned in other than mint condition.
Between feuding families, almost a normal occurrence.
Among edgy garrisons, with military pride an ingredient, something to be squashed immediately.
With Osbern of Eu and a group of his own leaders and their following, Thorfinn had visited the Lothians and made his views known to the offending bands with frightening precision.
That was when, without awaiting Rogation Week, the air over Alba became filled with the smell of split wood and turned earth and the dank odour of freshly laid mortar as men carried out the King's orders and places of refuge and defence were repaired and  strengthened from the west side of the kingdom to the east.
From Glamis, her home for the moment, Groa moved about her concerns with the farm people and tried to ignore the rumble of wagons taking felled timber to the palisade, or men with pickaxes and shovels on their way to Dunsinane, where the old ring-fort below the watch-station had received new stone-and-earth walls, and shelters for folk as well as animals.
It was coming close to midsummer, and a time when every man had more than enough work on his own land; but Bishop Hrolf, rendered pentecostal amid the dusty glory of his chosen element, dispensed his rota of tasks with a bone-clear, indisputable justice that only the hardier ever disputed, and then under plain fear of excommunication.
It was to Bishop Hrolf, indeed, arriving unexpectedly that evening with Prior Tuathal behind him and a string of riders as hot and soiled, though not as cheerful, as he looked himself, that Groa expressed her surprise.
‘Of course you are welcome.
Breasal will show you where to go, and then you must come back to the hall.
You will know the King has left for Kinrimund.
I thought he meant to take you both with him.’
Wood-flour clad the heated planes of Bishop Hrolf's brow and cheeks and gloved the powerful crag of his nose save, endearingly, for the double fingermark where he had blown it.
Tuathal, in a leather helmet borrowed from someone, had wiped his face, seamed with infilled pock-marks like a well-repaired amphora.
Bishop Hrolf said, ‘Ah, Kinrimund.
Very wise.
Enough is enough.
No, my lady.
The King is better advised to deal with this himself.
A pity.
For myself, a great pity.
But no one can say Bishop Malduin has not received latitude.
Every courtesy and consideration.
But there are temporal rights as well as temporal privileges, and a kingdom must be ruled.
Excuse me.’
Groa looked after the Bishop as he retreated.
Prior Tuathal, also watching, remained at her side.
‘He's embarrassed,’ said Tuathal.
‘After all, he and Bishop Jon were brought in because Malduin wasn't doing his job.
You know, probably, that Malduin wouldn't have anything to do with the fortifications in Fife and the Lothians, and would only release his land-workers when under a direct order from my lord your husband.’
She knew.
At Abernethy, when she had teased Bishop Malduin over his squirrel, the confusion of allegiance from which he was  suffering had been very plain.
He was Thorfinn's first cousin, and his very revolt against his heritage had driven him into the arms of Siward and Durham.
Now, with this new drive of Thorfinn's, when the adherence and co-operation of every man was important, it was a matter that must be resolved, and seen to be so.
Groa said, ‘If that's what he's gone to Kinrimund for, then I wish I'd known.
I would have said a charm over him, against the shot of gods, elves, and witches.
Except that if the Bishop's good wife is there, she'll probably have said it over the Bishop already.
What is the worst that can happen?’
‘That the King should lose his temper,’ Tuathal said.
In the event, it was Bishop Malduin who lost his temper, as he might not have done if Elfswitha his wife had not been sitting draped in white cloth in the corner, with her large, shallow eyes fixed on himself, even when the King was starting to speak to her.
Her household utensils glittered and clanked in her lap, keys against scissors, knife against comb and spirtle and needle-case.
Hitched to her girdle, a battery to be respected, as many a junior, including Colban her son, had discovered.
Now the King said, ‘I am sorry to say as much before your lady, but it was by your wish that she stayed.
I repeat, however: I do not think we face war.
But Earl Siward's acts are not those of a friend, and I must take steps to protect myself.
The union between the regions of Scotia is recent, and must be bolstered in time of stress.
A bishop who cannot make up his mind which side he is supporting is inconvenient.
So I must ask you: Will you come to Scone and make it publicly known that this kingdom is your prime care?
That, in war and in peace, you will strive, with your prayers and with what material aid you can summon, to work for the sole weal of Scotia?
And that if, God forfend, a state of war should exist between this kingdom and England, or any conflict should arise between this kingdom and Northumbria, with Earl Siward or with the Bishops of York and of Durham, that you will choose to support this kingdom and no other?’
In the ensuing silence, Elfswitha's weapons clanked once and the shallow eyes stared.
The Bishop stood up.
‘It is an insult,’ he said.
‘My service is to mankind.
My only master is God.’
‘You are Bishop of Alba,’ Thorfinn said.
‘A land without priests and without churches.
Where Irish monks preferred not to come.
Nevertheless,’ said Bishop Malduin,
‘I did what I could.
I have found young men and trained them.
I have ordained those who were fit.
I have performed all the offices that my calling requires, whatever the discomfort.
Even when what few benefits might exist were pre-empted over my head by two strangers.
That is the duty I owe to my cloth.
But engage in warfare, no.
Encourage young husbands and fathers to walk out to slaughter — again, no.
Not to save myself from your anger, or my body from whatever punishment you may choose to inflict on it.
It is against my beliefs as a man of the church,’ said Bishop Malduin.
The King did not rise.
Standing alone in the room, with his wife's glare enshrined on his right and the King, in riding-trousers and tunic, occupying the whole of a high-backed chair on the left, made Bishop Malduin feel isolated and unsure.
Once, stepping out to read before twenty-four pairs of eyes, he had been sick in front of twenty-four porridge-bowls.
The King said, ‘It has its attractions, as an idea.
Unique, of course.
I can't think of anyone, from my lord Pope down to Bishop Ealdred, who would agree with you, but attractive, for all that.
If you were a hermit or even a monk, you would have little trouble indeed in implementing it.
Unfortunately, on becoming a bishop you forfeit your right to that particular principle.
If you do not help your people, or allow them to help themselves, they may all die, and take you with them.
If the master you rely on for your temporal well-being has not dealt with you, that is, already.
What is the fate of false coiners?
Genitalibus et oculis privatus?
Their wives do not, I'm sure, like it.’
Elfswitha clanked twice.
‘You threaten, my lord,’ said the Bishop.
‘Not unless you are a false coiner, as well as a greedy and cowardly man.
You quote principles.
You have no principles,’ said the King.
‘You have no guiding rule save self-interest.
Yet you are my Bishop and you can, as you say, fulfil the spiritual calls that men make on you.
I have to tell you that you must also fulfil the other obligations you have to your people if you are to remain in this kingdom.
I shan't place an axe or a flag in your hand.
But if I and mine prepare to defend the kingdom, you and yours must do the same.
Choose.’
The Bishop's legs trembled with anger.
‘Abuse will not serve you,’ he said.
‘I join the martyrs, punished for what I believe.
What does Peter Damian himself say of the Pope's illness?
That it is due to the wrath of the Lord against a militant prelate.
Shall I fear your anger when that other might be my fate?’
‘Sit down,’ said the King.
He half rose and the Bishop, looking round, found a chair higher than his wife's stool and sat on it.
The King said, ‘Let's be plain.
You want Durham.
You won't get it now.
If you go to Siward, he'll make you fight, too.
You had better, therefore, resign yourself to it.
The only difference would be this: in Alba, you would have a see.
In Northumbria, you would not.
Which is it to be?’
The Bishop wished he had remained standing.
He drew himself up in his seat, preparing for martyrdom.
Elfswitha's voice, from the corner said, ‘We will stay.
You give us no alternative.
We will stay in Alba.’
The Bishop looked at his wife.
‘And co-operate in every way?’ said the King.
‘In the encouragement of your people against their enemies?
In the provision of labour for attack or defence?’
The shallow eyes delivered their message.
‘You leave us no alternative,’ echoed the Bishop.
He looked at the King.
‘You compel us.’
‘That is my right and my privilege,’ said the King.
‘And my power.
For all of that, no doubt I shall answer, as you will, to an authority other than Peter Damian.
I have made myself understood?’
‘You have,’ said the Bishop with stiffness.
‘And you agree to remain on my terms and proclaim them?’
‘I do,’ said the Bishop.
‘Then, since I am busy, as you are,’ said the King, ‘there seems little more to be said.
Such words between cousins should not have had to be spoken.
I am sorry.
I will not ask for your blessing.
Only think, when you pray, of your people.
Whatever lies between you and me, they should not suffer.’
He saw the King to the gates and, coming back, heard the clangour of Elfswitha's malevolence before he arrived at the door of their chamber.
Whether struck down by the Lord's retribution or by his failure in Italy or by the neglect of his sponsor the Emperor, the ninth Pope Leo, Bruno de Nordgau, died in April in the city of Rome, far from his beloved Toul and the Vosges of his family.
The Alpine snows closed over his militant steps, and the sinners he had excommunicated for one reason or another turned their thoughts from irregular union or simony, if they had ever been on them, and peered into the mists of what promised to be a very long vacancy.
In the home  of Hildebrand, gathering dust, lay a long, padded box containing a golden rod entwined with roses.
The news came to Perth on the day of the King's special council, and was brought to Thorfinn by Bishop Jon as he prepared to leave with Prior Eochaid for the Moot Hill.
Bishop Jon, a warm-hearted man, had been weeping, and even Eochaid, remembering, found himself moved near to tears.
So to end all that endeavour.
And what, now, of Adalbert of Hamburg and Bremen, the Metropolitan of the North, and his white-and-pearled caparison, and his iron ambition?
What of Isleifr's white bear, uselessly rampant in Goslar, while Isleifr waited in vain for his summons to consecration?
What of Juhel of Dol and his careful and simian plotting to keep his suffragans out of the grasping fingers of Tours?
Bruno of Nordgau had been fifty-one years old when he died.
Ten more years of his pontificate might have set both the church and the statesmanship of western Europe in a different direction.
He had snapped the circlet of runes from Thorfinn's throat.
But the Norns had smiled, and lifted the shears in the end.
Of what he felt, Thorfinn's face gave no sign.
Perhaps Bruno's death, long expected, had already been consigned to the past.
It was part of Thorfinn's philosophy: the Viking philosophy that lived afresh each coming day.
There was the imminent council to think of, and the fact, of which everyone was aware, that Bishop Malduin had not so far arrived to confirm his allegiance as promised.
And that the ships had again been delayed: the long-awaited new ships commissioned from King Svein of Denmark, about which King Svein of Denmark had been so apologetic.
Lost in thought, Eochaid did not at first hear the shouting outside, or see Thorfinn thrusting his way through the crowd to the door until he had almost gone.
Something about the note of that call, something about Thorfinn's manner as he stood in the yard listening to the stammering rider who stood grasping his saddle and speaking into his ear made Eochaid's shaven scalp tingle, and his body shrank, for a moment, from its clothing.
Then Thorfinn looked up and, catching sight of the Prior, walked to his side as eager helpers swarmed to the messenger.
The King said, ‘Come to my room.
I have sent for Tuathal and Osbern.’
The texture of his voice was unfamiliar, and his face, when Eochaid glanced up, was drained with some sort of force which Eochaid suddenly saw was consuming anger.
He followed the King into his chamber, and Thorfinn in silence walked to the window and stood there, looking outwards.
Almost at once, the door behind Eochaid opened, and Osbern of Eu came in, looking heated, and followed by Tuathal, his thick face enquiring and grim.
The door closed.
The King said, without turning round, ‘That was a message from Lothian.
A clerk of Durham, collecting church-dues with an armed escort from Melrose, came into conflict yesterday evening with an equally large party of Normans under Flodwig of Dol, and a running battle ensued.
Several farms were burned or devastated in its path, with some consequent deaths.
Of the opposing parties, a score of men lost their lives or were badly hurt on each side.
Among the Northumbrian dead was counted Osbern, the only adult son of Earl Siward.’
The King turned; and even Tuathal flinched.
The King said, ‘My lord of Eu, you and your countrymen have brought this nation to war.
I hope, when Siward comes with his army, that you find the field as easy to quit as it has been to enter.’
FIVE
To avenge the death of a son is not hasty work, if he is to be honoured.
To raise major levies, King Edward's leave would have to be sought by Earl Siward.
To muster an army would take time — but not too much time, for men were hard to come by at harvest.
In high summer, provisions were plentiful, but would have to be gathered and loaded.
Auxiliary shipping was not unlikely, to carry reinforcements and food and extra weapons and take off the wounded.
York's ships were mostly trading, in summer-time.
To collect a small fleet would take a week or two.
So Norse mind interpreted Norse, as Alba moved, prepared by her King, from the state of armed defence to the state of imminent war.
Those were the weeks when the minutes were measured like mancuses of purest gold.
When Thorfinn was never to be seen in one place for more than a few hours, and when he no longer looked like a man with a fleet ready loaded for sea, but like a man already on board and lifting his ship to meet the first swell of the storm.
The first wave, and the next, and the third.
The news that Kinrimund was empty and Bishop Malduin, his wife, and his household had vanished, no one knew where.
The news that the Bishop of Alba was in York, and that two young Fife men, Fothaid priest-son of Maelmichael and Cathail son of Dubhacon, had travelled there with him.
The news, received much later in silence, that Ghilander also had fled, with Colban the Bishop's stepson, and that Kineth of Brechin had gone with them, leaving Angus leaderless.
The secret news from Dunegal of Nithsdale, using a name that only Thorfinn would recognise, that Thorfinn did not talk of at all, at least before Groa.
His energy, she saw, was not abated, or his confidence shaken.
In place of zest, there was determination, that was all.
She moved into Fife to be near the Forth estuary, where Thorfinn was oftenest to be found.
He visited her there one evening, Bishop  Jon and Eochaid in tow, and the three men talked without ceasing, before food and through food and after it, Bishop Jon making notes in his own hand on a slate with a stylus that squealed.
Then he ceased to make notes and listened, his clean-shaven jaw sinking lower and lower until, with a small thud, the slate dropped to the floor and Thorfinn, turning, saw that he was asleep.
‘Don't wake him,’ said Groa.
‘Morgund will be here soon anyway.
He arrived this afternoon and I sent him off to rest.
He had Lulach with him.’
‘Lulach?’ said Thorfinn.
‘I didn't send for him.’
‘You are calling on Moray to fight for you,’ Groa said.
‘I shall be calling on the northern fleet, such as it is, to fight for me,’ Thorfinn said.
‘But I expect Thorkel and Hlodver and Odalric to stay where they are and look after my interests until I tell them otherwise.’
Somehow she had ruffled him: a rare occasion indeed.
Otherwise, he would never have referred to the only point upon which he and his  advisors were at odds.
At no time since the earliest plans were drawn up would Thorfinn consider drawing men from the north to fight on land in Alba.
With his ships, he had been liberal.
Only one fighting-ship remained off the island of Man, and two of moderate size further north in the Sudreyar.
Six were at sea, on the business of trade — an act of faith that he might have cause to regret.
The rest were on the Caithness coast, refitted and waiting, with men of Orkney and Caithness to man them.
If the new ships came from Denmark, the Caithness flotilla might not be needed.
If the new ships did not come, the handful now in the north represented the only sea-force Thorfinn could lay against any fleet Siward might bring.
Few as they were, they might be sufficient, for the men in them would be seasoned seamen and raiders who would brawl for the love of it, on shipboard anywhere; who would defend their own northern lands to the death, on land or on sea; but who would never march south in cold blood to throw away life defending a foreigner's ground.
One day perhaps, but not yet.
There had not been time to teach them.
That Groa understood, even if Thorfinn's southern council did not.
He had carried the day, of course, for although in fourteen years he had made himself supreme King in Alba, he was born to the  north, and from Moray to the northernmost island of Orkney he was the leader men trusted and knew.
One day, when he was gone, they would turn to Paul, and to Erlend when he was old enough.
It was to safeguard Orkney that Paul was being left there at this moment.
It had hurt him, Groa knew, that his father did not need him at his side now, in the first hour of real danger since Rognvald had tried to claim the north seven years before.
But he had been reared to rule Orkney, and he would keep his place.
There had been little dispute about anything else Thorfinn had wanted to do since the day he was told of the fighting in Lothian.
That evening, pacing the floor of his chamber before the most able of his mormaers and his churchmen, he had said, ‘What would I do if I were Siward and I had just lost all hope of my heirs ruling Northumbria?
And he has, make no doubt of it.
The only other son is a child, and his nephew will have no better chance than the rest of his brothers-in-law and their offspring against the brethren of Wessex, once Siward goes.
What would you do, my lord Prior?’
And Tuathal, whose authority Groa had watched advance through the years, had said, ‘I should make for Wedale straight off, and every fortified place with Normans in it.
And I shouldn't leave Lothian until I had killed every Norman I could find, and all the families who were supporting them.
I should destroy the crops and burn every building, and flatten what wouldn't burn.’
‘How well you know Siward,’ Thorfinn had said.
‘But would he do that all over Lothian, or only in Wedale?
The St Cuthbert churches elsewhere are his, you must remember, and their lands and their people.
The rest of the churches are mine, and the fringe of land south of the Forth estuary, but there are not necessarily Normans in all of them.
Also, my share of the Lothians has been in the care of my cousin the Bishop of Alba.
They may have come to share his lack of discrimination.’
He had put into words what they all knew.
It released the voice of Osbern of Eu, his colour still high from the interview that had preceded this one.
He said, ‘These fortresses can pin down a countryside, but they won't stand against an army mustered for war.’
‘But an army mustered for war would overrun friend and enemy alike,’ Cormac of Atholl had said, ‘And Earl Siward has allies — hasn't he?— to placate with land when this is all over, and rivals who would be better off settled in Lothian than snapping at his heels for a bigger share of Northumbria.’
‘I agree with you,’ Thorfinn had said.
‘To blacken Lothian would do him no service.
He must attack Wedale, yes; and the Norman lands to the west and any fortresses near.
But he'd be wise to leave the rest to be taken at leisure, and make positive use of his friends in the Lothians.
Call them under his banner.
Use them as signalmen between his army and any ships he has on the coast.
Because if he's going to take Lothian and settle it, he's going to need all the friends he can get.’
Bishop Hrolf, hands on knees, was considering.
‘This man Siward: how can he hope to hold Lothian, so far from York and from Durham, with a strength such as yours massed to the north of him?
He cannot, unless he destroys your strength first, or convert it into one friendly to him.’
He sat up.
‘I say he must either wreak his vengeance on Wedale and retreat, or he must go further and seek to destroy you and your whole power.’
‘Again, I agree,’ Thorfinn had said.
‘Where?
Will he expect to find us massed against him at Melrose?’
‘Hardly,’ said Tuathal.
‘With disaffected Lothian behind you, and possibly sea-borne troops as well, by that time.
But he might expect you to trust your estuary lands more than you should, and give him battle west of Dunedin where he would have you between his ships and his army.
Unless he knows more than we do about how soon your new longships are coming.’
‘I wonder,’ Thorfinn had said.
‘Can he rely on his fleet?
He must know that I shall bring down some vessels from Orkney.
He must know, at the very least, that a great many more are coming, through Svein, with men in them who are fighting for money.
If he is unlucky, then there will be a battle at sea, and the best he can hope for is that none of our sea-borne army manages to make a landing.
Consider, therefore.
If you invade Alba through Wedale and, say, Tweeddale and you have no supporting ships, what do you do?’
No one answered, for there was no need to answer.
Without ships, there was only one way to cross the river Forth to Fife and Strathearn: one key to the royal lands by Loch Leven; one way to strike north between the low hills to Forteviot and Perth and Scone; to strike upriver to Dunkeld, or across river to Angus, where lay Glamis and Forfar and Brechin.
And that one way was the bridge and causeway at Stirling, the rock fortress on the river forty miles inland from Dunedin.
Then Cormac of Atholl had shifted in his place abruptly.
‘You would win a battle at the Forth crossing.
But what if you are  wrong?
What if Siward has no interest in settling Lothian, but only in vengeance and money?’
Thorfinn had said, ‘To get to Dunkeld…to get to anywhere that matters, he would still have to sail up the Tay or march north by the Forth crossing.
Our ships will have instructions.
They will guard Taymouth as well as the Forth.’
‘Are there enough of them?’ said Bishop Jon.
‘No.
But their seamanship is excellent, and they will have coastal signals to help them.
The alternative is to divide our forces.
I am not in favour.’
And they had accepted that, too, although to Groa it had been a questionable decision.
By the time Siward's army had reached the plains by the Forth, it would have marched a very long way, and suffered fighting, and would be drawn, in any case, only from those regions Siward was master of, for neither Wessex nor Mercia, it was sure, would waste men on extending Northumbria's empire.
And against this jaded, depleted army would be the whole resources of Thorfinn's kingdom, from Moray south to the Forth, fresh and waiting.
It was a small risk, surely, to deploy some of them, as an insurance, to Perth.
But that, after all, was the only discussion at which she had been present, and many conclusions, clearly, had been come to since then.
Among them, and the reason for Thorfinn's presence in the south-east, was the resolve to clear Lothian.
When and if Siward of Northumbria and his army made their way to Wedale, they would find there neither Normans nor loyal families on which to expend the grief and fury of loss.
They were tired, then, these men sitting here in her chamber; tired enough, like Bishop Jon, to fall asleep.
But to stretch himself to the limit should be the pride and destiny of every man, and she shared, in that part of her being that was not maternal, Paul's disappointment at being excluded from such a brotherhood.
Whereas Lulach had come, and had not been welcome.
He knew it, she thought, the moment he entered the room and sought his stepfather's face, although he greeted Thorfinn, clearly, with light affection as he always did, and Thorfinn, distanced now from the moment's irritation, showed no desire to hector him.
After satisfying herself to that end, she rose presently to give them a chance to be together, and to allow Bishop Jon to awaken without embarrassment.
The toisechs' and mormaers' wives and daughters and sisters who always moved with the court would be waiting, and eager for news.
It occurred to her, not for the first  time, what a large part of her life was spent among women, now that the kingdom had changed.
It had many advantages.
She liked being with women she was fond of.
But not perhaps quite so often.
She did not observe Eochaid, therefore, as he sat quietly watching the King with his stepson, or hear Lulach say, smiling, ‘You would like to shoot an apple from my head, like Palnatoke, and perhaps miss.
It is natural.
If Paul or Erlend or I were to die at Siward's hand, you would feet as he does.
Yet Siward, too, must have looked at his son Osbern sometimes and seen nothing but another man to sit in his chair.’
There was a pause, as if Eochaid's presence had made itself felt, and the impending arrival of Morgund.
Bishop Jon breathed gently, the stylus in his scrolled fingers voyaging up and down on the buoy of his abdomen.
Thorfinn said, ‘I think I can look my successor in the face, provided I have even the illusion of free will.
Whatever happens, you are not to blame.’
‘Yet you kept the rod,’ Lulach said.
‘The bough with leaves I once sent you.
It came from Birnam.’
‘I kept it,’ said Thorfinn, ‘for a hlauttvein.
A blood-twig to sprinkle and hallow with, after the sacrifice.
I thought that was why you sent it.’
‘And you thought of it again when Grágás was lost,’ Lulach said.
‘It was a storm like that, wasn't it, that sent down the Bison?’
And, smiling, he quoted softly:
‘It was Thor's giant-killing hammer
That smashed the ocean-striding Bison.
It was our gods who drove
The Bellringer's boat ashore.
Your Christ could not save
This buffalo of the sea from destruction.
I do not think your God
Kept guard over him at all.’
Bishop Jon yawned.
‘The Bison?’ he said.
‘Thangbrand's ship.
Thangbrand, Willibald's son.
As bloody-minded a missionary as any I ever heard of, and if his ship went down, it was because God and the Aesir were pushing together.’
He opened one eye on Eochaid.
‘It's his pleasure,’ he said, ‘that figure of mischief over there, to blow any piece of rubbish out of his mouth and challenge me to return it.
Have you caught me out  yet?
‘Young Lulach?’
‘Bishop Jon,’ said Lulach, with laughter in his wide eyes.
‘When you are awake, no one can catch you.
Come and see me off.
I am going back to Moray before the excitement begins.’
He could not have known.
But he had barely been gone for an hour when there came the signal that Thorfinn had been waiting for.
He did what had to be done, and then went to find Groa.
‘Pack,’ he said.
‘And leave in the morning.
Siward has called in his levies and has begun to march north.’
In the mouth of war, the names of honour, for three long days, were those of the signalmen.
Pinnacled above an empty land into which, hour by hour, a torrent of steel was being inducted, they sent the tidings from Soutra and Pentland, from the hills south of Traquair and east of Penteiacob to where Thorfinn waited with his army.
The Earl Siward and his Northumbrian army have crossed the river Tweed.
They have moved through the moors, burning all they can find, and are spreading north and west through all the passes, leaving no living object behind them.
They are between the hills and the Forth and are sparing nothing in Lothian, from the east coast to Dunedin.
They are making no haste, and suffering no losses that matter.
But for its refugees, Lothian and its southlands are dead.
Cormac of Atholl said, ‘We were wrong.
We thought he would court Lothian.
We thought he would pass straight through Wedale to the north.’
‘I was wrong,’ Thorfinn said.
‘Outside the churches of St Cuthbert, he is allowing his men to ravage and rob where they wish, and at leisure.
He has five thousand men, no more than we have, and Malcolm is not with him.’
‘Who is with him?’ said Cormac.
‘Has anyone caught sight of banners?’
‘Most of those who love us best,’ Thorfinn said.
‘Ligulf of Bamburgh, with the Bernician strength.
Siward's nephew of the same name, whom we met at Melrose.
York and Durham, perhaps even in the persons of Aethelric and Cynsige, with the armed power of the church.
My brother's nephews Gospatrick and the second Maldred.
Our friend Forne, who married my stepfather's daughter, with Wulfgeat.
Brand of Peterborough, and Leofnoth and Ulfcetel, since someone has to look after the army's treasure-box.
And, last but not least, my cousin Bishop Malduin of Kinrimund with, no doubt, his stepson Colban.
Kineth of Angus, it is said, was seen with them.’
‘I dare say,’ Cormac said.
‘good for troops to see men changing sides before battle.
After it, if he's any sense, Siward will execute the whole brood, including your cousin the Bishop, begging your pardon.
So they are all there, kicking our teeth in.
Is that all they are going to do?’
The summer breeze blew in his face.
Waiting for the King to speak, he could hear the gust claw through the heather behind him and set the flowering whin, silk and tinsel, rubbing together, bough against bough.
It was because the moment of decision was approaching that they were up here on the hill of Dumyat, six miles from Thorfinn's muster-point at Dunblane, and half that from the crag on the Forth beside which, on one side or another, Thorfinn would take his stand against any Northumbrian advance out of Lothian.
Below them, from right to left, the river Forth ran to the sea: a silver inlay of zig-zags in a great plain chequered with corn and green mosses and the harsh buff and sliced resilient brown of peat-beds.
Beyond the river, the plain married into wandering uplands where the low Lennox hills banded the horizon, a ridge thrusting eastwards above forest and hamlet to merge with the west Lothian hills and the Pentlands, and to end far to the left, where sea and sky met, with the crag, small and dear, of Dunedin.
Today there were no boats and no fishing-nets on the river.
The cabins of wattle and clay, of timber, of turf packed with stone, showed no smoke from the woven-reed thatches, neat as favours for children, that mushroomed everywhere on high ground, and on the slopes of the rock-citadel opposite.
No mill-oxen dragged by: no cattle stood in the marshes or sheep, lately shorn, walked with their lambs on the hills.
Sound had vanished as well: of the blows of a wood-axe and the shout of a drover, of children calling and the crow of a cock; the beast-sounds from the byres and the fields; the groan and clank of a winch at a well; the clack of loom-shuttles and women's voices chattering over them; the brazen voice of a meat-cauldron being scoured and the squelch and fizz of cloth being pounded at the washing-stones in the side streams.
The women and children and old people had gone.
The men fit for fighting were moving down there, in thick leather jackets and helmets, with their spears and hunting-axes, their clubs and their  knives and their bows, with satchels packed by their wives with barley-bread and some lard, a  goatsmilk cheese and a bit of dried fish and mutton, with a few onions, fresh-dug, for savour.
Their toisech would greet them, in his cone helmet with its metal nose-guard and his tunic of ring-mail over leather, and would lead them to the wing of the army commanded by my lord Ferteth, their Mormaer, and my lord Gillecrist, the Mormaer for Lennox and Strathclyde.
And there they would greet the men that they knew, and collect what news they could, and visit the cess-pits more often than they would like to admit, while turning all the time to look up here, where the King their leader was deciding what was going to save them from the army of Northumbria.
At least once in their lives, most of these men would have met Thorfinn: more perhaps than had come face to face with King Duncan in the six years of his reign and before, when he had been prince of Cumbria in the shadow of Malcolm his grandfather.
The men who had marched north with Duncan to dispose of his dangerous half-brother at Tarbatness had mostly died in that battle.
The young men who had grown to manhood in the past fourteen years had had no experience of war, and little of fighting, other than the kind that might break out between neighbours, or the kind they saw during their service at court, when a raid on coast or frontier had to be repelled, or the King's justice enforced.
Whereas Siward, as a direct vassal of England, had appeared on every battlefield with his Northumbrian levies and knew their strength, as they knew each other 's.
But it took more, surely, than fourteen years of moderate peace to erase the fighting instinct that had served a race through two hundred years and more of Viking attacks, through the civil onslaughts that led to the fusion of Pict and Scot, of Scandinavian and Gael; the wars of royal cousin against royal cousin as the descendants of Kenneth MacAlpin fought for the throne.
Against invasion, such people would always fight, with all the skills of a hard daily life, with bow and spear and axe to aid them.
What they would not yet do, and what Thorfinn had not asked them to do, was to fight as a nation, north beside south, no matter what the threat.
Between them, Canute and his sons had achieved it in England.
They had had to farm Cumbria out, but Siward was England's man, fighting England's enemies.
The difference, Cormac thought, was that under Emma's care Northumbria had never been allowed to become a threat to Wessex.
Whereas, under Thorkel Fóstri, under his sons of Orkney and Moray, Thorfinn might well command the north to come to the aid of Alba the south and might well be obeyed.
But the south, witnessing the brilliant array of fighting men that the north could so amply provide, and their foreign tongue and alien ways, might well think their better safety lay with the enemy.
In the distance, the smoke lay over the land like a corpse-veil.
Over the river, the banners glinted red over the fort, and the long line of its shadow began to creep down its rock to the east.
Thorfinn said, ‘He's arrived at the coast and judged our numbers.
He ought to muster and start south before nightfall, if he's going south.’
The Norman Hugh de Riveire, hands on his hips, moved from his viewpoint to the King's and studied the skyline.
‘Is he a man who would punish and run, this Siward?’ he said.
‘Even with equal numbers?’
‘He is not the man to punish and run,’ Thorfinn said.
He turned, and the flash of his movement drew every eye within range.
‘Nor is he the kind to come north at all without a very sure chance of success.
I don't think our strengths are meant to be equal.
I think he has come to a rendezvous.
In which case, we don't wait.
We cross the Drip ford at nightfall and attack, or provoke an attack as soon as there is light enough.’
The Norman said, ‘What rendezvous?
No second army has come into Lothian.
I have heard your couriers.
Not even a ship has been sighted.
And if it were, there is your fleet waiting out in the estuary to welcome it.
Your excellent ships.
Ten, did you not say, in the Forth and two held back, waiting at Taymouth?
A small fleet, but no smaller then Siward's will be, considering what manpower he has.
The reinforcements will never land.’
Polite reason vying with impatience made his French quicker and more idiosyncratic.
He added fretfully, ‘Your own new ships will come sooner, that you have purchased from Denmark.
You fight now, and perhaps you throw away your biggest advantage.’
‘I had thought of that,’ Thorfinn said.
Only once had he ever lost his temper with the Normans.
His eyes rested on de Riveire's face.
‘There was a danger that allies of Siward's might approach him from the south-west.
There is no sign of them so far.
But we would be as well to take no risks.
The Danish ships have taken too long already.
They may well arrive when this is all over.’
‘From the south-west?’
There was coming anger as well as puzzlement in de Riveire's face.
He frowned at Cormac.
‘My lord of Atholl has been told,’ Thorfinn said.
‘And my lord of Eu also.
We had no wish to spread alarm.
We hoped that, in time, our fears would prove baseless.
We still have no proof.
But Earl Siward's delay is inexplicable otherwise.
He also must know that my ships from Denmark might arrive at any moment.
It is wiser to attack while we can.’
‘From the south-west?’ the Norman repeated.
His brow had cleared.
Given a military problem, Osbern of Eu and his men resembled nothing so much, Cormac thought, as a starving man with a knife set before a belly-piece of fat pork and an ale-horn.
He was smiling at the King with something that, under normal circumstances, might have been admiration.
‘More of your cousins or your brothers marching against you, my lord?
We have the same trouble in Cotenville.’
‘A third cousin, merely,’ Thorfinn said.
‘But, unluckily, he could bring the power of Cumbria with him.
His name is Thor of Allerdale.’
It still had the power to turn the stomach, that whisper of shifting allegiance that Thorfinn himself had picked up weeks ago, and that Dunegal of Nithsdale's hurried warning of danger had seemed to confirm.
Dunegal of Nithsdale had not come to Thorfinn's standard, nor had any of the men of Dumfries and the western lands of St Cuthbert.
Absent also was Leofwine, who had taken Thorfinn for King as Cormac had, or so it seemed, on the glorious journey to and from Rome, and who had stood trembling as Cormac had on the steps of St Peter's, one of a brotherhood that had seemed to promise a future none of them had so far dreamed of.
They were not here, nor was Thor of Allerdale himself; but, after all; it was strategy such as this which had kept Allerdale free despite the wolves at his frontiers.
And the wolves had not all come north.
The banners gathering there on the banks of the Carron on the other side of the Forth did not include those of Orm or Gamel, the kindred of Siward's wife, or of Osulf her cousin, whose father Siward had killed, or Copsi or Carl Thorbrandsson or Archil, all powers in York.
They did not include the banners of Edward of England, or the Fighting Man or the Dragon of Harold of Wessex.
Whatever else they had sent, the south of England had not supported Siward with an army.
Some of the magnates of York had not shared his ambitions either, one had to believe.
Not every thane had been left behind to act as a watchdog.
But some had.
And with Northumbria there, even half-manned at her borders, Cumbria had to keep guard.
So one might argue.
But the arguments did not convince.
For, as Thorfinn had said, his royal nephew Malcolm was not with his uncle.
And without Malcolm, the excuse for conquest had gone.
Thorfinn said, ‘The night will be short enough.
The men should have a good supper and rest.
Let us go down.’
They strode down and found more news already arriving.
The enemy, having mustered at Dunedin, was not turning south.
Instead, it was marching west, six thousand strong, along the opposite bank of the river towards them.
At the door of his tent, Osbern of Eu looked at the King.
‘You are not disturbed?’ he said.
‘Therefore, there is no danger of an attack during the night?’
‘No,’ said Thorfinn.
‘He'll manage twenty-five miles or so by nightfall, and that will bring him to the stream over there called the Carron, with a dozen miles of forest and boggy ground between himself and the main river-crossing.
He'd never traverse that in the dark, and his men will be tired.
He'll probably take them over the Carron and put them into the coille torr, the forest there, for the night.
‘By morning, we ought to be on the same side of the Forth as they are, and facing the open space to the west of the forest.
There's a Roman road there, and some firm ground if you know where to look.
Bishop Hrolf will tell you all about it in a moment.
Unfortunately, Forne and the Fife and Angus men will know of it as well.’
‘If they are waiting for reinforcements,’ remarked Osbern of Eu, ‘they will be in no hurry to fight in any case.
Then what?’
‘Then we send an invitation,’ said Thorfinn.
‘A pressing one.’
SIX
At four o'clock, nearly an hour before sunrise, the first blackbird began to sing and Thorfinn moved from light sleep to full awareness a moment before Klakkr son of Bathrik, his body-servant for many years, touched him on the shoulder and gave him the sentry's report: no movement from the enemy in the wood.
The familiar Scandinavian-Irish of Caithness was linked, as his sword was linked, with the high, cold brilliance of the moment.
The dawn waking to battle, with his friends sleeping about him.
The strong hand of Skeggi, still half-laid on his axe.
The warm hair of Rognvald, shining like eglantine among the crushed bracken.
Odin, Father of Victory, said the runes on his own Ulfberht axe.
It lay over there with the gold helm made in Germany to replace the helm of Canute's that had blown in pearls to the wind, beading the ashes of his forebears' great hall at Orphir.
A new helmet he owned, and a new circlet of gold, and a white scabbard marked with a cross, and a white shield bossed in steel with a great silver cross studding the cow's hide.
And white gloves with a tunic of silvery mail, lying there in a tent that was empty but for himself and Klakkr.
Last night, the newest bard, who was called Lorcáin, had sung: a song to God, and one to the King.
Every arm of his host had its priests, and the two Bishops, Jon and Hrolf, had moved quietly among them once they were settled.
Sometimes, above the noise, one voice or another could be heard: Deliver, O Lord, the souls of thy servants…
May we all reach that Kingdom.
May we deserve it.
May we inhabit it for ever and ever…
The blessing of God come upon us.
May the Son of Mary save us.
May He protect us this night.
Or a scrap of Norman-French: Pro Deo amur et pro Christian poblo et nostro commun salvament…
Last night, he had listened to prayers, but had prayed to no one, for that had never been his habit.
With the same instinct that had sent Bishop Jon, he noted, to pare his nails and perfect the glossy ring of his tonsure, he on the eve of battle came cleansed from a hot bath: the ritual laugardagr observed once a week by his fore-fathers, of which the other Bishop John in far-off Bremen would so have disapproved.
Despite all his years with his stepfather Findlaech, despite the life he had made in Alba, the Norse came first to his tongue, always, in a matter of war.
Soon, the army outside his tent would kneel to receive the sacrament, himself beside them.
Alone of them all, he had been shriven by the Pope — the Bishop would proclaim it yet again — and yet felt no different from the man who had stood on shipboard beneath a sky turned to flame and faced death with no fears and no doubts, for on such a day it was no hardship to die.
No different?
That wasn't quite true.
The wild elation had gone, with his early youth and his comrades.
Still, the Normans were his kind.
Like Tuathal, they like puzzles, but in steel.
They liked solving them, as he did, for the sufficient reward of achievement; but also for power, and to compel the respect of their fellow-men, and to earn a name for skill and for courage.
Such a nature had carried him into his tortuous business of ruling, where he had found himself responsible for people who owned neither ships nor battle-gear, nor skill, nor health, nor ability.
People who needed a God and a leader as he needed his sword.
People who lived if their leader were successful, and who bled and died for each of his mistakes.
So, now, war was different; but he did not know what to do about it.
He suspected that Bishop Jon, who guessed, and Tuathal, who knew, had long discussed how to lead him to the state of proper sanctity in which a king should dwell.
‘Pray to Brigit, why not?’ had said Bishop Jon encouragingly only the other night.
‘Goddess of poetry, healing and smithcraft, if she takes you that way; and if not, enough saints of the name to see you out of any small predicament.
Mise dol a mach orra shlighe-sa, Dhé…
There's a fine prayer, now.
It should appeal to you.’
While Klakkr brought him ale to drink, and water to splash on his face, Thorfinn ran the lines through the echo-chamber of his mind:
I go out in thy path, O God; God be before me; God be behind me; God be in my tread.
The knowledge which Mary made for her Son, Brigid breathed through her palms.
Knowledge of truth, without knowledge of falsehood.
As she obtained her quest, so may I too see The semblance of that which I myself am in quest of.
It pleased him.
He consigned the thought, as a gift, to one of the two he held most dear.
To the other, he had already quoted Alcuin.
‘Death?
An uncertain occurrence; an unavoidable journey.
Ceres; sorceress; if it comes, you must wear the royal helmet.
You must endure, as a daughter of Eve.
That it should all go for nothing: that would be a cheap death indeed.’
Before his people, ten minutes later, Thorfinn said, ‘Every group of families appoints its protector and, when its protector is challenged, must choose which contender to follow.
‘You have chosen to follow me, as your fathers chose to follow my grandfather against the same enemy.
I think you are men, as your fathers were, who will not lightly see your homes burned, your women shamed, your cattle driven off, your children taken for slaves.
Let us show Northumbria what they have wakened.’
He stood, resenting the fate that had forced him to declaim, while they shook their spears and cheered him.
At Tarbatness, his name had been the battle-cry.
Now he heard, roared for him, the war-slogan of Duncan's doomed men: ‘Albanaid!
Albanaid!
Albanaid!’
A hand fell on his arm.
Eochaid of Scone, friend, priest, and secretary, said, ‘My lord King.
There is news.’
His fingers and thumb were stained with ink still, from the long hours with the quill that had assembled there at Dunblane the cartloads of tenting and weapons, of beef and pork and ale-kegs and mattocks, of campaign cauldrons and ovens, of sacks of charcoal for the blacksmiths, of meal for the griddles, and of oats for the couriers, horses, and the toisechs' garrons, and the powerful mounts that the Normans, alone among Western fighting-men, were accustomed to ride into the battle itself.
In battle, too, Eochaid would stand with the Bishops and the King in the van.
For, as Prior of Scone and its guardian, he bore round his neck the Brecbennoch, the little silver reliquary casket of St Columba which was all the Celtic church could bring to any battle while its Abbots of Iona and Armagh and Kells disputed with one another in the turmoil of Irish battle, Irish famine, Irish plague, demanding the grace of St Columba and first claim to the aid of his relics.
Eochaid said, ‘It is good news from Fife.
Earl Siward's ships were sighted south of the estuary two hours ago.
Six only, and two of them small.
The eight ships you left waiting had already moved across to intercept them.’
‘Siward's fleet has the wind,’ Thorfinn said.
‘But one of my ships has Killer-Bardi in it.
And even if my eight have sunk to the bottom, it is too late for anyone to interfere with this battle now.
Although, as you see, Siward is not anxious to fight.
Should we tell him the news, do you think?’
Eochaid smiled.
The early sun, striking up from the silver, made patterns on his cheek, and on his throat with all the music in it.
He screwed up his eyes and said, ‘We should have the sun against us for a bit.
But I can find a spokesman for you, if you like.’
From side to side of the field, the army buzzed, like a harp strung with horse-hair, and the sun rose higher ahead above the black forest of pine mixed with alder and birch that closed the battleground at its far end, and within which the Northumbrian army was waiting.
‘Send a priest,’ Thorfinn said.
‘I would go myself if I thought it would serve any purpose to be killed before a blow had been struck.
He'll have to be quick.
They'll be out of that wood very soon.’
He saw the man Eochaid picked, and watched him ride out to mid-field with two unarmed monks and the biggest cross they could find, drawing men's eyes from Thorfinn himself.
It was as if a looking-glass had been diverted.
He used the moment to check on his leaders.
Holding the men of Lennox and Strathearn on his left, on the edge of the boggy ground that ran to the river, were Gillecrist and Ferteth, with Bishop Hrolf, encased in crosses and relics, between them.
On his own right, on the rising ground that led to a wood, and then to the moors and hills that rimmed the horizon, stood Cormac and Gillocher with the men of Atholl and Mar, and the church-banner of Tuathal, holding firm those men of Fife who had chosen to follow the King rather than Bishop Malduin, his acolytes, and his family.
The men of Buchan and of Moray, who knew him best, he had kept in the centre under himself, with Morgund and Mael-Isu.
Among these also stood the men of Angus, deserted by Kineth, with Malpedar from Moray to work with their own leaders and the presence of the Moray men to stiffen them.
Above them, overshadowing  the rippling wicker-work of personal banners, floated the white standard blessed by the Pope, in the care of Bishop Jon.
Behind him was the rock-fortress of Stirling guarding the bridge, the narrow crossing over the Forth.
Behind that, among the bogs of the river-plain, was the wide crossing that led to their station last night and then, further north, to Dunblane, where their base was.
The horse-lines and baggage were over the river.
Siward's were in the forest ahead, along with six thousand men far from home and greedy for booty.
An hour ago, all you could see was the sparkle of steel in the blackness under the trees, and the falling ray of an arrow when one of his men moved too near, having a look at the ground.
Now the trees were fenced with armed men standing shoulder to shoulder: brown, featureless faces above scales bright as fresh-landed fish.
In the centre, taller and broader than any man there, his greying head bare, stood Siward their leader, Kalv's nephew.
Siward, son of that rich Norwegian fur-trader who had found more profit in England than in the uncertain fortunes of Norway.
Siward, the man who had planned in his turn a fair dominion for himself and his offspring, and had seen his son die in the land of his rival.
Siward, the man who, had he, Thorfinn, been standing under that cross and issuing that challenge instead of a priest, would have had no hesitation in ordering his best marksman to smite him dead with his bow or his javelin.
As he would do to Siward, given the chance.
Bishop Jon said, ‘Will you listen to that?
I never heard the fellow so eloquent when he was blessing the butter.
‘What hope has your fleet against the fleet of Macbeth?
They have met, and your ships have sunk.
What hope has your army against an army blessed by the Pope?
Throw down your arms, and we will spare you.
If your men are afraid to fight, as we see, and also afraid to surrender, place yourself in our hands.
You will be an honoured hostage, and to your underlings we shall display our lenience.’’
‘I told him what to say.
You don't have to repeat it,’ Thorfinn said.
A flashing ripple passed through the distant trees and struck an answering glitter from his own side.
Then Siward, his arm raised, had his men under control, and in a moment the sound of his voice could be heard shouting his rebuttal.
Throughout, Thorfinn kept his horse motionless.
It didn't matter what the words were.
He had had no expectation of doing more than exasperate, and supply a distraction.
He looked round again and collected the eyes of his leaders.
He had drawn his sword and  held it, not yet in challenge aloft, but where the naked blade could just be seen by men on horse-back.
Only the leaders were mounted, and even that would not last long, although there were horse-boys behind with replacements.
Siward's army would be the same.
A man used to wielding an axe fought best on foot, and preferred the round targe with its cutting-edge and ramming-spike to the long, harp-shaped shields of the cavalry.
Above the trees, a frieze of white smoke rose into the blue morning sky and hung unremarked under the sun, thickening a little.
On either side of Thorfinn, there was a rustle and dash as men shifted.
The priest, standing in front of them, was relaying Siward's message, which contained words he thought he had forgotten.
Over the forest, the smoke looked like newly plucked wool, with darker tufts here and there, and glints of orange, bright as sunrise on spear-blades.
A shadow passed over the empty battle field: then another.
The voice of both armies changed.
The rumour of noise from under the trees became spaced, punctuated by sharper sounds and sometimes by a subterranean crackling, like distant footsteps in frost.
Then the sun started to darken, and the orange spear-tips melted together to form one mountainous band, and the spaces under the trees flashed and shook with leaping men and torn shouting.
Thorfinn said, ‘He will either send back a fire-party and advance with the rest while he still has them in order, or he'll abandon both his carts and his cover and bring them all on to finish us.’
‘I think —’ Tuathal said.
‘Yes.
Good.
He's bringing them all.
Let's go,’ said Thorfinn, and stood in his stirrups.
Every face was already turned.
The pleasure he felt, and the calmness, and the determination burned as dear as the trees in the forest.
He smiled — the unknown, rare smile, as if it were his wife he was going to meet — and, lifting his glittering sword, thrust it upwards and forwards.
The answering roar blenched the flames back and cleared the face of the sun for an instant.
The trumpets blew on both sides.
Then, in a long, jolting line, Northumbria marched from the flame of the forest with Siward in the van, mounted now, and buckling the straps of his helmet before taking his gloves and his shield.
His voice, shouting commands, hardly ceased.
It was not necessary to hear them.
As they approached, the Northumbrian army  began to divide, until it, too, was formed in three blocks across the limited ground, to match the three advancing rectangles of Alba.
The horses wanted to break out and canter.
Thorfinn held his big gelding hard-reined, and saw the mormaers doing the same.
The marching-pace had to be held even and steady.
He wanted Siward's army over the centre, and also over the bright, narrow vein of the deepest of the many rivulets that seamed the field, running down to the Forth.
He also wanted to see who was opposing him.
Cynsige of York in the centre, with Siward.
The power of the church that consecrated the Bishops of Alba against the power of a dead and discredited Pope.
On Siward's right, the standard of Siward his nephew and of Forne, who surely had no great experience behind him, and the great banner of Durham.
Bishop Aethelric, this time, against Bishop Hrolf, the nominee of Cologne and Bremen and Goslar.
Gillecrist and Ferteth should manage the nephew and Forne.
Bishop Aethelric, he had heard, was accounted able even in Peterborough, and ruthless into the bargain.
But he had not, perhaps, been taught overmuch about the battle-tactics of the Romans.
Siward's left wing, though, was of a kind that spelled danger.
Ligulf of Bamburgh against Atholl and Mar.
Hard fighting-men all of them, and Ligulf with a reputation equalling Earl Siward's own.
And with Ligulf, the banner he would rather not have seen.
The flag of Kinrimund, with, under it, Malduin, Bishop of Alba, and his men, and Kineth, his lost Mormaer of Angus.
Tuathal's Fife levies would be opposed by their own flesh and blood.
And the men of Angus, here in the centre, would be close enough to their fellows under Kineth to make it easy for them to falter or abscond.
All riddles could be solved.
Including this one.
Siward's men were over the stream.
Watching, Thorfinn could feel the eyes of the trumpeter beside him burning into his skin.
‘Yes.
Now,’ he said, and lifted his sword again, spurring suddenly as the trumpet blared, followed by those on either flank.
Now he was riding clear in the front, and so, on each wing, were Cormac and Ferteth, their shields held before them.
The exposure lasted only an instant.
A spear, too spent to hurt, struck his own shield and found no room to fall to the ground, for by then men and shields were packed close around and behind him, and the three wedges had formed the svinfylkja, the pig's snout, the secret of Odin that he hoped fur-traders' sons had not been instructed about.
Thorfinn spurred, and the wedge of men behind him and behind Cormac and behind Ferteth broke into a pounding run.
To the Northumbrian army they must appear as three arrowheads with a thousand barbs each, roofed and armoured on either side by the heavy, scaled ranks of their shields; the risky moment was the first, when they made impact.
But his horse was from Normandy, brought up through Wales and trained to kill with its hooves.
And once it went, he would be in the thick of it with all his weapons and a better chance than most.
He aimed for the centre, where Siward's helmet flashed and dulled as the smoke wavered over the sun.
He was conscious of a gust of warmth, brought by the wind, and of a sprinkle of white ash, gentle as snow.
He hoped, an instant before the impact, that the gambit of the fire was not going to spoil the gambit of the Normans, and saw from a distant glitter far on his right that it was not.
The shields of his men broke bows against the shields of his enemies, and the shouting that had been going on all the time rose to a shattering yell.
Steel flashed.
He lifted his sword and slashed, one, two, three, at the men between him and Siward and then found himself hurtling beyond him, pushed by the momentum of his own men screaming behind and on either side.
He serrated the air with his sword and used his shield as a wall and a battering-ram.
Like sod sliced by the share, or sea by the bowsprit, butchered meat in its clothing reeled back on this side and that, and as men fell behind him, they were replaced in the svinfylkja by others.
It was the same, he could see, on either side.
He knew what Siward would be thinking, behind him.
Let a dart enter the body so far, and the body will give way and encircle it.
He wondered when Siward would glance to the wood on the rise.
Then he would see the glitter transform itself into a body of fully armed horsemen thundering down to cut his army in half, just ahead of the three driving wedges.
And then, having cut it in half, turn again and again at the charge to carve it, neatly, for Thorfinn's well-placed and well-protected infantry to engulf and slaughter.
The Norman cry was ‘Dex aie!’.
Coming from eighty throats, it swept with them down from the wooded foothills and made them sound like a flock of scavenging birds disturbed from their carcass.
He saw the flash of Osbern's teeth before the struggling mass all around him was rocked sideways by the shock of the cavalry; of live men flinging themselves out of its pathway and of dead men thrown after them.
He could feel the fighting around and behind him slacken.
His  horse had taken a dozen blows and was weakening.
Thorfinn lifted himself in the saddle and saw men's heads turn, and the flash of a spear to be deflected.
He was the only man still mounted, apart from the Normans, and the Normans had seen him.
Siward, taller than anyone else, was behind him and to the left.
Thorfinn drew a great breath and roared, ‘Albanaid!’ and was answered by a shout that drowned that of the Normans.
Then he shook his feet free of the stirrups and, lifting his horse for the last time, sent it rearing into the enemy mass to crash and sink amongst them.
His pristine shield with the glittering cross was scarred and broken by blows of which he had no recollection.
He threw it away and, transferring his sword to the left hand, felt at his belt with the right and pulled out the big Ulfberht axe.
Tuathal, unexpectedly beside him, screamed, ‘My lord!’
The wedges had served their purpose.
It was time to disband all three and convert them instead to small killing-groups, easy for the Normans to recognise.
Already, on the side nearest the river, Osbern had reformed his men and was driving back again at a different angle.
Thorfinn shouted to the men about him; and again, over a mass of heads, to Malpedar with a knot of Angus men at his shoulder.
He had seen Mael-Isu drop a little time back, and the Strathclyde pennant had suddenly gone.
Tuathal said, ‘My lord, news.
News!
Your fleet is coming.’
Someone saved him from a blade he had not seen, and he killed the man who wielded it and began to fight his way back the way he had come, towards Siward, still calling orders.
His fleet, whether it had sunk Siward's or not, was twenty-five miles out in the estuary and its arrival was irrelevant.
Tuathal said, ‘My lord!
Your new Danish fleet.
Twenty-five sail.’
He said, ‘Are you sure?’
And Tuathal said, ‘Scandlain told me himself.’
Twenty-five ships, and a thousand mercenaries in them.
More than could ever come to Siward's aid, no matter where he sent for them.
That they, too, were out of reach at the moment was of no importance.
He could afford to wait for them now, if he wanted.
Tuathal said, ‘Siward's trumpets.
They're regrouping.’
Again, an unmistakable slackening: a foundering of noise as well as action; Thorfinn said, ‘No.
They're withdrawing.
Let them.’
He had seen one trumpeter killed.
Another, a younger man, had been at his elbow ever since.
He turned to speak.
Tuathal said, ‘You have them beaten?’
A spear squealed on the rim of his shield and he lifted his sword.
A man thrust past, dragging another, and, seeing the King, stopped and lifted his axe, hatred in his face.
Before it came shoulder-high, Thorfinn killed him and saw him drop bleeding over his friend.
The axeman wore the first beard of a boy and had big ears that stuck through his hair.
For a moment, he was a person and what had happened to him was death.
Then the moment passed.
Thorfinn said, ‘Why should we lose men?’ and had the signal blown: to pull back and allow the enemy to withdraw.
Osbern of Eu, ignoring it, led his column of horse, hardly impaired, in another thundering drive through the streaming Northumbrians and pulled up above Thorfinn's head.
His horse fretted, its haunches nudging its neighbours, and flayed the air with a hoof.
The frog was thick with what it had galloped through.
‘Herding them into the fire?’
Osbern called.
‘But the wind has changed.’
It had moved to the south-west, isolating untouched the stretch of forest between the high road and the marsh of the river.
There, the Northumbrians were running.
Thorfinn saw, to his regret, the banners of Durham and Kinrimund.
He said, ‘Let them go.
They'll surrender.
My big fleet from Denmark has been sighted.’
‘So the saints have heard us,’ said Osbern.
He turned and yelled at Hugh de Riveire and his men, who had launched on a private war at his back.
He turned back.
‘You have tides in your blood.
When will they come?’
‘Not for a while.
My own ships will lead them in and show them where to land.
Till they do —’
‘I knew it.
You want us to lie east of the forest with the fire in our faces and cut off Siward if he tries to make his escape.
How will your mercenaries know we are friendly, if they come from the east?’
‘Killer-Bardi will lead them.
Take some Moray men.
They know him.
Excuse me,’ said Thorfinn.
‘It is not usual for a king to be left alone in the field at the end of a withdrawal.
That battle was yours.
Celebrate when the reinforcements come.’
It was more than time to cross the field back to his starting-point, along with the wary groups of his van dragging their wounded.
One of them shouted.
‘My lord King!
Is it true that a great army is coming, and the war has ended?’
Thorfinn was walking backwards, Tuathal and the trumpeter at his side, looking across the trampled mess of earth beaten with turf and heaped with dark shapes like cattle resting on dung.
He was not interested yet in the dead, who would have to be  cleared and identified later.
He was interested in how far Siward had taken his men back into the untouched part of the forest, where the clearing kept for the highway from Dunedin to the Forth crossing had encouraged the fire to turn to one side, helped by the slight change of wind.
There, the forest was not so thick, and lay close to the bank that sloped down to the bogs by the riverside.
Had the disengagement happened in any other way, it would have been worth sending all his army, Normans included, crashing through the trees to clean them out while the fighting-power was still in them and Siward's troops were disorganised by the sudden descent of the cavalry.
Siward himself must have wondered why he abstained.
The way the battle was going, another half-hour would have seen the Northumbrian army beaten to shreds.
The heaps of dead reclaimed his interest.
They were out of range, most of them, of the forest.
He shouted back to the man who had spoken to him, ‘Are you tired of fighting?
Reinforcements are coming.
The Northumbrians will keep till they get here.’
To the trumpeter, he said, ‘I want the dead on both sides counted quickly.
Find Prior Eochaid.
I saw him a moment ago.
And get him to take out a party.’
He had reached the white standard, with Bishop Jon standing, arms folded, beside it.
Bishop Jon looked at Tuathal, and Tuathal answered the look without speaking.
There was no point in appearing to notice.
Alba was empty enough of men to govern and serve, without throwing them away to no purpose.
Thorfinn said, ‘Is there more news from Scandlain?’
Scandlain was the chief of his mounted body of couriers and signalmen.
Scandlain could get a simple message from one end of Fife to the other in a matter of minutes.
For greater detail, they would have to rely on a chain of fast horses aided by signals, and no one could expect miracles.
But sometimes Scandlain could achieve them.
And the messengers would come all the time.
Bishop Jon said, ‘Report says that Killer-Bardi's flotilla had locked horns with Siward's when your new fleet made its appearance over the ocean and changed course at once to join your ten ships from Orkney, with what sad effect on Siward's ships is not yet clearly known.
Does that man not have a Christian name?’
‘Killer-Bardi?’ said Thorfinn.
‘He's called Lawrence.
It doesn't suit him.’
‘Oh, you're elated,’ said Bishop Jon.
‘I'm sure I don't know for  what act of yours the Deity has seen fit to bless us with mounted Normans, and shiploads of mercenaries, and woods that burn in a trice, but you must have dropped a word somewhere that commended itself.’
‘We declared a trading-peace, heaven and I,’ said Thorfinn.
‘I saw Mael-Isu.
Whom else have we lost?’
‘Gillecrist of Strathclyde is dead,’ said the Bishop.
‘And Morgund and Gillocher have had a minutio, but nothing serious.
You've lost a ring or two of your curtain, I see.
You'll be stiff tomorrow.
Is your helmet not frying you?’
‘It is,’ said Thorfinn.
‘But it's also identifying me.
I'll walk through and tell them what's happening.
Tuathal, they can eat, but serve the ale as if every pint of it cost you a toenail.
The standard can go back in its socket.
Bishop, you and Hrolf and the physicians ought to be busy.
Eat in relays.’
‘And you, my lord?’ said Tuathal.
Eochaid, approaching behind, looked drawn, but did not walk as if hurt.
There was a splash of blood on the roof of the Brecbennoch.
Thorfinn said, ‘The venison of the Naas, the fish of the Boyne and the cresses of the Brosna are the due of the High King, but devil a man of you will have stirred himself over it.
How many?’
‘Seventy of ours, and over four hundred of my lord Siward's,’ said Eochaid.
‘But you have lost two mormaers.’
Odin the Leveller.
‘We shall not need to use that formation again,’ Thorfinn said, and saw that the forest was quiet and the scouts had nothing to disturb them before turning to walk to his men.
They had heard the news of the new fleet already.
They were high-hearted and noisy with success; bright-eyed still with the plunge through the wedges, that excited crash of the cavalry ringing in their ears.
They were warm under the sun and full of vigour hardly drained in the short battle and soon flooding back.
They wanted to drink, failing a quick thrash with a woman, and then tumble back into the field and race shouting into the forest to make the kill of which they had been unkindly baulked.
Thorfinn could hardly get a hearing, at first, for the shouting.
He simply stood still saying nothing until the cries died away, and then told them what they were waiting for, and that he expected little more fighting.
Someone shouted, ‘But there's booty in that forest that hasn't been burnt.
And it was us that did the fighting.’
‘Then see that you are there,’ Thorfinn said, ‘when the booty is  shared at the standard-pole.
The mercenaries fight for their hire; and I fight for Alba.
Are you satisfied?’
They cheered him and themselves, and discovered, at the uncovering of the food, how hungry they were.
He saw that they kept in their lines, with their helms and weapons in reach, and went back to the awning his servants had raised with a bench under it, and some saddles.
Their shields, reversed, served as boards on light trestles.
Klakkr, he saw, had brought out a second shield, also silver on white, and was already cleaning his sword.
He took off his helmet, his sweating brow cold in the air, and wondered who was lying outside the pavilion, wrapped in wool cloaking.
Then he saw the broken string of a relic-bag and realised it was Mael-Isu of Deer.
He ignored it.
The secret of a long day of battle was fitting the components together: the state of caution; the state of preparedness; the state of uncaring action; the state of elation; the state of waiting; so that each stage matched the others in sureness and strength, with every thread of body and mind strung to its finest pitch ready to sing to the touch, from one night's sleep until the next, or until death itself.
So he did not wish greatly to eat, although he did, and he kept the same singing pitch running through his being as he talked quietly with Tuathal and Eochaid and the others about what was to be done; which meant what Siward would do.
What a man like Siward would do, who was hiding a second time in a forest and had blown the withdrawal within minutes of the Normans' arrival.
‘You would almost think he had heard the news as well,’ said Morgund of Moray, who had a round red bruise from a spear-butt in the middle of his forehead and had blunted his axe on six men.
‘Could they have learned it from us?’
Thorfinn said.
Tuathal said, ‘If you mean, did any of our Fife men defect, then the answer is yes, but I killed them both.
We were opposite Malduin.
He said his prayers aloud all through the fighting, but no one from our side ever got near him.’
‘More's the pity,’ said Malpedar.
‘And the Angus men, I can tell you, were too busy to do more than yell insults at the other Angus men.
In any case, if Siward knew fresh forces were coming, you'd expect him either to gather his forces and try to reverse the battle quickly, or to muster them in the forest and get away before the rest of the enemy could arrive.’
‘He hasn't done that,’ Thorfinn said.
‘And wasn't even trying to  when I posted the Normans behind him.
When is the next message due?
Whoever brings it — Ferteth?— see that the messenger reaches me without having to walk through the camp.
I should like to know this time before the horse-boys do.’
It was unfair, because last time he had been in the thick of the fighting when the message came, and Tuathal had fought to be beside him.
It was unfair, but that was the least of it.
The next messenger was Scandlain himself once again, and he was seeking to avoid the encampment even before Ferteth arrived to conduct him.
Nor would he say anything at all until he was before Thorfinn under the awning.
So Thorfinn gathered from Ferteth.
To Scandlain he said, ‘Sit.
There is some ale.
The six of us here will all attend to your news, but you will tell it with your back to the men, and you will not expect to read what we think on our faces.
What have you to say?’
‘You speak as if you knew,’ Scandlain said.
Under the awning, it was very quiet.
The fringe flapped in the little wind, and eddies from over the field brought the resinous warmth of the dying fires and another powdering of silvery ash mixed with charcoal.
It had settled already on the mounds still lying heaped on the field, white as quicklime; flesh not yet cold and consigned already to ashes; bone, juice, and fibre still consuming its fuel, deflating from its last action; sponging off the last image and led already to dust.
‘The fleet from Denmark?’ said Thorfinn.
‘The fleet from Denmark,’ agreed the signalman.
‘Twenty-five ships.
I told you, my lord.
It appeared in the estuary.
Your old ships, my lord King, were already engaged with the ships of Earl Siward and getting much the best of it.
Two of the Northumbrian ships were on fire, and one broken-masted and drifting.
The other three turned to fly up the estuary, which was stupid, as the tide was against them and they lost the wind.
‘My man could hear from his hilltop the cheering from the Orkney ships, my lord, as the twenty-five new ships sailed into view.
Dragons they are, with twenty-five thwarts apiece and maybe seventy-five men packed between the gunwales.
Fighting-ships, as you ordered.
They identified your ten ships right away and cheered back.
The leading ship raised a raven flag to the masthead, and Killer-Bardi ran up another.
It was like boys from a priest-school on a feast day, my man reported.’
‘And then?’
Thorfinn said.
Under the heated steel rings and  leather, his shirt was wet enough to wring water out of, and his skin shivered with cold.
‘The twenty-five ships from Denmark got up to the Orkney ships,’ the signalman said, ‘and surrounded them.
The men in them were mercenaries, maybe Swedish: at any rate, they spoke the same language, you could see.
They were shouting over the sides as the ships came up close, exchanging nonsense and laughing.’
‘And then?’
Thorfinn said.
‘And then, my lord King,’ Scandlain said, ‘every man in the dragon-ships jumped to his feet with a spear in his hand and cast the spear through the heart of a man in the Orkney ship next to him, and, after that, threw aboard grappling-irons.
Then they followed the irons and boarded, axes in their hands, and more spears, and killed every man on the ships, but for two that broke away and fled north.
‘Then the twenty-five ships from Denmark sailed over to Siward's ships and took aboard the men from the wrecked ships, and greeted the ones on the three ships that were not damaged, and, led by the three ships, set sail across the mouth of the estuary.
‘Twelve ships, led by one of Earl Siward's, unloaded nearly a thousand men at the mouth of the river Leven and then turned and sailed out.
Thirteen ships, led by two of Earl Siward's, continued north past the estuary and were last seen setting round for the mouth of the Tay.
‘All twenty-five ships have broken out my lord Siward's colours.
No other banner is flying.
Killer-Bardi is dead.
While you sit here, my lord King, pinned by Siward, foreigners in Siward's hire are invading the heart of the kingdom.’
No one spoke.
Then Bishop Hrolf of the stentorian voice cried in a whisper, ‘Mo dê brot!
And where is the Lady?’
‘On the Tay,’ Thorfinn said.
‘At Dunkeld.’
SEVEN
Svein of Denmark had betrayed him with Siward.
Why, was for later.
This was not only vengeance for a lost son, but an invasion.
Not an invasion by Denmark, or five hundred ships would have arrived.
An attempt, therefore, by Siward to possess not only Lothian but a divided Alba itself.
With England's blessing, but without England's material support.
Without, it seemed, Thor of Allerdale.
(But Gillecrist, who might have advised him about that, was dead.)
And without, it seemed, his nephew Malcolm to tinge the conquest with legality.
But perhaps Malcolm had refused to come.
Lacking ships, the Forth crossing here was the only sure access to Perth and Scone and Dunkeld, Forteviot, Glamis, and Forfar.
For those who were sea-borne, the river Tay led, a royal highroad, to them all.
An invading army would find no resistance.
Two watch-vessels at the mouth of the estuary who would fly, if they were wise.
Fifty men left as insurance at Forteviot.
Having taken his strongholds, his wife, and his wealth, such an army had only to march thirty miles south to trap him here, with two thousand enemy mercenaries at his back and Siward before him, triumphant.
Siward, who had done his best to delay.
Who had fought only when driven to it, and withdrawn as soon as he could.
For whom the news of his ships, far from mortifying, must have signalled the approach of the far greater fleet he was awaiting.
For he would know, as the nine men watching him knew, that unless Thorfinn defended the Tay, he was lost.
With part of his army or with all his army, Thorfinn had to withdraw.
It crossed his mind that an hour earlier, receiving this news, he could have cut off Siward's escape from the field and forced him to finish the battle.
Instead of seventy dead, it might have cost him five hundred, a thousand, to destroy Siward's army so that it could neither attack him nor follow him.
But then he could have turned north to the Tay in safety.
With a tired army.
But with an army twice the size of the one awaiting him.
One hour.
So small a margin.
He wondered how long he had been silent.
A short time only, for no one had spoken.
He said, ‘All right.
Over nine hundred have landed at Levenmouth.
Any horses?’
‘None,’ Scandlain said.
‘You're sure?’
‘My man was quite sure.’
‘And how long ago?
Two hours?
Tuathal, how many garrons could they pick up in Fife?’
Gillocher broke in.
‘None.
Fife is empty.
We have all the garrons at Dunblane.’
His voice shook a little.
Thorfinn said, ‘Empty?
This army will pass through Markinch and Scoonie.
How many garrons could Malduin's friends hide?
A hundred?’
‘Not much more,’ said Tuathal.
‘But I see.
If some of the nine hundred got horses, they could ride north ahead of the foot and meet the fleet as it came into the Tay, in time to protect the main landings.’
‘If they have horses,’ Thorfinn said, ‘they'll be at the Ochils by now, and at Tayside with two hours to spare before the fleet gets into the river.
They may take Abernethy, or leave it for their foot.
They would certainly have time to get to the river Almond and cut off any interference from the garrisons there at Perth and at Scone, even if they can't overwhelm them.
They'll probably try to do the same at Forteviot.
It's on the way here.
‘A courier, then, to Forteviot, Scandlain.
Of the fifty men at arms there, thirty to get inside Scone, ten to Perth, and the rest to stay with the household.
No fighting on the way.
No sallies once they get there.
Just hold these three strongholds until they are rescued.
And the scout to return and tell us what he can find.
Two — another man to go quickly and quietly round the burning part of the forest with word for the Normans.
My lord Osbern to come here immediately.
The rest to round up all the horses they can find and bring them back here, unseen if they can.
I take it the signals are lit?’
‘Yes.
Tayside knows trouble is coming.
My Lord,’ said Scandlain, ‘I don't know if any courier can get to Forteviot before mounted men from the Leven.’
‘I do.
He can.
And you and he will win this day for us,’ Thorfinn said.
‘Quickly…’
He watched Scandlain go.
The courier might even do it.
The mercenaries had to get hold of their horses somewhere in Fife, and there were always distractions.
Bishop Hrolf said, ‘I've lost count.
How many landing on Tay?’
‘Thirteen longships, including two guide-ships of Siward's?
About eleven hundred fresh men,’ Thorfinn said.
‘They'll come on the flood past Earnmouth but not any further: the banks are too conveniently close for assailants, and we trust there will be assailants.
They must, clearly, try to take the main citadels, and especially Scone.
Then they should turn south past Forteviot and march against us.
By that time, the rest of the army landed at Leven should have reached Tayside by foot and joined with them.
A total of two hundred foot and a hundred horse in possession of all central Alba by nightfall, and ready to march south and fall on us tomorrow morning.’
Ferteth said, ‘We could thrash Siward by then.’
‘We could at a price,’ Thorfinn said.
‘We began evenly matched.
His losses are small.
If we fight now, it will be a fight to a standstill and, no matter who wins, the slaughter will be crippling.
If we killed every Northumbrian, we should still have fresh troops coming against us, and Scone and Perth would have fallen.’
He drew a long breath, keeping it clear, keeping it steady, keeping it low.
‘We can't afford to wait and let the northern army join with Siward.
We can't afford to run north.
We couldn't outdistance Siward.
We should have to fight all the way, and arrive too late to save anything.
We have to split our force and deal with both invasions.
Remember, the one in the north is arriving in stages, beginning with a small group of horsemen from Leven who will be unsupported for at least two hours after they have arrived at the Tay.
And we have five hundred horses in the lines over the bridge here.’
‘If you detached five hundred men now and sent them north?
What could they do?’ said Malpedar.
‘No: I see,’ said Eochaid.
‘They might get rid of the Leven men, for a start, and help the places already being attacked.
And once the ships came, they could hinder the disembarkation and delay the eleven hundred in their march, wherever they may be making for.
From Earnmouth to the Almond is eight miles.
To Forteviot, ten.
I should like to go with them, if I may.’
The Prior got up.
He had wiped the blood from the reliquary and only a little remained, stuck in the filigree of its thick little roof-disc.
Back in Scone were the embroidered vestments, the  golden book-shrines and chalices, the great painted gospels which could be replaced one day, precious though they were.
Back in Scone were the monks, Eochaid's family.
And the Stone of Inauguration, upon which the Kings of Alba were enthroned.
And the long, jewelled box containing the rod, without roses or leaves, that was the wand of his kingship.
Of all of these, Eochaid was the guardian.
Thorfinn said, ‘You and Ferteth and Cormac will go, with five hundred Strathearn men.
In a moment, I shall tell you how.’
Cormac of Atholl said, ‘Can you beat Siward with five hundred men gone?’
Thorfinn said, ‘I think we can beat him with two thousand gone, provided the Normans remain.
We shall have to.
You and your horsemen will be facing four times your numbers by the time the foot-army from Leven has joined up with the eleven hundred from the ships.
But less than three hours after that, fifteen hundred  footsoldiers of ours could be there, provided they start within the next half-hour.’
Cormac said, ‘They'll arrive having marched thirty miles.’
‘The Leven army will have come just as far.
The ship-borne army will have had five hours of marching and fighting.
With your help, and that of the Forteviot men, the main citadels may still be standing.
And with what we have left here, we can stop Siward's army from joining the others.’
Tuathal said, ‘We shall only have two-thirds of Siward's force.
Less.
But we can certainly hold them up.’
‘Don't you see?’ said Bishop Jon.
‘They'll want to be held up.
The longer he thinks he's pinning us all down here, the better chance, surely, Siward thinks he is giving the fleet to take Perth and Scone.
Cormac, O hound of feats, you'll have to steal those horsemen away the equal of an army of angels for silence.’
‘About that,’ said Thorfinn, ‘I shall have something to tell you.
Then I shall speak to the men.
Then we shall move.
There is no time to say what should be said.
But this is a matter for concern, not a matter for despair.
Siward is fighting from greed, whereas we fight for our homes.
We will win.’
He had not mentioned Dunkeld.
No one had mentioned Dunkeld.
Dunkeld, which would be attacked: nothing surer.
But, first, Scone and Perth had to fall.
And twelve river-miles and three hours of marching lay between Scone and Dunkeld, Crinan's monastery, Cormac's monastery.
Where Groa was.
‘Bottom pudding!’ said Siward of Northumbria.
‘Do all the cooks come from Bamburgh?
Take it to Ligulf and bring me some meat.
What d'you see?’
Forne of Skirpenbeck took away the bowl, although that was not his business, and came back with a leg of pork, the burnt seaweed still sticking to it.
He said, ‘They've got the news, on the other side.
Bishop Aethelric saw the King addressing the army, and some sort of movement is starting.’
‘Is it, by God!’
Siward said.
He got up, taking the meat, and, setting his teeth in it, walked to the edge of the forest.
His cheek-hairs moved as he chewed, and his beard glistened with fat.
He swallowed.
‘Aye.
They're trying to cover it, but they're mustering.
They're withdrawing men to go north.
But how many?
What would you do if you were Thorfinn?’
‘Retire to Orkney with my red-haired wife and forget about Alba,’ said Ligulf, strolling up.
‘He's withdrawing a lot.
Look at that.
Mind you, I've seen better-managed secret dispersals.’
Forne said suddenly, ‘Is he withdrawing a lot?
Look more closely.’
Everyone peered.
The two Maldredssons came up, and the fool Malduin, who had, however, made all this possible.
Siward said, ‘I can see the Normans already in line, and a lot of foot behind the banners and awnings.’
‘A lot of foot, with a lot of spaces between,’ Forne said.
‘It looks a good many at first glance, but I doubt if there are five hundred men there ready to leave.
Could Thorfinn be tricking us?’
‘Could Thorfinn be a Norseman?’ said Ligulf.
‘If you think half his army has withdrawn, you're going to attack him, aren't you?
And what a shock you're going to get when you find his full army there, all but a hundred or two.’
‘Hence the apparent poor cover.
He's right,’ said Forne.
‘The scouts say it looks at first glance as if thousands are leaving.
It's only five hundred.
We shouldn't attack.’
‘Of course we shouldn't attack,’ said Siward.
‘So long as you give me something better than bottom pudding I'm willing to sit here till nightfall if need be.’
‘He'll try to provoke you,’ said Forne.
‘Personally, it seems,’ Ligulf said.
‘He's coming himself, a bishop on either side, to address you from mid-field.
Or no.
Before mid-field and out of bowshot, more's the pity.
I can't quite hear him, but the gutturals sound very insulting.
He seems to be speaking Norse.’
He was speaking Norse, and it was more than insulting.
Earl Siward's tunic creaked with the force of his breathing.
Thorfinn had not even troubled to wear his helmet.
On either side of the black ridge of his brow, the soot-black plaits were looped, Viking-style, under the leather band of the hla , confining his hair in case his head became bared in battle.
His father had been killed in the Brian war when his helmet-buckle had been slashed apart.
He was still speaking.
Siward jerked his head, and a hail of arrows and javelins sped rustling from the forest on either side of him and thudded, in sufficient reply, into the ground between himself and Kalv's nephew by marriage, who had won a kingdom and thought he was no one 's vassal yet.
The King waited a moment and then turned back, his bishops following.
Earl Siward made a joke that was barely repeatable, even when changed into Anglo-Saxon, and pushed past Bishop Malduin into the forest, laughing and biting into his pork.
It would be entertaining to see what the fellow would try to do next.
It would teach him.
It would teach him to strut about Lothian and Cumbria, treating Siward like some English underling.
He needed a lesson for that.
For the death of Osbern his son, he needed another lesson, which he would receive also.
The next hour was, of course, highly unpleasant.
Although there was no question of rising to it, the means of provocation were ingenious.
Shield-hung hurdles were brought out into the field, and bowmen and slingshot-throwers behind them began to shred the trees with a descending curtain of missiles.
He had to put archers and javelin-throwers of his own up all the climbable trees before he had them on the run, and lost a dozen men to no purpose.
The heat and the gnats were the next burden.
As the sun rose into clear skies and burned down on the plain of the Forth, you would say the exposed army opposite would have the worst of it, despite their shields and their awnings.
But there in the open air they escaped the shimmering body of heat from the blaze on the other side of the highway.
And since the wind changed, the smoke, once so unwelcome, had drifted northeast; and the armed hosts native to the wood had arrived in their thousands to attack the armed host that was not.
The army became restive.
The army wanted to get out of the trees.
The army wanted to slake its thirst and, rightly, was not prepared to believe their Earl when he quoted the number of ale-casks destroyed in the fire.
A group of men who had come with Leofnoth found a broached cask and began to drag it out of the  rear of the wood, and Siward had three of them hanged.
He noticed that someone had moved the few horses they had managed to round up, and sent two men to find out where they had been taken.
A shout from the front of the wood called him back to the edge of the field, where men were watching a group of the enemy busy with spades on the high ground to his left, near the wood where they stationed the Normans.
Supervising the diggers was a large man he recognised as the Irish-Scandinavian bishop from Saxony whose name be believed to be Hrolf.
Forne said, ‘They're diverting the stream to come through the wood.’
‘Then shake your fist at them,’ said Earl Siward, slapping his neck.
‘For, by God, they don't know it, but they couldn't do us a better service.
I'd send out and help them if it wouldn't spoil everything.’
It was only a little after that, and before the damming had got very much further, that Ligulf said, ‘Siward?’
The Earl of Northumbria objected to the way Ligulf addressed him.
He said, ‘Well?’
‘Send a man up to look at that part of the army,’ Ligulf said.
‘Is it as thick on the ground as it was?’
His best climber was standing by.
Earl Siward snapped his fingers, and the man darted off.
Siward said, ‘Where?
I see.
They've shifted them.’
‘Where to?’ said Ligulf.
‘Look along the line.’
‘It looks the same to me,’ Siward said.
‘The banners are all there.’
‘They would be,’ said Ligulf.
‘Here's your man.’
‘Well?’ said Siward.
Could Thorfinn be tricking us?
Could Thorfinn be a Norseman?
‘My lord Earl,’ said the climber.
His chest was heaving.
‘The men on the right wing and the men on the left have lost half the ranks behind them, although they're spread out and from the front it looks just the same.
My lord, fifteen hundred men must have gone.’
‘What?’ said Siward of Northumbria.
‘What a pity,’ said Ligulf his brother-in-law.
‘And we have wasted all this time resisting provocation, which was just what they wanted.
But now, my dear Siward, I think the time has come to be provoked.’
‘God blind him!’
Siward said.
‘Is Thorfinn still there?’
‘Yes, my lord.
I could see his helmet,’ said the scout.
Fifteen hundred men on their way to the Tay.
No, two thousand altogther, including the horsemen who had already left.
But  fifteen hundred whom he had time to catch, provided he finished this business quickly.
Against him, after all, was a force now only two-thirds of his in size, and lacking the Normans.
He said, ‘Prepare the men to give battle.
To form up as before, but this time quietly.
This time we shall surprise them.
This time, they will not dream that we are coming until they hear the trumpet and see us marching upon them.
In half an hour we shall be riding north, victors.’
In the event, however, the victorious half-hour expired and Siward of Northumbria was not even aware of it.
For the army of Alba, it seemed, was not at all unprepared for the sudden emergence of the enemy from the wood and only waited politely, as before, for the troublesome stream to be crossed, together with a number of novel earthworks of Bishop Hrolf's devising, before throwing itself in neat but different formation against Siward's lines.
In the van, as before, flashed the white-and-gold helmet of Thorfinn, towards which Siward spent all his great strength in fighting.
It was with anger and astonishment, therefore, that he found, confronting that royal figure at last, that the face under the helmet was the minatory one of Bishop Hrolf.
He would have had no hesitation in sending the Bishop back to Saxony by celestial transport, save that at that moment the Normans emerged again from the wood.
He had seen them leave with his own eyes.
Ligulf had seen them, too.
It was all Ligulf's fault.
The half-hour went by, but neither army, killing and being killed, was aware of it.
Under the same sun, Thorfinn of Orkney and Alba had crossed the river and was riding north with a handful of men and a fresh horse collected, with all else he required, at Dunblane.
He led them round the range of the Ochils and swept through the strath down which the river Allan poured on its way to the Forth far behind him.
In due course, he would meet with the Earn, flowing north and east in the opposite direction to add its waters to those of the Tay eight miles east of Scone.
Also behind him were fifteen hundred of his own men on foot, with Bishop Jon leading them.
Ahead, it was easy to see where Eochaid and the five hundred horsemen had already passed, leaving churned earth and dung on either side of the cart-wide stones of the road.
All the steadings the  King went by were empty, although hearth-fires still burned; and there was no one at the little monastery of Dunning.
Eochaid would have taken the monks with him for safety, and those of Muthill as well.
Or perhaps they had gone with their people to comfort them.
Then, just short of his hall at Forteviot, the King came across the first group of injured.
Not men-at-arms, but a lad of eleven and another not much older, supporting an elderly man.
He stopped.
They recognised him, or perhaps the gold band round his helmet.
The man sank to his knees, but the boys were too excited to care.
A group of thirty horsemen had come against Forteviot from the east an hour before, and had tried to set fire to it with burning arrows, and strike down the defenders with slingshot and spears.
They were getting the best of it, too, for there were only serving-people left and a few armed men, since the rest went off north with the courier.
But then my lord Prior of Scone had appeared like a miracle, with a great army behind him, and had killed every horseman.
You could see them for yourself, past the next bit of wood.
And they had been asked if they wanted to stay in the fort, since more soldiers had now been put into it, but they thought, since they couldn't fight, they would rather go and hide with their people.
Tuathal dismounted and helped the man up, and the King himself bent over and spoke to him, for that was all there was time to do.
Then he spurred on to Forteviot.
Men would always fight for Eochaid, and Ferteth and Cormac of course were their Mormaers.
Men, it seemed, were ready to fight for himself, as well.
At Forteviot, he went no further than the gateway to pick up more news.
More than a hundred enemy horsemen had arrived from the Levenmouth landing two hours before noon.
Thirty had cut through Glen Farg straight to Forteviot.
The rest had overrun Abernethy and crossed the Earn higher up, by the last ford before it flowed into the Tay.
There the intruders had divided.
Fifty had continued upriver, on a course that would take them to Perth and to Scone opposite.
Fifty had remained where they were, on the Tayside meadows called Rhind, where the estuary narrowed to river.
‘So that is where the landings will be.
What look-outs do we have?’
‘Plenty on the north side of Tay, my lord.
I doubt we'll have lost our man on Moncrieffe Hill.’
‘We'll put another there.
And Prior Eochaid?’
‘Has gone to Scone, my lord, with fifty horsemen.
He said that was all he would need.
My lords of Strathearn and of Atholl have taken the rest of the horses to Rhind.
It'll be four hundred and fifty of them against the fifty enemy horse waiting there, and easy enough, you would think.
But they say there's a fleet coming upriver, and it may get to Rhind before they do.’
‘It won't,’ said Thorfinn.
‘And, in any case, there are fifteen hundred men marching behind me.
Can you hold out until they get here?’
‘Of course, my lord King,’ said the captain of Forteviot.
‘They'll have this hall only when we are all dead.’
The words followed Thorfinn as he flung his horse away from the gates.
Confidence was a great thing.
Under that roof, Erlend had been born.
Behind him, Tuathal's fractured voice said, ‘Marching behind us?
They can't get here for five hours.’
‘Oh, they might manage it quicker,’ Thorfinn said.
‘If Siward is chasing them.’
Tuathal said, ‘i don't suppose you mean that, but I'd prefer not to have heard it.
‘Save your breath,’ said Thorfinn.
‘And start to think how best to welcome fifteen enemy ships who want to offload an army.’
The longships were beautiful, and worth all he had paid King Svein of Denmark.
The only thing wrong with them was that they flew the Northumbrian flag, and not his.
They were already in sight when Thorfinn with Tuathal behind him rounded Moncrieffe Hill and dashed into the flat plain of Rhind, where the Earn joined the Tay.
Distant in the big river, the line of vessels threaded the sandbanks, the sinuous pattern of poles moving past the green northern slopes of the estuary.
Their wells were crammed with cone helmets and glittered with shield-hoops and the faggoted filaments that were spears.
They looked like vessels infested with hornets.
In front of the King, the marshes and mud-flats of Earnbank were already filled with struggling men as his own dismounted vanguard disposed of the last of the fifty intruders from the Forth landing.
He sent someone to round up loose horses and looked for Cormac and Ferteth.
Knots of horsemen, as far as the eye could see, were moving along the banks of the Tay, firing the jetties that were not already broken, and two ferry boats crowded with men were in midstream on the Tay, hazed with smoke as they struck tinder into their torches.
Cormac appeared and said, ‘These horsemen were Swedish.’
Some Northumbrians and three Fife men.
They're all dead.
I can only get forty over the river before the ships come, and they won't have horses.’
‘They may discourage a landing on the north shore,’ Thorfinn said.
There were bits of cornland and thatched buildings all over the firmer ground and the slopes of the hill behind him, some of them fired by the early arrivals but many intact.
He said, ‘There's cover.
Let's get the horsemen out of sight.
And the bodies.
They'll want to land on this side anyway.
It's where they'll be expecting the Levenmouth army to arrive in two or three hours to support them.
They may not even know of the bogs.’
‘Ghilander and Fothaid are with them.
They do,’ said Cormac; and plunged off, shouting orders.
Ferteth at his elbow said, ‘I heard.
I told the men along the banks not to come back, but stay to harry the march between the hill and the river.
They'll hide.’
Thorfinn said, ‘If the landings take place on the north side, they'll have to look for more boats upriver and get themselves across till we can come.’
‘I'll tell them,’ said Ferteth.
‘No.
Send someone.
I need you,’ Thorfinn said.
‘It's here, as they land, that we'll need all the ingenuity we can get.’
It was hardly past noon and in a few moments eleven hundred fresh fighting-men would be stepping ashore.
Against them were five hundred men, less the fifty Eochaid had taken to Scone.
Men who, since sunrise this morning, had fought in Siward's first battle and had ridden thirty miles and more to arrive here, with two further skirmishes.
They looked, as he felt, high-hearted and tireless.
It would not last.
But it was another moment, another gift from life, to put with the others.
He had orders to give, and he gave them, swiftly making his rounds, and was ready when the first dragon-ship turned its baleful golden jaws to the land and ran towards him.
The dragon-ships had been promised no opposition.
They had expected some throwing of stones and worse from whatever straggle of peasants ventured down from the hills to the banks, and that they received.
They were not even disturbed by the burning jetties, or the waiting batons of flame and black smoke that fenced the narrowing river beyond them.
They did not intend  rowing so far.
Where they would land on the southern bank of the Tay was a spit of fine, shoaling sand lifting to watery meadows.
Longship keels had no need of jetties, except to unload dry-shod merchants and unwieldy cargo.
The springing swan-bows, neck by neck, would slide homing into the sand-flats like silk.
They were surprised to see leather helmets and the glitter of ranked steel among the rock-throwing denizens of the north bank and to receive several arrows, harmless in the teeth of the wind, as they began to swing round to the south shore to accomplish their landing.
Bows and arrows being the staple of every river vessel's equipment, their archers shot back, with the wind, and had the satisfaction of seeing a few men and youngsters impaled.
On the south bank, on the other hand, all was as it should be.
Drawn up waiting for them were their friends: the men landed early that morning by their companion ships at the mouth of the Leven.
The helmets and the shields were the same: they had designs you could hardly forget if you wanted to.
And some of them were already quelling the fires on the landing-stages.
The men on the shore cheered, shaking their swords and their spears, and the men on board the two leading ships cheered as well, as the seamen leaned forward, swinging the seventeen-foot oars for the stroke that would lift the prows safely home to their beaching.
A valance of stones appeared in mid-air and fell, knocking oar blades and oarsmen.
A fringe of arrows, whistling, followed it, thudding into wood, flesh, and leather.
Men screamed.
The leading longships, interrupted in mid-stroke, swung helplessly, half on and half off the shore-bank and fouling the ship close behind them.
Archers and men-at-arms, knocked off balance, thrust and twisted and swore in both ships.
In their sterns, men jolted over the gunwales found themselves swept away, sinking in midstream.
Off the prows, the first man to jump knee-deep into the water clutching a mooring-rope met three feet of good German steel.
The fifty men on the shore, whose shields were not now familiar at all, were in the water before anyone else, and started boarding.
Following them was another double line of fifty, risen from nowhere.
And then more and more, running from all directions.
And there all the time, a line of kneeling archers, letting fly from behind their ranked shields.
Each ship carried seventy-five men, closely packed, with little room to swing sword or axe against roaring trolls high on the gunwales, who walked on men as on a highway and brought steel, thick and thin, hissing down, cleaving and searing.
The fighting groups overbalanced into the shallower water and continued struggling there, ignoring the arrows beginning to fall from the following ships of the line, swinging up, oars flashing to fill the breadth of the river.
The fighting spread from the two helpless ships to the third rammed behind them, now cramped fast with a grappling-iron and rocking with incomers from the two dying vessels ahead.
A trumpet blew on the land.
A fourth and fifth longship, shipping oars, slid to the rear of the third and locked, pouring fresh men over its stem.
The dragon-ships of midstream, abandoning the dead in the first and the second, thrust forward and, turning rapidly in, ran up on shore further upriver and began to land men fast, under a renewed fall of arrows.
On the bank, the trumpet twittered again, and the water became full of spray and hurtling bodies as shoremen left their attack and threw themselves back on the sand.
Some of them, racing in from the river, met and clashed with running parties of mercenaries, cutting straight from their landings to intercept.
Horns from the fleet drew back the mercenaries.
To shouted commands, they threw up their shields and ran to take up defensive formation.
Soon, behind a barricade of shields and of steel, the helpless ships were drawn off, and the rest of the crippled fleet began to come in, two by two, and make their proper landings.
The misleading welcoming party with its treacherous shields had quite vanished, but for the dead and the wounded in the three leading ships and on shore.
As the disembarked men were being lined up to march, a detail of mercenaries went from heap to heap, spiking those who still lived and removing what valuables they could discover.
It was when, on their leader's orders, they went to search the huts and hovels and woods beside and ahead of them to find signs of retreat or of ambush that the news they brought back seemed to unsettle their leader and the noblemen from Northumbria and from Fife whom he conferred with.
Indeed, he gave the Northumbrians a taste of his temper.
‘Four hundred horses,’ he said.
‘My men say there are traces of at least four hundred horses.
The men who attacked us just now all have mounts.
‘They will not, therefore, have retreated.
They lie ahead, and since they can travel at twice our pace, we may be sure that for all  the length of our march we shall be subject to ambush.
I was not told, when we left, that I should have to fight a running battle with four hundred horsemen.
I was told that a band from Levenmouth would be waiting, with a further support from the same source in three hours.
I was told that your Earl Siward had the army of Alba immobilised in the south, and expected to overwhelm it.
What has happened?’
But the men from Northumbria and from Fife did not appear to know.
And so, black with anger, hot for revenge, the nine hundred invaders, who had once been eleven hundred, marched, sword in hand, towards Scone.
A third of the way towards Scone and when the running fight with the marching shipmen was at its hottest, the good news came to Thorfinn.
Eochaid and his fifty horsemen had overcome the special detachment from Leven and were safely inside the monastery.
Two-thirds of the way towards Scone, Thorfinn withdrew what was left of his horsemen and, leaving the damaged nine hundred to continue their march, raced on to Scone himself, with all the men he had left.
He had sent word to Eochaid, and the gates opened.
Around him in the yard, his men made water anywhere and, long-throated, poured down the mead and the ale and snatched bread and cheese while the monks clustered over the wounded.
Eochaid said, ‘My lord!’
‘It's other men's blood,’ Thorfinn said.
He caught a towel and, dragging his helmet off, scoured his face and his neck.
He said, ‘They're three miles away; about eight hundred and fifty.
Did you get horses?’
‘Forty left of our own, and thirty of the besiegers’.
They'll be fresher than yours.’
‘Yes.’
Thorfinn tipped the ale-jug into his open mouth, and his throat became his own again, and the rest of his body.
He said, ‘Give me the ten Forteviot men, mounted, and the best horses you have in exchange for our worst.
That gives Cormac three hundred mobile men outside to harry them with, once the shipmen settle down to besiege you.
Then the foot-army from Forth should be here to help you in about three hours from now.
Do you want Ferteth to come in beside you?’
‘You'll need him.
You have your own Perth to guard, over the river.
We can hold out for days.
You know that,’ said Eochaid.
‘Is there any news from the Forth?’
‘We know the fifteen hundred got away and are coming.
Bishop Jon sent word.
We don't know how Siward's battle went.
We should have news any moment.
Look.
Arrows and throwing-spears.
We pulled a handcart off one of the ships.’
‘Keep the arrows,’ Eochaid said.
‘My flock aren't archers.’
Thorfinn had already noted that among the fighting-men and the monks and the household there were women, and boys with clubs in their grip, and old men with axes.
Not everyone had taken shelter in the hill-forts.
He said, ‘They have been fighting beside us, too, all the way along.’
‘You sound surprised,’ said Eochaid.
‘These are their brothers and sons who are riding with you.
And don't you remember your home-coming from Rome?
Do you think they don't care who protects them?’
There was nothing, it seemed, that he was able to say.
Eochaid lifted his hands to his neck and began to unfasten the chain of the Brecbennoch.
Behind them, men were hurrying and horses trampling and snorting as  Ferteh and Cormac prepared to withdraw.
Eochaid said, ‘Why not take it?
We have faith enough here.
We shall save Scone if God wills it.
And the invader will reach Dunkeld only over our bodies.’
The chain was warm.
The little relic-house, five inches long, hung from his fist.
Thorfinn said, ‘It deserves better than I can give it.
I shall take it to Tuathal.’
‘Take?’ said Eochaid.
His fresh horse was waiting, with the King's saddle on it.
Thorfinn said, ‘There are friends of Malduin's with the ship-army.
Fothaid and Ghilander.
We cut out a Fife man and made him tell us the plan for the men they dropped on the Forth.
The foot-army from Levenmouth is coming up through Glen Farg and expects to cross the Earn at the nearest main ford and march to their friends here at Scone.
They would double the numbers against you.
They won't be allowed to.
I've sent Tuathal with a hundred horse to catch them in the ravine at Glen Farg.’
‘A hundred against nearly nine hundred?’ said Eochaid.
‘He won't stop them all.
But he might hold the rest at the Earn until our fifteen hundred come up from the south.’
‘And you are going to help him?
Alone?
There are still twenty Forteviot men here,’ Eochaid said.
‘And horses for them.
Take them.
I shall expect to see you back with your new army.
You and Tuathal and Bishop Jon.’
‘In this world, it is a possibility,’ Thorfinn said.
It was time to mount.
For the first time that day, he felt the ache of loss, and without real reason.
He gave the only gift in his power and, removing his eyes from Eochaid's, dropped on one knee.
Eochaid's hand, still marked with ink, touched his hair, and he received Eochaid's blessing.
Then he rose quickly, and mounted, and turned his horse with his knees while he fastened his helmet and the Forteviot men collected behind him.
Then, without looking back, he left Scone.
It was seven miles to the river Earn ford.
He crossed the Tay from Scone to his fort of Perth on the opposite side and transmitted encouragement, he hoped, to its captain.
After that, he turned south, on a fresh horse, with twenty fresh men beside him and the afternoon sun hot on his right.
He had been fighting, one way or another, since just after noon.
He had been fighting or riding since three hours after sunrise this morning.
And there were six hours to get through before sunset.
The toisech among the men with him wanted to talk, and he was sharp with him, because he had to think.
Later, he relented.
To think was one thing.
To shut his eyes as he rode was another.
Three and a half hours after noon, he was close enough to the Earn to hear the shouting and deduce that the army landed that morning at Levenmouth had completed its march northwards through Fife and even its struggle, harassed by Tuathal, through the defile of Glen Farg, and was now here, on one side or the other of the Earn crossing.
Then, rounding a hill and thundering over the plain to the river with goat-dung flung from his hooves, and smashed heads of ripe barley, and mussel-shells, he was able to see what was happening.
Tuathal had crossed the Earn and was on this side, strung out with what remained of his hundred horsemen.
On the opposite side were the men who had marched up from Levenmouth.
More than eight hundred mercenaries, but not in battle order.
Or only those detailed to keep guard against any hint of attack from Tuathal's side of the river.
Behind, the remaining hundreds lay on the grass; or sat chewing, their satchels open beside them and their leather flasks between their dusty cloth knees.
There seemed to be a lot of wounded.
Tuathal had made a good job, then, of his ambush.
After that, of course, Tuathal had had to drop his attack and race to be first over the river, since he could not face eight times his  number in the open plain between the Glen and the crossing.
And the mercenary army, logically enough, had taken full advantage of the respite.
Whether to care for their wounded or because the men had rebelled, tired from the long day's march and from the fight in the defile, they were being a! lowed to eat and to rest.
After all, they must expect to see very soon traces of the hundred of their number who had found garrons and arrived here before them.
They would expect to learn of the success of the Tay landings, and to set off on the seven miles that would take them to the central strongholds of Alba, already besieged by their fellows.
Behind them lay Fife, tamed or docile or empty.
Further south lay Lothian and the plains of the Forth, in the grip of Earl Siward's army.
They would not expect the taking of Perth and Scone to be easy, and night would fall long before they could send back to clear out Abernethy and Forteviot, or before they could press on the further twelve miles to Dunkeld.
There was time to rest.
By their lights, it was sensible; even necessary.
It was an unheard-of stroke of good fortune.
The longer they stayed, the more chance it gave Bishop Jon's army to arrive.
The fifteen hundred men who had set off north from the Forth directly after the first struggle with Siward and who must be less than two hours away at this moment, marching up Strathallan by the way he had come himself, passing Dunblane and Forteviot.
Tuathal, spurring up to him, said, ‘You see.
We tired them out.’
The Prior had taken his helmet off.
He looked the way all the Forth army looked now, with brown keel-marks under his eyes and his riddled skin beaten like metal.
Then he asked, ‘Eochaid?’
His eyes were on the casket.
‘Triumphant in Scone,’ Thorfinn said.
He unclasped the chain and signed to the toisech, who was hovering, to lead his men to join the rest on the riverbank.
The relic came free, and he held it out.
‘You are to have it,’ he said.
‘I am merely the messenger.
Scone is invested, but there are three hundred horsemen of mine in the neighbourhood to keep everyone unhappy.
Have you heard from Bishop Jon?
‘No,’ said Tuathal.
‘I was hoping you had.
Neither of my couriers came back.’
He took the chain and held it.
‘You should have this.’
‘It will be safer with you,’ Thorfinn said.
‘You will fight harder, but I am the target.
Anyway, I have my axe.’
Tuathal's sharp eyes relaxed.
He said, ‘What will we poor priests  do when you conquer, against a double invasion and your own new fleet turned against you?’
Thorfinn put his horse in motion, walking beside Tuathal's down to where their own men waited on the riverbank.
In relays, they, too, were resting.
The wind brought the smell of sweat and horses and metal and beaten grass and sweet clover.
Also, the sharp odour of food.
He said, ‘If we conquer.
It depends on the south.’
He dismissed from his mind, because it was of no concern at this moment, the fate of the army he had left fighting Siward.
He had weakened his own side by subtracting two thousand men.
But he had left them the inestimable advantage of the eighty Normans on their strong horses.
Face to face, these two armies would have to fight one another to a standstill, for neither could afford to give way.
He knew what the losses might be.
He knew that Siward, finally, might have just enough extra power to prevail, upon which his men had their orders: to give way; to appear to fly; to cross the Forth somehow at the wide ford, having got rid of the bridge.
And to stand at the ford as long as humanly possible, denying the Northumbrians the crossing until they were forced to give way.
By then, very likely, there would be nothing much of an organised army left on either side, and both sides would be exhausted.
He would expect no man, having come through that, to set out to march thirty odd miles to the Tay, this side of nightfall.
Equally, he was safe from any remnant of Siward's army on foot.
He had thought that perhaps Osbern or some of his friends still on horseback might have got through, provided the fighting was over.
That none of them had could be a bad sign or a good.
Meantime, all that mattered were the fifteen hundred marching men who, however tired they might be, would still be able to save them.
He said, ‘Your couriers didn't come back.
Send two more.
Send two of the Forteviot men: they'll ride faster.’
He saw from the look that crossed Tuathal's face that he was understood, even before he himself tossed someone his reins and, dismounting, walked down through the men, rallying them; stopping to talk to the wounded; lifting from the food-baskets some bread and a piece of mutton in passing.
The look that recognised, no matter what their hard fighting and their successes so far, that all the future hinged on the army they were now waiting for.
And that if that army did not come, the invaders would very likely prevail.
Half an hour passed.
He remembered it afterwards as the oddest  part of the day.
In the heat of the afternoon, both armies lay quiet, somnolent after the long hours of nervous exertion and the effects of the warmth and the food.
Thorfinn sent Tuathal to sleep for ten minutes and, when he returned, dropped in his place on the bare earth of an old wattle barn, asleep before he stopped moving.
Seven miles off behind him, Eochaid and Ferteth and Cormac were fighting to save Perth and Scone from the army besieging them; and here, motionless under the sun, were a hundred men who could help them.
Except that if they moved away, there would be nothing to hinder the army couched over the river from crossing and flinging their full weight against Scone before his own men from the south could arrive.
One made one's decisions and stood by them.
And when there was a chance to rest, one did not waste it.
Tuathal wakened him just after four.
‘The other side seem to be stirring.
Ours are standing to arms.’
No courier had come from the south.
However fast the army was marching, the Forteviot men would take an hour to reach them, and another hour to come back.
Unless, of course, they met an incoming messenger on their way.
Patience.
He talked to Tuathal and then to the toisechs as he put on his mail shirt again and took up his helmet.
The golden fillet and the richness of his dress and his harness were all he carried that would identify him, for his banner was on the Forth and his pennant had long since gone.
But, with his height, it was enough.
When he appeared, riding, and the sun flashed on the gold, his own men turned as they stood with their spears and called to him, ‘Albanaid!’
He raised his sword and answered them with the same word.
It did not, now, bear the stamp of Duncan on it.
Nothing did.
The men across the river marshalled themselves into lines and raised their banners.
‘Cathail macDubhacon, fighting in Siward's hired army.
May he go to hell with his pains, as he deserves,’ said Prior Tuathal.
Thorfinn looked at the banner.
‘Osbern had a favourite saying.
La laiterie ouverte rend les cats friaunds.
Alba, I agree, is not a dairy.
But still, I should prefer Cathail and his friends captured, not killed.’
‘You expect too much,’ said Tuathal.
‘I used the word prefer, not expect,’ Thorfinn said.
‘Why do you suppose they are moving like that?
To try the next ford upriver?’
‘There's no advantage in that,’ Tuathal said.
‘Our horse would get there before they do.’
Thorfinn said, ‘They're not dividing their forces, either.
But they might.
Why don't we send half our force forward, parallel to theirs?
We can soon send on the rest if we have to.’
The men, revived by their rest, were excited and restive.
Leaving a toisech in charge, Thorfinn rode on with Tuathal and the advance group.
After a moment, he said, ‘They're striking away from the river, and south.
It's Forteviot.’
‘Can you be sure?’
Tuathal said.
He had put a sleeveless tunic over his shirt of mail, and the Brecbennoch clung to it, undisturbed by the pace of his horse.
‘I can't be sure,’ Thorfinn said.
‘That's why they're doing it.
If we gallop on and pack ourselves into Forteviot, they simply turn and race for Scone, crossing the river unhindered.
If they turn all their power on Forteviot, we either have to do nothing or cross the river ourselves and give battle.
We should not only lose, against eight times our numbers, but we might well tempt the Forteviot garrison to come out and rescue us, and the fort would be taken.’
Tuathal said, ‘If Bishop Jon's army is near, this little force will walk straight into its arms.
It can't be far off.
It can't be far off.’
‘Whistle up your other half, then,’ Thorfinn said.
‘All we can do is keep pace on this side until we see what will happen.
By Forteviot, we can cross the Earn anywhere, if we have to.
If Bishop Jon and his stout men arrive, as you say, we shan't have to.’
The other army, obscured now by scrub and by trees, continued to move gently south, nor, said the scouts, was there any diminishing of its numbers.
Tuathal said, ‘They're taking their time, aren't they?’ and broke off.
‘They were,’ Thorfinn said.
‘That was an order by trumpet, repeated twice.
And that, my Lord Prior, is a jog-trot.
They're in a hurry now, all right.
And they're still making south.
So they haven't heard of Bishop Jon and his army.
So if they run fast enough, they'll run into its jaws, and Bishop Jon can say a prayer over Cathail.
Let's keep up with them.’
Behind him, the horses moved to a trot, and he could feel the wariness giving way to disbelief, and the disbelief to the first stirrings of a dazed expectancy.
Everyone knew they were riding towards Bishop Jon's army.
And so was the enemy.
Above the rustle and thud of the hooves, he could hear the voices of Tuathal's riders behind him calling to one another, quipping breathlessly, their voices still surprised.
Without  anything said, Tuathal turned in the saddle and held up a flat palm for silence.
Silence was not in fact necessary.
But open jubilation or even jeering might be unwise.
Perhaps this was merely a ruse to trick them into a crossing at Forteviot.
Perhaps it was not.
In which case, the less the other army suspected, the better.
It seemed a wise edict, if a bit over-cautious.
The band of riders obeyed it sufficiently.
Battle-excitement was something no one would expect to extinguish.
When, far in the distance, a familiar rider was seen approaching on their side of the river, and then behind him another, the wise edict found itself swept aside, and the men behind Thorfinn gave a snatched cheer, and then went on cheering.
The riders were the Forteviot men.
The men sent south an hour ago to bring back news of Bishop Jon's army.
Tuathal said, ‘It's too soon.
They must have got news at Forteviot.’
And then, ‘They're…
O Mary, Mother of Christ.
Keep them off.’
‘Not now,’ said Thorfinn.
It was too late.
Whatever news the couriers had to tell, the men behind would have to hear it.
They had stopped cheering and calling already and, instead of speeding, the sound of their hoof-beats had slackened.
The galloping men in the distance came closer.
White faces: cracked voices shouting.
These were not the outriders of a large and powerful army sweeping to join them: an army visible, if they rode hard, in half an hour.
These were men unmarked by battle who screamed indistinguishable news as they rode, so that over the river and through the trees you could glimpse the turning masks of grinning enemy faces, while on this side of the river the King put up his hand and Tuathal and his men came to a halt.
Silence fell.
The horses pawed, shaking their manes and switching tails, and harness jangled.
Faced with that band of silent men, the two riders' headlong rush veered and slowed, and one of them dropped to a loiter.
Everyone saw him slide suddenly from his horse and bend, retching and whistling, into the grass.
The other rider rode up and stopped.
The other rider said in a whisper, ‘Save yourselves.’
His eyes were fixed on Thorfinn.
Thorfinn said steadily, ‘We will.
Tell us what you know.
Bishop Jon's army?’
‘Cut to pieces.
The Normans, too, that escaped Siward and joined them.
Forteviot's burning.
Do you see the smoke now?
They do, over the water.
They're going to strip the bodies and finish the killing…
‘It was the surprise, you see,’ said the Forteviot man.
‘Not the numbers, although there were enough of them.
They were waiting at Ruthven Water.
By St Cathan's church and the monks’ houses.
Bishop Jon and my lord of Riveire and the rest came marching up, suspecting nothing.
My lords, save yourselves, there is nothing any man can do there.’
‘Who was waiting at St Cathan's?’ said Thorfinn.
He put all the skills he had ever learned into the timbre of his voice.
The man drew a long breath and spoke clearly.
‘A great army of men, my lord King, splendidly equipped with many banners, and two of them gilded.
One was the flag of Thor of Allerdale.
The other was the royal standard, they say, flown by my lord Malcolm, King Duncan's eldest son.’
He choked, and his chest leaped.
‘My lord, the kingdom is lost.’
Thorfinn said, ‘Fife is not Alba.
Scone is Alba, which can be rescued.
Dunkeld is Alba, which is still safe.’
‘My lord!’ said the Forteviot man.
‘Dunkeld fell early this morning.
Allerdale's army came from there.
And a thousand men stayed, they were boasting, to level the church and the hall and the monastery and then leave to do the same to Scone and to Perth.
‘My lord King, there is nowhere to go.
Alba has fallen.’