

Editorial
Over the years that The Women Artists Slide Library has been collecting and documenting the work of women artists it has become sensitised to the many issues around health and disability.
Not only have there been many important exhibitions held on these issues but many women artists have developed brave and challenging work.
Some of this work has been informed from personal experience either because of being physically challenged or from having worked as a therapist, as an artist in residence within a hospital complex, in a mental institution, or has a counsellor in a hospice.
There are many experiences which can sensitise and inform committed work.
The Women Artists Slide Library explored many issues around women artists and disability in its conference in 1989 called ‘Taking a Closer Look’.
This event brought together 30 practising women artists who were all actively involved in the production of paintings, photography, mixed media and sculpture.
The organisation as a whole became sensitised to the many debates which faced women artists who were physically challenged.
This issue of the magazine will be a positive contribution to these ongoing debates and we hope will also draw attention to the work which WASL is continuing to do in indexing information on women artists and disability.
This indexing is to help to give out information and to network.
Most importantly it is also a positive response to the constant stream of enquiries we get from researchers, readers and users of the library as a whole.
The Women's Art Magazine constantly tries to reflect the views and diversity of many women artists and writers, rather than supporting a closed house style, a club mentality or printing articles from just one particular stable of thought and theory.
This distinctive way of working and developing women's Art Magazine reflects the organisation's aims and ambitions as a whole.
Most importantly, it holds a position within the world of art and art publications which is totally unique.
The Women Artists Slide Library offers a specific focus for women and the arts in this country today and works under a great deal of pressure to maintain this position each year.
This particular issue of Women's Art is the last to be produced under the editorship of Genevieve Fox and we would like to thank her for her contribution to the magazine over the last year.
WASL would also like to thank Sally Cousins for her development work on the listings section.
The next issue of the magazine will be edited by Sally Townsend who will be bringing together a focus on the recent college shows and the Whitechapel open.
There will be news and coverage of recent exhibitions and an insight into the new artist in residence at the Tatè in Liverpool.
We hope that you enjoy this issue and we would like to encourage all women artists to continue to send up details about your exhibitions and events for inclusion in our extensive listings.
ON OUR TERMS
LIZ CROW re-defines integration for disabled artists
Where We Are Now — Able bodied Arts
There is a joke amongst Disabled people that non-Disabled people listen to music, do the gardening, hold down jobs, but Disabled people do music therapy, horticultural therapy, occupational therapy.
Where Disabled people are involved, almost every activity of life seems to have to be justified in terms of its medical and therapeutic benefits.
This approach is based on a couple of ingrained assumptions about Disability.
Disability is largely regarded in medical terms, as a body or mind gone ‘wrong’.
Lack of ablebodiedness is considered to be a personal tragedy, the overriding feature of Disabled people's lives and one which we would gladly escape given the opportunity.
Encounters with professionals are dominated by medical and therapeutic interventions designed to return us to ablebodiedness to assist our physical and psychological ‘adjustment’ to personal limitations.
Our primary interest in the arts is no different from that of non-Disabled people: put simply, we want to create art.
This perspective is so prevalent that it has spread far beyond medical, health and welfare agencies to influence fundamentally most people's approaches to Disabled people.
When a medical condition is taken as central to Disabled people's lives, every thing is tinged with therapeutic objectives.
The approach to Disabled people of the arts community does not escape this conditioning.
This issue of Women's Art , for example, groups together art, health and Disability and emphasises the role of art therapy.
Picture courtesy of SHAPE London
Art therapy, for many Disabled people, becomes the only involvement in the arts, and gives rise to a different experience of the arts from that of non-Disabled people.
it is a narrow experience focusing on alleviating medical conditions.
It is largely controlled by non-Disabled ‘experts’ and frequently run in segregated settings such as adult training centres, hospitals and ‘special’workshops.
These overtones of differentness and specialism inhibit much of the mainstream arts community from working to include Disabled people and thus perpetuate a whole cycle of exclusion and presumption.
Underlying this whole approach is the fact that no account has been taken of Disabled people's ow understandings of Disability or priorities for the arts.
Asking us what we think about being Disabled generally produces an entirely different perspective which has major repercussions for arts involvement.
Being Disabled can be divided into two distinct strands: impairment and Disability.
For most Disabled people, individual medical conditions, regardless of whether they are physical, sensory, learning or emotional, are of relative unimportance.
What is important is that we all live in a society organised in a way which routinely excludes people who have impairments.
We are Disabled not by impairment but by a range of discriminatory practices which remove or restrict our abilities and limit our opportunities.
Disability works against people with impairments in the same way as sexism works against women.
The key value of this interpretation is that it separates the internal (impairment) and external (Disability) causes of disadvantage.
It shows that exclusion is not an inevitable part of having an impairment, but is socially-created and can therefore be socially-changed. it shifts the focus from ‘adjusting’ to impairment, onto bringing an end to discrimination.
This leads to a different understanding of all areas of disabled people's lives, the arts included.
Art therapy is applied arbitrarily to Disabled people and has often been used less to benefit Disabled people and more to minimise disruption to the ablebodied world.
Art therapy can be of immense value to some Disabled people, as it is to some non-Disabled people, but it has not intrinsic link to Disability and offers no solution to the problem as Disabled people perceive it.
The real problem is disabled people's exclusion from many areas of social life.
The over-whelming priority for disabled people is no different from that of non-Disabled people.
We want access to the same range of opportunities to participate in and contribute to the society in which we live.
Our primary interest in the arts is no different from that of non-Disabled people: put simply, we want to create art.
We want full and equal access to all facets of art: art for leisure, art for employment, art for education, art for self-development, art for cultural and political statement and art for sheer enjoyment.
Where We Want To Be-Integration v Disability Arts
Disabled people's main aim may be just to create art, but for many the current scale of discrimination makes that goal unreachable.
We find our arts opportunities restricted at all levels, from lack of physical access to arts facilities and regulations which bar us from training courses, to our invisibility and misrepresentation in the images produced and promoted.
The ultimate aim may be the same as non-Disabled people's but until discrimination is removed we find much of our creativity must be redirected towards achieving the most basic access.
There are different opinions as to how those rights are best achieved.
Much of the focus has so far been on integration, instigated predominantly by non-Disabled people, as a mean for all sections  of the community to be involved on an equal basis, in a way which does not differentiate between the intention of this approach is genuine, in practice it often transmutes into another form of exclusion and discrimination.
The problem arises primarily from the desire to treat all participants similarly.
It overlooks the fact that people with impairments have different needs from people without impairments, and the uniformity it introduces means that the specific needs and characteristics of individuals often go unrecognised.
This not only restricts physical access, but can also undermine personal experiences and priorities which differ from the majority.
Discrimination against Disabled people, in the arts or other areas of life, creates experiences, needs and priorities which are qualitatively different from those of non-Disabled people.
Not only may access to training and development opportunities have been restricted, but the focus of Disabled people's creative work may differ.
Unquestioningly treating Disabled and non-Disabled people the same may obstruct Disabled people's access to recreational, training, employment, funding and promotion opportunities.
Overall, this approach risks a half-way integration in which disabled people are ‘invited in’ to participate on non-Disabled people's terms.
Truly integrated arts are not simply about providing suitable facilities, but about involving Disabled people as equals at all levels of decision-making and practice, and recognising the experience of Disability throughout the arts structure.
The problem underlying all of this is the tendency either to group people rigidly by arbitrary features, such as impairment, or to treat people uniformly.
In reality, of course, we need to set up structures which allow us all to be our selves.
Once again, this approach to involving disabled people in the arts is flawed primarily because disabled people have not been consulted about what is wanted.
Asking Disabled people produces a quite different approach.
The emergence of an international movement of Disabled people over the past decade has enabled millions of Disabled people to pool experiences and to find new ways of working towards a form of true integration in all aspects of life.
More recently, in an offshoot of that movement, the disability arts movement has combined these new ideas with an interest in the arts, for the dual purpose of achieving true integration and using the arts as a medium to promote its campaigns.
Disability arts belong to Disabled people allowing the creation of art to be paramount, without the more usual digression into issues of inaccessibility.
Much of the art we produce is qualitatively different from that of non-Disabled people.
At its most distinct, it includes work which could not physically be produced by a non-Disabled person (for example, drawing as seen by someone with a specific visual impairment, or using muscle spasm to create a particular photographic quality).
disability arts include art which directly represents the experience of Disability, as well as documenting and promoting disability rights campaigns.
It also includes and promotes work produced simply by people defining themselves as Disabled.
By reflecting all the aspects of Disabled people's lives, new images of Disability are created.
These serve to provide Disabled people with a positive cultural identity and impetus for continued campaigning as well as communicating to the non-Disabled arts and general community what being Disabled is really about.
This separation from the mainstream arts community is the first stage towards true integration.
In Britain, the National Disability Arts Forum and the number of regional and local forums are expanding rapidly.
These create a meeting point where, alongside developing a new arts genre, issues of importance to Disabled people can be debated and the skills necessary to achieve equality can be practised.
Disability arts is a circuitous route to the inclusion of Disabled people in mainstream arts and wider society.
However, whilst other approaches offer superficial change, Disability arts carries the possibility of triggering the kind of fundamental change in mainstream arts that is vital for true integration.
As the worker of one Disability Arts Forum says, ‘There's integration on anyone's terms and there's integration on our terms, and on our terms we'll get it right.
We're using the arts to integrate Disabled people and, hopefully, at the end of it, we'll be able to put Disability arts in a little glass case and say ‘there it is, we don't need it anymore’, because we're completely integrated into the community’.
How We Want To Get There — Changing Roles
Making fundamental changes to the way the arts are structured demands fundamental change to the roles of those people participating.
This is true for disabled people as well as non-Disabled people.
The therapeutic approach has tended to cast Disabled people in very passive roles, initiated and controlled by non-Disabled professionals.
We are needing to learn active roles, to choose what we want and how to achieve it.
Whilst making choices sounds simple, constant discrimination or extreme segregation have removed from many Disabled people the skills needed to make even basic decisions.
Disabled people meet substantial resistance to many choices, and so a range of communication, assertiveness and negotiation skills is needed.
Artist Micheline Mason with daughter Lucy, photographed by David Hevey, ‘The Creatures Time Forgot: Photography and Disability Imagery’, Routledge
We also need to learn to work within the disability community.
Many Disabled people are wary  of being with other Disabled people because this is associated with disempowering situations of segregation and isolation.
We need to recognise that coming together through choice gives us a positive identity and the collective power to create change.
Interwoven with all of this is the need for Disabled people to create a new relationship of equality with non-Disabled people.
Picture courtesy of SHAPE London
Whilst Disabled people need to learn the opposite of traditional roles, non-Disabled people need to adopt altogether new roles, away from direction and towards facilitation.
Relative to disabled people, it is non-Disabled people who hold the social and economic resources, and ways need to be found to facilitate equitable access to them.
Facilitation means taking responsibility for making the fundamental changes necessary for true integration, whilst accepting the direction for that change from Disabled people's own organisations.
Are there problems with the current structure?
What do Disabled people need and want changed?
How do Disabled people wish to be involved?
Do non-Disabled people have a role in supporting and promoting Disability arts?
True integration involves facilitating Disabled people's representation throughout an organisation and facilitating full access so that all resources can be used on equal terms with non-Disabled people.
It also means ensuring that the full inclusion of disabled people is integral to an organisation's structure, rather than peripheral concern easily surrendered to other interests.
Ten fairly random examples of facilitation in practice include:
ensuring full physical access to facilities is not compromised because non-disabled people's arts take precedence
developing funding criteria which are sufficiently flexible to support qualitatively different or less established arts
employing Disabled artists, workshop leaders, etc
making information available in print, on tape and in braille
informing people about resources and services
providing sign language interpreters and audio descriptions
introducing positive action measures to redress imbalances in staffing, participants, trainees, etc
instating ticket concessions which reflect many Disabled people's lower incomes
agreeing flexible working hours and conditions to accommodate health and other needs
compiling exhibition and performance programmes which represent Disabled people's perspectives and priorities
True integration rests on non-Disabled people ensuring their arts practice is fully and equally accessible to Disabled people ready for as-and-when we choose to become involved.
Conclusion-On Our Terms
So much remains to be done if we are to achieve true integration in the arts and wider society.
At the same time, we are now quite possibly reaching our greatest potential for that change.
As more Disability Arts Forums emerge and the involvement of disabled people and non-disabled allies increases, this is the most rapidly shifting and most exciting time to be working towards this aim.
The priority of the disability arts movement is the full and equal inclusion of disabled people in the arts and wider society.
However, out work carries immense potential, even more far-reaching than our own lives.
Ultimately we are campaigning to be allowed to be ourselves, with all out differences and similarities, and such an aim can only be to the advantage of us all.
Sally Booth, THE ARTIST WITH AN EYE FOR THE EVERYDAY
Key Gallery, Glasgow, 15–30 May 1992
I am delighted to be reviewing Sally Booth's latest work, firstly because it ‘take's one to know one’…
One what?
An artist who has a visual impairment, working with and not against its limitations.
She sees beauty and life’ in strong shapes and colour in the most unlikely things and places, as well as in everyday surroundings.
I have a severe visual problem and this has led me into wonderful ventures around the galleries, ‘seeing’ art in my own way.
I love Sally's pictures because of a certain magic and charm she brings out in every thing she paints.
The soft blur of outline adds to this attraction.
It was impossible for me to visit The Key Gallery, Glasgow where her work was exhibited from 15th to 30th May.
This is a fairly new Gallery, Glasgow where her work was exhibited from 15th to 30th May.
This is a fairly new Gallery which is showing art by artists who have disabilities.
The standard is high and varied and well worth a visit if one is in the area.
Being unable to travel ‘up there’ in time to review this splendid collection, the ‘mountain’didn't exactly come to me, but we made a ‘kitchen table’job of it…or nearly!
Sally spread all her 30 pictures on the floor around a very large empty room in the flats where she lives.
What a treat for me!
No peering at various heights to see what my ‘eye’ can manage to ‘see’…but a really close examination, even to holding some paintings up to a better light when required.
It was all enormously enjoyable and satisfying and as good as a week-end break.
Sally's pictures have this effect on many people, due largely to their refreshing quality.
he quiet, humorous view of buildings and people is unerring.
She is attracted to ‘wonky’(her word) architecture and houses, things that look crazy and awry, particularly trains, viaducts, and fairgrounds and anything in repetitive rows.
This is well demonstrated in the chimney pot and flower pot pictures, the slightly toppling cottages and the rollercoaster carriages.
colour is all-important to her and she uses it to convey feeling and sensation.
this is interesting in the fact that this is how colour is ‘described’ to a person who has no vision whatever.
Certainly colour is still of more importance to me than the picture in many cases.
Sally uses mixed media and is still experimenting with other materials.
Pen and ink sharply, though kindly, ‘caricature’ people observed, quite in contrast with the other work.
I found much that I identified with, the old lady looking in the TV shop window, enjoying all channels, one assumes, the ‘Eye-drop’ queue in the hospital.
I've been there and still put my hand up to see if the cotton-wool pad is slipping.
Her own self-portrait is hilarious, albeit showing only her red-socked feet in front of a glowing gas fire.
There are the stalls in Brick Lane, full of crazy alarm clocks, the striped awning and bird's eye view of a fruit shop as seen from the top of a bus.
Sally uses blues to great effect.
This shows well in the ‘Blue Boat’.
Only a small part of the side of the boat and rail are depicted and three blues show up again and again throughout the collection and seem to draw one's attention to a detail otherwise missed.
The strong vivid colours of the ‘Cleethorpe Rollercoaster’ contrast with the sombre hues of ‘Hungerford Bridge’, and there, pressed into the rail, stands another self-portrait, blending in with the darkness.
If one knows this bridge, it also puts one ‘in the picture’ suspended there over the Thames.
The urban floodlit streets and office blocks are strangely attractive, caught in the evening light, just before the dark.
Windows reflect various colours as smudges in the dusk.
Sally's latest work is large, very large, and she plans to increase the size of her canvases.
The ‘Skaters at Broadgate, Liverpool Street Station’ is all whizz and action.
Full of energy and compulsion, the same can be said for ‘Dodgen’ where the colour is all part of the motion.
Both have a circular direction of movement which is most pleasing and exciting.
It is amazing how restful and calm some of the pictures are, then this sudden splurge of actual speed is sprung on the viewer.
Most exhilarating!
It was interesting to see the many impromptu sketches made in situ, often as skilled as the finished work.
I sometimes think that artists could well exhibit a few sketches along with the actual picture.
Sally also takes photographs, especially when touring around England.
Anyone who saw her sketchbook exhibition will know what a fine display these made alongside her paintings.
her work is certain to be exhibited elsewhere this year, so do look out for it…a real treat not to be missed.
Seeing the life around one through Sally Booth's ‘eye’ will bring colour and renewed awareness to the simplest of scenes.
Ice skates at Broadgate, Liverpool Street Station’, 1992 oil on board 4′ × 3′
Interview
MARKS OF STRUGGLE
Phototherapist Jo Spence is still fighting breast cancer.
In this extract from ‘The Creatures Time Forgot: Photography and Disability Imagery’, its author DAVID HEVEY, talks to Jo Spence about the battle to be heard
David Hevey Can you elaborate on how getting ill made to value political and practical photographic theory?
Jo Spence I think it was then I was ill that I understood for the first time what it was to be a victim.
Previously, all the theory I learnt was head stuff.
When I was ill, I suddenly realised that, in reading discourse theory.
I was in a discourse, a medical discourse, and I hadn't understood what a discourse was before.
Here I was on the production line, as the kind of fodder passing along between doctors and consultants.
That was the beginning of it.
I began to see how they constructed a world view through the way they worked and what I wanted was irrelevant really.
I was the patient, who had to be managed, got better, but I didn't exist, other than what their discourse made me.
They didn't want to know anything about me really, apart from‘where is it and how soon can we take it off?’
The process of theory taught me how to research, and the substance gave me critical tools.
I think coming from my working-class background, I was frightened of everything that had a vague look of an institution about it.
I suddenly realised that I actually knew how to use a library.
I knew how to get information.
so the second level of using theory was to actually begin to find out what I could do to help myself and that threw me into the middle of ‘what is knowledge?’
And ‘where does knowledge come from?’
Having been diagnosed, I abandoned that I thought I knew, which was a series of stereotypes about cancer.
I'd only experienced them through other people and it was something I couldn't bear to think about, really, because my mother had died of it and all I could remember was a series of silences and around the silence was terror to me.
A no-go area.
Don't think about it, you're safer that way.
I literally had to plunge into the abyss and find out what I could about what they were doing to me, or what they wanted me to do.
My mother was working class and didn't ever question what happened to her as a cancer patient and the motto I had in the family, in relation to health in particular, was ‘Do as you're told’.
The medical profession is God, yet in my family, the doctors never delivered the goods.
No one ever got better of anything.
They just got steadily worse.
It wasn't acknowledged like that, because, like many ‘non-disabled people’, they were held in check by drugging; this is how the bronchitis, depression, arthritis and so on were ‘dealt with’.
D.H.
And was the bottom line self-blame?
J. S. Yes.
I think I grew up with the idea that disablement or illness was inevitable, that drugging was inevitable and that maybe being locked up or cut open was inevitable.
A part of me was do terrified, that I didn't have anything to lose when my turn came, which is why I refused what they wanted to do to me.
I refused to have a mastectomy and I see now in terms of theory, that I was stagemanaged at various points on the production line, into trying to turn me into a well-behaved patient by traumatising me by saying ‘If you don't do what we tell you…’ or ‘You're being very naughty’or ‘You're being hysterical’, or ‘We haven't got time to deal with all these questions, we'd never get round’, and so on.
D. H. The passive lump?
J. S. Exactly.
It was like an obstacle race.
I got past the consultant and sent back to my GP and she immediately said, ‘You've been very naughty, you've got to have your breast removed, never mind what you found here and there, I am going to send you back to someone in London who'll take it off’.
The fact that I had adopted an alternative approach via traditional Chinese medicine was brushed aside as irrelevant.
Toxic drugs can'£t cure anything really, they just hold thinks in check.
The point is you need to appear to get better.
And to all intents and purposes from capitialism's point o view you do get better, back on your feet, back to work and off the sick.
Ironically, I would argue cynically, the only way I could become acceptable was to turn my illness into a piece of work at one level.
I think what is quite interesting about my work is that I was non-disabled, then became disabled, and I operate at these borders.
So my work is very much about person-centred, holistic health.
D. H. You have said that your family moved in and out of illness: did this give you the position to turn breast cancer and person-centred health issues into political photography?
Does the growing up on fragile ice create, if you like, metaphorical value in your cancer work?
Can it speak other languages?
J. S. That's interesting.
I think at the point where I was struggling to understand what I could do to help myself, I certainly wasn't aware of anything called patient-centred medicine at that point, or group-activity in relation to health.
It wasn't until much later that I saw it metaphorically.
What happened was that I did the work and received not a word from anybody about it.
It was like it fell into the greatest silence I have ever come across.
So, I did what I learnt to do as a working-class woman, which was to justify why I did my work by saying, well of course it is a metaphor for all kinds of struggle, and of course it is, but actually the original reason wasn't that at all.
The more I said it, the more I believed it.
But I can't tell you what it felt like, first of all having cancer, secondly trying to talk about it, and being continually asked, ‘Well, how are you Jo?’ and  you'd see their eyes glaze over and they'd think, ‘Christ, I hope she's not going to tell me!’
The reception of the work was amazing; that is, an amazing silence!
I went to this gallery opening of my work and there was silence except for someone coming up and saying ‘I like the green card it's on’!
D.H.
Listening to what you're saying, all the areas you identify — education, the polytechnic, the reception at the opening, the medical profession — are these areas where the politics of the body are dealt with on an intellectual rather than an experimental level?
J.S. Yes.
For people experiencing impairment first-hand, it is a struggle both to maintain our bodies and get the struggle heard.
Firstly, they are shit-scared if all forms of actual production.
From factory production to the production and reproduction of illness.
Ironically, I would argue cynically, the only way I could become acceptable was to turn my illness into a piece of work at one level.
D.H.
Some sort of abstraction?
J.S. Yes.
so that it could be handled by abstract people.
When the work goes to places where people have cancer, there's no taboo at all, they just fall about you with open arms and say, ‘How marvellous to be able to talk about it.
That we could talk about having a breast removed or being badly damaged by surgery or our hair dropping out or whatever.’
So, it's the difference between audiences: if you put it into one context it's bad art, you put it into another context, it's brilliant information.
D.H.
but it has shifted the radical photography base quite seriously.
So, as you say in a lot of your articles, it's social-sciences, teachers, users, actual utility users that love the work, whereas the photographic intelligentsia or the ‘counter-culturalists’ have found it, in a perverse way, too usable and too located.
J.S. Oh, they think it's a bit low brow and they can't talk about it and, as you say, they're not in their bodies.
I talk about a textual body, and then I talk about a body that I inhabit and so many make bastions and institutions don't want that.
They don't know what to do because they're so used to the female nude; that's The body !
D.H.
That whole absenting of body as a site of struggle does meet its final nemesis within disability and the access issue.
Images of disabled people, particularly those used by charity advertising, have constructed disabled people as the refuse of the social body.
J.S. Yes, that's right, and the breakdown of the body and the potential for death, that's the point isn't it?
I am presenting a supposed ‘hidden’ disability and the marks of struggle against the medical or cultural discourses.
I think that people live in such a world of fantasy around what they think is going on and kidding themselves that they have some ‘control’, that a kind of chink in the armour like that is terrifying.
That's without all the other things that a re going on.
But I think cancer is a particular taboo because with cancer you could end up losing a leg, an eye quite suddenly, or a breast.
It's an illness that is unpredictable.
It does have different characteristics from other more fixed medical conditions, such as cerebral palsy.
With cancer, what I've known is people gradually having bits of them taken away until their bowels are not working any more and they can't breathe and so on and so on.
And they still appear to be ‘normal’.
I am presenting a supposed ‘hidden’ disability and the marks of struggle against the medical or cultural discourses.
D.H.
They still have the temptation to ‘pass’ within that because of the pressure.
J.S. When someone who has cancer is finally dying, that's one thing, but many families go into mourning at the first diagnosis as a form of disavowing their own pain and fears.
On the other hand, what you'll get is this continual lying going on about kidding everybody that everything's better than it is and, of course, the eternal gratitude.
They're encouraged to because people can't stand it.
For instance, going back to my father.
He was a ‘chest case’ for years and when I look back at the photographs of him he's always trying to look normal but actually his face is pained from trying to breathe.
And whenever he was with people, he mustered his energies together to appear to be ‘normal’.
But if you saw him running for the bus, he would go blue in the face and collapse on to the bus.
If he had to go upstairs, that would be it, because of the smoke.
People wouldn't see that.
D.H.
And no criticism of the drugs or medical regime because they're too frightened.
J.S. And grateful to have the treatment.
What you're dealing with, if you're involved in any sort of ‘against-the-grain’ work on something like cancer, is the stereotyped notion of knowledge.
you're up against the power relationship that each patient is caught up in with their consultant.
And they say ‘my consultant’.
It's like a hang-over from the Royal Doctor.
I think, to come back to ‘where does knowledge come from?’, just how can you produce work that actually counters that weight of belief in the invincibility of people who are patently failing in front of your eyes!
Some cancers are now curable, but most of them aren't.
But 90 per cent of them could be prevented actually if we had better working and environmental conditions or weren't so stressed and needed to smoke and drink to kill the pain of daily life.
When I was ill and was told I would have to go on a diet for the rest of my life I felt totally deprived that I wasn't going to be able to eat junk food any more.
Then, when I started to get into it I felt kind of holy, y'know, ‘I'm eating this good food’, but behind that was the desire continually to revert to eating junk food (and I do) because I am emotionally dependent on it.
And the worse the problem with cancer got, the more I wanted to eat.
I went to a holistic conference and asked the question, how do you tackle the problem of emotional eating?’
Which is what the whole culture is caught up with.
D.H.
And what was their answer?
J.S. They hadn't got one, beyond saying you have to take a more holistic attitude, but what does that mean?
D.H.
Photography as a process necessarily admits consumerism and rapid production, but you've brought in issues of class-and body-language.
The vulgar physical body occupying the pure cerebral theoretical body.
In this sense, not only do you not ‘behave yourself’ medically, you don't behave yourself culturally or intellectually.
Would you agree?
J.S. Yes, I would.
What I've been through is most extraordinary, I wouldn't call it crucifixion exactly, because I'm not religious, but I actually thought I was doing quite radical work and it has never been names as such.
Then what happened was the AIDS crisis became apparent at the point where I was ill and, suddenly, all these people that were right-on theoreticians were suddenly all going on about AIDS.
Now, that's not to denigrate that issue.
Simon Watney, in particular I wouldn't wish to denigrate, but clearly other people have jumped into the AIDS industry.
My answer to that is go and make a project out of the politics of your own life!
To me, the struggle is between anger and ultrasilence and I actually can deal with anger better than ultra-silence.
Coming from my background, ultra-silence means I don't exist.
There's no position to speak from.
But let me give you the peak of my experience as a cancer patient.
I went to the third National Conference of Self-Help Groups.
I took my picture of Health Exhibition by invitation and put it up.
And I did a workshop on images to cancer and disability.
A lot of people cam to my workshop and said, ‘Oh yes, it's very interesting but I don't know what to do with it.
Y'know, I can't deal with things ideologically, I am only here for practical information’.
And then, when I was taking the exhibition down, a couple of women helped me and they said, ‘Why are you so angry, dear?’
And I said, ‘Well, don't you think there's a lot to be angry about?’
And they said, ‘But they're doing the best they can’.
And I realised what was happening.
At the conference, in the final plenary session, what was emerging was that the whole conference was virtually treating itself like handmaidens to the medical profession.
There were only a couple of critically dissenting voices.
But all the radical social workers who were there on a political and class base were asking the most difficult questions I have ever heard, saying ‘We're not here to service the medical profession.
We actually want to discuss the politics of illness’.
And I was trying to ask another sort of question which was, ‘How is our illness represented and how does that help to position us through our basic ignorance?
Of course, that was another set of shushes.
D.H.
to question the very basis of the welfare state medicine, which is based on non-holistic, toxic intervention, is still seen as a traitor if you criticise the medical regime.
Not only are you anti-Tory, you're anti-labour!
J.S. That's right.
They can't get their head round the notion of patient-centred medicine, basically.
The only place I ever heard what I would call politics was at the British Holistic Medical Association which is the rival to the British Medical Association.
They actually tried to have a structure for the organisation that had doctors, nurses, alternative healers and patients with parity at the organisational level, but they kept the front up that it was run by doctors, because that way they would be acknowledged within the discourses of medicine as having equal power to argue.
But it was actually about patient-centred medicine.
But they did talk about how, if you have a holistic attitude to some one, you have to take account of their social and environmental factors which would take them perhaps into green politics.
These are medical people talking, they're not saying, fill the buggers up with drugs and let's get on with it, let's have the next patient.
But bringing this back into my work, I see myself as good old anarchist Spence, blundering around between the different discourses between cultural politics and alternative health and mainline health and actually being silenced at every count.
Except that privately I was lauded quite a lot and told, ‘Oh that's good, keep going into the hospitals and doing that’, but people couldn't acknowledge it in public because their jobs would be on the line.
The work does help create a climate, but it's about the most lonely thing I have ever been involved in, in my entire life.
But, essentially, my relationship to theory is a very practical one.
I'm not interested in abstractions, I'm interested in how you can use theory and who it's for and for what purpose.
I can't assume from my background that I can trust all theories any more than all accountants or all lawyers.
D.H.
It seems to me that your work does reside right in those discourses but, as an aesthetic, it seems to me to talk about a spiritual vacuum with consumerism and the commodity.
Unlike practically all other discourse theory, the site of your theory is actually in the plastic commodity.
You seem to reinhabit a popular form, the family album, and bring to it a militant anarchy it wouldn't appear to possess.
J.S. Yes, but I think my work will endure because it's actually funny.
I want it on the biting edge between ‘isn't it hysterically funny?’ and ‘isn't it absolutely unbearably awful?’it's the working class ploy, or disabled ploy, that you joke about adversity.
When I was in hospital, one of the things I said to Terry was: ‘If they want my breast, I'm gonna ask for it back in a jar!’
So my work deals with many forms, including self-analysis, inhabiting the centre of the web, inhabiting the theories, but also populism and out own catharsis with vulgarity and getting rid of our shame.
But it's not just getting rid of it, it's enjoying it and sharing it.
It's a mix between discourse theory and the seaside postcard!
Also, I produce and operate in a place and time-zone that colleges, institutions and so on don't.
They are into philosophical time, producing work once a year or less.
Radical intervention demands a bit more than that, I think.
D.H.
Which also, of course, ties up with the propagandist.
J.S. Well, the thing is that my work moves right across that because I work with what is seen as ‘negative’ imagery.
And in coming to terms with the negative, the so-called negative, all those images become part of my dialectical way of thinking about myself.
That which is hidden away, the shadow, is out in the open!
In photography, I tend to work with clients who've heard me talk or seen my work, so they know my agenda.
The first thing that has to be established between us is that there is no hierarchy.
Second, that I am not in a position of knowledge and I can't deliver some goods to them; that basically, I'm on a journey and I will hate the techniques I'm learning for unpicking the threads of my life by becoming assertive and getting new knowledge with them.
I don't want to be positioned as someone who they have to defer to.
I also establish safety by showing I'm able to take a hell of a lot of flack and stress and if they go to pieces, I'll be there.
But I want them to fight back all the time.
In therapy, the whole thing is to facilitate the other person to feel safe enough to hear what they've got to say, and I'm the witness or advocate.
And I'll use any tools to do that, from playing games or getting them to draw their feelings, or  setting them photo assignments or working on family album photographs or using masks or setting up psycho-dramatic tableux with them.
For example, working with someone who is an ‘emotional eater’, I created the family table and she played through all the parts round the table at childhood meal times to the camera.
She said she had never realised what went on before as she went round and inhabited each seat and became the person.
Then she could actually see what was going on in the family, which was that her mother was servicing her father, who just looked out of the window most of the time, psychically speaking, while the siblings got on with their rivalry.
that's no big deal, but she'd found that out in about five minutes!
She could've talked to me for ten years and still not come out with it.
So, it's the enactment or re=enactment of something and the making of the image which is taking them further and further into whatever they need to work on.
I work with people on a one-to-one basis and the most I've ever done is ten sessions with anyone.
And people become very assertive and self-knowledgeable and they're not into family blaming.
They actually start to take responsibility for themselves and become empowered in some way.
Some then begin to marry up this with their politics.
A lot of the people I work with initially have no sense of value of themselves at all, and therefore they sometimes treat other people like shit.
And my job is not actually to punish them but to reflect back to them what they're doing.
So somebody pisses me about, I reflect it back to them.
I don't have a go at them.
D.H.
So you're working on a peer-group political model of photography and meaning?
J.S. Yes that's right.
I've also taken the therapy techniques I've known into women's groups and they've adopted methods of having a dialogue in the group and stuff shifted in the group like lightning.
We no longer have long theoretical positions being set up, we actually weave in and out of public face, into private trauma, into theory, into therapy.
As women, we're able to do that weaving and keep the ball afloat and we're learning to have a different sort of peer group.
D.H.
No longer just terrorist versus those brutalised?
J.S. That's an extreme version of it, but yes.
The fact of the matter is that a lot of people within political groups are disavowing their family patterns that they bring with them.
My experience is that a lot of people on the left are actually in extreme distress from unresolved family traumas or interclass traumas, or the transition from non-disabled to disabled, and so on.
I'm saying that there are different articulations of rebellion but people need to know how to rebel!
As Terry Dennett says, the point is not just to be visible as a human being but t make the process visible.
Cancer has taught me that life isn't a dress rehearsal, this is it and you only get the one chance.
And the problem is, having nearly died, I have to ration my energy so that I don't completely burn myself out again.
On the other hand, I don't want to go and retire in the country and grow cabbages, in order to prolong my life!
This is my disability paradox.
I will never be fit again.
I have an impaired liver and blood, I have very bad lungs.
Breast cancer was just the tip of the iceberg.
As my body has been fragmented, so my disablement is fragmented.
I think it's important to understand that all my work is about demystification — both of the self and of the medical and family discourses which defined me for much of my life.
I needed to find out who I had been told I was before I could contradict it.
In that sense, the methods are tools which I share with the others.
I use my own life history very much as a case study — not to privilege my chronic disability or my particular set of life events.
Notes to photograph on p.9
Jo Spense: Cancer and the marks of struggle
How Do I Begin to Take Responsibility for my Body?
A montage of photographs produced (at my instigation) by working with two different women.
In the centre, we record part of my daily routine for self-help holistic medicine which includes pectoral muscle exercises.
This is surrounded by images of body fragments which ask questions (‘How do I begin to take responsibility for my body?’) taken in an early phototherapy session.
Phototherapy evolved between myself and Rosy martin out of the use of techniques from a range of therapies, plus photographic skills.
It is a form of reenactment of repressed memories, a kind of photo-theatre, or psychic realism.
The work was always reciprocal — I offered Rosy a session in return of doing a session with me, building on co-counselling skills.
Although this was initially done as a form of self-healing, the work was later used in my exhibition The Picture of Health? in 1984.
This question the politics of cancer and is still used in health and educational venues.
This extract is reproduced courtesy of Routledge and is take from Chapter 8, Towards a disability imagery currency.
Part I: Cancer and the Marks of Struggle.
For details of the exhibition and free poster series that accompany this publication, contact   
Jo Spence/Rosy Martin Rites of Passage
NOTES TOWARDS A CRITICAL PRACTICE: PUBLIC ART AND FEMINISM
The current trend for publicly sited artworks could be viewed as a by-product of the postmodernist influences in the art world.
As artists, we have seen shifts int he boundaries of public and private, high and low, inaccessible and accessible and, indeed, even personal and political but the influences of past feminist art practices on these moves is very rarely acknowledged.
For it could be argued that women artists have a quite specific relationship and history to publicly sited works.
Many women artists of the past gave up trying to gain entry to and recognition within the traditional male art institutions: the museum, the art gallery, the history books and journals.
Instead, women's art has largely been confined to ‘alternative’ sites.
Partly due to their systematic exclusion, but also as a matter of choice, feminist artists increasingly preferred to display their work in settings they considered more appropriate to their desire to participate in the more public/political debates of feminism and a recognition of art as a communicative medium.
Feminist art production of this type represents a radical challenge to the conceptual basis of male dominated art: in particular, rejecting conventional notions of ‘individuality’ and spontaneous creativity.
I would hope that my own work could be situated within this debate.
In 1990 I produced a new work entitled ‘Memories are made of this, Made of this are memories’.
the work, a large photographic installation sited in the gallery space, consisted of three segments: a series of photographs and text, a publicly sited work placed in the special Care Baby Unit in Birchill Hospital and a live art work performed in the gallery.
The three segments function, and may be read, independently, but add further comparisons and meanings when seen together.
All three parts rework or reference photographs from my own family album and question their role in the organisation of my self-image, my experiences and expectations.
The installation contained monumental images that mimicked the pages of a photo-album.
The intention of the work was to interrogate the way in which pictures of my past, of my mother and myself as a baby or with my brothers and sisters, excluded and included certain stereotypes, perceptions and ideals and how this mediated my own experiences within a non-represented area — having a premature and sick baby.
This theme was also played through in the photograph and text work, which was sited in the Special Care Baby Unit where Rory was born, six weeks prematurely, in 1987.
Art has a particular relationship to the hospital space.
It has traditionally been viewed as either leisure and pleasure, ‘brightening-up the place’, or of therapeutic value.
Alternatively, in recent years there has been an increasing tendency to display ‘art’ as part of corporate packaging.
In this context, the negotiation of a critical feminist perspective is rather more complex, not only in terms of the hospital's response (made easier by my personal connection with them), but also in terms of my own intentions for the work.
For me, a publicly sited work cannot ignore questions of responsibility and accountability: Who am I addressing?
How will this work be read?
How far can I expect the audience to share the desired meaning of the work?
And, most pointedly, what type of responsibility must I take into account in placing a work in a sensitive area, like a Special Care Baby Unit.
Do I have an obligation to consult the people who reside and work in this space?
All too often an artist would produce the work, put it up, and walk away.
A feminist approach, in my view, must accommodate the knowledge and experiences of those who have to ‘live with’ the work on a daily basis after I have left.
above right Birchill Hospital 1991
above Birchill Hospital, close-up
At the very least, artists should be aware of the context in which the work will be shown.
Of course, it could be argued that my work will be shown.
Of course, it could be argued that my work is the expression of a personal experience — in this instance, the experience of premature birth.
Some women artists would say that as ‘the personal is political’, to depict a woman's experience of premature childbirth is, in itself, a political act; and, in some respects, it is.
However, if artistic representations of my experience are to do more than merely reflect a personal trauma, it is imperative that the work connect with the common experiences of other women in the same or similar situations.
The inherent danger of conceiving of art in purely personal terms is that the commonality of experience is robbed of its political value.
This is especially important, as the experience of hospital invariably disempowers women.
The aim, I would suggest, should be to politicise the personal, but not in a personalised manner.
Instead, the work should consider what has culturally negotiated this experience for the artist and for other women whose personal experiences so closely echo her own.
Critically, this approach to art production puts the stress on the means of representation as much as the representation itself.
Therefore, preparation for my work included a theoretical investigation of research undertaken in this area; specifically, with a view to deconstructing the myths of motherhood and the family album's relationship to it.
In this, I was indebted to the work of Jo Spense, Judith Williamson, Jo Lambert and Jane Beckett 1 .
My work was then only possible by a fusion of different feminist women's critical work, a radically different approach to that of the male conception of individual genius.
The actual work consisted of seven black and white photographs which were placed inside the Special Care Baby Unit.
these images parody traditional family album photographs, a very different ‘baby's first photo’.
The incorporation of hand written text placed on top of the photographs referenced women's un acknowledged areas of writing, diaries and letters.
The aims of the work operated in different ways but principally they represented my attempt to set personal responses to premature labour into a cultural context.
The work referred not only to the seemingly private areas of our lives like the family album but also the more public construction of motherhood (baby food ads and Mothercare catalogues).
The work also voiced taboos and silenced areas in an attempt to make visible shared and common experiences, revealing their roots in the social and cultural rather than the personal.
The responses to the work seemed to have been very positive and indeed could only be gauged by revisiting the hospital.
This process and this work represent my own attempts to acknowledge my position as a feminist artist and seriously to consider my responsibility and accountability as such.
This is of course an ongoing process for feminist artists as the work produced accommodates and contributes to the changing debates and theories of Feminism both in alternative public sites and more traditional gallery sites.
This exhibition is still available for hire, contact Sarah Edge through women's Art magazine for further details.
BIRTHTALES: FORBIDDEN WORK BY HIDDEN ARTISTS
The reality of childbirth has never been a popular subject for art.
AGATHA SCHWAGER talks to curator Debbie O'Rourke about a Canadian exhibition that put the writing on the wall.
‘Whether the birthing chamber is a hospital operating room or our own bedroom, most of us enter without any previous experience or images to guide us.
When labour has finished, the world celebrates with gifts of knitted pastels and flowers in ceramic baby booties, nothing that acknowledges the momentous nature of this event: the forging and re-forging or three people.
It has not rituals whatever to deal with distress and grief resulting from a difficult birth or a pregnancy that ends in death.
We find the world nearly empty of images and accounts with which we can prepare ourselves or comfort ourselves, or find a mirror of our exaltation or grief.’
I have introduced this article with a quote from a statement by Debbie O'Rourke, artist and curator of Birthtales.
These words sum up her intention and feelings, expressing the result of two years of preparation for a show that came to mean so much for the many artists participating in the event.
For many, it became a unique chance to have their voices heard through a diversity of media, linking artists culturally visually, emotionally and psychologically to those entering the exhibition spaces of participating in the events.
Birthtales became an expression and validation of birth, an often neglected aspect of life in Western culture.
Birthtales gave us insight into the most essential human experience, birth, where artists from different cultural backgrounds found a common ground.
In 1990, Debbie's proposal to curate a collection of artwork about childbirth was accepted by A Space, one of Canada's oldest parallel alternative artist-run centres and arts publications throughout Canada and the U.S.A. A grant from the Canada Council Explorations programme allowed her to choose 40 artists, including some whose work was shipped from the far coasts of Canada Council Explorations programme allowed her to choose 40 artists, including some whose work was shipped from the far coasts of Canada and from scattered points in the U.S.A. Faced with a tremendous volume of committed, powerful work from every discipline, her curatorial decision was to be inclusive rather than exclusive; to show-case the incredible diversity of personalities, experiences and methods that have been employed to address this long repressed subject matter.
This was a risky undertaking, but the power of the theme proved to be a strong unifying force.
The result was an exhibition that some praised as ‘the most beautiful show at A Space’.
Debbie was criticised in some quarters for including works that were seen as too ‘traditional’, referring to older forms of artmaking such as drawing, painting and sculpture.
Debbie's conviction was that an emphasis on the narrative, personal, figurative, subjective treatment of the subject matter was essential to the teaching aspects of the show.
She also felt a commitment to those artists whose blatant and subjective rather than allegorical treatment of the subject matter may have excluded them from showing elsewhere.
To put a section of this show in the medical Sciences building of Toronto University, bastion of Western medical beliefs, was a courageous choice.
The panel discussions, which included the voices of aboriginal midwives as well as registered nurses, took on a different meaning in this medical environment.
Birthtales became a story woven together by artists, poets, performers, mothers and healers from different cultural backgrounds.
It was a celebration of life, but it also had a sobering effect.
it made us wonder how our culture could have drifted so far astray, leaving women often isolated and devalued.
The large attendance was due to the outreach efforts of coordinator Bonnie Burgess, and the Women's Issues Committee of the university of Toronto Medical School.
Notwithstanding all the excitement and positive feelings generated by the participating women — bonds were established, friendships formed — there seems to have been a deliberate silence from the media, including feminist arenas.
Birthtales looks forward to the day when these female experiences are considered to be a valid subjects for inclusion in galleries.
Certainly the public is ready for this step.
How far behind are the galleries and critics?
Debbie O'Rourke ‘Caesarian wound from Birth Suite’
PAINTING A HEALTHY PICTURE
GENEVIEVE FOX talks to artists working in hospitals
Photo: Julia Parry
People only go to hospital when they are sick or are visiting the sick.
They are depressing, alien environments, made more dismal by drab walls and endless corridors.
Since the 1970s there has been a movement to bring art into hospitals, to sugar the pill, to the advantage of both patients and artists.
But the role of both art and the artist-in-residence, more often female than male, have not always been appreciated by the medical profession, funds are low and artists can find themselves struggling to retain their identity.
Janet Boulton ‘Christmas Dinner with Sister Carol’, Radcliffe Infirmary’ 1986 watercolour and pencil 14″×13.5″
In 1990 Richard Cork made a selection of prints for purchase at an affordable rate by hospitals.
Anish Kapoor, Thérèse Oulton, Richard Long and Bruce Maclean were four of the big names.
They were not popular, Long deemed too grey, Oulton too abstract.
What is appropriate for hospital walls should be determined not by outsiders, by dealers and critics, but by the users — the patients and staff.
They are the instinctive critics, the punters who say ‘Oh!
I know nothing about art but I know what I like’.
‘The occupational Therapy department doesn't understand what art is about at all.
It's like being a pioneer’
There are still those who believe art is a luxury and medical care a necessity.
Unconvinced of the healing powers of art, they can give artists-in-residence a hard time.
‘I feel very much as though I am a curiosity,’ says Frances Broomfield, an artist-in-residence in Ealing Hospital's Geriatric Ward.
‘The occupational Therapy department don't understand what art is about at all.
It's like being a pioneer,’ she reports, received like ‘revelations’, she writes on her work in the ward.
Like other artists working in hospitals, Frances feels that the emphasis steers towards the end product instead of to the process of creating art with patients.
‘The Occupational therapy department are looking for things to put on the wall, whereas for the elderly patients themselves, it is just the process of working that they find enjoyable.
There isn't always an end product.
You have to try and please both parties.
I have to show some finished work in order to keep the department happy.’
The distinction needs to be made between art therapists and occupational therapists, who have diagnostic and medical powers, and artists-in-residence, who do not.
They value their role not as therapists but as enablers, agents to trigger off dormant creative processes which in turn bring pleasure.
‘I am not attempting to unravel their lives through the medium of art,’ asserts Tessa Waite, wary of the view that artists should not work with patients unless they are trained.
Working in the Mid Wales Mental Hospital, Talgarth, was well as in a mental Resource Centre, Tessa is convinced that painting and drawing give the patients a rare sense of self-worth.
‘I've definitely seen people really coming alive.
In offering them something and being positive, not judgemental, in giving them support and a belief in the visual medium and the fact that they can participate in it freely.’
Janet Boulton, who spent two six-month periods doing portraits of geriatric patients in Radcliffe Infirmary in 1986, has also met with resistance.
‘Both the nursing staff and the ancillary were doubtful about me being there.
The great question I was always asked was, ‘Are you here to do art with the patients?
Are you an art therapist?’
They were terribly disapproving’.
It was only when she exhibited her portraits in a boardroom  that the medical staff actually saw what she was doing and she finally felt accepted.
‘They were concerned I would do something gruesome or speak critically about what went on in the ward.’
The patients liked to be drawn, she explains.
‘In the end I became like the chaplain or the lady who did the hair or the manicurist. patients would ask, ‘has the artist done you yet?’
Confidence was handed on from patient to patient.’
Today, there are numerous schemes and organisations dedicated to bringing art and artists into hospitals, including the Public Art Development Trust, the King's Fund, Arts for Health — established by manchester's pioneering Peter Senior in 1973 — and Sheridan Russell's inspired Paintings in Hospitals scheme, started in 1960.
Sarah Hosking, a regional arts co-ordinator, says the paintings in Hospitals collection, which includes Elizabeth Blackadder, Mary Feddon, Elaine Unwin and Bridget Riley, is a bit dated.
She goes for the bold approach, transforming whole walls and courtyards with bright murals, herb mazes, whacky garden furniture.
‘helping Hands’ 1987 etching 12″×18″ by jane Henderson, consultant for art in hospitals.
Part of a series of prints, photographs and drawings produced during a residency at Brentford Hospital Long Stay Geriatric Unit, Middlesex
West Middlesex University Hospital Photo: Julia Parry
‘I've definitely seen people really coming alive,’ says Tessa Waite, here seen working with a patient in the studio at Mid Wales Hospital, Talgarth.
Photo: Mary Giles
‘Butterflies/Garden’ 16″×21″ collage with 3-D butterflies done by patients in the Day Hospital, Ealing
‘There is a whole side of art,’ writes Marina Vaizey on the selection criteria for Paintings in Hospitals, ‘the kind of art that questions assumptions, that creatively promotes tension, insecurity, curiosity and enquiry that is restless, probing and disturbing, which is not appropriate in these circumstances.
On the other hand, we certainly are not looking for the bland, but rather for the anodyne which is also intriguing and interesting and has a sense of positive enthusiasm.’
‘But’, says Janet Boulton, ‘you can never really predict what people's responses to a painting are going to be.
Saying a picture of somebody crying would make somebody gloomy is prescriptive. it could be just what a person needs to see because they would not feel alone, they could identify with it.
A cottage with roses around the door might depress people appallingly.’
While the debate over what is appropriate for a hospital persists, the need to ‘interior design’ often stark Victorian institutions is recognised by everybody.
‘The idea of the Hospital,’ writes Malcolm Miles, ‘is being transformed away from the nineteenth-century institutionalism to a contemporary sense of individual experience, human scale and human dignity.’
Contrast this optimism with Sir Richard Attenborough's (President of Arts for health) description of West Middlesex University Hospital, a former workhouse: ‘whole areas that looked like something out of a horror film; the paint — under the onslaught of incurable rising damp, literally falling off — and plaster beneath erupting into monstrous carbuncles oozing slimy mould.
How could anyone,’ he asked, ‘hope to get well or remain cheerful in such an environment of decay?’
‘I can't think why anybody would want to paint this,’ said one staff nurse about Radcliffe Infirmary's Geriatric Ward.
In the light of the sometimes Dickensian working conditions, perhaps this isn't such a strange question.
Why is it that artists should be drawn to places of ill health, suffering, death, and why women more often than men?
‘whole areas that looked like something out of a horror film…
How could anyone, hope to get well or remain cheerful in such an environment of decay?’
the women's traditional role of instinctive carer is one explanation, particularly amongst women who have grown up in a family of disabled or dependent relatives, willingness to accept low pay is another.
Wanting a context for their work, many feel a conscious need ‘to give something back to society’, to justify a ‘self-indulgent’ pastime, avoiding what they see as the stereotype of the male artist as self-obsessed.
Tessa Waite recognises the stereotype of the woman as carer but has misgivings.
‘Why?’ she retorts, ‘can we not give something back by doing our own work?’
This is why, when her contract expires in April 1993, Tessa will move on and devote time to her own work.
But the emotional strain or working is a hospital, the drain on creative resources and the very common sense of isolation can have very positive repercussions on the artist's own work.
Not only is life re-evaluated at an absolute premium, but self-identity is honed through enabling others and through resistance to an institutional existence which threatens individuality and human dignity.
‘I have had to think about myself as an artist much more clearly through being in an alien environment,’ says Tessa Waite, working in what she describes as ‘a Victorian asylum in the middle of nowhere.
‘I have had to develop my own identity through having something to fight against, trying to stay true to my ideals as an artist and not allowing that to be compromised by the opinions and attitudes of others.
that can be hard in an isolated situation when those are the only views you hear.’
Jane Henderson, who initiated the arts projects at West Middlesex University Hospital and has been working in Hospitals since 1986, is committed to the community aspect of her work, but she is not blind to the costs of her own creativity.
Asserting herself as a conceptual artist, considering all her work as creative, whether working with other people or developing ideas for further projects, jane nevertheless sees spending time on to her people's creativity as a Catch-22 situation.
‘You're on a kind of treadmill.
The more time and energy you give to developing residencies in hospitals and working with other people the less time there is for your own work.
There is still the creative side of me that is screaming out for attention.’
History IN PURSUIT OF HEAVEN
ETHEL WALKER (1861–1951)
‘No artist I have ever known has ever felt to assured of the immortality of her work — or of the salvation of her soul,’
Ethel Walker (1861–1951) is a little known artist today but she managed to attain the respect of the art establishment of her time.
In 1935 a grand dinner was held by Sir William Rothenstein in honour of her ‘too-long-ignored’ talent and many of the big names of the time attended —‘a great crowd’, including Professor Fred Brown, ‘old saw-bones Tonks’and Wilson Steer, as Virginia Woolf who was there with her sister, Vanessa Bell and Duncan Grant, described them 1 .
Walker was a Slade student in the time of Brown and Tonks, and she also took Sickert's evening classes at Westminster.
She had come to painting classes at Westminster.
She had come to painting late but after the exhibition of ‘Angela’ in 1900, an Impressionistic portrait of a woman at a mantelpiece in a shimmering, full-skirted dress, she was made the first female member of the New English Art Club.
At the time, the French-influenced NEAC was considered to be fairly anti-establishment and avant garde.
She continued to exhibit most of her work with them and also held frequent one-woman shows at the Lefevre Gallery from 1930 onwards.
She painted portraits, flower pieces and seascapes but her consistently favourite subject seems to have been women.
In her portraits Walker pictured real women of various ages, races and class backgrounds — Elsa Lancaster as Prue in ‘Love for Love’, ‘Vanessa’(Bell), ‘Pearl of the East’ or simply, ‘Portrait of a Woman’(in overalls).
She pictured women as mothers with their babies, she pictured them as sultry reclining nudes.
She dressed them up in full nineteenth century bourgeois feminine regalia and had them flower arranging or idling by the mantelpiece as in ‘Angela’.
But her most extraordinary pictures of women are the visionary/allegorical decorations showing groups or tall, slender women arranged to create compositions of beautifully rhythmic contours.
These are the pictures which interest me most for their complex attitude to the feminine.
They seem to involve a highly personal spiritual search for an idyllic free space for women which is ultimately compromised by latent elements of patriarchal oppression of women.
‘Old bass-voiced Ethel Walker,’ Woolf called her and described her as having a ‘rough-raddled charm, the result of living a regular herring grillers life’.
2 she was a woman of formidable character with ‘Superhuman energy’ who inspired great admiration in her friends despite the overbearing, exacting nature of her company at times.
She was convinced of her own artistic genius and perpetually dissatisfied with the quality of recognition she received.
Being entirely uninhibited when expressing herself and equipped with a famous (and at times infamous)‘caustic wit’, her self-assertion was never subtle.
3 In a letter to John Rothenstein, then director of the Tate Gallery, she asked him to buy more of her pictures, writing that ‘every purchase of my work strengthens and enriches the sum of good pictures at the Tate Gallery’.
4 Rothenstein wrote her work — or of the salvation of her soul,’ he wrote in Modern English Painters, 1952.
She was so self-absorbed, he said, that ‘she could have lived happily…in a vacuum’.
5 
This ‘vanity’ is the evidence of an artistic ego that had been nurtured carefully.
Germaine Greer accuses her of developing her artistic personalities as an end in itself.
6 Walker certainly took her career as an artist seriously and made sure nothing in her life-style obstructed a total commitment.
she never married and unlike her contemporary female Slade Students, Edna Waugh, Gwendoline Salmond, Ursula Tyrwhitt and Ida Nettleship, she did not allow herself to be distracted fro her career by emotional or domestic concerns.
In her self-portrait at the Tate Gallery (c.1930) she presents herself as an artist at work with the canvas just perceivable to the right and a brush in hand.
Wearing a chic, low cut dress and heavy gold chain she meets our gaze with a challenging look.
She is not only asserting herself as an artist, she has painted herself with all the bloom and freshness of a young woman although she was in her mid sixties when it was made!
It is likely that she was a lesbian.
In her self-portrait at the national Portrait Gallery she appears ‘characteristically in a suit’.
7 This suit is not severely masculine — it consists of a shirt, tie and pale yellow jacket with fancy, scalloped lapels, and so could be considered merely a fashionable, feminine version of masculine dress.
Grace English, a close friend of Walker's whose memoirs of her lie in the Tate Gallery archive, records Walker's deep relationship with a childhood friend named Claire Christian.
They attended art college together and co-habited for fifteen years.
They were both aspiring artists and socialised together in eminent artistic circles but, ‘George Moore [the art critic]took Claire from her in ‘1900’.
8 Claire died in childbirth shortly afterwards.
1900 is the year Walker achieved widespread recognition with ‘Angela’ and seems to have married herself to her artistic ambition from then on.
She spent the rest of her ‘ninety years of aggressively independent living’9 with only the consistent company of a pack of fox-terriers, alternatively at her Yorkshire cottage perched precariously on the edge of a cliff or in her Chelsea studio overlooking the river.
To her female friends her ‘vanity’ was considered to be quite justified.
‘Her life was utterly devoted to her art and it was a devotion she demanded from others.
There is no conceit in it,’ wrote Grace English,10 Her niece wrote to John Rothenstein, ‘In my opinion Ethel has no vanity — she knows her own worth and the worth of her paintings’.
11 To there friends who knew her, her self-assertion was born from nothing but a necessary and confident determination to succeed in an area where women rarely rose to prominence.
Anyway, what was so unusual about it?
Augustus John's ‘leonine personality’ was well known, as was Wilson Steer's total life devotion to his ‘absorbing passion for painting,’12 or Sickert's arrogant self-belief — all artists Walker admired as the best and aligned herself with.
When Steer died she is reported to have said, ‘Now he and Sickert are gone I'm the only artist left’!13 She wanted to be seen at the top where she clearly felt she belonged, doing the same as the best, as well as the best.
Without this ambition she probably would not have dared to paint her allegorical decorations, such as‘The Zone of Love’(c.1930) and ‘The Zone of hate’(1914–15) at the Tate Gallery, which are not only large in size but in concept too.
In the former an all-female host of angels welcomes the birth of a new soul, a young girl, into its midst — uplifting her from the bottom foreground into the centre of the picture.
In the words of Mary Chamot who knew Ethel Walker, it represents, ‘her soul's  dream of a land of youth, love and springtime’.
In contrast ‘The Zone of Hate’, painted just before the outbreak of World War One, shows the crushing of a figure into the bottom of the picture by the five personified forces of; hate, Life, Death, Destiny and World Sorrow.
The two figures on the left and right completing the arabesque symbolise the Mother of the Race and the Earth covering the dead.
For the only time in any of her decorations Walker has made some of the figures quite distinctly male — the clearest being a nude figure in a pose which is repeated in reverse on either side of the central action, at the head of the crowd.
‘Self-Portrait’ oil on canvas, 25″×30″ courtesy Tate Gallery
Virginia Woolf was one of a limited number of outspoken feminists of the time whose attitudes to gender provide a contemporary feminist yardstick for the analysis of Walker's treatment of women, Woolf, like Walker, assumed a dichotomy of human characteristics and qualities according to gender.
Ethel Walker associates femininity with all that is spiritually good.
her decorations, such as‘In the Land of Ecstasy’(Leicester City Art Gallery) or ‘Invocation’(private collection) run along the same theme as ‘The Zone of Love’ and reiterate its gender associations.
They picture women gathered together to dance or perform some apparently ritualistic act of worship.
Their setting usually indeterminate in time and place.
Rothenstein calls them, ‘ideal visions of a Golden Age,’ and, ‘a Rainbow-hued springtime world peopled by slender young girls, naked, dreamy and innocent’.
14 ‘In the land of Ecstasy’ is a joyful celebration of the beauty of women.
With gentle faces of mixed racial characteristics they sit and move gracefully in nakedness of near-nakedness.
One plays upon a pipe or reed like Pan, another drinks from a crystal bowl while behind them another leaps with an arched back and arms outstretched into a cloud or white birds.
Their gentle beauty is indication of their spiritual goodness.
Like ‘the Zone of Love’ this is in fact a vision of a heavenly environment which is very much influenced by the theologies of the East but more particularly the writings of Swedenborg (1688–1772).
Walker was baptised a Presbyterian but throughout her life her religious faith grew ever broader in its outlook.
Ethel Walker's visions are attempts to bring all the glory of her idea of heaven, as it was inspired by Swedenborg, within the reach of our sensibilities.
They are, as Mary Chamot called them, ‘translations of a state of mind’.
15 ‘The Zone of Love’, for example, translates a state of innocence and peace.
‘Innocence and peace are the two inmost things of heaven,’ wrote Swedenborg.
According to Swedenborg every soul is destined for eternal happiness in heaven unless individual freedom in life has been used to pursue the wrong types of love — love of the material world and love of the self instead of love of the neighbour and love of performing what he termed ‘uses’(useful acts).
he also believed that ‘women are born loves’.
17 (The masculine is basically intellectual and seeks wisdom, while the feminine is affectional and seeks someone to love.
men are ‘only a recipient of love.’
18 This is not to say that he envisioned heaven, like Ethel Walker, as a place of women only.
On the contrary, he saw the sexes as being so fundamentally different and their union so mutually complementary and divine that is continued in heaven to truly ecstatic degrees!
Walker's symbolism runs along Swedenborgian lines to a certain extent.
It is questionable that she believed women to be intellectually deficient and her only interest in masculinity in ‘The Zone of Hate’ is negative but women for her are symbolically the embodiment of love.
Their loving goodness and truth are all the qualities necessary to transcend a soul to heaven in her opinion.
She even de-sexualises her figures in order to emphasise these spiritual qualities, making them fairly androgynous looking at times, although they retain enough of a feminine aspect to make them clearly women.
For example, the breasts, waist-lines and hips of the figures of the soul arriving into ‘The Zone of Love’ or the kneeling angel to her right, have been very much under-accentuated.
Despite the obvious influence of Impressionism in the appearance of Walker's pictures she also worked under the umbrella of ‘decorative symbolism’— belonging more specifically to a tradition dominated by Puvis de Chavannes, which was authoritatively identified in relation to Augustus John by David Fraser Jenkins in his essay ‘Slade School Symbolism’ for the Barbican exhibition catalogue, the Last Romantics (1989).
this is a style defined by ‘imposing decorative design rather than satisfying pattern, which is midway between the advanced and the traditional — The Camden Town Group and the Royal Academy’.
Characteristically linear in design and dominated by rhythmic movement, it conjures a world beyond time.
Walker's images do reverberate with the classical and much of this is due to her ‘expressive’ use of figures in careful poses to create harmonious compositions, which makes us think of Hellenistic relief work as well as Renaissance paintings.
it also has something to do with her predominant yearning for an idyllic space which is similar to the yearning for a classical Golden Age.
Even her repeated conception of women in groups has firm roots in the classical.
At the Tate Gallery there is another all-women decorative piece by Walker which deals quite specifically with a classical subject.
‘The Excursion of Nausicaa’ is based on book lV of The Odyssey.
Nausicaa, a princess, has taken the palace washing to clean in the sea with her attendants, whilst also having a picnic.
The setting is a beach though in the crowded painting, background trees suggest it could also be some sort of a clearing.
Whichever, the feeling once again is of a peaceful environment removed from ordinary life.
Walker's yearning for the idyllic belongs to a very general interest in the primitive and lyrical which puts her firmly in touch with Augustus John whose decoration, ‘Lyric Fantasy’ and cartoon for a decoration, ‘Galway (both at the Tate Gallery), share some of these concerns to find a primitive Golden Age that is not necessarily classical.
this, in turn, makes Walker comparable with William Blake and his primitive/Gothic spiritual mission.
Blake also made ‘expressive’ use of the figure and was influenced by Swedenborg.
However, it is through an unexpected connection with the Pre-Raphaelites which is most useful to an analysis of Walker's attitude to, or treatment of, women in her images.
In his essay, Jenkins cites Lawrence Binyon as the ‘most thoughtful’ critic of ‘Slade School Symbolism’, and Binyon asserted a direct relationship between this decorative style and the ideas of the Pre-Raphaelite movement.
19 Walker would have loathed such an association.
She affiliated herself more with the opposing camp of Impressionism — when a female caller at her studio who hoped to have a portrait done told Walker that she was regarded as having a ‘Burne-Jones-face’ Walker replied, ‘what a damn sickly sort of face to have!’20 However, despite this aversion and the fact that her own women do not resemble the Pre-Raphaelite type, in her attitude towards her women there is much that is similar.
To the Pre-Raphaelites women were very much the muse and so, as Griselda Pollock puts it, they become ‘ciphers for the (masculine) creative process itself, inspired by love for a beautiful feminine  face’.
21 As such they are creatures relative to the artist, in the service of his ego.
Ethel Walker's women are also muses, especially chosen according to her own ideal of beauty — long and lean.
They are given the status of goddesses by virtue of their being, in a Swedeoborgian sense, vessels of symbolic love and so they are mystified and removed from the realms of real, whole, sexual beings.
They are creatures not only in the service of Walker's spiritual symbolism, but also her creative ego.
They have been inspired by a reverence for the so-called ‘feminine’, an essentially patriarchal construct which participates in the whole Madonna/whore syndrome.
Walker fails to question the given definitions of femininity.
Her constant use of women as subject-matter, from classical literature to the more personally spiritual in conception, seems automatically to include an appropriation of the masculine gaze.
Her female nude studies reveal her ‘male gaze more blatantly.
They are utterly complicit with the usual representations of nude women in the history of art.
Many of them are reminiscent of Modigliani's nudes.
Always young women, they recline and modestly turn their faces into their arms which are raised around their heads, so that their graceful, elongated bodies are presented as objects to be looked upon without the discomfort of a confronting stare back into the viewer's gaze.
their beauty and sexuality become mere attributes designed for the arousal of this look.
In her decoration ‘Lilith’(Museum Boymans-van Beuningen, Rotterdam — watercolour sketch at the Tate Gallery) it is as if she has taken one of these nudes and stood her against a tree, where, with arms wrapped around her head and one leg twisted into the other she writhes provocatively for the pleasure of the viewer.
The subject of Lilith has complex origins.
Probably originating from Palestine she appears in Greek mythology.
The subject of Lilith has complex implications for feminism.
On the one hand she is a strong and independent woman of power while on the other she is undeniably a patriarchal invention, a master of disguise designed t inspire fear of such female independence and power by associating it with demonic forces.
Walker's image confirms this meaning.
Lilith appears in the guise of a seductive temptress to lure men to their peril.
The serpent coiled around the branches of the tree behind her enhances the foreboding of her appeal.
Walker re-iterates an interpretation which is essentially a projection of masculine fear of feminine power.
However, I believe Walker is basically well-intentioned in her portrayal of women despite these appropriations of the patriarchal perspective.
The strong, active, lithe bodies of her women are at least an improvement on the passive and fragile looking beauties of the Pre-Raphaelites.
Her women look capable and self-sufficient.
The de-emphasising of hair and breasts as sexual attributes which are usually fetishised by male spectators might also be considered an improvement.
During the period that Walker was picturing her women like this, constricting female fashion was changing; corsets were abandoned, hair was shorn and eventually even trousers became acceptable.
Women over 30 were enfranchised in 1918 and over 21 in 1928.
A pencil sketch by Walker at the Courtauld Institute shows a standing female nude with arms fully stretched upwards and face turned to follow which is inscribed underneath with the title ‘Aspiration’.
An extraordinary oil entitled ‘Watchers by the Sea’(private collection) pictures women as strong and sexually assertive beings in their own right, quite unlike Lilith.
Two female figures occupy a patch of beach amidst a flock of white birds.
One stands naked facing front with her arms raised around her head which turns to face the sea.
She presents her body resting her weight on one leg with the other bent to the side.
her thighs are far heavier than usual which makes her look solid and strong.
Before her a seated, lightly clothed figure leans back on her straight arm with the other lifted in mid gesture.
Neither wriggles at out look nor do they lounge voluptuously.
They are fully engaged in watching and waiting, perhaps for what the mystery of the sea might bring them.
The white birds, used symbolically in other pictures, underline a spiritual significance to the meaning.
The so-called ‘feminine’ vanity and self-conscious attention to, for example, hair or modesty which is present in many other interpretations of sea-shore bathers, is certainly not evident here.
Walker's most liberating pictures of femininity are the many watercolours of groups of women sometimes with children gathered by the sea.
They picnic and bathe either lightly clothed or naked, completely absorbed in their own company and activities.
In ‘The Bathers’ at the Tate the figures are clustered as they are in the decorations.
They occupy a cove with the sea and steep cliffs behind them and a sailing boat anchored to the right.
Colours are plain and strong which, despite the underlying sketchiness, makes the picture less ephemeral than it seems in black and white and so further removed from the heavenly evocation of ‘The Zone of Love’.
Nevertheless the setting is rich which metaphorical possibilities.
On the beach these women are between things — the sea and the land.
They are removed from real-life and are neither subject to the rule of the land nor the mystery of the sea.
They occupy a space which is potentially free, both psychologically and physically from the codes of (patriarchal) society.
The sheltered setting, the anchored boat, and domestic touches such as the picnic hamper and baby, create a sense of reassuring safety and security.
These watercolours are actually very close in conception to the heavenly scenes of her decorations.
Women are not only the embodiment of heavenly qualities but can also aspire t find and occupy a heavenly space.
Both the watercolour bathers and decorations express a yearning for an idyllic space where women can be ‘free’.
Yet this portrait of women is incoherent and Walker's great desire to liberate and celebrate women is compromised by her appropriation of patriarchal perspectives that ultimately constrict this freedom.
Women portrayed as the embodiment of all that is spiritually good are essentially muses.
As such they are creatures designed specifically to inspire and so their meaning is not their own.
Women whose seductive sexuality is essentially a projection of patriarchal fear and a means of control are also robbed of their own expression.
The puzzling question is why Walker compromised her portrayals like this.
It is my assertion that the answer lies as much with her desire to be recognised as a ‘Great Artist’ on the same terms as any male artist, as it does with her probable lesbianism.
She nurtured an artistic, creative ego and vision according to the ready models of what it was to be a ‘Great Artist’.
Such models are born out of a patriarchal ideology of creativity and greatness, incorporating the concept of an active,(male), subject/artist holding the position of power and control through his representation of a passive, object/woman.
She failed to intiut many of these power relations that underlie the representation of women because she was not questioning them.
Unlike Virginia Woolf she did not seek ‘new words and new methods’ for women on earth, but only dreamed of a heavenly free-space.
However, it is still a pleasure to re-introduce her and uncover some of the issues she raises, since the search for a realisable free-space for women continues and her pictures are one stop on the journey there.
News from the Women Artists Slide Library
This year will see the launch of two major publications for WASL as well as a number of other new publishing initiatives.
We are positively exploring various ways in which the organisation can make information from the archive more generally available.
Over the course of each working year WASL received all sorts of unique pieces of research.
These and dissertations, extended essays and historical papers are all part of the general information we receive.
The organisation is exploring ways in which this type of information can be made more available so watch this space for further developments.
We will be printing a new cumulative index to help research into back issues of Women's Art and some educational ‘fact packs’.
WASL continues positively to seek funds to develop and maintain all aspects of the organisation.
We are looking as schemes which will directly benefit out members.
One of these schemes has already started and it has potentially lots of scope for our members' work.
WASL has written to many galleries, gallery co-ordinators and exhibition organisors and invited them to visit the organisation and view the collection.
These visits will be taking place throughout this year and it is hoped that members' work will encourage these galleries to give the artists some sort of exhibition exposure.
It is also important for the galleries to realise that the organisation is an archive which can be used at any point and provides a massive variety of work and information.
During this year WASL will maintain its opening ours from Tuesday to Friday, from 10am–5pm but it will be formally closed to readers and users during the whole month of August.
The Microfiche and catalogue of Contemporary Women Artists published by Emmett Publishing is now available to order from Emmett Publishing or to view at WASL.
Members Focus
Prism helps JAN MARSHALL get back to nature
Installation artist Jan Marshall gains much of her inspiration from Prism, the ‘Arts for Everyone’ facility for those who do not normally have ready access to the arts.
While studying Fine Art at Trent Polytechnic, Jan suffered a nervous breakdown and was treated for depression.
An attempted suicide left her severely disabled.
Attending a weekly group for disabled artists, workshops revolve around dance, drama, art and music.
Currently working on a booklet of poems and drawings, Jan is also working on ‘Common Senses’ an installation to be shown at a large visual arts festival to be held during spring 1993 at Tullie House, Carlisle.
A series of events and workshops will take place in the gallery for groups with special needs.
Jan's work is made up of natural materials, branches, twigs, bark, leaves, chippings, seeds, stones, soil, earth, mud, clay, wax, wood, straw etc.
And with the use of both muslin and hessian it will form a tunnel or tunnels from the place of entry to the ‘centre’ of the denlike structure, full of tactile hangings and sounds, floor coverings and fairy lights, feathers and leaves, crawl-spaces and wheelchair tunnels.
The space created will be like a tented temple in which everything may be seen in a different landscape, the familiar becomes strange and muted whilst the unfamiliar echoes past resemblances.
The nucleus of the space is the place of the divine!
The outer circumference and walls will be more exhibition like, but can only be found by going through the tunnels opening into that segment.
The wall works will be very tactile panels displayed with Braille scripts and written poems.
Jan describes her installations as magical spaces with sensory delight…‘dens to hide in, spaces to explore, wall hangings and seed-pods of natural wonder pouring from the tops of branches.
A weird, errie, earthly, supernatural dream to take up from’.
Prism was founded just over five years ago by individuals involved in the arts, either at community level or in further education establishments.
discussions revealed an interest in community arts work and, in particular, in those groups who have no access to the arts.
Originally comprised of five people with backgrounds ranging from the visual arts to music, dance, drama and writing, the group made exciting forays into cross-art forms.
Prism has worked with a very wide variety of groups including the elderly, people with learning difficulties or physical handicap, those recovering from mental illness and those who care for and enable groups who are returning to the community.
The main thrust of Prism's work is a belief that creative work can foster equality, joy and empowerment.
These activities provide new channels of communication, opportunities for decision-making and for contributing ideas and space to develop new skills and self-confidence.
The company applies its techniques through workshops or residencies over extended periods of time in hospitals, community centres of special schools.
While certain aspects of performance, role play and disguise are used, the work is essentially client-led, devised around their needs and interests.
It is an opportunity to experience at a practical level the pleasures of creating a piece of work or joining and dance.
Prism is a registered charity based in Cumbria.
For further information, contact    
Installation: ‘Animal, Stick and Stone’, Trent Polytechnic, 1986 Photo: John Morgan
ANITA KLEIN reveals some home truths during the East End Open Studios
During June and July many artists living and working in East and South East London have been opening their studios to the public, coordinated and publicised by the Whitechapel Gallery.
At a time when galleries are feeling the financial squeeze and playing safe with established artists, or even closing altogether, showing and selling work to the public from one's own studio is an attractive option for artists.
Doing away with heft commissions, not having to wait six weeks or more to be paid, and, most rewardingly, meeting the people who actually look at and buy artworks, make the inevitable disruption a small price to pay.
For many of us, working as a group to make the East End Open Studios even a success has been a rare chance to cooperate rather than compete with other artists.
For me, opening my studio to the public makes sense in other ways too.
As I have two young children, I fit my working time around school and sleep times so I am lucky to have a small room at home that I use as a studio.
Isolation from other artists is a disadvantage, so I was pleased to discover that quite by chance I live in an area literally teeming with all varieties of visual artists, most working in studios in their homes.
Forming ourselves into a studio group for the purpose of the East End Open Studios meant tracking down over 55 possible participants, with tips from neighbours, friends and even the local milkman as to where they might be found!
Finally 22 of us agreed to open our studios on two consecutive Sundays in June and to hold a ‘post mortem party’ in July.
Opening one's studio is always a disruption to work.
If it is your home as well‘disruption’ is almost a euphemism!
My work, however, looks better in a home than a gallery, being fairly small and personal.
So although regular airings in galleries, especially solo shows, are good for sales and CVs, showing my work at home puts it in its most sympathetic environment.
My work has always been a visual diary.
it mostly concerns the small details and seemingly unimportant events which make up my experience as a woman and a mother.
I aim to express some truth about intimacy.
Not the colour supplement or phot-album idealized view, but the ‘warts and all’ closeness to others that can bring us so much happiness — and pain.
I am more concerned with what bodies fell like than how they look, and I like to draw ‘from the inside’ rather than from models, mirrors or photographs.
I have little in common with the ideal woman that male artists in particular have so often painted.
It is wiping sick from the carpet, worrying about the size of my thighs, being woken in the night by a crying baby and meeting my children from school that I want to remember, laugh at and celebrate.
‘Bathtime Blues’
A view of birth which challenges the ‘secret society’ of mothers
In 1988 I had my first one-woman show at the Barbican Centre, London.
Called ‘Women Together’, the work explored women's friendships and attitudes towards one another.
The major work, ‘Friendship Quartet’, conveyed the feelings between two women friends involved in a disagreement and subsequent reconciliation.
My interest at the time was in describing the close bonds of friendship women often from, an intimacy rarely found amongst men and about which I spoke on Women's Hour.
The arrival of my first child, a daughter in 1989, left me stunned and fascinated at society's attitude towards birth.
Like many women, I had not know what to expect and had been shocked at how little I had been told about the reality of giving birth.
What I had heard was ‘I'm sure it will be alright, dear!’ from almost all the mothers I met.
None talked of the shock, pain and agony I experienced, nor of the wonderful sense of reward in having my baby in my arms.
There seems to be a common myth that women forget the pains of childbirth as soon as they have had the baby.
I may be an exception but, two years later and pregnant again, I am not looking forward to another birth.
I feel neither shame or embarrassment at my feelings, not do I think they should be ignored.
Though most women experience the feelings I did, they are only willing to discuss them with other mothers.
Why should there be this conspiracy to keep this painful secret amongst mothers?
The most common reason offered is that is mothers told the truth, women wouldn't have babies.
the reason is more deeply rooted.
Our society sees expressions of emotion as outbursts, unreasonable ways of dealing with feelings.
Admission of pain is an admission of weakness and fear doesn't help anyone.
Conversely, a more realistic preparation for birth would help most first-time mothers, many of whom are terrified by the level of pain involved in childbirth and fear something is wrong.
My paintings, I hope will bring about a change in this ‘secret society’ amongst women.
In the belief that it was time a woman was honest about the experience, my paintings try to convey the sensation of giving birth and my feelings at the time.
I use vivid colour to portray the extreme pain, in marked contrast to the muted, subtle tones used in the previous ‘Friendship Quartet’.
The new subject matter dictated a dramatic change in style and approach.
Working the paint thickly with a knife I tried to create a jarring effect with colour and texture conveying the power and pain of the experience.
There is, in a sense, a dichotomy in the change of direction in work, moving from the closeness of women's friendships to the seeming betrayal of these friendships.
However, I still have old close friendships as well as blossoming friendships amongst new women friends.
My work has always paralleled my life experiences.
I see this change in direction as a development and broadening of the experience of understanding the history of women.
Michele Franklin's next exhibition will be held at the Sue Rankin Gallery  
‘My Birth’, oil, 14″×16″
Exhibitions
OUTER SPACE A Photographic and Video Installation
Outer Space has come to ground at Arbikfini, after a nine month gallery orbit via the Laing in Newcastle, Ferens in Hull, and Camden in London.
Organised by Alexandra Noble, with Yve Lomax as co-curator, the exhibition involves photographic and video-based installations by eight artists from Europe and North America, five of whom are women.
To quote the Arnolfini poster blurb: ‘Exploring the multiple possibilities of photographic ‘images’, the artists use a kaleidoscope of new visual technologies to spectacular effect…the audience is invited to literally enter and participate in the works on show’.
This is, of course, rather difficult to do.
The framing of the traditional photograph and its construction from a particular perspective offer a safe viewing distance.
Here, no such safe position is tendered.
For instance, Susan Trangmar's slide installation cannot be fully seen from the margins, but the act of walking to the centre of the four projector installation involves passing one of the projectors so that your shadow passes across the image.
The installation is not roped off, but people resist involvement, standing where the rope or white line isn't.
Likewise, some hesitate, despite Jeffrey Shaw's specific invitation to stand on the mirror steps onto which his videographic crowds of people and skyscapes are reflected, or pause rather than walking through Judith Barry's wall of words across a computer animated floor.
But in order to respond fully, our active participation as spectators is very obviously called into play — as well as called into question.
The exhibition works through a series of separate installations.
The connections and inter-relations are intellectual.
The purpose appears threefold: to explore existential issues using references ranging from the emotive to the more cerebral; in line with post-modern experiementation, to challenge conventional spectatorship positions; to showcase different ways of working using new technologies.
Geneviève Cadieux ‘Blue Fear’ 10990 185×292 cm colour photograph on Masonite
Opposite Ania Bien ‘Hotel Polen’ 1987
In her catalogue introduction Alexandra Noble notes the extent to which installation art, using hybrid forms, has come to represent a challenge to the modernist emphasis on the purity of the particular medium.
She also notes ways in which installations, referencing and drawing upon the mass media and a range of other cultural sources, tend to bridge the gap between fine art and popular culture, thereby challenging the idea of the single fixed meaning and, indeed, conventional assumptions involved in the ‘making sense’ of visual imagery.
In these senses this show contributes to contemporary radical perspectives within the visual arts, especially as contextualised within the gallery.
Not having seen the exhibition previously I cannot comment on how differing gallery spaces have contributed to the overall effect.
At Arnolfini the larger gallery spaces are subdivided, providing welcome change for those of us over-accustomed to too particular an exhibition style there.
Given that there are both upstairs and downstairs ways into the gallery spaces, there is no single order of access and no installation seems particularly privileged in relation to the others, although Ania Bien's work is tucked away.
This contributes to the power of her work, adding an element of claustrophobia, but there is some risk of it being missed.
The work varies in style and theme.
Bien's ‘Hotel Polen’ is the most emotive: images based on old photographs and possessions are placed in a menu stand from the Hotel Polen in Amsterdam, itself destroyed by fire in 1977.
The several six foot tall, black and white images line the four walls of the rectangular (coffin-shape?) space.
Absence and destruction are evoked, through empty landscapes, through old family snaps, though a map centred on Kracow.
Ania Bien was born in Poland in 1946 and lives and works in Amsterdam.
The inclusion of an empty leather luggage label simply inscribed Josef Bien is one reminder of her personal involvement.
Likewise, Willie Doherty's commitment to questions of Irishness is evident in his tape-slide in which we see a single image of a man's face and become increasingly insecure as to his identity and the meaning of this image as poetic spoken comments shift in implication.
Stereotyping is questioned by the method is elliptical, and effectively so.
Some of the work is disappointing.
In ‘Blue Fear’, Canadian artist Geneviève Cadieux invites us to consider the conventions of portraiture through the superimposition of a back view of the balding head and naked hairy shoulders of a man against a close-up, blue-toned shot of his blue eyes directly confronting the spectator: looked at, and looking.
The concept is clear, but it is well-trodden territory.
New York-based Judith Barry's installation is also uninspiring, didactically retracing familiar issues to do with the dehumanising implications of technology, its potential to control rather than serve humankind. computer generated references to the history of communications fleet across the floorspace between two walls of words, one written as mirror writing but not as a direct reflection of the other.
I don't know enough about computer animation to comment on the complexity of experimentation involved (a colleague who works in electronic arts was mildly dismissive), but the sentiments are too predictable to command lengthy involvement.
For me the work less obviously caught up with technologies resonated most.
Obviously this may tell you more about me than about the works themselves.
But Susan Trangmar and Krystyna Ziach, as well as Doherty and Bien, say more through simpler installations.
The technology does not take over.
Enveloped within Trangmar's four projector set-up, circling images, with apparently random global references, evoke a set of concerns associated with the transnational and transcontinental.
The photographs were taken in East London during an artist-in-school residency, but the implications seem much broader.
I was not alone in being reminded of the superficial blandness of, for example, Benetton ads — images fraught with a complexity of issues.
What identities are being portrayed, for whose consumption, for whose benefit?
Whose identity?
What sorts of contradictory circumstances contribute to the construction of subjective senses of identity?
Trangmar's work demands an intellectual response.
By contrast Krystyna Ziach's three photographically-based installations delight primarily through their formal qualities.
Polish-born, based in Amsterdam, Ziach spent two months in Japan in 1987, and her work is influenced by Zen Buddhism and Shinto.
The work is geometric, calm, careful, with attention to details of space and shape.
In ‘Infinity’ a triangular multitude of small portraits are reflected in a black edged mirror.
The triangle changes proportions according to where you stand, and bits of the gallery ceiling may invade, but there is something essentially pleasing about the geometric coherence.
 Mathmatics as reassurance?
Likewise, a path of sand and stones leading up to a  triptich centred on a long industrial corridor with female figures int he images either side battling as if caught within transparent plastic, their head hidden behind their arms, is marked by a continuous figure-of-eight swirl on the sand.
This motif invokes a sense of harmony in direct contradiction to the industrial urbanscape and human angst implied in the imagery.
But if the exhibition has a theme it is to do with disharmony, loss of control, shifting understandings.
The catalogue includes a set of notes by Yve Lomax, characterised as a ninth piece of work (rather than a catalogue essay).
Starting from a critque of Cartesian notions of boundaries, taken to include, for example, the subject and the object of photography, Lomax discusses the contemporary crisis of representation whereby we sense ourselves inhabiting an environment of images, images which refer only to other images.
hence she questions whether we can any longer construe a notion of ‘outer space’, the space beyond the frame within which images or ideas are traditionally secured.
The notes are pertinent to the exhibition, but left me slightly disquieted: the style of writing is, appropriately, neither fact not fiction, but this allows her to make shifts through sleights of words which in more academic circumstances would beg fuller exposition.
Also, the piece speaks to our fears and insecurities, but in order to do so she uses an apposition between previous understandings, and contemporary questioning, which lends credence to modernist philosophic attitudes when her purpose is to challenge.
My overall response to the exhibition is mixed.
As I has suggested, some of the work is disappointing.
In particular, Ulrich Gorlich's outdoor photographic piece of a head and foot on the side of a local shed seems curiously detached from the rest of the show and, frankly, commands little attention.
other work intrigues.
But pleasure, and intellectual challenge, is in response to individual installations rather than to the exhibition as a whole.
Post-modernism acknowledges incoherence.
‘Grand narratives’ no longer offer a sense of interpretative security.
To what extent, therefore, should be continue to seek coherence of theme or form within the exhibition mode of exposition?
THÉRÈSE OULTON
Abstract with memories, Marlborough Fine Art, London, 1 May –12 June
In his last years Monet stumbled upon the exquisite notion that colour in itself could become the first subject for his art; painting has never looked back/
The profound delight in colour which can be felt in the recent paintings of Thérèse Oulton is of a different quality.
The intense red of ‘Flare Up’ would seem an unlikely descendant from Monet's lily ponds, its reference more inward than atmospheric, and yet the painting's fiery colours move gently against one another and, as in Monet's paintings, depth and surface are suggested through the play of horizontal and vertical elements.
Oulton has rekindled the colour theories of Impressionism and knows the value of the after-image as well as Monet ever did.
In ‘Close Up’ she manipulates colour with all the subtlety needed to re-create this elusive phenomenon on canvas.
Elsewhere colours are handled with such delicacy that they look like light projected over the surface, a supposition which is emphatically contradicted by the physical texture of the paint.
The ‘Transparence’ series plays superbly on this paradox; its rainy character belied by the firmly structured substance of the painting.
Paradox, ambiguity and doubt emerge as the themes of Oulton's new work, from the shifting focus of the small ‘Saturations’ of red, to the listing horizons in the ‘Abstract with memories’series.
These suggest unsteadiness and imbalance; brittle textures and hard yellow-greens evoke the dazzling clear-cut light of reason, but their surfaces are marred by thin wounds and blemishes which, camouflage by the paint's substance, present an insidious challenge to the perfect symmetry of composition.
The equation of abstract painting and music is long established and provides a genre in which Oulton's work may be seen against the likes of Mark Rothko.
Like Rothko she creates surfaces, which move rhythmically, but whereas he offers no musical incident Oulton also delivers a libretto.
Repeat and variation are handled with the subtlety of a virtuoso, while the coherent wholeness of her work denies all accusations of facile artistry.
The Wagnerian drama of Oulton's early work is replaced by a cooler, more formal metre, which refers back to her response to John Dowland's ‘Lacrimae’.
The cellular surfaces of her paintings frown organically, with details repeated, similar but never identical, in a process that parallels nature's own working method.
The nature of vision repeatedly explored through art, and an interest in the workings of the eye is hinted at in Oulton's work (witness her 1989 prints ‘Love and Cataracts’).
Her most recent work implies looking at reality through a web of membranes which is in some way suggestive of the substance of the eye itself.
In some of the paintings near-transparent shapes float across the field of vision, reminiscent of drifting shapes on the retina.
Feelings of doubt and uncertainty abound but the exhibition also evokes memories of the light and colour of the ‘Nympheas’, the last paintings of Monet, the grand old man of Impressionism, plagued by cataracts but still wielding the brush with a rousing bravado.
More profoundly, perhaps.
Oulton's paintings may serve as a reminder that each looks out from different eyes with one's own conception of what is real, thus the artist leads us to question the truth of our own vision.
While the feminism v modernism debate continues, LOUISE PARSONS reports on an exhibition happy to flout the rules.
(dis) parities, Mappin Gallery, Sheffield, until 19 July
(dis) parities is the first of a season of three exhibitions of paintings and art works produced by contemporary women who share a commitment to abstraction.
The exhibitions were facilitated and curated by the Mappin Art Gallery, Sheffield and will be on show at the gallery until December 1992 before touring to the Herbert Art Gallery and Museum, Coventry in 1993.
The first and third shows,(dis) parities and countervail, profile with work of two groups of women who have been working collectively for a number of years.
These women have made full use of their respective groups to discuss the theoretical, formal and personal concerns underpinning and sustaining the shifts within their creative practice.
The two exhibitions were both group-instigated, and the individual artists have been closely consulted in relation to the selection and hanging of the work.
The second show, Sense of Purpose, is a curatorially orchestrated affiliation, featuring the work of four women artists, with no previous connection, who have been invited to produce site specific work of the Mappin's Victorian galleries.
All three exhibitions are clearly the result of a finely tuned collaboration between Michael Tooby, until recently the Mappin's Keeper, and the 23 artists concerned.
1 
This season of exhibitions promises a unique and long awaited opportunity to address, at first hand, the current concerns and practices of the women artists who have picked up the gauntlet of the conventional ‘feminism versus modernism’ polarisation.
Over the next six months the Mappin will provide the necessary focus and space to deliberate and discuss some of the newly forged procedures and pleasures explored by the contemporary women artists who are reappropriating non-representational painting, drawing and installation work as a suitable form of creative expression.
And, perhaps more importantly, the work endeavours to relocate formal and gestural practices to one side of the traditional frame of modernist aesthetics.
In other words, the majority of work in these three shows refuses to be silenced by the weight of modernist authority, choosing instead to inhabit the body of tradition in the form of an uninvited and irrepressible guest.
(dis) parities exhibition shot, Mappin Art Gallery
(dis) parities opens the debate.
The exhibition is accompanied by a catalogue containing two excellent essays by Rosemary Betterton and Angela McRobbie.
The work on show, produced by none recently graduated women artists, demonstrates an unmistakable commitment both to engage and challenge the painterly and formal conventions of modernism. 2 The group originally came together as a result of a set of interviews and articles coordinated by Rebecca Fortnum and Gill Houghton, published in a special issue of the Women Artists' Slide Library Journal in 1989. 3 
The current work at the Mappin demonstrates the refreshing versatility in which each exhibitor establishes her own position in relation to the traditionally sanctioned modernist frame of reference.
Despite the multifaceted character of the displays certain overlaps and complementary motivations are apparent.
An evident interest, shared by many of the group members, is the desire to explore the pleasures of paint coupled with an sensual delight in the decorative aspects of design — be it the tangible substance and glowing colours of woven, embroidered and printed textiles, or the flowing line of a fashion garment, or the presence of domestic artefacts.
Another consolidating feature of the work on show is an apparent preoccupation with the relationship between creativity, subjectivity and identity — a concern developed in the psychoanalytic writing of Julia Kristeva — suggesting that the activity of creatively reworking existing cultural codes is inescapably interwoven with the processes underpinning the formation and continuous realignment of our sense of self.
In her catalogue essay, Rosemary Betterton draws attention to the development in the 1970s of a feminist politics of representation which justifiably set out to expose and dismantle the patriarchal jurisdiction over creative and institutional practices.
She reminds us that the battle against the modernist masters was indeed a campaign to counter the sanitised aesthetic conventions of art embodied (mainly) in the practice of painting.
The challenge to the ‘…purist aesthetics of modernism’ issued by these contemporary women artists lies in their willingness to use paint to reference the interplay between emotional, intellectual, cultural and social facets of lived reality.
It is thus precisely through a clearly registered refusal to withdraw from the day-to-day pleasures of thinking, listening, looking and feeling that the sensual references within these paintings remain anchored within socially experienced and theoretically informed sensibilities.
The value of the supportive stimuli derived from shared group experience is of course nothing new.
Modernism is described to us with references to a neat sequence of male coteries who obviously made full use of the opportunity for dialogue and debate.
The groups of women artists who met and worked collaboratively during the same period are less clearly referenced in standard texts.
Judging  from the apparent reticence of many of our municipal galleries and mainstream critics in addressing work produced by women artists, it is clear that the time-honoured tradition of institutional myopia persists.
All the more reason to congratulate the Mappin Art Gallery and the Herbert Gallery for opening their doors to these groups of women.
Footnotes:
1.
Mike Tooby has recently been appointed Director of the New Tate Gallery, St Ives
2.
(dis) parities, Mappin Art Gallery, April, 1992
3.
WASL Journal, April/May, 1989
4.
(dis) parities op.cit
5.
Fanny Adams, ‘Critics Choice’, Women's Art Magazine, May/June, 1992
VANESSA JACKSON
Goodsway Gallery, London May/June 1992
Vanessa Jackson's paintings situate themselves historically.
they are, without a doubt, ‘modern art’.
The modernism they evoke is ‘early’, bringing to mind the colour experiments of Itten and Albers, the compositions of the constructivists, perhaps even the architecture of the Bauhaus.
The geometry employed on these bold canvases shown in the Goodsway Gallery appears to be regulated, indeed these paintings positively proclaim their rules.
There is a strong sense of order and control.
Jackson's work is fundamentally committed to formal concerns; the spatial effects of colour, the purity of form, the dynamics of line; the paintings appear both as experiments in aesthetics and exercises in logic.
The vast 100ft gallery allowed one to move from each painting as from event to event, marking its relation to the last.
Within the body of work that these large paintings create, the consistency in approach to paint and composition means that we come to understand each piece through its difference to the others.
Thus a powerful lexicon is achieved, a storehouse of colour and shape in which repetition, augmentation and alteration become important devices.
One is reminded of modernist poetry; the echoes and reverberation of Eliot, the Imagists' individual statements within a given form.
However, once one acknowledges Jackson's involvement with this period it seems important to move on.
In our times ‘modernism’ has, of course, been analysed and found wanting, most particularly for the women artist.
1 it is interesting to note Griselda Pollock's comments in her important essay ‘Feminism and Modernism’ when talking of Frank Stella's work:
‘Work which represented a literalist abstraction, seemed to threaten the potent and ideological and economic component of modernism — the idea of art as expressive subjectivity, the emblem of individualism.’
There is a way then that such work can exercise its (albeit limited) powers of subversion.
Undoubtedly Jackson's work can be seen in this light.
It is anti-heroic, critical of gestural abstraction and its connotations of a unique authorship.
The palette knife marks, the smooth slabs of even colour neutralise any notions of the personal autograph.
When gesture us used as a foil for the more flatly painted areas (as in ‘So much depends’), it appears repetitiously over the painting's ground and, relegated literally to the background, is emptied of special status by its multiple application.
Might it be also true of Jackson's work that its formalism is so relentless that it actually reveals itself as questioning the parameters within which it operates?
Indeed it would seem that these paintings undercut their initial didacticism and that order is evoked primarily to bring it into question.
For example, the three dimensional illusionism which appears to reference visual puzzles (such as those by M C. Escher) can actually be analysed as essentially flat compositions of interlocking shapes.
There are other anomalies.
Close inspection of the boundaries where the flat slabs of colour meet reveals the smallest traces of undercoats of carrying shades subtly indicating the changing process of their origin and belying the direct certainty of their appearance.
Jackson also employs both harmonious and dissonant colour choices leading the viewer to discover her own subjectivity in her response to the various combinations.
It appears that rather than allowing us to enter a realm of meditation and escapism so associated with abstraction these paintings are determined to make us face up to the ambiguities in our readings of the visual world.
Rosa Lee ‘Transcript’ 1991 78″×94″ oil on canvas.
Courtesy Todd Gallery, London
1.
For example, Mary Kelly, ‘Re-Viewing Modernist Criticism’, Screen, 1983 as well as Griselda Pollock's essay cited.
‘it's All Because’ 1992 oil 7′×6′
CZECH MATE FOR FEMINISM
Czechoslovakia's first feminist art show opened this year, though not all women have time for feminism.
CAROLINE JULER reports
Books Dealing with Degas: Representations of Women and The Politics of Vision, Edited by Richard Kendall & Griselda Pollock, Pandora, 1992
It is highly courageous to launch a frontal attack on the main lines and the main structure of nature, and cowardly to advance by aspects and details; art is really a battle.
Edgar Degas, Notebook, 1856–7
Were one to substitute the word ‘nature’ for the ‘nature of art history’, then Degas might unwittingly have written a fitting description of this most recent book on his work.
Presented is a veritable battleground of academic crossfire surrounding the alleged misogyny of Degas, by contributors Deborah Bershad, Anthea Callen, Hollis Clayson, Heather Dawkins, John House, Richard Kendall, Linda Nochlin, Griselda Pollock and Richard Thomson.
Some approach the canonical figure of Degas with a frontal attack on the patriarchal structure of art history itself (most vocally expressed by the feminist critiques of Pollock and Callen), others offer more tentative snipes at aspects and details of individual works.
Feminist analysis is not a ‘pick and mix’ methodology but a continual questioning which seeks to destabilise and change the patriarchal dominance of art.
‘Dealing with Degas’ was published as a response to the Liverpool Tate Gallery exhibition ‘Degas: Images of Women’held between September and December 1989.
Most of the twelve essays were based on a two day symposium held at the Tate in October that year.
According to coeditor and exhibition curator, Richard Kendall: ‘The decision to publish the symposium papers was taken to provide a more leisurely and less highly charged opportunity to study the issues, and to bring new material and new insights to the attention of a wide audience ’.
This declared ambition to reach a broad readership beyond the closed bastions of academia brings one to the first fissure in the book.
Because of the artist's status as a household name and his command of spectacular prices at auction, the museum exhibition was inevitably both a highly popular and broadly attended show.
However, the academic tenor of all the essays included, the extensive theoretical posturing revealed by the footnote cross-references, the unquestioned presupposition of both the issues raised by ‘New Art History’ in the 70s, as well as poststructuralist theory, actually exclude a wider audience.
Encouraging art enthusiasts to see Degas' work in other than the sepulchral tones of revisionist art history and to lay bare the politics of class and gender would surely have been better achieved by the use of less opaque references to theoretical debate and the inclusion of these fascinating essays in the Liverpool exhibition catalogue itself.
Additionally, the texts would have become more lucid had the book been adequately illustrated, which brings me to my second qualm.
In keeping with the Foucauldian critique of reflection theory, Kendall outlines a general shift away from versions of social histories of art that employ images as mere backdrops for cultural analysis: ‘The shift towards theory and the invocation of new disciplines and methodologies has left the work of art with an uncertain status and a disquieting future’.
It is this commitment to visually focused investigation which forms a common thread amongst the scholars.
Incongruously, however, the reader is invited to seek out the visual components of the arguments by oblique referrals to P.A. Lemoisne's Degas et son oeuvre , Paris of — wait for it — 1946–9!
I would dearly like to know where a ‘wide audience’ is supposed to obtain a copy of this prized item.
Underpinning the desire for a popular reappraisal of Degas' modernist status as genius is a justified desire for academic recognition of the developments and achievements of feminist art history.
To return to my Degas quote: many of the writers seem to be appropriating what they see as ‘feminist tools of socio-political deconstruction’ by examining details of Degas' work according to a binary opposition of woman as object/man as Baudelairean flaneur .
They have missed the point.
Feminist analysis is not a ‘pick and mix’ methodology, but a destabilise and change the patriarchal dominance of art.
Pollock writes: ‘Feminism is a practice of constant theoretical provocation.
It criticises and deconstructs its own formulations as it struggles against the dominant system of meaning.’
At its best — in Pollock's poststructuralist examination of the pre-symbolic formation of masculinity and femininity in the work of Degas and Cassatt — feminist analysis becomes a means of challenging female Otherness, not reinforcing it.
At its worse — as in Heather Dawkin's embarrassingly biographic study of Degas' models and their claims that he was an anti-semitic, mean-spirited man with public lice — it reinforces Modernist paradigms of auratic authorship.
No doubt the academic battles surrounding Degas' art will continue even if a wider audience are yet to be enlisted.
THE MONKEYS' DREAM Story and Etchings by christine Tacq
Christine Tacq's storybook of etchings, The Monkeys' Dream, is the exquisite result of over 15 years of preparation, starting with drawings from observation at London Zoo.
it is an artists' book of the first order, the making of which has been managed from beginning to end by the artist herself, thereby satisfying her desire for creative control over every aspect of its production.
The Monkeys' Dream is the tale of four young Talapoin monkeys in the Zoo — Pip, Ambrose, Coral and Tulip — who dream of the ancient tropical rainforests and also have their own visions of possessing beauty, wealth, strength and knowledge.
One day the opportunity to escape presents itself and the book follows their adventures on the journey along Regent's canal and across the sea to the forests, not of their imagined Africa, but of Borneo or Sumatra, home to the Orang Utan.
Along the way, each thinks often misguidedly, that their own particular dream has come true — a clever reflection of human world and our shared history.
It is the detailed, etched pictures that really tell the tale; the text serves to reinforce the story but suggests rather than dictates the plot, with different monkeys taking over as narrator.
This presents gaps in the text which surprise at first, but then allow the imagination to intervene and to draw on the richness and depth of the images to fill the spaces with one's own interpretation.
The book encapsulates a whole range of complex ideas that reach far beyond the story told within its pages.
The key to its ethical and practical success lies in the way in which the technical problems involved in its production were overcome.
The book is well designed; the pages are made of Zerkall mould-made paper which flops languidly open rather than standing to starched attention perpendicular to the open cover.
To keep the images and text flowing across the facing pages, Japanese book binding was chosen, allowing the embossed images and the letterpress to be printed, not at the same time, but on both sides of the same page folded over.
This particular process in turn suggested the use of printed linen and natural materials and colours, echoing the dreamt-of rainforest, for the cover.
The book is ecologically as well as artistically sound.
Like all good stories, the real message lies between the lines.
The monkeys, although as close to observation as a personal interpretation would allow, are not fallible primates but symbols of the idealism of youth, full of aspirations, possessing the freedom to act upon ambition — freedom from responsibility and captivity.
The artist cites William Blake and William Morris's Utopian vision, ‘news from Nowhere’, as inspirational sources.
One might ask the first question: Is it art or is it craft? it is a tour de force combining both.
The book includes 53 etchings of various sizes, each an impeccably composed, finely executed, intricate drawing, bitten and rebitten into a copper plate and then printed by the artist herself.
Tacq's technical knowledge enables her to give complicated ideas pictoral form.
Each image is a complete story often told through a dense, receding picture space.
The central characters are emphasised by pushing them into the foreground with bold biting or by establishing them appropriately within an off-beat compositional design.
Often the size and shape of a plate will dictate a particularly unusual use of space, especially effective in the dream sequence where the sleeping monkeys are squashed into their frame-cages.
The second question: Is it a book for children or adults? is not so straightforward to answer.
there is no doubt that this is not a publication to be left around the bedroom floor gathering foot prints and Coca-Cola stains, but then similar neither is it to lie moribund on the coffee table or in the display cabinet.
This is a beautifully crafted, intimate object to be considered often with careful hands.
Her is an illustrated story to be lingered over and added to with discussion by adult readers or those introducing children not only to the magic of adventure and solid drawing but to the underlying message that is a sober reminder of our obligations to the life and lives of the earth.
Letters
Too negative for the nineties
I write in response to Katy Deepwell's essay, ‘Time Ladies’,(May/June 1992) which I felt was too negative for the situation as I see it: Feminism has been a catalyst for analytical practice.
Feminists in the 60s and 70s deconstructed out culture to find their way and called for a non-hierarchical theory.
This is emerging in the 90s with Post-modernism, particularly the kind of Reconstructive Post-modernism described by Suzi Gablik in her book ‘the Enchantment of Art’.
I believe the agenda for the 90s is rooted in daily life and Postmodernism is in harmony with this and not an autonomous entity.
Deconstructivism has led to the recognition of what is valuable.
Reconstructivist Post Modernism which is based on a feminine way of thinking and working will lead into the 90s.
Inspired
I would like to congratulate you on the production of WAM which I think is stylish, well presented and interesting in content, and encouraging in its attention to issues of class, colour, gender and international politics.
Each issue is an inspiration.
thank you.
Paradox Praised
I would like to congratulate Rosy Martin on her feature ‘I Pose a Paradox’,(march/April 1992).
Little did I know that I would be confronted with the loss of a loved one, my husband Norman, so soon and unexpectedly.
He sat with me and watched Jo Spence's documentary on her fight against a serious illness and he admired her for her spirit and for using her work to get through her situation.
Baffled by Babel
I have just completed part of an Extra Mural Study course in Art History and Modern Art.
I am now familiar with some of the issues of gender, euro-centrism, so-called ‘primitivism’, and the diversities and perversities of the art historical narratives.
I am already aware that I am beginning myself to use the acceptable university jargon that saturates the material that is presented within these diploma courses.
I have also of course been very excited by the new doors that have opened up for me that I never knew existed.
Consequently I was very interested to read the article ‘Tower of Babel’ by Tania V. Guha (May/June 1992) since I realised that I could now without too much struggle understand most of it, or perhaps I should more truthfully say about 80 per cent of it on first reading.
I have familiarised myself with some of the feminist writers on art, women, and power — Linda Nochlin, Whitney Chadwick, Griselda Pollock.
But I would like to ask: Is there anyone out there who could write about these issues, particularly about women and art, in a simple straightforward way, so that it does not sound like reading a P.H.D.
essay, and what's more, using the same sort of language and form that have been handed down by mainly male-dominated art historians?
I would really like to see some drastic sweeping away of the turgid sort of historical writing that necessitated some of my fellow students, not too familiar with art history, reaching for their dictionaries.
This — not to understand the artworks themselves — but the fathom out what the writer might be getting et.
May I take a passage from the last section of the article: ‘If the ethical nucleus of culturally specific mankind is not to be lost within the framework of media globalism we need to encourage a ‘Self-critical Regionalism’ based on the heterogeneity and plurality of gender, ethnic background and class’.
The rest of the statement by bell hook could be included.
Would anyone like to take up the challenge of demystifying this article; and how would Tania Guha herself ‘rewrite’ it if it were to be read by those ‘others’who have not yet been through the intellectual sieve of the university hierarchy?