

The Institute introduced the first video package in 1982 and currently has eight titles available for sale.
They are intended for use in discussion-led groups of about 20–30 people and are a valuable aid to teaching and revising for the Institute's examinations.
The support material for the earlier titles is presently being updated to include new legislation or changes in practice since the videos were introduced.
Listed below are the current titles with some general information about their running time, content and usage:
It helps if you understand the accounts
The popular story of how James the Grocer uses cash flows to finance an expansion of the business.
Examinations: Accountancy and Branch Banking — Lending and Marketing (32 minutes)
You need to know your customer
The use and interpretation of accounting ratios.
Examinations: Accountancy and Branch Banking — Lending and Marketing (40 minutes)
S & J Electronics
Starting a new business — cash flow forecasting and bank services.
Examinations: Accountancy and Branch Banking — Lending and Marketing (22 minutes)
Banking on a fine day
Lending to small businesses, cash flow, contracts and risk insurance.
Examinations: Accountancy and Branch Banking — Lending and Marketing (26 minutes)
Vin de table Importing: finance, forward contracts, freight forwarding, bonded warehouses and VAT.
Examinations: Trade Finance — Payments and Services and Branch Banking — Lending and Marketing (47 minutes)
Exporting in style
Exporting: exchange risk, methods of settlement and short-term finance.
Examinations: Trade Finance — Payments and Services and Branch Banking — Lending and Marketing (32 minutes)
Appointment with change
The management problems encountered by someone taking up a first managerial appointment in a medium-sized branch.
Examinations: Management in Banking.
(40 minutes)
Managing change — changing the manager
A look at how changes in banking are affecting branch managers.
Examinations: Management in Banking.
(33 minutes)
Video Order Form
Each video package consists of a video tape available in VHS or U-matic format (a limited number in Betamax) and a leader's discussion guide with detailed worksheets and accounts etc relevant to the storyline of the package.
The price per package is £150 (plus £26.25 VAT, UK only) plus postage.
UK: £3.00.
Overseas: £15.00.
(NTSC copies £35.00 extra).
Format required VHS U-matic Betamax (as indicated*) NTSC (by special order)
Video Order Form
Practice of Banking VIDEO PACKAGES
Each package consists of a tape plus a discussion leader's guide.
The price is £75 for one package or £130 for the set of two (plus VAT, £13.13 (one); £2.75 (two) UK only) plus postage.
UK: £2.00.
Overseas: £6.00.
NTSC copies are available at an extra cost of £35.00 per tape.
Practice of Banking 1 (864) Practice of Banking 2 (865)
BANKERS BOOKS
INFORMATION SHEET
PRACTICAL TRUST ADMINISTRATION Michael Sladen
Readership
Lawyers, executors, bankers and those charged with providing investment advice.
Those interested in, or who need to be able to refer to matters connected with the law and practice of wills, estates and trusts.
Content 
Part I Wills, Intestaces and Deceaseds' Estates.
Wills.
Death & Probate.
Intestacy, rearrangements and family provision.
Dealing with the liabilities and assets.
Distributing the estate
Part II Trusts, Trustees and Beneficiaries.
Trusts.
Trustees and their duties.
Powers of trustees.
Special types of trusts and trustee.
Variation of trusts.
Breach of trust
Author
Michael Sladen joined Midland Bank in 1940.
After the war he took a job with the Midland Bank Executor & Trustee Company.
For the next 30 years he was involved in the practical application of the law of wills and trusts.
In 1978 he left and briefly practised at the Bar and taught at the City of London Polytechnic and the University of East Anglia.
He is also co-author of The Law and Accounts of Executors and Trustees .
Newsletter Summer 1993
Welcome to the first edition of the new look newsletter
CIBLINGS
Editorial
‘Who's that gorgeous looking baby on the front cover?’.
Yes, I know what you're all thinking — shame it turned out to be me — Andy Harris.
As the ‘lucky’ person who drew the shortest straw to be editor of the first edition of the revamped CIBLINGS, it comes down to me to think of something to fill the vast amount of space which is the front page.
Firstly, my thanks go to David Bowley for without him I would never have learnt the art of letching which is essential for the editorial role.
Thanks also go to the publishing team who put so much into making this possible, they are (in obligatory alphabetical order): Moray ‘World Traveller’ Lawson Debbie ‘Where's my contact lens’Maddison Deirdre ‘Baby obsession’Seeley Joe ‘Newsdesk’Tarrant
Remember that any sarcastic comments about this page go to the whole publishing team and not just the editor!
We've put together quite a variety of articles for your pleasure/disgust/ abuse (delete as appropriate).
They range from Badminton to Babies, Food to Flying, Politics to Problems, Stress to Staff and a lot more crammed in.
We've tried to keep the newsletter as light hearted as possible without going into the realms of indecency, and have even printed in black and white so those of your who are colour blind won't feel left out.
The contributions to this issue have been mainly from the London staff but this should be more balanced next issue as I'll be chasing you lot in Canterbury for contributions.
Remember that there is a £10 prize on offer each issue for the lucky article out of the hat — that's not much I know, but we spent all the budget on meeting ‘refreshments’(hic).
The winner for this issue is Alison Precious.
The next issue will hit your desks in October (1993 I hope) so please put pen to paper, fingers to keyboard (but not tipp-ex to screen I beg you), and get your scribblings in to the publishing team by early September (exact date will be given soon).
Moray Lawson will be the editor next issue so we wish him luck (he'll need it).
Now (at last) on with what you've been waiting for/dreading (delete as appropriate)…
The new boy at Newbury
David Rendel, MP describes some moments he will remember about the Newbury by-election and his first week as an MP.
It was the photographer from the Telegraph who provided one of the most ludicrous moments.
He had found a field of yellow rape in full Liberal Democrat bloom and he wanted a picture of me walking through it.
‘I've thought of this wonderful caption’, he said, which really set the mind boggling —‘Rendel Rapes Newbury’ perhaps — No, surely not.
Apparently what he was really thinking of was ‘The man who changed the political colour of Newbury’ which didn't sound too bad.
So we agreed to do it for him.
Ten minutes drive later, we finally found the field he had noticed.
Sure enough, the next day, there it was, a great picture — in black and white!
It's been fun since the election too.
If I hadn't been elected, I doubt if I would every have had to request to ‘Take some gentle exercise with Jerry Hall’.
When I told my wife Sue about this she wasn't at all sure she approved.
But in the end it turned out to be all quite innocent.
All I had to do was stand around pretending to pull on one end of a tug-of war rope while a load of peers pulled on the other, as Jerry stood by attracting the tabloids' photographers.
All in honour of the Macmillan Nurses, so it was probably about the most worthwhile thing I have done since becoming an MP.
There has been one nasty moment.
I was making my maiden speech, which is traditionally a somewhat nerve-wracking experience.
Actually it wouldn't be half so bad, if only the other members behaved normally (i.e. paid no attention whatever to the MP who is speaking).
But for a maiden speech, by tradition, everyone keeps absolutely silent and no one is allowed to interrupt.
Suddenly you could have heard a pin drop, which is enough to make anyone feel self-conscious.
Anyway there I was, and the speech seemed to be going down ok, when I reached the end of page one.
I turned over…and found myself at the top of page three .
In normal circumstances, no one would have noticed if I had carried on from there.
But with everyone listening intently, there followed what seemed like hours of scrabbling around with my paper looking for page two.
At last there it was, and somehow I got through the rest without further mishap.
And there's one bit of good news.
I shall never, ever have to make another maiden speech in the House of Commons.
But there's no doubt what my favourite and proudest, moment of the by-election will always be.
Paddy Ashdown and I were doing a walkabout in the main shopping precinct on the day after the election, when three small boys walked up to Paddy and asked, ‘Ooh, are you David Rendel?’
‘No,’ he replied.
‘But I can introduce you to him.’
And he promptly did!
Incidental Happenings…
I recently made a tour of India which was arranged by ANZ Grindlays Bank to promote CIB qualifications to their staff.
The cheapest way to go was via Colombo and so I dropped in on the local centre there.
I had hoped to slip in unnoticed but, almost as soon as I booked in the hotel, I was isolated by a dusk to dawn curfew.
This may have had nothing to do with my arrival and more to do with some riots on the occasion of the funeral of the assassinated opposition leader but clearly they were taking no chances.
On my departure they assassinated the President.
You may be pleased to know that all glass doors in Sri Lanka and India remained intact during my visit although there were one or two other incidents, of which more anon.
My first impression of India was lots of people.
There are about 1 billion Indians, about half of who were at Madras airport offering to carry my bags.
From Madras my wife and I were taken to see the Shore Temples at Mahabalipuram and beside this is (or was) a very large boulder resting on the hillside.
This had been there for thousands of years and had defeated the British Raj's efforts to move it.
My wife wished to take a photograph of me leaning against it from uphill and I have to report that the stone proved not to be immovable and now rests at the bottom of the slope.
We went to Delhi and made a side trip to see the Taj Mahal.
It was very hot and the coolest clothing seemed to be native, but the transport was somewhat primitive.
Above: My wife and I on the way
When we eventually reached the Taj, I bent down to examine the inlay on the tombs more closely.
There was a tearing sound and I bared my all to the world.
Now this is considered the height of vulgarity in such a sacred place and so, until my departure from Delhi, I had to adopt a disguise.
Above: Have you seen this man?
Left:Before the Mortimer visit and…
Below:After the Mortimer visit
THERE'S A LOT OF IT ABOUT!
by Joe Tarrant
When I mentioned to a colleague that I was writing an article on stress for CIBLINGS, he nodded and said ‘yes, there's a lot of it about’.
Just what is stress?
Stress is anything that makes you angry, excited, afraid, worried or anxious.
An expert on stress says that stress is a major cause of, or contributor to, most of this century's main diseases.
Headaches, migraines and irritability are all signs of stress.
The article looks at two questions:
.
What can you do to relieve your own stress levels?
.
What can you do to relieve those of your colleagues or staff?
Looking after ‘Number One’
Plan your day by structuring your time.
Make a list of main tasks.
Cross off tasks you have accomplished and take satisfaction from doing so.
Be realistic in what you set out to achieve.
Learn how to say ‘no’!
Learn how to relax; don't ‘bring the job home’.
Take enough exercise.
Try to identify any recurrent causes of stress.
Is it some aspect of your work or your life that is getting out of control?
What can you do?
Looking after other people.
Try to give people as much responsibility as they can handle (within reason).
Bored stiff can be as stressed as over worked ones.
Boredom can lead to absenteeism and poor productivity.
This leads nicely to:delegation .
Just as Batman had Robin, you may have an assistant who can manage something a little more advanced than recent work.
And Robins: remember — you can say no if the going gets too rough!
Don't push people too hard.
There is an old saying that whipping a donkey will do no good if it's running as fast as it can.
Praise a job well done.
Be interested in people's problems.
Allow people to say ‘NO’.
If a person already has too much to do, adding another task will cause stress to that person, as well as to you, the manager, when the task isn't carried out.
Finally!
Remember this — tomorrow is another day…
If you are worried about stress, the Library can help with books on managing stress and other aspects of your daily working life (well, I had to get a plug in somewhere!).
Letter to the Staff Officer
Before I approach BIFU with a view to them taking this up for bank staff (and others) in general, I thought it would be good for staff morale and also for our members if we adopted a practice which was, after all, in use in 2,550 BC.
If our tea and lunch breaks could be structured on the lines of the ancient Egyptians I am sure that by 10.30am each day there would be a smile on the face of each and every member of staff; and if we could ensure that all our members were treated by their employers in the same way, our membership figures would double instantly.
What am I talking about?
Just read the attached cutting.
Yours sincerely
Deirdre Seeley
PS: I have my reservations about the other woman though!!
Sex, beer and neat moustaches solve riddle of the pyramids
Edward Pilkington
TWO-TIMING men with neatly trimmed pencil moustaches who like to drink as hard as they work are unwittingly modelling themselves upon a style that is at least 4,500 years old, archaeologists have discovered.
A search through hundreds of Egyptian cemeteries has revealed that the workers who built the pyramids at Giza punctuated their day in a habit not unlike the Great British tea-break.
But in place of tea they drank beer.
There was beer in the morning, beer in the afternoon, beer at night, with a choice of five varieties, plus four kinds of wine.
Pencil moustaches were the vogue.
Tombs found near the pyramids, which were constructed from about 2,550BC, also give the lie to the theory that the men who built them were slaves.
They were free spirits working for the gods; the pharaoh gave them food, clothing and shelter.
Not that this made them live longer — average life expectancy was only 38.
Some died from injuries.
Others had curved spines from the heavy stones they carried.
Excavation of one tomb has also shed light on the Egyptians' sexual mores.
The man buried there lay wantonly between his wife and another woman.
‘Texts show one woman had to be a girl friend,’ said Zahi Hawass, an Egyptologist.
‘It's surprising the wife put up with it.’
GUARDIAN 13 MAY 1993 
Time Travel and the spinster…by Alison Precious
On the 1st May an odd selection of individuals, myself included, set out to travel not only South to Totnes Castle, but also back in time about 530 years.
This little band are know as the Medieval Heritage Society, a re-enactment group with a strange desire to give people a glimpse of life in the 1450's.
It all began on Saturday evening with Stuart (or Sir Parker of Westminster) and myself (Mistress Margaret, house keeper to which ever castle we happen to be at) driving around Totnes trying to find the St John's Ambulance Hall.
We did find the Hall that was to be home for the next couple of nights, with a note pinned to the door giving directions to the pub where the rest of the Society had gathered.
A few hours later it was a merry band that wended its way back to the hall and marked out sleeping spaces for the night.
To get into the medieval way of things and because  it's cheap, we all camp down in the same room hence this is not a society for the bashful (light sleepers are advised ear plugs).
The quality of accommodation wouldn't have won any stars; blackholes, maybe!
The lack of a lock on the one and only toilet was compensated for by the frosted glass panels in the door.
Hot water was available but it meant vying for position in the kitchen with those cooking breakfast and making tea.
The mornings of Sunday and Monday were spent setting up the arena, putting in some dance and fight practice, and generally preparing for the show before the pre-show meeting.
A couple of the members had to miss this on Sunday as Phil (Sir Courtney) had to be taken to the local hospital for stitches in his fingers.
The injury was caused by fighting with maces whilst not wearing a gauntlet.
Fortunately everyone was back in time for the grand procession into the arena, when the members of the Society are introduced, in character, to the audience.
Whilst the ladies sat in the pavilion and the knights and their squires stood at their stations I took up my position at the serving table.
Once the Knights had made their challenges ready for the tourney held at the end of the show and the demonstrations of dancing, archery and squire practice had started I wandered off outside the arena to demonstrate spinning with a drop spindle.
The disadvantage of being the Society's spinster is that I spend all weekend smelling of sheep.
For the tourney I returned to the serving table to serve the knights who had just fought with a drink, and serve the ladies with bread, cheese and fruit.
I did manage to give my hands a quick rinse beforehand and nobody has mentioned food poisoning so it must have been ok.
The shows went well on both days with no further injuries.
Despite stitches, Sir Courtney not only fought on both days but managed to win both as well, even without bribing the audience!
The final part of the weekend was spent packing everything away in the van.
This was the worst part as by now everyone was tired, hungry, needed a long hot bath and still had a long drive home; however spirits were cheerful and by the 29th May we were ready to do it all again.
If this sounds like your idea of fun and you would like information on joining in or even booking the Society, please contact me for details.
Anyone who would like to come along to watch a venue, the next date is:
Pevensey Castle, Sussex 29th & 30th August
A tale of two cities
by Moray Lawson
Hong Kong and Bangkok tend to be lumped together in holiday brochures under the same Far East tag, and indeed, it makes sense to visit both if you just happen to find yourself in that part of the world.
What's interesting is that the contrast between the two cities is so great that they could equally well be at opposite ends of the planet.
Hong Kong, about 14 hours flight from London, is at first sight like a futuristic Ridley Scott vision of a city, sitting encircled by treacherous mountains on the edge of China.
Everything seems to have been built yesterday, and giant skyscrapers are sill shooting up from this little patch of land in an attempt to outdo the cities in America it resembles.
Hong Kong is, in fact, like a little bit of the West in an exotic, hot location, almost like a giant Chinatown.
It is busy, open all hours, and full of shops which sell anything from ancient Chinese herbs and medicines to electronic gadgetry.
The pace seem to be frantic, making London look like a laid back country town.
It is easy to feel stifled with the massive tower blocks and hordes of people, and a trip up the hills behind the city or on a boat out into the South China Sea helps give a better perspective of the place.
There is history and culture there, and a trip worth making is out to the old Portuguese colony of Macau, far less prosperous than Hong Kong, probably far more like the real China.
Hong Kong used to be renowned for its bargains, but most prices there seemed pretty close to what they are in London.
Bangkok is a much cheaper place to live, eat, shop, in fact do almost anything!
Traffic jams are as common as the street hustlers in Bangkok.
Their roads make the M25 look like a drive down a quite lane.
And it is hot, noisy and dirty, but full of character and life.
You either love or hate it!
There is far more to visit in Bangkok than Hong Kong.
The palaces, their roofs lined with gold.
The temples, the golden  buddhas , the markets.
Take a ride in a tuk tuk, a sort of motorbike with a passenger bit at the back, by far the quickest way to get around, although not necessarily the safest.
The Thais are normally friendly and helpful, although will always try to sell you something or anything (literally).
There are of course areas of the city that are notorious for their bars and sex shows, but even there the atmosphere is lively and interesting (!) and you can just walk past!
(Bet you did Moray — Ed).
If you can stand the pace and the heat, Bangkok is a very rewarding place to visit, although it may make you feel like taking a week afterwards to lie on a beach and recover.
It may be somewhere to visit once, just to see what it's like, but it is totally unlike anywhere else, full of remarkable sights.
Above: A Palace in Bangkok
GENERAL KNOWLEDGE QUIZ
Here's something you can do on the train without getting arrested.
There is a prize of £5 on offer for the person who gets the most correct answers.
Please send all entries to the Editor Andy Harris, to arrive no later than Friday 27th August.
The answers will be published in the next issue of Ciblings.  01.
Which 1956 film caused riots in cinemas all over the world? 02.
Who wrote ‘For Whom the Bells Tolls’? 03.
Who played Vincent Van Gogh in the film ‘Lust for Life’? 04.
In which year was the first television broadcast from Alexandra Palace? 05.
Whose greeting was ‘Hallo Playmates’? 06.
Who was the first Doctor Who? 07.
Who played the leading role in ‘A Man Called Horse’? 08.
Which artist was famous for his nonsense rhymes? 09.
In which city would you find the Belvedere Palace? 10.
In Ancient Egypt what did a canopic vase hold? 11.
What sort of birds were Polly James and Nerys Hughes? 12.
Whose opening gambit was ‘Hello my darlings’? 13.
Who did Ilya Kuryakin work for? 14.
How do performers get around in ‘Starlight Express’? 15.
Whose friend was Boo-Boo?
MENTORING
by Jim Basker
Mentoring is a new idea for staff development.
A company might give its senior management a short course in encouraging and support of staff, and allocate likely lads and lasses to those managers.
Looked at in a different way, a feudal knight would have a squire who carried his armour for him, sharpened up his sword, and polished his boots.
When the knight got to be too old for fighting, about 30 (!), and became arthritic and slow, his squire would have learned all the skills of chivalry and daring, and would defend him and his family into their old age.
He would probably also marry the knight's daughter and so be knighted in turn.
Similarly, our modern managers bring on their favoured assistants, introduce them to the secrets of the filofax and the business lunch, and teach them how to influence important people.
And so, when the manager gets to 60 or so and is given his carriage clock and company pension (if he is lucky), there is somebody to take over who knows the right people and can do the right things.
However, there is a flaw.
If you, an ambitious young squire or the equivalent (a grade 2 clerk) are allocated a knight whose own baron or mentor is out of favour, or whose manager is out of fashion, your ambitions will be thwarted.
Your mentor might lose his head on the block, or be handed a P45 in today's language.
It's not only who you know, but what you know about who you know that counts…
Politics illustrates this well.
Sir Keith Joseph mentored Margaret Thatcher, who in turn mentored John Major.
This successful sequence made life difficult for those who followed the stars of Geoffrey Howe or Edward Heath.
Powerful men in their time, now more or less forgotten.
The canny squire in medieval times would keep one ear open to what the messengers and washerwomen were saying and would be careful to drop hints to other knights about how much he admired them.
And would try to impress their daughters at the jousting.
All in case his own knight came a cropper and he had to change horses in mid stream.
Although in theory betraying your master was not condoned, rich and powerful lords found such squires useful for procuring services and removing rivals.
The mentoring system still works, and works well.
It is a natural way of transferring high level skills.
And if you want to become a manager one day, the more you know about now he or she survives, the better.
And these days, you don't necessarily have to marry their son or daughter!
HOT SPOT
Have you got a problem you would like aired?
If so, get writing!
We are hoping that we will get replies to your questions from the management team.
Any replies will be published in the next issue of CIBLINGS.
So, don't just sit back, put pen to paper (or finger to key) and send your questions to any member of the editorial team.
All comments will, of course, be treated in the strictest confidence.
you may send in your questions anonymously if you wish.
To get the ball rolling, here a few for starters…
1.
Why does everyone seem to hate the Library?
2.
Why can female staff in Canterbury wear casual clothes but the men have to wear shirts and ties?
Shouldn't there be one dress code for all CIB staff?
3.
Could new staff spend time in each department to find out how the CIB really works?
PLACENAMES
by Joe Tarrant
I have always been interested in maps and looking for odd placenames on them.
England is full of the oddest of names: Yell, Wallcrouch and Ugglebarnby are just some examples.
Recently, I have begun to notice another phenomenon: contradictory placenames.
My current favourite is a street in Acton, west London.
It's called Avenue Road.
Now, it can't be both.
It's either an avenue or a road, right?
It's like calling a street Boulevard Lane.
Then there's Paddock Wood.
Where's the sense in that?
A paddock can't be full of trees, nor can a forest be all fields.
It's quite peculiar.
And then there's…sex!
Namely: Sussex, Middlesex, Essex and what used to be Wessex.
So, I asked myself, where's Nussex?
What happened to the North Saxons?
Were they wiped out?
Did they just pack up one day and go back to Germany?
Did they die of plague?
Perhaps they merged with somebody, there's a lot of that about!
What made them so unpopular that they aren't even commemorated in a country name.
Answers to that one on a postcard please.
If anybody has any favourite contradictory placenames of their own, I'd love to hear of them.
The future is that time when you'll wish you'd done what you aren't doing now.
First Blood
by Andy Harris
A trip to the blood donors may seem like a strange topic to write about in a staff magazine but it is one that took my mind back a few years to the first time my mum persuaded me to go.
At the time I thought she was keen for me to do my bit to help others but I've since found out that while I was getting a prick in my arm she was (I know what you're thinking) getting some peace and quiet.
When I walked into that church hall I was unaware of what was to come next.
After reading the notice about all the nasty sexual diseases under the sun which I shouldn't have had,(back then, Aids meant things you stuck in your ears or what mum kept in her bedroom drawer) this rather butch looking nurse pricked my thumb with what looked like an elaborate stapler.
After she had squeezed blood out of me and squirted it into little bottles, she said ‘Thank you very much’— I thought ‘That wasn't so bad’ and was halfway out the door when a nurse redirected me to a bed and rolled up my sleeve.
My heart was pounding and realisation sank in when I saw the needle being prepared to go into MY arm.
Previous to this, the biggest personal puncture I'd had was when my pushbike ran over some glass, so I was naturally apprehensive.
My fears were to be unfounded as the nurse chatted to me and before could stop fantasizing about women in uniform the needle was in and the blood was pumping.
Afterwards I was pleased to get a free plaster and a cup of tea with a rich tea biscuit before my trip home.
I continued donating until late 1987 when the pressures of my early twenties swept me into a few years of self neglect by alcohol and all those unhealthy things that young people do.
I forgot all about donating and the transfusion service lost track of me as I moved from house to house over the years, until the other day when the subject came up in the office.
So, with a quick flush of guilt for not going in 5 years, I trundled off to downtown Canterbury — quite a way downtown it was too, past Mr Careys bungalow and all the tacky tourist shops.
I was surprised how things had changed — as I walked in I was given a big plastic number 33 (shame I didn't turn up later as I could have stolen the number 38 to replace my house number which has seen better days) and was given a list of reasons not to give blood.
After reading the list and being thankful I hadn't had sex with any African women (amongst other things) I signed the declaration and had the blood tests for Anaemia and other nasties.
The thumb prick had become a finger prick over the years and was the only bit which mildly hurt.
Once I was lying on the bed I noticed that with the appearance of Aids, there is so much more precaution — every needle, tube, cotton wool swab etc is carefully disposed of.
As the needle got closer to my arm I remembered that it never used to hurt as long as I gripped really tightly the nice bit of perspex they lend you.
Of course, it didn't hurt at all and 12 minutes later (the nurse timed it on a stopwatch) I felt quite satisfied that I had ‘done my bit’ and maybe would help someone to live.
While I was lying there staring at the ceiling counting the number of tiles I heard a girl going ‘ouch, ouch that hurts’, when I looked over she was having difficulty with the needle going in and I noticed she was barely gripping the nice bit of perspex.
‘Ah’, I thought, my theory was right —‘If you grip it hard, it goes in much easier’.
After I got my free plaster and sticky tape to keep the cotton wool swab on I found not just a cup of tea and rich tea on offer but a wide choice of beverages and crisps and chocolate biscuits all individually wrapped — from looking at that feast you wouldn't believe the NHS is strapped for cash.
While I munched on a choccie biccie I noticed loads of free stickers lying around — each design had a different concept.
They ranged from the self-pitiful (‘Be nice to me — I gave blood today’) to the egotistical (‘I helped save a life today’) to the plain daft (‘Look at me — I gave blood’).
Seven designs in all — what a choice we have in todays consumer society!
After I got back to work I realised just how many people don't give blood in the Institute (which is what prompted me to write this article).
Some people are just scared (no names mentioned — Kevin Hall) but there's no reason to be — just think of the good you would be doing.
I can honestly say that the most painful bit of going to the blood donors is the next day when you come to rip the sticky plaster off your arm (even more so if you've got as much hair as Arthur Upton!) so, if you've never been — give it a go.
Baby quiz competition
AHHHHHHHHH…
Aren't they cute, but can you identify the famous people they grew up to be?
To help you along, here are the names of the individuals pictured here at the ‘what a cutie’ stage:
Edward Bear (or Big Ted to his friends)
Jamie Lee Curtis
Tony Frost
Andy Harris
John Harrison
Janice Hyde
Robert Redford
Deirdre Seeley
Karen Warden
PS.
Sent all your entries to the EDITOR, Andy Harris.
Remember, there is a prize of £5.00 for the person who gets the most correct answers.
GOOD LUCK!
Thoughts…
It is easy enough to hold an opinion, but hard work to actually know what one is talking about.
The computer can do more work faster than a human because it doesn't have to answer the phone.
FAST FOOD CORNER
Sluschi spaghetti
Ingredients (for two people)
240g spaghetti (or any other pasta)
Sauce 1
4–6 oz of Gorgonzola cheese
small tub of single cream
Sauce 2
jar of pesto (crushed basil and pine kernels in olive oil)
Fill a large pan with water and bring to the boil; add a heaped tablespoon of salt and a dash of ordinary cooking oil (this prevents the pasta from sticking).
Drop spaghetti into the boiling water and let it ‘collapse’, stir to ensure that strands are separated.
Test pasta after approximately 10 mins (most packaging will give you the cooking times, in any case)— pasta should never be overcooked — it is ready when it is still firm.
One form of testing the Italians swear by is to throw a strand at a wall: if it sticks, it's ready (al dente), if it falls off, it needs a little longer!
Alternatively, tasting it is another successful method.
While the pasta is cooking…
Sauce 1 (only for those who like the taste of blue cheese)
Chop cheese into small cubes; put in a small pan together with the cream and stir continuously on a low heat until cheese is completely dissolved.
 Strain pasta and pour sauce over it.
Serve with a salad, or have it on its own
Sauce 2 (for the minimalists who believe in as little washing up as possible)
Once pasta is cooked, strain water off through a colander and, using the same pan, add two to three tablespoons of olive oil; heat the oil and drop in one to two tablespoons of pesto.
Stir a couple of times, and serve over the pasta.
Serve this with extra Parmesan (lots of it!)
A quick, filling salad for summer
(can also be served as a starter)
Ingredients (for 2 people)
120g  Mozzarella 
3–4 medium sized tomatoes
a few leaves of fresh basil, finely chopped
pinch of oregano (optional)
2–3 tablespoons of olive oil
1–2 tablespoons of vinegar (any kind, although red wine vinegar is very nice)
salt
Chop  Mozzarella into thin slices; do the same with the toms.
Add all the other ingredients and toss well.
Serve with hot Ciabatta bread (you get this in most supermarkets)— ideally, you eat this salad with friends so that you will not feel too inhibited to mop up the delicious dressing with your bread!
And if you are still hungry after that, here is something guaranteed to fill you up!
Banana and yoghurt loaf
Ingredients
Mix together:
1½ cups of wholemeal flour
½ cup of rolled oats
1 cup mashed banana
½ cup sultanas
½ cup of dates, chopped
1 tsp of baking powder
Cream 4oz of butter or margarine with ½ a cup of sugar.
Beat an egg into this and add to dry ingredients with ½ cup of natural yoghurt.
Pour into a loaf tin and bake at 350°C for about 1 hour or until cooked right through.
PS. it's great served with cream (watch those hips) or yoghurt.
For a variation, try a diced apple instead of the banana.
BON APPETITO!
Problems? tell them to Auntie Jo…
I'VE ALWAYS WANTED TO BE THE SORT OF WOMAN WHO DROVE MEN WILD.
WHAT SHOULD I DO?’
Auntie Jo says:‘Wear a lot of patchouli in a crowded winebar .’
‘I THINK MY FANCIES OUR NEW MILKMAN.’
Auntie Jo says:‘Watch you milk bill!’
‘MY BOYFRIEND HAS LEFT ME AND I DON'T HAVE ANY OTHER FRIENDS.
WHAT SHOULD I DO?’
Auntie Jo says:‘Wear a short skirt, high heels and strong perfume in any crowded pub .’
‘I HAVE REACHED THIRTY AND I WANT TO GIVE UP SEX'N'DRUGS ‘N’ ROCK'N'ROLL.
IS THIS SENSIBLE?’
Auntie Jo says:‘Yes.
Now shurrup'n'have another drink .’
‘I DON'T HAVE MUCH LUCK WITH GIRLS.
ANY ADVICE?’
Auntie Jo says:‘Yes.
Watch out for girls wearing patchouli in crowded winebars and pubs .’
‘I WOULD LIKE TO TRY BONDAGE BUT I DON'T KNOW HOW TO GO ABOUT IT.’
Auntie Jo says:‘I'm…a bit tied up…ooh…at the moment!
Ask me…later!.’
‘I AM A SECRETARY AND I THINK MY BOSS IS FALLING IN LOVE WITH ME.’
Auntie Jo says:‘This is what comes of wearing minis and patchouli in crowded winebars .’
‘AUNTIE JO: I THINK YOU ARE OBSESSED WITH PATCHOULI.’
Auntie Jo says:‘Listen, this is my problem page and my obsessions are my own business!
Here — that milkman's gorgeous!’
(‘SHE'S DEFINITELY GETTING WORSE…’— The Editor.)
One up for the Phyllosan* set
by John Harrison
All right, I know it was hardly the All-England championships; I know it was only the badminton club doubles competition.
But, after years of trying, WE WON!!!
Why so triumphant?
Well, we were the oldest pair in the competition — both my partner and I are closer to the Queen's telegram than the christening gown; both nearer the bathchair than the pushchair!
There were 23 other pairs — all younger and all seeming to possess the speed of Linford Christie around the court — and, when my partner greeted me with the news that he had been undergoing physiotherapy for a dodgy back all week, I felt that our interest would be peripheral, to say the least.
So, you ask, how was it done?
I think we took full advantage of the ‘contempt factor’.
You know the type of thing: ‘Take it easy with the old boys, we don't want they injuring themselves’.
I felt that the Zimmer frame parked alongside the court evoked a touch of sympathy.
The between-points wipe with the towel, surreptitiously soaked in Wincarnis (younger readers, ask your parents!) also helped…luckily random drug tests haven't arrived at our club yet.!
Anyway, we both played like a couple of 25-year-olds (each?); seven hard adrenalin-pumping games got us to the final.
Up against us were a good pair who had previously given us a drubbing.
To cut a long short story (‘yes, please’ from a hundred throats!), just before 11.30pm, victory was ours.
Sadly, the bar had closed and the staff had long since departed so the celebration pint of bitter had to be put on ice for another day.
We wended our way home, glowing with triumph (and blood pressure!), each of us the proud possessor of a plastic, imitation silver, trophy.
I arrived home just before midnight, the Institute beckoning early next morning to share my moment of glory (there haven't been too many of those with my beloved, knowing how proud she would be of her hero!!
At this point, my body decided it had had enough.
The legs started trembling and cramping à la Victor Meldrew and did not improve until I had sunk about six gallons of tonic water, minus gin I hasten to add.
My night of glory ended up with a hobble to the shower and a flop into bed — very athletic, eh?
So, if anybody saw me on the morning after, either hobbling up or down the stairs in St Swithin's or leaping up and down (very slowly), with an ‘ooh, ah’, accompanied by much frantic rubbing of calf muscles, you know why.
I wonder if there were any England selectors there…
Would I have to take a flexi-day to play for England?…mmm, I wonder?
* A tonic for the over 40s.
SPIRIT OF ST.
SWITHINS
by Sylvia North
Some of you may have heard the rumour that my husband Malcolm and I have spent the majority of our spare time these past three years beavering away in our garage.
The fruits of our labours have resulted in us now being the proud builders of our very own MW6 microlight aircraft: GMYGE: known to us as ‘midge’.
Malcolm, an engineer, started training for his microlight pilot's licence in 1987, and several hours solo flying, three written exams, and ‘General Flying Test’ later he obtained the magical piece of paper allowing him to ‘commit aviation’!
We began flying together in a Raven flew-wing microlight that we owned, and spent two very happy years flying around Buckinghamshire/Oxfordshire in her.
In the Spring of 1990 we decided to take the plunge and build our own fixed-wing microlight-under the guidance/regulation of the Popular Flying Association and with help from the MW builders club.
Work started first on the boom, struts, fuselage and seat support assembly.
By Easter 1991 the above were well on the way, and the wheels had also been fitted.
We then concentrated our efforts on the tail-rudder and elevators were in place by late Summer 1991.
January 1992 saw the Rotax 532 (60 h.p.) engine installed.
The radiator followed three months later, and the exhaust was in place by September — as were the flying instruments/gauges/compass which we had shipped to us from Florida.
We ordered them while on holiday there last Summer: an enforced break from the building — but we managed some fabulous flying in the sun whilst we were away.
A year ago, we channelled all of our efforts on finishing the wings-eleven ply and spruce ribs on high-strength aluminium allow spars (each wing).
Work went well during the summer, and Midge passed her Pre-Covering Inspection on 26 September 1992 with ‘FLYING colours’— absolutely no apologies for the pun!
So now we had the go ahead to cover the tail surfaces and the wings (span of 36′ 9″) with fabric, dope and paint.
We hired a 20′ x 10′ marquee for a week last Xmas as our wing covering garden workshop, and by New Year all tail and wing surfaces were covered but not yet painted.
We were WELL PLEASED, I can tell you.
We fitted our seat belts this February and then concentrated on painting her flying surfaces — the paint-spraying booth at Malcolm's place of work helped a great deal!
Now we were ready to transport her carefully from our garage over to the buildings at a friend's farm at Weston Underwood — yes, he flies microlights too!!!
Our local PFA Inspector Pat Barker kept a keen eye on our progress, monitoring our workmanship at all the recognised stages throughout the build, and on 8 March this year, Midge's  propeller turned for the first time under her own engine power, being a Monday, I naturally had the day as holiday!
Having helped at all stages of the building, I certainly wasn't going to miss it!
Our inspector declared her ‘a fine aircraft’(who were we to disagree with him) and we applied for her ‘permit to test fly’.
This duly arrived and the five hour Test Programme has just been successfully completed at the farm strip at Weston Underwood where Midge is presently ‘stationed’ She has company too — her stable mate is a Tiger Moth: G-AMHF.
Under the aegis of witnessing the flight-testing, I accompanied the test-pilot (not Malcolm unfortunately) last weekend on a 50 minute jaunt around the skies between Weston Underwood and Milton Keynes.
It was my first flight in her and she performed beautifully, bless her.
I had a WONDERFUL time and can only say that Malcolm and I are looking forward very much to many happy journeys in her at home and abroad in the future.
Navigator North out!
NETBULLETIN
by Sam Brown and Nikki Brice
You must all have heard by now about the Canterbury girls latest ‘Fight the Flab’ scheme?(‘speak for yourself Samantha’the rest of the team shouts in disgust!)
After the disappointment of Ballpark closing down nearly 2 years ago, some of the girls here in Canterbury were more than enthusiastic to have the opportunity to once again, ‘do the Institute proud’ by re-launching its very own Netball Team and entering the Country Cricket Grounds Netball League.
To build up our confidence even more (without sounding too corny) the sponsorship from the Institute itself, was a great boost.
We hope one day Brian can polish the mantle piece and display our gold plated trophy and maybe perhaps carry the flag in the next Olympics.
(At present we are thinking about an all male cheer leader gang, together with pom poms and perhaps a little dance routing cheering ‘Give me a C, give me an I, give me a B, give me a S, what have you got…
CIBS’, its just the little matter of hairy legs that just might not fit in with the ra-ra skirts…)
The Team is as follows:—
Nikky Brice — Goal Shooter
Sam Brown — Goal Defence
Annie Davison — Goal Keeper
Sara Hammond — Goal Attack
Clare Herrington — Centre
Debbie Knight — Wing Defence
Yaina Willis — Wing Attack 
Above: The CIB Netball Team Below Right: The losing boys team — still smiling even in defeat.
6 League Games have been played as to date (22.06.93), with 1 draw, 2 wins and 3 losses (we have to give them some sort of chance before we give them a good thrashing).
Having 2 ex-county players on the team has also been very worthwhile with helpful tips being tried out every week (as the Institute chaps will tell you, comparing our game with them a few weeks ago and the Charity Match just played — sorry David what was the score…?)
A very unexpected comment at our first game at the Cricket Ground was met with the Umpire who enquired, ‘What does CIBS stand for?’
It wasn't until we told him, that he exclaimed ‘Oh yes, I remember the Institute Netball Team first time round in the 70's — Oh yes, a right tough lot!’— Marion, we'll get together for a few team tactics eh?
As you will see below a photograph of the ‘CIBS’ team was taken after the Charity Match, please appreciate that we are not looking our usual stunning selves, but unfortunately rouge and hairspray are not allowed on court!— no comments please Harris…
Once again the Team as a whole would like to thank the Institute for its support and sponsorship.
A BLACK DAY IN SPORTING HISTORY
by Andy Harris
Friday 18th June will go down as being Black Friday in the minds of certain men at the Institute.
The charity netball match of boys v girls took place at Canterbury Cricket ground in front of a crowd of three (one of those was the barman) and was a full half hour of pushing and shoving, all in the cause of moral victory (and raising money for charity of course).
The boys started off quite well and used their height to their advantage (with the obvious exception of Sean Parker) and finished the first half eight goals to their credit and in the lead.
At half time a mental breakdown resulted in a couple of the boys (names no mentioned to save their embarrassment) swapping positions for the second half which was a mistake on par with buying a timeshare in Bosnia.
The girls took advantage of the boys' sudden inability to catch or shoot and before long the game was over and the girls won 12–8.
There was only minimal violence during the game (provided courtesy of Clare ‘Tango’ Herrington) and only a few excuses afterwards.
The girls, spurred on by their victory went on to win their next league match and the boys went on to play for England football and cricket teams.
NOTES OF A MEETING OF LIBRARY STAFF
HELD ON WEDNESDAY, 9 JUNE 1993 AT 3 PM IN THE COUNCIL ROOM
The purpose of this meeting was to discuss ideas and plans for the reception and library areas at 10 Lombard Street.
STAFF PRESENT:
Robert Rendel began by saying that the library has been doing very well during recent years and that the usage by our members of the library facilities had increased despite falling membership.
However, it was extremely important for us in the next few years to develop this usage.
Robert referred to the recommendations and suggestions made by Alison Precious and Karen Jessop after the time they spent working on the reception desk and mentioned particularly the question of resiting the switchboard.
Unless this can be done, the way in which the area operates would have to be very considerably revised.
There seems to be no technical problem in taking the switchboard away from reception and Tony Frost is researching where else it could be sited.
It would be possible for it to be installed in Canterbury as the majority of calls coming into London are usually transferred to Canterbury anyway.
Telephone calls for the library might have a direct line so that these calls are not put down to Canterbury and then transferred again.
There are various types of switchboards available that do various things and no decision as to which one would be best for us has yet been made.
It would be possible for officers' secretaries to deal with external calls and most people do dial out direct anyway.
This should not cause any problems.
It is proposed that both reception and library desks remain but physicality and function change.
The reception desk itself and the issue desk currently in the library will merge.
The screens should be removed from the reception desk to make it more friendly and less like a bank.
The screens do, however, act as a block for sound and security and this should be borne in mind when the changes are considered.
It is not possible for all the functions of the two desks to be done at one desk in reception.
Two desks will still be needed.
The desk would have to be large enough to hold all the equipment necessary and also allow space behind for books etc to be stored.
It is proposed that the current library desk would stay where it is but that the quick reference material would be kept behind the reception desk together with the books for sale.
Some functions at present done by the library desk would move out to the reception desk such as reservations and collections etc.
We do need a desk in both places — a desk to welcome people is important.
A desk in the library is also necessary as members want to see a physical presence of staff.
It also stops books doing astray.
Another point is that it could be difficult to direct members to the book shelves, CAL area etc if only one desk was planned.
One point about security in reception is that all money would be dealt with from one desk and this would make staff very vulnerable.
Another point raised was about an area for books for sale.
It might be difficult to stop books being stolen.
Members would, it is felt, like to browse over books they are thinking of buying as without being able to see the items they may not want to buy.
The best way of displaying books for sale is to put them on bookshelves.
We could enlarge the numbers of books which we have for sale in Lombard Street.
The selection held at the moment by reception is limited to syllabus books, but putting out as much as possible on display would be beneficial.
It was mentioned that there should be somewhere for guest and visitors to sit.
There must also be room for deliveries of bulk items, taking Institute subscriptions, taking membership subs.
It is envisaged that there would be terminals in the library but three people might be needed on the reception counter at busy times.
Also, the importance of signs was stressed to make the whole area more friendly.
If there are going to be two desks we need one member of staff on each desk.
It was thought that there would be new tills and some furniture and chairs coming from CBSI, Ware.
After hearing all the views and ideas, Robert said the reason why he favours removing the screen is that it brings information services closer to our members.
We appear to be cut off and the look of the whole area is old fashioned.
We need to attract and retain members and that can be done with information which is very powerful.
This information must be readily available to members.
A different name for the reception desk was discussed — perhaps ‘Information Centre’
10 JUNE 1993  Ms Alison Footitt Barclays Management Resource Centre  6 July 1993
Dear Alison
Thank you very much for your hospitality on my recent visit.
I was very interested to learn more about Barclays' methods of training these days and to get your views on the materials supplied, particularly videos.
I look forward to seeing Laura.
I am planning a buffet lunch at 12.00 noon on Wednesday, 29 September next in the Council Room of the CIB for bank librarians to exchange views, and I would like you to come, if you can.
Lloyds Bank has closed its training establishment at Hindhead and has distributed the learning resources to its regional offices.
Stuart King of the Management Training Centre at Kingswood is setting up a new resources centre, but it is far less ambitious.
Now that Joe is back from holiday, no doubt he will be in touch with you about a visit to Godalming.
With best wishes
Yours sincerely
JIM BASKER
Manager — Information Services
THE CHARTERED INSTITUTE OF BANKERS LIBRARY MEMBERSHIP
Library membership runs from July 1st of year 1 to December 31st of year 2 and for the 1993/94 year costs £75.
As a library member your membership card entitled you to library services only.
Lending Rules 
For security, every time you come to the Institute be sure to have your card with you.
You are responsible for everything you borrow until it is back in the library.
You can borrow up to six items at any one time and most items you borrow are due back in 28 days (not a month), but some in heavy demand are due back in 14 days.
Always check the date stamp to be sure.
REMEMBER we charge fines at 50p per item per week from closing time on the date stamped in the item.
BUT you can renew a loan by telephone as long as nobody else wants the item.
Please renew several days in advance, just in case somebody else is in the queue and you have to bring it back.
You can hire some of our videos and language tapes at £2 per hire period (2/4 weeks), with an overdue charge of £2 per week.
Please post loans back in a sound Jiffy bag to prevent damage.
Other Services
In addition to books, the library has more than 200 periodicals and more than 400 information files full of periodical articles and press cuttings.
You can use them yourself or, if you are outside London, library staff will help you.
It helps to use the paper-based index World Banking Abstracts or the CD-Rom product ABI/Inform,as well as our in-line catalogue.
If you are outside London, photocopies can be sent to you for an additional charge or you can use the self-service photocopier if you are in the library.
You can reach us — and we can reach you — by mail, telephone, fax or in person.
REMEMBER WE ARE HERE TO HELP.
July 1993 
MESSAGE DISPLAY FOR SHEILA PFEIL
Gill is bringing in Kyoto and Victor, our CIB designers, to look at the signs this afternoon.
Can you please ensure their views are passed to Karen as soon as possible so she can tell Bodoni?
THE CHARTERED INSTITUTE OF BANKERS INFORMATION
SUPPORT FOR MBA STUDENTS
TEXT BOOKS
If you can't get to a specialist finance library or your library doesn't have your texts, we can help you: and we can lend books to you if you give us your membership number and address.
You can join the library for £75 if you are not a member of the CIB.
RESEARCH PROJECTS
When you undertake research you will find that the CIB has many specialist books, journals and research reports as well as databases which can identify sources of research in banking and current activity worldwide.
We can help you find information and obtain materials from elsewhere whether books, journal articles or research reports.
So it doesn't matter where you work.
THE RESOURCES TO HELP YOU ARE HERE
April 1993
Are you able to get to all your lectures
Are you studying on your own
Are you seeing the right textbooks
Can you pass the exams just by learning the textbook?
Do you fear failure?
Can your tutors pull you through?
If you expect to pass, why not go for a merit? or for a distinction? or one of our prestigious prizes?
WHATEVER THE ANSWER YOU GIVE, AND WHEREVER YOU ARE, THE CIB'S INFORMATION SERVICE CAN HELP
THE CITY RESEARCH PROJECT
The City Research project is now moving in to its second year and has already seen the publication of three reports.
Over the course of the next three months six further papers will be published:
The Implications of Surplus ACT for the Location of Financial Services.
This reviews the recent changes announced in the Budget and shows their impact on London's position as a favoured location for European headquarters.
The use of Technology for Competitive Advantage: A Study of Screen v Floor Trading.
This looks at the way in which exchanges manage technology with particular reference to the Deutsche Terminborse and London's Liffe.
Sources of Competitive Advantage in General Insurance and Investment Management.
This paper also examines the linkages between these two sectors and other financial sectors in London.
A Comparison of Telecommunications Infrastructure across Five Financial Centres.
This examines the impact of deregulation and advances in technology on the operations of financial firms.
The importance of Settlement and Clearing in Wholesale Equity Investment.
An evaluation of settlement services across financial centres.
London's Contribution to the UK Economy.
I feel certain you will be interested in come of these reports and to aid distribution, and to prevent our troubling you with unwanted copies, I would be grateful if you could arrange for the enclosed card to be completed and returned to us.
Yours sincerely
MESSAGE DISPLAY FOR JIM BASKER
To Lib From: Alison Precious Postmark: Jul 06, 93 4:12 PM Host: LOM2 Delivered: Jul 06,93 4:12 PM SUBJECT: hide and seek
Message: The following are now located between the information files and the college prospectuses Journal Indexes Anbar Abstracts World Banking Abstracts (back copies in Gallery etc) Research Index (back copies in Basement) CML Journal Index
Message: I have been thinking about your suggestion that we do not charge for ABI when we re-launch on 21st July.
Advantages — no staff involvement in managing service EXCEPT changing paper etc.
The fairest policy would be to take bookings like CAL — one hour maximum — but free.
This would mean punters know they are monitored so casual abuse might be avoided.
Using Direct Access I will be checking usage anyway.
On a more general note we MUST rationalize our charging policy or add-on services — CAL, CDROM, Online — and aim at some sort of consistency.
It's still very fuzzy for staff let alone customers.
Your comments will be ‘appreciated’