

GUINNESS globe
The newspaper of Guinness Brewing Worldwide.
July/August 1993.
Number 75
Festival programme presents…
Wexford, Cork and all that jazz
Guinness Ireland has launched its 1993 Summer with Guinness Festival programme with a special luncheon at the Dublin brewery attended by representatives from Guinness-sponsored events.
The programme got underway with the Liberties Festival in Dublin and continues right through the summer, finishing with the Wexford Opera Festival and the Guinness Cork Jazz Festival in October.
It includes well-known events such as the Rose of Tralee International Festival (see story page eight) in August and the Galway International Oyster Festival in September.
Guinness Ireland sponsors over 100 festivals each year — nearly three quarters of all Irish tourist board listed festivals — at an annual cost of IR£1.5m.
‘Both the economic and social benefits of festivals in Ireland are extremely important,’ says Guinness marketing manager .
‘A study undertaken by John O'Hagan, Professor of Economics at Trinity College, Dublin, showed that the annual foreign earnings generated by tourists who visit Irish festivals is estimated at IR£31m.
‘This represents approximately 2,000 full time jobs.
In addition, the study showed that further income is generated by Irish people who stay at home to attend a festival instead of travelling abroad.
In terms of social importance, festivals contribute greatly to cohesion within the community and provide welcome sources of entertainment.
‘In fact, Professor O'Hagan stated that even if the many festivals in Ireland provided no economic benefits at all, the social benefits alone could justify their existence,’ said .
To mark the launch of the programme, a race was held at the St James gate brewery, featuring bartenders from different festivals around the country carrying pints of Guinness on a tray.
Guinness around the world, part three: these three girls are largely responsible for promoting Guinness in the south-east Asian country of Vietnam, where Foreign Extra Stout was introduced last year.
‘We conducted extensive research into the market before starting importing from Malaysia,’ explains country manager , who is based at GBW's regional office in Singapore.
‘This is a new market for Guinness and one that has lots of potential but, though the Vietnamese drink plenty of beer, a black beer is virtually unknown.
‘Our main vehicle for introducing Guinness to customers is the team of promotional girls who travel to restaurants and bars.’
Welcome to the Taste Sensation
Guinness Brewing Great Britain has unveiled its ‘Taste Sensation’— a five-room travelling roadshow which uses the most modern technology to take visitors on a make-believe journey through a pint of Guinness.
Its launch follows the start of a new advertising campaign for draught Guinness which also uses technical wizardry to focus on the product ‘experience’.
The journey through the Taste Sensation lasts 10 minutes, with each room representing one of the five senses — smell, sight, sound, touch and taste.
In the room which focuses on sight, visitors see, hear and feel themselves being poured out of a can of draught Guinness, into a glass, down a mouth and through the human body.
In another, an Old Master oil painting comes alive as a bald female head appears, floating in space, to blow the smell of hops and barley around the room.
In the final chamber — taste — visitors receive a free glass of Guinness.
The idea was originated by Guinness and produced by a team of technical experts led by Anthony Daniels, an actor best known for his role as the golden robot C3PO in the Star Wars series of films.
Anthony mastered the hi-tech trade with Hollywood creatives like director George Lucas and the Disney team.
over view
A round-up of events in the international brewing industry
JAPAN.
Kirin Brewery Co has set up the 25,000 square metre Hokuriku beer park which is open to the public and can brew up to 1m hectolitres of beer per year.
IRELAND.
Murphy's has launched Coors Extra Gold, a US premium lager, which will compete with Budweiser, Miller and Rolling Rock.
BRITAIN.
The country's first ‘instant’ draught lager machine went on sale in June amid mystery over the brewer supplying the lager concentrate mix for use in the new machine.
RUSSIA.
Moscow is considering a ban on alcohol and tobacco advertising in most public places and on transport.
It would be allowed in specialist shops and in kiosks selling the products.
EUROPE.
The European Commission is planning to cut the legal limit for blood alcohol in drink-driving offences to 50mg/100ml in proposals which could be implemented EC-wide if approved by a majority of EC states.
The current limit is 80mg in most states.
CHINA.
Production at the Wuxi brewery is to be increased.
The brewery uses water from the Taihu, one of the lakes in China which is protected from pollution.
SINGAPORE.
The Orang Utan Brewery and Pub — Asia's first to brew its own ale — has opened, following problems with Customs duties and other regulations.
It is able to brew 10 different types of beer, including exotically flavoured beers.
FRANCE.
A beer made from prunes is now available in central France.
L'Agenoise comes in 25cl and 75cl bottles and uses 20 per cent prunes in addition to hops and barley.
DENMARK.
According to a study by a Danish doctor, moderate consumption of alcohol is good for the heart.
The 10 year study covered 13,000 people aged 30–80.
The lowest death rate was among people who drank 2–5 glasses of beer a day.
International newsbrief
Malaysia
One hundred strong years
Guinness stout is celebrating over 100 years in Malaysia with a series of promotions running until the end of the year to reward loyal drinkers for their support.
To kick off the celebration, Guinness Anchor Berhad has produced a specially-recreated commemorative classic bottle that carries the original 1965 Foreign Extra Stout label.
The bottle — a limited edition which should become a collector's item — is only available through an exchange offer.
Customers need Guinness stout bottle liners or can ring-pulls equivalent to six points and RM3.60 in cash for each bottle.
The bottle exchange offer runs until the end of this month (July) and will be succeeded by a range of other promotions.
Guinness stout was first imported from Liverpool in the late 1880s and by the early 1960s had become so popular that Guinness decided to brew in the country.
In 1965, the first bottle of locally-brewed Guinness stout rolled out from the Sungei Way brewery.
Today it is far and away the leading stout in Malaysia.
Australia
‘Green’ pub goes greener
New South Wales premier John Fahey pulled the first ‘CFC-free’ beer in Australia — a Guinness — at Sydney Irish pub the Mercantile Hotel recently.
The Mercantile — a leading draught Guinness outlet and a favourite spot for Sydney's Irish community — has installed a new beer chilling system which runs on the ozone-sage CFC replacement gas Klea 134a.
The Mercantile's switch to Klea 134a is another step in a growing trend to phase out the use of CFCs which is required by 1995 under a world environmental agreement.
Leading by example, Australian Prime Minister Paul Keating and Environment Minister Ros Kelly have had their car air-conditioning units converted to Klea 134a.
The Mercantile also hosted the launch of the Guinness Celebration of Irish Music recently.
Promoter Jon Nicholls again managed to bring the cream of Irish music to Australia and New Zealand for the festival.
New Zealand
Touching the Blarney Stone
New Zealand has another Irish pub — and it sold over 50 kegs of Guinness in its first three weeks, well ahead of any other beer it stocks.
The Blarney Stone opened in May, after builders and contractors converted the burnt-out shell of a nightclub into a pub with three bars.
The four partners — all Irish — had planned to be open for St Patrick's Day but, as the photo shows, that didn't stop them unfurling their banner to indicate they were already prepared for next year.
The main bar, Tipperary, has Irish bands most nights as well as lots of space for dancing and there are two smaller bars to which customers can retreat for a quiet drink or for private functions.
The pub features a large kitchen whose Irish chef looks set to attract the tourist market as well as New Zealanders.
Ghana
Fingers crossed for Kotoko
Guinness Ghana is sponsoring the champions of the Elite Club league in Ghana, Kumasi Asante Kotoko FC, in their campaign to win the Africa Club Champions competition.
As the Globe went to press, Kotoko had reached the quarter finals of the competition and lead Merekesh Club of Morocco 3–0 following the first leg of the round.
The victory follows a 2–0 aggregate defeat of Sahel Club of Niger in the first round.
The sponsorship lasts as long as Kotoko remain in the competition and during it the club will wear Guinness product branded jerseys in all their home matches and Guinness Ghana has exclusive rights to stadium advertising and airtime during all Kotoko international matches on GBC television.
Kotoko FC have won the trophy twice in the past — in 1971 and 1983.
Malaysia
Emergency exercise
A loaded BP fuel tanker develops a major leak while unloading 15,000 litres of fuel oil.
The driver tries to stop the leak but slips and injures his leg…
This was the scenario for Operation Guinness — a live joint exercise between Guinness Anchor Berhad, BP, the local fire department, police and hospital, which was designed to test procedures in case of emergency at GAB's Sungei Way brewery.
Controlled and coordinated by GAB's chief security officer and the local Petaling Jaya Fire Department, it was the first of its kind conducted by an industry in Malaysia.
In the exercise, an emergency was declared and Guinness personnel immediately contacted BP, the fire brigade and ambulance service.
In the meantime, the injured driver and GAB workers were attended to by a first aider by GAB and then sent to hospital by ambulance.
The exercise successfully tested GAB's procedures for dealing with a spillage, along with local emergency services and BP.
Sponsorship
Studying the world
GBW-sponsored students at Leeds University in Britain visited the Park Royal brewery last month to find out more about the company through presentations by company management.
The students are on a year-long course at the university as part of a joint sponsorship scheme between GBW, the British government's Foreign and Commonwealth Office and the University of Leeds itself.
The cost of their tuition and air fares is covered, together with allowances for living expenses, books and equipment.
comes from Delta State in Nigeria and is studying for an MBA in Development Studies at Leeds.
He says the Leeds course has broadened his horizons: ‘We have people on my course from all over the world so the approach tends to be international.
Everyone has the goal of development but the method of getting there varies a lot.’
That internationalism is not confined just to studying, says Indonesian student , who is taking an MA in Politics of International Resources and Development.
‘In my flat we have people from Greece, Italy and Brazil as well as myself.
We exchange opinions on religion, politics — just about everything in fact.
And I now know at least a few words in Greek, Italian and Portuguese!’
Both were impressed by the size and diversity of the Guinness operation.
‘In Nigeria I only knew of Guinness as the stout and Harp lager so I have been surprised by the diversity of the company,’ reflects .
Both will finish their courses in September and will return to their countries to apply what they have learnt.
Their fellow students are .
Ghana
Moving up a gear
Guinness Ghana has improved its distribution system with the introduction of mechanically-loaded trailers.
In the past, Guinness vehicles were loaded and discharged by hand.
‘The new system has made a big improvement to our customer service and has reduced costs,’ says Guinness Ghana managing director .
‘The round trip to Accra can now be completed in one day.’
Pat points out that Irish readers may well find the new trailers familiar — they were originally with Guinness Ireland in Dublin.
The photograph shows Guinness Ghana distribution manager  briefing his team at the brewery in Kumasi.
SHARE WATCH
writes: The Guinness PLC Annual General Meeting held on May 26th was well received in the circumstances by the City and shareholders alike — there were few surprises.
Our annual institutional presentations held in London, Edinburgh and Paris mapping out the next phase of company development were also well received.
The beginning of the month saw Guinness share volumes traded at an average of three million per day, well above normal.
However, this began to trail off towards the end of June due to outside distractions — Wimbledon tennis and International cricket.
In early June the price was affected by a story concerning price reductions in champagne.
News broke in late June about a 50 per cent reduction in Japanese duty on imported spirits.
This turned out to be something of a red herring as the official duty rate has not been applied since 1987 and in the meantime the temporary rate has already been 50 per cent less.
As we understand it, nothing has changed in Japan but it still managed to make the news and push the share price higher, so that it ended the month in much the same place as it began.
Asia Pacific region
Indonesia's growing taste for FES
Guinness may be easy to find in Indonesia today — but two decades ago it was a different story.
Simon Bottery reports on the journey from minority appeal to much wider popularity.
Twenty years ago, Guinness was virtually unheard of in Indonesia.
Though the brand had been in the market since before the war, it had a very small market share.
Drunk by the Chinese population of the country, it sales depended largely on a reputation for medicinal properties.
Now, the brand is the third largest in the country and far and away the biggest selling stout.
The years between 1973, when Guinness first established a presence in Indonesia, and today have seen a long but seemingly inexorable growth in the Guinness brand.
Doddy Abdurachman remembers those early days well.
Now managing director of Guinness sales, marketing and distribution agent PT Gitaswara Indonesia, in 1973 he answered an advertisement to market the then fledgling brand.
‘To begin with, we had four people but no office to work in.
Within two weeks, we had got an office — though still no desks and chairs,’ he recalls.
Doddy's first job was to find out the extent of the Guinness brand's availability.
It was — quite literally — a sobering experience.
‘In the whole of Jakarta, I could find only 62 outlets selling Guinness — and those were mainly in the port area and in Chinatown,’ he remembers.
Today, Doddy heads up the 400-strong PTGI company, an agency which makes available Guinness throughout the country, from small road-side stalls to large supermarkets, from luxury hotels to more downmarket bars.
It controls its own distributor company and also — almost unique for a Guinness agency — acts for United Distillers marketing UD/MHA's brands in Indonesia.
Looking back, Doddy sees the brewing agreement with local brewers Multi Bintang Indonesia — who brew FES — as the starting block to success.
‘Our relationship with MBI is excellent.
That sort of partnership cannot be built up over a few years, it has to be through a long term commitment by both parties.’
Recuperative powers
Equally as important, though, has been the reputation of Guinness as a tonic.
Guinness drinkers in Indonesia had long believed in the recuperative powers of Foreign Extra Stout and this has not changed today.
‘There is widespread acceptance here of the restorative and health benefits of alcohol,’ explains Doddy.
The latest stage in the Guinness growth story has come from TV advertising, with the Guinness commercial in Indonesia being perhaps the most unusual in the group.
It is a highly successful adaptation of an advertisement which was first shown back in the early 1980s in Britain.
The story behind this unique commercial starts in 1991 when the Guinness licensee — brewers Bintang — began a series of commercials on Indonesian television.
It was the first time the brewer had advertised on TV and the landmark was not lost on Guinness.
The cost of producing a new commercial could not be justified — the Indonesian beer market is still relatively small, although growing — so PTGI scoured the GBW network for existing advertisements which might be adapted for Indonesia.
It found one in Guinness Brewing Great Britain's commercial ‘Nature’.
At 60 seconds it was too long — PTGI wanted one 30 seconds long — but after editing out the product shots and making a few other amendments it was suitable.
In August last year it was ready and went on air.
Positive response
The response was quick — and positive.
Sales rose in September and have continued to rise ever since.
Other brewers were surprised that Guinness — marketing a black beer in a country where nearly 90 per cent of the market is blonde beer — was on television.
The commercial is not designed to win non-drinkers to Guinness but rather to build company awareness and to remind current drinkers — and especially blonde beer drinkers — about Guinness.
In that it has been successful.
Research shows that blonde beer drinkers were aware of Guinness and found the commercials unique and somewhat mysterious — precisely the image that PTGI was trying to develop.
Non-drinkers tended not to know about Guinness and found the advertisements very difficult to understand.
Overall, research shows that the commercials are very meaningful to Guinness drinkers and reinforce its  reputations as a tonic.
Fortified by that success, PTGI is now looking at extending its advertising into the cinema.
The full 60-second version of ‘Nature’ will be used, with some small additions to link it to the TV commercial.
The cinema campaign starts this month (July).
Meanwhile, PTGI continues to review videos of other Guinness advertising around the world to help decide on the next step.
‘We are looking at the possibilities of using other Guinness commercials which we can edit or modify using local models,’ says , the Guinness brand manager at PTGI.
‘We have thought about developing our own commercial but the cost would be prohibitive so we are looking at repeating the success of the ‘Nature’ commercial by taking advertisements from other parts of the world.’
Even if that were not to happen, evidence suggests PTGI's growth would continue.
The company has innovative and successful promotion strategies apart from above-the-line advertising.
The nature of these is, like its TV commercials, to some extent born out of necessity.
Indonesian bars work on a tied system.
A bar will be tied, say, to one brand of blonde beer and limited in what else it can sell.
Bar owners will usually insist on being able to sell Guinness because of its popularity in Indonesia and generally the brewers will agree — but only if no Guinness promotional activity takes place in the bar.
One way around that problem has been the use of outdoor announcement boards, which are positioned just outside the bar and are very clearly Guinness branded.
The problem with tied bars is particularly acute where the bar is linked to the number two blond beer, Anker, which has its own black beer, Anker stout.
Here, the Guinness name, prestige and selling power really comes into its own.
‘Anker stout has only a small percentage of the market so though bar owners will agree to stock it they will usually insist on selling Guinness as well,’ explains .
‘That allows consumers a fair choice between the two brands.
Obviously, we are convinced that most drinkers will choose Guinness’
Giving further solidity to the PTGI set-up have been the recent moves into the fields of distribution and having a wider portfolio of products with the United Distillers range of spirits brands.
joined PTGI from Guinness Brewing Great Britain in July last year and, as he says, ‘things haven't stopped for me since.
This is a fascinating place to work and during my first year here the business has continued to develop.
There have been lots of changes.
We are growing the Guinness business rapidly with advertising and closer links with the trade through our distributor company, GBS.
Add to that the new agreement for wines and spirits and life has been really hectic.’
PTGI's retail trade distribution is handled by GBS, originally set up to market Guinness Black Shandy a few years ago.
Black Shandy failed but GBS made a tidy living selling nuts and snacks until PTGI decided to develop a closer trading relationship with it last year and to manage more directly the retail distribution of the FES brand.
In doing so it became one of the few countries where the brand has an active agency handling Guinness through the retail distribution system.
GBS now has 10 depots and an eleventh will open next month (August).
Complex market
Given Indonesia's size and geography, distribution is hardly simple.
‘It's a very complicated market with all manner of complexities, and tight legislation regarding the production, marketing and distribution of alcohol,’ says .
‘Outlets vary from large supermarket chains to guys by the side of the road maybe selling six bottles a week.
They are both important and we have to make sure they are all covered.’
The capital city, Jakarta, accounts for around 40 per cent of the Indonesian market but there are Guinness drinkers on many of the 13,677 islands in the archipelago and they also need to be served.
The move to GBS outside of Jakarta has gone very smoothly, says .
Distribution control has cut out two layers from the chain, given PTGI greater control of retail stock levels — and increased margins.
Adding to PTGI's uniqueness in the GBW network of agencies is the agreement which began in January for the company to market the full range of United Distillers' products.
From Johnnie Walker Red and Black Label to Hennessy XO, PTGI now holds a position which few other companies related to GBW also hold.
The new agreement means that wines and spirits will now be a significant part of PTGI's portfolio and it offers excellent potential for future growth as tourism develops in Bali, Lombok and Indonesia's other tourist destinations.
With a controlled distributor system, the spirits range and its own TV airtime, PTGI — and Guinness in Indonesia — is moving on still further from its origins back in the 1970s.
The Indonesian market may not be the biggest for Guinness in south east Asia but, like the country itself, it has great potential and is one of the most challenging and diverse.
That's one thing, at least, that hasn't changed for Guinness in the last 20 years.
Cats and dogs
Guinness Foreign Extra Stout labels in Indonesia have their own unique symbols — a cat and a red-tongued dog.
They were originally the signs used by the distributors of FES but have now become almost as well-known in the country as the Guinness brand name itself.
Bir Hitam, incidentally, means ‘black beer’.
Earthwatch sponsorship
A cross section of the world
GBW is sponsoring ten students from all over the world to take part in projects run by Earthwatch, the international organisation that sponsors scientific research.
Here they explain a little about their backgrounds, their interests and their hopes and fears for the future.
Adventure and challenge has always been in me.
If you tell me something can't be done, I'll probably tell you it can and when I've started on it things like sleep and food can become secondary.’
David Chin Kah Hin's response to a question about adventurousness, adaptability and tolerance typifies the spirit and imagination of the 35 applicants for a Guinness Earth Science Award.
David's application was successful and along with nine other students he will shortly be setting off for one of eight specially selected Earthwatch projects for two weeks of hard work, learning and fun.
Here's now nine of the applicants (one of the places is still being decided) described themselves in their applications, together with some of their concerns, interests and plans for the future.
To win a Guinness Earth Science Award, applicants had to supply a 1,500 word essay covering the following subjects:
As a student what do you view as the benefit of joining an Earthwatch expedition?
How might you use your field research experience in your studies?
How will an Earthwatch expedition contribute to your professional development?
Most of the information in this article comes from these submissions.
On their return, volunteers will submit a report on their fieldwork which we will publish in the Globe.
David Chin, Singapore.
Age: 23
Project: Florida's Underground
My name is David and I'm now doing a course in Materials Engineering.
My interests include almost anything adventurous or challenging, like mountain and rock climbing, exploring, scuba diving etc.
However, I would think twice about bungee jumping.
More commonly I run, swim, cycle, play squash and badminton.
If ever I get the chance I would love to take up sky diving and roam through the Amazon jungle (especially while it's still around) to collect undiscovered plants for medical research.
I think that a sense of humour is a very important quality (besides honesty, loyalty etc) because I believe that if you can laugh at things it makes life a whole lot easier.
Besides, it is the best medicine.
I hope to find a new challenge, not just something to add to a list but a challenge with a greater cause behind it.
Making new friends and learning to work side by side with people from other places is also something I am eager to do.
Furthermore I hope to share the experiences gained in this expedition with those around me so that they may realise that they can make a difference, however small it may be, if they choose.
Hassan Mohammed, Nigeria.
Age: 36
Project: Wind and Sun Power for Kenya
I am the officer in charge of all cultural activities in Birnin Gwari local government of Kaduna State in Nigeria.
This includes research and documentation of the history of local communities; exploring and exposing historical sites and ancient monuments; revival and promotion of cultural festivals; studies into traditional healthcare.
It also includes discouraging cultural traits that have outlived their usefulness and may be otherwise harmful to society.
At the same time we expose local people to new developments that may be beneficial to cultural activities.
The problems I would like to briefly highlight here are in the fields of traditional health care systems and ecological disturbance and the problem of drought and desertification.
In traditional medicine we have a lot of local herbs that are proven to cure venereal diseases, effectively suppress malaria, and alleviate stomach pains, ulcers and even certain types of cancer.
However in the aspect of maternal health care systems, pregnant women are daily losing their lives due to inadequate care through the traditional delivery system.
The local techniques cannot be totally condemned, however they need to be refined, up-dated and new techniques need to be injected into them.
More than 60 per cent of households in Nigeria rely on firewood for cooking purposes, partly due to ignorance and partly due to the fact that they cannot afford kerosene stoves or gas cookers.
This frustrates government efforts in checking desert encroachment.
I hope by participating in the Earthwatch expedition I would have the chance of studying alternative sources of fuel for the benefit of local communities which would help in checking the ecological disturbance.
The forests are at the same time being stripped of valuable and rare animals.
Poachers devour these at will, daily, forcing many of them to migrate.
Others, less fortunate, are caught as game and used to supply the necessary protein for family consumption.
The Kamuku Game Reserve is a typical example of a forest area that is experiencing the kind of problems described above.
The experience I would hope to gain in an Earthwatch project would make me competent enough to join hands with the necessary authorities in improving the condition of these game reserves.
Francisco Martin Garcia, Spain.
Age: 26
Project: Australia's shrinking wildlands
I was born in Gran Canaria in the city of Las Palmas, which is the administrative centre of the Canary Islands.
The memories of my childhood were suffused with images of the beauty of the landscape and the peaceful atmosphere of the island.
However, during the late seventies and early eighties the Canary Islands in general and Gran Canaria in particular began to be spoilt by the indiscriminate exploitation of the big tour operators (encouraged by local speculators).
High apartment buildings and hotels were built up without any urban planning.
The island was sold as a sun and sea destination.
Tourists from all over Europe came to Gran Canaria with no knowledge of its rare flora and fauna and with no interest at all in its environment.
The island for these tourists was nothing but a sun-tan and duty free shopping.
The steady inexorable process of exploitation, with great cost to the environment, has gone on and on.
The current recession seems to be a breakpoint in this trend.
The government has at last realised the importance of preserving the eco system as a way to attract a new kind of tourist (with more culture and money to spend) who will see Gran Canaria not just as cheap holidays in the sun but as a living island.
To this end a campaign to grant the status of national park to a large wilderness area comprising about a sixth of the land area of the island is being carried out by the local government of Gran Canaria.
The hope now is that the tour operators and the local population will seize the opportunity presented to the island.
For these reasons when I heard about the work of Earthwatch I wanted to find out more about it.
As the main problem for me to join an Earthwatch expedition was the high cost  it the possibility of getting a grant from Guinness was good news.
I think that participating in an Earthwatch project is one of the best ways to gain some knowledge about the environment and its real problems and therefore is a ‘must’ if you want to understand the way the environment reacts to human activities.
Jacqueline Points, Britain.
Age: 21
Project: Maternal Health in Africa (Zimbabwe
I am a 21 year old female medical student hoping for a career in health promotion.
I work during my vacations as an auxiliary nurse at my local hospital.
I work part time as a barmaid in a four-star hotel.
I enjoy most sports, listening to all kinds of music and cooking.
Too often students go straight from school to college and on to university without seeing any action resulting from their studies.
I feel it is important to get a taste of a working environment before going straight through schooling into paid employment.
Even work experience for just a fortnight — such as an Earthwatch project — is worthwhile.
I spent a year working in a hospital as an auxiliary nurse between college and university.
I think that this was more beneficial than continuing my education directly.
Jane Harman, Britain.
Age: 20
Project: Maternal Health in Africa (Zimbabwe)
Hi, I'm Jane a prospective midwife due to a bizarre attraction towards pregnant women!
Maternity work with women from varied ethnic backgrounds developed my interest into health education and promotion.
I tasted African culture with the Ethiopian children and am eager for more!
I am into chocolate, keeping fir (!), travel, pigs (!) and I truly love talking to people (anyone will do!)
I think that this Earthwatch expedition could contribute invaluably to my professional development, most obviously because the Maternal Health in Africa project fits so perfectly with my interests and future hopes of becoming a midwife.
I strongly support having as natural a pregnancy and birth as possible as opposed to blanket medical intervention for all women during such an instinctive process.
I would be interested to experience a situation where medical intervention is not as widely available as it is in Great Britain.
Despite the fact that I feel strongly about this issue, I remain open-minded and by seeing as much as is attainable my ideas will develop and so determine the kind of practitioner I hope to be.
Nicholas Adjei Antwi, Kenya.
Age: 24
Project: Hungarian Lake Survey
I received five years of general secondary education and two years at computer training school.
During this period I worked as a computer programmer in Accra for a year.
My greatest aspiration is to work towards a clean healthy environment for all humanity.
Through the Earthwatch expedition I hope to benefit greatly by assisting to improve the quality of life on earth and especially the life of the poverty-stricken people of my continent, whose lot in life is always disease, environmental degradation and poor living standards.
I hope through the Earthwatch programme to assist in preserving natural habitats, saving endangered species of this planet and promoting and preserving the cultures of different tribes.
By doing so I hope to provide a great example for others to follow and to leave my name and footprints in the history of my school.
Dylan Patrick Browne, Britain.
Age 23.
Project: Saving Philippine Reefs
My name is Dylan.
I am working on my Masters degree in oceanography.
I love climbing mountains and sailing seas.
I look forward to parties where people do not stand in the kitchen.
I enjoy movies but am a sucker for sad endings.
I find Filipino sea food delicious but deliberate about conscience.
The origins of the word ‘travel’ is a derivation from the Latin term for ‘torture’and indeed travelling can, on occasion, be a gruesome experience.
When travelling, the intensity with which foreign cultures are encountered inspires a need to understand.
Unusual sounds, sights, smells and tastes need to be related to a standard which we often call home, this correlation is naturally conducive to education.
This may be the inspiration of a new perspective on an old situation.
As a student, one is fortunate to have a mind nurtured into a condition to be open to such experiences and benefit from such insight.
Sarina Abdul Rani, Malaysia.
Age 19.
Project: Wind and Sun Power for Kenya
Hello.
My name is Sarina and I am an A-level student from Malaysia.
I am interested in outdoor activities and journalism.
What experiences have I had which have showed by adventurousness, adaptability and tolerance?
While waiting for my O-level results I worked as a part-time crew member in a restaurant.
During the six months I spent there I realised how important it was to adapt quickly.
Dealing with customers also taught me that not every situation is the same and I had to think fast and wise when faced with a problem.
I learned that good communication skills, courtesy and commitment were extremely necessary for the job.
In the past two years I have stayed with my friends in another part of the country and we travelled together to an island, a famous hill and many other interesting places.
I have also been on many other outings with my family where we enjoyed nature together.
At the moment I am residing in a hostel where I have to share all the basic amenities and do my share of cleaning up.
I am used to sharing rooms with friends in inns or hotels when we travel.
After my exam, I would like to go for a course at the Outward Bound School where I can learn many new things.
As a student, I have the obligation to gather as much knowledge as possible.
When I step out to join society, I have the duty to put to good use the knowledge I have acquired.
Susan Steele, Ireland.
Age: 21.
Project: Mediterranean Island Wildlife
I'm outgoing, I enjoy being active and I like to spend most of my time — when I'm not studying marine biology — scuba diving.
I went to boarding school and so am used to living in close quarters.
I was made head girl there and captain of the senior hockey team.
I have gone to world peace meetings in London and to international North Sea ones in Germany and Ireland — these have been longer than two weeks and so I am used to meeting people.
I love camping and am an active scuba diver, both of which mean interaction.
I am at present a student rep in Bangor.
I am an outgoing, lively person who enjoys adventures and meeting new people.
I am also interested in everything!
Malaysia
Effort award for volunteer force
A team of 24 firemen who have operated for 17 years without pay and raised the money for their own equipment are the most recent winners of the Guinness Stout Effort Award in Malaysia.
The awards — which started in Malaysia 18 years ago and are also award in other countries where Guinness operates — recognises achievements in a variety of fields and are intended to foster a sense of pride and civic consciousness among Malaysians.
The Voluntary Fire Brigade of Kuala Kedah was formed in 1976 after a tragic fire which destroyed almost the entire village, burning down 800 houses and making more than 5,000 people homeless.
The brigade began with 18 members, of which 16 are still active, and raised money from the public to buy fire fighting equipment.
In 1981 the brigade received a second hand fire engine from the local fire department and in 1989 public donations allowed them to buy a second reconditioned engine.
Two years ago — again with help from the public and the team's dedication in raising money — they were able to build a headquarters on a piece of land donated by the state government of Kedah.
Brigade chairman  says the force has turned down allowances for its services because the formation of the brigade was voluntary and they are proud to render their services to the people and the country.
They were chosen for the award by an independent panel of judges comprising leading local journalists from the print and electronic media and are the sixth award winners from the state of Kedah and the 142nd overall since the scheme was launched in July 1975.
Each of the volunteer firemen was presented with a Guinness Stout Effort Award Certificate, an engraved pewter goblet and a copy of the 1993 Guinness Book of Records.
Britain
Another ‘Sharp Exit’
Harp Lager, one of the UK's best selling lager brands, has launched two new TV commercials based on the successful ‘Sharp Exit’ campaign.
The commercials —‘Cinema’(above) and ‘Department Store’— broke nationally on July 15th and will run during July and August for six weeks before returning at Christmas.
Since its introduction in 1989, the campaign has earned the highest awareness ever for Harp advertising.
Marketing manager  says: ‘Harp is performing well in very tough market conditions.
Our marketing spend reflects our confidence that the brand will continue to grow ahead of the market.’
Circulation
Getting up to date People move jobs, departments move offices, companies move headquarters — and each time the Globe circulation gets slightly out of date.
There's an easy way to solve the problem though.
Simply fill in the attached form and return it to the Globe office.
It will make sure that you receive the correct number of copies of the Globe on time each month.
Use the form if
You have moved office
You are receiving too many or too few copies of the Globe each month
You do not currently receive a copy of the Globe but you would like to
Fill in this section if you want to change the number of copies of the Globe that you receive…
Current number of copies received
Number of copies you wish to receive
Fill in this section if you want to change the address to which your copy is delivered…
Name and address on current label (if known)
And finally fill in this section…
Germany
German ‘Rose’ on her way to Ireland
Sabine Sheehan (21) was elected the German ‘Rose of Tralee’ last month in a competition of which Guinness was the chief sponsor.
Sabine was among the many girls of Irish descent who entered one of eight regional finals held in Guinness Irish pubs throughout Germany, all culminating in the national final held in the Irish Pub in Berlin's Europa Centre.
Sabine, whose mother is German and father is Irish, has been living in Stuttgart for one year.
At the end of August she will travel to the international finals in Tralee, Ireland, also sponsored by Guinness.
There she will represent Germany among contestants from the United States, Australia, New Zealand, France and many other countries.
This is the second year that Guinness has been the chief sponsor of the event, following Murphy's unsuccessful attempt to gain the right to the event back in 1992.
The five members of the jury had a difficult time choosing the winner from the eight finalists, says Colin Bruder, general manager of Guinness GmbH.
‘All the ladies impressed us with their charm, their sense of humour and their vivacity.
We would have preferred to choose them all as the German Rose of Tralee,’
An audience of over 300 guests was entertained during the final by popular German television personality Fritz Egner and the band ‘Rock 59’ from Berlin