

House Newspaper of Stoddard Sekers International PLC
STODDARD TEMPLETON WINS MAJOR AWARDS
This year's Harrogate Exhibition must rate as one of the most successful ever for Stoddard Templeton.
The exhibition was used as the official launch of ‘Lafayette’ a new Axminster range which won the premier ‘Stylesetter Award’.
Next came an award for Silktones Elite, also a new range, which won the prize for the best carpet for living areas, category two, and finally a commendation for the latest design being added to the Glenmore range — Shelburne Green.
These awards confirm Stoddard Templeton's position as leaders in design, a reputation that is both hard won and rewarding.
The panel of judges was selected from leading retailers, briefed to select the winner as the range of carpets which had the most originality and innovation with outstanding sales potential.
It is, therefore, of particular significance to Lafayette as this new range, which took one year to develop, is launched into the market place.
To capitalise on the award, adverts are being taken in the main trade magazines, and leaflets are being distributed to the sales force, both of which will inform carpet retailers throughout the country that Lafayette has ‘outstanding sales potential.’
It is the first time that the Stylesetter Award has been given to an Axminster carpet range.
Stoddard's previous success was in 1986 with the Variations Tufted package.
Other awards were also won that same year, the most significant being a Design Council Award presented by the Duke of Edinburgh.
Since 1985, not one year has passed without winning an award at one or another of the major trade exhibitions.
Rod Turnbull, Joint Managing Director, comments ‘We are delighted to have received these three awards.’
The Stylesetter Award is particularly gratifying as it confirms that Stoddard Templeton is continuing to lead the way in carpet development through its design expertise.
He goes on to say ‘In presenting us with the award for Lafayette, the judges believe that the new range has outstanding sales potential.
As a result of the extensive research we have carried out into its introduction, we too are convinced that Lafayette will be a major success story.’
(Lafayette launch details see page 5 )
Ronnie Wilkie, Chief Designer (left), receives the award for Silktones Elite from Brian Cruttenden of Carpet & Floorcoverings Review, organisers of the Harrogate Awards.
At the Harrogate Awards presentation in the Majestic Hotel, attended by over two hundred carpet trade executives as guests of ‘Carpet & Floorcoverings Review’, Bill Naysmith (left) Design Director is presented with the premier ‘Stylesetter Award’ by Brian Cruttenden, Advertising Manager C. & F.R.
MAJOR BUSINESS GAINS FOR GROUP
Boosted with the news of two important new contracts, both Lyle Carpets and Stoddard Mercia Contract are set to gain a significant increase in market share.
In one stroke Lyle has added 230 retailers to their list of customers and Stoddard's Contract Division has received an order for 15,200 square meters of Custom carpeting for two Stakis Country Court Hotels.
Lyle's contract was signed with the Associated Carpet Group (A.C.G.) representing independent carpet retailers throughout the U.K. It was won against stiff competition by offering a collection of five carpet ranges made up of 72 individual items all presented on one Tombola.
This winning combination will be sold as an A.C.G. ‘own label’ product to be called the Malvern Collection.
Stoddard Mercia's expertise in weaving special designs to the customers' exact requirements was a major factor in obtaining the Country Court order.
Between 20 and 24 new hotels in the U.K. are being planned for which this order (for hotels in Northampton and Maidstone) represent a fraction of the full potential.
Corridors 300 feet in length, using individually positioned bordered squares in the run of carpet are just part of the requirement which also includes all public areas and bedrooms.
A number of Stakis Casinos are also in the pipe line as part of a separate order.
Results give Confidence
In the Annual Report published in July, Hugh Laughland, Chairman of Stoddard Sekers International PLC, praised the efforts of all who worked for the company.
He stated ‘Success is achieved only through the commitment of all concerned in the group.
We have enjoyed the loyal and industrious support of our employees throughout and I thank them for their individual contributions to the year's achievements.’
Ralph Ellis — Chief Executive
Outstanding Service
The Chairman's statement went on to say ‘The Group's policy of major investment in design leadership, quality manufacture and an outstanding level of customer service, has produced commensurate rewards in the year to 31st March 1990.
Much has been written of the difficult trading condition as interest rates rise and demand slows, but a substantial market place continues to exist.
Illustrated within the report as an example of outstanding customer service was the NARF Award to Stoddard Templeton, voted by 3,000 members of the National Association of Retail Furnishers, for the ‘best service to retailers.’
Hugh Laughland — Chairman
Praiseworthy
‘Our carpet companies traded with notable success,’ said the Chairman, ‘strengthening our position as a leading member of the industry.
It is a praiseworthy achievement to produce a result in line with last year in an economic climate which dampened demand in the retail market and caused considerable well publicised problems for certain companies in the industry.
Sekers Fabrics has been revitalised and will now move forward from its breakeven position of the past year to acceptable profits anticipated in the year ahead.’
Under the heading of ‘People’ in the Chief Executive's Report, Ralph Ellis states that ‘The skills, commitment and professionalism of all our employees continue to play a vital role in the group's performance.
We are maintaining our investment in training and development throughout the group.
Most employees have opportunities to supplement their remuneration through various performances related schemes and to share meaningfully in the profitable development of the group.
it is worth noting that one in four of our employees have expressed their commitment by direct shareholding or as share option holders.’
Communication
As part of the company policy to inform all employees of the results, Ralph Ellis, Chief Executive, held a series of Communication Meetings during August.
These took place in canteens, offices and showrooms throughout all factories in the group, carefully timed to enable the attendance of those on shiftwork.
Figures were interpreted and relevant points highlighted.
Employees were encouraged to raise questions following the meetings together with ideas for improving the format or content of the presentations.
NEW LOOK FOR LONDON
Following the move of the Contracts Division London Showroom, from the Business Design Centre to premises shared with Sekers Fabrics in Cavendish Place, a complete refurbishment of the interior has been carried out.
The existence of a London Showroom for the contract and international market is a vital part of the marketing process where designers can see at first hand the fabrics and curtains to be used in their interiors.
One of the more recent visitors was the Richmond Design Group, one of the largest in the world, who chose special carpet designs for the Metropole Hotel in London and the Old City Hall in Amsterdam, R M J M Architects chose one of the most individualistic designs yet woven by Stoddard Mercia, using circular carpet in New Zealand House, London while Conran Design chose a custom made design based on Celtic knots for the gift shop at the headquarters of Glenfiddich.
Hotel Groups such as Hospitality Inn and the Sheraton have also recently specified carpet for their hotels in Edinburgh.
Jacquie Taylor, creates imaginative carpet designs for clients in the London studio.
The spacious premises on the first floor were completely reorganised  including a new studio where our designer Jacquie Taylor, is able to work with potential customers creating individual designs on the new H.C.S. desk top computer.
Standard carpet ranges and stock items are also on display together with Sekers Fabrics, examples of which are attractively draped in co-ordinated setting to create a showroom that is both practical and in keeping with the expectations of the world's leading designers.
The interior renovations were carried out by Whitecroft Design, specialists in display who also build Stoddard's exhibition stands for ‘Interior Design International’, ‘Harrogate’ and ‘Decorex’the three main annual exhibitions.
Specialised lighting, racking systems and display units have all been installed.
Fabrics and carpets are displayed in the spacious interior of the London Showroom.
Many carpet and fabric examples are used by interior designers in the London Showroom.
SPOTTING THE CHANGES
In a ‘walk about’ around the factory with John Cunningham, Chief Engineer, the Glenpatrick News reports on many changes and developments.
At the ‘top end’ in the open space between the design studio and the pattern room, the car park has been upgraded and extended, covering the sunken stream now passing underneath a bright shiny new tarmac surface.
Contractors levelled the ground with mechanical diggers using huge pre-stressed slabs of concrete to reinforce the covering on the ‘Brandy Burn’.
Retaining walls have been built by John Rankin and George Ballantyne outside the entrance to the lower floor of the pattern room behind which the raised level of the new car park stretches across to open ground where the old Wilton sheds once stood.
Eventually it is intended to remove the ramp which presently gives access to the pattern room.
Moving into the factory a Wilton loom has been completely reconditioned during the holiday period and 200 new Axminster spool frames are already in use.
In the despatch area new racking is about to be erected, meeting the demand for more warehouse space and nearby the returns areas has been shifted with two inspection floors being placed adjacent to one another in a new location.
Recently a new S80 large fork lift has been supplied to the warehouse.
In addition to all this, during the holiday period a newly bought fifteen foot wide Axminster spool gripper loom was lifted in by a seventy ton crane, and now awaits assembly.
Meanwhile two twelve foot Axminster Jacquards are being overhauled and rep-commissioned ready for contract and export orders, the first of which is being woven for Stakis Country Court Hotels.
Steady as she goes — the 15 foot Axminster loom is off-loaded by crane.
Young Designers Encouraged
Stoddard Sekers continue to work closely with Art Institutions and Colleges.
In particular the Royal Society of Art and the Glasgow School of Art, giving support and encouragement to designers by recognising outstanding ability.
For the past few years, Stoddard Sekers has provided practical and financial assistance enabling students to gain an understanding of the Textile industry and at the same time providing the company with an insight into what ‘is going on today’ in the various colleges.
The creative techniques explored by students when linked to their uninhibited artistic approach is a useful stimulus to our designers assisting the company to keep its leading edge at the forefront of design.
The 1989/90 R.S.A. Student Design Awards for Furnishing Textiles and Home  Furnishing attracted 117 candidates from 26 colleges.
Alan Mcleod (age 21) of Edinburgh College of Art won The Sekers Fabrics Ltd.
Attachment and Travel Bursary Award for his bold print designs, inspired by Greek Classical Art.
Alan is currently working in the Elderslie studio on the 10 week attachment prior to using his travel part of the award.
Opportunities
Samples of the G.S.A. students' work, sponsored by Stoddard Sekers were displayed during early summer at the Scotfree Exhibition at the Business Design Centre in London.
This exhibition is organised to promote the best of Scottish design.
Opportunities were also given at the Interior Design International Exhibition in London, where examples of the G.S.A. students' work was shown on the Stoddard Sekers stand, including the stunning fresco print by John MacAulay which was featured on the stand ceiling.
‘This is an ambitious liaison between Stoddard Sekers and Schools of Art,’ said Mr Bill Naysmith, Group Design Director.
‘It involves a very serious commitment by several of the design staff in a tutorial and critical appraised role throughout the College terms.
It is seen to help the designers of tomorrow cross the industrial and academic divide by being involved with a commercially successful design team.
I look forward to many more exciting developments in the future.’
Alan Macleod (left) from Edinburgh College of Art is presented with an R.S.A. Design Award by Bill Naysmith, a member of the R.S.A. judging jury, and Group Design Director of Stoddard Series.
An Englishman's Home…
Carpets from Stoddard Mercia have decorated some amazing locations ranging from oil rigs to mosques, but one of their recent orders must be counted amongst the more unusual.
It is ‘No Mans Land Fort’ which stands completely isolated in the English Channel about three miles off shore from Portsmouth.
Built in 1870 by Palmerston to ward off the French, this circular granite and steel stronghold which was never used for its original purpose, rises sheer from the sea bed, and has been converted into a James Bond style multi-millionaire's private residence.
The asking price is a cool £5.75 million including the helicopter, speed boat and two swimming pools, all of which hit the headlines on national television news and were extensively featured in a Sunday colour supplement.
Stoddard Mercia, worked closely with developer Roger Penfold and his wife Carolyne, who has her own interior design business, Libra Interiors.
For the Music Room and dining area, a geometric effect in cream and indigo blue was chosen to help break up the space.
Woven in 80% Wool, 20% Nylon, the carpet is a Custom Wilton, specially designed in Stoddard Mercia's own design studios as part of their Custom Programme.
For the master suite in the Lighthouse complex and the other luxurious bedrooms, Carolyne Penfold specified Champagne from the successful Silktones range.
No Man's Land Fort, now renovated with a luxurious interior where cannons once stood, is three miles from the nearest port.
With walls  built as defence against artillery shells, a beautiful interior has been created using Stoddard Mercia Carpet.
Lock Stock & Barrel
Fire damaged Gairloch Hotel has been completely refurbished using Stoddard Mercia carpets and Sekers Fabrics throughout.
For the first time Stoddard Mercia were responsible for creating the complete interior scheme including furniture, light fittings and wallpaper.
Jim Maxwell, Contracts Manager Scotland, worked closely with Norscot Hotels, owners of the Gairloch Hotel, to gain approval of the colour schemes chosen by the design studio.
The provision of bed covers, curtains, pelmets, chair covers and furniture were all co-ordinated by the contracts department who liaised with other manufacturers.
Carpets with borders were custom made for the large public areas and standard ranges were used for the 72 bedrooms.
The hotel which had been gutted by fire last year, re-opened for business during August.
Furnished through by Stoddard Mercia, this luxurious interior contrasts with its wild surroundings as the Gairloch Hotel, near Ullapool, re-opens for business.
BROCHURES HELP SALES FORCE SELL
Over four hundred carpet designs have been illustrated in a new brochure which now forms part of the sales aids used by the Contract Sales Force.
A tuft box with two hundred and seventy colours has also been created to give interior designers, architects and specifiers one of the wildest choices available for special designs.
These folders and tuft boxes are part of the Custom Service used by hotels, banks, breweries, restaurants, offices and all commercial buildings to create individual one-off carpets.
Seldom are the designs  reproduced exactly as illustrated.
Adaptions are created by the design studio who continuously support the sales force, supplying specially made hand samples and computer designed coloured illustrations for their client.
To help each designer in his or her choice, the design folder has been separated into different styles.
Sections such as‘Eastern Paradise’, ‘The Classics,’‘Flowers and Ribbons,’ and ‘In Vogue’give illustrations selected from the wealth of material available from Stoddard's archive design library.
The production cost for each box is in the region of £100 and illustrates the commitment behind the complete portfolio of presentational material.
Taken at the annual sales conference, the photograph shows the Stoddard Mercia sales team together with Rod Turnbull, Joint Managing Director.
The conference was held at Elderslie during March and included factory tours, during which the latest manufacturing development at both Douglas Reyburn in Kilmarnock and at Glenpatrick Works were on view.
Product reviews, design, marketing, and performance reviews all formed part of the intensive two day schedule.
The conference was efficiently organised by Jim Maxwell.
Contract Sales Force Expands
The Stoddard Mercia Contract Sales Force has been strengthened with the appointment of two additional representatives.
Robert Thomson joined the team in April, taking a newly created position as representative for Scotland and Northern Ireland.
It was an area well known to Robert as previously he had worked with C.V.
Carpets as their Scottish representative.
Robert's home is in Prestwick.
At the end of May, Kay Roper joined the Southern Sales team, responsible for an area covering West London and counties to the North and West.
Kay brought extensive experience of contract selling from competitors Hugh MacKay.
Her home is in Windsor.
SALESMEN OF THE YEAR
From the sales force of seventeen Stoddard Templeton representatives, Eddie McDermid won the silver quaich trophy for ‘Best Salesman of the Year’.
The achievement was praised by Ralph Ellis, Chief Executive, at a special presentation in the showroom where Eddie was given a cheque together with an inscribed replica of the quaich.
John Gordon and Derek Davis also received cheques as runners up, together with Rex Wolfe as Manager of the Northern Area, who beat the Southern Area to first place with the highest sales figures.
These presentation were made during the annual sales conference.
Part of the agenda included a tour of the factory and design studio where the sales team were able to see all developments on the manufacturing side and the latest style trends and colour predictions of the studio.
This familiarization is important to the salesman who operates away from home base for most of the year maximising his time on the road.
Other subjects included a summary of the current business position, and an in depth discussion on the latest and significant initiative by Stoddard Templeton to introduce fabrics into the market place alongside carpets.
Presentations were also made on the carpet ranges from the Contracts Division and by Credit Control and Marketing.
Towards the end of the conference, using a floodlit display the new Axminster range ‘Lafayette’ was unveiled and introduced by Design Director Bill Naysmith.
It was the first time that many of the sales force had seen the new range, which had taken one year to develop and would be launched into the market place within the next few weeks.
Chief Executive Ralph Ellis together with Joint Managing Director Rod Turnbull, attended the launch which included details of style, development and quality by Chief Designer Ronnie Wilkie.
John Gordon,(left) joint runner-up to the Salesman of the Year Award is shown in action selling carpets and fabrics to one of his many customers.
Smiling with success, Derek Davis (right) received a cheque from Chief Executive Ralph Ellis a runner-up to salesman of the year.
Salesman of the Year Eddie McDermid (right) is presented with a silver quaich by Chief Executive Ralph Ellis.
MILLIONS SEE STODDARD TEMPLETON ADVERTS
Helping the launch of Stoddard Templeton fabrics into the market place is a £500,000 advertising campaign combining carpets and curtains ‘that are made for each other.’
As well as reaching the consumer through well known magazines such as Good Housekeeping, House & Garden, Ideal Home and Homes & Gardens, adverts have also been taken in the carpet trade press informing retailers of the support being given to promote sales.
Two separate advertisements will run during the campaign which lasts for eight months, the first between May & August with the second between September and December.
The adverts are expected to reach 6.3 million readers in that period, a figure calculated from the audited circulation of each publication.
Enquiries stimulated by these adverts are continually being received.
To handle these, a separate telephone line with a twenty four hour answering machine service has been installed and to each individual is sent a list of stockists for their local area, together with a covering letter.
By Christmas, few readers of these home interest magazines will be unfamiliar with the name Stoddard Templeton, a name that has now been advertised in separate campaigns for three successive years.
Brochures Bring Business
Stoddard Templeton are increasing their marketing  activities with a new initiative aimed at attracting customers into retailers throughout the country.
It comes at a time when the advertising campaign is already in full swing adding another dimension to the promotional mix.
By using the resources of the local retailers to identify their potential customers over 85,000 colour pamphlets have been posted to individual homes.
Each carpet outlet is sent enough pamphlets for their requirement, selecting known customers and others who have recently made enquiries.
These are then sent out by the retailer.
Having received the colour mailshot which highlights the exciting new collection of carpets and curtain fabrics by Stoddard Templeton, customers are encouraged to visit their local retailer by the offer of a free pen.
This is sent out from Elderslie once the coupon has been returned and endorsed by a member of staff during their visit, hopefully whilst selecting new Stoddard Templeton carpets or fabrics.
It is seen as a measure by Stoddard Templeton to actively support the retailer and combine with the mutual interest of winning customers.
Stoddard Templeton have recently appointed Mark Collard (22) as Sales Representative for Hampshire, Sussex, South Kent and parts of Berkshire.
The appointment became effective on 2nd July 1990.
Mark was previously a Sales Representative with Halls Carpets Ltd. a carpet wholesaler based in N. London.
His home is in Burgess Hill, West Sussex.
FOURTEENTH CENTURY INSPIRATION WINS 1990 AWARD
‘Lafayette’ may have been the name of a French noble woman, but it now refers to a brand new and stunning range of carpets launched by Stoddard Templeton.
Samples are already in retailers throughout the country with nearly two thousand outlets being supplied from the Pattern Room, in a carefully planned introduction timed to take advantage of the main selling period during the autumn.
In September Lafayette took pride of place on the Stoddard Templeton stand at the Harrogate exhibition, the main retail carpet exhibition of the year, where it was officially launched and shown for the first time.
The range was given a tremendous boost by winning the premier award of the carpet industry —‘The Style Setter Award.’
The launch of a complete range of patterned carpet is an event worthy of note.
Individual patterns belonging to established ranges are renewed on a regular basis within the trade, whereas the introduction of a whole range is not such a routine event.
It means the introduction of a new style or quality that has been well researched and developed to fill a gap in the market place.
Lafayette took one year, and cost over £300,000 to develop and launch.
This included in depth research, and pre-launch consumer testing.
The design style was inspired by the renowned Silks of Lyons, described as ‘all that was finest in woven silks’, dating back to the 14th century.
Five colourways are in the style of a silk Moire, never before manufactured as a standard range using subtle colour variations of minute proportions to  reproduce the effect of watermarked silk.
Darker colours are used in the remaining five colourways, derived from an adaptation of the Damask style, again influenced by the Silks of Lyons.
They move the collection into the dark moody feel which is so prevalent in  today's fashionable interiors.
The introduction of Lafayette increases to five the number of patterned Axminster ranges in the Stoddard Templeton portfolio.
Each has its own design style from classical through to modern fulfilling the individual requirement of the ever more design conscious consumer, and the increasing popularity of traditionally woven patterned carpets.
The Damask design is available in five colourways from the new Lafayette range, Stylesetter Award winner.
(Bottom Right) Whilst contractors prepare the ground for a smart new car park between the Pattern room and the Design Studio buildings, George Ballantyne (right) and John Rankin (work's slater and brick builders) feed the cement mixer for the finishing touches to the retaining wall which they built.
THE QUEEN CHOOSES THRONE ROOM CARPET
From the Palace of Holyroodhouse, a very special order has been received to weave a spectacular new carpet for the historic Throne Room within the Palace itself.
It began in September 1989 and has taken just over a year to finalise all the details with the design being personally approved by Her Majesty The Queen.
Many different design styles were submitted and considered before a decision was reached to base the design on fine ornate plasterwork of the Throne Room.
Photographs taken of the ceiling and archive material have helped to inspire the designers to create a very grand Acanthus scroll pattern, coloured in rich red with gold accents.
A gold and blue alternative colouring was also presented, although the red presentation was Her Majesty's preferred choice.
The presentation was made to the Queen during her annual visit to the Palace of Holyroodhouse in July when each year the Royal Family take up residence.
Early Start
It was a time of considerable activity and excitement in the design studio.
For example, Bill Naysmith, Group Design Director, was contacted late one evening to meet with Her Majesty the following morning.
This was accomplished with all the relevant design information, thanks to computerisation and a 6.30am start in the studio by the designers involved.
Further changes were requested, one of which was to include the Scottish Crown in the four corners of the carpet, reflecting the one used on the ceiling of the Throne Room.
Final acceptance was given at Balmoral Castle in October, when Bill Naysmith in private audience with the Queen received approval.
At this meeting there was a further request for two additional carpets for the dais, where the two thrones are situated.
The presentation was an excellent example of design expertise using the C.A.D. and the latest computerised sample machine.
Four square yards of coloured design printouts were supported by six carpet samples each 18 inches square, giving a very clear impression of the finished project, which will be woven on 27 inch wide Wilton, using the Chlidema process.
Bill Naysmith commented that ‘Her Majesty too great personal interest in the project and her understanding of design and colour made it a very rewarding and memorable experience.
The Queen was clearly impressed by the speed of the presentation and with the result and the benefits achieved by using computer assisted design.’
Recognition for going Green
An award for helping to improve the environment and simultaneously giving support to a local hospice, has been presented to Stoddard Carpets Ltd.
The Green spot Environmental Award was given to the company for providing a bottle bank, now standing in the Johnstone Co-op Car Park, with proceeds from the sale of glass being sent to the St Vincent de Paul Hospice, Johnstone.
Stoddard have also introduced a policy of using recycled paper whenever possible for their administrative and stationery requirements.
The award was presented by Paul Evangelista from Johnstone who recently founded ‘Worldcare Organisation’ to raise funds for the hospice and other environmental projects.
Worldcare instigated the Green Spot Award for those companies, or individuals, who actively support improvements to the environment and the local community.
It was received on behalf of Stoddard by Stan James, Company Secretary and Director.
Stan James receives the award from Paul Evangelista (right).
Bonded Machine Sales on the up
A healthy contribution to company profits is coming from Bonded Developments Ltd., a subsidiary set up to sell the Bonded Machine Worldwide.
America has bought six machines over the last few years with two going to the Wellco Corporation and the remainder to Shaw Industries, the world's largest carpet manufacturer with turnover in excess of $1.25 Billion.
Over the last few months, Shaw have installed one narrow and one five metre bonded machine.
Two more have been ordered.
It is the first time that a Vernier machine has been build outwith the inventor's factory in Belgium, and has been constructed by Pickering Staplina, joint partners with Stoddard in Bonded Developments Ltd.
As part of the technical back-up service, Stoddards own personnel together with Pickerings, erect each new machine and only hand it over once fully tested and operational.
Operative training is also part of the deal.
Each complete purchase is put at around £500,000.
Two engineers from Stoddard, Willie Wallace and John McManus, formed the team from Elderslie, together with Simon Fraser, Director of Bonded Developments Ltd, who states that they ‘performed their duties in an admirable manner.’
It takes about one month to commission each machine with the next one being delivered in October and another before the end of the year, when once again Stoddard's team will be visiting the States.
Stoddard operational experience is second to none, maintaining their position as world leaders in Bonded Technology.
The finishing touch — Simon Fraser (left) hands over the Bonded Machine manual to Geff Roman, Manager with Shaw Industries U.S.A. on completion of the installation.
RUSSIAN ABOUT
The effects of Perestroika,(or is it Glasnost) means that trade with Russia is generally on the increase.
Opportunities are beginning to appear, so it was with future business on his mind that Fraser Gordon, Export Manger Europe visited Rostov on Don with a trade mission organised jointly between the Glasgow City Chambers and Chamber of Commerce.
In June, an eighteen strong team of business men headed up by Councillor Pat Lally, visited Glasgow's twin town in Russia.
There, with the help of the mission organisers and an interpreter, Fraser met with interested parties, and also travelled to other towns, including a visit to the Zemlyansk Carpet Factory, 200 miles by taxi across the Russian Steppe Lands.
‘It was an eye opener’, says Fraser, ‘They could not believe the sophistication of our sales presentation material and the vase choice of either custom made or stocked items.
It was another world to them.’
The factory manufactured traditional Persian style Axminster rugs and a limited amount of broadloom on approximately twelve jacquard gripper looms using designs supplied from the state studio in Moscow.
It acted as a centralised design studio for all carpet factories in Russia, sending out infrequent batches of new designs, which only then would enable a manufacturer to change.
The routine was established that if a customer wanted a carpet, their name would go on a list at the local carpet shop, and then wait their turn.
The unit included a spinning mill within its plant, producing one hundred per cent wool yarn.
Mainly New Zealand wool was used for which just enough foreign currency was released to buy the minimum immediate requirement.
There was always a difficulty in obtaining enough currency, a major barrier to trading with the west.
Whilst in Rostov, each member of the mission made a short presentation to the equivalent of the local Chamber of Commerce, at which Fraser was able to explain that Stoddard had already provided carpets for the famous Russian cruise liner, Maxim Gorky.
A one day visit was also made to the joint British-Soviet Trade Fair in Kiev, an exhibition opened by Princess Anne, and visited by Margaret Thatcher.
Afterwards as the rest of the mission returned to Rostov, Fraser went on to Moscow where he met contacts, organised by the commercial section of the British Embassy.
Meetings over the next few days included major hotel owning groups such as, In tourist and Moscow City Council, as well as the state buying company ‘Razno Export’.
Razno have buying experts for every conceivable item required by Russia, and it was to the carpet expert that Fraser was introduced.
‘There is a market in Russia’ concluded Fraser —‘one frustratingly stifled by the lack of foreign currency, but one that could yield results in the long term.’
Fraser Gordon in Moscow with Red Square buildings in background.
News from Sweden
Stoddard's Swedish subsidiary, Stoddard Mattor is negotiating to lease new offices in Stockholm.
Thomas Nilsonne, Sales Director explained that a new site of 180 square metres has already been located within the same area of town and is hopeful that the contract will be signed in the next few weeks.
It is larger than the present office and will provide improved showroom and administrative facilities.
If negotiations are successful, the new office will be slightly closer to their warehouse which is also used as a design studio.
Considerable renovation is required to bring it up to standard.
Three new staff have recently joined Esa Airas — Salesman: Rolf Bergholm — Assistant Studio Manager and Anne Lie Berglund as a secretary, bookkeeper and receptionist.
Altogether six staff including the directors and one agent are now employed in Sweden.
Stoddard Mattor specialise in designing ultra modern carpet squares for offices, using plain bonded carpet where strips of different colours are hand cut and joined together.
There is no limit to the effects which can be created using this method, except that it is restricted to the use of plain carpet.
Some designs are fitted wall to wall where shapes, diagonals and borders are all cut and joined together.
‘It is very exclusive’ said Thomas Nilsonne, ‘we succeed by offering architects a very personal service.’
Each design is created for an individual room.
Recently a group of seven Swedish architects visited Elderslie to see more traditional methods of manufacture.
Hosted by Anders Falkman, Managing Director and accompanied by Thomas Nilsonne and Esa Airas, it was an opportunity to show potential clients the complete contract service.
Whilst in the design studio they were able to observe at first hand the adaption, of a Chinese Motif which was being prepared by Roger McDowell, Contract Designer, for another Swedish customer.
Two recent contracts of note which have been completed for Sweden are The Globe Hotel and The Park Hotel.
Mrs Anne Lie Berglund Secretary, Bookkeeper and receptionist
Mr Esa Airas Salesman
Mr Rolf Bergholm Assistant Senior Studio Manager
A group of influential architects from Sweden are shown the latest developments in the Design Studio by Chief Designer Ronnie Wilkie (far left) together with Directors and Executives from Stoddard Mattor.
Dramatic Display at International Show
At the Annual Interior Design International Exhibition in London, Stoddard Mercia Contact shared a stand with Sekers Fabrics Ltd.
Matching fabrics and specially designed Chlidema rugs formed an exclusive exterior to the stand, one of the most impressive and creative at the show.
After seventeen years' service with Stoddard Ellen Gardner retired from her position as an Export Administrator on the 27th July.
Alex Montgomery, Export Director, presented her with a crystal decanter and a cheque on behalf of colleagues who had generously contributed to the leaving present.
The presentation took place in the showroom where she also received a Caithness Crystal glass vase given by her friends in the factory and warehouse with whom she had close links for many years.
Brian Pask (left) and Steve Green deal with customer enquiries on the I.D.I.
exhibition stand.
sekers TODAY
Sekers Fabrics was founded in 1938 by Miki Sekers and Tomi de Gara.
They chose Whitehaven as their base, after fleeing from their native Hungary because of the Nazi threat, setting up the company originally known as West Cumberland Silk Mills.
During the war parachute silk was produced which later changed to the manufacture of the finest dress fabrics, brocades and bridal gowns.
This continued until the early 60's supply the best known couturiers such as Dior and Haeim.
Gradually the company changed to the production of furnishing fabrics and by 1978 was known as Sekers International with two subsidiaries producing silk cloth.
These subsidiaries have since been sold leaving Sekers exclusively as manufacturers of quality furnishing fabrics, although today many high street retailers sell their cloth under the brand name of Stoddard Templeton.
It was in 1988 that Sekers merged with Stoddard Holdings to become Stoddard Sekers International Plc.
Sekers now employ 96 people in total, reduced from approximately 250 some ten years ago due to modern and efficient manufacturing methods.
The experience of the workforce is reflected in that 18 per cent have contributed 25 years of more, to the company.
Recognised as being in the quality bracket, their fabrics are exported throughout the world.
Sales are expanding considerably in the home market, using the ready made Stoddard Templeton sales force as an additional initiative on the retail side, backed up with an extensive contract involvement.
‘Hello, Stoddard Templeton, can I help’— This is how Phyllis McQMcQuire answers the many telephone calls from customers enquiring about fabrics at Sekers, Whitehaven factory.
As more and more samples are introduced to new customers throughout the country by the Stoddard Templeton sales force, so orders have ‘steadily increased’, said Phyllis who has been with the company for 22 years.
A direct Stoddard Templeton telephone number is now used, keeping separate those calls from Sekers' own customers.
Two sisters work side by side in the Fabric Cleaning and Mending Department.
Rachel Douglas (left) has been with Sekers for 19 years and Diane Madine for 17 years.
Once a month, Sekers' mill shop is open to the public selling off bargains that are hard to beat.
Frank Johnston, Materials Manager demonstrates his versatility as he operates the till, serving customers who have browsed over many tables piled with rolls of fabric.
Frank's responsibilities are normally concerned with the inspection, finishing and despatch departments.
As an example of their world wide exports, Frank recalled some of those countries where orders had been sent within the last few days — Cyprus, Fort Worth, Texas, Abu Dabi, Oman, Italy, Australia, France, Holland, Belgium, Germany and the weekly load to America.
It's all smiles on Sekers stand at the Interior Design International Exhibition as Graham Bishopp, Sales Executive, shows the latest designs to an appreciative customer.
Weaver and marathon runner Tom Jennings operates eight looms simultaneously during his shift.
The fast Dornier Jacquard looms run at speeds ranging from 280 to 400 picks per minute, an interesting contrast with carpet looms which operate between 50 and 60.
Altogether there are 32 looms at Sekers, some of which are used for development work.
Tom is also a keen marathon runner.
Last year he took part in the London race along with 27,000 others, being placed in the top six per cent at number 1,442.
His time was four hours and two minutes.
He is also planning to run in the Newcastle to South Shields half marathon within the next few months.
Oh!
What a Whopping Wahoo!
This is a real fisherman's story, but it's true.
The photograph is proof.
Richard Edwards, Sales Director of Sekers Fabrics caught the largest deep sea fish of its kind whilst on holiday in Kenya.
It is called a ‘Wahoo’(no joke) and was said by Richard to be the fastest fish in the sea with speeds up to 70 mph.
Weighing in at 91 lbs, it broke all records winning the All Africa, Kenya and all tackle record.
The fight lasted 20 gripping minutes before the streamlined, sharp toothed giant was landed on the deck of his boat.
This was deep sea fishing at its best.
Nothing would equal that moment and although Richard did not fish every day, he caught a total of 24 fish of various types, during his holiday.
It will be one to remember.
For Anne Barr it all began in church, for it was there, some years ago that she first met her husband to be.
Anne, who works as a laboratory assistant, married Robert Bowen on July 14th at Elim Penticostal Church in Whitehaven.
‘It was a brilliantly sunny day’ said Anne as she recalled the wedding.
After the church service, a reception and buffet was held in the Hundith Hill Hotel, Cockermouth, attended by the family and many friends, followed by an eight day honeymoon in Paris.
Lyle KEEPS PACE WITH CHANGE
Increased production, new tufted machines, extra shifts, more employees and new buildings over the last two years, means that Lyle has expanded and grown.
Changing times means changing ways, as control systems are introduced to cope with the increase in size.
They also form the basis on which future growth can be built.
‘Considerable office reorganisation has recently taken place at Lyle,’ explains Ian McCulloch, Company Secretary and Financial Controller.
‘Financial and management accounting departments have been separated to achieve greater control, and individual offices have been constructed.’
On the production side all functions have been streamlined, each with a specific remit.
Planning and Control are now established as separate functions, each with their own office situated within the factory.
The new sales office has been established for some time, as has the computer system connected on direct line to the main processor at Elderslie.
Further investment for additional backing plant driers is planned for the next stage, as Lyle becomes one of the most up-to-date tufting companies in the business.
In the new production office, Stewart Fernie (left), Warehouse Controller and Pat Meechan, Warehouse Supervisor, discuss business with Heather Hourigan on a fleeting visit from her desk in the sales department.
A separate quality control function has been introduced at Lyle, with the establishment of a new office where Ian Morris (left) Quality Controller and Garry Cowan, his assistant, test and record details of yarns and finished carpet.
Ian has been with the company for four years as a qualified Textile Technologist and Garry is learning the skills during his first year.
The Production Planning team at work in their new offices.
From left Roberto Calierno, Margaret McCafferty both Production Control Assistants and Martin Sloss, Assistant Materials Controller.
Margaret will shortly be leaving the company for one  year's travelling experience in Australia.
Organising the Lyle's Sales Office with a staff of 7, is Yasmin Burrows who was promoted to the position of Sales Office Supervisor in March.
Yasmin has worked with the company for eight years, initially in the Sales Office and laterly as secretary to the Managing Director for the past three years.
Many special designs are woven at Runcorn as part of the Stoddard Mercia Custom Service.
Joe Samways is shown weaving a Chlidema Wilton for the Hilton Hotel in Paris, a highly skilled operation where borders are woven as an integrated part of the main design.
Bobbins of yarn are swiftly replaced as (left to right) Linda Marsh, Donna Denson, Hilda Jones and Elsie Shaw try to break their own record for changing coloured yarns on a five frame Wilton Creel.
RUNCORN ROUND-UP
New Technology saves time
Wendy Connolly (pictured right) operates the new £30,000 computerised card cutting machine recently installed at Runcorn.
Wendy, with eleven years' experience, is also an experienced ‘Picker & Setter.’
The new machine produces ‘cards’ approximately eight times faster than previously, considerably increasing the flexibility of carpet design and the production of specially made, one-off, carpets for individual customers.
Cards are used as the medium which translates the pattern into a mechanical function on the Jacquard loom.
Holes in each card representing one row of tufts in the carpet, instruct the Jacquard loom which colour to weave.
As there are many rows in a pattern repeat, so there are many cards mounted above each loom all carefully tied together in sequence.
Much of the laborious, but skilled work, is now cut out substituting a floppy disk for design paper and automatically selecting the settings one card at a time.
These were previously interpreted by hand.
The new machine is reliant on an up-to-date design studio using C.A.D. (Computer Aided Design) techniques that can reproduce each design onto a floppy disk.
Runcorn's design computers are now equipped with a ‘converter’ as part of a new system to enable compatibility between different languages of each computer type.
It was a summer wedding for Janet McQuade who married John Aitken on the 14th July in Cumbernauld Old Parish Church.
The reception was held in Dalshannon Farm Restaurant, Condorrat and their honeymoon was spent in Blackpool and also in the countryside near Callander, where they enjoyed a camping holiday for a few days.
Janet works in the Sales Office on Customer Service and has been with the company for two and half years.
Wedding Afloat
A floating barge on the Clyde and Forth Canal between Kirkintilloch and Bishopbriggs, was the imaginative choice for the wedding ceremony on 29 June of Anne Raitt, Management Accountant at Lyle and Michael Yaffe.
Afterwards the reception was held in the Coachman Hotel, Kilsyth.
Anne and Michael then took a two week holiday based at their new flat in Cumbernauld.
DOUGLAS REYBURN
INVEST IN THE BEST
The first part of an £800,000 investment for new dyeing machinery is nearing completion at Douglas Reyburn.
Two large stainless steel cylinders, the latest in high pressure dyeing technology, have been installed and are expected to become operational by mid November.
Trials on similar machines confirmed the advantages of this flexible, high tech.
system which will be used to introduce Package Dyeing to Douglas Reyburn for the first time.
It also has the ability to handle loose wool and hank dyeing operations, a combination which traditionally require separate dye vats but are now possible from the one machine.
Quality is also expected to improve with increased consistency and uniformity accurately controlled by computer.
Less water is needed than in the traditional methods, resulting in a number of technical savings and efficiencies.
It is intended that yarn for hard twist carpets will form the bulk of production in the future months.
Test running, and making final adjustments to the newly installed hank scouring machine is Duncan Dawson.
Engineering Charge hand.
The scourer, bought second hand, has been completely reconditioned as new by Douglas Reyburn's Engineers.
Once operational, the existing scouring machine presently located in the dye house will be moved along-side its new partner, where foundation work has already been completed for this major operation.
Engineer Jack Cuthbert makes some finishing adjustments to one of the new high pressure package dyeing machines being installed at Douglas Reyburn.
Record Breaker Betty Law Retires
As a mark of her popularity, Betty Law had a tremendous farewell when she retired from Douglas Reyburn on 12th September after 45 years' of unbroken service.
Betty began in 1945 working in the despatch department, unloading hanks of yarn as they came off the dryer.
It was not until forty years later that Betty changed jobs when a new drying machine was introduced changing the system.
Thereafter for the next five years she helped to load the new machine.
It has been calculated that Betty, singled handedly moved a total of 40,500 tonnes.
It can only be described as a record breaking achievement.
Bill Service, Personnel Manager states ‘In all the time she has been in the Mill, she was never late of absent until February 1987 when she unfortunately slipped while coming to work and sustained a dislocated elbow.’
This dedication must be another record.
During her last few weeks, Betty was shown round the factory at Elderslie, the factory to which all her tonnes of yarn had been sent but which she had never seen.
On the day of her retirement, representatives from every department assembled in the despatch area.
Betty was given a large selection of presents, all carefully chosen.
A farewell cake placed on a table with flowers formed the centre of the presentations.
Soon afterwards Betty Law was having another presentation, this time in the board room as the assembled directors and senior management gave her a colour television on behalf of the company.
It was a fitting farewell.
Andrew Steel, Managing Director (2nd from left), together with Directors and Senior Management, presents Betty Law with a colour T.V.
When Betty Law retired, many of her colleagues and friends gathered to wish her farewell.
Who Sent The Telegram!
Senior Accounts Clerk Elsa Faulds, who has worked with Douglas Reyburn for five and a half years was married to Jim Speirs on 14th September at Darvel Central Church.
A Rolls Royce then took the happy couple to their reception in Kilmarnock's Masonic Hall, after which the honeymoon was spent in Blackpool.
Elsa and Jim met four years' ago.
Jim works as an electrician with Western Scottish Omnibus.
A few days before the wedding.
Elsa organised a ‘hen party’ which included many of her colleagues and friends from Douglas Reyburn.
The Crown Hotel in Newmilns amy have a few stories to tell as surprise, surprise, one of her friends had organised a ‘Strip O'Gram’ to provide some hilarious entertainment.
Wedding Island in the Sun
Malcolm Carmichael, known by his colleagues as ‘Malky’, Douglas Reyburn's works plumber for the past eight years was married to student nurse Lynne Elliot on the 10th September in St Lawrence Church, St Lawrence.
The place might not be familiar even to geography experts.
It is in Barbados!
Malky decided that it would be special, but it turned out to be more special that he expected.
As a surprise, his mother and father, together with his travel agent friend (who became best man) arrived unannounced at his hotel the day before.
It all made for a very happy family wedding.
As a Scot, Malky was married in the kilt, wearing his formal black jacket as he  refused to acknowledge the hot temperatures of the holiday island.
Afterwards the whole group stayed on for a few extra days.
Obituaries
Mr Charles Broadhead
Charlie Broadhead died on Monday 15th October while recuperating from a major operation.
‘Charlie’ as he was known to everyone, joined Douglas Reyburn in 1940 and left shortly after when he was enlisted in the Army.
He returned in 1947, resumed his position as foreman in the Flats area where he was in charge of around 100 people operating Pealts Spinning frames, Arunco & Boyd Twisters and associated reeling machinery.
He worked in this area until his retiral in 1975, but was immediately re-employed as time-keeper (part time), a position he held until April 1990 when he officially stopped work.
Charlie was pre-deceased by his wife two years earlier.
MANAGERS AND ENGINEERS APPOINTED
As some departments within Glenpatrick works move onto shift working, there have been changes in the manufacturing activities resulting in the appointment of three shift managers.
John Mathews, James Mitchell and James Weir are now responsible for the operational running of all departments during shift hours.
The first department to move onto three shift operation some time ago was the Wilton weaving.
Since then Spool Setting has been given an expanded nightshift, resulting in a smoother operation and a reliable twenty four hour despatch service to customers.
Three engineers, Ian Cadden, James Delaney and Edward Haley have recently joined the company to provide plant maintenance during shift operations.
Any emergencies can now be dealt with without having to wait until the next day.
Other changes of personnel include the appointment of Ann Dickson as Assistant Preparations Manager to assist Tom Blackburn in the efficient running of Axminster and Wilton preparation, and within the same office, Louise Andrew has been appointed to take the place of recently retired Joan Breckenridge, to record production figures.
CARPET WEAVER RETIRES
After twenty five year's loyal service, Willie Tait retired at the end of June on his 65th Birthday.
To mark the occasion, the company presented him with an engraved watch and from his colleagues and friends he was given a number generous gifts, including an envelope containing £100 from the Axminster Darners, a magnum of sherry, a shirt and a birthday cake.
Willie remembers the early days of the company well, recalling that his first wage was four pounds and four shillings a week.
After training, he started work as an Axminster Weaver, eventually moving to a number of different departments before completing his service with the Darning department.
His home is in Halo Avenue, Johnston, from where he will pursue his interest in horse racing as an acknowledged enthusiast of the sport.
Keith Bill, Works Director (right) presents Willie Tait with an engraved watch.
NEW APPOINTMENT
With twenty six years' experience in industry, Jim McDaid was appointed to the position of Chief Industrial Engineer for Stoddard Carpets Ltd.
He joined the company in May and is presently making arrangements to move his family from Durham where he worked as a Management Services Executive with Ramar, manufacturers of apparel textiles.
For a time Jim also worked as a management consultant advising many companies of all aspects of work study, efficiency and wages, again specialising in textiles.
He has also held the position of factory manager.
Jim is married with two children and hopes to move to Cambuslang.
RIBA RETIRES
On the 13th June, Riba Hair retired after 22 years continuous service with the company.
Her career was unusual in that she remained within the Customer Service Department throughout, becoming an expert in dealing with complaints.
It takes a special person to handle complaints in any case but to do it for 22 years deserves a special mention, always maintaining a diplomatic and friendly attitude to each individual case.
As John Sampson, Retail Sales Administration Manager explained in his farewell speech, Riba was with the company during a period of extensive change from ‘quill pens to computers’.
John summed it up as the super sixties, sobering seventies and ebb and flow of the eighties.
The sales office where Riba worked was full of her colleagues and friends at her farewell presentation, with a table set aside to hold the many cards and presents which she received.
Rod Turnbull, Joint M.D. presented Riba with a cheque and a large card, signed by all those who had contributed, wishing her a happy retirement.
As a farewell gift Jackie Tinley then presented a large bouquet of flowers.
There is no doubt that she will be kept busy at her house in Elderslie with eight grand-children in her family.
Two of her relations also work in Stoddard.
Jim Hair; Brother-in-law and Kirsty Hair; Niece, will keep the family tradition going into next generation.
Rob Turnbull and John Sampson bid farewell to Riba Hair on her retirement.
FAREWELL AFTER FORTY ONE YEARS
For Joan Breckenridge it was a mark of popularity that so many colleagues and friends attended her two presentations, when she retired from the company on 20th July, after forty one years of continuous service.
Stanley Peters, Joint Managing Director in his farewell speech, paid tribute to the value that such extended experience brings to the company and to the loyalty of those like Joan who had spent all their working lives with Stoddards.
From her colleagues at Spool setting,(the department which she joined in 1949), Joan was given a hi-fi system and from Axminster winding a handsome envelope of money.
Many other individual gifts were also given, including a cake and two arrangements of flowers.
From the company, Stanley Peters presented Joan with a cabinet for the new hi-fi system together with a cheque.
Although Joan mostly worked as a Spool Setter, she became an Axminster Winding Instructor for a period during which she was sent to a subsidiary company in Holland (Bergos Stoddard) for a number of weeks.
She still keeps in touch with friends made at that time and sends a copy of the Glenpatrick News to the retired Chief Industrial Engineer, Mr Wyffles.
For the past eleven years Joan has worked as a Clerkess in the dyed yarn store office, recording piece work production figures.
She now hopes to pursue other interests from her home in Peockland Place, Johnstone, together with her husband David, who works with Renfrew District Council.
Joan Breckenridge and friends assemble in the showroom for her farewell retirement presentation.
Joan is shown holding papers in front row.
Margaret McLachlan Retires
After thirty years with the company, Margaret McLachlan retired on the 6th September.
Her ties will remain strong as she still has many family connections.
Her son Alex, Brother-in-law, John Reilly and two cousins all remain working in various departments.
Many of her friends gathered together to wish her farewell.
From the Wilton Weavers she was given a camera as a leaving present and from the Winding Department and the Spool Setters she received a generous gift of cash to which everyone had contributed.
Margaret began working as a Beamer in the Winding Department in January 1958, a position she held for 26 years before becoming a clerkess responsible for recording production statistics.
A special leaving party was organised in the Bird and Hand a local hotel, on the evening following her retirement.
Wilton Weavers gather round as Margaret McLachlan bids farewell on her retirement.
OBITUARIES
Mr James Armour
On Saturday 18th August, James Armour, Wilton Weaver, died suddenly at his home in Howwood, aged 64.
Known as Jimmy by his friends, he was due to retire in December and has been a weaver with Stoddards for the past 34 years.
Many colleagues attended the funeral at Kilbarchan Cemetery, including his Department manager, Ronnie Cleland who described Jim as ‘a most loyal and reliable weaver who will be sadly missed by his friends.’
The sympathy of all his colleagues is extended to his wife Agnes and his daughter Margaret.
Mr William Patterson
Whilst at work, William Patterson dies suddenly on 27th September.
William was employed in the Maintenance Department on General Service Duties, a position he had held for the past two years.
For most of his forty years with the company, he worked in the Finishing Department where he began in 1950.
Later he moved to the Dye House and also worked as a yarn storeman.
Tragically he lost an arm through an accident at work many years ago.
At home he was a keen  gardener winning many prizes for his efforts.
He gave the same dedication to his work described by his friends as completely reliable, first class and not happy unless working.
The sympathy of all who knew him is extended to his wife Jean.
PROMOTION
Ronnie Cleland has recently been promoted from his position as Weaving Manager to become Production Manager.
The announcement was made at the beginning of October.
Ronnie, who has been with the company for six years, is now responsible for all production departments within the factory and will assume responsibility for the Warehouse and Pattern Room from 1st April 1991.
STODDARD INVESTS IN TRAINING
Keeping abreast of the latest developments across the whole spectrum of the carpet manufacturing industry, means sending personnel away on courses — a considerable investment that is on-going within the company.
Over the past few months seven candidates have attended different courses.
Annette Simpson from production Planning, Eleanor Murray, Purchasing Manager, and Jim McDaid Chief Industrial Engineer, attended a one week course at Kidderminster College called Technical Briefings for The Management Team.
It covered details of the production process from spinning through to fitting techniques, including manufacturing methods, design, testing and quality control, giving a wider perspective to the expertise already gained in their current job role.
Jim Weir, Arthur Breen and Ann Dickson also attended Kidderminster College for a six day course on ‘Training for Productivity and The Contribution of the Supervisor.’
It is part of the Government sponsored ‘Carpet Industry Training Development Initiative’ and included practical ‘role playing’exercises as well as lectures, workshops and seminars.
It leads towards the Introductory Certificate of the National Examination Board for Supervisory Management (N.E.B.S.M.)
Alan McDonald, Industrial Engineer, after a two year ‘day release course’ at Stow College, Glasgow, and much home work, achieved good results in his finals for the Institute of Management Services.
Eighteen places are reserved for an Industrial Relations Course and the same number for a Junior Management Course, maintaining the training initiative as an important policy within the company.
Qualified to Buy
It was at the end of April that Eleanor Murray, Purchasing Manager, heard the good results of three and a half years work, studying for an exam to become a Member of the Institute of Purchasing and Supply.
The exam ranged over twelve subjects, the main part of which was purchasing but also included Economics, Statistics, Business Law and Accountancy.
Now Eleanor, already with a BA Hons in French and German, can add M.Inst.P.S. after her name.
All studies were done in her own time mostly working at home on correspondence courses or attending the Central College of Commerce in Glasgow.
Membership of the Institute requires appropriate practical experience as well as the written exam, so it was a double success story that she was accepted on both counts.
Brides and Grooms
Simon Howard, Computer Programmer, was married to Janie Hunter on June 23rd at Blairshill Dundyvan Parish Church, Cambridge.
Simon first met his future wife whilst on holiday in Majorca three years ago.
As the romance blossomed, he moved from Enfield to be nearer her home in Coatbridge and obtained a new job in the Computer Department at Stoddard.
Major certainly changed his life as he came back with a lot more than just a sun tan.
It is a story with a happy ending, and a new beginning.
After the church service, a reception was held at the Lesser Town Hall, Airdrie after which the one week honeymoon was spent touring Scotland.
Most of his colleagues in the Computer Department attended the wedding.
Simon and Janie now live in their new home in Baillieston where Janie works as a nurse with Minerva Medical Services.
Designer Weddings
At Dunlop Parish Church on 8th June, Ginny Harron was married to David Mann.
The wedding was followed by a reception in the beautiful setting of the Montgreenan Mansion House Hotel, followed by a two week honeymoon in the Dordogne region of France.
Ginny works as a senior designer in the studio at Elderslie and David, apart from playing golf, is a manager with First Leisure.
The story goes that he managed a round on the morning of the wedding and even, it is said, a few strokes later in the day.
Their home is in Gateside.
Family financial planning is now in good hands for George Grant, a senior designer at Elderslie, as he has recently married Myra Skinner, secretary to the General Manager at the headquarters of the Clydesdale Bank.
The wedding took place at St Nicholas Parish Church, Hillington, on 11th May at which fellow designer Roger McDowell was an Usher.
The reception was held at the Swallow Hotel, Bellahouston.
George and Myra's home is in Kilbarchan from where they left for a week's honeymoon enjoying candle lit cruises and the splendours of Amsterdam.
Chariots of Fire
Using his Yamaha 250cc, Mono Shock trials bike, Alan McDonald, who works in the Industrial Engineering Department of Stoddard, is competing with outstanding results in the Scottish Trial Championship.
On his feet he has also had considerable success running the 100 and 200 metres, together with the long jump, winning outright in all three.
Alan, who learnt the art of trial biking at his family home in the hilly countryside of Morar, now holds fifth position in the Scottish Trial Championship.
This year he is four places ahead of his brother but all could change as there are two more trials to complete the season, each counting towards a final score.
His placing so far has been third, fourth and  eighth , a remarkable feat when  competing against the best that Scotland can produce.
‘Just a chip off the old block’ as Alan McDonald successfully leaps the obstacle.
Riding high, Alan McDonald reaches for the sky.
Football Team Hopeful
Beginning their new season in the third division of the Paisley & District League, the Stoddard Carpets football team are fighting to get back into the second division where they were last year.
Ian Shiels, the non playing team organiser explained that ‘New players have recently joined which gives us a better opportunity to reach the second division.’
He described their chances as being ‘hopeful.’
Ian, who works in the warehouse is also responsible for sponsorship and is delighted that Stoddard Carpets have sponsored the team with a complete set of strips, each shirt being emblazoned with the company name.
The majority of the team is made up of players that come from outside the company.
Those from within are Robert Kerrigan from the Finishing Department, Ralph Allen, Warehouse and Alan McDonald from Industrial Engineering.
Hugh Stevenson, who recently changed jobs and has now left the company, is also a member of the team.
Training for a new season began with sessions every Wednesday night, held at the Johnstone Burgh ground.
Their first league game was played at the beginning of September, at the Glenpatrick Road pitch.
Simon Howard, Computer Programmer has achieved a Grade One, HNC pass in Computing.
For two years Simon attended the Clydebank College one day each week on a ‘day release course’.
Originally intending to do basic programme course it developed into a full HNC incorporating systems analysis and design as well as programming.
The grade one result represents an achievements of between eighty and one hundred per cent in each of the three subjects.
STODDARD Sport
This year the Bevan Trophy was held at the West Lothian Golf Club on 8th September.
Thirty members of the Stoddard Golf Club took part in what Jimmy Shiels, Captain, described as ‘a very enjoyable and successful day.’
The morning was taken up by the competition itself and after a good lunch in the Clubhouse, a fun game was organised in the afternoon.
Numerous prizes, generously donated by sponsors, were given out at the end of the day.
The winner with a set of borrowed clubs was Rod Turnbull, who scored 72.
Runner up Ian Proudfoot scored a very close 73.
The Best Scratch score was David McLeod.
All three were given prizes of £20 vouchers.
The best nine holes outward was Hugh McFadden and inwards was John Phillips.
Both were presented with putters.
A pair of golfing gloves and balls were won by Ron Turnbull, Ian Proudfoot and Jim Dever for the best team nett score and winner of the Booby prize umbrella was Richard Millward.
Sponsors were: Akros Print, Besmer U.K., Charles Busfield & Co Ltd., Allied Fibres, F Ball Adhesives, Doverstrand Ltd., Douglas Reyburn & Co Ltd., Richards of Aberdeen, M Kuzmack Photography, Lyle Carpets Ltd., Plasticisers Ltd, and Sanquar Tiles.
Not everyone could be pulled away from the clubhouse, but most are present at the close of the Bevan Trophy.
Straight and steady, David Speirs gets in some early practice.
From the same tee, the two Jims drive off in fine style, Jim Hopkins on the left and Jim Hair on the right.
Chairman, Hugh Laughland (centre) enjoys a breather with Andrew Rennison (left) and Jimmy Shiels.
STODDARD RETAIN BUCHANAN CUP
by Duncan McCallum
The weather was fine and the course in excellent condition when Stoddards, Lyles and Reyburns clashed in the 25th Buchanan Trophy match at Braehead Golf Club, Alloa.
Stoddard Carpets eventually came out on top in this ten man team Stableford Competition.
Stoddards amassed a very creditable 255 points with their best eight scores, an average of 31.9 points per man on this testing course with Augusta like greens where three and even four putts were not uncommon.
A good showing by Lyles put them into second place on 233 points while Reyburns, one of the fancied teams, did not live up to expectations and finished third on 210 points.
A measure os Stoddards' strength in depth was the fact that if their two non-counting scores were added in, their average only fell to 31.3 points.
Lyles would like to thank the Stoddard ‘non-playing’ Captain, Jimmy Shiels, for stepping in as their late replacement, scoring a creditable 26 points.
This score, announced by Eddie Docherty at the Trophy presentation, came as a surprise to the Stoddard players who had been reliably informed by Jimmy that he had scored 32 points.
The Stoddard players would like to thank their Captain for not upstaging their team on behalf of Lyles.
In the afternoon ‘individual sweep’, the unbelievable happened when John Mathews (again Stoddards) playing off 12, scored a net 63 and tamed this four hour round course which had fast been gaining a ‘killer’ reputation.
When the dust finally settled on the day's play, the Stoddard Captain, showing no reluctance to collect the Buchanan Cup on behalf of Stoddards, even although he had played for Lyles, took the opportunity to thank both Eddie Docherty and Ian McCulloch of Lyles for the splendid organisation of the event.
This was a sentiment roundly endorsed by all present.
After much amber nectar and other  alcoholic beverages had been consumed, the players from all teams made their way home, already thinking about next year's event in Ayrshire to be organised by Reyburns.
If it comes close to matching the Braehead competition, then it will be a resounding success.
John Stewart, Managing Director of Lyle Carpets (left), presents the Buchanan Cup to Jimmy Shiels, Captain, Stoddard Golf Club.
Lyles get into Golf
Behind the newly formed Lyles Golf Club, is Eddie Docherty, founder and Captain who has gathered together seven enthusiastic members of the company to play the game.
Some have experience, others are beginners but already Eddie is looking for a local golf course that will accept their membership as a club to provide a base.
Their inaugural golf outing was held at Braehead on the 7th May amidst wind, rain and hail.
Ian  McCulloch won the first round with Colin Sproull and Eddie in second and third place.
Good team spirit was built up during lunch before heading out to the second round.
This time stroke play was used with first place going to Eddie, second to Andy White and third to Ian McCulloch.
Later that month Lyles hosted the Inter Company Buchanan Trophy, a major event which was also held on the Braehead Course.
Other members of the club not mentioned before are John Cannovan, Dugald Ferguson, Stewart Fernie and Pat Meechan.
NOTICE BOARD
The Stoddard Golf Club Annual Dinner will be held on 23rd November in the Elderslie Village hall.
Tickets £8.00 from any member of the committee