

Mikhail the Liberator
This is Europe year for Mr Gorbachev.
Mikhail the Charmer plans to carry his smile and his talk of a ‘common European home’ to all four of the big West European countries: Britain this week, France and Italy sometime and — the visit that really counts — West Germany in June.
But his travel plans do not include the part of the continent under Russia's sway.
It is because Mr Gorbachev keeps his hands off Eastern Europe that a growing number of people there see him as Mikhail the Liberator.
The West should take time off from being Gorbacharmed to think about recent events in Russia's outer empire and the awkward question they raise: how to undo Europe's post-1945 division without undoing its post-1945 stability.
Remarkable things are happening in Europe's eastern half.
In Poland this week government and opposition signed an agreement which would have been unthinkable even six months ago.
It provides for legalisation of the banned Solidarity trade union, for a third of the seats in the lower house of parliament to be reserved for the opposition, and for free elections to a new upper house.
In February Hungary agreed to move towards a multi-party system, an idea that was once as dreamy as the Danube.
Communists are still in charge.
But both Poland and Hungary are heading for a spell of power-sharing and, who knows, maybe even genuine democracy by the mid-1990s.
Both are trying to open their economies to the West.
Down in Yugoslavia —not part of Russia's empire but a barometer of East-West storms —things are falling apart without causing the superpowers one Yugojitter.
These are the East European blessings of Mr Gorbachev's liberalisation: the changes would surely not be taking place if Brezhnev or Chernenko still ruled the Kremlin.
They have set people wondering how far reform can go.
Might Hungary and Poland be’ Finlandised’or’Austrianised’?
Eventually, they might.
Neutral and prosperous neighbours could make Russia feel safer than its current buffer of allied but unhappy comrades.
Its least troublesome border is the one with Finland (though it doesn't take a Clausewitz to spot that Finland leads nowhere much, while Poland is the corridor to Germany).
But no matter where East Europeans would like to end up, what counts now is getting them there.
How far can reform be pushed without provoking counter-reform?
Many people in the West have been asking how it can best jog things along.
It should start by abandoning the idea that watching the drama in Eastern Europe can be a spectator sport.
For one thing, Gorbachev laisser-faire in Eastern Europe is matched by Gorbachev seduction in West Germany.
NATO's discomfort will grow if reform spreads to perestroika-resistant East Germany; West Germany would be tugged harder towards neutrality and thoughts of re-unification.
And if change in Eastern Europe produces shocks for Mr Gorbachev, the tremors will be felt in the West, too.
Shocks will be hard to avoid.
Debt-ridden Poland and Hungary could be sucked into hyperinflation.
The easing of Kremlin discipline is creating new tensions —a customs war, rows in Comecon —between the reforming Poles and Hungarians and the conservative East Germans, Czechoslovaks and Romanians.
And it is exposing the region's old nationalisms, which in the past have been crushed by force.
Mr Gorbachev would hate to destroy his efforts to persuade the world that Russia is cuddly by sending tanks on to East European streets.
But one day he could face the choice between using force in Eastern Europe and losing power in the Kremlin.
In short, change in Eastern Europe will be messy.
So tidy minds in the West have been thinking of ways to keep the process under control.
Mr Henry Kissinger has proposed a new East-West deal under which the Russians would give Eastern Europe more freedom in return for a western promise not to make trouble for Russia there.
One Yalta was plenty
This would amount to’ Yalta II’.
It would be a mistake.
Today's Eastern Europe is too messy for a tidy plan.
Besides, why seek a deal on looser Soviet control in Eastern Europe when Mr Gorbachev is already loosening his grip?
The Russians would almost certainly insist that any haggling over Eastern Europe include bargaining over Western Europe, which is hardly what the NATO allies want.
The West can still help, in a more useful way than Mr Kissinger proposed.
First, and hardest, by making sure that as Poland and Hungary wriggle free from the East they do not find themselves blocked off from the West.
Western countries should be prepared to open themselves far wider to East European countries that make a real move to democracy and free markets: let the shameful visa queues at western embassies disappear, welcome Gastarbeiter from these countries, open up to any exports deserving East Europeans are capable of selling in the West's competitive markets.
Second, the West can do more to help —through student exchanges, places in business schools, joint ventures —with the huge job of teaching East Europeans about western business and culture.
Should the West also send in cash to prop up the reformers?
Certainly not yet.
The pressure of foreign debt has been one of the main things pushing Poland and Hungary towards freer markets, and one dominant problem in most East European economies is too much cash and too-fast inflation.
It would be foolish for western governments to relax the pressure while most of the reforms remain on paper (so say a polite’ no’to Solidarity's Mr Lech Walesa if, after this week's deal, the Polish government sends him cap.in-hand to the West).
But once the reforms really bite —signs would be a sharp rise in unemployment a far bigger influx of private western investment and radical currency reform —then it would be worth offering the sort of help that could sensibly be given to reforming debtors in Latin America: capitalization of interest payments above a certain share of export earnings.
Yalta's bad name was in some ways a bum rap.
The agreement itself was realistic and flexible: Eastern Europe was to have’ free elections’and governments’friendly’to Russia.
Stalin interpreted that as complete subservience.
Mr Gorbachev's interpretation is clearly different.
He knows that the West would still not send its troops to help rebellious East Europeans, because Russia is still a superpower.
His idea of the freedom East Europeans can safely be allowed is far more generous than Brezhnev s, let alone Stalin's.
In his view, Finland is’ friendly’; Sweden, acceptably socialist East Europeans have more scope than at any time since 1945 to make of their lives what they will.
Once they bump up against the limits of Yalta-redefined, it might be time to reconsider.
Until then, long live Mikhail the Liberator.
Shopping at the Al fayeds
The government has talked of’ wrongdoing’in the Al Fayeds' purchase of Harrods.
It should publish its findings without further delay
And thus the whirligig of time brings in his revenges.
The Al Fayed brothers have owned Harrods, London's top shop, for just four years.
But they indulged in some dubious business ethics to obtain it (see page 33), and inspectors appointed by the Department of Trade and Industry have apparently said as much.
It ought to be only a matter of time before the brothers are forced to sell the company.
This would be harsh punishment, but fitting.
What are at stake in the Harrods affair are ethics and the standards of behaviour required of people in business and public life in Britain.
It has been clear for some time that the Al Fayeds are not who they said they were in 1985.
Nor was their purchase the straightforward financial operation they claimed.
Their duplicity on both counts undoubtedly smoothed their way to buying Harrods, and now embarrasses those in the British government and the City of London who believed them.
Since each of these parties leant on the other for reassurance, relations between them will be soured as a result.
Nor has the tenor of British business life been much adorned by individuals so ready to dress up lies as the truth and, through their lawyers, to castigate the truth as libel.
The brouhaha of recent days over the behaviour of Lonrho, and the Observer newspaper which it owns, should not be allowed to cloud this issue.
Lonrho's ethics have been publicly queried in the past, so many in Whitehall are galled to see it cast on the side of the angels by its opposition to the Al Fayeds, after they had thwarted Lonrho's own designs on Harrods.
And the Observer spoilt its image of editorial independence by producing a special mid-week edition to coincide with its proprietor's annual general meeting, and of editorial responsibility by pre-empting the deliberations of the highest court in the land.
The Law Lords are due to review on April 10th the status of the report produced by the DTi inspectors: waiting a couple of weeks would not have been an editorial disaster.
But none of this alters the ethical issue and the consequent injustice done in 1985.
The DTi inspectors submitted their report last July.
Lord Young, the trade secretary, passed it to the Serious Fraud Office and was apparently advised to defer publication pending possible criminal proceedings.
He was right to take account of the lawyers argument that premature publication of reports impedes the police and reduces the possibility of successful criminal prosecution where that might be appropriate.
But this argument is far from conclusive.
In private, Fraud Squad officers dismiss it.
Lord Justice Watkins would have none of it in the high court in January.
Above all, Lord Young was not bound by his lawyers' advice.
He had to set the argument for delay against others which weighed in favour of publication.
In suppressing the report for nearly nine months, he struck the wrong balance on three counts.
Politically, it was essential last summer to distance the government from what had clearly been a shabby episode.
More than three years had already passed, and further delays could only risk exposing the government to exactly the charges now being levelled against it.
There is no suggestion that Mr Norman Tebbit, the secretary of state at the time, was party to some sinister conspiracy when he waved the Al Fayeds' bid through in March 1985.
But Lord Young's behaviour has unnecessarily implied that the government has something to hide.
As a result, public confidence in the good faith and competence of the DTi has been shaken.
Governing secretly
Secondly, the suppression may conceivably have safeguarded somebody's rights at an unknown future date —but only at the expense of an immediate disservice to other interested parties.
Quite how long Lord Young was proposing to delay publication is a moot point.
It has taken Fraud Squad officers months just to obtain clearance from the Egyptian authorities for an evidence-gathering trip.
In the meantime, the two DTI inspectors, Mr Hugh Aldous and Mr Henry Brooke (now Mr Justice Brooke), have had to listen in silence to a spokesman for the Al Fayeds publicly rubbishing their report.
Lonrho and its shareholders, whatever the merits of their case, have had to wait an unconscionable time for the facts to be established.
Not least, the general public has been treated to another dose of Nanny Knows Best.
Many people want to know what actually happened.
Unless there was some overriding issue of national security, Lord Young should have acknowledged that and published.
Thirdly, his chosen course —compounded by last week's injunction to block illicit publication of the report —is wrong because it is unworkable.
Lord Young is behaving as though the’ Spycatcher’battle had never happened.
Once leaked, most kinds of information can no more be rebottled than pigs can fly.
Persisting with the injunction now offers foreign publishers another opportunity to humiliate the government and over legal principles which this time look trivial beside those at stake in the’ Spycatcher’affair.
Three reforms are needed.
The Law Lords should review at the first opportunity the natural injustice of injunctions which can silence all the media at a stroke.
All DTI inspectors reports should be published automatically, with a maximum delay of three months.
And drastic measures are needed in the Serious Fraud Office, set up last year, to ensure that it moves at something more than a glacial pace.
Nuclear desert
Israel's safety depends more on winning a stable Middle east peace than on wiping out the Iraqi dictator's nuclear plants every few years
Like a bad dream, it keeps returning.
On March 3 East the Washington Post reported that Iraq was building an atomic bomb that might be ready within two years.
President Bush, declining to confirm the report, chose not to deny it either.
The story originated in Israel, just before Mr Yitzhak Shamir's arrival in Washington for what looked an uncomfortable visit.
It could have been planted by Israel in order to distract America's attention from the prickly question of the Palestinians.
Even so, it is an issue the world cannot ignore.
Iraq denies wanting the bomb.
Unlike Israel, it has signed the Non-Proliferation Treaty and has therefore put its nuclear facilities under the supervision of the International Atomic Energy Agency.
In 1981 Israeli aircraft nevertheless destroyed Iraq's big Osirak nuclear reactor, near Baghdad, on the grounds that Iraq was producing material for an atomic bomb there.
Many impartial experts have come to agree that Israel's fears were justified.
Iraq's nuclear plans seemed to go into abeyance while it was reactorless and still bogged down in its costly war against Iran.
Have they been dusted off now that the war is over?
The Iraqis certainly have the expertise to build a bomb.
Thanks to Saudi Arabia they may soon have a reactor too.
Last week King Fahd said his country would help pay for rebuilding Osirak, on the understanding that it would be used for peaceful purposes only.
Even without a reactor, Iraq may already have the fissile material it needs.
Some 25 pounds of enriched uranium were apparently salvaged from Osirak.
That is enough to make at least one bomb.
Israel itself has not forsworn nuclear weapons.
On some plausible estimates it has already built well over 100 atomic bombs, together with a score or so of even more horrific hydrogen bombs and the means to deliver them.
Russia complains that one class of Israeli missile could hit its southern republics.
The case against pre-emption
What's fair for Israel is fair for Iraq?
No.
In the real world not all countries are created equal.
Despite its recent dab at elections (see page 80), Iraq is a dictatorship.
The dictator, President Saddam Hussein, has a fondness for weapons of mass destruction.
During the Gulf war, Iraq indiscriminately fired hundreds of missiles into Tehran.
Although Iraq is a party to the 1925 Geneva Protocol against chemical weapons, it has used poison gas not only against Iranian soldiers but also, in peacetime, against its own Kurds.
Many people who dare not say so would be secretly glad if Israel swatted away Iraq's nuclear ambitions with another elegant air raid.
They are wrong to hope for this.
Osirak was an easy target.
Today Iraq's bomb-making plants are said to be dispersed and hardened against attack from the air.
In 1981, busy with the Gulf war, Iraq chose to let Israel's raid go unpunished.
Today President Hussein, the victorious war leader who humbled the mighty Iranians, could hardly forbear to retaliate.
He has the means: an experienced air force and long-range missiles capable of dropping high explosives, maybe even poison gas, into the heart of Tel Aviv.
Even if it were feasible, another pre-emptive strike by Israel would be foolish.
It would push a powerful Arab country back into implacable confrontation with Israel just when voices calling for a peace settlement are gaining strength throughout the Arab world.
In February Mr Edward Shevardnadze, the Russian foreign minister, offered one answer to Israel's nuclear quandary.
He suggested that Israel give up its nuclear weapons and submit, with its neighbours, to international inspection to keep the region nuclear-free.
One day, perhaps, peace will reign for ever.
Until then, Israel is unlikely to be tempted Mr Shevardnadze's way.
It keeps its nuclear weapons for the same reason NATO needs short-range missiles on European soil: as a deterrent against enemies whose potential advantage in conventional warfare is simply too great to match any other way.
Nobody should want an Iraqi bomb, but Israel cannot hope to keep a nuclear monopoly for ever.
That need not necessarily be horrifying: Europe has shown that it is possible to live with a nuclear stand-off.
But Europe is at peace.
Iraq has not even recognised Israel's right to exist.
Increasingly, Israel's own interest lies in winning the recognition that the Arabs have made contingent on a decent settlement for the Palestinians.
If nuclear Iraq is an Israeli scare concocted to distract attention from Palestine, it is an own-goal.
British management buy-outs
Shareholders need to be told enough to judge if they are being ripped off
The great American management buy-out has crossed the Atlantic to Britain.
Will a great management-swindling of shareholders prove to have been a fellow-passenger?
America has seen nearly 400 buy-outs of public companies, worth $182 billion at the end of 1988, since 1984 when the idea took wing.
Britain has seen barely a score, worth £2.1 billion ($3.6 billion).
The largest yet, an offer of £629m for Magnet, a chain of builders' merchants, went to shareholders this week.
Unfortunately, as British buy-outs come firmly into vogue, they raise the same question that early American ones did.
How do shareholders know whether they are being made an offer they ought to refuse?
Managers like buy-outs because they offer a chance to get rich quick.
If the proposed buy-out of RJR Nabisco had gone ahead, the seven top executives would have stood to make up to $3 billion.
Shareholders are right to wonder whether, if business is going to be that good, it should be they rather than their managers who make the killing.
Most bought-out companies aim to return to the stockmarket within five years or less.
In a 1987 buy-out, 24 managers at a Welsh steel company, ASW, paid £700,000 for a stake in the company.
Who would have guessed then that six months later their shares would be worth £4.2m when the company was floated on the stockmarket?
How much of that gain was the product of newly fired-up managers?
How much was implicit in the business beforehand?
To raise the cash they need, managers give their bankers a three-year business plan.
Shareholders get nothing more than a bald one-year profit forecast.
This is not enough.
The assertion that that is all the information given to shareholders when a company comes to market, or is subject to a takeover bid, will not wash.
In a management buy-out, the managers are in a unique insiders' position.
If they are any good, they know their business's prospects better than anybody else.
To whom can shareholders turn for advice?
Managers trying to buy their company still have a fiduciary duty to shareholders.
To resolve this conflict of interest, a board appoints an independent adviser, usually a merchant bank.
In the Magnet case, it is Kleinwort Benson.
Kleinwort has advised that the buy-out offer looks too cheap, but that in the absence of others shareholders should consider it seriously.
None too helpful.
What Kleinwort needed, to give more useful advice, was the detailed forecasts of the company's and industry's prospects up until 1992 which the managers had given to their own backers.
Kleinwort got no more, and does not have to be given more, than Magnet's three-year profit forecast —no breakdown, no detailed management plan.
In America, once managers make an offer for their company, the independent directors hire investment banks to look for other potential buyers.
The competition flushes out the information shareholders need to decide to whom to sell.
Fear of litigation by shareholders who felt cheated quickly established this practice after some early abuses.
In Britain, the threat of writs is not great enough to make non-executive directors follow suit.
Managers should be obliged by the Takeover Panel to provide their shareholders with the same information, particularly three-year cash-flow forecasts and industry analysis, that they show their bankers.
Oil off Alaska
Once again, the unthinkable has happened because nobody felt responsible
A sea otter, its fur drenched in oil, dies slowly of cold.
Its carcass is eaten by a bald eagle, whose gut becomes lined with oil.
The eagle plummets —dead from dehydration.
Modern economic trade-offs and an old human failing lie behind this topical sequence.
Benefits for the many increasingly bring chances of misery for a few.
Infinitely small risks of infinitely nasty mishaps proliferate.
And alertness that goes untested for too long decays into complacency.
Whenever —as off Alaska recently, or off Brittany in 1978, or at Chernobyl, or at Bhopal —complacency leads to catastrophe, the immediate reaction is the same: ban the trade-offs.
It takes a clear head to retort: nonsense, they are endemic to modern life; the real villain is the complacency.
Television, oil spills and dying animals make a strong political brew.
America, which has not had a big oil spill since 1976, is reacting collectively and predictably to the spill in Prince William Sound off Alaska by condemning the oil business and all its works.
Congressmen will now find it hard to vote for further exploration in Alaska, especially in the wildlife refuge where the biggest untapped reserves probably still lie.
That is wrong-headed.
The human failing is the thing to attack, not the oil exploration.
Exxon and Alyeska Pipeline and the state of Alaska let themselves be lulled to the point where they disbanded an emergency team and downgraded the equipment designed to fight oil spills at Valdez.
Then Exxon allowed a known drunkard to take charge of a tanker.
For the press, the inadequacy of preparations, the tardiness of the companies' response, and arguments over whether tankers should have double hulls will be the cause of much investigative zeal.
The zeal will be fruitful if it makes the chain of human errors harder to repeat; fruitless if it seeks the mare's nest of perfect safety, particularly through technology.
Some 8,700 loaded tankers have made the trip from Valdez since the Alaska pipeline began disgorging oil in 1977.
They have spilt 0.00004% of their load (including the latest spill).
Indeed the amount of oil spilt worldwide has fallen since the 1970s while the volume shipped has grown.
The oil-shipping system is basically safe —so safe that men forget that they are still required to run it properly.
Categoric claims about benefits and associated risks tend to be suspect.
Do not be taken in by oil-company promises that opening the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge to oil exploration will never harm the 170,000 caribou that go there to calve.
Do not fall, either, for the argument that America must have the oil underneath the refuge to reduce its dependence on foreign oil —at a time when, despite the greenhouse effect, the American government has all but abandoned incentives for energy efficiency and has repeatedly bowed to Detroit's absurd demand that it relax its drive for fuel-efficient car engines.
Oil deserves to be found and pumped out if and only if, it can be sold at a price that covers the cost of appropriate environmental safeguards, by a company with a powerful incentive to keep those safeguards working.
Where the buck really stops
The real lesson from the Alaskan wreck involves the complacency that lets an adequate system unravel into disaster.
Modern business diffuses personal responsibility too rapidly.
If you fine an oil-spilling company ten times the value of the spilt oil, its insurance rates merely rise.
Exxon will not suffer much for its mistake.
Its liability is legally limited.
Directors and employees of companies which profit from things that are very unlikely to turn very unpleasant should be personally exposed to fear of these unpleasantness.
They should lose their jobs when the’ impossible’happens, just as the president of Japan Air Lines quit when an aging jet crashed.
That sense of personal responsibility would do much to keep the safety drills slick, the captain sober, the otters swimming.
Britain's import binge
The country must redirect its output abroad.
Whether or not it can do so is the true test of Thatcherism
It sometimes seems like the bad old days.
Britain's reported current-account deficit has run at an annual rate of £20 billion ($34 billion) in the first two months of this year, equivalent to 4% of GDP —even bigger than America's.
On unchanged policies, adumbrates the glummest of American forecasters (whom the foreign-exchange speculators may read), the deficit will rise to £45 billion (8% of GDP) by 1992.
Economic growth is already slowing fast.
Back to Wilson-Heath-Wilson stop-go?
Back to a return from bad Labour-Tory-Labour-Tory government to better government of Britain by the International Monetary Fund?
That just isn't so, for reasons of both dubious statistics and benign intent.
Dubious statistics: Britain is a proud net exporter of invisibles, and such exports are notoriously difficult to measure because they move at button-push.
Until last year the balancing item (ie, errors and omissions) in the over-seas accounts was larger than the recorded current-account deficit: so that deficit quite possibly did not really exist.
Last year's deterioration, however, was impossible to fudge.
It was a symptom of an overheated economy, and a useful early warning of faster inflation to come.
Between 2% and 4% of Britain's economic output now needs to be redirected abroad.
As for the benign intent: whereas dashes for growth in the 1960s and early 1970s were engineered by governments that deliberately overestimated the economy's ability to grow, last year's boom was the result of a miscalculation, which probably erred on the right side.
On the morrow of October 1987 Black Monday the Treasury had to decide whether the stockmarket crash threatened a 1929-33 type fall in demand, and decided not to risk it.
The fact that Black Monday's effects on demand turned out to be trivial is the knowledge of hindsight.
Most of Mr Nigel Lawson's critics of today thought yesterday that his policies might bring something like the 3% growth in demand in 1988 at which he aimed, instead of the 7% that he actually got.
Had that guess of 3% proved right, GDP should comfortably have expanded by the same amount.
Inflation would not have picked up.
The external deficit would not have ballooned.
The sluggish growth of exports last year was not mainly because they were uncompetitive, but because manufacturers, already operating at full capacity, switched output from exports to the home market to take advantage of surging demand and healthy margins.
As demand now slows, the imperative to export will return.
The trickier question is: can Britain's businesses make the required switch into exports?
Their ability to do this will demonstrate the extent of the restoration of flexibility and efficiency which Thatcherism is supposed to have been about.
Our own guess is tentatively encouraging, but not confidently so.
Lower tax rates have sharpened incentives in business.
Trade unions have been tamed, and decisive management made easier.
Flabby firms have been forced to become leaner.
In the 1980s Britain's productivity growth in manufacturing has been faster than Japan's.
Manufacturers' rate of return on capital has jumped from 2% to 10%.
Until it slipped last year, British manufacturers' share of the volume of world exports had been broadly stable at 7% since 1981, after falling continuously since the 1950s.
A recent investment boom should help firms to compete internationally, though in the short term it has worsened the trade deficit.
Almost two-thirds of the increase in the volume of imports last year was in capital goods, intermediate goods and semi-finished manufactures.
The boom was not pure consumer profligacy.
The supply-side test
Fine, as far as it goes.
But it has so much scope to go further.
Each manufacturing worker in Britain still produces roughly a third less than his rival in America, Japan or West Germany.
Britain's expanding service businesses have often done even less than declining manufacturing to improve their zip.
Although Britain's output of services is almost three times its manufacturing output, recorded exports of services are only half those of manufactures —and in the past 30 years, Britain's share of world trade in services has fallen slightly faster than its share in manufacturing.
The output of these service industries is harder to switch abroad.
And their inefficiencies handicap the manufacturers that buy services to make their exports.
The British professions —such as lawyers, doctors, teachers and bankers —are riddled with restrictive practices or inefficiencies.
Mrs Thatcher has rightly chosen to focus upon improvement here in her third term, but she is meeting an opposition to change that is more wily than the one she was offered by the miners.
A testing exchange rate will not lick the service sector into shape.
The government's crusade against that (often Tory) opposition will bring forward the day when Britain can confidently return to’ go’.
Blue-helmet blues
United Nations forces sometimes have to fight to keep the peace.
They must be strong enough to do it.
The United Nations was never intended to police the world.
There are some things its peacekeepers simply cannot do.
They cannot stop huge armies like those of NATO and the Warsaw pact from clobbering each other if they want to.
At the other extreme, they cannot long do the job of a local police force.
The UN certainly has a part to play in keeping peace.
With the winding-down of two decades' worth of cold-war conflicts in Africa and Asia, that part is getting bigger, and the UN is politically better able to play it.
But it must know what it aims to achieve and what will be demanded of it when it sends in its peacekeepers.
Unhappily, this week's bloody fiasco in Namibia suggests that it didn't know these things.
It was not the UN's fault that heavily armed SWAPO guerrillas violated the Namibian peace deal in its first hours by crossing the border into the territory (see page 75).
But the UN force in Namibia should have been up to handling the affair rather than turn the job over to the South Africans; it would have been able to cope if it had been as strong as originally intended and deployed in good time with a decent plan in its knapsack.
The Namibian peace agreement is in jeopardy but will probably survive this setback.
There will be no such margin of error for any international force called upon to keep Kampuchea's fiercely warring factions apart when the Vietnamese withdraw their occupying army in September (see page 63).
Successful peacekeeping requires two things: authority and strength.
UN forces always come with at least a dollop of moral authority.
Some people argue that this is enough.
They say that a weak, non-fighting force can be effective when the combatants want an excuse to stop shooting at each other and are glad to be separated by a symbolic line of bright blue berets.
That is fine when it happens; but weakness in the midst of an armed crowd is always risky.
In the more usual case, strength as well as authority is called for; but the UN too often shrinks from the hard decision.
It votes to set up a force, but keeps it too small and sends it off with orders not to shoot.
Stop me before I kill again
The history of the UN's peacekeeping operations shows what can go wrong when timid measures are tried.
One of the most ambitious operations was launched in 1960 in the Belgian Congo (as Zaire was then known).
In the confusion following Belgium's partial withdrawal from its colony, the UN force was at first given the foolish order not to shoot unless attacked.
After losing some men and witnessing some horrific atrocities that it might have prevented by timely action, the force began to jump in to keep the peace.
There is little doubt that by going on to the offensive the UN force saved Zaire from being cut in two by civil war.
There is no doubt at all that without the peacekeeping force the war would have been worse than it was.
The Congo operation was a half-success.
The UN Interim Force in Lebanon has been a complete disaster.
Set up in I 978 with the twin missions of keeping Israeli troops out of southern Lebanon and helping the Lebanese government to control the Palestinians there, it was never given the strength to do either.
The countries and warlords involved do what they want when they want; and UN soldiers continue to be killed for nothing.
Politicians should think hard before committing a UN force anywhere.
But if the decision is made, enough men must be committed to do the job.
Peacekeeping forces do not have to be strong enough to overwhelm an army; but they must be something more than score-keepers or targets.
They should be burly enough to promise either side a bloody nose.
For that purpose, nice judgments about a force's size are not really needed; but a weak force will usually be worse than useless if the UN's planners and hopers have got it wrong.
When in doubt, beef it up — the more powerful the force, the less likely that it will have to fight and the more likely that it will succeed in its mission.
The worst answer is to send a clearly inadequate force (which is what happened in Namibia) and then try to keep it safe by ordering it to avoid violence.
If armed peacekeeping forces are needed at all, they are needed because they can fight.
Where there's muck there's high technology
Guaranteed and growing demand, ever-rising prices.
What more could the booming garbage industry want?
Quite a lot, it seems
Each American household generates, on average, more than a ton of rubbish a year.
Add in 60m tons from commerce, 90m from industry, and America's grand total is around 25Om tons of what experts categorise as’ solid’waste-paper, packaging, kitchen and garden waste and so on.
On top come a further 250m tons of’ hazardous’waste: anything (whether solid, in the non-experts' sense, or not) containing substances that require special treatment.
It is a huge and rapidly growing rubbish mountain, the largest, per citizen, in the world.
That is one reason why America is the citadel of the garbage industry.
The other is that Americans have grumbled louder and longer than anyone about the rubbish they throw out.
They have strict environmental laws, and the cornerstone provisions, amendments to the earlier Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, date from 1976.
Until the mid-1970s America's rubbish was largely handled by small firms or local government.
Most was taken by truck to out-of-town sites and dumped.
More dangerous rubbish was simply buried.
Nobody cared much what happened to it.
Collection of garbage was then, and remains, mostly a local business.
It is labour-intensive, and accounts — says Kidder, Pea-body, a firm of stockbrokers expert in the topic — for about three-quarters of America's near $25 billion of solid-waste costs.
Collection is a growth business, thanks to growing volumes of garbage — up 2-3% a year — but a fairly unexciting one.
The real changes have come in disposal of the stuff.
Bigger garbage firms developed as concern about the safety of garbage dumps did.
The dumps were generating explosive gases and leaching noxious chemicals that polluted underground water sources.
They were a hazard to human health and to wildlife on land and sea.
The new big companies, which handle both collection and disposal, mostly began as amalgams of small ones.
In solid waste, 75% of which is still handled by local municipalities, two giants lead the private sector, Waste Management and Browning-Ferris.
Over 90% of hazardous waste is disposed of by the manufacturers who generate it.
But here too the garbage professionals are moving in.
Waste Management leads, but faces several sizeable competitors.
That company has grown explosively.
The small family-owned firms in Illinois, Wisconsin and Florida that were to make it up had an annual turnover of $5m-6m between them in 1968.
By 1983 Waste Management was the industry's first billion-dollar group; in 1988 turnover (about one-fifth coming from its hazardous-waste subsidiary) reached $3.6 billion, with profits of $750m.
Browning-Ferris evolved from a small waste-collection firm called American Refuse Systems, founded in 1967 with a single truck in Houston.
After a series of acquisitions, its turnover reached $2 billion in the 12 months to September 1988, with pre-tax profits of $360m.
It now has over 7,000 trucks, collecting from 4 1/2m households and Jim commercial customers nationwide.
The garbage giants' advantage was their ability to meet new environmental standards requiring safer, costlier methods of disposal.
The three that count are:
Bury, burn or recycle?
Burial.
Landfills, the burial sites for waste, are high technology now.
Constantly monitored, they are lined with impermeable materials.
Trenches are built into the base to collect noxious fluids that could leak out and contaminate water.
These are then pumped to the surface and made inert.
Landfills not meeting such standards are being closed: since 1980 more than 3,000 sites for household waste have been shut, and half the remaining 5,500 will shut over the next few years.
Many eastern states are near the end of their landfill capacity.
Incineration.
This was rare 20 years ago.
Today America has more than 100 incinerators that not only burn waste but get energy from it.
Many more are planned.
Modern incinerators contain the fumes of burning rubbish.
Hazardous waste is burnt in special incinerators, often at very high temperatures.
In 1988 Waste Management bought 23% of Wheelabrator Technologies, a leader in waste-to-energy equipment.
Recycling Though costly, recycling is becoming a popular way to cut waste volumes.
In some towns — New York will soon be one — households are required by law to separate out recyclable waste.
But recycling still has far to go: Japan, with little land to spare, recycles 40% of its solid waste.
Compared with the small operators they took over, the giant companies deal with a wide range of rubbish.
Legislators have broadened their definitions of waste, so creating new markets.
One small town has stopped householders throwing out garden rubbish.
This is now collected in a giant municipal compost heap and sold off.
Waste once considered safe is now deemed hazardous.
Regulators have tightened the limits of toxicity allowed in waste, as chemists improve methods of spotting toxic substances in proportions as low as one part per billion — as good as spotting one Chinese among all his fellow-citizens of China.
New markets
Clean-up of old sites is another big new market.
The 1980 Superfund Act, under amendments that came into force in 1986, is perhaps America's toughest environmental law.
It outlines how some 950 old and dangerous landfills are to be cleaned up.
Some manufacturing companies are also voluntarily cleaning up old waste dumps.
The clean-ups are complex: sites must be treated with special chemicals or bacteria.
In November 1987 Texas Eastern agreed to clean up 89 chemically contaminated sites along an oil pipeline; the total cost was estimated to exceed $400m.
American car factories used to bury their paint sludges in the ground.
Six years ago the practice was prohibited.
The liquid paints, it was decreed, must first be stabilised and turned into solids.
In 1986 it was decided that those paints, even the treated ones, that contained lots of nasty chemicals could not be buried at all, but had to be burnt.
Last year it was decided that even less toxic paints could not be put in the ground.
The cost of getting rid of paint sludges has risen tenfold to $250 a barrel.
That sort of rise is nothing unusual.
In 1978 it cost about $2.50 to have a ton of hazardous waste dropped in a safe hole in the ground; in 1987 the cost ranged from $200 upwards.
Burning the stuff cost $50 a ton in 1978; in 1987 fees ran at over $200 a ton, or $2,000 for really nasty wastes.
Such costly advances in disposal have strengthened big garbage companies, but are putting small ones out of business.
Some of the fancy high-temperature incinerators cost $100m each.
But new standards and technology are not the only reason for higher costs: another is simply that waste volumes are outgrowing local capacity to deal with them, especially in eastern areas.
So these pass on their rubbish to garbage companies, which transport it for burial to states like Ohio that still have landfill space.
A decade ago garbage companies charged $3 to get rid of a ton of common-or-garden rubbish.
Long Island, which ships out nearly all its household refuse, now pays $130 a ton.
Europe's private-sector rubbish industry is less developed than America's, smaller and more fragmented.
One reason is that European governments are only now pushing through strict environmental laws.
The European leader is a water company, Generale des Eaux, whose solid-waste business in France turns over some $600m a year.
Britain's largest firm is Attwoods, but most of its soaring turnover is in America.
The biggest local operator is Shanks & McEwan, with a waste turnover of around $125m.
Its prize assets are holes in the ground, the brickfields from which London was built.
Europe's way
The European firms have disparate origins.
Many were formed from the grouping together of small refuse collectors.
In Italy tax-collection used to be a commercial business.
When the state nationalised it, the col lectors switched to garbage instead.
In Britain quarrying or gravel-dredging left emptied space looking for a new use.
The private sector collects around 60% of household rubbish in France, barely 5% in Britain, though that figure will grow fast as local authorities are forced to seek competitive outside tenders.
Other countries lie between these figures.
Disposal of hazardous waste is still mostly handled, if not by those who generate it, by the public sector.
In Holland the state has clubbed together with the generators to process this waste.
Nearly all Britain's hazardous waste is handled by private operators.
ReChem, for example, concentrates on extremely toxic waste.
About one-third of the waste burnt in its two high-temperature incinerators comes from overseas.
Pre-tax profit margins in 1987-1988 were a hefty 34% on a modest £13m ($23m) turnover — which could double by 1990.
The rubbish industry, you might think, should have few worries.
It is fast-growing.
Plenty of small operators remain to be gobbled up by big ones able to meet the capital and research costs now required.
Kidder, Peabody recorded 125 acquisitions of small private garbage firms in America in 1985, twice as many in subsequent years.
Privatisation is spreading there as in Britain.
Worried men
Operating margins have increased to 30% or so, putting garbage up with pharmaceuticals in terms of profitability.
Moreover, prices are expected to rise because the activity is still relatively cheap.
In 1988 the average cost of collecting and disposing of the rubbish from an American household was about $90 — against its spending of $120 on newspapers or $450 on telephone service.
And since the industry is not dependent on consumer choice — safe and effective disposal of waste is a legal requirement — it has been largely recession-proof: garbage companies did well throughout the American and British recessions in the early 1980s.
Yet the industry is uneasy.
Its troubles begin with the regulators and public that helped to create it.
There is no agreement on who should pay the costs imposed by new environmental standards.
The laws themselves are inconsistent, laxly monitored, seldom enforced.
This creates distortions in the market.
Thus:
Standards differ from one national or local government to the next.
No one agrees, for example, on what is’ hazardous’waste.
By their respective standards, Britain generates only 4m tons of it, America 250m.
Nor is there agreement on how to handle it.
Britain uses’ co-disposal’, the burial of solid and hazardous wastes together.
The theory is that the household rubbish will soak up the ill effects of the nasty stuff the not — so accidental practical result is a large cost saving.
Other rich countries call this dangerous nonsense, fearing that such cocktails may cause unforeseen chemical reactions.
National laws on air, water and soil pollution are seldom mutually coherent.
Yet poisons can move from one to the other.
Thus fluorinated gases released into the air by chemical works can get into the sewers as liquids.
They enter the sludge and are spread as fertiliser.
Grazing cattle then develop an illness called fluorosis.
In most countries some industrial companies pour out whatever they can get away with.
Sometimes the state turns a blind eye.
A fifth of Britain's sewage works contravene state standards on effluents because the owners refuse to invest in them.
The owners?
The state itself.
Fresh Kills, New York's garbage dump on Staten Island, is an eyesore which by 2000 could rise to 500 feet and be the highest point south of Maine on the eastern seaboard.
Yet the regulators have given it a dispensation: the rubbish has to go somewhere.
Half of America's rubbish dumps break the law, but are allowed to go on doing so, for the same reason.
The trouble is that the public backs the law but not the means to make it work.
Garbage companies trying to build modern, safer landfill sites or incinerators find it hard to get licences: safety by all means, but’ not in our backyard’.
Communities and nations object to waste from elsewhere.
Most disliked are dangerous chemicals, whether brought in openly or like the 41 barrels of dioxin waste, a legacy of the 1976 explosion at Hoffmann-La Roche's Seveso plant, that turned up in 1983 in a Paris abattoir having passed through umpteen subcontractors on the way.
Fierce protests greeted ReChem's recently announced plans to expand near Southampton.
But even incinerated household rubbish, the cleanest sort, that a British firm planned to import from Zurich angered towns near the intended burial site.
All this means trouble for the garbage industry.
It itself is by no means always innocent, but it would cheerfully clean up its own act if everyone else were forced to pay it to clean up theirs.
That does not happen.
Politicians will not close important factories or meddle with publicly owned bodies that pollute.
Local communities are often unwilling to reflect rising costs of waste management in higher local taxation.
Distorted markets
Lax rules and inadequate policing force down the prices of waste collection and disposal: nice for those who pay them, but not for garbage companies ready to meet high standards.
Britain, reckoned easy-going by its own politicians and by the industry itself, has the lowest prices in Europe.
This has helped make it a big importer of garbage.
The origin of some of this waste is obscure; so are some of the British firms that handle it.
Cowboys can charge cowboy prices.
The rubbish companies run into other problems as they try to push through the higher charges justified by their rising costs.
Their customers, companies or public-sector, are often in the waste-disposal game themselves and can undercut not always fairly.
Britain's local councils charge £6-10 a ton to put solid waste in landfills: a price, say the commercial firms, that does not reflect capital investment or the sums that must be et aside to ensure a landfill is properly maintained during its 30 years or so of life.
Not that this is any privilege of local authorities.
Rather the contrary: in Britain a wastesite operator who finds it too expensive to meet the rules can simply hand in his licence and walk away from the site.
The best answer to these laments would be a tolerably level playing-field for all operators, and one where the rules are seriously enforced.
EEC countries are trying to harmonise their environmental laws in the run-up to 1992.
Standards are likely to be levelled up rather than down.
A level field, but which game?
Some countries are trying to improve the policing of waste management and raise the penalties for rule-breakers.
The Swedes recently came to the conclusion that government should not be involved in waste management at all, since that requires it to police itself.
So the government plans to privatise SAKAB, the state-owned firm that handles Sweden's hazardous waste.
But provision of a level playing-field cannot determine what game is to be played on it.
What is to be done as waste volumes grow while landfill possibilities shrink?
One answer is to discourage the generation of waste, directly by’ polluter pays’rules, or indirectly through taxation (eg, on non-returnable bottles)— an idea easier to offer than to carry out.
But this can only be a palliative: a richer world will always grow richer in garbage too.
How and where is it to be got rid of?
The obvious solution is to stop filling scarce space with bulky rubbish just as it left the bin: switch to recycling and incineration.
How, when they cost more?
Easy: raise landfill charges.
But here you hit the oil economist's conundrum.
Just as it costs peanuts to get oil out of a hole in the ground, it costs peanuts to put rubbish into one — so long as the oil, or the space, lasts.
Clearly, though, prices should cover replacement costs.
But can you get those higher prices when there are people, the Gulf sheikhs of waste, who can afford to forget tomorrow and charge as if space, like oil, came free — as to them, perhaps, it does?
The answer may be yes, given the heavy cost of transporting waste to the cheaper hole farther down the road.
But there is a risk, as America has shown, of a ferocious price explosion as available landfill sites abruptly fill up (while politics closes alternative holes like the seas or the third world).
Those customers still paying peanuts for their waste disposal may one day wish prices had been raised moderately against them now rather than slammed up later.
Lord Young's awkward bit of unfinished business
Being seen to be soft on the City is something that Mrs Margaret Thatcher has always dreaded.
She knows her party is vulnerable to any hint of being kind to crooked capitalists.
The government was relatively unscathed by scandals at Lloyd's, the collapse of Johnson Matthey, and the Guinness saga.
The Harrods affair may yet be different.
For it demonstrates amateurish bungling by ministers and their officials.
The affair is the noisiest clash (so far) in what must surely be the longest-running takeover battle in business history.
Mr Roland’ Tiny’Rowland, head of Lonrho, has been trying since 1977 to acquire House of Fraser, owner of Harrods in Knightsbridge, London, and of various other department stores throughout the land.
When Mr Rowland bid for the group in 1981, he and his colleagues were grilled by the Monopolies and Mergers Commission about their plans for Harrods.
Their bid was blocked on grounds that seemed contrived: the MMC purported to be worried, eg, that Lonrho might flood Harrods with nylon sheets made by one of its subsidiaries.
Just over three years later, in 1985, the block was lifted but only in the wake of clearance for a rival bid, launched days earlier.
The bid that saved House of Fraser from Mr Rowland came from an obscure Egyptian businessman and one-time director of Lonrho itself Mr Mohamed Al Fayed (see page 37).
With two brothers, he had turned up with a cash bid for House of Fraser.
Banks in Switzerland and the City had vouched for the money.
Mr Norman Tebbit, then secretary of state at the Department of Trade and Industry (DTI), asked few questions and waved through the Al Fayed bid in ten days flat.
The British establishment dislikes Mr Rowland almost as much as he covers Harrods.
But it was soon clear that the Al Fayeds had misled Mr Tebbit, and perhaps pulled a fast one on Mr Rowland.
Mr Rowland's bitter campaign of vengeance has been driven by that affront.
It was his persistent badgering that led another Tory industry secretary, Mr Paul Channon, to commission an inspectors report into the Al Fayeds' purchase in 1987.
That was presented, last July, to yet another secretary, Lord Young, who has since refused to publish it.
Late last month, Lonrho acquired a copy.
Lengthy extracts appeared on March 30th in a special Thursday edition of the Observer Sunday newspaper, which Lonrho owns (and through which, not least, it has conducted its campaign).
All members of Parliament and many journalists were sent copies.
Lord Young has had to battle hard ever since to defend both his original deferment of publication and his decision to stand fast despite the leak.
Thus did a quarrel over the ownership of a shop win front-page headlines in Britain for seven consecutive days.
Why will Lord Young not publish?
Three days after receiving the inspectors report, he passed it to the Serious Fraud Office for further investigation.
The DTI thought it had done a deal with the lawyers and police: by the end of last September these would say whether or not there were grounds for criminal charges.
If the director of public prosecutions (DPP) was going to proceed, the DTI could announce that; if not, it could publish the report.
Law lords to the rescue
The SFO is still beavering.
Indeed, it may beaver for many months yet.
Only five officers from the fraud squad of London's Metropolitan Police are working on the case.
They have not yet spoken to Lonrho or the Al Fayeds.
They seem likely to become bogged down in the intricacies of Swiss banking and Egyptian commerce.
Indeed the poverty of the police resources put on to this kind of case is one of the lasting issues it raises.
Lord Young has been told that, if the report were published, police inquiries might have to stop and it would be hard to find an unbiased jury for any criminal case.
If this advice had come only from junior officials, he might have been able to over-rule it.
But the SFO reports to the attorney general, Sir Patrick Mayhew, who, as the government's chief legal adviser, has responsibility for the DPP.
It seems likely that he, too, has advised the DTI against publication.
But on other occasions (see box below) Sit Patrick has taken a more robust view of juries.
Indeed, when Mt Rowland and Lonrho were themselves the subjects of a DTI inspectors' report in 1976, they had no such protection.
They were criticised for a cavalier approach to company expenses and for contravening the government's economic sanctions against Rhodesia.
On that occasion, the inspectors' report was handed to the press at the same time as it was referred to the DPP for possible criminal proceedings.
A number of other arguments have helped dissuade Lord Young and his colleagues from publishing the report:
Before the Observer leaked extracts, ministers in the DTI took the view that publication would allow the Labour party to accuse them of jeopardising the rights of any defendants to a fair trial.
Since the Observer's leaks, indignant ministers do not want to give the impression of being bounced into publication.
The government has already gone into court arguing that it is justified in not publishing the report — the case goes to the law lords on April 10th — and does not want to anticipate their decision.
If the law lords tell Lord Young to publish, he will breathe a sigh of relief and obey.
If they order him not to do so, he will also be in an easier political position.
The report's contents are not expected to be damaging to the government.
Indeed, some Tory backbench Mrs are relieved that the government is blessed with such a distraction from the weightier issues of the economy or the national health service.
Yet the handling of the report has made the government look fumbling and unprepared.
Lord Young, a minister who has never had to face an election, has a meagre reservoir of affection and support among Tory backbenchers.
The Harrods affair will not have helped his political career.
Environment
Green thoughts
Yes, green she is and by God she is going to prove it.
Eight cabinet ministers have been summoned by the prime minister to an all-day seminar on climatic change on April 26th.
They are the foreign secretary, the chief secretary to the Treasury, the agriculture minister, and the secretaries for the environment, industry, education and science, transport and energy.
The seminar is intended to educate them on climatic change and global warming.
It has been arranged by Mr David Fisk, chief scientist at the Department of the Environment.
No excuses or substitutes will be accepted and Mrs Thatcher herself will open and close proceedings.
An Australian physicist, Professor Tom Wigley, director of the climatic research unit at the University of East Anglia, will open the discussion with dire predictions of the impact of the greenhouse effect on the sea level.
His own university in Norwich could be one of the first to be inundated.
Mr Ken Currie of the Energy Technology Support Unit at Harwell will then describe what the rich world could do to mitigate the effects.
Sir Crispin Tickell, Britain's ambassador at the United Nations, who is rapidly developing the sort of rapport with Mrs Thatcher that Lord Cherwell had with Churchill, has been summoned from New York to describe how the rest of the world can be brought into line.
Mr Martin Holgate, formerly chief scientist at the environment department and now director general of the International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources based in Geneva, will summarise the possible action to be taken a role which he performed brilliantly at the recent London ozone conference.
Others attending may include Lord Marshall, chairman-designate of National Power, the larger of the two privatised electricity-generating companies; and Sir James Goldsmith, an international financier who has become increasingly interested in environmental issues.
Sir James has been lobbying the prime minister for a scheme to use official aid money to buy up Third World debt, sell off the principal, and swap the right to interest payments for a lease on tropical rain forests.
Ministers have generally failed to grasp the implications of Mrs Thatcher's conversion to the cause of the environment.
Only Mr Kenneth Baker, secretary of state for education, said promptly,’ more money and put in successfully for a rise in the science-research budget.
Some ministers, including Sir Geoffrey Howe, the foreign secretary, are simply not interested in environmental issues.
Others have had difficulty in taking their departments with them.
The minister in charge of the Overseas Development Administration, Mr Chris Patten, is a keen green, and helped to write Mrs Thatcher's how-green-I-am speech to last year's Tory party conference.
But his department has been slow to ask for more cash for environmental aid to the Third World.
One project being reconsidered in the wake of the prime minister's conversion is Britain's contribution to a European scientific space satellite.
Britain dropped out of the project when the space-research budget was cut last year, but the satellite would be particularly useful for monitoring the destruction of the Amazon forest and other aspects of climatic change.
The minister most in need of re-education, according to some of his Whitehall colleagues, is Mr Cecil Parkinson, the energy secretary.
He and his department have been reluctant to discuss ideas for energy conservation, claiming that sulphur emissions from power stations have declined since 1979 (and ignoring the fact that they have risen since 1984, a side effect of faster economic growth).
In particular, the energy department has been reluctant to talk about a carbon tax, an idea which Mr Nicholas Ridley, the environment secretary has said in cabinet that he is keen to explore.
The purpose of such a tax would be to make forms of energy which emit carbon dioxide, and thus contribute to global warming, more expensive compared with those (such as nuclear power) which do not.
The prime minister is still basking in the success of last month's conference on the ozone layer.
One sign of its international impact has been a new willingness on the part of the Soviet Union, not traditionally regarded as an environmentally sensitive nation, to follow whatever lead the British set in getting rid of chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs).
The conference has helped to establish the ministries most immediately concerned with organising it, the Environment Department and the Foreign Office, as the leaders in devising new environmental initiatives.
The Foreign Office earned plaudits for roping in so many ministers (a total bag of 80), while Mr Ridley's visit to China in January was responsible for the important participation of the Chinese.
Mrs Thatcher is now anxious to find another equally striking initiative.
She is keen on the idea of an international convention on the atmosphere.
Before her conversion, she would doubtless have insisted on waiting for the results of a number of studies being conducted by an international panel on climatic change set up by the World Meteorological Organisation and the United Nations Environmental Programme.
The panel is due to report late next year.
But it now looks as though pressure for earlier action may surface at the United Nations in the autumn, led by Canada and Malta.
Mrs Thatcher may feel it would be politically astute to take a lead in getting a convention under way.
This would involve the government in thinking about the need for new international institutions to oversee such a convention.
One idea, being mooted by some of the Russian representatives at the United Nations, is that the UN'S trusteeship council, set up to look after colonies en route to independence, be converted into a trusteeship council for the planet.
The danger for such grand schemes is that the developed countries will think up targets for the rest of the world to meet, without fully considering the implications for their own domestic policies.
One effect of Mrs Thatcher's seminar may be to fix that point firmly in the minds of her ministers.
One journalist's tale
In the battle for control of House of Fraser, both Lonrho and the Al Fayed brothers have tried to use the press.
One of the few journalists who was always sceptical of the Al Fayeds' case has just joined the staff of The Economist.
his is his account
’ An officer from the Fraud Squad of London's Metropolitan Police rang me on Thursday March 30th.
Had I seen the extraordinary edition of the Observer newspaper, carrying extracts from the government's official report into the Al Fayeds' purchase of the House of Fraser group?
The squad had picked up several copies from a local newsagent: would I like one?
The officer was surprised to be told that an injunction had been served and that The Economist had already received its mid-week Observer.
His offer did not come out of the blue.
The Fraud Squad had been seeking the help of several journalists for some weeks, as part of its work on the findings of that official report.
I wrote an unflattering portrait of the Al Fayeds in 1985 and aspects of my involvement then are apparently relevant to the Fraud Squad's inquiries.
But Thursday's friendly gesture sat oddly with the government's ban on publishing the report.
After all, the main reason for that ban given by Lord Young, secretary of state for trade and industry, was that the Fraud Squad among others had asked for it.
This absurdity is in keeping with my earlier encounters with Mohamed Al Fayed.
I set out in May 1985 to write a feature for the Financial Times about this man apparently rich enough with his two brothers to pay £615m in cash for the House of Fraser.
Their advisers, Kleinwort Benson, a City bank, claimed that the Al Fayed family had been wealthy for generations.
The bank mentioned the brothers' international shipping interests.
I spoke to six leading shipping brokers.
None had heard of the Al Fayeds.
Further research turned up a small shipping business, but it was modest indeed beside the kind of wealth claimed by Kleinworts.
The same proved true of references to construction, oil, banking and property.
Assets on the scale needed to buy the House of Fraser were simply untraceable.
Mr Mohamed Al Fayed had clearly acted in the past as a middleman for British companies seeking contracts in the Gulf.
Had he grown rich on hidden commissions?
I went to Dubai and called on several prominent figures who had known him as a local businessman.
My Arabic was rusty but I had studied the language in the 1970s and knew the Gulf reasonably well.
What I learnt of the Al Fayeds settled one question but raised another.
Yes, their fortune almost certainly came mainly from construction in the oil-rich sheikdoms of the Gulf.
By any normal standards, the Al Fayed brothers had been rich men for perhaps a decade or even two.
But no, it was inconceivable that the money they had made there could have paid for Harrods.
For the Al Fayeds to have dissembled over the origins of their own money was hardly of great moment.
But suppose a large part of the £615m was not really theirs at all?
This looked far more important.
The British government had waved through the bid in the space of just ten days in March 1985 on the grounds that the money was indeed all theirs.
Even had the bid been financed mainly with borrowed cash, would it not have been referred to the Monopolies and Mergers Commission?
The government would surely have wanted to know who exactly was to own one of Britain's best-known companies.
Whose money?
In the City, some thought the Al Fayeds' cash came from the Sultan of Brunei.
Mr Mohamed Al Fayed had advised him on various matters.
Others were baffled.
At Kleinwort Benson, the responsible director, Mr John MacArthur, was on holiday.
Others at the bank were reluctant to speak on his behalf.
There was no such reticence at the City offices of Lonrho.
There, research into the antecedents of the Al Fayeds had become a cottage industry.
I was inundated with photocopied documents and background papers.
I treated these with caution.
Lonrho's chief executive, Mr Tiny Rowland, had once been a close business associate of Mr Mohamed Al Fayed, and the sulphurous mood at Lonrho partly reflected a falling out of old sparring partners.
But nothing I took from Lonrho proved misleading.
The outcome of my work was published by the Financial Times as a feature entitled’ The Mystery of the Al Fayeds’on May 31 1985.
It left open the question of whose money had paid for the House of Fraser but made clear that nothing in the career of Mr Mohamed Al Fayed could account for such new-found wealth.
The Al Fayeds had risen without trace — yet Kleinwort Benson still insisted that there was’ no hidden hand behind them’.
The article also claimed, however, that’ no one seems yet to believe’the Al Fayeds and their financial advisers.
As the bankers and their lawyers, Herbert Smith, promptly pointed out, the British government had believed them.
The Financial Times therefore had to retract that point.
But nothing in the response of the Al Fayeds' advisers, for all its bluster and menace, rebutted my basic case or added one jot of information to explain the origins of the brothers' wealth.
The riposte of Mr Mohamed Al Fayed himself was intriguing.
It is clear today that the article's portrait of his career was correct in every significant detail.
As it asserted, he was born of a humble background, worked as a salesman in Saudi Arabia in the early 1950s, prospered through his association with Mr Adnan Khashoggi, a Saudi entrepreneur, and then became a millionaire by helping to fix government contracts in the Gulf construction boom.
But when the article was reprinted in French by Le Figaro on June 6 1985, Mr Mohamed Al Fayed sued me and that newspaper for defamation.
Bizarrely, the Paris courts ruled that the article had indeed’ wrongfully referred to the mysterious and even suspicious origins of the Al Fayed family’.
Le Figaro was ordered to pay costs plus one franc of damages and had to publish a summary of the court's findings.
Mr Mohamed Al Fayed thus obliged a leading French newspaper to substantiate, by implication, a grand version of his personal history that has turned out to be false.’
State industries
The rate for the job
Since the publication of the white paper on nationalised industries in 1978, Britain's public-sector companies have been required to make a pre-tax real return of 5% on their new investments.
At the time, this looked reasonable enough: private-sector industrial and commercial companies (excluding North Sea operations) made a real return of 7% in 1978.
Come 1981, and the deepest recession since the 1930s, a 5% rate of return looked downright demanding: by that time, Britain's private sector was returning just 3%.
The boom years of the 1980s, however, have seen private-sector profitability soar.
Private rates of return have risen every year since 1981; in 1988 they hit 11%.
Remember that this is the average rate: new investments should do better still.
With the opportunity cost of capital so high, the Treasury reckons Britain's remaining public-sector industries ought to appraise their investments against a more realistic yardstick.
On April 5th Mr John Major, chief secretary to the Treasury, announced that nationalised industries will now be required to make a return of 8% on new investments.
The discount rate used to appraise projects in the non-trading part of the public sector will be nudged up from 5% to 6%.
Why change now?
After all, private-sector returns have been above 5% and rising for the past five years.
The Treasury reckons it needed to be sure of the trend.
Unbelievers say that the rate-of-return rules hardly matter now, because the number of state industries has dwindled as Mrs Thatcher has sold them.
Close as they are to being sold, electricity and water will be largely unaffected by this week's change.
That, cynics claim, is why the Treasury has marked time: had the electricity industry still been firmly in the public sector, an 8% rate-of-return requirement would have embarrassingly undermined the government's plans for capital-hungry nuclear-power stations.
Back in I 986, for example, the Nuclear Energy Agency estimated that the Sizewell ‘s' nuclear-power station now being built in Suffolk would be one-third cheaper than an equivalent coal-fired station at a 5% rate of return; at 10% the agency thought it would be dearer.
It probably will be so at 8%, too.
The planned nuclear station at Hinkley Point in Somerset is unlikely to be cheaper than a coal-fired one at any realistic rate of return.
The Treasury hopes that the new rates of return will make those companies still on the privatisation back-burner, such as British Coal and British Rail, leaner and more efficient.
It will also make them more sellable.
British Coal says that it is not worried by the change because these days it considers only projects which beat 8% by a decent margin.
But part of British Rail's investment programme may suffer; so may its passengers' pockets after BR's financial targets are reviewed later this year.
In one indirect way, however, the new rate-of-return rules will affect the soon-to-be-privatised water and electricity industries.
Some measure of expected rate of return will be incorporated in the price-regulation sums for parts of both industries.
The figure being used?
By strange coincidence, 8%.
Bad news for consumers: on balance, the higher the figure, the greater the upward pressure on prices.
Local councils
Wobbly
Could a local council go bust?
For decades, those who lent money to them assumed not.
They got a shock when, two years ago, Mr Nicholas Ridley told Parliament flatly that’ the government does not stand behind local-authority debt’.
The shock passed, but it has now been revived by doubts about the legality of councils' interest-rate swaps and swap options.
That issue is to go to court.
Meanwhile, some of the 70-plus councils involved in such deals have felt forced to default on payments due.
It is unlikely, but some creditors may yet have to sue for their money.
Meanwhile, though creative financing has mostly been stamped on, some councils' past ingenuity is catching up with them.
They spent money today, agreeing to pay tomorrow; now tomorrow is here and the bills with it.
Of course, councils can slam up rents and rates.
Two of London's most strapped have done just that: Brent has pushed rates up by 30%, Haringey by 56% and its council rents by even more.
But suppose their, mostly poor, citizens simply do not pay?
That is a real risk.
Last April housing benefit was sharply cut for all but the poorest; and even they must now pay 20% of their rates bill.
Some boroughs — including the two named — are notoriously bad at collecting rents, and London arrears have soared already as the tighter benefit rules have taken effect.
Rent-collection (which for council tenants means rate-collection too) will be the make-or-break skill this year.
What if a council finds itself on the brink?
In theory, it can be served a’ section 114’report, which prevents it taking on any new, uncontracted expenditure.
That has happened to three boroughs, but only in January, near the end of the financial year.
No council could continue for long on such a basis.
The councils' lender of last resort (and since 1980, increasingly of first resort as well) is the Public Works Loans Board.
But there are limits to its tolerance.
Mr Ridley said in 1987 that it could not lend to those who seemed unlikely to be able to service their debts — He went too far: technically, it could.
But would it?
Notionally independent, it is in fact a tool of the Treasury.
Mr Ridley was trying then to scare councils into lower spending, and no doubt hoped his threats would never be put to the test.
That does not prove he did not mean them.
Curtain up in the town hall
Rate-setting is a springtime routine that all local authorities must perform by April East — This year, in some places, an accumulation of past extravagance, poor accounting an uncertainty about the lawfulness of various bits of figure-shuffling has transformed it into drama.
The north London borough of Haringey offered the best show in town.
Haringey (unemployment around I 5%) is one of the poorest bits of the capital.
Of 59 councillors, 39 are Labour, 19 are Tories, and one is a Democrat; but, as 12 Labour councillors are hard-left, the council, in effect, is hung.
The law requires the council to balance its books each year.
But, bit by bit, Haringey found that in setting 1989-90's rate, it had rather more than the year's expenditure to cover.
To get the new rate demands printed in time for April East, the deadline was midday on March 31st.
Here is how the temperature rose:
December 1988: The budget deficit for 1988-89 looks like turning out at £4m or £5m.
Nobody is much worried: the reserves can cover that.
December 8th: The manager of the direct-labour organisation, which does the council's building work, announces that it will not be making its projected profit, but a £3m loss.
The council appoints outside consultants to examine the DLO.
January 1989: The consultants report that the DLO's deficit will in fact be £7-5m — and if, as the law requires, it is to earn 5% on capital, 600 people will have to be sacked.
Early February: More red ink.
Housing benefit is over budget, partly because of the rise in the number of homeless families having to be expensively bed-and-breakfasted.
Haringey has 1000 of them.
February 20th: The Labour group begins to think about setting a rate.
The deficit by now looks like £12.9m.
But within days (i) a bill arrives for £2.5m to pay off the former DLO employees;(ii) the borough treasury suddenly lights upon a £6.5m deficit left over from 1987-88; and (iii) up pop £21m of debt repayments, mostly the result of deferred-payment agreements — glorified hire purchase — entered into when Whitehall started rate-capping in the mid-1980s.
A bit slow on the uptake, you might think, Haringey's finance department.
Council officers have a different explanation: it has only one-third its usual tally of accountants because so many have taken voluntary redundancy.
Meantime, another sub-plot is running: £22m of capital receipts which the council has spent as revenue.
After a court ruling that this was unlawful, Haringey rang round other councils to see if they could borrow and lend on the money to tide it over.
Alas
March 29th: The district auditor says this device too would be illegal.
Haringey will have to find the £22m for itself.
Its accountants sit down with the auditor for a day of conjuring tricks and, hey presto, £15m gets lost in a cloud of smoke, leaving a mere £7m to find.
March 30th, 7.30pm: The council meets to set a rate, facing an inherited deficit of about £50m on top of £175m of 1989-90 spending.
A massed choir of anti-cuts protesters drowns speeches.
As the report incorporating the last-minute £7m has not yet been photocopied, the council adjourns for samosas and salads.
9.45pm: Hot off the copier, the report is passed around.
Labour moderates propose a 56% rate rise, with £5.6m of cuts.
The hard left points out the parallels between colonial district commissioners and the district auditor.
Tory councillors make cumbersomely jokey speeches well suited to a Rotary dinner.
March 31st, 1.30am: The hard left calls for’ struggle — no rate rise, no cuts — and joins the Tories to defeat the moderates' motion.
2.00am: The borough solicitor, barely comprehensible through a jungle of subordinate clauses, warns councillors that failure to set a rate by midday would make them personally responsible for losses incurred.
3.00am: The Tory group sits with folded arms and a collective smile saying it has nothing to say.
Both sides want to be the last to put forward a proposal, reckoning that if no rate is set, a court will pin the blame on whoever was last to reject one.
Mr Steve King, leader of the hard left, denounces his fellow-councillors as dunderheads, nincompoops and dolts.
Stalemate.
The dunderheads etc wander in and out picking hungrily at the remains of a beetroot salad.
The three besuited council officials — chief executive, treasurer and solicitor — are grave.
5.15am: Bullied by the solicitor, the Tories put up their figure: a rate rise of 20%, with £30m cuts.
Labour roars in horror.
The treasurer says cuts that big cannot be done, so the Tories' budget is in’ latent deficit’and thus unlawful anyway.
A Labour moderate collapses and is taken off in an ambulance.
8.15am: Another Tory package, with a 30% rate increase, gets the bird.
Bacon sandwiches arrive.
10.00am: Labour moderates offer an extra 1350,000 of cuts.
Too little, say the Tories, too much says the hard left.
Motion defeated.
Exhausted and nervous, councillors disappear into small cabals.
11.56am: Bingo.
Labour moderates win over four of the hard left by agreeing that the cuts shall involve as few compulsory redundancies as possible.
With four minutes to spare, Haringey gets a rate-56% higher than last year.
The play is not over.
Council tenants also face a 60% rent rise.
There could be a rent strike, a rates strike, or both.
Official statistics
Renumbered
From July the Central Statistical Office (650) will at last live up to its name.
At present most of the figures that dominate headlines and move markets are produced by individual departments.
The CSO's main job is to compile the national accounts.
Now, on the recommendations of a study of official statistics directed by Mr Stephen Pickford, head of the Treasury's economic briefing unit, the government has decided that the 650 should be in charge of the retail-price index and the family-expenditure survey (both jobs currently done by the Department of Employment), and all the statistical series, such as industrial production and investment, currently collected by the Department of Trade and Industry (DTI) and the Business Statistics Office.
The CSO was set up by Winston Churchill in 1941, largely because he was fed up with getting conflicting numbers from different departments.
In many European countries, statistics are the responsibility of a single office, but the Rayner review in the early 1980s rejected this option for Britain.
Two things have since changed:
Virtually all the data the 650 needs to compile the national accounts are collected by other departments.
In recent years, public-spending cuts have made departments less willing to collect data in the form the 650 needs for the national accounts.
The government's requirements have changed.
Since it believes in minimum meddling in industry, there is less need for detailed disaggregated figures, and so for figures to be collected by the departments where policy is made.
The exception, perhaps, where statistical data are still essential to policy, is employment and so the Department of Employment will remain in charge of the unemployment figures.
The enlarged CSO, under its present director, Mr Jack Hibbert (one of the few permanent secretaries in Whitehall to have started his career as an executive officer), will become a separate government department responsible to the chancellor of the exchequer.
Later it will become an executive agency.
That will put it on a more commercial footing and help to maintain its professional independence.
The Pickford report also makes no less than 31 detailed technical recommendations to improve the quality of the data.
But the CSO's likely wish to collect more numbers and use larger samples may clash with another imminent report, by the DTI, into business statistics.
Its brief was to seek ways to minimise the burden on companies.
Any demand for more and better statistics is almost bound to impose costs on industry.
The new centralised system will also be better placed to improve the quality of the figures, which seems to have deteriorated sharply in recent years.
The gap between the different measures of GDP has widened, for example, while the balancing item in the balance of payments has actually been bigger than the current-account deficit itself.
Some have concluded that the current-account deficit is a myth.
But Mr Hibbert thinks the main discrepancy is on the capital side of the account.
The abolition of exchange controls has made it harder to track flows of cash in and out of the country.
Dodgy data are often blamed on the spending cuts in the early 1980s.
The number of statistical staff at the 650 was indeed cut by about a third, but as the Pickford report points out, this was made up for by greater use of computers.
Also, the number of professional staff as opposed to number crunchers, has increased.
One reason why British figures look less reliable than those of other countries is that the CSO is too honest.
The committee found no other country in the world that publishes all three measures of GDP as Britain does.
Even where two are published, foreign statisticians often’ reconcile’accounts internally before publication.
Life after abolition
The Anti-Slavery Society, Britain's oldest human rights organisation, celebrates its 150th anniversary this month.
Founded to export British distaste for slavery to the rest of the world (Britain abolished its slave trade in 1807 and freed the slaves in its empire in 1833), it was inspired by a felicitous combination of nonconformist religion and utilitarian calculation.
Nonconformists saw slavery as an affront to their religion; utilitarians dismissed it as inefficient.
Walter Bagehot gave slavery short shrift:
The slave will not work unless he is made, and therefore he does little; he is no better, or little better, if he does his work well than if he does it ill, and therefore he rarely cares to do it very well.
Looking at the superior economic performance of the northern United States compared with the south, political economists had a simple explanation (now vigorously disputed by economic historians): slavery.
Abolitionists regarded the outlawing of slavery as a triumph for enlightened public opinion.
But, muscular Christians all, they were not averse to reinforcing moral injunctions with physical force-Throughout most of the nineteenth century one of the Royal Navy's main tasks was the suppression of the slave trade on the west and east African coasts.
This brought Britain into conflict with Islamic fundamentalists, who believed that the Dar al-Islam, the world where Islam ruled, should be peopled with slaves from Dar al-Harb, the lands of the infidel.
’ It is vain for these Arabs to endeavour to resist the consummation of that which is written in the Book of Fate,’fulminated Lord Palmerston, when he was foreign secretary.
The Anti-Slavery Society has since had to adapt Victorian values to the post-Victorian world.
After the second world war it had to adjust to the loss of an empire.
Without imperial authority to reinforce its moral precepts, it increasingly relied on high-minded exhortation.
As the methods have changed, so has their target.
The abolition of slavery in 1970 in Saudi Arabia and Muscat meant that there was no more genuine slavery to be anti.
The society has therefore revised its definition of slavery to include large numbers of people whom William Wilberforce would not have regarded as slaves: bonded labourers, exploited women and children, blacks in South Africa.
(The United Nations now brands apartheid as the true slavery of the twentieth century.)
Thus redefined, the number of slaves in the world is now greater than it was 150 years ago.
Campaigns against such exploitation are to be applauded: but the use of the term’ slavery’is as ingenuous as Karl Marx's notorious concept of’wage slavery’.
Perhaps it is time for the society to change its name.
The folly of raiding the piggy-bank
A man wants a holiday but has no spare cash.
Prudently, he decides to save.
He puts part of his pay into a spending account and the rest into a piggy-bank.
But he keeps on spending as much as before, topping up his spending account with cash from the piggy-bank, which he replaces with little bits of paper saying that the spending account owes the piggy-bank money.
He thinks he has saved for his holiday — a fallacy that is exposed only when he tries to redeem those bits of paper against an empty spending account.
This little story describes the present workings of America's social-security pension system.
The trust fund that collects pay-roll taxes from employers and workers and pays out pensions to the old and disabled is running big annual surpluses (see chart).
Splendid, say many politicians: we are saving to finance the pensions the baby-boom generation expects to collect in the next century.
Such prudence is unusual among politicians.
And, sure enough, they promptly combine it with profligacy by’ borrowing’those lovely surpluses to finance other spending.
The trust fund holds bits of Treasury paper; spending continues as before; yet the budget deficit seems to shrink.
The trust fund goes back to the start of social security in 1935.
It was supposed to keep retirement benefits safe from politicians' tinkering.
But until a decade ago, there was no thought of accumulating large surpluses.
The system was pay-as-you-go’: taxes on people in work roughly covered payments to people on pension.
This arrangement worked fine until a decade or so ago, when high rates of inflation, increased benefits and an upsurge in the number of pensioners threatened the fund's solvency.
Looking ahead to the retirement of the baby-boom generation made the prospect even worse.
To a procrastinating president and Congress the solution was clear: set up a national commission to study the problem.
The commission, looking at some gloomy Treasury Department projections, recommended a small trimming of benefits in the distant future and a speeding up of planned increases in payroll taxes.
Thanks to the commission's high reputation (it was presided over by the present Federal Reserve chairman, Mr Alan Greenspan), this package was adopted.
By next year, payroll tax-rates will have risen by 30% since 1978, and half of all Americans will be paying more in payroll taxes than they do in (more progressive) income taxes.
In consequence, the trust fund is accumulating surpluses.
The surpluses are’ invested in special interest-bearing Treasury securities.
These securities and the interest they collect are notional: they amount to nothing more than claims on the taxes and loans that the Treasury will have to raise when they are redeemed.
But the extra income the trust fund raises from workers and employers is real, and reduces the Treasury's need to borrow (or raise taxes) to finance the deficit.
The trust-fund is ostensibly’ off-budget’.
But its annual surpluses ($56 billion in fiscal 1989) are added back for the purposes of the Gramm-Rudman deficit-cutting law.
When you hear some figure referred to as the federal deficit, that is after this convenient bit of jiggery-pokery.
Those who disapprove of this double-counting suggest four ways of ending it:
1.
Take social security genuinely off-budget.
That would, of course, require deeper spending cuts in order to balance the budget.
Both Republicans and Democrats on the recent National Economic Commission proposed a variant: count in social security but aim to run a budget surplus exactly equal to the social-security surplus.
2.
Instead of investing the social-security surpluses in Treasury paper, invest them in corporate equities and bonds.
The government would have to borrow more outside or spend less.
3.
Recognise that the federal government's pension liabilities in the next century will be too big for comfort and start cutting benefits, at least for the better-off.
A variant would partly’ privatise’social security by cutting benefits (and payroll taxes) and getting workers instead to invest in private pension funds.
4.
Stop pretending that pension commitments in the next century can be met by piling up bits of paper now, and restore the system to its original pay-as-you-go basis by cutting payroll taxes.
This too would require lower government spending or more borrowing.
In pondering these options, the key point to bear in mind is that the only way a society can get a rich future is by engineering a rich economy.
It is the size of the economy that matters, not that of some nominal trust fund.
And to increase the size of the economy tomorrow requires an increase — in saving and investment today.
Advocates of option one say it could achieve this.
If the federal budget were in balance, not counting social security, the federal government would be in overall surplus and this would be a form of national savings.
The government would reduce its outstanding debt, freeing capital for private investment.
But there are two crucial provisos — besides the political impossibility of such Gladstonian rectitude.
First, the switch from deficit to surplus must not be offset by falls in private saving (which might follow from higher taxes).
Second, it must not mean cuts in productive public investment (including education) since that would be self-defeating.
Option two — investing the trust fund in real assets instead of government paper — also assumes that honest book-keeping will embarrass politicians into spending less.
The big difference between it and option one is that the government would not be us ing social-security receipts to reduce its outstanding debt but would instead be making multi-trillion-dollar investment decisions in the private economy.
Option number three — reducing benefits — looks more promising.
Cutting prospective future costs is as good as or better than generating extra resources to meet them.
But it will be hard to tell today's workers, who already are paying big payroll taxes to finance today's pensioners (far bigger than those pensioners themselves paid) that they will not enjoy the same level of benefits when they retire.
Nor is it clear in an age of continuing economic growth that the economy will not be able to support today's yuppies when they become tomorrow's grumpies.
Privatising social security sounds appealing, but cannot itself affect tomorrows resources unless it brings with it higher national savings and investment.
Privatisation also cannot solve the double-counting problem: if today's workers are allowed to invest their social-security contributions for their own retirement, where will the money come from to pay for today's pensioners?
That leaves option four, reverting to pay-as-you-go.
This would amount to admitting that governments cannot save for the future, a view that some describe as pre-emptive capitulation.
But the social-security surplus is having the opposite of its intended effect: in helping the government to evade cutting the deficit, it is reducing national savings, and thereby reducing the country's ability to support future pensioners rather than increasing it.
Nor is it obvious that today's generation is better placed to bear higher taxes than tomorrow's generation — continuing economic growth would indeed argue the other way round.
Imagine telling a hungry nineteenth-century railway navvy that he must pay higher taxes to help meet the pension bills of the richer century to come.
Even today's less hungry navvies will surely object to this soon.
Missiles
Three legs good, two legs better?
FOR 20 years, America has been arguing about the’ window of vulnerability’of its land-based intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs).
Two presidents were elected on a platform of doing something about it.
Now a third has come to office with the same goal.
And still the argument rages.
It may not rage much longer.
Signals of compromise are coming from the tepee.
The window of vulnerability is the fact that, unlike American ones, Russian missiles are accurate and numerous enough to destroy the other side's missiles in their silos.
That is because most Russian warheads are on land-based ICBMs, whereas most American ones are in submarines and bombers.
An American retaliatory strike would either have to be launched before the incoming missiles arrived — a policy that would put nuclear war on a hair trigger and increase the chance of a mistake — or would have to consist of submarine-launched missiles which are only accurate enough to cities.
Therefore the Russians can threaten a more credible attack — disarming America's ICBMs — than the Americans, who can threaten only mutual Armageddon.
The first solution to this dilemma was to harden existing Minuteman missile silos.
More accurate, multiple-warhead Russian missiles undid that.
In response President Carter chose to build a ten-warhead American missile, the MX.
But Congress insisted the real solution was to make America's missiles mobile, so they wouldn't be sitting ducks.
A plethora of schemes was thought up.
They would lurk somewhere within a system of tunnels; no good: explosions anywhere in the tunnel would reach them.
They would live on desert racetracks linking up shelters; it proved impossible to get hold of enough desert from angry human inhabitants.
They would shuttle between many silos: too hard for the Russians to verify arms control agreements.
They would all stick to gether in one place (’ densepack’) so that incoming Russian missiles would commit fratricide: impossible to test the theory.
After 20 years and about 70 such schemes, the Reagan administration began to deploy 50 MX missiles in the old Minute-man-3 silos in Wyoming.
It offered to put some of the Mrs on railways in the 1990s, but this solution was never very popular outside the Air Force, which wanted anything so long as it was cheap — lest it have to take money from other projects.
An MX on rails is not really a solution anyway, because it would take too long to load the missiles on to trains in case ofa surprise attack.
Meanwhile, Congress had found an alternative to the rail Mx.
The Scowcroft commission, charged with closing the vulnerability window, had recommended in 1983 that, along with the MX, the United States should build a small, single-warhead, truly mobile missile that could go on roads: the Midgetman.
Ironically, the MX, born under a Democratic president, became a virility symbol for Republicans while the Midgetman, conceived by a Republican presidential commission, was adopted by Democrats and Congress.
For five years the administration and Congress failed to choose.
The decision was left to George Bush.
He is on the brink of taking it.
His national security adviser, Mr Brent Scowcroft, is the Midgetman's father.
Mr Scowcroft was, until his appointment, the co-chairman of a committee drawn from the defence elites of both parties, which in February found a form of words that satisfied its wide range of members and came down gently in favour of Midgetman first and rail-MX only later.
A similar decision would have come from the White House by now were it not for the delay in finding a defence secretary.
Mr Dick Cheney, who now has the job, has always voted for rail-Mx, but that does not mean he is set against the Midgetman.
The Air Force resolutely champions the htx because it is cheaper.
A little bit of both is the almost certain outcome.
That was the gist of what the Air Force chief of staff said, thinking out loud a few weeks ago.
General Larry Welch said 50 Mx missiles, instead of 100, and 300 Midgetmen, instead of 500, would make a nice litter.
Mr Cheney promptly slapped him down for speaking out of turn, which had more to do with Pentagon power play than strategy.
But General Welch is on target.
He was selling to the military the concessions of accepting Midgetman (perhaps a two-warhead version) and limiting MXs to 50.
Strategically, it would be close to the worst of all worlds: expensive, because of the Midgetman, and not very invulnerable because there are so few missiles (and they would not be ready until the next century).
If Mr Bush takes that decision, he or his successor still must decide where the Midgetmen would live.
The Air Force, again for reasons of cost, wants them based at existing missile sites in Wyoming, whence they would flee when a crisis loomed.
But that would make them vulnerable to a surprise attack.
They could not roam the range in peacetime without upsetting the locals.
Mr Jim Woolsey, a member of Scowcroft commission and one of the Democrats' leading missile experts, says it makes much more sense to put them on the vast military bases of Nevada and California, where they could be continually on the move.
That would cost about $3 billion more.
The debate about the vulnerability of land-based missiles has been going on so long that a few cynics have begun to wonder if it matters all that much.
Mr Barry Blechman of the Johns Hopkins Foreign Policy Institute recently wrote in the Ned Republic that perhaps 20 years of fruitless argument proves the problem is insoluble.
There may be no missile that is survivable, affordable and compatible with arms control.
And, after all, a Russian first strike against the land-based missiles would still leave America with about 11000 of its 12,000 H-bombs, on submarines and bomb ers.
The standard answer to that has always been that submarines are growing more vulnerable to detection and bombers to preemptive strike.
Though true, this has never struck Democrats as sufficient reason for another vulnerable land-based missile with a hair trigger which is how they see the MX.
But doubts about the necessity of preserving the land-based leg of the’ triad’are not confined to the liberal left.
Mr Fred Ikle, who was President Reagan's undersecretary of defence for policy, has always had his doubts.
He recently compared ICBMS to cavalry in the 1940s: an outdated weapon with increasingly limited uses, still defended by die-hard supporters.
His point is not that the other two legs are invulnerable, but that far too much of America's political energy has gone into discussing ICBMs and far too little into submarines, cruise missiles, stealth bombers (which could be used against targets other than the Soviet Union) and especially command and control centres.
The vulnerability of ICBMs is not insoluble, merely very expensive to solve.
The Soviet Union, with vast tracts of land and no nimby-fied electorate, is the ideal place for land-based missiles.
America is not.
Air safety
One-way ticket
After a visit to the White House on April 3rd by relatives of the victims of Pan Am flight 103, the airliner blown up over Lockerbie, Scotland, the Bush administration announced stricter airport-security standards.
The government will require sensors that can detect plastic explosives at busy American airports and at busy foreign airports where American airlines operate.
The machines cost about $1m each.
At the moment there is an odd inconsistency in American airport-security rules.
Consider the recent experience of an Economist correspondent flying on an American-owned airline.
Outward from London's Heathrow to New York's JFK.
The passenger must pass through a security gate before reaching the check-in desk.
He is about parcels he may have been given.
Luggage that is destined for the aeroplane's hold is x-rayed.
(Some passengers have this luggage searched by hand.)
On-board luggage is x-rayed later.
It is followed by a complete hand search of carry-on luggage, entailing the unwrapping of a gift and a demonstration by the passenger that a lap-top computer works.
Passenger is frisked.
Homeward from Miami to London.
Passenger's carry-on baggage is x-rayed.
Full stop.
Since the Pan Am bombing there have been different security standards imposed on American-owned airlines depending on whether their flights are going to or from America.
The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) requires that American airlines in Europe and the Middle East x-ray or hand-search all baggage on flights to the United States, whether carried on board or destined for the hold.
Passengers must also be selected at random and be subjected to a complete baggage check.
All checked-in baggage must be’ matched’to a passenger travelling on the aircraft.
Citing security, airline and FAA officials won't say exactly what is required of carriers flying from America.
It is known, however, that baggage in the hold must be’ matched’to a passenger on board and that some, but not all, of the luggage bound for the hold is x-rayed.
Why this discrepancy?
The answer is that airline-safety officials deem America to be far less at risk from terrorism than other places.
Some statistics do back this up.
Business Risks International, a company that counsels firms on terrorism, says that of 35,116 terrorist acts conducted between 1970 and 1988, only 747 took place in North America, 626 of them before 1980.
Still, America is not immune to terrorism (and will become more vulnerable to it if its security is relatively lax).
Since January there have been four bombings within the United States apparently linked with Islamic or Middle East matters.
Two book shops and a newspaper office have been firebombed, possibly because of Mr Salman Rushdie's novel’ The Satanic Verses’, and an attempt was made on the life of the wife of the captain of the uss Vincennes, the ship that shot down an Iranian airbus.
An Air India jet is widely presumed to have been emptive strike.
Though true, this has never struck Democrats as sufficient reason for another vulnerable land-based missile with a hair trigger, which is how they see the MX.
But doubts about the necessity of preserving the land-based leg of the’ trial’are not confined to the liberal left.
Mr Fred Ikle, who was President Reagan's undersecretary of defence for policy, has always had his blown up by terrorists on its way from Canada to Europe in 1985.
Bombs in the baggage from a CP Air flight from Vancouver exploded the same day in Tokyo.
Suspected Sikh terrorists were arrested in Canada in 1986, reportedly with plans to attack a jet flying from New York city.
America's differing standards make it hard for Europeans to swallow the government's demands that non-American airlines flying to America also tighten their security.
In March foreign carriers that use American airports were ordered to submit their security plans to the FAA, including plans for security at airports outside the United States.
This has triggered accusations that America is trying to tell other countries how to run their affairs.
Mr Samuel Skinner, the secretary of transport, will be in Europe later this month to try to get foreign carriers and governments to foot some of the bill for the new bomb-detecting machines.
His task would be easier if America's security standards were as high as those his government is asking of others.
Smog
A plan to let you see LA
In what is probably the boldest attempt yet to change Human behaviour for the sake of the environment, officials in southern California have produced a long-range plan to deal with Los Angeles's infamous smog.
The aim is to make southern California reach federalstandards of air quality by the year 2007.
’ The price of clean air must include changes in how each resident uses his or her car says the official plan adopted by the South Coast Air Quality Management District.
It orders more ride-sharing and changes in work hours, including work weeks of four ten-hour days.
In 20 years, the plan foresees that 60% of the workforce will be on alternative working hours of some sort.
The plan aims to reduce driving by bringing homes and work closer together.
Government-sponsored’ neighbourhood work stations’in suburban areas are proposed so that more work can be done without driving downtown to the office.
Proposed land use and zoning changes would place 10% of new employment in’ housingrich’areas and a bit under 5% of new housing in’jobs-rich’areas.
Deliveries of goods would be required to take place at night, despite protests from workers and those bothered by the noise.
Electric trains would be encouraged to supplant diesel lorries.
Video communications would be promoted to replace face-to-face conferences for businessmen, and universities would be urged to televise classes to save commuting by students.
The report's most dramatic assumption is that within the next 20 years electricity can replace petrol for many of the region's cars, buses and lorries.
While this step awaits technical advances, cleaner fuels for cars and lorries, such as methanol, are urged for immediate use.
The first rules will include a ban on petrol-powered lawn-mowers ($81 m worth of such mowers were sold in California last year).
People would be forbidden to use lighter fluid to start their backyard barbecues.
The paint industry, breweries, aerosol manufacturers, and even bakeries would have to install equipment to reduce noxious emissions.
Air quality in the South Coast Air Basin, where 11m people live now and 15m are expected to live by 2010, is close to the worst in the country.
Ozone concentrations reach three times the federal health standard.
Carbon monoxide and ash from fires reach maximum levels of twice the federal standard.
The southern California air basin is the only area in the country that still fails to meet the nitrogen dioxide standard.
Although this region was the nation's first to identify the cause of smog and to make pioneering strides towards curbing air pollution, population growth keeps overwhelming its efforts.
The Southern California Association of Governments says that the region’ is buckling under its own weight’.
The governments believe it is obvious that improved air quality depends on controlling growth and the distribution of housing and jobs.
Many towns in southern California are bewildered by the new duties the plan would impose on them and the new taxes that would be needed.
Businesses are alarmed at the costs they foresee in complying with the plan.
The cost to government of such new facilities as improved roads and electrical railways is put at about $42 billion.
If all goes according to plan the first stage will cost about $7m a day.
The planners cheerfully calculate that this works out at only 60 cents a day per person — and that this cost will be offset by people having to spend less on doctors and medicines.
Cover your assets
Americans who don't take out their frustrations with a gun tend to do so with a lawsuit.
Doctors, lawyers, accountants and other professionals live in terror of their clients.
Recent absurdities of the tort litigation system have included the parents ofa teenager who had committed suicide suing the Catholic church because a priest allegedly gave their son poor advice, and a series of bankrupt borrowers suing their banks for lending them too much money.
This year there will probably be 50,000 personal-injury lawsuits, twice as many as in 1975.
The average medical malpractice award is now close to $1m.
Five years ago a medical general practitioner might have spent $8,000 a year on an insurance policy that gave him cover for a claim up to $1m.
Now he needs cover for $3m and the cost will be around $50,000 a year.
Medical specialists pay more.
Now clever lawyers have figured a way for nervous professionals to guard their wallets from other clever lawyers intent on raiding them: an’ asset protection trust’(APT) in the Isle of Man, a British possession in the Irish sea.
Manx law gives unusually strong protection against litigators.
The assets need not leave America.
However, a straightforward APT means giving control of your assets to the trustees.
A better, if more complicated, way is to combine an APT with an American’ limited partnership’in which the trust has a 99% share while you retain a 1% share and effective control.
You then carry on life as normal, except that most of your assets are beyond the reach of lawsuits.
APT partnerships were thought up by Engel and Rudman, a Denver-based law firm frustrated by its own high insurance premiums.
The firm has already organised APTs for doctors, lawyers, stockbrokers, and accountants.
It says a long queue is forming.
The trust usually costs less than $15,000 to set up and around $2,000 a year to run.
No clients of Engel and Rudman have abandoned their insurance policies.
All, however, have reduced their cover — usually by around a third.
Mr Barry Engel says that the Isle of Man's liberal tax structure can be used to save more money, but he usually counsels against it, to avoid arousing the curiosity of the American taxman.
APTs are a vaccine for litigation sickness, not a cure.
All applicants are screened by Engel and Rudman to see if there are any outstanding malpractice suits.
The firm fears that if defendants appeared to be using an APT deliberately to evade justice, this would give the device a bad name.
Other law firms may be less conscientious.
Doctors and accountants are one thing; husbands on the brink of divorce or even drug barons close to capture are another.
Drugs
War profiteers
The three businessmen staring at Newsweek readers smile but their message is grim.
’ There is a crisis in the business community,’reads the advertisement for the impressive-sounding Princeton Diagnostic Laboratories of America.
’ This crisis is drug, abuse and…your bottom line suffers.
Every war has its profiteers.
The crusade of the Reagan-Bush administrations against drugs has created new opportunities for entrepreneurs, some of whom have passed through the’ revolving door’from government service in the traditional Washington manner.
Princeton Diagnostic is headed by the former director of President Reagan's Drug Abuse Policy Office, Mr Carlton Turner, along with a retired rear admiral and a self-described’ international expert on toxicology’.
They offer free’ valuable information’on how to detect a potential drug user (sunglasses worn at inappropriate times, irritable mood) and how to dismiss that person in a way that minimises the possibility of a lawsuit.
That is the come-on.
What they are actually selling is drug tests for employees.
That business got a boost on March 21st when the Supreme Court upheld the constitutionality of drug tests for government workers in sensitive jobs.
The limits of the ruling are unclear, and the bill of rights does not apply to private employers anyway, but the decision is expected to legitimise and encourage the growing practice.
The government has plans to test half its 2.2m civilian employees.
According to the Washington Post, more than a third of America's companies now have some kind of drug-testing programme.
Syva, a Californian company, introduced the first mass urine-testing procedure for marijuana in 1981.
Syva's revenues have grown steadily since then to $1 3Om last year.
The drug-testing industry is on the verge of gaining that token of respectability, government certification standards.
Running a drug-testing programme is not just a matter of buying a lot of paper cups.
A company must pay consultants to set up the programme and chemists to test the urine.
The Georgia Power Company pays chemists about $30 per specimen for analysis and spends another $20 each on administering the programme.
Then there is the cost of lawyers to handle the lawsuits filed by employees dismissed after testing positive.
The American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) is happy to file such lawsuits.
It thinks universal or random drug testing of employees is an unwarranted invasion of privacy.
It is helping members of President Bush's own staff who are suing to avoid taking the test.
Opponents of drug testing argue that the test punishes an employee for off-the-job behaviour that may not directly affect his performance.
The ACLU also notes the inconssstency that an employee can be punished for smoking a joint on his summer holiday, which leaves a residue that can be detected for weeks, but not for getting drunk in the evening of a working day.
Meanwhile, in a different war, the Food and Drug Administration will hold a public meeting to hear another group of entrepreneurs who want to market home AIDS-testing kits.
The purchaser would take his own blood sample, send it off to the laboratory, and await the results by post.
The agency is dubious about the idea.
It worries that people who test positive will not get adequate counselling.
Brooklyn, Bronx, Belfast
Meddling time is here again.
Latest of an endless line of east-coast politicos who have gone seeking Irish-American votes 3,000 miles still further east is Mr Harrison Goldin, comptroller and would-be mayor of New York city.
Mr Goldin has been visiting Catholic west Belfast and, yes, you guessed, he reckons its citizens are crushed under the heel of the’ mischievous’Brits.
Not for Mr Goldin the folly of admitting, even temporarily, as New York's mayor, Ed Koch, did last year, that, perhaps, in a province with a large pro-British majority, the British are not an occupying army after all.
Mr Koch soon had to back-track.
Should Mr Goldin choose to attend any more fund-raising dinners of Noraid, the IRA's American front, as he already has done this year, he can dine with no such blot of truth on his conscience.
Not, says Mr Goldin, that he approves of the IRA and its guns.
His preferred weapons for Northern Ireland are the MacBride principles.
These call on American companies with Northern Irish plants to practise fair employment there.
In effect, this means to practise discrimination in favour of Catholics.
America's Irish lobby has campaigned hard for the MacBride principles, and several states have made them mandatory on local companies.
The British do not like that.
They accept the aim of fair employment; indeed their government is putting through a similar, if weaker, law.
What irks the Brits, and irks far more their Unionist fellow-citizens in Northern Ireland, is that foreigners — in pursuit of domestic votes, not Irish welfare — are using economic pressure to tell them how to behave.
Every American’ fact-finding’visit to Ulster, let alone those of overt IRA propagandists, rubs salt into this irritation.
It is a small wound, but a worsening one.
Ambitious New Yorkers, please note: Northern Ireland is not part of New York city, nor yet of the United States, nor even of South Africa.
Its six counties, by the wish of their majority, have since 1801 been part of the United Kingdom, an independent country since — well, let's say since 1776.
Virgin Islands
Rum doings
There are people on St John, the sleepibest and most beautiful of America's Virgin Islands, who think that Charlotte Amalie, the colony's capital on next-door St Thomas, is too noisy and rushed.
To everybody else it is a mildly bustling West Indian tourist haven where, between rum drinks, the biggest excitement is the arrival of another cruise ship.
Normally, that is.
These days Charlotte Amalie is getting more excitement than it is used to, or wants.
Mainland newspaper reporters have been scouring the island.
The Department of the Interior, which acts as a kind of colonial office, has been investigating the local government.
The FBI has even conducted a’ sting’operation in the very heart of tourist St Thomas, the luxurious Frenchman's Reef Beach Resort.
The cause of all this activity was an illfated meeting in December, up north in the District of Columbia, between Mr Marion Barry, DC's mayor, and Mr Charles Lewis, a St Thoman who once worked for Mr Barry's government.
Police raided a hotel room after the two men met there and found traces of cocaine.
Mr Barry has been under intense scrutiny ever since; Mr Lewis was arrested on March 3rd in the FBI's Frenchman's Reef sting, allegedly for trying to sell drugs to undercover agents.
Unfortunately for the Virgin Islands, the encounter between Mr Barry and Mr Lewis also brought attention to a joint project, partly run by Mr Lewis, in which the DC government was helping the territory with its personnel management — not a field in which the District of Columbia government is especially highly regarded.
Enter the Interior Department which, with a degree of imperial elan, investigated how its charge had conducted the project.
A report was issued on March 31st.
It was stinging.
According to the department's inspector general, nearly $229,000 of the project's $260,000 budget was spent improperly or questionably.
The government of the Virgin Islands was accused of mismanagement and having almost no control over the activities of DC personnel working on the project.
Some of the consultants were found to have spent money from the project on gifts and on unnecessarily high-priced hotel rooms.
There are also unanswered questions about more than $35,000 in airtravel expenses.
The scandal is another blow to the administration of Mr Alexander Farrelly, the governor of the Virgin Islands.
Mr Farrelly, a Democrat, entered office in 1986 amid the general expectation that he would be able to solve many of the islands' problems.
Despite what was until the Eastern Airlines strike a prosperous tourist trade, the percentage of people living in poverty on the islands is nearly three times that in the mainland United States.
But Mr Farrelly's tenure has been troubled.
His administration has been scolded by the Interior Department for its involvement in a complicated deal involving an aluminium plant and a company with ties to Mr Marc Rich, a businessman whose taxes and trading have sometimes aroused the interest of American authorities.
Three of Mr Farrelly's top officials have resigned since November, two of them citing lack of support from the governor as a reason.
This political ferment does not touch the duty-free shoppers in Christiansted or the snorkelors of Trunk Bay.
But for the is landers who have just celebrated Transfer Day, the 72nd anniversary of America's purchase of the islands from Denmark, it is unusual.
The lotus-eaters on St John knew it all along.
Housing
Room at the inn
For 21 years federal law has forbidden housing discrimination on the basis of race, sex, colour or national origin.
Until last month this was little more than an expression of good intentions.
The federal housing authorities had no powers of enforcement.
The Justice Department could not ask for damages or seek penalties against the guilty parties.
Anybody wishing to claim his rights under the law had to find — and pay — a lawyer.
Not surprisingly, few did.
All this changed when a new law, the amended Fair Housing Act, signed by President Reagan, came into effect in March.
It empowers the Department of Justice to sue to obtain redress for victims of housing discrimination (the damages may include payment for personal humiliation as well as loss of time or money).
It can also seek heavy fines on landlords who discriminate.
Mr Jack Kemp, the new housing secretary, promises vigorous enforcement of the law.
Government complaints alleging racial discrimination in rental policies have al ready been filed in Miami and Minneapolis.
The new law also adds to the categories of people who cannot be discriminated against: the disabled (including those with AIDS) and families with children.
This last category is by far the largest group of Americans who find suitable housing beyond their grasp.
Single mothers and those with mental illnesses are the least likely to be able to establish their rights without government help.
The only people excluded from the protection of the new law are drug dealers, addicts and transvestites.
Developers of big blocks of flats designed for successful young people in and around the big cities and for wealthy pensioners in Florida and California are worried.
Arguments that balconies and swimming pools pose dangers for children are unlikely to get very far.
Under the new law, the only valid excuse for excluding children is that 80% of the flats in a development are occupied by someone aged 55 or more.
But the main intended beneficiaries of the new law are unlikely to be able to afford the rents at places they now have legal access to.
Professional blacks families may benefit most.
Many can afford the rents but find themselves excluded — often ostensibly because they have children.
Poland's new deal
If it had happened in 1980, when Solidarity was first created, it would have been a miracle.
If it had happened even six months ago, it would have seemed astonishing.
Now, set against the fast pace of Hungary's reforms and the excitement of the recent election in the Soviet Union, the agreements signed on April 5th between the Polish government and the Solidarity-led opposition seem almost commonplace in Eastern Europe.
Yet the documents, which for the second time this decade give Solidarity the right to exist, go much further than either the communist party feared or Solidarity dreamed nine years ago.
Poland's communists look prepared to make a formal surrender of their monopoly of power.
They have not done so easily.
In the nine years between the previous attempt at a historic compromise and this one Poland saw the virtual collapse of the party, the imposition of martial law, the banning of Solidarity and relentless economic misery.
By creating what it calls a’ socialist parliamentary democracy’, the party hopes to win back both its authority and enough support to carry out a painful reform of the Polish economy.
It has had to accept that it can do neither without a deal with the opposition.
For Solidarity and its leader, Mr Lech Walesa, this has been a far from trouble-free second coming.
Until the last moment the talks threatened to collapse.
Poland's official trade unions were refusing to sign because of a dispute over how much workers should be compensated for rising prices.
What should have been a triumphant closing ceremony turned into an embarrassing muddle, so much so that Polish television switched to a football match.
The crisis-weary Poles are showing far less enthusiasm for this agreement than they would have in the heady days of 1980.
At Warsaw dinner parties the round-tablers are jokingly called stolarzy (’ carpenters’).
But the changes they have agreed on, if they are really carried out, will poke a big hole in party power.
Top of the list is Solidarity.
An act of parliament will again legalise it as a trade union.
It will keep its regional and national leadership intact.
Local recruiting offices are already open.
Both Rural Solidarity and the independent students' union are also to be legalised.
At elections due in June, 35% of the seats in the Sejm (parliament) will for the first time be freely contested.
But the contest will be among the opposition only.
The communist party and its tame allies will have the remaining seats.
There is an understanding that at subsequent elections all seats will be openly contested.
Two big constitutional changes were agreed on late in the negotiations.
There is to be both a new executive president and a senate (an upper house of parliament).
Fearing the results of open elections, even for only one-third of the seats in the Sejm (now to be the lower house of parliament), the party wanted a strong president.
Whoever gets the job will be responsible for foreign affairs and defence, will have the right to dissolve parliament and will also have the right to veto laws passed by parliament.
The first president is to be chosen by the two houses of parliament.
He will probably be none other than General Jaruzelski, the party boss.
After this president has served six years in the post, his successor will be chosen by popular election.
The senate is the opposition's counterweight to the new president.
All seats will be filled by popular vote.
The senate will have the power to veto laws passed by the lower house, and it will take a two-thirds majority in the lower house to override the senate.
While its powers will be limited by both the president and the lower house, the fact that it is to be freely elected will give it hard-to ignore moral authority.
There is to be greater press freedom.
The government has agreed to the re-birth of Solidarity's weekly paper.
There will be a Rural Solidarity weekly, as well as regional union papers.
In addition, the opposition will be allowed to publish a daily newspaper with a circulation of 500,000.
After much haggling, the opposition also won the right to one hour on state radio and 30 minutes on state television every week.
Agreement on economic policy proved hardest.
From the start, the opposition negotiators decided to concentrate on two demands: that wages be indexed to the rise in prices and that increases in food prices be gradual.
Although these may not be the brightest of economic policies in a country with huge food subsidies and 60%-plus annual inflation, the opposition decided they were necessary to prevent social unrest and further strikes.
There was broad agreement that there would be some sort of wage indexation, although workers are unlikely to be compensated fully for price rises.
The two sides accepted the need to cut the budget deficit as a way of tackling inflation, to improve living standards and to reduce Poland's $38-billion foreign debt.
There was, however, no indication of how all these things were to be reconciled.
This is still not the end of the list.
Private schools will be permitted — meaning that the Catholic church will be able to run its own schools.
Private health care will be extended, and there will be extra money to improve the state health service.
There is a commitment to do more for the environment.
Pollution from Poland's heavy industry is probably the worst in Europe.
It all sounds good on paper.
Will it really happen?
There are already signs of mounting opposition to the deal from within the party-run establishment.
The official trade unions, thought to be linked to conservatives in the communist party, were holding out for 100% wage indexation.
They circulated a document in several factories and mines blaming Solidarity for trying to’ sell out’the workers.
Their attempt to cause trouble is not only a sign of division within the party; it could also pose problems for Solidarity.
The government-backed unions are trying to portray themselves as the true and uncompromising voice of the workers:’ outflanking Solidarity to the left’, as one commentator put it.
They are even calling for strikes for the first time in their history.
The official unions will have to compete directly with Solidarity for members, so they want to land the first blows.
What happens next will also depend on the reaction of Poland's neighbours, both to the east and the west.
Will western banks judge favourably an economic reform which increases the power of trade unions?
Mrs Thatcher managed a painful but successful restructuring of Britain's economy by strong, single-party government and by breaking union power in the biggest industries; Poland is doing the opposite.
And the Russians?
One opposition leader, Mr Jacek Kuron, rendered the hardest-boiled judgment:’ This couldn't be happening if they didn't want it to happen.
Celebrating Zita
Was it really the end of an era?
Republican Austria buried its last empress, 96-year-old Zita, with all due pomp on April 1st.
She had spent 71 years in exile, but Vienna's Socialist mayor was in St Stephen's cathedral for the requiem mass at which the old imperial anthem Gott erhalte unseren Kaiser (’ God save our Emperor’) was sung and a benediction given in the seven languages of the Austro-Hungarian empire.
Even more remarkably, two days later a requiem for Zita was held in St Matthew's church in Budapest.
That was where she and her husband, Karl, had been crowned as king and queen of the Hungarian half of the empire in December 1916, just two years before the empire broke up.
Zita's son, Mr Otto von Habsburg, was there.
A citizen of West Germany and a member of the European Parliament, he was greeted by the crowds as one of their own.
He speaks all the languages of the old empire, so he was able to reply in perfect Hungarian.
The Hungarians were once bitterly opposed to the Habsburgs.
When Hungary's ruler after the first world war, Admiral Horthy, defeated an attempt by Zita and Karl to regain their throne, most Hungarians were not sorry.
Why the warm feeling now?
Nostalgia undoubtedly plays a part.
Like other Central Europeans who had lived and grumbled under the Habsburgs, Hungarians have had even more to grumble about since.
Otto von Habsburg would almost certainly get an equally warm welcome if he showed up in Cracow, Prague or Zagreb.
But, except for a few dedicated monarchists, Central Europeans are not dreaming of a restored Habsburg dynasty.
What they are looking for, as they grope towards freer politics, are forms of government that would resurrect some of the best features of the Habsburg empire: economic stability, religious and racial tolerance, the rule of law.
In celebrating the last human symbol of the old empire, they were thinking with hope of their own future in a reasonably peaceful and prosperous new Mittleeuropa.
Hungary
Central European soloist
’ Like Bartok’may be the best way to describe the adventurous foreign policy Hungary's diplomats are making in their noisy ministry on the Buda side of the Danube.
The music of Hungary's best-known twentieth-century composer was a mixture of ultra-modern and traditional, with a strong national flavour and lots of solos.
At international meetings Hungarians who said anything at all used to parrot the Russians.
Mutism in foreign policy was a price for relative freedom at home; it was the opposite of the course taken by Hungary's bugbear, Romania.
Hungary's foreign policy is now catching up with its domestic reforms.
Its diplomats are finding their own voice and testing limits of the possible.
Even neutralism is no longer a taboo.
One reason for this change is that the loosening of Russian control over Eastern Europe has bared old frictions.
Not even lip-service is paid to’ proletarian internationalism’— the theory behind Eastern Europe's former common face.
Hungary's allies do not mind that it criticises Romania, which is relocating Hungarian.speakers and razing their villages.
At a March session of the United Nations Human Rights Commission in Geneva, western countries voted on Hungary's behalf to condemn Romanian maltreatment of ethnic minorities.
The Russians abstained.
Hungary is also being pushed to strike out into the world economy.
Although it will go on buying Soviet raw materials, it wants other economic partners from all over.
There are nearly 200 Hungarian-West German joint ventures.
South Koreans promote trade from a newly opened embassy in a quayside hotel.
Top Hungarians are no longer afraid of saying openly that Comecon is nearly useless now that Hungary and Poland want market reform while other Comecon members, notably East Germany, stick with state control.
Hungary would love to join other trade clubs.
It did join the International Monetary Fund and World Bank in 1982.
It flirts with the EEC and the European Free Trade Association, but membership of either still seems more a fantasy than a real option.
Hungary's relations with Russia are changing.
Hungarians are no longer afraid, at least not so long as reformers run Russia, that Soviet tanks will snuff out their democratic experiment, as they did in 1956.
The Hungarian party leader, Mr Karoly Grosz, said on March 29th that, had Mr Gorbachev been around 3O-odd years ago, he would not have interfered with force in Hungary's internal affairs.
Although that’ internal’needs noting, the restraint — even encouragement — which Mr Gorbachev shows Hungary is another reason for its growing self-confidence abroad.
Encouragement?
Yes, in certain things Hungary is useful for Mr Gorbachev.
Following Hungary 5 recent opening of ties with South Korea, diplomatic relations with Israel are said to be imminent.
The Soviet Union could soon choose to follow these precedents.
Yet Hungary is not just an obedient stalking horse.
Leaving the Warsaw pact is not on the agenda, but Hungarians are asking what benefit their country derives from protection against a NATO alliance that touches its borders at no point.
The Warsaw pact offers little or no help to Hungary in disputes with other East Europeans.
Militarily, there is not much Russians should fear in a neutral Hungary.
The Warsaw pact would have to find a new home for its southern command, a small price.
Withdrawal of one of the four Russian divisions in Hungary is already scheduled.
If negotiated cuts in central Europe do in fact put Warsaw-pact troops on a defensive footing, Hungary's army, now 100,000 strong, would all but lose its job as flank guard for a Russian thrust west.
Reflecting such thoughts, Mr Oleg Bogomolov, a reformer close to Mr Gorbachev, said in February,’ If Hungary chooses to be a neutral state, then it will not be a threat just because of that.’
Other top Russians disagreed.
But the Bogomolov kite shows the change since 1956, when what finally provoked the Russians was the Nagy government's intention to withdraw from the Warsaw pact.
Is there a point of no-return for Hungary in slipping out from Soviet influence?
Most Hungarians want to reach out now in case Mr Gorbachev fails.
Yet Hungary cannot up and move.
Though dreams of again becoming Greater Hungary live on, Hungary's real future is as a small country beside a giant neighbour.
What matters is not the fact but the character of this relationship.
The obvious model is Austria, though getting there may yet take time.
Turkey
My president, right or wrong
With one election just out of the way — the voting two weeks ago for new mayors and provincial assemblies — the Turks are in a ferment over another.
In the autumn they must find a successor to President Kenan Evren, whose seven-year term ends in November.
Already there are the makings ofa constitutional crisis.
The ruling Motherland party won a dismal 22% of the vote in the local elections.
That is why the opposition parties are turning over the prospect that the prime minister, Mr Turgut Ozal, may impose a head of state from his own conservatives.
It might even be Mr Ozal himself (he has not ruled out the idea of standing), but one of his associates seems a likelier choice.
He can impose his choice because the president is elected not by the voters but by the National Assembly, where the Motherland party still has an ample majority: it holds 290 seats out of 450 Should a party which, judging by the latest test at the polls, is supported by only one voter in five choose the head of state?
The opposition is screaming about a’ travesty of democracy’.
It would not matter so much if a Turkish president were just a figurehead.
But he has some real power.
He can send legislation back to parliament, veto the prime minister's choice of ministers (as President Evren has done on occasion) and in extreme circumstances dissolve the National Assembly and call a general election.
Mr Ozal is now under pressure to seek agreement with the opposition on a suitably dignified figure to fill the post.
He shows no sign of doing so.
Meanwhile, to bolster his sagging fortunes, he has sacked 12 of his 22 ministers, including his brother, Mr Yusuf Ozal, and a cousin, Mr Husnu Dogan.
Their exit is an answer to allegations of nepotism, but most Turks have dismissed the purge as window.dressing.
Few members of his own party believe the prime minister can survive until the next general election, due in 1992.
The biggest danger is that his uncompromising stance on the presidency may anger the army chiefs, who are highly sensitive on the subject.
Of Turkey's seven presidents to date, only one (Mr Celal Bayar) has been a civilian, and he was ousted by the army in 1960.
The generals are now prepared to accept another civilian; but they want Mr Ozal to pick the right man.
Spain
Back to bombs?
’ All fronts in the struggle are open.’
So-said ETA's Communique, after its 72-hour ultimatum for concessions from the Spanish government had run out.
The stark statement on April 4th from the Basque separatists seemingly put an end to their longest-ever truce.
Yet at mid-week the government was still hoping a way might be found to re-launch the talks with ETA which truce had made possible.
The government's chief negotiator, Mr Rafael Vera, was said to have returned to Algiers, where the talks ere held.
The prime minister, Mr Felipe Gonzalez, indicated that talks would remain a possibility until ETA carried out its next terrorist attack.
Neither side can afford to be blamed for the collapse of a dialogue which had raised Spanish hopes of an end to ETA violence.
The terrorists' political wing, Herri Batasuna, is hoping to retain its seat in the European Parliament in June.
And since, for the Euroelection, Spain is one big constituency, it needs support beyond the Basque country.
The government, already facing labour unrest and mounting inflation, needs all the sympathy it can get, especially if as some believe, it intends calling an early general election.
Gamesmanship apart, is there really a chance to salvage the best opportunity yet for peace in the Basque region?
Ministers were pinning their hopes on a change of wording in ETA's latest statement.
The talks came to grief after the separatists insisted that the government, or perhaps the ruling Socialist party, should publicly acknowledge that its representatives had agreed to negotiate with ETA on the Basque country's political future.
Even if true, it is an admission no democratic government could sensibly make.
It would undermine the non-violent parties in the region, which together command a majority of the vote, in favour of the men and women with guns.
But the communique ending the truce said ETA's only condition for resuming political’ conversations’(not negotiations) was a’formal’(not public) undertaking to respect the preliminary agreements reached in Algiers.
At the same time, separatist politicsans were predicting that ETA would make its first action a kidnapping rather than a shooting or bombing.
ETA still has some odd ideas about what constitutes a compromise.
But it just might be learning.
Italy
Sex, drugs and Radicals
Mr Ralph Salerno, bilingual in New York American and his ancestral southern Italian dialect, could walk straight into performance as a Godfather.
In fact, as head of the New York city organised crime unit, he arrested many of the heroin mufiosi who infested the town 30 years ago.
Now he says that arresting drug barons is a waste of time, since their cousins, godsons or even more horrible rivals will at once fill the vacancy.
Mr Wesley Pomeroy also believes that the war against drugs is being lost.
He should know: he set up the police unit which, fictionalised, rushes around the small screen under the name’ Miami Vice’.
Last weekend in Rome these ex-policemen, together with a Madrid drugs-squad inspector, a thoughtful chap from Holland's Office for Alcohol, Drugs and Tobacco, a French judicial officer and a slew of academics from Harvard, Colombia (the South American one), Venezuela, even Britain, founded an International League against Prohibition whose ideas will be familiar to regular readers of The Economist.
Prohibition of drugs, they say, works no better than prohibition of alcohol did in the United States.
Banning drugs mainly promotes crime, so it would be better to legalise, control, tax and discourage them.
The argument has special attractions in Italy, whose governments have never been able to beat the Mafia and its offshoots.
Young Italians die wholesale from heroin poisoning.
In 1972 the drug directly killed one person.
Last year it killed more than 800.
That is one reason why the Italian Radical party spent $200,000 of its fat state subsidies on organising the new international anti-prohibition league.
The party had more Machiavellian motives too.
The Radicals, like all Italian parties, attract subsidies according to their voting strength.
At present they have 13 members in the Italian parliament and three in the European Parliament in Strasbourg.
Their brightest personality, bringing in plenty of votes and therefore money, is a deputy who, under the professional name of Cicciolina, takes off her clothes for reward.
Their dominant leader is Mr Marco Pannella, a deep-bronzed, ever-smiling man known as l'altissimo, because he is very tall and has a very grand manner.
Mr Pannella wants more members, votes and subsidies.
At home in Italy he is trying to form a’ lay alliance’with the Liberals, another small middle-of-the-road party.
At the European Parliament election in June he wants to put up Italians for seats in other countries, and foreigners for Italian seats.
(He dreams of three British candidates: Dr David Owen and Mr Paddy Ashdown, two middle-of-the-roaders who mostly quarrel with each other, and Mr Salman Rushdie, the author of’ The Satanic Verses’.)
An international campaign against prohibition fits the Radical pattern: odd but just short of eccentric, controversial but with respectable supporters, and newsworthy.
On April 1st Mr Pannella and several of his international guests held a demonstration in front of the Italian state television offices, because the formation of their league against prohibition had not been mentioned on the evening news.
The will to die
Untill the 1950s, average life expectancy in Greenland was about 35 years.
It is now almost twice that.
This is the result of the Danish-financed modernisation that has converted Greenland from a primitive hunting-and-fishing society to a near-industrial one.
But has it made Greenlanders happier?
It seems not, judging by how fast they are now killing themselves.
In 1960 (say the official records) two people committed suicide in Greenland; that would have been six per 100,000.
In 1970 there were seven suicides and in 1980, the year after Greenland won’ home rule’under Danish protection (until then it had been a province of Denmark) the figure rose to 41.
Of them 35 were men.
In 1987, the latest year for which figures are complete, there were 53 suicides.
This amounted to some 100 suicides per 100,000 Greenlanders, or nearly 17 times the rate in 1960.
It was also four times the rate in Denmark, which itself has one of the highest levels of suicide in the world, 27 per 100,000.
All the 1987 suicides in Greenland were men.
Around 180 per 100,000 Greenland males killed themselves that year.
Suicide has always played a big role in Greenland.
In the traditional hunting communities, those who were a burden — because they had become too old to hunt or to follow the family as it trekked to a new hunting ground — took themselves off to an ice-floe or an isolated rock and waited for death.
The recent increase is different: youngsters have been killing themselves.
Some 32 of the 1987 suicides were by people aged 15-24: more than 500 per 100,000 males of this age.
All explanations for the rise in suicides point to the destruction of old ways of life.
There has been a dramatic shift of population since the 1950s: hunting-and-fishing settlements gave way to small towns.
The largest of the towns is Nuuk (formerly Godthaab), the capital, which has a population of 11,000.
In Nuuk are all the comforts of civilisation, but also much boredom and drinking, which may go some way to explain why so many young Greenland men are destroying themselves.
EEC social policy
The passionate dimension
’ Social dimension’is not a spine-tingling phrase.
But it is the one part of the European Community's I 992 single-market programme that stirs real passions.
Few of the business-men and politicians who get excited about it know quite what it means, but they know what they do not like.
Its (mainly British) critics suspect the social dimension is really a socialist dimension, masterminded by the European Commission's French Socialist president, Mr Jacques Delors.
They spot an attempt to impose unnecessary rules from Brussels on Europe's brave new market.
’ We emphatically do not need new regulations,’Mrs Thatcher said in Bruges last autumn,’which raise the cost of employment and make Europe's labour market less flexible.’
The commission says it intends no such thing.
It stresses that it wants to keep rules to a minimum, but argues that the Community has to do something to help its weaker parts adapt to a single market and to meet workers' worries about what 1992 will mean for them.
Quietly shelving an overzealous working paper produced last September, the commission has repackaged its ideas.
The’ social dimension’, Eurocrats now emphasise, is as broad as it is benign, and consists of five main areas.
The structural funds.
These are designed to encourage even development throughout the Community: for example, by helping to retrain the long-term unemployed, or by channelling aid to poorer member-states and to regions hit by the decline of old industries.
Last year the EEC's member-governments decided to double the size of the structural funds in the five years 1988-92 to 50 billion ecus ($55 billion) to offset ‘imbalances’ likely to be caused by the 1992 project.
The money has already been agreed on, so not much room for controversy there.
Hygiene and work safety.
All the member-states agree that it would be desirable for such rules to be brought into line.
The question is how.
It would be wrong to’ harmonise down’, bringing standards in richer countries down to those in poorer ones; but it will take time for Greece and Portugal to’harmonise up’to the stringent rules of Denmark or West Germany.
On April 5th, ministers of social affairs reached a preliminary agreement on health and safety at work.
A European social charter.
This is where Anglo-Saxon nerves begin to twitch.
The idea is to soothe workers' fears about 1992 with a’ solemn declaration’on their rights to social security, to join trade unions, to equal pay for equal work, to information on companies' reorganisation plans.
A draft charter should be ready soon.
It will not have the force of law, the commission stresses, but will merely exert’ moral pressure’.
The British are doubtful that things would stop with worthy declarations.
Social dialogue.
Starting with a meeting he arranged at Val Duchesse in 1985, Mr Delors has tried to encourage discussion between management and union leaders.
The discussions got stuck on the question whether agreements reached at these meetings should remain purely informal or should be translated into Euro-directives.
In January it was decided to go on talking but let a’ monitoring group’suggest what should be done with the results.
.
A European company statute.
This is the really contentious bit.
Most people accept that such a statute, which would be optional, not mandatory, could make it easier to set up subsidiaries or merge companies across EEC frontiers.
But the commission wants it to include recipes for worker participation, an idea tried in the rejected Vredeling proposal of the early 1980s.
Companies adopting the European statute would have to choose between three versions of worker participation.
One is the’ German model’of Mitbestimmung (putting workers on supervisory boards).
Another is the’ Franco-Belgian model’of comites d'entrepise (elected workers' councils).
The third is the supposedly’ British model’, which leaves it up to individual companies to negotiate their own arrangements.
In the commission's view these rules are so flexible that no company need be put off by them.
Still, Mr Delors insists that there can be no’ zero option’for worker participation.
Sceptics point to the tax incentives the commission wants to offer to companies adopting the Eurostatute and wonder how’ optional’it would really be.
Many companies are worried by the worker-participation clauses: if they are really so flexible, why bother with them at all?
Even before ministers get down to arguing over the details, they face a row about whether the proposed company statute can be approved by a majority vote (as the commission would like) or must be passed unanimously.
That could be crucial, because Britain will have few allies in opposing the workerparticipation rules.
Socialist governments in the Community are naturally in favour.
West Germany and Holland support the idea because they do not want other EEC countries to enjoy the competitive advantage of fewer regulations than they themselves have.
Try as the commission might to smooth things over, the’ social dimension’seems bound to arouse passion for a while yet.
This stems not so much from the differences between conservatives and socialists as from the clash between British attitudessupported by the managements of some American multinational companies — and those of much of the rest of the Community.
Most Europeans accept that there should be a’ partnership’between workers and employers.
British businessmen feel they have only just restored their right to manage after a hard-won showdown with organised labour.
Why lose in Brussels what was gained at home?
Vietnam's September song
Will Kampuchea become a land of gentle peace, or is the bad blood from ten years of fratricidal war about to gush in torrents?
The question becomes urgent following the abrupt announcement on April 5th that the Vietnamese will withdraw all their troops from Kampuchea by the end of September.
They say they will go even if the Vietnam-backed government in Phnom Penh fails to achieve a political settlement with the resiStance.
On the face of it, Vietnam's exit is good news.
But without a political deal it risks turning bad.
The civil war might continue, as has happened in Afghanistan; it could end, in the worst case, with the genocidal Khmers Rouges again coming to dominate the country.
The Khmers Rouges ran Kampuchea for three years until 1978, when the invading Vietnamese put them to flight.
In pursuing their brand of communism, the Khmers Rouges were responsible for the deaths of perhaps Im people, a seventh of the population.
The prospect of their return to power may, however, be more alarmist than real.
Reports from Kampuchea claim that the country's 35,000-man army is good enough to stand up to Khmer Rouge incursions.
There are also probably around 400,000 Vietnamese civilians settled in Kampuchea, many of whom can double as fighters.
The Khmers Rouges claim that Mr Pol Pot, their notorious leader from the 1970s, has retired in favour of more amiable types like Mr Khieu Samphan, who has represented the Khmers Rouges at meetings on the future of Kampuchea.
The Vietnamese foreign minister, Mr Nguyen Co Thach, told reporters in Hanoi that China had assured Vietnam it would stop arming the Khmers Rouges.
Even if these things can be believed, it would be foolish to write off the Khmers Rouges.
According to some reports they have perhaps 25,000 fighters, with arms dumps hidden inside Kampuchea.
They are much stronger than the other two resistance groups, led by Prince Norodom Sihanouk and Mr Son Sann.
They exact ruthless discipline in their refugee camps inside Thailand, and they even shoot up their resistance’ allies’to show who is boss.
Why, then, is Vietnam eager to leave, ahead of its previous promised date of December 1990 and without the political settlement it had long demanded?
The official reason, in a Statement signed by Vietnam, Kampuchea and their ally Laos, is that if Vietnam's troops leave and if foreign help to the reSistance also stops, this will’ stimulate the Kampuchean parties to settle the internal aspect of the Kampuchean question before September 1989 on the basis of national reconciliation
So much for the fig-leaf.
The reality is that Vietnam needs to leave Kampuchea to stave off economic disaster and to satisfy Mikhail Gorbachev.
The two motives are connected.
Vietnam's economic collapse is held at bay only through massive aid from Russia amounting, by one estimate, to $3m a day.
And Mr Gorbachev does not want Vietnam's role in Kampuchea to mar his summit meeting next month in Begging with Mr Deng Xiaoping.
Russia has plainly concluded that continuing the proxy war, in which Russia supports Vietnam and China finances the Khmers Rouges, is hurting the Soviet Union too much both in its pocket and in its big Asian aim of better relations with China.
Just how much Mr Gorbachev's armtwisting mattered is a matter of conjecture.
He got things going almost three years ago with a speech in Vladivostok on Russia's Pacific policy.
Ever since then a Russian deputy foreign minister, Mr Igor Rogachev, has been repeating that his country is impatient for an Indochina deal; he said it most recently last month in Thailand.
At first the Vietnamese resisted this pressure.
They now see the virtues of pragmatism.
The reward is obvious for a crushingly poor country of 60m people which has been virtually embargoed by most of the non-communist world.
Once the remaining 50,000-70,000 Vietnamese troops have left Kampuchea, Vietnam will have a chance of winning investment and economic aid from America and its friends, including Thailand and other members of the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN).
Such help could free the entrepreneurial spirit that survives in the south of Vietnam.
No wonder Thailand's prime minister, Mr Chatichai Choonhavan, talks so enthusiastically ofa regional Suwannaphume, or Golden Land, embracing his country (which thinks it stands to gain most from a regional economic revival), communist Indochina and Burma.
The Afghanistan that the Russians left in February has little prospect of becoming a golden land.
Can Kampuchea take a different path, guided by a government that has the support of its people?
The wisdom of long convention holds that the only leader acceptable to all Kampucheans is Prince Sihanouk.
That may be so, but the prince was ousted from power by the Lon Nol coup back in 1970, and made only a brief comeback as a Khmer Rouge figurehead in 1976.
For young Kampucheans he is not even a memory.
He is often called’ mercurial’, but this adjective does injustice to the prince's bewildering changes of mood and tactics.
Vietnam's withdrawal is the best opportunity he will have to lead his country once more, but he may botch it by taking one political twist too many.
One such twist may be the prince's insistence that the Vietnamese withdrawal be supervised by the Unit.ed Nations, and not, as Vietnam proposes, by India, Poland and Canada, the countries that supervised France's withdrawal from Indochina in 1954.
Another hurdle is the resistance's demand that Mr Hun Sen's government in Phnom Penh dissolve itself and form a provisional government with the guerrilla factions.
Such problems are the kind that politicians and diplomats are meant to solve.
The best hope that Kampuchea can be spared more agony is the gathering weight of diplomatic contact.
In January Mr Hun Sen went to Bangkok to talk to Mr Chatichai, and a Vietnamese deputy foreign minister, Mr Dinh Ngo Liem, went to Beijing.
The following month the Kampucheans met in Jakarta, along with representatives from Vietnam, Laos and ASEAN.
Inconclusive though the Jakarta talks were, the diplomacy was continued, not least by President Bush when he went to China in February.
Early next month Mr Hun Sen and Prince Sihanouk are to meet in Indonesia, and a few days later Mr Gorbachev and Mr Deng meet in Beijing.
Imagine the smiles if Mr Gorbachev and Mr Deng can shake on a Kampuchean deal.
In Kampuchea, though, people are said to smile to hide their fear.
Japan
The hounds bay
Tokyo's relentless public prosecutor is scenting blood in the Recruit scandal.
Next week he will allow his hounds to close in on some 13 leading politicians, including the prime minister, Mr Noboru Takeshita, and the former prime minister, Mr Yasuhiro Nakasone.
Some or all of the 13 will be questioned about shares which they or their relatives or aides received from Recruit; the prosecutors suspect they were given in exchange for political favours.
If the investigators are satisfied that their suspicions are correct, arrests and charges will follow.
So will mayhem for Mr Takeshita and the ruling Liberal Democratic party.
Between them, the 13 politicians reportedly received 115,000 unlisted shares in Recruit Cosmos, a Recruit subsidiary, one month before it went public in October 1986.
When it did, the 13 are believed to have netted a total profit of more than ¥250m ($2m).
Some politicians also received more direct donations from Recruit.
Last week Mr Takeshita admitted that, in addition to the 12,000 shares that came his way, Recruit slipped him ¥20m just before his bid for the prime ministership in 1987.
This week an aide confirmed that Mr Takeshita got a further ¥30m a week or so later from Recruit.
In both cases the money went for tickets to fund-raising parties organised for Mr Takeshita.
Such contributions are not in themselves illegal, but they would be if they were judged to be bribes.
In a rare act of unity, all the opposition parties save the Communists banded together this week to set up a shadow cabinet.
The line-up is to be headed by the leader of the Japan Socialist party, Miss Takako Doi.
The chairman of Komeito (’ Clean Government’), Mr Junya Yano, is to be shadow finance minister.
The Democratic Socialist party's Mr Eiichi Nagasue (a lieutenant in the old Imperial navy) will get the defence job.
The coalition group has agreed on nothing that could even loosely be termed an election platform, let alone a policy for governing the country.
But for the first time in decades the opposition parties are trying at least to look like a credible alternative government.
Miss Doi wants the shadow cabinet posts parcelled out by April 21st, when three planets move into ominous conjunction for the government.
By then the government must have its 1989 budget through the lower house.
Temporary appropriations for paying civil servants' wages and unemployment and sickness benefits will have run out by then.
By the same date the Recruit case sleuths should have completed their investigations.
Prime-time television could then be showing high politicians being hauled off in handcuffs.
Also by then, as their monthly pay checks begin to run out, voters will be feeling the bite ofa controversial new consumption tax.
Mr Takeshita bulldozed this through parliament last December, and on April 1st it began to be applied to all goods and services.
The opposition parties have brought proceedings in the Diet to a standstill.
They have refused to debate the budget until the government calls Mr Nakasone to testify under oath about his role in the Recruit affair.
If Mr Takeshita ditches his predecessor he can say goodbye to his party's fragile unity, which, until now, has been the main basis of his own power.
The government seems increasingly paralysed.
The finance minister, Mr Tatsuo Murayama, did not go to the G-1 meeting in Washington last week because he needed to be on hand in Tokyo in case the scandal blew up.
The government may again do the unthinkable and push the 1989 budget through the Diet without the blessing of the opposition.
The electorate took a dim view of this practice when the government used it to get the consumption tax through in December.
Mr Takeshita's cabinet is desperately unpopular.
According to opinion polls in late March, only 12% of those questioned (down to 9% in one poll) had a favourable opinion of it.
Might Mr Takeshita therefore be forced to call an early general election?
And will it be timed to coincide with the upper house election due this summer?
Double elections favour the Liberal Democrats, who are the only parry with a wide choice of candidates and slick money-raising machinery.
The upper house election has to be held no later than 35 days after the Diet session ends.
Mr Takeshita wants that election to come after the Paris economic summit in mid-July, hoping that the voters will be impressed with his statesmanlike performance in dealing with the Latin debt crisis.
So he may extend the current session, due to end on May 28th, to July 9th — the date when the term of the outgoing upper-house members expires.
The latest date possible for the upper house election would then be August 13th.
Even if Mr Takeshita drives the budget through in the opposition's absence, he will still need time for some further bills.
One would be an anti-corruption law — expected, in the present climate, to be a popular measure.
Party officials are advising Mr Takeshita to hang on until he can pick the most auspicious moment to hold a double election.
Political commentators are pencilling in July 30th, August 6th or August 13th as dates not to be caught out of town.
Isles of the lost
The Philippines comprises more than 7,000 islands.
Not surprisingly, it occasionally mislays one or two, as it did last week.
A military aeroplane set out for the Kaylayaan islands with voting papers for the village elections being held throughout the Philippines.
It searched and searched but couldn't spot the islands.
A second aeroplane was dispatched.
Not only did it not find the islands but it couldn't find the way home.
Nearly out of fuel, it landed on a previously uncharted islet, inadvertently adding a new outpost to the Philippine republic.
The Kalayaan islands are in the Spratlys, a group in the South China Sea.
They are not much to look at but they may contain oil, which is why the Philippines keeps a garrison there.
There was some anxiety that the islands might have disappeared, which can happen when the tides are high.
All is well, however, except that the 140 people on the island will have to wait for another occasion to exercise their democratic rights.
The foolhardy knights of Afghanistan
Richard III would have had some sympathy for the frustrations of the Afghan guerrillas in their fight for Jalalabad.
The English king lost the battle of Bosworth, and his life, in 1485 because his attack was disorganised and one of his expected allies, the Earl of Northumberland, failed to support him.
In the battle for Jalalabad, which appeared to have reached deadlock this week, the mujaheddin fighters have not been prepared to fight as a single force, and the most famous guerrilla commander, Mr Ahmad Shah Massoud, has declined to join the battle.
The mujaheddin's medieval behaviour, whatever its interest to future historians, has become an embarrassment to its staunchest supporters, the United States, Pakistan and Britain.
Nearly two months after the Russians pulled out, the government of President Najibullah which they left behind in the capital Kabul grows more confident by the day.
The Indian prime minister, Mr Rajiv Gandhi, said last week that Mr Najibullah is’ much stronger than he is made out to be’.
India supports the Kabul government, much to the annoyance of Pakistan and most western countries; but while allowing for the mischievous nature of Mr Gandhi's remark, they suspect that it is no more than the truth.
It underlines the problem of trying to replace the Najibullah regime with a broad-based, freely-elected government, the sort that the West envisaged during the nine years of Russian occupation.
An attack on Kabul or on one of the bigger provincial towns was a temptation even before the Russians left.
With the mujaheddin at the gates, it was believed, the town's defences would crumble as the Afghans within turned on supporters of the Najibullah regime.
Jalalabad has up to now disproved this theory.
Since March 8th, when the guerrillas began their assault, the defenders have contested every yard.
Pakistan's military intelligence service, the ISI, which is assumed to be directing the attack, has lost face.
The probability, though, is that the guerrillas refused to be directed.
Although Pakistan has been the conduit for the arms supplied to the guerrillas by America and Britain, the guerrillas in the field have been their own men.
They have no great regard for Pakistan's military prowess as exhibited in its three wars with India.
As a result, quite sensible Pakistani advice is disregarded: for example, that the guerrillas should treat their prisoners well.
In fact, prisoners are usually killed and their bodies put on display, another medieval touch.
This may be one reason why Jalalabad has been defended so desperately.
If the guerrillas cannot win the civil war outright, the alternative, sooner or later, has to be a political compromise.
The guerrillas, deprived of Russian invaders to hate, may eventually grow weary of fighting their own people.
The slaughter suffered by both sides may get worse.
The Kabul government said this week that it believed Pakistan intended to supply the guerrillas with chemical weapons for use in the Jalalabad battle.
Although this sounds like propaganda, the memory of chemical warfare waged by the Iraqis in the Gulf war is too recent for it to be dismissed.
A longing for peace by the guerrillas is one of the assumptions of the Najibullah government.
Its foreign minister, Mr Abdul Wakil, said in Kabul on April 3rd that’ the only solution is a peaceful one.
He then left for New York, to complain to the United Nations of’ Pakistani military aggression’.
But he was also hoping to blow softly into the ears of the American government.
Last week he said that his government had moved from its’ extremist policies’and was’never going to construct socialism or communism in this land’.
That is pretty obvious, but it is the first time the Najibullah government has said so.
In public the Bush administration is wholeheartedly on the side of the mujaheddin, as was President Reagan.
It is said to be thinking of appointing a special envoy to the interim government set up in February in the Pakistan border town of Peshawar.
But neither America nor Britain, nor indeed most countries, have formally recognised the Peshawar government.
When the British foreign secretary, Sir Geoffrey Howe, visited Peshawar on March 28th and talked to resistance leaders, he ducked the issue by saying that Britain's practice was to recognise states, not governments.
The reality is that the Peshawar government as yet has little for anyone to recognise.
Its’ prime minister’promised on February 24th that it would move into Afghanistan within a month.
That deadline is long past.
According to China's news agency Xinhua, which appears to have good contacts inside Afghanistan, a group of mujaheddin field commanders has rejected the Peshawar government and wants the United Nations to settle the civil war.
Dissension between the Peshawar politicians and the resistance commanders brings glad tidings to Kabul.
Disagreement between the commanders is even more welcome.
Mr Najibullah regularly offers miniature peace treaties to those bits of Afghan territory in opposition hands.
In his most recent offer, on March 27th, he promised to supply them with food and services to’ achieve an acceptable livelihood’in return for a ceasefire.
The money for this largesse would presumably come from Russia, which keeps Mr Najibullah supplied with arms and food.
It is a burden that Russia could do without, but at least it is far cheaper than maintaining an army of occupation in what Richard III might have called the very long winter of discontent.
Indonesia
Suharto in word and deed
The history books of Indonesia are full of heroes.
But President Suharto appears to be leaving nothing to chance.
This week the 68-year-old soldier-politician burst into print with a 600-page autobiography, somewhat immodestly entitled’ Suharto: My Thoughts, Sayings and Deeds’.
Its publication coincides with a film being shown in Jakarta and other cities that depicts a larger-than-life Suharto fighting the Dutch in the war of independence, his crushing of the 1965 attempted communist coup, and other exciting matters.
Indonesians are expected to seem self-effacing, even if they are not.
In the book and the film Mr Suharto appears egocentric and opinionated.
His army colleagues are upset that he has admitted in his book that the government was behind the killing of an estimated 10,000 people in a ten-day crack-down on’ organised’crime in Jakarta in 1983.
Human-rights groups said as much at the time, but General Benny Murdani, then head of the armed forces, claimed that the killings were the result of gang feuds.
Western diplomats wonder why Mr Suharto, a man who has near royal status in Indonesia, should behave like an everyday politician who likes to see his name in print.
The president, the country's ruler for 20 years and now in his fifth term of office, has already secured a place in Indonesian history as the father of the nation's development.
He has presided over a degree of prosperity unknown under his predecessor, Sukarno.
Some Indonesians believe the president may have become impatient with the growing criticism of his government.
University students were out on the streets last month.
Rice farmers in central Java have staged protests about the compensation they were offered after their village was flooded by a dam development.
Enough is enough, the president may be saying in his book and on the screen.
Just remember what you owe your country, and me.
Namibia's birthday fiasco
South Africa seldom plays fair with its black neighbours.
But it is seldom given as good an excuse for playing rough as it was this week by the blunder of the guerrilla force that has been fighting it for 23 years in Namibia and by the embarrassing unreadiness of the United Nations peacekeeping force to do its job of supervising the Namibian peace settlement.
In fighting that raged throughout the week in northern Namibia, South Africa's men killed more guerrillas of the South West Africa People's Organisation than in any other battle of the long war.
The South African foreign minister, Mr Pik Botha, publicly threatened to abort Namibian independence and was apparently cajoled out of it by Mrs Thatcher, who was in Windhoek when the trouble began.
The presidents of the neighbouring black states denounced South African’ genocide’.
The one consolation is that, for all the shooting, South Africa seems to be sticking to its promises of independence.
And a free election in November, and probably a SWAPO government, remain murkily in sight.
The shooting started on April 1st, the day the transition to independence formally began.
The South Africans claimed that between 600 and 800 SWAPO guerrillas had crossed from Angola into Ovamboland, their party's home ground; during the following three days, they said, another 500 or so came over.
The independence agreement signed in Geneva last August obliges SWAPO guerrillas to be north of the 16th parallel by April 1st, 120 miles inside Angola, clear of Namibian soil.
The Americans, who arranged the agreement among the Angolans, the South Africans and the Cubans, had omitted to include SWAPO.
But the organisation's president, Mr Sam Nujoma, wrote to the UN secretary-general to say his men would stay north of the 16th parallel.
The United Nations was supposed to supervise the move to independence.
When the guerrillas appeared it could do nothing to stop them.
The South Africans therefore demanded that they should do the job, and the UN's representative agreed.
About 2,000 paramilitary policemen, 600 Bushmen auxiliaries and several helicopter gunships set off after the SWAPO men.
The UN further agreed that South Africa's Namibian army, the South West Africa Territory Force, should deploy three battalions.
This fore like SWAPO'S, was supposed to be confined to its bases by April 1st and disbanded altogether by May 13th.
By mid-week, about 200 guerrillas and 20 from the security forces had been killed.
SWAPO says its men had been in Namibia all along.
This seems untrue.
SWAPO has plenty of supporters in northern Namibia, with guns buried in the garden.
But this week's guerrillas numbered more than 1,000, some of them with heavy weapons.
They claimed they were on their way to UN assembly points inside Namibia, which do not exist.
The guerrillas' motives are unclear.
They like to claim they forced the South Africans out.
With their enemies confined to their bases, it must have seemed worth trying to contact the men from the UN, which has for years backed SWAPO.
But the UN, which is trying harder than SWAPO probably realised to be an honest broker, had almost nobody on the ground anyway.
Its Transitional Assistance Group was utterly inadequate to sort out the mess.
Over the protests of black African states, the Security Council had reduced the number of soldiers from the 7,500 originally envisaged to 4,650.
Even the smaller contingent was delayed: less than a quarter of it was in place by April 1st.
When the fighting began the UN had only 100 soldiers in the north, most of them signallers and engineers.
Belatedly, the Americans promised on April 6th to fly in a battalion of Finns, armed with pistols.
The best hope is that all 4,650 observers will be in place by April 20th, three weeks too late.
In the meantime UN officials tried for a ceasefire.
Mr Marrack Goulding, the head of peacekeeping operations, tried to fix a deal from the Angola side, while the special representative in Namibia, Mr Martti Ahtisaari, went to the war zone.
The South Africans said that if the guerrillas surrendered and handed over their weapons, they would get safe conduct back to Angola.
But the guerrilla bands have been broken into fragments by the fighting.
Getting them to disarm will not be easy.
Even if the fighting has stopped, the peace deal is badly damaged.
Both sides have seen the UN force at its weakest and may not respect it when it gets up to full strength.
SWAPO and its sympathisers condemn it for let ting the South Africans out of their bases.
The civilians caugh (in this week's crossfire may no longer put their trust in UN protection.
SWAPO too may be weakened.
Its supporters may be nervous about attending its rallies, and the movement itself is divided.
Its members inside Namibia have grown increasingly impatient with its Zambia-based leadership, under the elderly and unpredictable Mr Nujoma.
Mr Nujoma himself was on the border when the incursions began and is suspected of having ordered his men to move south.
The internal leaders may be wondering why he pounced when SWAPO looked likely to be handed power through the ballot box.
Most important, however, is the impact of the fighting on South Africa, which could still scrap the independence deal.
Ministers, including Mr Pik Botha, the foreign minister who negotiated the transition agreement, have suggested that if the UN cannot control SWAPO it should get out.
The far-right Conservative party wants to use the’ betrayal’of Namibia's whites to beat the government in South Africa's own general election, expected within six months.
The UN maintains that the SWAPO units had no’ aggressive intent’but it concedes that they broke the agreements by moving south out of Angola.
The South Africans have threatened to kill the guerrillas who do not surrender, while insisting that for their part they have scrupulously observed the agreements.
They insist that the UN should condemn SWAPO'S behaviour and hope that the incident will dent the movement's fortunes in the election campaign.
The peace plan, unlike at least 200 Namibians, is still alive.
Argentina
Down tools
The team that was meant to rebuild the economy has downed tools and walked off the site.
On March 31st Argentina minister of the economy, his deputy, the governor of the central bank and the secretary of the treasury all resigned.
The minister, Mr Juan Sourrouille, had struggled to contain inflation and to put the government's finances in touch with something like reality.
The effort began in July 1985, with the Austral Plan.
This introduced a new currency and set out the necessary steps of raising taxes, cutting public spending, selling state monopolies, keeping wage increases realistic and generally enlivening Argentina's corporatist state.
Because this policy existed, and the government was democratic, both the United States and the International Monetary Fund have given Argentina the benefit of the doubt and lent it money to tide it over.
The policy failed not because it was wrong, but because the government did not apply it.
In a new and nervous democracy, beset by rebellious soldiers, the ruling Radical party always gave in when pushed by public servants, trade unions, employers, state governors and every pressure group in sight.
Mr Sourrouille tried.
His colleagues, and his boss, President Raul Alfonsin, would not let him succeed.
So fast is the decline that the figures are hopelessly out of date.
The public-sector deficit has swollen to more than 10% of GDP.
The government has paid for this by printing money, fresh austral notes, smelling cleanly of half-dried ink, and borrowing on the domestic market in amounts that raise interest rates sharply, drain the market of productive capital and swell the rate of inflation.
Profits are restrained, but the minimum wage moves in line with inflation, so few investments are made.
Prices rose 10% in February and I 5% in March.
That points to an annual rate of 310%.
Everybody who could rushed to buy dollars.
Mr Eduardo Angeloz, the Radical candidate to succeed Mr Alfonsin in the election on May 14th, wanted to dissociate himself from this disaster; he found it cOnvenient to blame Mr Sourrouille.
On March 30th he implicitly called for the economy minister's resignation, and the next day he got it.
Only after four days could the president swear in a replacement.
He is Mr Juan Carlos Pugliese, who had been president of the lower house of congress.
Mr Pugliese, like Mr Alfonsin, is a good democrat.
But his main qualification for cleaning up Argentina's economic mess is that he did the same job (rather badly) in a short-lived government a quarter of a century ago.
Whereas Mr Sourrouille was on the whole a free-marketeer, Mr Pugliese thinks the state should play a bigger role in the economy; he did not say how.
His objective seemed to be to save the Radical party's electoral chances by matching promise for promise the prospectus of the rival Justicialist party.
The Justicialists, led by the know-nothing Mr Carlos Menem, inherit the populist tradition of General Peron.
The party's base is in the unions, most of whose members work for the state: for its bloated railways, its idle port authority, the dark light-and-power company, the incompetent civil and education services.
Mr Menem woos them by saying that both money wages and public-sector employment should rise.
He adds for good measure that the public-sector deficit would be wiped out if the country stopped paying its foreign debts.
Mr Menem applied such nonsense in the state of La Rioja, where he is governor; it has gone broke.
His election as president seemed certain, even before the Radicals fell into disarray with Mr Sourrouille's resignation.
In Argentina, as in Brazil and Peru, democracy is showing its, power to disappoint the people who desire it.
Haiti
Coca coup
Dictators do well out of foreign aid.
When a visitor from the State Department said the Americans might start helping Haiti again, the country's latest boss, General Prosper Avril, was glad to accept the conditions.
The general was to move to wards free elections (which, like his former masters, the Duvalier family, he routinely promises to do).
More difficult, he was to stop his fellow-officers trans-shipping drugs from Colombia to the United States.
When he seized power last September the general placated the Americans by sacking the army's main drug transporter, Colonel Jean-Claude Paul.
That changed nothing.
The colonel promptly died of’ food poisoning’, and other officers took over his trade.
This time General Avril fired four lieutenant-colonels and announced the formation of a new army anti-drugs unit, presumably paid for by the Americans.
The army's drug profiteers were alarmed.
At dawn on April 2nd Colonel Himler Rebu of the Leopard battalion (which thinks of itself as Haiti's finest) arrested General Avril in the presidential palace, set his own men to patrol the streets and said he was in charge now.
The neighbouring Dominican Republic, issued a’ temporary humanitarian visa to General Avril, welcoming him to exile.
The colonel set off for the airport with the general in custody.
The plot fell apart on the way.
Troops loyal to General Avril intercepted the Leopards, released their prisoner and arrested Colonel Rebu.
But the Leopards in the palace had hostages: the general's family and the defence minister and his family.
What was more, they were threatening to burn down the capital if Colonel Rebu was not set free — and Port-au-Prince is mostly built of wood.
Mobs burned tyres in the streets, and the prudent stayed at home while soldiers drove around firing their weapons.
This stage of the palaver seemed to have ended with four soldiers dead, the capital under curfew and the general back in his palace.
The Americans had bought him some time by offering refuge to Colonel Rebu and two other colonels.
But the army has fallen bitterly into rival factions and the army had replaced the Duvaliers' secret police as the only coherent force in the country.
The Americans have continued dropping hints about aid, presumably hoping that will buy better behaviour.
The United States can hardly like helping General Avril, the Duvaliers' heir.
But it has little choice.
Without the food and fuel that Haiti cannot afford to import, its people would begin starving in their thousands.
No amount of American subsidies can give the Haitians a decent government, a disciplined army or the prospect of any economic activity whose profits would remotely approach those to be earned by trans-shipping cocaine.
Cuba and Russia
Generation gap
Three days of Mikhail Gorbachev's meetings, speeches and press conferences in Havana were, said Mr Fidel Castro, like a family conversation.
To outsiders Mr Gorbachev's visit, which ended on April 5th, sounded more like a family row.
Since he took power in 1959 Mr Castro has often disagreed with the Russians.
All that time he has been kept going mainly by Russian hand-outs.
The giver should therefore win the arguments; but it is not clear that Mr Castro has lost yet.
Latin America's most enduring caudillo hated the way Nikita Khrushchev withdrew the Soviet missiles from Cuba in 1962.
He tried to export revolution to the rest of Latin America, while Leonid Brezhnev preferred to deal with established governments.
He enjoyed a personality cult while Yuri Andropov tried to end Russia's.
He keeps Cuba's economy under state control while Mr Gorbachev is moving the other way.
Mr Gorbachev's disappointing remarks included:
’ We are against doctrines that endorse the export of revolution or counter-revolution.’
Russia is’ not see king political or military advantages in this hemisphere.’
’ There is mounting hope in the world for better relations, and I think the Soviet Union and Cuba understand their responsibilities.
Mr Castro replied that’ we have no such certainty that imperialism has assimilated that new international reality.’
Mr Gorbachev reaffirmed his belief in perestroika, politely observing that economic reform was not a prescription for every country.
Mr Castro said it would be’ arbitrary, capricious and absurd’to apply policies designed for a big country to little Cuba.
Mr Gorbachev talked a lot about last month's Soviet election.
Since Mr Castro is planning no elections, that event received scant coverage in Cuba; and as soon as the visitor was gone, Cuba's main human-rights protestor was publicly arrested.
Mr Castro, at 61, is undisposed to change his ways.
Mr Gorbachev understandably fights shy of an open quarrel but must now decide how to cut the political and economic costs of the alliance.
Russian sources have recently been making it clear that once current investment projects are up and running Cuba will get little more direct financial assistance.
Most Russian aid to Cuba comes in the form of subsidised purchases of sugar, nickel and citrus fruit, and cheap sales of more oil than Cuba needs: it sells the surplus for hard currency.
The Americans, who are inclined to guess high, reckon that all this is worth $4 billion-$5 billion a year.
Hinting at what is to come, Mr Gennady Gerasimov, the Soviet foreign ministry spokesman, said Russia would seek’ a gradual balance of our economic ties’.
Since the deficit is on the Cuban side, that might mean increasing Cuban exports (but the Cubans already produce too little sugar to fulfil their quota).
Or it could mean cutting Russian exports, which would leave the Cubans short of all sorts of things they need.
If the family is breaking up, it will transform the politics of the Caribbean and Central America.
Bush, Shamir and son of Camp David
Before it happened, the first meeting between Mr Yitzhak Shamir and President Bush was billed as one of the most dramatic in the Israeli prime minister's life.
It happened, in Washington on April 6th, on the very day this newspaper is printed.
Never mind.
Here are the drama's programme notes.
In the plot so far, Israel and America are friends.
America gives Israel more than $2 billion a year to help it survive in a region where all its Arab neighbours, bar only Egypt, reject it.
Lately, however, a strain has come between the buddies.
Mr Yasser Arafat, a former terrorist, has offered to live in peace with Israel.
In return, Israel must end its occupation of the West Bank and Gaza, territories that it captured in a war in 1967, and let the Palestinians have a state there.
America, intrigued, holds meetings with Mr Arafat.
In the past, the Americans opposed the idea of a Palestinian state: there was not enough room, they said; and, given independence, the people in it might break their promise to be nice to Israel.
But America has always wanted Israel to give up some of the occupied territory, and has grown keener since the start of a desperate revolt by the occupied people.
Perhaps the Palestinians could share control of their state with King Hussein, a nearby monarch of proven reliability, who once ran the territory himself?
At any rate, it's time to talk.
Mr Shamir arrives in Washington appalled by this disloyalty.
It is obvious, he says, that the spruced-up Mr Arafat still harbours murderous intentions.
If he got control of the West Bank and Gaza, he would soon turn on Israel proper.
Nice King Hussein would be no match for the wily Palestinian.
Besides, the Israelis have a perfect right to the occupied territories.
God gave them the lands in sacred trust, thousands of years ago.
How, Mr Shamir embarrassingly asks, could any good Jew give them away?
Now the curtain rises on the friends' meeting.
In principle, only three things can happen: they can fall out completely, patch up their differences, or part without a formal rupture but on frostier terms than before.
And now, perforce, The Economist turns to speculation.
There can be no complete falling out, because too many Americans care too much about Israel to leave it all alone in a cold world.
But to patch things up the friends need to agree on a peace plan.
Mr Shamir has one: the Camp David accords that brought peace between Israel and Egypt in 1979.
Mr Arafat hates that plan, because it did not offer an independent Palestine.
The Americans are cool, too, because they know most Arabs consider the plan an excuse for Israeli procrastination.
It promised the Palestinians’ autonomy’, but set aside for later negotiation the question of who should ultimately own the disputed territory.
Mr Bush cannot embrace Camp David without looking wimpish.
At the very least, he will make it plain that Israel must one day let go of most of the West Bank and Gaza.
Already, before Thursday's fateful meeting, he had startled Israel by saying bluntly that the occupation must end and that the Palestinians must have their’ political’rights.
So must it be an inconclusive, ill-tempered parting between the friends?
Not if Camp David can be artfully repackaged.
Some of its ideas the proposal for a gradual Israeli disengagement from Arab towns, local elections and Palestinian selfgovernment — are still good.
But the Palestinians will not accept it unless they are persuaded that the new plan is a first step towards real independence, not an evasion.
An evasion, of course, is exactly what Mr Shamir wants.
Why not an American-Palestinian version of the 1917 Balfour declaration, in which Britain promised the world's Jews a national home in Palestine?
The Palestinians, after all, live there already.
Where peacekeeping works
At the end of their patrols, majors and colonels from UNIIMOG treat each other to leberknodel from Austria or Indonesian spiced rice.
It is not the best of assignments, says one experienced blue-beret wearer, but it is still better than Lebanon.
The only casualty came in the first week after the ceasefire last August.
Someone got sunstroke.
UNIIMOG, you remember, is the United Nations Iran-Iraq Observers Group.
A month ago, the UN thought it had persuaded Iran and Iraq to agree on a mixed military commission to settle some of the problems along their 750-mile border.
Then protocol raised its head.
The Iranians would consider only two meeting places: one in the middle of some southern marshes, the other several miles behind Iraqi lines.
They also said there could be no handshakes and no serving of tea or coffee.
The commission has not yet met.
The 350 UN peacekeepers come from 15 countries.
A staff of 100 civilians mans twin headquarters in Baghdad and Teheran.
The commander, a Yugoslav general, shuttles back and forth on direct flights instead of going the long way round through Turkey.
There are few violations of the ceasefire.
Iran has opened the gates ofa large canal north-east of Basra.
The flooding renders some Iraqi positions on the border untenable but would make the going there impassable for tanks if fighting resumed.
In the centre of the front two Iraqi oil wells and a gas well have been burning in no-man's-land since the last days of the war.
Between feasts, UNIIMOG collects dead soldiers.
So far, more than 2,000 bodies picked up in the border area have been sent back to their families.
Iraq
One Saddam, one vote
In April 17th Iraqi diplomats are due to meet their Iranian counterparts in Geneva for a new round of peace talks.
They are unlikely to negotiate a formal end to the Gulf war while Iran's leadership is in its present condition of internecine turmoil.
Still, nobody expects the Gulf war to resume.
Fortified by the lull, Iraq's President Saddam Hussein is consolidating his control at home and dabbling cautiously in some new adventures abroad.
During the eight years of war against Iran, President Hussein made his power absolute by clamping tight personal control on the army, the Baath party and the ubiquitous mukhabarat, the secret police.
The soldiers were kept busy at the front and the party loyal with privileges and gifts.
The secret policemen made themselves so hated by ordinary Iraqis that they now depend on the president's protection almost as much as he depends on theirs.
On April 1st, citizens were given a public holiday and a chance to vote.
The president did not put his own job on the line.
But 8m voters were eligible to choose members of the national assembly, a parliamentary body whose main job is to rubber-stamp decisions handed down by the ten-man Revolutionary Command Council through which Mr Hussein governs.
In a show of confidence, the government allowed independent candidates to stand against the ruling Baath party.
’ Pluralist’reforms are promised vaguely for the future.
A more convincing sign of confidence would be a decision to let more soldiers come home from the front.
About I m men are still under arms because, says the government, the war is not yet over.
The real reason is fear of the political and economic dislocation that demobilisation might cause.
Two coup attempts have been rumoured in recent months.
Returning soldiers would expect higher wages than the Egyptian migrant workers hired during the war.
In many ways, Iraq has emerged from the war a calmer place.
President Hussein no longer seems passionately interested in liberating Palestine, or in destabilising or over-running the small Arab sheikhdoms of the Gulf.
But he remains interested in foreign policy.
Most Iraqis share his conviction that, although Iraq started the war, it served the interests of all Arabs by fighting off the Persian onslaught.
Iraq has become the strongest Arab military power.
The president demands appropriate respect.
He is getting it.
With Egypt, Iraq is at the centre of a new Arab alliance, the Arab Co-operation Council, in which Jordan and North Yemen are junior partners.
Iraq seems in no hurry to repay the billions of dollars it owes the Gulf Arabs for money received during the war; and the Gulf Arabs seem in no hurry to ask.
King Fahd of Saudi Arabia visited Baghdad at the end of March for the first visit by a Saudi monarch since Iraq's Baathist revolution of 1968.
There he signed a non-aggression pact and promised extra money to help Iraq rebuild, for peaceful purposes, the nuclear reactor Israel destroyed in 1981.
This wary goodwill could evaporate if President Hussein goes too far in avenging himself on Syria, his old rival, for taking Iran's side during the war.
Liberal supplies of Iraqi weapons are said to have given General Michel Aoun, who heads the Maronite administration in Lebanon, the confidence to challenge Syrian authority in his country.
As a result, Syrian forces and their allies have been pounding the Christian half of Beirut with artillery for several weeks.
Most members of the Arab League would welcome a Syrian withdrawal from Lebanon, but not if it means an inter-Arab war.
Newfoundland
The union at 40
Its people noted, but hardly celebrated, Newfoundland's 40th birthday as a province of Canada.
There are still old Newfoundlanders around who chopped down their maple trees and ripped’ O Canada’from their song-books on March 31 1949, when the proud island which had been England's oldest colony joined the Canadian confederation.
To this day some maintain that a mighty mistake was made in the 1948 referendum.
That was when the islanders voted to join Canada rather than resume the status of’ responsible government’after having been run for 15 years by a commission from the United Kingdom.
Newfoundland is known as The Rock.
It has always bred sturdy, original thinkers; theirs is the only country to have declared bankruptcy, in the depths of the Great Depression.
It recovered swiftly in wartime as the main staging post between America and Europe, and as temporary home for thousands of American airmen.
Today even the most fervent opponents of union with Canada admit that the move brought its blessings, including money to pave the roads and all the benefits of a welfare state.
The province still receives in federal transfer payments about C$3.50 for every tax dollar Newfoundlanders send to Ottawa.
Life has improved immeasurably since the first provincial premier, Joey Smallwood, began coaxing his people out of the hundreds of little ports that were accessible only by fishing boat and into more urban living.
On the debit side, Newfoundland gave up exclusive control of its offshore resources.
It took much of the fiery energy of Mr Brian Peckford during a decade as premier to regain full say over the development of the vast Hibernia oilfield.
The old wounds about this are easily opened.
Newfoundlanders were mortified on the very day of their 40th anniversary to learn that Ottawa had agreed that France could fish an extra 11000 tonnes of cod from these east coast waters.
In return, France says it will allow a dispute about fish and maritime boundaries around its islands of St Pierre and Miquelon, off the Newfoundland shore, to go to an international tribunal.
News that a consortium of oil companies and governments was nearing agreement on bringing Hibernia into production by the mid-1990s was distant comfort set against the threat to the fisheries.
Unemployment in Newfoundland already runs at twice the national average.
For all their oratory and wit, Newfoundland's premiers have not proved good businessmen.
Joey Smallwood, during his 23 years as Liberal premier, did several dreadful deals in hopes of quick riches: from the oil refinery at appropriately named Come by Chance to the sale of hydroelectric power from Churchill Falls, which brought wealth to Quebec instead, as the middleman supplier to New England.
Just before he resigned in January Mr Peckford made himself a laughing stock for the C$20m ($17m) he poured into a huge complex for growing cucumbers.
They promptly wilted in this foggy land.
Mr Thomas Rideout, his successor as Conservative premier, called a snap election for April 20th and distanced himself from the Peckford follies.
He has closed the greenhouses and turned the spotlight back to fisheries.
The Tories and Liberals are level in opinion polls, but a well calibrated display of anger against his fellow Conservatives in Ottawa may win Mr Rideout a chance to steer his province into sunnier waters.
Aerospace Takes Off
Gloom has turned to boom in the aerodustry during the past two years.
From about 25 in the 1940s, the number of aircraft manufacturers in the non-communist world dwindled relentlessly until, by the mid-1980s, there remained only five companies capable of building a jet airliner — and the future for some of those looked dicey.
The minnows, British Aerospace and Holland's Fokker, could never again afford to make a new jet airliner on their own.
Officials from Airbus Industrie went to California to discuss joining with McDonnell Douglas to compete harder against Boeing.
But now billion-dollar aircraft orders are announced almost daily.
In stead of too many aeroplane-makers, there are too few.
Aerospace firms are rewriting their plans to cope with growth.
Boeing has bagged more than $8 billion of firm orders so far this year, and made sales of $30 billion last year.
In a single week Airbus announced orders and options worth more than $7 billion, including a $3.6 billion order from Trans World Airlines and a $2.2 billion one from Cathay Pacific.
More are coming.
The CPA Group, a leasing company based in Ireland is expected to buy several hundred new aeroplanes from a number of manufacturers.
The growth won't stop there.
Boeing's latest, and usually conservative, study of the aerospace business predicts that this surge in growth will continue into the next century.
It reckons more than 8,400 new jet airliners will be sold by western manufacturers over the next 15 years, worth more than $500 billion (see chart overleaf).
That is I 500 more airliners than the company predicted last year — an extra $100 billion worth of business.
More than $90 billion-worth of those aeroplanes have already been ordered.
Growth in air travel is fuelling the boom.
Boeing predicts that revenue passenger miles (RPMs — the number of passengers carried on each flight multiplied by the distance of the flight) will continue to grow by 5.4% a year over the next 15 years.
That will more than double the size of the market to 2.5 trillion RPMs in 2005.
About 70% of all new aircraft will be bought by airlines just to accommodate that growth, says Boeing.
The remainder will replace older aeroplanes.
More competition encourages the use of modern, efficient aircraft.
Fears about geriatric jets falling apart or out of the skies and stricter noise regulations force airlines to order replacements.
A third factor encouraging the rush to buy new aeroplanes is the way delivery dates stretch farther out of sight with every new order.
Cathay Pacific, for instance, will have to wait until 1995 before it can fly the first of the Airbus A330s that it ordered on April 3rd.
Airlines still brooding over what to buy may have to wait until the turn of the century.
Many, particularly those strapped for cash, will lease aeroplanes instead.
So the leasing firms are placing big orders, too.
CPA expects to end up with about 10% of all the new aircraft on order.
Its big rival, ILFC, basedin Beverly Hills, Calafornia, already has 10% of those due for delivery over the next four years.
The demand for more aircraft has created a sort of aero-futures market.
Pan American, which ordered several Airbus A320s a few years ago, made more than $100m by selling its place in the Airbus queue to another airline.
Others cash in by selling aircraft as soon as they get them to consortiums of banks and investors — and then lease them back.
To meet surging demand, aerospace firms want to increase production, but it is not easy.
Boeing hit problems trying to build more of its $125m-a-time 747s.
Aircraft are late and the company has’ borrowed’more than 600 workers from Lockheed to catch up.
With a record backlog of orders, McDonnell Douglas has also warned of delays in delivering its MD-BI airliners.
Airbus, which made 71 aircraft last year, aims to make 162 in 1993.
Speeding the production line solves only part of the problem.
Thousands of suppliers and sub-contractors must also be geed up which requires organising people from one end of the earth to the other.
Commercial aircraft are global products.
Bits of McDonnell Douglas's MD-Ii are made in Austria, Japan and Brazil.
Airbus's principal subcontractors are its partners: France's Aerospatiale, West Germany's MBB (see page 88), British Aerospace and Spain's CASA.
The partners are now subcontracting more Airbus work to other companies and countries.
Yugoslavia and South Korea are the latest eager recruits.
Worrying about how to build more aeroplanes has got aircraft-builders' minds off their big worry of two years ago: how to compete with Boeing.
With more than half the world market, Boeing's share is more than double that of its two biggest competitors: Airbus and McDonnell Douglas.
At one time, the two firms thought collaboration might be the best route to survival.
But Airbus now no longer needs McDonnell Douglas to help build a bigger version of the A320; nor does the American company need Airbus wings to fit on a bigger version of its MD-Il.
Both may find new partners instead from the ranks of companies eyeing the sudden boom in aerospace: including those from Japan (see below).
The tiddlers of the aerospace world are also expanding.
Fokker was almost bankrupt two years ago.
Today it is working flat out and pondering buying Belfast-based Short Brothers from the British government.
An order from American Airlines worth $3 billion for 75 Fokker 100s (plus options for 75 more) may take it further abroad.
Fokker is negotiating with Lockheed to assemble aircraft in America: this would bring Lockheed back into the commercial business, which it quit in 1981 after losing its shirt with the TriStar.
That was back in the days when there were too many manufacturers and too few customers.
Japanese airliners
Try, try again
Though successful in most things they Turn their minds to, the heavy hitters of Japanese industry have not yet cracked making airliners.
Their latest, a prototype 80-to 100-seater called Asuka, has devoured ¥38 billion ($210m) of taxpayers' money over the past 12 years.
Had it worked as designed, this Q-STOL (quiet short take-off and landing) jet would have rivalled the British Aerospace 146 whisper jet in service since 1983 in America, China and Europe.
Instead, the Asuka recently made its final flight at the government's National Aerospace Laboratory.
It will shortly be rolled into a museum.
Asuka was the second airliner designed and built wholly in Japan.
The first, the twin-prop YS-11 developed in the 1960s, faithfully copied many features of the Hawker-Siddeley 748-including a crippling design flaw.
A few dozen of the 64-seat YS-11s eventually went into service and are now, to the delight of jolted passengers, nearing the end of their lives.
Now the Japanese are gearing up for a third try.
The Ministry of International Trade and Industry (MITI) wants to have a preliminary design for a short-haul 75-seater codenamed the ys-x worked out by 1990 and to have the aircraft in service by 1994.
During the next few weeks, MITI officials will be visiting aircraft firms in America, Canada, West Germany, France and Britain, to sign up partners they need to build an aeroplane that will actually fly.
Many of the firms whose engineers will consult with the men from MITI have already done the rounds of Western defence contractors looking for a partner to build the FSX jet fighter.
Headed by Mitsubishi Heavy Industries, the group includes Fuji Heavy Industries, Kawasaki Heavy Industries, Ishikawajima-Harima Heavy Industries an Mistubishi Electric.
Though the firms eventually chose America's General Dynamics (having had their second choice, McDonnell Douglas, and their first choice, going it alone, overruled by the Japanese government), the group also looked at the Panavia Tornado, the Anglo-American Harrier it and the Swedish Gripen.
As in commercial aircraft, going it alone was never a realistic option.
The FSX's predecessor, the Mitsubishi Fl, reminded Japanese firms of the limits to their aircraft-engineering skills.
It was put into production with so many faults that, to this day, the Fl is virtually unflyable at night, and has a blind spot which ensures that few Fl pilots will come out of any dogfight alive.
Having recognised their limitations, can the Japanese overcome them with the skills to be learned from the FSX and the YS-X?
Not easily.
The technology of military aircraft is distinct from the civilian variety.
Besides, Japan's problems with aerospace run deeper than engineering.
Its engineers are as good as any in the world; their handicap is lack of a culture that continually challenges all design decisions, no matter how high in the hierarchy they were made.
Without it, de-bugging aircraft design is impossible.
The present aerospace boom will provide the Japanese with opportunities to build parts of other peoples' airliners.
Getting their own to take off in the market place is another matter.
It will, at least, cost a lot more than is now being talked of.
Estimates that creating the Fsx would cost only ¥165 billion (at 1985 prices) were good for nothing more than selling the project to parliament which had to vote the money.
Yet development alone is now likely to cost more than ¥400 billion.
Even that figure could be too low.
The American F-16's development is reckoned to have cost $7 billion (¥2.1 trillion at 1972 exchange rates).
The little Eurofighter being developed by West Germany, Britain, Italy and Spain is expected to cost close on $10 billion (¥1.3 trillion) to get into the air.
Daimler-Benz
On the runway
West Germany's Daimler-Benz looks set to win its long battle for control of the country's aerospace industry.
It has already bought two leading aerospace firms, Motoren-und-Turbinen-Union (MTU) and Dornier; now it is about to pounce on the third and largest, Bavaria-based Messerschmitt-Bolkow-Blohm (MBB).
Those three, along with the aerospace bits of AEG, an electricals company also owned by Daimler, will be run as a new Daimler subsidiary to be called Deutsche Aerospace.
With annual sales of around DM14 billion ($7'/z billion), it will be bigger than France's Aerospatiale, and roughly the same size as British Aerospace.
It will be a victory for Mr Edzard Reuter, Daimler's chief executive since 1987.
Mr Reuter wants to diversify from Daimler's main business of building luxury cars and lorries.
He hopes know-how in other hightech fields will help Daimler build better vehicles — a theory which British Aerospace has not yet proved in its acquisition of the Rover Group, another carmaker.
Not everyone is cheering Mr Reuter.
Together with MBB, Daimler will have annual sales of more than DM80 billion (close to 4% of West Germany's CHI') and 380,000 employees.
Critics complain that Daimler will have excessive power in aerospace and military hardware and be too big a recipient of government contracts and money.
The federal cartel office in Berlin is hinting that it will forbid the takeover of MBB.
But the word in Bonn is that the economics minister, Mr Helmut Haussmann, will overturn the veto’ in the national economic interest.’
The way will then be open for Daimler to take a majority stake in MBB later this year, first 30% through a capital increase, then by buying just over another20% from other shareholders.
The total cost would be about DM1.5 billion-pocket money to cash-rich Daimler.
Deutsche Aerospace's size should make it better able to compete in European and international aerospace projects.
The company expects a steady flow of orders follow ing recent decisions by the West German government to participate in various space efforts and several European military-aircraft projects.
The projects include the joint development of the PAH 2 anti-tank helicopter with France and the building of a successor to the Tornado fighter.
The government has also agreed to continue to shoulder most of MBB's financial risk as its country's partner in the pan-European Airbus consortium.
Despite that, many in the industry reckon Daimler's biggest troubles may still be ahead.
Dornier is an old rival of MBB and the latter, in any case, has always been a hard outfit to run — with its mix of brilliant ideas men and bureaucrats used to hefty injections of government money.
Mr Jurgen Schrempp, the Daimler manager expected to be the boss of Deutsche Aerospace, has had no aerospace experience.
That may not be a bad thing.
Mr Frans Swarttouw, the chairman of Fokker, worked in the port and shipping business for 20 years before reviving the ailing Dutch aeroplane maker.
Two cheers for the world economy
The IMF's latest economic forecasts promise industrial economies continued growth and modest inflation.
The big risk is large and persistent current-account imbalances
INDUSTRIAL economies had an excellent year in 1988.
Real GNP grew by an average of 4.1% more than a full percentage point higher than forecast last spring.
Business investment rose 11%, while world trade expanded by 9.3 the fastest this decade.
Inflation increased by only a fraction to 3.2%.
Can it last?
The IMF's answer is a qualified yes.
In its annual World Economic Outlook, published at the recent Washington meeting of the IMF and World Bank, the Fund forecasts that average GNP growth in the industrial world will ease to a still healthy 3% or so in 1989 and 1990, and inflation, though it will rise to 3.8% this year, will drop back in 1990.
The IMF sees two risks:
Inflation.
The Fund's economists believe that tighter monetary policy in the main industrial economies over the past 12 months will cool overheating economies and keep inflation in check.
If, however, domestic demand continues to grow faster than capacity, governments must, it says, stand ready to tighten up further.
This poses the threat of a global interest rate war as West Germany, say, matches each rise in American interest rates, in order to support the D-mark and so avoid importing inflation.
The result could be world recession and a worsening of the international debt crisis.
So the IMF warns policy-makers, especially in America, to lean less on monetary policy and to allow fiscal policy to share the burden.
Current.account imbalances.
America's current-account deficit fell last year to $135 billion from $154 billion in 1987.
Its exports rose by 24% in 1988, accounting for a third of the increase in world trade.
Japan's current-account surplus fell from $87 billion to $80 billion.
Unfortunately, the pace of adjustment in trade imbalances slowed in the second half of last year as the impact of the dollar's depreciation started to taper off and Japan's capital-goods exporters got into top gear.
The IMF expects the imbalances to widen again this year and next.
America's deficit is forecast to rise to $139 billion in 1989 and to a record $157 billion in 1990, while Japan's and West Germany's surpluses widen.
Looking further ahead to the mid-1990s, the [Mt does not expect the three big economies' external imbalances to change as a percentage of GNP — in dollar terms they will rise-assuming economic policies and exchange rates stay the same.
If so, the second assumption is unlikely to hold.
More likely, foreign investors will eventually push the dollar down sharply.
The Fed would be forced to raise interest rates in order to check inflation.
The result: slower growth, higher inflation and financial instability.
Everybody knows there is a better way.
If America cuts its budget deficit, then the Fund's model forecasts a bigger reduction in the current-account deficit than with just dollar depreciation, along with faster growth.
This remains wishful thinking: the American administration's estimate that the budget deficit will fall from $163 billion this fiscal year to $37 billion in the year ending September I 993 ‘looks wildly optimistic.
The Fund thinks the deficit could still be $l 14 billion in fiscal 1993.
This year, Japan and West Germany escape the Fund's usual digs at their fiscal policies.
With both economies close to capacity there is no room for a further stimulus.
Indeed, Japan wins praise from the Fund for its rapid adjustment to the stronger yen.
Last year its GNP grew by a heady 5.7%, despite a fall in real net exports equivalent to nearly 2% of its GNP.
The [Mt expects Japan to grow by around 4.5% this year and next.
West Germany's current-account surplus has continued to widen.
The IMF takes West Germany to task for failing to shake up the supply-side of its arthritic economy.
The economy is riddled with rigidities, says the IMF, which distort responses to exchange-rate changes and insulate sectors from foreign competition.
While the IMF gives fairly high marks to Britain's monetary and fiscal policies, it is more gloomy about its current-account than the government.
It expects a deficit of $30 billion (£18 billion) this year, against the Treasury's £14.5 billion.
Developing countries grew by an average of 4.3% last year, the fastest rate since 1980, thanks mainly to the boom in world trade.
But most of that growth was concentrated in Asia, which enjoyed 9% growth.
In Latin America and sub-Saharan Africa growth slowed.
Future growth relies on the industrial world.
As a rule of thumb, if the growth rate in industrial economies falls by one percentage point, the export growth of all developing countries will be I h points lower, and their GNP growth cut by half a point.
From Argentina to Zimbabwe, all eyes will be on America's budget deficit.
French state industries
Days of reckoning
France's big state-owned industries made record profits last year.
So why aren't their bosses smiling?
Answer: their three-year terms are up at mid-summer.
None of them knows for sure if the controlling shareholder, the French government, will keep him on or, in the Gallic equivalent of the kick upstairs, say thank-you and raise him a grade in the Legion d'Honneur.
If as the government says, performance is the test of success, most state chairmen should have little to fear.
But performance alone has never yet ensured the job of a French nationalised industry chairman.
For many, recent results have been impressive indeed.
Net profit at Rhone-Poulenc, a chemicals company headed by Mr Jean-Rene Fourtou, jumped 48% to FFr3.5 billion ($587m).
That of the defence-electronics group Thomson, run by Mr Alain Gomez, almost doubled to an estimated FFr2 billion.
Most startling of all is the FFr6.5 billion net profit (FFr8.9 billion taking account of the taxes forgiven by the government) just announced by Mr Raymond Levy of the carmaker Renault.
The state has helped.
It has sought little from the companies it nationalised in 1982.
Excluding its long-profitable oil company Elf dividends received from nationalised industries total only FFr1.7 billion ($230m) over the past seven years.
Meanwhile, the government has given much.
Over those years, it has poured in some FFr103 billion of capital into nationalised industries.
All the same, the 1988 results give Socialist defenders of the mixed economy new ammunition to fire at would-be privatisers.
Since 1984, interference from the government has dwindled.
Appalled by mounting losses, the Fabius government of the day called for a change of course: ministers were to keep hands off state industries were not to be cushions against unemployment, and profit would be the test of performance.
Today's profit has been bought at the cost of tens of thousands of pay-packets.
The privatisers are unimpressed.
Mr Edmond Alphandery, a spokesman for the centre-right, says these firms would have done as well or better in private hands.
He blames the original strategy of creating large, highly integrated manufacturing groups.
This arose, he thinks, partly out of ungrounded fears of’ de-industrialisation and import-dependence.
Several recent studies, including the OECD's latest report on the French economy, suggest that France may actually import too little.
Counter-intuitively, keeping imports low may boost France's trade deficit in manufactures because it prevents French firms specialising in what they do best.
The best reason to privatise, according to Mr Alain Juppe, a neo-Gaullist conservative and former budget minister, is to break the government's power to hire and fire state bosses.
Though everybody pays lip service to performance, politics is often the ultimate arbiter of their fate.
In 1983, the Socialists put in a lot of their people.
In 1986, the conservatives sacked a dozen of 24 state bosses (banks included) and in turn replaced them with friends of the right.
If the Socialists are tactful and want to win favour with the centre-right, there will be no clean-out in June.
Fortunately for the incumbents, some powerful Socialists might appreciate the support of the centre-right to buttress their position in the debate over the role of the government in the economy.
Socialist policy to state industries was laid down only in part in President Mitterrand's campaign’ Letter to the French’during last year's election.
’ Stop the ballet,’he wrOte: there should be no more nationalisations or privatisations.
That was all very well, but it left big questions of detail in how the mixed economy was to be run.
Right-wing Socialists, led by the prime minister, Mr Michel Rocard, his industry minister, Mr Roger Fauroux (former boss of Saint-Gobain), and Mr Lionel Stoleru, a centrist ironically in charge of the now almost non-existent national plan, all favour giving state industries wide freedom to raise capital on their own.
Ideas include allowing them to issue shares up to 49% of capital, to turn non-voting certificuts d'investissement into full shares, to sell subsidiaries or create cross-holdings with non-French European companies.
But if the state industries can raise their own money, can anyone really then tell them what to do with it?
Oil
Spring fever
A few months ago it seemed that oil markets were in for a chill spring.
They were awash with oil, and few believed OPEC could cut production to the 18.5m barrels a day (b/d) it had promised.
So why were prices at a 20-month high in early April, up $4 a barrel since December?
OPEC is part of the explanation.
Though oil ministers meeting in Vienna last week talked wistfully of raising the cartel's official production ceiling to 20m b/d in June, OPEC has been relatively disciplined recently.
Since December it has cut its output by 3m b/d to 19.8m b/d.
That is still 1.3m b/d above target, but the discrepancy is smaller than that left by previous efforts at self-restraint.
Some non-OPEC producers also are cutting back: seven (including Russia and China) have offered to pump 5% less oil during the second quarter of 1989.
This sounds as if they are joining the cartel, but it will cut world production by only 1/2%.
What of the oil stockpiled last year-up to 250m barrels of the stuff?
Much of it now seems to have already been burned.
Stronger than expected demand is the main reason: the International Energy Agency reckons that OECD oil consumption climbed by more than 5% from the last quarter of 1987 to the same period of 1988.
Cheap oil has slowed conservation efforts.
In Japan and Britain oil consumption per unit of GDP began to rise again last year after falling throughout the 1980s; in America and West Germany conservation efforts slowed significantly (see chart).
Other factors have lent OPEC a hand, too.
Oil consumption has been buoyed by problems with nuclear and hydro-electric power generation in Japan, France, Italy and Spain; production difficulties in the North Sea; and a 12m b/d reduction in oil shipments from the Alaskan port of Valdez following the huge oil spill there.
All this has swelled OPEC's coffers, but not by as much as it would have liked.
It has lost up to $3 billion of oil revenues in the first quarter of 1989 because a barrel of Dubai crude, the Middle-Eastern benchmark, now fetches $2.50-3.00 less than North Sea Brent — double the differential of a year ago.
This is partly because of strong demand for light refined products like petrol: Middle East oil produces less petrol for each barrel refined than Brent.
But it is also because one or two traders have squeezed the Brent forward market, which sets the price.
Despite everything that is working in OPEC's favour, odds still are that oil prices will weaken later this year.
Some OPEC members notably Iran, Iraq, Kuwait and the United Arab Emirates (UAE)— are growing restless with their quotas.
They will probably pump more oil in coming months.
Iran is already 10% over quota, Kuwait 35% and the UAE nearly 50%.
In a recent lecture Sheikh Ahmed Zaki Yamani, the former Saudi oil minister, predicted that Iraq will become chronically dissatisfied with its 2.6m b/d quota when its export capacity — recovering from war-hits 5m b/d later this year.
While some of last year's stockpile has vanished, a lot of oil is still sloshing around in storage.
Saudi Arabia has stockpiled close to 30m barrels of the stuff during the first quarter of 1989; Iran has been busy filling European storage tanks; Saudi, Kuwaiti and Iraqi oil has been pouring into America almost as fast as it did in December.
Output from Alaska is already returning to normal; North Sea output will recover by the third quarter.
Total non-OPEC output (camaraderie with OPEC notwithstanding) will rise again this year.
With consumption forecast to rise by 2% in 1989 — and with demand for OPEC oil expected to be at least 1m b/d less than the cartels supply during the second quarter — the world could again be awash in oil in a matter of months.
Trimming the fat
Taxpayers round the rich world owe thanks to a bunch of 14 mostly-developing countries known as the Cairns group.
They represent the best hope in years of cutting the rich countries' farm subsidies which, at taxpayers' expense, build up huge surpluses of foodstuffs that are then dumped on world markets at low prices — and which then put third-world farmers out of business.
Specifically, the Cairns group members have told trade officials meeting in Geneva that they will obstruct progress on the Uruguay round of tariff-reductions under the CATT unless Europe and America start to talk sense on agriculture.
This is not altruism.
Cairns group members — which include Australia, Brazil, Argentina, Indonesia, Canada, the Philippines and Thailand — account for about one-quarter of world agricultural trade.
None can afford an escalation of subsidies on agriculture exports.
Unless a deal is done which reduces subsidies and makes agricultural trade subject to normal GATT rules, they say they will block progress on freeing trade in services and rewriting international rules governing intellectual property.
They hope that neither Europe nor America will want to make such sacrifices to defend farm subsidies which they cannot themselves afford.
Some progess has been made.
America and Europe smoothed over the argument which had hitherto stalled progress.
No longer will America insist that Europe agree eventually to’ eliminate’agricultural subsidies.
Something like’ reduce greatly’will do — But the Europeans came up with a new wheeze to infuriate everyone.
Agreeing to reduce total subsidies, said the men from the EEC, has nothing to do with subsidies on individual crops.
So if the EEC reduced subsidies on crops which now get a lot of taxpayers' money, like wheat, it could increase them — albeit not by so much — on other products, like non-grain animal feeds.
Clearly, the Cairns group has years of work ahead.
Drugs mergers
Everybody get together
If it goes ahead, the proposed merger of America's SmithKline Beckman with Britain's Beecham will be the biggest the pharmaceuticals industry has yet seen, creating a group with annual sales of $9 billion.
It will also be only the second significant merger the industry has yet seen.
In the past, drugs firms could rely on innovation for success: one blockbuster drug was enough to win a place at the top of the pharmaceutical league table.
Now drugs bosses reckon they must be big to stay beautiful.
For Beecham and SmithKline Beckman, which together would rank second in world drug sales, one of the potential benefits of bigness would be a broader product range.
Both have for years eked lacklustre profit out of aging products.
Antibiotics account for two-thirds of Beecham's business and Tagamet, an anti-ulcer drug, accounts for slightly less than one quarter Of SmithKline's sales.
Bigness could help them to improve:
Research and development; Beecham can afford to spend only £100m ($170m) a year on R&D, well below the $670m spent each year by Merck, the world's largest drug firm.
The high cost of clinical trials and animal tests has forced Beecham to hold back products that looked promising in research.
In the past, this would not have mattered much, provided one drug was eventually a winner.
Now such a delay is risky because the pace of innovation has quickened and the profitable life ofa new drug has dropped from 15 years to three or four.
Global marketing; big drugs companies try to ease the pain of more competition by selling products worldwide.
SmithKline could help Beecham sell in Japan and America, the two biggest markets, while Beecham could help SmithKline in Europe.
SmithKline could also benefit from Beecham's experience in selling over-the-counter medicines.
It hopes to sell Tagamet, now a prescription drug, this way.
Focus; both Beecham and SmithKline depend on diversified operations to generate the cash flow needed to fund expensive drugs RED and marketing.
That distracts time and attention into sectors which typically offer lower profit margins than drugs.
If the merger goes through, Beecham could get rid of its cosmetics business, with sales of about $700m, and some of its food and drinks brand names, such as Marmite.
SmithKline might sell its 84% stake in Beckman, a scientific-instrument business, and Allergan, an eye-care subsidiary.
One obstacle that might stand in the way of the proposed merger is a personality clash between the strong-willed bosses of the two firms.
It now looks as if SmithKline's Mr Henry Wendt would be chairman of the new company while Beecham's Mr Bob Bauman would manage day-to-day affairs as chief executive.
There are still wrinkles to be ironed out in the final terms of the merger — though the firms have agreed in principle that the merged company should be owned 50:50.
To keep British shareholders happy, it is likely to be headquartered in Britain.
A bigger difficulty is that the premature announcement of merger talks may tempt other firms into bidding for one or both.
This is why the two companies want to finalise the deal soon.
American carmakers
Re-inventing the wheel
The second in a three-part series on America's reviving car industry looks at the way its management has changed
THE birth of a new car is a secretive, expensive and lengthy affair.
At a cost of up to $1 billion, carmakers cannot afford to create lemons.
But as development times lengthen to six or seven years, so too do the chances that a new model will be obsolete before it leaves the drawing board.
So carmakers are having to rewrite their procedures to cut development times in half.
They are also pushing more of the risks and rewards of innovation on to suppliers.
Both are wrenching changes for Detroit.
Traditionally, product development proceeds step by painstaking step, with one department handing work on to another like a baton in a relay race.
A new model may start with a’ concept’design to decide how it will look.
Then it passes to another team of engineers who decide how it will work.
From them it goes to manufacturing engineers, who, as like as not, discover that it cannot be built as designed so far, and that the whole process must start again.
A better way and faster, say Detroit's managers today, is for all the departments to work together.
GM has adopted a new management system, known internally as the’ the four-phase process’, to develop its new cars.
Many departments, including marketing, are now involved from the start.
At each phase, the project team has to show that the new car meets predetermined criteria, including financial targets, before moving on to the next.
This way a new model evolves with everyone's approval — instead of getting lost in continual shuffles from one part of the corporation to another.
After the car reaches the production line customer compliments and complaints are monitored, and improvements made accordingly.
In about three years' time all GM's new cars will have been developed this way.
Partial implementation of the system has already shown benefits: half the usual number of engineering changes on one new model; on another, cost savings of $300m thanks to early suggestions from sections of the company that would not normally have seen designs until they had been fixed.
The new GM method and similar ones used by Ford and Chrysler are also changing the way suppliers do business with the big three.
Into the supply chain
Outside suppliers are an integral part of the carmaking business: GM spends some $30 billion a year with its North American suppliers alone; Ford $17 billion.
Once suppliers were simply told what to make.
Now, says Mr Donald Pais, GM's vice-president of materials management, practice is shifting toward what he calls’ collective progress'—The idea is to establish longer-term relationships with suppliers, and to involve them in product development much earlier — almost like internal departments of the company.
Ten years ago every part of a GM car was sourced from two, and in some cases three, suppliers.
But variety made it difficult to maintain consistent quality.
Even a few microns difference in the size of a component can cost valuable minutes on the production line as machines are re-set.
Now almost all GM's parts are single-sourced.
Having fewer suppliers makes it easier to move towards just-in-time delivery of components.
That reduces stock (inventory) costs — which, in turn, reinforces the emphasis on quality.
There is no longer time to test components as they are delivered.
So suppliers must take responsibility for the delivery of fully-tested components.
That may mean doing some assembly work, such as wiring instruments into a dashboard.
Quality is improved and costs reduced if the components are designed with the suppliers' most efficient manufacturing process in mind.
So the suppliers also take on more responsibility for R&D.
Ford began changing the way it treated its suppliers in 1980 by rating them for qual ity.
Most scored 60-70%.
In 1982 the company gave what it calls a QI award, and preferential treatment, to suppliers that scored 85 or above.
Ford has continued to raise the minimum standard for the award — and by 1991 will use only suppliers that meet it.
Ford is also now rating its suppliers on other things, for instance their R&D ability.
In January 1987, it asked suppliers to increase their productivity by 5% a year, for five years.
Constantly turning up the pressure on suppliers to do even better makes doing business with carmakers tough (see box).
So what do the suppliers get out of it?
Mr Norm Ehlers, Ford's executive director of production purchasing, sums it up simply:’ If we sell, they sell.
It's survival’.
Chrysler too has focused on management change to increase its competitiveness.
Five years ago, it began to give more autonomy to its parts subsidiary, Acustar.
For the first time, Acustar had to’ sell’its services to its parent as an independent supplier would.
Eventually, a number of bids were made for Acustar.
Though Chrysler turned them down, the size of the bids intrigued Chrysler's management:’ We tried to see what outsiders saw in getting more from Acustar,’says Mr Gerald Greenwald, Chrysler's vice-chairman.
It was, the company decided, more autonomy: the ability to improve engineering through partnerships with other parts-makers, and to tap economies of scale through sales to other carmakers.
So Chrysler has encouraged Acustar to do just that.
American car companies now reckon they will use about half the number of suppliers they once did.
A decade ago, Ford had parts shipped to it from 3,700 different factories.
That has now been reduced to about 2,100 and it is likely to fall to about 1,800.
Merger mania
With fewer companies chasing bigger chunks of business, merger mania has broken out.
The ownership of all three of Chrysler's carpet suppliers, for instance, changed hands within one year.
Carmakers view this as a mixed blessing.
In some take-overs suppliers get stronger by acquiring skills or technology they did not have.
But others have been forced to take on heavy debts to fight off hostile bids.
That is money which the carmakers would sooner have seen invested in the business.
Takeovers are not the only thing that keeps American car-parts suppliers looking over their shoulders.
As Japanese carmakers transplant production to America, so too come Japanese car-parts makers.
In 1980 only 18 Japanese firms made car parts in America; at last count, 232 did.
So far, the Japanese have provided little direct competition.
Unlike American firms, which typically supply all three big American carmakers, Japanese ones traditionally work exclusively with one maker.
Moreover, American firms are reluctant to buy from the Japanese because, as one executive put it,’ we will never be any more than their second most important customer’.
But that is changing as the Japanese adapt their products and management to new surroundings.
About a third of the Japanese parts-makers and their joint-ventures now have contracts with one or other of the big three, a few with all of them.
Buddy boys
Though it is tougher now for a supplier to do business with America's carmakers, there are compensations.
The Budd Company, based at Troy, Michigan, was asked by Ford to go’ paperless’, and use computers throughout the design and development of a front-suspension part for a new car, the Thunderbird.
Though expensive and time-consuming, the change cut the time needed for the project from three or four years to two.
More important, it has helped both companies see the benefits of co-operation.
Ford and Budd hooked their computers into one another to exchange design information more rapidly.
Staff from both companies were roped into working as a team.
Budd reckons it was a’ monumental success’, allowing the company to develop a fully-computerised design and manufacturing system essential to future competitiveness not to mention the money it will make on the Thunderbird contract itself.
PPG Industries, a paint supplier, has taken partnerships a step further.
Painting cars has become such a complex process that it can account or up to one-fifth of the manufacturing cost of a car.
Difficulties with the special paint finishes that General Motors wanted for its Buick plant in Lansing, Michigan, led PPG to move into the factory to manage the process itself.
The company is now setting up similar paint ventures within other car plants, not just in America.
Entrenched competitors can make it hard for a supplier to win new orders.
But it can be done.
Capitol Plastics of Bowling Green, Ohio, reckons that it took it three years, $200,000 of investment and meetings wit several hundred people to win its first order (worth a little over $200) from Honda's plant in Marysville, Ohio.
Its business with Honda is now worth more than $1 m a year.