

STATEMENT FROM THE PROPRIETOR
The Illustrated London News Partnership was established in 1985 to acquire the ILN and Natural World from the International Thomson Organisation.
The Partnership now also publishes Orient-Express Magazine, Prestige Magazine, Connections and Island Visitor.
The ILN commenced publication in 1842 and for the better part of the 19th and early years of the 20th century enjoyed enormous popularity because it was able regularly to reproduce illustrations when the newspapers could not.
Even when the newspapers were able to introduce photographs, the ILN prospered because of the depth of its pictorial coverage.
By the 1950s television began to make great inroads into the territory of pictorial news magazines and the ILN started to decline.
In 1971 Thomson found it necessary to reduce publication from weekly to monthly.
Since then the ILN has been seeking to find a new readership.
Competition for advertising against the weekend magazines of the UK quality newspapers has become intense.
We experimented with a new Editor who wrote and commissioned interesting and often controversial articles, but this approach was competitive with the British Sunday press and I discovered that "controversial" can be distasteful.
As these events were unfolding we were finding that our Partnership's lifestyle magazines were going from strength to strength.
These magazines concentrate on discriminating travel, food, fashion, nature subjects, archaeology etc, always with extensive and beautiful pictorial coverage and written by the best authors in their respective fields.
We then thought it would be appropriate to combine the best traditional ILN subjects with articles which were proving so successful in these other magazines, and the result is the first issue now in front of you.
We will publish in this format four times a year.
The Royal Year and Christmas numbers of the ILN have always been successful extra issues each year, and they will henceforth both be sent to subscribers, giving them in total six issues of the ILN each year.
Starting with the Royal Year issue this summer we shall be delivering an improved magazine in the great pictorial tradition of the ILN The Christmas number will be equally enhanced.
The present issue of the ILN is the largest published in recent years, with 116 pages.
We expected little advertising support for the first effort in our new format but it came anyway on the strength of our description.
The cover of the ILN will no longer be a photograph.
It will be original artwork of leading British artists, reflecting London and British scenes of topical or seasonal interest.
There will be no more clutter of article descriptions on our covers.
I hope you will enjoy the new ILN.
I welcome your suggestions on how to improve it further.
Please write to me at 20 Upper Ground, London SE 1 9PF.
JAMES B SHERWOOD
RETREAT FROM AFGHANISTAN
On February 15 the Soviet Union completed its withdrawal from Afghanistan.
200 soldiers in 60 armoured personnel carriers crossed Friendship Bridge on the Oxus river and passed into Soviet Uzbekistan.
The last man to leave, General Boris Gromov made the final part of the crossing on foot.
The soldiers' departure marked the end of Russia's nine-year and 50-day occupation which began with the airlift of troops into Afghanistan at Christmas, 1979.
On December 27 during a Soviet-backed coup Kabul, President Hafizzollah Amin was ousted and killed Regarded by Moscow as an incompetent he had failed to prevent the killing of Soviet "military advisers" in January and had proved incapable of controlling the Muslim rebels who opposed his government Amin was in danger of being over-thrown by a militant Muslim regime.
The Russian invasion forestalled this, and after the coup a Soviet nominee, Babrak Kabul, a hard-line Marxist and former deputy prime minister, was appointed head of state.
By mid-January, 1979 an estimated 85,000 Soviet troops were in Afghanistan, but any hopes of a quick and decisive victory over the mujaheddin rebels soon evaporated.
Fired by religious fervour and armed with weapons supplied by the United States and their Muslim neighbour Pakistan, the rebels resisted doggedly and fought a war in which their superior mobility and unconventional guerrilla tactics proved more than a match for the Soviet military machine.
Learning from their heavy losses, the Soviets abandoned offensives using convoys of tanks, which had been easy targets, and adopted more flexible methods, relying particularly on helicopter raids.
However, Stinger and Blowpipe surface-to-air missiles, supplied to the rebels by the US from 1986, helped maintain the equilibrium and the war raged on.
The Soviet attitude towards the war began to change when Mikhail Gorbachev became leader in 1985.
He saw it as an economic drain and realised its damaging effect on Moscow's international relations.
In February, 1986 he described it as Russia's "bleeding wound" and as he consolidated his position in the Politburo was able to press for an end to the conflict.
Finally, in April, 1988, an agenda for withdrawal -many would say retreat -was drawn up in the Geneva accords: all 115,000 Soviet troops in Afghanistan would be pulled out by February 15, 1989.
The withdrawals began in May, 1988 and had reached half-way point by August 14; they continued in 1989, although there was heavy fighting along the Salang highway the road which runs north from Kabul to the Soviet border -as the Russian convoys left.
About 15,000 Soviet soldiers were killed during the conflict and about 37,000 injured.
Casualties on the Afghan side were far greater more than a million people were killed in the country as a whole, with the government party and forces sustaining about 70,000 of these losses.
Thousands of Afghans, many of them children, were maimed by mines which were scattered, uncharted, around the villages; five million others fled the country for the refugee camps of Pakistan and Iran.
Those remaining faced disease and starvation and the prospect of continuing civil war because the Russians left Afghanistan more unstable than they found it.
On February 6, before the withdrawal was complete, last-minute talks in Islamabad between the Soviet Foreign Minister, Eduard Shevardnadze and Pakistani officials failed to produce a peaceful settlement to the civil conflict.
Shevardnadze proposals for a broad-based government in which the People's Democratic Party, headed by President Najibullah, would take a share were unacceptable to the mujaheddin.
Reviving The Peoples Palace
John Fordham describes the latest attempts to relieve Alexandra Palace of the jinx which has dogged it since its opening 116 years ago.
It was not so much spiritual angst as geographical angst that cramped my teens.
Living in those chintz-curtained north London suburbs like Southgate or Palmers Green or Cockfosters, one had to work pretty hard to have a misspent youth.
The only obvious landmark in north London was Alexandra Palace.
Its famous television aerial, visible from most hilltops in the area, seemed to say that not everything in the region was private, anonymous, apologetic and parochial.
And wandering the rolling green slopes of the peeling Pally's 196-acre park gave some sense of exuberant distance over the rituals of lawn-mowing, car-polishing and prudent scurryings among the packed semis below.
One could let one's imagination off the leash up there — dream that the Mallard was still blasting its way out of King's Cross, past the back gardens, up the old LNER iron road which, from the Palace walls, looked like a model railway track.
One could imagine the early days of the place, when Blondin had walked on a tightrope across the Great Hall, when 20,000 Wolf Cubs rallying to honour Rudyard Kipling unleashed their "Great Howl" in 1922, or when what were reputed to be the greatest firework displays in Europe were held there.
Or there was the horse-racing, cricket or football in the parkland, a visit to the skating-rink, or simply marvelling at the mixture of bravura, vulgarity and confidence with which the Victorians had dropped this gigantic testament to British economic expansion into what were then the sleepy rural outskirts of the fast-expanding city.
It always looked better from a distance, and by the 1960s it was a tatty, faded and unkempt relic of another age — impractical as an exhibition centre compared to functional establishments like Wembley or Earl's Court, unappealing to any hippy entrepreneur or maverick Recreations Department dreamer who might have visualised some cultural cathedral or fun palace.
But it had a special place in many north Londoners' hearts.
Louis Bizat, the Palace's present general manager, says: "When it burned down I received, within eight days, over 200 telegrams, of which 190 were from abroad, from places as far apart as Canada, Hong Kong, the States, Australia, all expressing their sorrow that this had happened.
Although it was falling down, somehow it had planted an image in people's minds — it was a faded old dowager, but still rather a favourite aunt."
The original Palace on the same site was erected in 1873 to match Crystal Palace.
The Great Exhibition of 1851-that gigantic public relations job for Britain's economic supremacy at the time — had been housed in a vast glass and iron building, itself a confirmation of the country's "workshop of the world" status, and romantically dubbed the Crystal Palace.
Thackeray called the exhibits on show-mostly machines "England's arms of conquest the trophies of her bloodless war" , and visitors flocked to London from all over the world to marvel at them.
Not long afterwards a consortium of Victorian entrepreneurs concluded that the exhibition business was a growth industry and that north London ought to have its own Crystal Palace.
Although it was conceived as a speculative building project, it was not a bodge.
The main hall of the first Alexandra Palace was to be bigger than St Peter's in the Vatican.
The walls were up to six feet thick.
Alexandra Palace was built to last.
But it didn't, because its jinx first struck 16 days after it opened when fire completely gutted the building.
The recovery was launched with a classic Victorian mixture of diligence and dash.
The Palace was entirely redesigned and rebuilt within two years.
Unaided by technology (but possibly assisted by an abundance of cheap labour and a convenient absence of red tape) the Mark II establishment was up and running in a quarter of the time it has taken the current version to proceed from the stage of the second catastrophic fire in 1980 to opening its doors.
Something about its original vaunted status as a "Palace of the People" fired the imagination of anybody who came into contact with it, and overcame the doubts that its rocky track record as a business prospect might have occasioned.
As a financial proposition, it has either consistently got its sums wrong or the people have never wanted their palace enough.
Companies responsible for its prospects have gone out of business seven times, discovering that while they could make money on the big promotions, the building and park were too expensive to run on a tickover basis (nowadays the park alone costs £650,000 a year to maintain), and in an earlier era of six-day working weeks, the public had not much leisure time to spend there anyway.
Each succeeding consortium sold a bit more of the park to keep the banks happy.
By 1900 they had shifted half of it — 200 acres.
Then a Private Members' Bill established a trust to protect it, consisting of representatives from five local councils.
With the arrival of the London County Council and subsequently the Greater London Council, the trusteeship passed out of local hands but returned to them when the GLC devolved its obligations to Haringey, along with £8 million for improvements.
Haringey is prohibited under the Act from subsidising the Palace through the rates.
Alexandra Palace and Park, the latest company willing to take up the baton, has been administering a relaunch for the premises through the offices of Bizat, a genial exhibitions and catering specialist, who had been at the place only 11 weeks, in 1980, when afire near the great organ gutted much of it and necessitated major reconstruction.
Bizat says he always jokes that he torched it not surprisingly, because much of the rehabilitation was made easier by the obligation to start from scratch, and the insurance produced £18.2 million.
Shrewdly invested, that sum had turned into nearly £50 million by the time that planning applications, investigations of builders and a two-year public inquiry had been negotiated.
Bizat, suspecting that-as the Victorians had discovered — exhibition clientele was going to be a mainstay of the Palace's economy, started checking out the market he was aiming at.
 "The exhibitors thought they just wanted a big shed," Bizat phlegmatically recalls, "and their view was" all we want people to see is our stands, we don't want them looking anywhere else", so they disliked the idea ofa setting that was attractive in itself But the then architect, Dr Peter Smith, wanted to bring the Palace back to its previous glory.
He was able to track down a lot of detail about the original construction and decoration — so he could keep the design and get it back to what it was, but incorporate new features, like a Great Hall without all those pillars, which is much better from the customers' point of view."
Smith let his imagination go in his variations on the original theme, with the result that muralists, stained-glass artists and interior decorators have put their stamps on it.
The Palm Court fountains are pyramid-shaped, following Smith's preoccupation with the Egyptian theme that he believes appropriate to the Victorians' far horizons.
Many old Ally Pally hands nevertheless prefer the woman with upraised hands who formed the spectacular fountain in the old Palm Court.
But the scale of the rehabilitation-3,500 pieces of glass needing replacement, special cutting of the brick stocks — drove the costs way out of the original ball park.
 "We are in difficulty with costs, I make no secret of it," says Bizat.
But since the rules are that the place has to pay its own way, he has welcomed all comers, from the World Indoor Bowls Championship to Militant Tendency, who staged their annual conference in the Palace of the People.
Ally Pally's pre-restoration days undoubtedly had associations of tatty romance — they lay in the contrast between the Cecil B. De Mille bravura of the original concept and such visible signs of its decline, as if it had become a Victorian actor/manager unable to gesticulate because of rheumatism.
All that tender loving care that has gone into the brickwork, the glasswork and much of the decoration has made the Pally sparkle again.
Facts About Fax
Desk-top fax machines are spreading across the world almost as prolifically as forests once did.
Their UK sales doubled last year.
Yet the principle of facsimile transmission was invented by a Scot in Victorian times.
Graham Vickers reveals all.
 "Nothing outfaxes a Nefax" reads the advertisement on the side of a traffic-bound London bus.
This prompts two thoughts.
Is this a clever or a foolish place to advertise a product associated with rapid communications?
And has the introduction of a new aspirational verb — to outfax-been calculated to add snobbery to the cachet of this suddenly desirable invention?
For fax has now arrived with a vengeance, doubling its United Kingdom sales annually and making possible a world in which a businessman in Croydon may instantly replicate his A4 thoughts complete with illegible signature — upon desks in Hull, Hoboken or Hong Kong.
In 1987, 170,000 fax machines were in use in the UK.
If the manufacturers are to be believed, by late 1988 the figure was over 340,000.
Meanwhile the number of telex lines in operation in the UK today is just 112,000.
If by any chance, you have still not encountered the fax machine, then its basic function is easily described: the fax transceiver plugs into a standard telephone socket, scans the document fed into it and then transmits the result electronically to a similar machine at the other end of the line where a facsimile document is printed out.
Straightforward in principle, although highly complex in technical detail, the majority of today's desk-top fax machines rarely seek to sell themselves with seductive design (the usual Japanese route to consumer appeal); they just sit there, looking like little photocopiers or big telephones, doing what they are supposed to do.
What they are supposed to do has suddenly been widely perceived as a necessary and valuable commercial asset, bringing substantial profits to UK market leaders NEC, Panasonic and Canon.
Fax is fast becoming their top-selling product.
It might seem that fax's current growth in popularity is attributable to a technological breakthrough or perhaps to some new commercial need to communicate pictorially as well as texturally.
This is not true, although standardisation has helped.
Fax machines have been around for many years and the obvious benefit of being able to transmit documents and graphics by telephone is by no means newly perceived.
Behind the sudden success lies a history as long and as colourful as it is unexpected.
The proposition that fax was invented by a Scot in the middle of the 19th century sounds rather as if it might come from the repertoire of E. L. Wisty, a companion piece to such wisdoms as "Did you know that Leonardo da Vinci invented the compact disc?" 
Nonetheless it is true.
Alexander Bain's claims to fame are twofold: first, he patented the automatic electrochemical recording telegraph in 1843; second, he is often confused with his more famous contemporary and namesake who was professor of logic at Aberdeen University from 1860 to 1880.
But while the latter was hobnobbing with John Stuart Mill and publishing treatises on English grammar, the former was modifying a system of synchronised electric clocks to make the first fax machine.
There is perhaps some small irony to be derived from speculating whose legacy has been the more significant now that illiterate hand-written memos can be reproduced instantly on the other side of the globe with every graphic spasm intact.
Alexander Bain, the inventor, devised a way of skimming raised metallic letters with a stylus attached to a pendulum.
A resulting stream of electric pulses could be sent by wire to the receiving device where a second synchronised pendulum swept across chemically-treated paper, leaving a dark mark wherever a pulse occurred.
In one of those little quirks so popular with the writers of Hollywood biopics, it is recorded that "the rate at which the apparatus was capable of working was discovered accidentally, in consequence of the breaking of a spring" .
The fax principle was thus established and Bain received £7,000 for his telegraphic patent, although, as my biographical source rather glumly notes,"the money was wasted in litigation and he died a poor man.
Intemperance was another cause of his non-success in life."
With Bain in his cups, it was left to a handful of European inventors to build upon his non-success and refine the fax principle.
Giovanni Caselli, Frederick Bakewell, Ludovic d'Arlincourt and Edouard Belin each contributed innovations, but it was not until 1902 that Arthur Korn, a German, demonstrated the first photoelectric scanning fax system.
Previous methods had depended upon Bain's contact-scanning technique.
Korn's breakthrough of giving the fax machine "sight" prompted serious commercial experimentation by three American telecommunications giants: AT&T, RCA and Western Union.
Five years later specialised fax machines were in use by the American press.
Korn then topped his previous triumph by transmitting a picture of Pope Pius XI by radio from Rome to Bar Harbor in Maine.
Galvanised by this exciting if slightly surreal achievement, fax in the US suddenly looked like developing in a new and radical direction: broadcast publishing.
Before long, by clipping a $490.50 do-it-yourself attachment to a normal domestic radio receiver, it was possible to receive print-outs of fax transmissions from local radio stations.
In what sounds like a mildly unsettling scenario, the appropriately modified domestic receiver would spring into life while the American family slept, printing out a radio-dispatched newspaper to be read at breakfast time.
In 1937 New York City's non-commercial radio station W2XBF was one ofthe first to be granted a fax broadcasting licence by the Federal Communications Commission.
By the end of 1940 there were around 40 US commercial radio stations broadcasting experimental fax newspapers.
Alter the war, The Miami Herald invested heavily in the system, at one point transmitting five editions daily, but the advent of television soon made the concept redundant and fax reverted, once and for all, to its previous role as a utilitarian communications medium.
Less interesting developments followed.
The first machines that could be connected to the public telephone networks were introduced in the 1950s, and at this point today's enthusiasm for fax might have been expected to appear.
However the major obstacle to general acceptance was one of incompatibility between different manufacturers' machines.
An international committee was formed to try to overcome this the Comite Consultatif International Telegraphique et Telephonique or CCITT.
However, the natural law governing committees soon took hold and progress was glacially slow.
Other problems of intercontinental telephone systems' compatibility held the fax system back as well: in the 1970s it was still illegal to transmit fax signals overseas from the US via the public telephone system.
Eventually all the machines manufactured over the past 30 years were divided by the CCITT into three groups, imaginatively designated as Groups One, Two and Three.
Group One machines were capable of sending a typical A4 page in six minutes, Group Two in three minutes and Group Three in one minute.
In practical terms Group Three specifications now predominate.
All new machines conform to this standard, and can talk to one another, and are downwardly compatible with most surviving Group Two machines.
Group One is now assumed to be obsolete.
It was against this densely-textured historical backdrop that I recently awaited the delivery of my own fax machine.
Shamed by having to say no whenever I was asked if an urgent document could be dispatched to me down the telephone — feeling badly outfaxed in fact — I had finally succumbed.
Last year's postal strike supplied a further motive, as I suspect it may have done for many other recent fax converts.
While waiting, I spoke to some of the curators of Alexander vision in the 1880s.
As usual it seems that once the initial heady thrill of an invention becomes history, the manufacturers, the committees and the salesmen take over.
Alan Pugh is the secretary of another group of initials, BFICC, which stands for the British Facsimile Industry Consultative Committee.
There is a somewhat abstract quality about this body which currently operates out of solicitors' premises somewhere in Berkshire.
An alliance of manufacturers' representatives, the BFICC, according to Pugh, aims to formulate UK market requirements for submission to national and international standards meetings and generally to monitor the UK facsimile market and provide industry liaison with the Department of Trade and Industry.
Pugh goes on to paint a picture of an industry with a lot of technology on its hands and an unclear view of the future.
 "Back in 1983 Group Four was defined by CCITT," he reveals.
"This group of machines was specified to work on digital networks-which don't yet exist.
The supposed advantage would be even faster transmission times.
My personal view is that, as defined, Group Four will never happen.
There are much cheaper ways of achieving greater speed by modifying Group Three machines."
In practice it seems inevitable that the CCITT will simply respond to the initiatives of the manufacturing giants.
Moggridge Associates is an international product-design consultancy whose principal, Bill Moggridge, is based in San Franscisco.
He identifies a global shift in the design of business equipment towards a more consumer-based aesthetic.
 "I particularly like designing business equipment," he says.
 "These days it isn't just purchased for capital goods reasons, there is an element of consumer choice, so it's positioned somewhere between technical equipment and consumer goods." 
While this is demonstrably true of most business equipment, fax remains something of an exception to date, neither needing nor getting a "sexy" image — the sales are simply too good already.
Moggridge Associates' designer Martin Darbyshire, who worked on a small fax machine for a Scandinavian manufacturer, endorses the view that the appeal of fax still lies in what it can do, not what it looks like.
 "We were asked to design a machine around a chassis from a Taiwanese supplier," he says.
"Unfortunately we were unable to do as much as we would like in terms of giving the product a visual identity-the exercise was fairly restricted by the basic product.
But it's clear that increasingly there is a visual association between the fax machine and the telephone.
Previously it was a printer object, now it is more of an extension of the phone."
Geoff Thorne of Canon UK confirms that with such healthy sales the major manufacturers can afford to let the boom be technology-driven for the time being.
 "More fax users make for a snowball effect," he says.
 "Each sale is worth several others as companies start to feel left out if they don't have one." 
He also suggests that the Japanese dominate the market partly because of their domestic need for a communications system which could accommodate an alphabet of some 2,000 characters.
This may be so, but Japan's overwhelming success in electronic product areas less obviously related to their own market requirements suggests that they would have triumphed anyway.
Future developments such as portable fax systems designed to sit in the boot ofa car along with the paraphernalia of the mobile phone are imminent, although wide acceptance is by no means certain-line noise, which can impair reproduction quality on conventional systems, is likely to pose a problem.
Even so, the future of fax now looks assured.
Only the dealers are worried.
I know this because after my machine arrived, the salesman whose job it would have been to persuade me to buy it, had I not been too quick for him, came to see me anyway.
He told me a bleak story of life out there in the fax field.
NEC UK, he alleges, is currently selling fax machines to dealers at a rate of some 4,000 units a month, average retail cost around £1,200.
In an atmosphere of such buoyancy the dealers are obliged to cut margins and try to survive competition from the opportunists for whom the fax boom is simply the latest in a long line of nice little short-term earners, such as double-glazing and car phones.
According to my jaundiced in formant, these profiteers are usually recognisable by their white socks.
As a social category this was new to me, but in the tradition of white- and blue-collar workers, it has a plausible ring.
The white-sock dealer, it seems, is a young jack-the-lad who lives with mum and dad, has access to their telephone, offers ridiculous fax prices to the hungry punter and is well pleased with his £50 profit margin.
This means that those with more conventional tastes in hosiery (and more substantial overheads) are obliged to take ever-smaller profits while trying to stay ahead of the game and figure out what the next business-machine craze might turn out to be.
Somehow it all seems a bit of an anticlimax after the bold legends of fax's pioneering days.
Now the excitement is hidden away inside the bland vanilla-coloured machines themselves, frighteningly complex and entirely baffling.
Sitting looking at the array of functions before me, now that I have fax credibility (but what is "Polling RX" ?
And what is "Reverse Polling ON/OFF" for God's sake?), my thoughts return to Alexander Bain and the protracted overnight success he provoked.
Perhaps his story remains the most interesting thing about fax, after all.
I like to think of him, weaving his way a trifle unsteadily between his electro-mechanical gadgets, dreaming of a future in which a grateful world uses Bain's invention and blesses his over-subscribed name.
Expensive litigation is still some way off The whisky has not fully taken its toll.
Suddenly there is a low-technology noise — it is the sound of a spring breaking.
Momentarily out-faxed, Bain frowns.
Then slowly his face clears as the pendulums pick up speed.
Towering Centennial
The Eiffel Tower, majestic symbol of Paris, is 100 years old.
Once deemed ugly and unsafe, the structure is today the pride of the capital.
photographs by Jean-Marc Charles.
The sight of Gustave Eiffel's soaring pyramid makes the visitor's heart quicken.
That first unexpected glimpse from taxi, aerial Metro or between the tower blocks that punctuate the swirling boulevard peripherique proclaims Paris more surely than anything.
After a competition to create a centre-piece for the Universal Exhibition of 1889, Eiffel's design was selected in the face of intense opposition from Pierre-Emmanuel Tirard, then Prime Minister, Charles Garnier, architect of the Opera, the composer Gounod, writers Leconte de Lisle and Guy de Maupassant (the last claimed to be so upset by it that he fled France), and more than 40 other national figures.
All thought it unsafe or ugly or both, and asked what use it would be once the exhibition was over.
Undaunted, and needing an injection of gloire after the rigours of the Paris Commune, the French people swiftly raised the funds to finance the construction of the world's tallest building unsurpassed until I 929 when it was overtaken by New York's Chrysler Building.
The 56-year-old engineer-already renowned for railway bridges in Portugal and Hungary, the colossal Gabarit viaduct in the Auvergne region and his gigantic locks for the first disastrous attempt to build a Panama Canal — declared his creation open on March 31, 1889 to an accompaniment of fireworks and a 25-gun salute.
Presciently, he opined that "a great part of the civilised world will pass beneath this immense triumphal arch" .
Tirard apologised for his earlier opposition and, to prove his change of heart, made Eiffel an Officer of the Legion d'Honneur.
The earliest visitors 23,000 a day-were advised to eschew the winding staircase of 1792 steps (corresponding to the year of the Proclamation of the Republic).
They queued patiently for lifts and ascended through a "Titanic cobweb" to find a choice of Parisian, Alsatian, Russian and Anglo-American restaurants on the first level and a bird's-eye view of the Seine sparkling beneath.
Venturing to the second stage, they could have their names and homelands recorded on a list published the follow ing day in Le Figaro de la Tour Eiffel certain proof to less privileged friends and relatives that they had indeed visited this engineering marvel — or could pen lines of poetry for inclusion in the same journal.
Waiting for the lift to go higher still, some released red balloons bearing tickets requesting the finder to return them.
According to a correspondent of The Graphic, these 19th-century visitors must have been little different from today's-instead of gasping at the 70-kilometre vista spread before them, their first reaction on arrival at the top was to write commemorative postcards.
In 1901 the young Brazilian aviator Santos-Dumont delighted the capital with his flights in a cigar-shaped, petrol-driven dirigible and was awarded a £4,000 prize for circling the tower.
Eight years later the Comte de Lambert — one of Europe's pioneer aeronauts — drew a crowd of 20,000 to watch him fly over it in one of France's earliest aeroplanes.
The clarity and "absolute purity" of the air at the 986-foot summit was declared ideal for meteorological and astronomical observations.
But it was the tower's potential usefulness to the French army in the rapidly advancing field of radio communications which saved it from almost certain demolition when its lease expired in 1909.
Indeed, in November, 1915, American radio engineers on the tower picked up the first broadcast voices beamed across the Atlantic from Arlington, Virginia.
Avant-garde writers and artists championed this symbol of modernity.
Seurat, Dufy, Utrillo and Pissarro celebrated it in their paintings; Apollinaire, in his poetry, saw it as a shepherdess guarding her flock — of bridges and Jean Cocteau praised it as "the Notre-Dame of the Left Bank" .
Some of the four million annual visitors seem to find the mere ascent insufficiently fulfilling.
To date people have attempted to fly from it, parachuted off it, abseiled down it and, sad to say, committed suicide from it.
It has appeared on countless screens, an instantly recognisable indication of Paris, provided a backdrop for pop videos, high fashion pictures and for films as diverse as So Long at the Fair, The Lavender Hill Mob and the James Bond adventure A View to a Kill.
Multifarious advertisers capitalise on the elegance it brings to their products.
Reproductions of its graceful lines fill souvenir stalls and tourists' luggage.
Its likeness has been formed in matches, baked in bread, spun in sugar, and moulded in chocolate.
This 7,224-ton daughter of the industrial revolution is repainted every seven years, using 40 tons of paint.
Many ofthe 2.5 million rivets have been renewed, and parts of the ironwork have been replaced in recent years-authenticated chunks of the original were sold off to the public as highly-priced souvenirs.
Today the structure houses a television transmitter, the French time signal and lends it name to the Paris radio station which reports the city's traffic jams locked below.
Eight months of commemorative jollification for the Eiffel Tower began in March.
A vast spectacle is planned for the weekend of June 17 and IS when French personalities will vie with lasers and special effects to evoke the past and guess at the future.
World-wide television links will enable those unable to attend in person to join the French nation in wishing its most celebrated symbol "Bon anniversaire" .
Aspects of Andrew
The newest Andrew Lloyd Webber production is poised to build on his unmatched success, writes Mick Brown.
Behold, the most successful composer in the world.
The tousled hair falls neglected across the furrowed brow.
The bottom lip protrudes in sullen, worried anticipation.
The eyes are more cautious than usual.
Andrew Lloyd Webber has not slept properly for weeks.
The weary sighs from friends and associates as they replace the telephone receiver after yet another call from the maestro have become somewhat more pronounced.
Habitually fractious, difficult, Andrew is now becoming well-nigh impossible.
Such is the routine which traditionally precedes the opening of every new Andrew Lloyd Webber show.
The latest will be no exception.
The opening of Aspects of Love, on April 12 at the Prince of Wales theatre, will furnish a mere footnote in what has become a success story of remarkable almost tedious consistency.
Within six weeks of the tickets going on sale last November, advance bookings totalled over £2 million, and the show was booked solid for months to come.
Aspects of Love is based on David Garnett's 1955 novel about a quintet of interrelated lovers in the South of France.
It is an unusual show for Lloyd Webber for several reasons.
The story is intimate, small-scale.
There is little scope for the sort of chandeliers-and-roller-skates production evident in previous shows.
Trevor Nunn, of the Royal Shakespeare Company, is directing, and Lloyd Webber's wife, Sarah Brightman, will be playing no part in it.
Nonetheless, like all Lloyd Webber's works, it has undergone a painstaking and methodical process of gestation.
The idea was originally given to the composer's sometime partner, Tim Rice, pre-Evita; he and Lloyd Webber made an early, unsuccessful stab at it.
It was then shelved for some years, until Lloyd Webber revived the project with lyricists Charles Hart and Don Black.
Like previous Lloyd Webber productions, the show was given a dry run at Lloyd Webber's annual Sydmonton Festival, held at his 1,200-acre Berkshire estate.
These "festivals" are actually more redolent of a between-the-wars country-house party, frequented by a well-disposed audience of theatrical folk, the likes of David Frost and Derek Jameson, BBC producers, investors and divas.
Cricket is played, much food and wine consumed, and penance paid at the local village church.
Lloyd Webber has other homes in the South of France and Mayfair.
He is an authority on, and collector of Victorian paintings particularly of the pre-Raphaelites and he is a bon vivant.
He also hob-nobs with the great and the good.
When, in January, 1988, Prince Edward enlisted in Lloyd Webber's Really Useful Company, in the humble role of general factotum, with the improbable public assurances that he would be treated "no differently from anybody else" , it seemed not only an oblique confirmation of royal patronage, but that Lloyd Webber himself had ascended to some peculiar level of hierarchy where he was able to employ princes as tea-boys.
Lloyd Webber's bankability as a composer is unique.
There is probably no other composer, living or dead, whose name above a billboard would guarantee advances in the order of Aspects of Love's.
The receipts from his shows have long since moved from the realms of the fantastic into those of the ludicrous.
It is claimed that one of Andrew Lloyd Webber's songs is playing somewhere in the world every minute of the day.
It is one of those alarming factoids of hyperbole like the sales of Jeffrey Archer novels, which intimate the inexorable triumph of consummately-executed blandness.
The craftsman's view of Lloyd Webber comes from the lyricist Don Black: "Andrew's tunes reek of melody, in a world that doesn't have much melody.
People nowadays talk about records, not songs — but Andrew writes songs.
There is an enormous market —call it middle-of-the-road if you like which is only catered for by Andrew."
The carping view of Lloyd Webber is somewhat different.
This holds that, far from being the innovative genius his champions claim, Lloyd Webber has artfully fashioned a kind of ersatz music from echoes of Puccini, Rodgers and Hammerstein, and the Beatles, but which lacks the uniqueness of any of them.
It is music for the coach trade, at which only the most high-minded purist is likely to take offence.
One of these, Bernard Levin, memorably described a visit to Evita as "one ofthe most disagreeable evenings I have ever spent in my life, in or out of the theatre" , and "Don't cry for me, Argentina" as a somewhat inferior melody to one he would hear as a boy, improvised on the saxophone by a busker outside the Albert Hall with only three fingers on his left hand.
Particular themes recur in any discussion of Andrew Lloyd Webber.
There is, first and foremost, his total commitment to musical theatre, with which he admits he is "terminally in love" .
There is his obsession with personal success "he is totally paranoid about it" , says one business acquaintance — and also his weariness with fame — "it's a bore" .
In the days of his partnership with Tim Rice, it was Rice who took charge of the "front of house" publicity, handling the round of chat-shows and press interviews with a breezy and plausible charm.
Lloyd Webber discharges the role awkwardly, and as infrequently as possible.
 "Tim was an extrovert," says Black.
"Andrew is basically very shy.
He's had to learn how to deal with the public; it does not come easily to him."
Others, more candidly, describe him as "prickly" and "highly temperamental" .
His air of tetchy, meticulous perfectionism, which encourages those around him to walk on eggshells, percolates through the entire Really Useful organisation.
It's like dealing with politicians,"says one business associate.
His wealth is a matter of awestruck tabloid speculation; his parsimony a thing of show-business legend: "Andrew was almost broke when he was down to his last £3 million," one friend remembers.
He is perennially exercised by the subject of taxation.
In the days when income tax was raging at 83 per cent, he made all the preparations, "bar the rubber stamp" , to emigrate to America.
And in New York, for the opening of The Phantom of the Opera last year, he again mooted a permanent move to America.
 "Many ofthe people I need to work with are now in America because their tax rate is around half of the 60 per cent they have to fork out in Britain," he explained.
His gratitude to the Conservative government in reducing his tax burden was repaid in 1987, when he composed the theme music for a two and a half-minute video film for Mrs Thatcher's election campaign.
He is sensitive to criticism and given to litigation.
Sensationalist stories in the tabloids about his life and activities have often been followed by curt retractions.
The News of the World was one paper obliged to apologise, and pay full legal costs, after printing untrue reports of a disagreement between Lloyd Webber and Sarah Brightman during rehearsals for The Phantom ofthe Opera.
Given all this, there is some irony that Lloyd Webber himself is currently facing a High Court action in which an amateur songwriter, John Brett is alleging the plagiarism of two songs from The Phantom ofthe Opera.
Lloyd Webber argues that he had made the demonstration tape of Phantom, and indeed that the show had been performed in its entirety at the Sydmonton Festival before a large audience, long before Brett's songs were submitted.
He attempted to have the case thrown out as "frivolous and vexatious" , but failed to have it struck off the High Court list.
For any composer, such litigation would pose a potentially fatal threat to his reputation for Lloyd Webber, deeply sensitive to accusations of plagiarism, the allegations must be particularly wounding.
 "Andrew is a very complex character as a man, but when he's composing, he's just like anybody else — he sits down at the piano looking for the tune," explains Black.
"He works very, very hard at his composing.
And he's always particularly keen to come up with original melodies.
He knows he has been maligned, accused of nicking tunes.
"His reputation also gives him something enormous to live up to.
Alan J. Lerner used to say that any composer must write for himself — if you try and write what you think the public want, you'll go mad.
Andrew knows that, and he does say he writes for himself"
Yet the real strength of Lloyd Webber, says Black, is that he is more than a composer.
"He envisages any show as a complete theatrical entity-staging, set design, choreography; he'll map out the whole show, then monitor it bar by bar — police it.
"A lot of composers will forget about a work once it's up and running, but Andrew isn't like that.
He will come out of a production in, say Vienna, and say ‘the orchestra was bloody awful’, arid actually do something about it.
Andrew is the ultimate professional.
He's very smart.
I've always thought that if he wasn't a composer he would have been Rupert Murdoch; he's just one of those people who would be successful in whatever he went into.
He can talk for hours about banking, collegiate music, gardening…
He's just a very bright boy."
Lloyd Webber's obsession with music has coloured his whole personal life.
He met his first wife, also called Sarah, at the age of 16, when she was playing the clarinet in a school orchestra.
And she came to play a significant role in building his career.
In 1979, when Lloyd Webber severed his links with both Tim Rice and his previous producers, the Robert Stigwood Organisation, to embark on his first solo venture, Cats, potential backers were suddenly thin on the ground.
Careful note was made of all those who had declined involvement.
Ironically, it would be Cats that would eventually bring his first marriage to an end.
While auditioning for the show, Lloyd Webber met a young dancer from the chorus line, Sarah Brightman.
In 1983 he publicly, and embarrassingly, announced that he and Brightman were in love, and that his 12-year-old marriage was over.
It seemed, on the surface, a curious match.
Brightman, 13 years younger, had previously been a dancer in the group Hot Gossip, and been squired by a flashy pop-music composer named Mike Moran.
SIte combines a porcelain air of preciousness with an intimation of ferocious ambition.
The consuming element in Lloyd Webber's rapture was apparently her ability to soar to F above top C, play Rachmaninov on the piano, and sing in Russian at the same time.
People have fallen in love for stranger reasons, but music has obviously played a central role in their marriage.
It is a mark of Lloyd Webber's character that he talks of their love almost exclusively in terms of music.
Being married to Brightman, he has said, has made it "much easier for performers to get in touch and feel they cart talk about their problems, and it's a good thing for me to be aware of some of the problems on the other side of the theatre fence" .
Her career has become a kind of obsession; her voice, the instrument of his enrapturement, a thing to be cherished and protected, to the degree that social life is circumscribed because of the effect which smoky parties might have on her.
 "His hair has been better since he's been with Sarah Brightman," confides one long-term associate,"and perhaps he developed more ofa sense of humour.
But the impression Andrew has always given is of being married first and foremost to his work."
Under Lloyd Webber's patronage, Brightman has become a star in her own right.
He wrote The Phantom of the Opera specifically for her.
When American Equity threatened to bar her from appearing in the New York version of the show, Lloyd Webber threatened to jettison it altogether.
It is a further mark of his clout on Broadway that American Equity relented.
In any event, the controversy did Phantom no harm.
It opened to 12 months' solid booking, having taken record advance bookings of$9.6 million in ticket sales.
However, Brightman's performance was savaged by critics.
ABC television memorably noted that "Sarah Brightman couldn't act scared if she was on the New York subway at four o'clock in the morning" ; while Frank Rich of the New York Times — the feared "butcher of Broadway" — remarked that she "simulates fear and affection alike by screwing her face into bug-eyed, chipmunk-like poses" , and that Lloyd Webber's score was "long on pop professionalism, and impoverished of artistic personality and passion" .
She is, nonetheless, scheduled to star in the Los Angeles production of Phantom this year.
The family was highly musical.
His father, Dr William Lloyd Webber, was a director of the London College of Music; his mother a music teacher.
He was a precociously talented youngster, naturally gifted at the piano, and even then composing musicals to be performed in his toy theatre.
There was never any doubt where his future lay.
At Westminster School his enthusiasm for South Pacific and The Sound of Music was greeted with incredulity.
Other boys wanted to be the Beatles; Lloyd Webber wanted to be Richard Rodgers.
It was at Oxford that he met Tim Rice, and the idea ofa songwriting partnership began to germinate in his mind.
When Rice left Oxford, Lloyd Webber abandoned his history studies after only one year and followed him to London.
 "Tim was four years older than me, and quite clearly destined to be something successful in life," he would remember,"so I thought it better to stay with him.
There was no one else at Oxford with his turn of phrase as a lyricist."
The pair's first collaboration, The Likes of Us, a musical about Dr Barnado's homes, was a flop.
But with the next work, Joseph and the Amazing Technicolour Dreamcoat, in 1968, Lloyd Webber struck a form that would serve as the foundation for a run of successes.
Jesus Christ Superstar followed in 1970; Evita in 1976; Cats in 1981; Song and Dance in 1982; Starlight Express in 1984.
The ill-fated Jeeves (1975) provides the only unseemly blemish on the balance sheet.
The Rice/Lloyd Webber partnership petered out after Evita in 1976, and in 1978 Lloyd Webber founded the Really Useful Company to manage his shows.
In 1983 the company purchased the Palace Theatre in London for £12.3 million, both as a commercial theatre, and as a base for the organisation although a new company headquarters in the West End has recently been purchased for £3.3 million.
By 1985 the Really Useful Company was showing a £2.7 million profit incredibly, almost all of it coming from one source, Cats, Lloyd Webber's biggest money-spinner yet.
In January, 1986, the company was floated on the Stock Exchange; Lloyd Webber is said to have made £9 million personally from the flotation, reducing his stake in the company from 70 per cent to 39 per cent.
In 1987 it registered profits of an impressive £6.2 million.
Following flotation, the company embarked on a modest policy of diversification.
It took over Aurum Press, which scored a success with Tom Bowyer's biography of Robert Maxwell in spite of the wrath ofthe subject: and in March, 1988, acquired a significant stake in a high-tech video company, Interactive Information Services.
But the works of Lloyd Webber himself continued to account for some 85 per cent of the group's earnings.
In the last intermediate report of the group, published in June, 1988, it was revealed that Cats alone had generated £250 million in the previous three years, and that Lloyd Webber had personally earned £12.5 million from the show.
In October last year, a boardroom split over company policy resulted in the departure of the group's managing director, Brian Brolly, with an £800,000 pay-off.
Brolly had played an important part in Lloyd Webber's rise.
In 1969, as managing director of MCA Records, he was responsible for developing and recording Jesus Christ Superstar; he became co-founder of the Really Useful Company in 1978 at Lloyd Webber's invitation.
In recent years, however, Brolly, once Paul McCartney's manager, has been keen that the group should diversify further into book publishing and recording, and the failure of a bid to buy an (unnamed) major publishing house hastened his departure.
He remains a major shareholder in the company with a 14.5 percent stake.
According to Really Useful's chairman, Lord Gowrie, the company will now continue to focus its strategy on the "core business" namely the copyrights to Lloyd Webber's work and related projects.
 "The nature of Andrew's work, and the force he is in world musical theatre, brings a great many opportunities for exploitation, in the gentlest sense of the word, and the development of partnerships in theatre, films and recording." 
Less than 48 hours after Brolly's departure, Tim Rice also resigned as a non-executive director ofthe board.
Rice explains that he simply felt he was "no longer contributing anything" to the company.
"It works in an area where I was getting less and less interested-the theatre.
To me, a public company should diversify.
Into what?
Anything, really.
I would have supported a move into anything intelligent, but I don't think anybody's voice was being heeded enough.
And I don't particularly like sitting on boards."
Rice's departure put another nail in what was becoming an increasingly tenuous friendship with Lloyd Webber.
One of Rice's reasons for accepting an invitation to join the board in the first place was his belief that it might lead to a rekindling of the old partnership.
"But it didn't.
It would have been nice if we could have got together, but the truth is there wasn't enough enthusiasm on either side.
The old spark wasn't there."
Rice now intends to concentrate on writing and his own book-publishing interest, with Pavilion Books.
In the reshuffle that followed Brolly's departure, Lloyd Webber himself moved from being a non-executive to an executive director on the Really Useful board.
Lord Gowrie pays tribute to his business, as well as his musical acumen, saying that"for a composer, Andrew is a remarkable entrepreneur.
He knows instinctively what is the best way to handle his own work.
At the time of Cats, for example, there were lots of offers to turn that into a film, but his instinct was to keep it as a musical play and hold off the film offers.
He believed that it was a piece that people would want to go on seeing for years, and that turning it into a film would shorten its life.
It was a good move to keep it in the theatre."
Short ofa complete upheaval in popular taste, the Really Useful Company seems assured of a long and lucrative future.
With the proliferation of media-television, film and recording-the smart money in the entertainment business nowadays is invested in the control of copyright.
For the next year, he says, his life will be all Aspects of Love — setting it on the rails along which previous vehicles have coasted with profitable ease — London, New York, Australia, Vienna, Hungary, Tokyo.
In the interim, Lloyd Webber is already reported to be working on another musical.
 "I'm still comparatively young for a composer," he has said, "and I think my main body of work will probably come over the next 10 to 15 years." 
Kestrel Country
As a teenager, and later as a club reporter, city-dweller Kieth waterhouse relished his chances to explore the lush countryside and wild moors of the Yorkshire Dales, tramping by rills and becks and over craggy rocks and soaring hills.
pictures by Patrick Ward.
It was the kestrel circling the dome of Leeds Town Hall, where it proved to be nesting, that gave the game away.
However citified and sooty my surroundings, I was but a shilling bus-ride from the crags and heather of the Yorkshire Dales.
The wind that blew tin cans along the streets of the dormitory suburb where I was growing up was the same wind that howled round peak and scar and wrested piccolo tunes from the reed patches below the drystone walls.
The River Aire, then purple with dye from the mills as it coursed under Leeds Bridge, began its journey as a pure, gushing stream tumbling cold and clear down through Airedale from Malham Cove — not far as the kestrel flies.
Every city-born Yorkshire tyke comes into this world with an inborn, umbilical attachment to the Dales, those lush valleys below the brooding moorland where the Yorkshire rivers flow down to the Humber: Wharfedale, Swaledale, Airedale, Nidderdale, and Wensleydale, the only one not named alter its river, the Ure.
Then, nestling in the folds of this great, green and purple, rumpled quilt, there are the minor, gentler dales with their hedgerows of brier-rose and honeysuckle, and stone pack-horse bridges spanning their rills and becks, each with its own distinctive character.
Like a good many of my generation, I began my acquaintanceship with the Dales on Sunday hikes to Ilkley Moor with my church youth club.
All through my teens it had to be a very rainy Sunday indeed that did not find us perched on the Cow and Calf a crop of murderous rocks resembling neither cows, calves nor any other animal, ' or out at Bolton Abbey, negotiating the stepping-stones across the wide but shallow Wharfe; or eating our sandwiches on Haworth Moor as we looked down on the Brontes' parsonage and re-enacted the highlights from Wuthering Heights in our romantic young heads.
But it was the ritual tramp across Ilkley Moor — or Rombalds Moor, as it is more properly but less popularly known that was the favourite pilgrimage (and so it remains, to the extent that the track through the purple heather has been worn down in part to bare rock).
Starting at the Cow and Calf you climbed through a Khyber Pass of crags from one ling-and-bracken horizon to another until it seemed the sky could not be far off.
Then, with the cold air stinging your cheeks and a wind that seemed to sing through your veins, you would take your bearings.
Theoretically you were as free as the common snipe to go in any direction you pleased.
You could, if you were of a mind to, head for the Pennines and finish up on Hadrian's Wall.
But for the true pilgrim there was (and is) only one path.
There below you, so far away that it might be in Derbyshire, was a single toytown rooftop.
Negotiating a few cairns, falling into a stream or two, arid avoiding the tempting green sheep-track to the left that would lead you straight into a bog, you followed the pilgrims' way ever downwards.
When the pilgrims' way petered out, as it frequently did, you kept that small rooftop in your line of vision.
When the rooftop vanished behind a yellow bluff of gorse, you followed your nose.
Given luck and a good breeze, you would eventually reach some hill pastures and, beyond them, a stile.
Descending a narrow gully that is path or waterfall according to season, you would ultimately attach your rooftop to four bare walls.
The completion of the jigsaw established an inn clinging precariously to the far edge of the moor.
This was, is, and ever will be, Dick Hudson's, which may justifiably claim to be the most famous pub in all Yorkshire, or indeed the world.
Nowhere does a glass of Tetley's ale taste so good (though for us it had to be lemonade) as when you have completed that two-hour trek over the brow of Ilkley Moor-or "ovver t'top" as they say up there.
But Ilkley Moor, however exhilarating for us townies, forms only the nursery slopes of the Yorkshire Dales.
Those invigorating tramps across the springy heather merely whetted my appetite for more.
Here, hut half an hour's walk from the nearest Woolworth's arid Marks & Spencer, there were tarns and gills and Druids' circles; golds and purples; curlews, waterfowl and plovers; wild campion, forget-me-not and mountain flowers.
looking in one direction you might imagine yourself in Greenland; another, and you gazed down upon a nest of' mill chimneys.
If it was so stunniggly desolate here, how must it be farther up, where the cool winds of the North Sea and the warm winds from the Atlantic met, sometimes to roar like a tornado down the Pennine Way?
There were ample opportunities to find out.
Scores of rambling and cycling clubs headed remorselessly for the Dales each weekend, come rain or shine.
As it happened I did not own a bike, nor did I possess the corduroy shorts, commando rucksack, chunky woollen socks and thick, dubbined boots which were the uniform of the dedicated rambler.
But British Railways (in the pre-Beeching era) used to put on Ramblers' Specials, stopping at such places as Kirkby Lonsdale and Sedbergh, where you were met by guides and conducted on a kind of forced march through the fells.
The "moderately strenuous" walk, I remember, was about 15 miles, usually "ovver t'top" ; the "moderate" walk, something of a defaulters' parade composed mainly of malingerers and amateurs like myself was a mere 10 miles.
It was on these - "moderate" walks that I came to appreciate the astonishing versatility of' the Dales, how inhospitably barren they can look from the brow of one hill, then how welcomingly like the gentle South Downs from the next; how one village, little more than a pub and a row of stone cottages, might be as gaunt and forbidding as some remote Highland hamlet, while another will be so prettified and roses-round-the-door picturesque that, but for the backcloth of soaring hills or looming crags, and the uncoursed rubble walls wending like strips of children's Plasticine up to the horizon, it could be in Mummerset.
Then I had a stroke of luck.
As a fledgling journalist on the Yorkshire Evening Post I had written one or two bits and pieces about my jaunts into the Dales.
One day I was called back from my duties of covering the coroner's and juvenile courts and told that henceforth I was to be the paper's "walking reporter" tramping the Dales and picking up whatever stories I could find.
Thus, a few days later, I found myself high up in Swaledale, where all the landmarks had enchanting names like Lovely Seat, Fairy Hole, crackpot, Booze Town, Jew Stone and Lady's Pillar.
For weeks, staying in youth hostels and living off substantial farmhouse teas, I wandered the Dales in all weathers, often struggling in the fine morning drizzle along high paths that led only into the clouds, then turning, rewarded, to watch the sunlight dipping through the hills and valleys as the rain stopped, glistening on the crags and throwing giant shadows on the slopes.
That was how I really got to know my Yorkshire.
I still, getting on for 40 years later, revisit some of those breathtaking old haunts but nowadays, I fear, by more sedentary means.
The last time I was up in Wharfedale it was with a London friend, a media man whose idea of the wide open spaces is Wimbledon Common.
We leaned over a humpbacked stone bridge looking at the trout basking in the crystal water.
Sheep browsed on the foothills sweeping down to the river.
The curlews swooped and circled.
My friend drank it all in.
At last lie spoke: "Wouldn't this be a great location for a cigar commercial?" .
The Eternal Sea City
The history of Venice has long been bound up with a pageant of ships.
From her favourite vantage-point by the Dogana, jan Morris reviews some of the ghost-fleets of the Serenissima's seafaring past and considers the continuing love affair between the Venetians and their boats.
For my tastes, watching the boats go by is one of life's happiest pleasures, and the best place in the world to do it is undoubtedly Venice, the supreme and eternal sea-city.
Built upon mudbanks and made great by maritime dominion during the centuries of its republican independence, it magnificently called it self the Queen of the Adriatic, and each year its rulers ritually married the ocean in a ceremony of sumptuous allegory.
Venice is a metropolis of the sea and throughout history it has welcomed to its lagoons, canals and quays an incomparable variety of water-traffic.
My favourite Venetian watch-post is the quayside beside the Dogana, the old custom-house which faces the Basin of St Mark in the watery centre of the city.
The spot commands one of earth's most splendid prospects with the city's roofs, towers, flags and islets panoramically dominated by the red-brick campanile of St bark's, the Basilica's bulbous domes and the pinkish mass of the Doge's Palace.
Here for nearly 40 years, I have loved to prop myself against a lamp-post with a sketchbook, binoculars, a sandwich and a bottle of wine, to spend an idle hour or two observing the sea.
On the whole I prefer to keep watch on one of Venice's days of brilliant gold-blue clarity, on a late summer afternoon which, while bright and warm enough, somehow lacks precision.
For them an insidious sense of illusion stimulates my imagination and enables me to see the entire pageant of Venetian ships, present and past, actual and intangible, sailing before my eyes.
Many of them are thoroughly real.
The entire daily life of this city without cars is still sustained by its boats; wherever I look, flotillas of' small craft are ploughing or plodding here and there, keeping the civic services going.
The neat, sturdy water-buses pass by, on their way to the railway station or over the Basin to the Lido; they used to be steam-powered, which is why they are called vaporetti.
Now they are diesel, but they remain the essential and wryly-beloved familiars of the city.
Then there are the heavy cargo barges puttering this way and that, languid helmsmen at their sterns, eager dogs, all blown about by the wind, tongues lolling, in the prow.
There are busy grey garbage boats, and postal boats, and perhaps an ambulance boat, and the virile motor launches of the customs and revenue people waiting to spring from their moorings on Giudecca.
If I am lucky a red fire-boat may come storming up from its station on the Grand Canal.
Hastening importantly past are certain to be scores of the varnished wooden launches that are the cabs of Venice, their occupants talking hard inside if they are Venetians, or reclining ecstatically in the open sterns if visitors.
Pleasure craft scud all around us.
Messing about in boats is more fun in Venice than anywhere, if rather more precarious, and on such an afternoon as this people are enjoying themselves all over the water.
Some are rowing about in spindly black rowing-boats in the graceful standing posture that is the classic Venetian stance, while others are darting around in speedboats.
Out in the lagoon a few yachts may be loitering, and every few moments the resplendent launch from the Hotel Cipriani sweeps another boat-load of guests, all sun-hats and bright colours, towards St Mark's.
But Venice is a seaport still, and above all these lesser vessels there still tread through the lagoon, as they always have, big ships out of the oceans.
Directly past the Dogana they come, up the Giudecca Canal towards the docks behind me.
Some are workaday freighters from Russia, Panama and Japan, their crews leaning over the rails chewing, drinking from mugs and watching the passing scene with a worldly dispassion.
Some, though, are gleaming white cruise ships, and when these festive vessels pass, their pennants flying and radars twirling, with tremors of vapour emerging from their funnels, they seem to bring with them a paradoxical frisson of antiquity.
The excited crowds thronging their decks, and pressing over each other 's shoulders to see the glorious city slide by, always remind me of pilgrims come to a shrine, or perhaps merchants bringing to this incomparable market-place furs, spices and slaves from the east.
With this fancy in my mind as I watch them pass, sometimes in that delusive light of Venice those ships seem to blur before me and I see them transmuted into vessels of the past.
For 1,000 years the Venetian Republic stood in the forefront of naval power and development, and down the generations ships of every kind, warlike and peaceful, simple and grandiose, displayed themselves to the world in these waters.
I imagine them all now, as the sun sets behind the dome of the Salute.
I see the merchant galleys of Venice's medieval prime, lurching home in convoy from Greece and Crete, Egypt and Syria oriental-looking ships with two or three lateen sails and triple banks of oars.
I see the formidable galleasses of the Venetian Navy, built in the Arsenale shipyard which lies just out of my sight beyond the Riva degli Schiavoni slave-oared, low-slung, slope-masted, with ferocious cannons mounted in the bows and immense ornamental lanterns above their captain's quarters in the stern.
I see the fantastical Bucintoro, the State barge of the Venetian Republic, as encrusted with decoration as a floating wedding-cake, sailing out to the Adriatic on the feast of the Ascension.
Fleets of small boats attend it while, in his high cabin, the ermined Doge prepares to throw his ring into the waters in token of La Serenissima's perpetual union with the sea.
All around, tacking between the galleys, milling around the Doge's vessel, I see the myriad small craft by which for so many years Venice exerted its supremacy around the Adriatic shores.
There are swift pinnaces and hefty red-sailed fishing-boats, merchant sailing ships with bulging, round prows, the astonishing variety of barge, skiff and rowing-boat, each with its own long-hallowed design, each with its own name, which even within living memory used to make the Grand Canal a perpetual exhibition of traditional ship-building.
A ghost-fleet sails by, but not in the least like a fleet of phantoms; for on such an evening I feel its presence homely and vivacious all around me; thronging those waters still with colour.
One craft which spans all the Venetian centuries is the gondola, the archetypal Venetian vessel.
Its gondolier stands in the stern as he always did, clad now in jeans, shirt and straw hat, clad once in jerkin, feathered cap and parti-coloured hose.
Its black hull is lopsided water.
Its connotations of romance, intrigue and skullduggery have remained constant down the generations.
Its passengers too.
Look at old pictures of gondolas and, give or take a wig, furbelow or satin skirt, the people sitting in their cushioned seats seem very much as they are now.
Something about the gondola itself which is, after all, only Venice made manifest in the craft of the shipwright metamorphoses almost everyone who travels in it; especially everyone who sits in the posher seat, the one with its back to the gondolier.
Here comes a gondola around the point now, just as dusk begins to fall, carrying two men of suitably traditional bearing.
In the forward, lesser seat, facing the gondolier, sits a pale young man in a posture of anxious respect.
In former times he might have been a nobleman's factotum, now I dare say he is a film director's personal assistant, and he leans forward obsequiously to catch his companion's every word.
In the other seat, the sede nobile, sits his properly lordly superior certainly a duke in previous incarnations, certainly at least an Oscar-winner now, wearing a glorious cape or velvet cloak and grandly gesturing as the boat disappears behind the Dogana.
I pick up my possessions and prepare to walk home along the quayside past the Salute, when the same gondola reapears on its return journey.
But now the two men have changed places, and the boat has worked its magic.
That magnate looks quite diminished as he crouches in the forward seat with his cloak wrapped awkwardly about him; but how gloriously his underling has been transformed.
How well-cut his suit now turns out to be, and how confidently, as they disappear once more he is laying down die law to the old man sitting so respectfully opposite.
There is a magic to many things in Venice, but no sorcery so powerful, or quite so entertaining, as the multifarious spell of the boats.
Artists' Jewels
Precious stones and precious metals were once familiar artists' materials.
Painters could work as easily with gems and enamels as they could with oils and watercolours; sculptors were as adept with gold and silver as they were with marble and bronze.
To celebrate a time when artists were also jewellers, we have selected some examples of their work-and of the work they helped to inspire.
All these finely crafted jewels are the subject of a beautifully illustrated book, Artists' Jewellery, Pre-Raphaelite to Arts and Crafts, by Geoffrey Munn and Charlotte Gere.
The Victorians and Edwardians took their jewellery seriously.
Brooches, bracelets and pendants were no mere accessories to be added to an outfit as art afterthought; they were chosen with care and worn with pride.
A fine piece of jewellery was appreciated on two levels: as a work of art combining precious materials with exquisite craftsmanship and, in many instances, as a tangible expression of love.
Jewels worn in remembrance of dear ones lost, or exchanged between lovers as tokens, were extremely popular in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, although the ubiquitous lockets containing tresses of hair were perhaps the least subtle of these keepsakes. fit a time when the language of such things was far better understood than it is today, hearts and flowers, birds and beasts and a multitude of other symbols were incorporated into jewellery design to signify romantic love, to represent those sentiments and virtues which were the major preoccupation of the day.
And it was the artists of the day who most successfully exploited the decorative and symbolic aspects of jewellery to create pieces that were both beautiful and distinctive.
Given the influences that shaped their work, it is hardly surprising that many painters, sculptors and architects turned to jewellery design as a natural and legitimate outlet for their creativity.
A new respect for craftsmanship and for traditional skills and handicrafts imbued the art world in the late 19th century, encouraged largely by John Ruskin, the eminent art critic, and by William Morris, the poet, designer and Socialist pioneer whose philosophy inspired the Arts and Crafts movement, and who is best known today, perhaps, for his wallpaper designs.
Both men particularly loved medieval art, admiring the rich decoration and painstaking labour it involved, and their enthusiasm was shared by the Pre-Raphaelite group of painters with whom they were closely associated.
Formed in 1848, the group included artists such as Edward Burne-Jones, Dante Gabriel Rossetti and William Holman Hunt — artists with a predilection for brilliant jewel colours, glowing and opalescent, for mythical, religious and literary subjects and for the imagery of love.
In an atmosphere so heady with romance, in a climate so receptive to gothic detail and intricate workmanship, jewellery and its design were to enjoy something of a golden age.
The Pre-Raphaelites and their circle depicted jewellery in their paintings and also designed or purchased pieces to give to their relatives and friends.
The rather florid ladies in Rossetti's pictures, for example, are often bedecked with gems to complement their ruby lips and amber hair.
Thus the Monna Vanna sports, among other decorations, coral beads, a heart-shaped, rock-crystal pendant and elaborate hair-clips.
Jewellery was equally important to Holman Hunt.
Particularly interesting is a cameo depicting a cupid's head and wings which he gave to his wife, Fanny Waugh, whom he married in 1865.
When Fanny died in Florence in 1866, shortly after giving birth to their only son, the brooch was engraved with a memorial inscription and passed on by Hunt to her sister, Edith, who came out to Italy to look after the baby.
Long attracted to Hunt, Edith gradually replaced Fanny in his affections, but under the Deceased Wife's Sisters Act it was impossible for' the couple to marry.
In 1875, however, they eventually defied public criticism and family opposition, and married in Switzerland where, under Swiss law, their marriage was legal.
In Hunt's striking portraits of the two sisters, each is shown wearing the cameo.
When it came to designing jewellery, Edward Burne-Jones was probably the most prolific of the Pre-Raphaelite group.
For John Ruskin he designed the Whitelands cross illustrated here, and he commissioned his favourite jewellers, Giuliano and Child & Child, to make up many pieces from his sketches.
A charming brooch depicting a bird on an olive branch was made to his design by Carlo Giuliano, for example.
The bird is set with turquoises and the leaves are of green enamel.
Burne-Jones was obsessed with the symbolism of love, and hearts are a recurring theme ni his work.
He had heart-shaped cuff-links and a heart-shaped ring made for him by Child & Child, and in 1888 commissioned a heart-shaped, leather jewel box for his daughter Margaret.
The brooch shown on the previous page, consisting of an opal heart suspended from a pair of wings, is also attributed to Burne-Jones.
The wings were charged with meaning for the Victorians: based on the ancient Egyptian good-luck symbol, the winged globe, they were associated, too, with winged time, with Cupid and with the protection of guardian angels.
But an interest in jewellery was not confined to the Pre-Raphaelites.
In the meticulous paintings of neo-classical artists such is Lawrence Alma-Tadema and Edward Poynter., jewellery was an important part of the period detail.
Alma-Tadema would visit museums and archaeological sites to sketch original artifacts, but Poynter, it seems, relied rather more on his imagination: a fanciful "classical" necklace of his own design was made up by Carlo Giuliano from silver gilt and green hardstone beads.
An almost identical necklace appears in Poynter's watercolour Helen, painted in 1887.
Charles Ricketts (1866-1931) was another painter who turned to jewellery design with great success.
Inspired by the work of Burne-Jones, he created magnificent lockets, pendants and brooches, enamelled in bright colours and set with gems.
One of his contemporaries was the sculptor Alfred Gilbert, whose most famous work must be Eros, the monument to Lord Shaftesbury in Piccadilly Circus.
Gilbert had a natural facility for jewellery, and being a sculptor was able to make up his own designs.
His rings and necklaces of twisted gold and silver wire have a distinctly modern look.
Of the Arts and Crafts jewellers, Charles Robert Ashbee, James Cromar Watt, Henry Wilson and his associate John Paul Cooper were among the most distinguished.
All four were trained architects who incorporated elements of Egyptian, medieval and Renaissance art in there work.
A silver pendant by Henry Wilson is shown on the previous page.
It depicts an angel with enveloping wings sitting in a boat; shining above them is a moonstone.
The artists mentioned here are just a few of those who were involved in jewellery design in the late 19th and early 20th centuries.
There were many more — in Britain, in Europe, and in the United States.
Through their work jewellery ceased to be something merely ornamental but attained a level of artistic and symbolic importance it has rarely equalled since.
Vision of Man's Origins
The Olduvai Gorge in the vast plain of northern Tanzania has yeilded important information about early human development.
Donald Johanson, founder and director of the Institute of Human Origins at Berkeley California, explains the significance of some of his own dicoveries there.
Standing on the rim of Ngorongoro Crater, I watched the pastel purple of the Tanzanian dawn slowly change to a golden red.
The dust which the constant
African wind brings from the east was gone, washed away by a rainstorm during the night.
The Masai say that Engai Narok (the black god), who lives in the dark storm clouds, has fed the earth with life-giving rain.
From this magnificent vantage-point on the volcanic highlands, I looked down on a seemingly endless expanse of green the Serengeti Plain.
The savannah, dotted with flat-topped acacia trees, covers nearly 15,000 square kilometres and is one of the natural wonders of the world.
While the topography has remained basically unaltered for millions of years, the ecology has gradually changed.
Over aeons, the undulating plains have been showered by volcanic ash blown westward from Ngorongoro, Lemagrut and other now-extinct volcanos.
But even today an active volcano, Ol Donyo Lengai (The Mountain of God), can darken the sky with violent eruptions, adding new powder to the Serengeti.
On the plain I could see long, black, sinuous lines of wildebeest, hundreds of thousands of them, constantly on the move.
These absurd-looking antelopes cavort, buck, kick and run in all directions, making a strange honking sound.
The annual migration of some one and a half million wildebeest is an awesome spectacle as they travel about 800 kilometres in search of water and green pastures for survival.
Trailing behind the wildebeest, trying to stay clear of their dusty trail, were the zebras.
The pattern of stripes, unique to each individual animal, makes them less visible at dawn and dusk when the carnivores lions, hyenas and packs of African wild dogs-are active.
Even so, the stallions are constantly vigilant.
Lion prides on the Serengeti are among the largest in Africa and, although some individual animals weigh upwards of 180 kg, they are alert hunters.
I once watched a lioness hunting a zebra.
Using enormous restraint, she stalked her prey [or nearly half an hour, and only when she was certain did she leap from her crouching position and bring down her quarry, seizing it by the throat and suffocating it.
As other members of the pride moved in to share the meal, the remaining zebras in the herd at first startled by the drama quickly settled back to grazing.
This world of vibrant life and sudden death is exemplified by the fastest animal on earth- the cheetah.
I watched, astounded, as a lean, hungry mother taught her cub how to hunt.
In broad daylight the cheetah pursued a herd of Thomson's gazelles.
Her cub followed, watching her every move.
The gazelles seemed too far away for a successful attack.
However, the cheetah had spotted a young animal which had strayed from the herd and, in a matter of seconds, had attained the unbelievable speed of more than 100km per hour to bring down her prey.
Mother and cub consumed the carcass at leisure and, when they had finished, the cheetah gently licked the blood off her cub's face like any domestic cat.
The Tanzanian government bas designated the Serengeti a national park, in an effort to protect the animals and conserve their natural habitat.
The Masai are not allowed to graze their cattle within park boundaries, and the thousands of tourists are restricted to specific areas.
It is easy to forget that it was here, millions of years ago, that our forebears first appeared.
The evidence for our palaeolithic ancestors having occupied this area is found in the eastern reaches of the Serengeti where the natural forces of erosion have cut a deep gash into the grasslands to expose the sun-baked deposits of Olduvai Gorge.
The strata at Olduvai make an intriguing window into the past.
Some two million years ago our ancestors began to fashion stone tools and launched an evolutionary career which would ultimately have an impact on the entire planet.
Although the layers of rock appear barren, they contain the fossilised remains of extinct animals, and clues to the lifestyle of our predecessors.
My recent explorations of Olduvai Gorge — as well as previous investigations by others permit us to paint a fascinating picture of the world of our ancestors.
The ecological setting was similar to that of today, except for an alkaline lake which has long since evaporated.
Excavations indicate that our ancestors frequented the lake margin where streams coming off the volcanic highlands entered the lake.
Lake Manyara, ringed by crusty salt deposits, is an excellent contemporary example of how Olduvai must have looked two million years ago.
While many of the animals around the vanished Olduvai lake resembled those of today, the fossils attest to some bizarre creatures.
There are pigmy giraffes, large giraffes with moose-like antlers and elephant-like creatures with downward-curving tusks in the lower jaw.
Buffaloes more than twice the size of today's must have been formidable beasts, and pigs the size of rhinoceroses, with metre-long tusks, had little to fear, even from such predators as the now-extinct sabre-toothed members of the lion family which roamed the area.
These and other strange animals would have given Olduvai a unique ambience, but the basic framework of the present-day savannah environment had already been established.
The real lure of Olduvai Gorge is what it can tell us about our own origins.
The extraordinary discovery in 1959 of a skull originally named Zinjanthropus (East Africa Man) provided an important impetus to the search for early man in the great Rift Valley of East Africa.
The skull possessed huge grinding teeth, anchored in powerful jaws which were attached to enormous chewing muscles.
From its large teeth arose the nickname "Nutcracker Man" .
The chewing apparatus indicated a vegetarian diet.
Although the creature walked upright, the combination of specialised chewing behaviour and a small brain does not make it our direct ancestor.
We now know that this hominid, with the tongue-twisting name of Australopithecus (Southern Ape Man), disappeared from the fossil record approximately one million years ago.
The slopes of Olduvai Gorge are littered with thousands of primitive stone tools.
At first glance the lumps of rock reveal nothing of the primitive technology which heralded the dawn of culture.
Utilising a simple stone-on-stone technique, flakes were chipped off natural pebbles, producing sharp edges.
We can only wonder when and how our ancestors struck on this idea.
With this first step to culture, they were no longer at the mercy of the environment, but rather could exploit it to their advantage.
During the search at Olduvai Gorge a hominid was recovered which more closely resembles us.
Diagnosis of skull fragments indicates another more advanced form, a contemporary of "Nutcracker Man" .
On the basis of its much smaller jaws and teeth and enlarged cranial cavity, scientists have assumed that this being was the tool-maker.
It was christened Homo habilis (Handy Man).
Not only did man make tools, but tools made, man.
Better tools required better' brains, and better brains led to better tools.
We may never fully understand how these early ancestors survived with only rudimentary tools, but we do know that there are concentrations of artifacts and bones at certain places in the Olduvai strata.
The bones are of antelopes, gazelles, hippopotami, pigs and other animals, and many have been smashed, presumably to get at the nourishing marrow; some even show marks of cuts, inflicted by a stone tool when the bone was still fresh.
Was Handy Man beginning to include meat in his diet?
If so, was he actively hunting or was he, like a vulture, simply scavenging from the skills of other predators?
There is no doubt that this early form of man had a greater impact on the natural world than any other animal.
To descend into Olduvai Gorge — back two million years in time — is humbling.
Man owes his existence to the maker of those primitive stone tools, who planted the seed of the human career.
What type of society did Homo habilis have?
We know they were not large creatures and, probably, sought security by congregating.
Was there a division of labour?
Did they recognise individual mates?
How did they keep warm at night, before they learned to control fire?
These and many other questions come to mind.
Climbing out of the Gorge, leaving the artifacts and fossilised bones behind, I was again struck by the timelessness of the Serengeti Plain.
Giraffes feeding on acacia, startled by my presence, ran off leaving puffs of dust where each foot struck the ground.
The sun was falling towards the horizon and birds were hurrying to their evening roosts.
The sounds of the day were giving way to the sounds ofthe night.
Fleur's Fantasy
A blend of charming inventiveness and acute observation characterises the magic realism ofa uniquely-talented artist.
 "In more than 22 years," says American-born Fleur Cowles "I've never painted anything that hasn't relied on imagination and memory." 
And, after some 40 exhibitions in cities all over the world, she can boast that every one of her 1,000 well-loved paintings has been sold, apart from a few she has deliberately reserved for herself.
Her popularity is surely due to the beautiful, serene world that she creates, a profusion of colourful animals and flowers.
Although, as a child, she delighted in.
American naive paintings, she herself had never considered taking up painting until shortly after she moved to England in 1955 to get married.
An enthusiastic collector of contemporary art, she attended a London exhibition by a young Italian artist, Dominic Gnoli.
While watching him at work she impulsively asked to borrow his materials and followed his advice to give her imagination free rein.
The result was a painting of "flying cyclamens" , one of the earliest to be sold at her own first exhibition a year later.
Since then Fleur Cowles has gone on to develop a style which has been described as "Magic Realism" .
She first started to include her hallmark, wild cats, in her paintings when her husband introduced an Abyssinian cat into their London home.
In her works tiny animals clutch or hide among giant, overblown flowers; tigers lounge in flower-filled riverboats; vividly-coloured plants tower over birds, butterflies and jungle beasts; hippopotamuses, elephants and unicorns perch in trees and outsized flowers, alongside birds and monkeys: a fantasy world of docile creatures living in harmony with idealised landscapes, as shown here in her Rock Garden paintings.
The subjects of many of her pictures have been transferred to Limoges dinnerware and transformed into limited-edition bone china figurines.
Fleur is unusual in that she eschews easel, palette and studio, preferring to balance her paintings on her lap and take the paint straight on to her brush from the tube.
Her technique is to paint with acrylics directly on to the surface, making no preliminary drawings.
She does not require solitude or silence while she paints; indeed sIte prefers to have friends around her in her chocolate-brown library.
Her work has taken her all over the world.
She was "roving ambassador" during the years 1950-54 in both President Truman's and President Eisenhower's terms of office, and in this capacity attended the Queen's coronation in 1953.
In addition to her painting, Fleur Cowles who was at one time associate editor of look magazine and editor-in-chief of Flair — is the author of several books, including an authorised biography of Salvador Dali.
Her latest publication, An Artist's Journey (Collins, £20), is in part an autobiographical account of her life as an artist and her memories of artists she has known, from Graham Sutherland and Henry Moore to Pablo Picasso and Georges Braque, and in part a collection of 48 of her own paintings art insight into her unique fantasy world.
Oz Overland
When Christine Osborne travelled 4,348 kilometers across Australia on the Indian-Pacific she met some down-to-earth characters and had the opportunity to see some of the country's most remote mining centres.
Here, in words and pictures, she takes a journey across the great emptiness of the Nullarbor Plain.
Never travel all the way across Australia without getting off the train.
It is 4,348 kilometres from Perth to Sydney by rail and, except in spring when the flat underbelly of the continent is carpeted with wild flowers, the first barren miles of the Nullarbor Plain from the Latin meaning "no trees" east of Perth look the same as the next.
Barren.
But the other reason to break the journey is to see some of the outback.
The Indian-Pacific railway passes through such colourful places as Kalgoorlie and Port Augusta on its route between Perth and Sydney (departures three times a week in either direction).
"With this it mind, I began in Perth, not on the Indian-Pacific but on a small train called the Prospector, the regular lifeline for Kalgoorlie and the sheep and wheat belt.
My idea was to spend time fossicking in the gold-fields, before joining the eastbound service of the Indian-Pacific on its appointed day.
The first stage took seven hours as the Prospector rattled around the edge of the Swan valley, tackling the gently undulating hill like a roller-coaster.
East of Wallaroo the country flattened out, wheatfields gave way to spinifex grass and mallee (eucalyptus) scrub until finally the highest point on the horizon was art anthill.
Most of the passengers on the Prospector had been to the Indian Ocean to shop and surf…
The woman who was sitting next to me had been to Perth (a 360kilometre round trip) to buy tomatoes: the only shop in Cunderdin, where she lived, charged A$3.50 a kilo, site told me.
We had tomato soup for dinner, followed by roast beef and sago pudding, served airline-style on a tray.
I spent the night in a motel on Hannan Street-the main thoroughfare in Kalgoorlie — named after Paddy Hannan, the Irish prospector who discovered gold there in 1893.
The long avenue is still lined with the iron-laced pubs of the gold rush days, with their wooden verandahs.
Cars with massive"roo-bars are angle-parked outside quaint shops, sonic of which have hitching rails for horses.
Within three days of Hannan's find on what became known as "the Golden Mile" , Kalgoorlie had 700 inhabitants.
Miners flocked in on foot and horseback, by cart and camel.
By 1902 the town had a population of 30,000, served by 93 hotels and eight breweries.
Today there arc motels and take-aways but Kalgoorlie still exudes art atmosphere of bygone days when burly miners danced on the bar of the old Exchange Hotel and gambled fortunes on two-up.
Passengers travelling on the Indian-Pacific can join a Goldrush Tours coach for a spin around the town while the train changes engines and crew.
There was an air of excitement among passengers and crew joining the train.
At 7am a siren sounded and an engine pulled 19 silver carriages alongside Kalgoorlie's lengthy platform.
On board were 142 first-class passengers and 100-odd — some of them very odd people travelling in economy.
Making my way along the zigzag corridor in Car 2, I found the bed in my single "roomette" facing the rear of the train.
Settling in, I looked out of the window and reflected on what it must have been like for the men building the Trans-Australia Railway when hundreds of navvies, using horses, camels and a few machines, battled their way across the inhospitable plain, which in winter crackles underfoot with frost while summer temperatures exceed a baking 50°C.
Some of the men went mad, wandering away from the camp to be found, weeks later, mummified by the heat.
Construction of the railway began in Port Augusta in 1912, using two and a half million sleepers and 140,000 tonnes of rail.
A link-up with the western end from Kalgoorlie was finally made on October 17, 1917 and five days later the first passenger train completed the historic crossing.
The first-class passengers on my train were mainly elderly Australian couples who had been visiting relatives.
Thirty veteran officers from the Australian destroyer Warramungu had been to a re-union in Perth.
There were English and American tourists, a group of Japanese students, and a German who played the piano for 1500 kilometres.
There was also Mr Maddern, seated comfortably in the lounge-car as though in the drawing-room of his home-and after 45 trips across the Nullarbor to sell shoes in Kalgoorlie, I suppose that is how it felt.
Asked the highlight of this lifetime on the Indian-Pacific, he thought deeply for several stations, before deciding that it was the night a passenger dropped his dentures down the lavatory.
Significantly, this happened near Rawlinna where the US Skylab dropped in 1979.
The train stopped there long enough for me to run along the line and climb up into the great diesel engine driven by Bert Coad from Perth and Hilton Hinchcliff from Kalgoorlie.
A driver on cIte Nullarbor for 38 years, Coad was squint-eyed from staring at the track.
He threw a lever and the twin 1500-horsepower engines roared to life.
Miles flew by in the barren landscape, punctuated only by the carcasses of kangaroos on the line.
The driver's cab reminded me of the bridge ofa ship and, as in mid-ocean looking into infinity, I could almost make out the curve in the surface of the earth.
I was set down at Nurina and returned to my roomette before the train tackled the "long straight" , a point where the line runs across the dead heart of the Nullarbor, a distance of 478 kilometres.
It is the longest straight stretch of railway in the world and the Indian-Pacific's siren is set to sound every 90 seconds in case the drivers fall asleep.
It took all day to cross the Nullarbor.
At dusk we stopped to refuel in Cook.
Passengers poked their heads out of the doors like rabbits testing the wind and, deciding it was safe, hopped down on to the station platform where a sign read: "Cook, Queen of the Nullarbor.
Get sick, our hospital needs you".
The most densely populated town on the Nullarbor, Cook has 110 inhabitants, who live opposite each other on the widest street in the southern hemisphere, broad enough for a camel-train to make a U-turn.
There is no entertainment; the only diversion is the arrival of the Indian-Pacific and the weekly "Tea and Sugar" train which brings supplies.
Back on board, we advanced our watches two and a half hours to Central Standard Time.
During the night we passed Kingoonya, the halfway mark.
Most railway sidings on the Nullarbor have lyrical aboriginal names.
Kingoonya means "nardoo seeds" , Mungala means "sand-hills" and Mulbooma means "wind" .
Lulled to sleep by the whispering wheels, I dreamed of ancient tribes finding their way along the trail.
Early next morning we approached Port Augusta where I was getting off.
Most people visit the town to ride on the Pichi Richi Railway a service operated through the Flinders Ranges by a veteran steam locomotive known as the "Coffee Pot" .
My own plan was to see Coober Pedy, the opal-mining town roughly 500 kilometres north-west, and return in time to rejoin the Indian-Pacific 48 hours later.
"Don't drive off the road, and make sure your tank is full.
Glendambo is the last petrol station for 200 kilometres,"warned the Budget car-hire girl, as she handed me the keys to a six-cylinder Holden Commodore.
I raced up the Stuart Highway at 180 kph; there were few travellers and the only signs of wildlife were the customary dead kangaroos.
From Port Augusta via Alice Springs right to Darwin, the black road cuts through red dunes and shimmering salt lakes.
Arriving in Coober Pedy at sunset, I noticed the desert sky was streaked with red like a fire opal.
 "Looks like rine," said the manager of the Desert Cave Motel which, like most of the town, is built underground.
Coober Pedy has produced 80 per cent of the world's opals since 1915.
It costs A$27 to stake your claim roughly A$10,000 to sink a shaft and almost everyone here is an opal miner the butcher, the baker, and even the town dentist (who is said to have the best drilling equipment).
Coober Pedy (form the aboriginal kupa piti meaning "white man's burrow" ) has a large migrant population but it was an Australian who dug me out when I became bogged down in the dull-dust, and an old swagman on the road who warned me to keep an eye on the weather.
The storm broke as I drove past Woomera on the way back to Port Augusta and locals there said it was the heaviest rain for nearly 200 years.
 "One day you come up here it's a dustbowl, the next its a quagmire," said a truck-driver waiting for the Indian-Pacific to arrive in Port Augusta.
Rejoining the train, I was confronted by a South Australian fruit-fly inspector wanting to confiscate any Western Australian fruit.
The border was back in Cook, I told him.
 "Don't expect me to live out there," he said, shaking a bag of apples and oranges.
The journey down the Spencer Gulf to Adelaide took four hours.
Arriving in tltis self-proclaimed cultural centre of Australia, we had 30 minutes' stopover while the big Australian National Railway diesels were uncoupled and a new pair attached for the journey to New South Wales.
Now there were only 70 stations left before Sydney.
My dinner companions were two Swiss nurses doing a world tour, and Roger Rasmussen, a pensioner front Queensland who said he had been travelling by train for 16 days non-stop.
Eligible for reduced rates, he spent his time riding round Australia, stopping only long enough to dry-clean his clothes and to buy another rail ticket.
The rest of the journey was an anticlimax by comparison, as it would be for passengers approaching Perth from the Pacific.
Horse Lake, Bogan Gate and Bumberry — the New South Wales scenery switched from treeless saltbush plain to sheep and wheat and back again.
Then the suburbs proclaimed Sydney and our arrival.
Indian-Pacific trains between Perth and Sydney depart three times a week in either direction.
First-class accommodation in twinettes (with private shower) or single roomettes A$780 per person, including meals.Journey takes about 65 hours, with three nights on the train.
Reservations are compulsory.
Information from Compass (GSA for Railways of Australia), 9 Grosvenor Gardens, London SW1W 0BH (01-8284111).
Christine Osborne flew London-Sydney on Philippine Airlines 747 service, via Manila (twice weekly) and Sydney-Perth on Australian Airlines.
The Treasures of Aphrodisias
Aphrodisias seems a long way from anywhere, but it is worth the trip for it is one of the most exciting archaeological sites in Turkey.
Neolithic in origin, it was one ofthe major cult centres of Aphrodite and one of the great cities ofthe Graeco-Roman period.
Its magnificence grows with every season of excavation.
The author has been directing the excavations since 1961, and many of the dramatic finds on the site have been made by him.
Here he describes the unprecedented amount of sculpture he has found, whose quality demonstrates that the sculptors of Aphrodisias were no mere copyists but artists ofa distinctive school which made a major contribution to ancient art.
Among the innumerable classical sites that grace the landscape of south-western Turkey and those excavated in the Mediterranean basin in recent years, Aphrodisias has rightfully earned a reputation for the importance, abundance and quality of its discoveries.
Excavation began in 1961, under the aegis of New York University, and the early seasons were reported in The Illustrated London News in 1962-63 and 1965.
To date the site has yielded many significant finds, including many well-preserved architectural remains, hundreds of inscriptions and other artifacts, and unusual quantities of splendid sculpture from the Graeco-Roman period.
During the past 28 years, many of the principal monuments of the ancient city have been explored, excavated, identified and discreetly restored.
Investigations in the temple of Aphrodite, after whom the city was named, have revealed evidence ofa long history for the cult of the goddess going back to the sixth century ac.
They also suggested that the building, whose 14 columns still stand as a striking landmark of the site, was erected probably in two phases in the first century BC.
South of the temple an attractive odeon, or concert-hall, was brought to light along the northern edge ofthe vast agora complex, which consisted of two long porticoes that have also been partly excavated and restored.
Concentrated work led to the uncovering ofa large theatre that produced crucial evidence for the history ofthe city.
Among other structures, two bathing establishments, a graceful Tetrapylon (monumental decorative gateway) and several private and official residences were investigated.
An unusual discovery of recent date proved to be the so-called Sebasteion (after Sebastos, Greek equivalent of Augustus), a striking building complex dedicated to Aphrodite and the cult of the emperor Augustus and his Julio-Claudian dynasty, and lavishly decorated with relief sculpture.
While these discoveries illustrated remarkably well the period of the greatest renown and prosperity of Aphrodisias (between late Hellenistic times and the early Byzantine era, i.e., first century BC to the seventh century AD), archaeological evidence for a long prehistory dating back to the fifth millennium BC was recorded in excavations of two habitation mounds, or höyük, located at the heart of the Roman city.
An unusually large number of inscriptions provided information for the reconstruction and illustration of the political, social, religious, artistic and economic history of the city as well as of its privileged status under Rome.
A series of documents carved on the north wall of the theatre's stage building, featuring copies of decrees, laws and letters emanating from Roman leaders and emperors and concerning Aphrodisias, presented an extraordinary dossier of information for the Roman historian.
The discovery and study of several inscribed fragments and graffiti and, above all, a tall pillar bearing a list of names accompanied by their professions, shed light on the Jewish community and its sympathisers at Aphrodisias.
The amount and quality ofthe sculpture unearthed was not entirely unexpected.
A number of statues and sculpture fragments bearing the names of artists from Aphrodisias had turned up in Rome and many other parts of the Empire.
Most of these signed items had been dismissed as the work of mere copyists of Classical and Hellenistic creations, and even the unusual decorative and free-standing sculpture unearthed in the short-lived excavations undertaken at Aphrodisias itself in 1904-5 (by Paul Gaudin) and in 1937 (by Giulio Jacopi) failed to excite many experts.
But in 1943 the Italian scholar Maria F. Squarciapino painstakingly collected and analysed the material, recognised its quality, labelled it as the output of a "school" , and urged a re-evaluation of the artists' contribution to the history of ancient sculpture.
Her conclusions led to a re-examination of their work and stimulated greater and more systematic searching at Aphrodisias itself.
The results achieved in 28 summers of work have been rich and conclusive, the sculpture ranging front portraits to mythological reliefs, statuettes to colossal figures.
The exhibits and grounds of the local museum, built in situ through the combined efforts of the Directorate General of Antiquities and Museums of Turkey and the New York University expedition, testify to the talents and versatility of the local sculptors.
If only by its unusual quantity, the collection would justify the existence ofa "school" here.
The discovery of dozens of trial and unfinished pieces, including many "exercise" fragments of hands and feet, ofa possible workshop area and several tools near the temple of Aphrodite must silence any remaining sceptics.
Furthermore, to the 20-odd names and signatures collected by Squarciapino, many new ones can now be added.
It is already possible to identify the main characteristics of the School of Aphrodisias, its chronological framework and some aspects of its contribution to ancient sculpture.
In origin the sculpture was dependent on the availability of excellent marble, both white and blue-grey, along the slopes of the Salbakos range (modern Baba Dag), barely a few kilometres to the east of the city.
This proximity was equally crucial to the development of marble carving.
Some archaeological evidence and observations indicate that the stone was already being carved during the late Archaic period, and surveys in the vast quarrying area have also revealed signs of occasional pre-Roman stone-cutting techniques.
But it was in the late Hellenistic period, as Aphrodisias developed from a temple site into a fullyfledged city and favoured ally of Rome, that marble began to be extracted at a faster pace.
The construction of the temple of-Aphrodite in the first century BC must have required abundant material, and although it is plaus ible to assume that local stone-cutters did exist, more ambitious projects clearly demanded more sophisticated and skilled sculptors and architects.
One attractive theory suggests that such artists came from Pergamon.
By the end of the second century BC, after the death of Attalus III, last king of Pergamon, their presence in that city was no longer needed, since the Romans, to whom Attalus had bequeathed his kingdom and treasures, were highly unlikely to maintain the royal artistic programmes.
Some sculptors might well have been attracted to Aphrodisias by its superior marble supplies, and perhaps by commissions.
In any event the privileged status of the city, its close ties with Rome, Octavian Augustus and subsequent emperors, as well as essential peaceful conditions in Asia Minor during the first two centuries of Roman rule, undoubtedly helped the development of marble-carving activities and the growth in the reputation of Aphrodisian sculptors.
It is not surprising that demands for their sculpture in Rome and elsewhere increased.
Finished or semi-finished statuary, marble blocks, plaques for wall revetments were transported by ox-cart and by sea to their ultimate destinations, where Aphrodisian or local artists would perfect, complete, or repair their work.
Even between the troubled third to fifth centuries AD, archaeological discoveries reveal that the quality of the school's production did not falter, despite the decline of civic life and eventually of the plastic arts.
Aphrodisias as a centre of sculpture spanned close to six centuries, almost unprecendented a period in the history of ancient art.
Discoveries have shown that the most striking achievements of the Aphrodisians lay in portraiture.
Whether of the early Imperial centuries or from the later periods of the fourth and fifth centuries, Aphrodisian portrait sculpture stands out among the best, especially in the intensity displayed by the late-Roman physiognomies.
Another successful contribution by Aphrodisians was their handling of architectural decorations.
The combined use of different-coloured marbles was another Aphrodisian characteristic.
Similar effects were also achieved on white marble through the use of different finishes: soft polishing of flesh parts, for instance, was often contrasted with the rasp finishing of hair or drapery, thus creating different subtle effects of light and dark.
The Aphrodisians were true virtuosi with their chisels.
Though they produced some statuary in Classical and Hellenistic styles they were not copyists.
For instance, they created highly original relief panels to decorate the Sebasteion as well as other sculpture that adapted earlier models for different purposes.
In short, when their work echoed Greek or Hellenistic prototypes, there were freer interpretations, inspirations and even variations or conflations.
It is logical that they revealed an intimate but not servile attachment to the achievements of past master sculptors.
Yet, their combination of idealism with an emphasis on realism and ornamentation was a typical feature of their own, which often led to a clear mannerism.
In many ways the Aphrodisians were the direct descendants of Hellenistic and, more specifically, Pergamene sculpture.
Thanks to the ample marble supplies at their disposal, they perfected their craft constantly and asserted their skills by producing all kinds of sculpture that blended earlier sources of inspiration with trends, styles and techniques of the times in which they lived.
It is right that they should be given a place of honour in the history of ancient art.