

KIEFER SUTHERLAND Lost in Los Angeles
’ Could I make a very special request?’asks Kiefer Sutherland in a fragile, full-of-flu drawl.
’ Can I do the photos sitting down, please?’
The WORST Californian February weather for 80 years and LA has a rotten head cold.
Its warm, wide, smoggy streets and boulevards with sunshine names have turned damp and bad tempered overnight.
Hollywood is wet, La Cienega is drizzly.
Los Angeles wears a raincoat and she hates it.
Kiefer Sutherland sits purring gently as his obliging press officer massages and pummels the  taut muscles on his neck and shoulders.
’ Oh boy, that feels good,’he says through his nose.
Later confiding that she was surprised that Kiefer turned up at all that day, the same press officer admits she was doubtful about the interview from the off.
’ You know things may change a little today,’the uncomfortable but professional PR had explained that morning.
’ Kiefer has a prior engagement that may, or may not, last all day.
At the moment we're not sure.’
But come 2.30 pm, Keifer's’ prior engagement’has been dealt with and hear he is — all bleary-eyed, stubbly, subdued and dog tied.
If he was up for a part in a Night Nurse commercial he'd be sure to get it unless Mickey Rourke turned up for the same audition.
Casually side-stepping the subject of the morning's business, Kiefer sits patiently as the groomer does his work.
He asks for’ just a slight covering’of powder on his face and leaves his hair messy.
The talk turns to music and Kiefer listens.
Drawing on his seventh Marlboro of the afternoon, his top lip arches into its semi-permanent M-shape with its legs splayed out making his mouth look unfairly petulant and pissed off.
This in turn doesn't help his voice, which rarely breaks from a rather lazy-sounding, aspirant Jack Nicholson-style Californian croak.
’ Rap music?
Christ that shit is the pits,’ he says.
’ My daughter listens to rap music.
That stuff is noise pollution.
When she starts listening to that I say to her,’ Hey, why don't you listen to Bad Company or Led Zeppelin or something decent for a change?’
A director once commented that Kiefer Sutherland had lived two years for every one that had passed.
His mature attitude seems to be at least a decade ahead of his slight, youthful physique.
People have said that Sutherland is a young fogey, old before his time, a man out of time, 22 going on 40.
This is a boy who is married to a woman 14 years his senior and plays father to a girl only nine years younger than himself.
He listens to early 70's progressive rock, not contemporary rap music — and he wears a denim shirt with a tie — the clothes of a 35 year old trying to get a job in a suburban jeans boutique.
The paint stains on his Levi's are from decorating his new baby's nursery.
Not surprisingly, he says he hates shopping.
’ I just bought these shoes,’he says, pointing at a pair of brown brogues.
’ They're only, like, the second pair of shoes I own.
I go shopping once every three years, you know, so these were kind a like a big deal for me.’
And that last SKY cover (’ WILD BOY!
Kiefer Sutherland — The Lost Boy Lets Rip’(May ‘88)?
’ Oh yeah, that's a funny picture,’he says cracking a smile.
’ That's the one where I look like I'm yelling or screaming or something, right?
The truth is that I have this slight problem with my jaw It gets sort of locked sometimes and I think in that picture I must have been trying to loosen it up.’
Sutherland doesn't resent people considering him mature for his age.
’ And anyway, it certainly isn't showing in my face yet,’he say’I think those are nice compliments.
I value the fact that people think I'm mature in my work.
I take it as seriously as I think it needs to be taken.
I mean acting isn't a cure for cancer or anything, but it is something I can potentially be very good at so I try and do my best, but my narrow-minded qualities do tend to come through on film sometimes.
’ It takes a lot of focus to do my work.
try and keep things very simple.
I don't like complex lines and intricate, tricky-dicky films.
I like things to be straightforward, almost black and white.
I think maybe that side of me gets mistaken for maturity.
But I can assure you I have my moments.
There are times when I regress totally.
Letting go is part of everyone's life and there have certainly been times when I have let go.
People say all sorts of things about me, they say I'm eccentric and off-centre but I try and ignore all that.’
What about Michael J Fox's comment.
’ Kiefer has that three-degrees off morphine thing happening for him…a bizarre energy’or Promised Land director Michael Hoffman, who said:’Kiefer wouldn't want to be normal.
For him, domesticity has a strange kind of flamboyance’?
Kiefer shrugs.
’ I don't think I'm particularly eccentric.
There's a part of me that would like to be very cocky and self-assured.
But every so often I go a bit crazy and hit a wall or go out and start drinking, but that sort of thing doesn't worry me very much.
I don't take much notice of what people say about me.
I don't think I have any really strange habits.’
Kiefer Sutherland was born on September 18, 1966, in St Marys Hospital, London (where his father actor Donald Sutherland, was working at the time).
’ I have a Canadian passport, a British birth certificate and an American green card,’he says.
After moving to Beverly Hills his parents split up when Kiefer was only four years old.
Living with his mother Kiefer stayed in Los Angeles for a few years before moving back to Bridgewater Canada.
After leaving school he left home for Toronto and then on to New York, where he attended theatre school.
’ I found it really pushy and very self-indulgent,’he says.
’ They say to you that the way to become a really good actor is to tell them everything about yourself, tell them all your fears and insecurities.
Let everything out into the open and then let them hurt you with it.
That kind of evil theatre crap is really offensive.
Ever since I left theatre school I've done my best to get away from all that sort of thing.’
He shifted to the West Coast and Los Angeles at 16, sleeping rough on the beach or in his car to save dollars.
’ It really wasn't that bad.
In fact, I don't know an actor who wasn't actually brought up in LA and who hasn't spent a few nights on the beach.
It was a good time really.
We used to party and have fun.
I remember one morning some friends of mine were fast asleep on the beach when a tractor drove along to rake up the sand.
It drove right over them, pressing their heads about three feet into the sand.
The guy said it didn't do either of them any serious damage, but they had really bad headaches afterwards.
’ People might think it's odd that I have this rich, famous dad and still end up sleeping rough.
Well, for one thing, he didn't know about it and I had made a conscious decision that if I was ever to be (he nearly says’ become someone’).
No, I had decided that whatever I washoping to do, I was going to do on my own so if anyone was going to be proud of me they were going to be proud of me for legitimate reasons.
’ Is my father proud of me?
Well, I don't actually know if he's proud of my work, but he's certainly proud of me as a person if that makes any sense.’
But if Sutherland sounds distant and indifferent to his father —’ We see each other very rarely’he insists — one has only to ask him to list his favourite Donald Sutherland movies to see a proud and admiring son.
’ I think Don't Look Now is probably the finest Nic Roeg film and the finest film my father has been in.
I think Klute is a superb film and I think he (his father) set an acting style in that film that has been mimicked a great deal since.
think his comedy style in M*A*S*H was excellent…and it goes on.
After parts in At Close Range with Sean Penn and Spielberg's section of Amazing Stories, Kiefer's big break came with Stand By Me, in which he played’ an asshole’called Ace Merril.
He took the part because he needed the money desperately.
’ I knew it was a good script,’he recalls.
’ I had no idea it would do so well.
The character of Ace was the least likeable in the film, but I kinda enjoyed the challenge of that.
If the audience didn't yell,’ Awlright!’when the other kids finally stand up to him, then the part didn't serve its purpose in the movie.’
It was The Lost Boys, a lashing tongue-in-cheek tale of small town, rock’ n’roll vampires who image-wise, at least, owed more to Guns N' Roses than Vincent Price, that brought Kiefer Sutherland into the movie worlds big league.
Gangs were formed in honour of the film.
’ They would have formed anyway,’says Sutherland who plays David, the leader of the teen vamps, with Billy Idol hair and chiselled cheekbones.
’ There was even some guy in Minnesota or Detroit or somewhere who killed a load of people and they started to call them the Lost Boy Murders, but I didn't take too much notice of it all.
Those things would happen anyway.
A film like The Lost Boys just gives a suitable title, something to hook on to.’
The Lost Boys also made Sutherland into one of the years less likely sex-symbols.
’ Sex symbol?
Are you serious?’ he chokes.
’ I never get letters from girls or anything.
They never phone and ask for dates.
Nobody walks up to me in the street and says,’ God, I think you're really sexy.’
’ I just get guys saying,’Hey man, I love that film where you bit that guys neck and then you shot him in the head and his brains went spilling all over your face.
That was really cool’.’
This brief period of anecdotal joviality over with, Sutherland goes back into serious actor mode.
’ I think the reason why The Lost Boys was so successful was because a lot of people can relate to someone like David.
He may seem wild and way out but, you know, peoples inner feelings are not all that different,’ he says pensively.
’ You have very similar motives in someone as charismatic as David as you do in the mute lad I played in Trapped In Silence.
An extremely aggressive person may suffer the same internal anguish as an extremely defensive person.’
After playing the gregarious cocaine fiend, Tad Allagash, in Bright Lights, Big City with his friend Michael J Fox (who is rumoured to have suggested him for the role), he began researching his part in Young Guns.
’ We had a wonderful time,’recalls Sutherland, whose part essentially involved living out all his Roy Rogers boyhood fantasies (ie, dressing up as a cowboy) with the likes of Charlie Sheen and Emilio Estevez.
’ We did six weeks of riding, six to eight hours in the saddle every day.
We did riding in groups, riding separately.
We had real cowboys teaching us how to use a gun although I've never felt the need to carry a gun um, I felt like a five year old with a pistol.
Yeah, it was fun, we played around.
My horse went down a couple of times when we were riding along a shallow river The hooves must've turned up the mud at the bottom and I'm sorry but no amount of expert preparation can help you keep cool when a 500lb horse goes down on you.
You forget everything you've been taught in a flash.
But working on that film made me think about my life.
Those people lived life for real.
Real life was survival, not just getting your taxes done on time.’
Future projects include a Canadian theatre production of Playboy Of The Western World, Flashback with Dennis Hopper and Renegades, a cop movie in which he stars alongside fellow young gun, Lou Diamond Phillips.
’ Renegades is a very aggressive film.
It has a very aggressive attitude and a very aggressive pace,’ says Sutherland.
’ It feels good to do a film with a pace like (snaps his fingers quickly) after doing small films.’
Small films?
’ Yeah, small in feel like Stand By Me and 1969 (out in May), sort of coming-of-age movies with a small, intimate feel to them.’
Perhaps Sutherland's life is like a’ small’movie.
Not for him the glitzy party animal networking of the Beverly Hills A-list.
He talks about’ having a wonderful family and two wonderful children’and how recent press coverage in Britain has defaced them slightly.
(For the record, he claims never to have met the girl linked with him in a recent Sunday supplement expose.)
He is financially comfortable but by no means ostentatious.
’ I spend most of my time working so most of my money goes in the bank for a rainy day or for my children's education.
I drive a truck, I enjoy skiing and camping and that's about it.
Most of the things I enjoy don't cost very much.’
At 22, he has shrugged off his brat-pack contemporaries by simply not behaving like a typical’ brat’.
Brats don't stay at home painting their kid's nursery pale peach.
Hollywood's slick public relations machine has produced a new improved model of a young movie star.
He doesn't take loads of drugs and sleep around and get his picture taken with other stars, but then again he doesn't make a point of not doing those things either — he's just a regular guy.
But at 22, can Kiefer Sutherland really be the stay-at-home family man he would have us believe?
Later that evening, the interview over several of Sutherland's rather uncomfortably-phrased quotes come flooding back.
’ Letting go is part of everyone's life and there have certainly been times when I have let go’…’
I've never felt the need to carry a gun’…’
I have my moments’
At one of Hollywood's more fashionable restaurants he is dining quietly with a friend.
’ Look, it's Kiefer Sutherland.
He's always here,’ someone says.
’ Boy that guy sure knows how to have a good time.
Did you see him in here last week?
He was completely loaded.’
Like any celebrity city, Los Angeles is rife with gossip and in Hollywood, anyone who gets’ completely loaded’is nota burping lager lout, just someone who drinks slightly more than you do.
But the next overheard bulletin was later endorsed by the TV news that same drizzly night.
’ Did you hear what happened to him this morning?
He was in court.
He was charged with reckless driving and having a pistol in his car They fined him $240 or something.
He's on probation for three years and he has to do 100 hours community service.
Can you believe it?’
Sometimes, is seems that even Hollywood is only human.
Talent: Sky's Race Starts Here
Lust in Space
Critics have drooled and dribbled over her out-of-this-world beauty and wide, spacey blue eyes, but now Kim Basinger is confounding them all by playing the title creature-from-another-planet in My Stepmother Is An Alien.
It's a weird galaxy-swap comedy, which requires the extra-terrestrial Basinger (like Daryl Hannah's mermaid in Splash) to capture the laughs with her innocence about adult human relationships.
She also has to wear a set of hideously long fingernails.
To make her alien believable, Basinger says she had to’ rape myself of everything I knew.
My character has been made exactly like a girl’.
This wacky space-chick might not be everybody's dream girl-who-fell-to-earth but at least it should allow Basinger to finally shake off the bruised sex-kitten image she's been saddled with ever since Mickey Rourke emptied his weekly grocery shopping all over her body in the designer sex-romp 9/2 Weeks.
’ People still come up to me on the streets all the time and ask the most personal kind of questions that you've ever heard in your life, like,’How could you do such-and such on screen?'
I just say,’ I act for a living’.’
Despite a former career as a top model, Basinger is notoriously insecure about her looks.
She is prone to pointing out to journalists that she has ugly hands (her assessment), says she grew up thinking she was plain and now is so embarrassed by her appearance on screen that she never sees her films unless she's forced to.
We've seen worse-looking aliens.
ANGELA HOLDEN Some time a- Shaun Brosnan developed an obsession with intricate 18th century garden statues.
Now the 27 year-old sculptor specialises In beautifully complex human and animal forms, steeped in classical influences and burnished or weathered to make them look as if they have several lifetimes of history behind them.
HOT METAL
They couldn't look more different from conventional modern sculptures — cold, remote shapes of shiny steel that clutter the entrance halls of Soho advertising agencies, while everyone tries to work out what on earth they are there for.
Brosnan, on the other hand, loves Greek, Roman and ancient Irish mythology, and likes to work with sheet lead,’ because It's so live and sensual.
I enjoy the battle to force it to do what I want’.
His epIc victory, a huge panel depicting the War Of The Roses, is on permanent display at London's Barbican Centre, while his individualistic collection of lead works — intricate horses, faces, torsos and fruit — also has a London showcase this month at the Rebecca Hossack Gallery.
And the big, lucrative commissions are beginning to roll in.
Brosnan has just been asked to adorn a Birmingham building with his burnished, living metal.
At the time of writing, though, he was waiting to make a start on it, being holed up in hospital with appendicitis.’ it's so inconvenient of him to get ill just now,’says his agent, only half-Joking.
ANGELA HOLDEN
Simon Allen is on a one-man mission to defrost stiff British theatre.
Like fellow-actor Kenneth Branagh, who also favours the DIY approach to drama, Allen has formed his own touring company, The Actors Ensemble Theatre.
But while the better-known Branagh champions a more traditional, British attitude to acting, Allen is a ferocious promoter of the technique that inspired Pacino, De Niro and a thousand sullen, italian-looking would-be Brandos — the Method.
Acting Up
Impressed by the Method masters' formidable screen and stage presence, Allen left fringe theatre for New York, where he studied at the famous Strasberg Institute (former pupils include Marilyn Monroe and Method's godfather Brando) and worked by night as a doorman at the fashionable club, Nell's,’ to pay the rent’.
Back in England, he's already planning an actors' agency and workshops, while his company performs two modern American plays, Hello Out There and PVT Wars, in theatres around the country this spring.
As for the moody magnetism Method actors devote all their energy trying to perfect, Allen can take it or leave it.
He's less interested in spending hours scowling sulky into his bedroom mirror and more fascinated by the rigorous training Method acting provides.
’ The thing that bothers me about English training is that although acting is as demanding as ballet or opera, dancers and singers work out every day.
Yet actors here think they can just sit around and wait for jobs.
American actors work on their craft while out of work.’
its a dilemma Allen himself shouldn't have to face too often in the future.
VIRGINIA GILCHRIST.
News
NET WORK NEWS
A Californian in Manchester Brix Smith (platinum blonde wife of Mark E) has been responsible for beaming a ray of pop sunshine on the dark world of pops fiery declaimers, The Fall.
Always more than a nepotistic afterthought, Brix had more musical input than The Fall could comfortably contain and now, after almost four years of intermittent solo action, she's finally made her own album (Spin This Web) with her own group Adult Net.
Though inspired by the spirit of 60s pop, Adult Net are dynamite in the 80s credibility stakes.
The players include ex-Smiths Andy O'Rourke and Mike Joyce and Blonde drummer Clem Burke.
So why is Brix making so little noise about her collaborators' credentials?
’ I'm using them because we work so well together not for their names.
The Adult Net is me.
I write everything and work my arse off and, while I'm very flattered they want to work with me, I'd just use someone else if they didn't.’
To stress the perverse modernity of her naive pop, the video for Brix's new single, Take Me, will probably feature clubland personality Leigh Bowery and avant-garde dancer Michael Clark, with Bodymap styling.
’ I wanted Bodymap to give me a unique style,’she says.
Brix Smith certainly means to keep up the progress:’ I've considered dyeing my hair brown to avoid being seen as another of today's toy blonde singers.’
SIMON WITTER
Mark Moore doesn't like being a pop star.
’ I've reached the stage where I feel like saying no more interviews,’says the man who is S'Xpress.
MOORE OR LESS
For a year now he's been trying to avoid packaged and drilled TV appearances, and enduring repetitive questions from bemused Europeans about sampling or acid house But he's still managed to have some fun.
’ I go out constantly,’be says-’People come up to you and say, ‘I loved your record, when's the next one coming out?'
It's good to know that people are genuinely into the music’
Moore has found his creativity hampered by his record company's commercial values.
They didn't like his original mix of the current single Hey Music Lover and he was told to commercialise it.
’ I can understand what they were doing,’he says’They were obviously thinking of me.
But at the same time I realise it means they're basically trying to control my music which I didn't expect’ As for taking him seriously, American composer Philip Glass offered to do a 12-inch remix of Hey Music Lover after Moore took him out for a night in the clubs.
And of the album, Original Soundtrack, released this week, Moore says:’ It's a clash of both commercial and underground music’.
Shop Front Thief!
The sparkling red BMW convertible screeches to a halt outside the designer menswear store and, after flicking through their Filofaxes, two well-dressed, well-spoken young men climb out and enter the shop.
The commission-hungry staff smell money and class, and the pair are welcomed with open arms.
On every floor the two ex-public schoolboys are helped into Armani suits, Ralph Lauren sweaters and Pierre Cardin shirts before leaving without a purchase.
But one store detective isn't totally satisfied.
Years of experience have left him with nagging doubts about the seemingly perfect customers.
He takes the cars registration number and calls the police.
Later that day, a search of the vehicle confirms the store detectives suspicions.
In the boot, police discover many of the clothes the pair tried on (’ Gosh, officer I don't know how they got there,’says one), and their bulging Filofaxes contain lists of past shoplifting conquests and future targets.
For James Tranter 28, a wealthy interior designed and 27-year-old Kevin Swan, a successful, equally wealthy jazz musician, it's the end of a long orgy of theft throughout London's top stores, including Jaeger, Austin Reed and Blazer
The pair are just two of a new breed of shoplifters: toffs with money to spend but who want something for nothing, a million miles from the normal image of hard-up old ladies slipping a couple of tins of food into their shopping bags.
Shop assistants wouldn't dream of suspecting them, with their designer clothes and posh accents, of palming the expensive clothes on display.
Instead they look out for the loudmouths in jeans and trainers.
Now they are having to change their attitude as more and more public school kids rifle shops in London's Kings Road and South Molton Street for the best in designer gear Because of their rich clientele, the shops have not previously used the tags and electronic security systems used in high street stores to protect themselves against the £1.5 billion-worth of goods lost through shoplifting each year But designer clothes are attracting designer thieves.
Nicola is one.
At just 17 she is privileged to have her own flat and sports car both courtesy of her celebrity father who also provides her with £200 per week pocket money.
A brief phone call to Daddy would allow her to purchase complete outfits from any top London store — but Nicola prefers to steal them.
’ It gives you such a buzz leaving a classy shop with a £500 jacket under your coat,’she says.
’ Nobody expects it from a well-dressed, well-spoken girl, especially in designer shops.
But if you look behind the mirror in Harrods's designer department changing rooms there are piles of security tags.
They're such a cinch to prise off, and the clothes are only slightly damaged.
In stores like Harvey Nichols and Joseph they rarely use tags, which is even better Everyone I know nicks from shops.
To Hazel Willis, manageress of Boy, in the Kings Road, Nicola would be one of the gang of regular shoplifters she refers to as the’ Chelsea groupies’.
’ They go around in gangs dressed as upmarket Brosettes, but they're so stupid.
You often catch them trying to steal right before your eyes,’ she says.
’ They go into the changing rooms with two garments and come out with just one.
When you stop them, they act all stupid, go back in the changing rooms, pull up their jackets and say,’ Oh, there it is, I must have left it on by mistake.’
’ We don't use tags, but we try to make it as difficult as possible for people to steal by keeping a close eye on them.
They still try though.
If they know they're being watched, they try to get clever by splitting up.
Some start complaining about staff harassment while the others are trying to nick stuff from the other end of the shop.’
Lunchtime shoplifting was a regular activity among many of the 600 girls at the £700-per-term private school in central London that Liz, now 22, attended.
Her own sticky fingers lifted make-up, jewellery and soft toys from various market stalls, but such humble exploits paled into insignificance alongside those of three others in the sixth-form.
’ They always went out together with the sole intention of stealing as many clothes as they could,’she says.
’ It was just a game to them.
They just wanted the thrill.
They could have afforded to buy the stuff if they had wanted to — their parents were all loaded — but school was so boring, it was the only way to liven things up.
Everyone in the school knew — only the teachers were kept in the dark.’
The three used to compete with each other to see who could steal the best clothes or who would take the biggest risk.
’ One of them once said the only thing that came close to giving her the same thrill she got from shoplifting was having sex in a public place — you know it's wrong and you might be caught, but it feels great,’adds Liz.
’ I don't think anyone just starts stealing, it's something you work your way up to.
These girls were the ones who were always getting put in detention, never did any homework, smoked dope at 11 and started having sex at 14 — shoplifting was just another phase for them to go through.’
The terrible trio eventually got caught and were expelled.
’ I've lost touch with all but one,’says Liz.
’ Last time I saw her she was working in a shop.’
Midas, in Sloane Square, sells exclusive designer fashionwear making it an obvious target for jet-set shoplifters looking for the ultimate bargain.
’ We take all the obvious precautions security tags, chaining up the leather, keeping staff vigilant but at the end of the day, it's impossible to be 100 per cent secure.
I challenge any shop to be,’ says owner Michael Turner
’ We do get a number of public schoolgirl types doing it, and I think it's pretty sick.
I believe the professional thieves are more ethical at least they're stealing for a practical reason, not just for kicks.
’ They're in here all the time looking through the clothes and you know exactly what's on their minds.
They're waiting for that split second when all the backs are turned so they can slip a jacket or jumper in a bag and walk out of the shop.’
Losses eventually led Midas to introduce security tagging systems, but Turner knows experienced lifters are well aware of how to get around such systems.
Its a cat and mouse game.
They want to steal; you want to stop them.
The more security you have, the more of a challenge it is for them and the more of a thrill they get if they get away with it.
’ We know most of the shoplifters who come in here, including the wild children.
They'll come in, look around, then if things get too hot leave really quickly.
They know they won't get lucky so they come back later.
How do you stop them?
I wish I knew.’
Andy is a store detective at a major women's clothes store in north London.
’ There was one regular customer awe spoken girl who was enormously fat, quite well-to-do — who used to come in the shop a couple of times each week flaunting her jewellery and expensive hairdos.
’ We all got to know her quite well and used to ignore her she'd just come in, browse around, buy a couple of things and go.
But one day as she was leaving, the alarm for one of the security tags went off.
’ We stopped her and took her into the back room where we found she wasn't fat at all.
She was in fact very thin but had this huge wire frame around her’ It turned out that she'd been coming in a couple of times a week, stealing hundreds of pounds worth of clothes, hanging them on her frame then walking out.
We only caught her because she'd forgotten to take off one of the tags.’
Liz Watts is regional manager of Group 4 Retail Security.
With 20 years experience in the retail business, she has come across all sorts of shoplifters, from down and outs to light-fingered public schoolgirls, and despises them all.
’ I don't actually think that anybody needs to steal.
I've never come across anyone who was so desperate that they really needed the things they took.
People who say they're hungry never go after a tin of beans, they always want smoked salmon,’ she says.
Store detectives undergo extensive training routines which include role playing and watching videos of mock incidents.
They are taught to look for the common signs of preparation that precede offences.
’ We're not able to make an arrest unless we actually see the act of theft.
Even if someone else comes up to us and tips us off about a possible shoplifter we can only act if we see the person steal again,’ she adds.
’ The chances of walking around a corner and seeing someone stealing something are very slim.
Instead, a store detective will look for suspicious actions and then try to put off the would-be thief by staring them out and making their presence felt.
’ It's more satisfying to make an arrest but it's more practical to put someone off because while you're in the back room charging someone, other shoplifters are having a field day in the store.’
Liz knows all the common tricks, including poachers' macs, parcels with false bottoms and using a store's own carrier bag, and ensures that her detectives are fully aware of what to look out for’ It's a question of common sense and instinct.
Most shoplifters give themselves away by constantly looking around at cameras and cashiers or staying in the same area for a long time.
Others stand out from the crowd by being generally nervous.’
Store detectives work about seven hours a day, including breaks, and tend to earn from £8,000-£10,000 per year To avoid getting too well known, they have a patch of around 10 shops which they patrol on a rota basis.
Bob Lofters is in charge of security at Harrods, where the cost of theft runs into millions each year’ A lot of them are plain greedy.
They don't necessarily need to steal but like the excitement.
We know a lot of the regulars and they know us, so they play a game with the store detectives.
’ When they realise they're being watched, they'll move around the store from department to department, trying on different clothes, testing make-up and so on.
Then, after a while without having stolen anything, they'll leave, pausing only to stick two fingers up at the store detective on the way out,’ he says.
The Chelsea Groupies have become so well-known in the King's Road area that a new scheme, Shopwatch, has been introduced to combat them.
It operates by splitting the King's Road into 12 blocks, with a major store in each block in charge of all the others.
Its very much in the early stages at present,’ says Shandy, the scheme's co-ordinator and owner of the shop, Charcoal.
’ But what basically happens is, if we see someone acting suspiciously in our store, we phone up a store in the next block and warn them, giving a description of the suspect.
They'll then pass the information on so that eventually everyone in the road knows.
’ Most of these shoplifters work their way up or down the road so by warning all the shops in the area, we know who to keep an eye on.
We don't actually want to catch people shoplifting, our aim is to try to put them off doing it in the first place.’
Shopwatch only started at the beginning of the year but is already proving effective deterring some casual shoplifters.
Shandy now intends to expand the scheme to include more shops, and posters warning thieves they are being watched.
But in many cases, increased security measures simply lead to a greater thrill for the would-be shoplifters creating the opposite of the desired effect as thieves become more determined to steal.
Baroness Phillips is director of the Association For The Prevention Of Theft From Shops, a 9,000-strong unIted front against shoplifters.
She believes the solution lies in tougher court sentences and a resurgence of moral values.
’ My leftie grandchildren think I'm to the right of Genghis Khan, but I really believe that you have to show people you can't do this sort of thing and get away with it,’she says.
’ Too many people say they wouldn't shoplift because they might get caught.
That's a dreadful attitude to have.
You shouldn't shop-lift because it's wrong.
’ The people who do it even though they can afford it are the worst, but I am far more concerned about the victims — the shops than I am about the people who carry out the crime.
It's still theft, whoever takes the item.’
APTS are currently concentrating their campaign on schools, trying to deter youngsters from petty crime before they have a chance to start.
But due to their supposed’ higher class’of citizen, the independent schools may fail to hear Baroness Phlllips's gospel.
Psychiatrist Dr Gerald Silverman runs kleptomania therapy groups (for people who cannot control their desires to steal), and claims most of his patients shoplift due to emotional worries or personal problems.
He is quick to defend the actions of the few compulsive thieves who, he says, are mentally ill.
’ The vast number of shoplifters are selfish, hard-up or just pathetic, but there are some who really cannot help themselves,’he says.
Few of these fall into the category of rich kids turning to crime just for kicks, but some believe they are equally blameless.
A few years ago, 16 boys from a school in Somerset were arrested after a day-trip to Taunton turned into a shoplifting spree.
’ It's a sad reflection of society nowadays,’said the school's headmaster’We blame children for a lot of things these days, but most of it is forced on them by the pressures of modern living.’
These observations are backed up by those of Tina, a 15-year-old born in Camden but now living in Gerrard's Cross, a small, affluent town 25 miles from London.
It's an area in the wake of the tide of drink, drugs and rural violence that is sweeping the country, and one where genuine thrills are hard to come by — legally at least.
’ I don't nick stuff myself, but I know a few people who do.
They're usually the ones who could afford the clothes if they wanted to buy them,’ says Tina.
’ They use the excuse that the shops, especially the ones selling really expensive designer gear are rich enough to be able to afford to lose a few clothes.
’ If they have a party to go to, they'll steal something to wear and if you ask them where all the new clothes are coming from, they just remind you how rich they are,’she adds.
’ They never have any trouble with their parents most of them are too wrapped up in their work and their money to take an interest in what their children are doing anyway.
I know one boy who was on drugs for a year before his parents found out.’
Cognito, the women's fashion chain, recently fitted an electronic tagging system to combat a chronic shoplifting problem at its store in Windsor.
’ We had one month when we were losing thousands of pounds worth of clothes each week,’says branch manager Sue Turner’It was strange because we never caught anyone.
But since we installed the system, it's dropped off by about three per cent.
’ That may not sound like much, but when you're selling suits at £900 and dresses at £2,000, losing just one or two items can really eat into your profits.
The cost of installing a system is easily justified.’
That cost, according to Brian Foster of Securitag, a company which installs security systems, varies from £2,000 to £60,000 depending on the size of the store, but Foster admits it is not so much ofa cure for theft as a way of changing its focus.
’ The stores we install at are generally those having a shopping crisis, he says.
’ Once the systems go in, the thieves just move onto another until they take precautions.
It's not a problem that's ever going to go away.’
Fashion News
THINK TIGHT, think sharp, think as far away as possible from the recent loose flowing, Eastern hippy influences.
Follow the tracks of designer Pam Hob to a Wild West look or close-fit 60s-inspired clothes that shine with pure shape.
BELT UP With Marie Pisa Snow's collection of Western-style belts, hat bands, boot and guitar straps made from the finest matt black Rolls Royce car leather They've been collected from all over the world and have been wrapped around the waists of stars such as Tom Jones, David Bowie and Tina Turner's tour band.
Basic belts start at £45 and range up to £120 for wider creations.
For commissioned pieces contact Pisa bathers, PO Box 98, Dorking, Surrey RH4 3YG.
WEAR AND WHEN…
Track down fitness shops for staple items of dancewear that can be worn from morning to night.
Pineapple offer a versatile range of stretch cotton Lycra from scoop-neck leotards to high-waisted jodhpur-style trousers.
If there isn't a Pineapple near you, write to Pineapple Mail Order/ SKY Offer 7 Langley St, WC2 for a free copy of their mail order brochure.
WET LOOK.
Skim your body with WET's latest swimwear collection.
In paneled flashes of bright green, slick black or soft sugar pink paneled skirt are approximately £40 each from Jones, 13 Floral St, WC2.
FRENCH DRESSING.
Watch out for Val Piriou, a young French designer who came to England just a few years ago unable to speak English.
Now she's successfully selling her collection of beautiful crochet lace and jersey bodys, clinging high-wasted trousers with white stitching emphasising seam panelling, high-wasted skirts and figure-hugging catsuits.
These shapely shorts cost £62 from Academy, Newburgh St, W1; Review, King's Road, SW3; chi Ni San, Glasgow; and Koko, Garrick St, WC2.
They're worn here with a salmon pink knitted body by the new French company, bar & bar at 53 Monmouth St, WC2.
Check out their brilliant selection from designers Emilio Cavallini, Soap Studio and Raoul Genzi.
They specialise in interesting shirts as well as underwear which started as an experiment but became their best selling items.
bar & bar say their aim is to’ present the best of the latest styles, keeping a realistic price structure and to lead their customer through the adventure called fashion’!
FELINE GOOD.
The ultimate Cat Woman figure looks brilliant in slim-fitting Lycra and body-flattering leather You should not be waif-like and skinny but strong, taut and well formed.
Get working on a fitness programme to suit you — it will alleviate that post-winter sluggish feeling too.
The Mind Warp
They can just plug into a mind gym instead.
The benefits, like those of meditation, are said to be stress reduction, improved memory, increased creativity, expanded awareness and better problem-solving.
There is even a portable unit for home use by people who are too busy to come to the Centre.
It's called a Relaxman and comes complete with flashing goggles, tape and a leaflet called The Relaxman Experience.
Everything in the new age seems to be’ an experience’.
In the future we won't be able to just do things, we'll have to experience them all the time.
Zerrer like her assistant Margo, who is busying herself about the Centre supervising clients as they get into their goggles, turns out to be, unsurprisingly, a new age devotee, though she cringes at the mention of the words.
’ I hate that term,’she says above the screeching parrots.
’ I just hate categories and sometimes new age can connotate airy-fairy, ridiculous things, whereas the synchro-energiser is based on scientific research.’
What airy-fairy, ridiculous things?
’ I wouldn't want to point the finger’'
However when pressed, Zerrer turns out to believe, like other new agers, that the Age of Aquarius is upon us.
New agers suffer from all sorts of new syndromes like’ earth anxiety’which means basically that, like anyone with any common sense, they've noticed that the planet is being severely abused.
But unlike a lot of us who think it will be severely abused for a good many years to come, new agers are optimistic.
They believe that since the Age of Aquarius started, people are beginning to be a lot nicer to each other a lot more responsible, caring and understanding.
’ The world's changing,’says Zerrer.
’ Its affecting everyone.
People are becoming responsible for their own happiness and health, and for what's happening to the planet.’
’ It's the age of enlightenment so people are getting enlightened.
They're becoming more aware.
Some people are realising that there's a lot more to life than paying your rent and having your American Express card,’ says Margo, conveniently forgetting about the discreet stickers near the cash desk encouraging clients to pay by American Express and Mastercharge.
New agers are a little vague about how the Age of Aquarius actually happened, but a few years ago, at the end of the selfish age of Pisces, there was, according to Margo,’ a lot of planetary alignment’.
In the summer of ‘86 there was something called the Harmonic Convergence, which was supposed to usher in the Age of Aquarius — people who were going on about it back in the 60s jumped the gun by about 20 years.
A couple of summers back, a lot of new age disciples rushed off to remote mountain tops to await a momentous signal to occur They waited and waited for something exciting to happen.
Nothing did.
’ Do you want’Ocean’or’Rainforest’?’
Margo is preparing the tapes for my mind workout.
’ Rainforest’turns out to be the squawking tropical bird noise already playing in the Centre, so I settle for the crashing waves and seagull cries of’Ocean’.
For good measure, Margo throws in some Mozart and something called the Gyuto Monks, described as a Buddhist Tantric choir whatever that is.
’ Those guys are really intense,’says Margo.
’ Whenever I hear them I feel real uplifted.’
Zerrer tells me that the mind gym relaxes you in a very deep way —’ Like an advanced set of tribal drums’.
This is another tendency of new agers.
They automatically think anything ethnic is good.
On the wall of the Centre is a huge golden sculpture which looks faintly like an Inca mask.
Books on Buddhism line the walls and, when I lie down on my futon, I am covered with an ethnic rug of indeterminate origins.
It could be Mexican or American-Indian, who knows?
But the brain gym itself is an undeniably pleasant experience.
The music and flashing lights move in time, producing a moving blur of colours and patterns that dissolve and fade into each other But the Gyuto monks were a bit of a bore with their constant thudding chants of ‘ohhm'.
During one ceaseless chant I was tempted to look at my watch, but didn't dare raise my arm since this was the signal to stop the synchro-energiser
But after a while the brain gym produces a sense of slipping away, while flashing colours play like a beautiful slow-motion firework display before your eyes.
At one point I felt as if I was drifting slowly across a huge, vivid moviescreen, so large I couldn't see its edges.
A 45-minute session makes you feel relaxed and slightly dazed, but not so severely that you can't go shopping afterwards.
I also tried the Graham Potentialiser, which looks like an expensive piece of Italian designer furniture.
It rocks you backwards and forwards and is supposed to stimulate the endorphins in your brain, helping to boost thinking power It didn't — but then I was only on it for about 10 minutes before I started feeling sick.
Bizarre though the synchro-energy system might sound, it's touched a raw nerve among jaded New Yorkers worn out by a decade of hard, hyped-up materialistic living.
All sorts of people come through the Centre's doors.
’ I get a lot of very serious, professional-looking businessmen in here who admit to meditating,’says Zerrer
In California, New Orleans, San Francisco and a dozen centres all over the States, tranquility-seekers are zapping stress by plugging in to brain gyms.
It can't be long before they cross the Atlantic as the children of the 90s start replacing designer bodies with designer minds.
And even the most hardened cynic must agree that lying down with your eyes closed listening to music is a lot more appealing than grunting and straining over a set of weights in your local sports centre.
The Prat Who calls Himself The Hit Man
The prat that calls himself the Hitman is how Stock Aitken Waterman's Pete Waterman describes himself.
It's an admission that a 42-year-old who throws himself around manically shouting,’ Go on kid, give it some of that’shouldn't be taken that seriously.
But his high-tack dance programme The Hitman and Her has become a kitsch saturday night institution.
Simon Witter reports.
Inside Nottingham's Ritzy club in the middle of the afternoon TV production assistants are busy organising blindfolds for a new game they've just dreamt up called’ Kiss, Cuddle And Feel’for the evening's show.
It will involve a blindfolded boy trying to identify his girlfriend in a line-up by feeling certain parts of the unfortunate females' anatomies.
Big laughs are expected, but while some of the production team look unconvinced, presenter and music biz big shot Pete Waterman's attention has already wandered.
’ Did you know’, he asks no one in particular,’that women outnumber men six-to-one in Nottingham?
You should see the foocking croompet we get in this place!’
This is the wild and tasteless world of The Hitman And Her, the vibrantly garish, unashamedly downmarket youth TV programme that is storming up the ratings chart with its gloriously OTT presentation of provincial culture.
The success of The Hitman And Her has been extraordinary.
Launched in September with no publicity, one of the worst time slots imaginable — one or four o'clock on a Sunday morning (depending on which TV region you're in)— and what looks like the lowest budget in TV, it nevertheless achieved a ratings increase from 300,000 to 1.6 million in it's first four months and, according to Granada TV insiders, it's guaranteed to run’ almost indefinitely’.
Considering the way TV screens have been awash with wistful trendy youth programmes, the popularity of such a brazenly tacky show isn't surprising.
The director, ex-Etonian Ludo Graham, says The Hitman And Her is’ completely opposite to Def II.
It's about real people.’
But the shows triumph has been its appeal not just to the unaddressed, naff masses, but also to a fashionable audience of discerning clubbers who never set foot in the kind of clubs the programme broadcasts from, and to the extremist yuppie subgroup that reads both the Sunday Times and the Sunday Sport.
They may watch it knowingly as a piece of kitsch, but the point is that they are watching it.
’ People tell me they hate it but its compulsive viewing,’says Pete Waterman, the man who conceived the show.
’ And that's almost the way I planned it.
If I get home at 12.30 I probably won't want to go down a club, but I'll pull a beer out of the fridge, sit down and have a laugh at everybody else making pillocks of themselves, including the prat who calls him self the Hitman.
We tried to play down the tackiness, but it didn't work.
The more obnoxious I am, the more people enjoy the joke.
Waterman was a Mecca DJ for 16 years — he worked the Leeds Locarno with Jimmy Save in 1965 — and The Hitman And Her is broadcast from a variety of Mecca venues such as Mr Smith's in Warrington and Sheffield, the Blackpool Palace, the Ritzy in Nottingham and the Leeds Locarno with a band doing a PA, a few videos and a lot of dancing.
Pete introduces the records, rants about major record companies and provides a sarcastic, leering commentary of the night's events, while co-presenter Michaela Strachan whips the crowd up with her boundless high spirits and comperes the competitions’ Pass The Mic’(an insult to Karaoke, where punters sing along to classic hits until the crowd can stand no more, and shout’Pass The Mic!’),
’ Showing Out’(a feast of ludicrous dancing) and the odd fashion show.
The graphics wouldn't look out of place on Play School, with the surreal instruction to’ Keep On Dancing!’(in lurid bouncing multi-coloured letters) at the fade-out before each ad break.
Sadly, there turns out to be a sound explanation for this instruction it's aimed at the club audience, who watch the show as it happens on banks of TV monitors.
The club night is very much part of’ talking DJ’dance culture, with Pete winding the audience up, making dedications over the PA and observations that would make all but the most committed sexist cringe’Hello!
She's almost wearing a dress’,’ Go on kid!
Give it some of that' or’ We've got Sabrina on next weeks show, and you don't get many of them to the pound, eh boys?’
And the Hitman's catchphrase,’ BE AVE!’
The atmosphere in the club is light and friendly, but the relish with which Pete and Michaela rib their often truly appalling competition entrants suggests that public humiliation is a mainstay of the programme.
’ Absolutely,’Pete agrees.
’ But the public want that.
We get people on the programme singing and dancing so badly it's painful, but they come back the next week and tell us that everyone's stopping them in the streets to congratulate them, not slag them off.’
In January The Hitman attempted to improve its network cred with a broadcast from the Hacienda in Manchester The show was a flop.
The plan was for Pete and Michaela to film a normal Hacienda night fly-on-the-wall-style, with local hero Mike Pickering as the DJ.
The shoot was supposed to be a secret, but word got out and Hitman regulars travelled down to Manchester Two thousand couldn't get into the club, and tension mounted between trendy regulars (locked out of their own club) and the Hitman's handbag brigade (shut out of their programme).
Police and ambulances turned up to see what was going on, but six bouncers couldn't prevent the metal entrance shutters from being wrecked, while inside Michaela was getting a barrage of abuse.
Afterwards viewers sent a deluge of complaints about how boring the show was and asking them never to return to the Hacienda.
The programme's late time slot permits not only the good-natured lairiness, but also a fairly progressive play list policy, in many ways the opposite of Top Of The Hops in its championing of the unreleased and overlooked.
Hits are broken on the show and bands that haven't yet got a record deal are often booked to appear As a result of heavy plugging on The Hitman And Her, Virgin gave Sandra's Everlasting Love a UK release, but as soon as it went top 40 the programme dropped it, claiming it was not about pop hits.
Nowadays The Hitman And Her is filmed’ as live’, which means there's all the panic and concentration of a live show, but they don't actually broadcast it until the following week, as a safeguard against major disasters.
The first three shows last September really were filmed live, and the temperature in the first club reached 152°F scrambling the digital equipments programming, so that Matt Bianco found themselves miming to a completely different tune.
’ We were riding on the seat of our pants,’
Pete remembers.
’ Anybody could've gone outside and pulled a plug out of the wall and the show would've been off the air A lot of people probably wish they had.’
Around 5pm Michaela arrives at The Ritzy by car from London.
She'd set off at 2pm from TV-am, where she'd been working since 8am on The Wide Awake Club.
It'll be after 2am before she bunks down in The Hitman coach on the way back to London.
Pete arrives, and half-an-hour later the equipment's ready for a quick rehearsal.
The two presenters run through the sequence of events and camera angles, practising a few boisterous' announcements and listening to snatches of some of the show's records.
He is down-to-earth and approachable — constantly entertaining the crew.
His perception of the show is astute and, in contrast to some of his public pronouncements on the music business, refreshingly unassuming.
He couldn't care less that very few viewers take his programme seriously, regaling us with tales of the terrible people they've featured.
’ Once we had this dance troupe on called Grand Slam, who appeared in leather G-strings and bras, despite the fact that all four of them were at least two stone overweight.
I begged them to cover themselves up, but they wouldn't.
When they came out the club went mad, and they honestly believed that the crowd thought they were good.’
Katie, the researcher who' later have to find contestants for all the competitions, asks Pete about the new game, Kiss, Cuddle And Feel.
’ The girls should be a real laugh,’he advises.
’ A bit tacky…but not too pissed.’
Pete's talk drifts towards dance music, an obvious passion, and countless interviews where he raged against people who view pop music as an art form.
’ Music isn't art,’he says.
’ It's for enjoyment, and anyone who says it's art is in the wrong business.
Music has always been written for a purpose, be it a wedding, a funeral or a birth, and people have always been paid for it.
Mozart, Beethoven and Handel all got paid.’
Is a Van Gogh painting not art because it fetches millions at Sotheby's?
’ Van Gogh died penniless because nobody bought his paintings — they didn't think he was very good at the time.
I've been very poor, I've cleaned toilets for Mecca, I've slept on Euston station, and I never want to be like that again.
I don't want to go down in history as a great songwriter because I died penniless.
I'd rather be remembered as a capitalist who left his children something.’
Pete's theory that pop music is just three minutes of disposable plastic makes a refreshing change from the self-inflated rubbish so many musicians are wont to spout, but isn't his view of music as a commercial product utterly cynical?
’ Why?
If you can use your talents not to stay poor you should.
Ten City have had three massive club hits without selling any records, and now they've got a chart hit.
Do you say they've sold out and stop playing them?
No, you say thank God they've finally got the hit they deserve.’
Pete Waterman's refusal to suppress his opinions has on occasion exposed him to ridicule as in the sampling storm but on the whole he appears confident and competent, clear about what he wants.
’ I think people find me obnoxious because I won't admit that I secretly loathe Kyle Minogue and Jason Donovan, but I really do think they're great artists — if I didn't I'd be the biggest hypocrite in the world.
I'm only in this business for my own enjoyment, yet because we've been successful and made a lot of money people automatically assume I'm a raving Conservative and resent.my criticisms.
’ I wish someone else would take on the major record companies, but nobody does, and I'm not prepared to sit back and watch them stifle British music.
I don't mean that in a nationalistic way.
In that Mel and Kim song we wrote’ We're a dancing nation’, and that's what the British are.
’ British pop evolved from R&B dance culture, but while the working classes were coming home from the factory and putting on some Motown, the people who now run record companies were at university listening to Genesis or Peter Frampton or whatever — their only contact with pop culture was Gary Glitter or Sweet.
I wish PWL had far more competition, but when it comes to pop music the major labels just don't understand it.’
Pete reputedly gets paid £500 for his work on The Hitman And Her, and he claims he loses money on the programme.
An odd job for a money-conscious millionaire?
’ I do this for selfish reasons.
Firstly because I hate not working and I haven't worked as a club DJ for eight years, so this was a way back in.
Secondly, it's very important for me, as the head of a record company, to research what's going down well on the dancefloor’
Pete Waterman is larger than life.
As a child he was a train spotter; now he owns a class 25 diesel that is active on a line not far from his home in Merseyside.
He claims he learnt to read only six years ago.
He also collects Ferraris, breeds rainbow carp in a pond behind his house, and has a fish farm in Japan.
’ Rick Astley introduced me to these giant goldfish and I've become totally hooked.
Ten years from now I'm gonna be 52, and I'm not going to be able to go down the Hacienda without looking a complete prat.
I'd like to be able to spend some time in Japan, which I find very beautiful and relaxing.’
Back at the Ritzy queues are forming around the block, and one of the production team has spotted a pair of diehard Hitman fans in the queue.
Franky and Mark are from Banks near Southport.
They first went to The Hitman in Blackpool after seeing one on TV and have since been to at least 10 of the shows.
Nowadays they get in free and are given VIP passes (access to all areas), but tonight the five mates with whom they've driven the 150 miles from Southport have all been refused entry by the Ritzy's management for being under 20.
Franky is a DJ himself and a fan of Pete's Hitman radio show — the biggest programme on Liverpool's Radio City — and Mark just enjoys the clubbing event that is The Hitman And Her.
’ I like the laugh that everyone's having.
We've danced on stage with Pete and Michaela and we got to meet Aswad.’
The Ritzy fills up in a flash, and Katie the researcher has soon found all the contestants for tonight's show.
’ These people are willing to do it at the beginning of the night when they're sober’she says.
’ What worries me is what they'll get up to by the time we get to the competitions, and they're a bit bevvied.’
Michaela has been given a minder since the Hacienda.
’ Some clubs are okay for walkabouts, but others aren't,’she says.
’ Most of the guys are quite tiddled, and when you're on the screen all they want is to get their hands in your knickers and pinch your bum.
I get really fed up with it, so now I've insisted on having a bodyguard with me.’
Showing Out and Pass The Mic yield some surprisingly good dancers and singers, but the choice of Pass The Mic winner suggests that breast size is the judges' main criterion.
’ Are they deaf?’screams Pete, throwing the crowd an incredulous look.
One girl stood out as by far the best singer The best-endowed girl won.
As the audience are too preoccupied to buy any drinks, the barman and five barmaids dance on the bar throughout.
When it's all over around 2am, the crew celebrate with a drink or five upstairs, and Michaela tells us she's just signed a record deal with London Records.
Her singing voice is far more impressive than her talking voice (she's been to musical theatre college), and the songs will be pure pop —’ Let's be honest, that's my audience,’she says.
’ I won't be working with Pete.
I've recorded a lot of stuff with song writers whose work I like, but I'll probably do a cover version as my first single because, as a TV presented I'm bound to get a lot of flak at first.’
After being involved with The Hitman, a show that celebrates its own lightweight tackiness, establishing her credibility as an artist could be a problem.
’ Not at all!
I don't have any pretensions, and I get really sick of artists who're so flippin' trendy that they don't have fun.’
Pete Waterman is making animated conversation at the bar After trying unsuccessfully to blackmail him with photographs of his dancing, we part company, wondering aloud if he would tart the programme up were Granada to come up with the big bucks.
’ No!’he insists,’I'd leave.
We're already so far ahead of our expected ratings that they keep suggesting we move it to an earlier time, but I won't let them.
It can't become a pop show, it has to stay the way it is.
People come home and switch on the telly, then they either hate it and switch off again, or they think,’ It's that bad, I'll watch it’.’
Techno Logical
in the heart of the dying motor city of Detroit, Kevin Saunderson is locked away in his downtown apartment creating a fresh form of electro house.
Called techno, it's the most vibrant dance sound of the late 80s.
Saunderson and singer Paris Grey are Inner City, who filled dancefloors across Europe with the hits Big Fun and Good Life.
Angela holden met them in Detroit.
The interior of Kevin Saunderson's apartment in industrial, decaying, downtown Detroit is much like any apartment belonging to a young and moderately wealthy man.
There is the standard, spacious, minimally-furnished living room, tastefully carpeted in subdued oatmeal and dominated by a long sofa and oversized TV.
There is a smaller bedroom and a tiny, suspiciously tidy kitchen, which looks as if it is not often used.
But there is one feature that sets it apart.
Leading off the living room is another room: a white-painted, glass-panelled space that looks like a control room at the Houston Space Centre.
Its walls are banked head-high with electronic equipment, dominated by a single computer screen.
At the top of the screen blinks the word’ menu’and beneath this list winks out in blinding-white neon letters on the black display- keyboards, horns, endless types of drums.
Any instrument you could ever need to make a house record is here inside the computer — yours at the touch of a button.
Saunderson wanders in, an amiable, bulky figure in stocking feet, sipping cinnamon tea.
He touches a couple of knobs, presses a button and Inner City's next, still unfinished, single crashes into life.
It sounds good — like a heavier club mix of the familiar Inner City sound.
’ Sorry it's a bit rough,’says Saunderson.
Then he grins.
’ I've still to add the commercial bits.’
Then, when the other half of Inner City, singer Paris Gray, has added her customary powerful vocals, the result will be an upbeat, impossible-to-stop-humming, accessible house single to follow the success of the pair's first single, Big Fun, and their recent top five hit, God Life.
Of course, the glass-panelled room isn't Saunderson's studio — that's next door.
Part of the inconspicuous red-brick building runs the length of a quiet, deserted side street.
From the outside it looks uninhabited facing on to the icy, wind-ravaged sidewalks as anonymously as any of the disused warehouse and industrial buildings that litter the once-thriving district.
Inside, it houses a basement studio, Saunderson's apartment and the apartments of his fellow producers and childhood friends Derrick May and Juan Atkins, who along with Saunderson are the pioneers of Detroit's new electronic house sound techno.
But even if Saunderson's apartment mixing-room is just a mini version of the real thing, it's comforting to note that the man behind Inner City — an increasingly sought-after producer called to work with everyone from Samantha Fox to the Wee Papa Girl Rappers — still composes songs if not in his bedroom, then in the next to it.
A few years ago Saunderson was a tele-communications student at the local East Michigan University.
He'd reluctantly given up his ambition to become a pro footballer —’ it didn't work out, basically, because of politics.
It's all a question of who you know’— and got a job as a DJ on a Detroit radio station on a show called Streetbeat.
His pal May and Atkins also deejayed on the show, playing an electric mix of house and European electronic music they'd got into in high school when all the other kids were listening to the Gap Band and Prince.
It wasn't the kind of thing that had ever been heard on Detroit radio before, but for a while it seemed to be going okay.
Then out of the blue, the radio station sacked them.
’ They said we were to ahead of or time,’say a Saunderson.
’ But that was a catalyst for me.
I brought a keyboard and an eight-track machine, and Juan and I set it up in my apartment on campus, even though we weren't supposed to play music loud.Then I made my first record, Triangle Of Love.
I suppose I started making records because, after being sacked from the radio, which is what every DJ dreams of, it seemed like there was nowhere for me to go.’
He hasn't looked back.
His brother, who worked in computers, came round and taught him how to use his equipment.
Then he set to work honing his own brand of precision engineering into countless dance records put out under the name Reese (short for Maurice, his middle name), Reese and Santonio and KS Experience.
Inner City's first album will be out this month.
Later this spring, Saunderson will remix a track for Bros.
Inner City are the visible, commercial tip of Detroit's techno iceberg.
Influenced by Chicago house as well as the unlikely European sounds of Kraftwerk, Yello and Depeche Mode — Saunderson, May (who uses the names Mayday and Rythim Is Rythim) and the original techno-master Atkins (Cybortron and Model 500), created a music that was sparser, leaner and harsher than house.
It is full of eerie electronic crashing, a futuristic trance-like wall of sound that Saunderson airily sums up as,’ using electronic equipment with a lot of energy’.
Now techno has taken over the city.
Every night while the white kids queue up at the teen club Todd's, or the new romantic Taboo, the black kids flock to the Music Institute for a dose of blinding strobes and pure, hard techno.
Friday night at the Music Institute is an evening of futuristic hedonism that lasts, even with the no-alcohol policy at the bar, well into the next morning.
Saunderson, Atkins and May DJ of course, just as they produce local kids with talent at their studio and put out their records on the myriad of small labels they share between them.
As in the chaotic, early days of Motown — that other record company which once epitomised the sound of Detroit — being a success means being able to turn your hand to anything.
Saunderson says, not without a hint of bitterness:’ Its really wild now, they're playing all our old records on the radio.
But when we first started, we never had any support — nobody would play our music.
I couldn't understand why my own city couldn't back me.
We needed the support of DJs and radio stations, but they saw someone doing something different and wouldn't accept it.
There are a lot of people here who are afraid to take chances and do new things.
They wait till something gets hot and then jump on the bandwagon.’
If it was a struggle to establish techno at home, by comparison, other places took to Inner City immediately.
Over lunch in a Chinese restaurant in the Renaissance Centre — a huge tubular steel and glass shopping mall put up in an attempt to disguise Detroit's decaying heart — Paris Gray is recounting the countries she's visited in the past couple of months.
Most of Europe is on the list.
Gray picks at a salad as she talks:’ I did this one interview where I was eating a cheeseburger and this guy wrote all about the blob of ketchup oozing down my chin,’she says.
She is dressed in black; her favourite wide-brimmed black hat never leaves her head.
Inner City's singer has flown into Detroit to listen to the new single.
Tomorrow she'll fly back to her home in Chicago, write the vocals, then fly back to Detroit to record them.
To Gray, this constant flying is not as inconvenient as it sounds.
Her work might be in Detroit but her home, her life and her boyfriend Chris are rooted firmly in Chicago.
Until recently her job was there, too — for three years she worked as a shop assistant in the hosiery department of the massive Neiman Marcus store — but then the success of Inner City allowed her to leave.
Until recently she was still Shanna Jackson.
’ But I knew I had to get rid of that Jackson'.
People would have been going, ‘Are you a sister a cousin, or what?'’
Even now, though, she won't be moving to Detroit.
’ Chicago's bigger livelier with a larger club scene,’she says.
Before techno, most people would have agreed.
Almost any spirited teenager who lived in Detroit wanted to move to its bigger busier neighbour Now a lot of people would beg to differ that Chicago is more exciting; Saunderson would most probably be one of them.
But then Saunderson and Gray differ in many respects.
They are the classic odd couple.
He is laid-back, affable and easy-going; she is more outgoing and flamboyant, continuously talking and joking.
He grew up in New York listening to disco — McFadden And Whitehead, Evelyn Champagne King — then moved to the wealthy suburb of Belleville, 40 minutes out of Detroit, where he teamed up with May and Atkins and started listening to Kraftwerk.
She grew up in Chicago listening to Chaka Khan.
Now she likes Pebbles and Janet Jackson.
His mother is a former Supreme, who sang with the band in the very early days before they signed to Motown.
Now both his parents are in business.
Her father was a postmaster her mother owns a small dry-cleaning business.
She grew up with eight brothers,’ which was like having nine fathers really, including my real father They were so bossy’.
Saunderson left school to go to a nearby college, and immersed himself in the local house scene, deejaying and doing one-off parties.
Gray grew up singing in the gospel choir at the local church.
’ Baptist churches really teach you to holler and stomp,’she says.
At 18 she moved to the east coast to study music at the prestigious Berkeley College in Boston.
Her chosen instrument was voice.
She adores gospel and jazz.
’ I wasn't really interested in house.
Not until the last three years.
Even now I still prefer pop for listening.’
Saunderson is passionate about techno; ardent about defending it to critics who argue it is soulless.
He will say:’ If you adjust your ear to everything that is on the radio, then of course you're going to say it has no feeling.
But you have to sit back and realise that techno's something different from everything else you're hearing.
If you open your mind, then you see it really does have feeling.
Its music from the heart.’
She will say:’ Having been through music school, I've seen so many people who really play their instruments — I mean, they didn't just plug in and press a button.
I'm not putting that down because there's a lot of good music made like that.
I just have a lot of respect for someone who can pick up a piece of wood or metal and make music out of it.’
The pair met through a mutual friend, producer Terry’ Housemaster’Baldwin.
Gray began singing for Baldwin after her cousin — an avid Chicago house devotee who would occasionally drag Paris out to the city's hottest clubs — heard Baldwin was looking for a singer and gave him Gray's number.
Later, Saunderson heard her voice and got in touch.
’ Its just happened so fast,’says the former Shanna Jackson.
’ Some days people will call me’Paris’and I'm like,’Who?’
My mother still refuses to call me Paris.
She thinks it's disgusting.
But my job, that was the killer.
When Inner City were taking off, people would phone me at the store and ask for Paris.
And there was this one older lady that worked there who would always go,’ Who the hell is that?
We got no-one here called that…
And I'd be like,’ God, how embarrassing’
Derrick May is piloting Saunderson's new, but already dented, Mazda hazardously along the city's bleak freeways towards a late-night bar’ Detroit is a dying town, it's a shell,’he says.
’ There- massive unemployment, the whole thing makes me really sad.’
He has a point.
The techno studio complex belonging to May, Saunderson and Atkins is one of the few expanding enterprises in central Detroit.
The once-thriving motor industry has been hit by steady recession.
Even Motown has packed up and gone to California.
All that is left is Berry Gordy's huge white mansion, complete with acres of grounds and one recording studio.
It stands on West Boston Avenue, Detroit's most expensive residential area: a seven-mile stretch of impossibly huge houses.
Berry is, of course, long gone, off to the sun and surf of the West Coast.
Only a succession of lesser Gordy's live there now.
There is also Hitsville, the Motown museum, housed in the tiny two-storey house that became a 60s legend.
Now, with its white walls and dark blue window frames, it looks like a slightly drab, faded boutique in a quiet English market town.
There is a Michael Jackson doll in the window; on the window pane, in uneven red sticky-tape are the words:’ We love you Michael’.
Later Saunderson takes up Maya theme.
’ Basically, you only have blacks in the centre of Detroit.
White people with money have all moved to the suburbs.
I feel because of that, they've allowed the centre to be run down, stopped building the city and moved everything out to the suburbs.’
To an insider Detroit might look empty; to an outsider it's bustling with the kind of noisy energy rarely seen in European cities.
Buildings, freeways and bridges — everything is on a grand scale.
Shabby, 40s-style gangster-movie buildings stretch for mile after mile.
Down the Detroit River huge slabs of white ice float in the glassy green water Across the river is Canada.
Detroit is shabby, poverty-ridden and struggling to keep its head above water It has a huge crime problem.
One of its nicknames is’ motor city’.
The other is’ murder capital of America’
Sometimes life in Detroit seems like a grotesque farce.
In the space of a few days an apartment building is burned down by drug dealers who suspect a rival crack gang of operating in its basement.
The previous day a 22 year old, a 19 year old and a 17 year old were shot by a state trooper when they tried to sell cocaine worth $50,000 to a couple of undercover policemen in a car park.
The law courts are also having a field day.
Detroit's prominent black judge Leon Jenkins, known locally as’ Neon Leon’(either because of his dress sense or flashy personality or both) is on trial for corruption.
Far from being dead, Detroit is getting a bit too much for flamboyant city police chief Gil Hill, who's better known for his movie-acting skills — he played the dour Detroit police chief in Beverly Hills Cop I and Il.
He's thinking of getting out he's juggling the offer of his own TV series in LA, which he describes vaguely as’ something to do with gangs’.
Back in Maya flat, in the red-brick downtown studio complex, a young local kid rings on his Ansaphone begging May to listen to his music.
He plays a short sample down the phone, an almost unintelligible blur May, a non-stop talker and tireless ambassador for techno, rolls his eyes in a resigned manner’ I get every kid in the city ringing me up and I feel bad because I don't have time to talk to them.’
The following evening, the three originators of Detroit- most sought-after new export are dining at a downtown restaurant- it's small, discreet, with no sign on the outside, just a number and a bell.
Inside, the decor is east coast old money: dark wooden floor old chandeliers, personal mementos belonging to the owner The clientele is white, business-suited, quietly-spoken.
The chef is German, the food is French.
When it arrives, May and Atkins promptly smother theirs in ketchup.
Talk turns to a familiar theme — the failure of the city to support new ideas, the segregation of black and white music, how difficult it is for dance music to get substantial airplay — most of all the struggle to make the rest of the city sit up and take notice of its thriving techno scene.
Suddenly May brightens.
’ I went down to the radio station today to renew my DJ contract,’he says.
’ There were three older ladies in the foyer — white, rich-looking, in their fifties.
Anyway, as soon as they saw me they scampered over and said, ‘We know you, you're that Derrick May aren't you?'
I'm like, ‘What?'
And they're saying, ‘Yes, we know who you are.
We've got that techno album of yours and we play it all the time.
We think it's wonderful!'’
Saunderson is giggling hysterically, his hands over his face.
Imagine, he finally splutters,’ all these little rich old ladies listening to techno It looks like Detroit is finally recognising its brightest new industry.
Michelle Shocks
She's currently the hottest actress in Hollywood, but Michelle Pfeiffer struggled for 10 years to achive star status; overcoming drink, drugs and a quasi-religious cult on the way.
Dan Yakir toasts her success.
She talks to you in a flat, friendly voice with an alluring self-protective hesitancy that only beautiful women can carry off.
She's just snapped at a styling assistant who's rearranging her hair yet again.
Then she apologises, draws hard on a Marlboro Light and says,’ I've never felt that I was extraordinary looking, just conventionally pretty.
its an asset in some ways, but not in others.
Looks are the hardest subject to talk about.
Its one of those things where you're fucked either way.’
But although she moans, it was Michelle Pfeiffer's looks that led her out of a dead-end job as a check-out girl at Vons supermarket in El Toro, California.
Vons, in turn, became her way out of Midway City, Orange County, the Californian backwater where she spent her first 20 years.
Now 10 years on, she's starring alongside Mel Gibson in Tequila Sunrise and in the period film Dangerous Liaisons.
On top of that is the lead in Married To The Mob.
Its the culmination of a career that began as a long shot.
Michelle Pfeiffer was the second of four children to a heating and air-conditioning contractor and his wife.
Dick and Donna Pfeiffer instilled the work ethic into their children at a tender age — Michelle used to clean second-hand fridges for her father at 50 cents apiece.
She started work at 14 and by the time she found herself at Vons she'd held a variety of jobs.
But by now she realised that what she really wanted to do was act (she chose drama at high school to get out of English).
Then her hairdresser persuaded her to do some modelling.
Michelle, set on being an actress, wasn't interested at first, but in the end she swallowed her pride.
Soon she was Miss Orange County.
In the Miss LA contest that followed which she lost Michelle met a commercial agent and began auditioning for adverts, which again she hated, but again swallowed her pride.
’ In order to be a good commercial actor you have to learn how to do a specific kind of bad acting well,’she says.
’ If you walk out of an audition feeling like you made an asshole of yourself, chances are you got the job.’
It is this straight talking and her lived-in looks that after 10 years hard slog have finally made her hot film property.
Michelle isn't one of Hollywood's Barbie Dolls reared and groomed for stardom.
Both her looks and personality came from a ride to stardom that has been far from comfortable.
She has got in (and out of) problems with drugs, alcohol and a quasi-religious cult:’ I was brainwashed and I gave them an enormous amount of money,’she says with a shrug.
During a career that started with junk TV through small film roles to her current stardom, Michelle also had to cope with the breakup of her marriage to Peter Horton, the star of American TV show Thirtysomething, which is now screened in Britain.
Now she's alone again, despite Hollywood rumours about various boyfriends including a supposed relationship with Dangerous Liaisons co-star John Malkovich.
It is the glare of such publicity that, she says, would be enough to make her throw away her career.
’ I'm a loner who likes to curl up on a sofa with a good book,’she says.
’ I like to work on my house, paint, by myself.
I'm very shy and I can only take a lot of people in small doses.
A big crowd really bothers me.
Sometimes you just want to be left alone, so I understand the violent reactions some celebrities have when they're infringed upon.
But I don't think I'm famous enough for photographers to hide in the bushes for me.’
Even with three top films on the go, Michelle is a little coy.
Presented with a hard question, she'll blush, stare at her feet and finally mumble her answer
’ It was a combination of being lucky and determined,’she says of her success.
’ With so many unemployed actors around, I sometimes think I'm lucky to be working at all.
I never enjoy my performances.
I just don't.
I always feel that I could do better’
Not that her first part could have been improved upon that much.
She appeared on American television's Fantasy Island with just one line’ Who is he, Naomi?’
She went on to play a character in a padded bra called Bombshell in the 1979 series Delta House, a spin-off from the Animal House film.
Her first celluloid appearance was as a younger version of Susannah Yorks character in Falling In Love Again.
Her first major film part was in Grease 2 (which flopped) and she followed it up by playing Al Pacinos hard-faced, cocaine-snorting moll Elvira in the blockbuster Scar-face.
Her portrayal was so convincing that she was offered nothing but bitch characters.
Michelle's starring role opposite Jack Nicholson, Cher and Susan Sarandon in The Witches Of Eastwick is the one that first brought her to the attention of British audiences, however This month we'll see her as saucy, sexy restaurant manageress Jo Ann Vallenari alongside Mel Gibson in Tequila Sunrise, and in Dangerous Liaisons- But it has been her straight lead role in the comedy Married To The Mob that has ignited the American critics' praise.
She plays the suburban Mafia wife, Angela, who wants to break the tedium of living with her macho hired-gun husband, Alec Baldwin.
To prepare for the role she followed the Method actors and sought out suburban wives on Long Island.
Her character, Angela, goes for a Bohemian lifestyle and an affair with bumbling cop Matthew Modine.
Michelle describes Angela as going from’ broad and light’to’serious and sad’among the comic action.
’ I met some great gals out in Long Island,’says Michelle, slipping into suburban Angela drawl.
’ They're fantastic.
Cawla and Anna Maria.
They were sistuhs.
Cawla was a hairdresser she was going to be getting her own chair.
We talked about hair we talked about make-up.
I wanted to be more like them after I met them.
Because they have a certain art of really enjoying life.’
Those normal, straightforward girls are part ofa society that she chose to leave a long time ago.
But for Michelle, they are part of a life she can never lead now.
And behind that realisation is a sadness.
A sadness that could make her give up acting for good.
When asked if she'd be prepared to tone down her good looks to play an unattractive part, she says:’ Sure!
In fact, I've always wanted to play a realistic, no make-up, bag lady.
I've always been fascinated by bag ladies who choose to live on the street- I've come to the point in my life where I can understand what makes them drop out.
I've always been a worker yet there is a part of me that feels I could end up like that, too.
’ I have some horrible, sadomasochistic streak.
I have to work at having fun.
I wish I could be more like Angela in Married To The Mob, in that respect.’
Nevertheless she has conquered the tough, ruthless climb to becoming a star actor and all the insecurities that go with it.
’ At first I felt I couldn't take care of my own life,’she says, remembering a rocky past with its broken marriage, drink and drugs.
’ But then I found that I could, after all.’
She smiles and lets her eyes drop again.
Perhaps she still isn't entirely convinced.
Give it Loads
BIG FUND
Richard Gere gives money to Tibetan refugees, Meryl Streep campaigns against the widespread use of pesticides.
Emily Lloyd, Whoopi Goldberg, daryl Hannah and Whitney Houston were amoung the dozens of rich and famous thronging the stage at Nelson Mandela's 70th birthday party — an event shocking not just because of the numbers of celebrities involved, but because of the sheer diversity of its star-studded line-up.
Onece the province of a few ropey old pop stars, caring for the world is now an essential requirement of any late-80s star.
Never before has charity been so glamorous.
Daniela soave examines the growth of the good-cause jet set.
At the USA leg of Live Aid, prototype of today's countless global charity events, grizzled rocker Bob Dylan took the stage, part of a stream of rock stars raising money for the victims of the Ethiopian famine.
The audience waved, swayed and sang along enthusiastically, as they had for the procession of artists who had preceded him.
Suddenly, in mid-song, Dylan stopped playing and began to mumble something into the microphone, off on his own personal tangent.
Yes, fine about the starving in Ethiopia, he muttered, but what about the poor dirt-farmers struggling in America's Midwest?
Shouldn't we give some of the money raised to Farm Aid?
The embarrassing Dylan incident, which shocked both the audience and TV viewers by its insensitivity, is the first example of multi-aid.
But supporting a bewildering variety of good causes is typical of the famous in the late-80s.
Pop stars, film stars, comedians, flagging old rockers, are all now united as never before by a new role — giving money to worthy causes.
Its as much a part of being a modern-day star as appearing on chat shows or signing autographs.
Most big stars, as well as being global philanthropists supporting this years fashionable cause, also have their own particular interests Sting went to the South American jungle to publicise the plight of the Amazonian Indians; Meryl Streep is obsessed by the over-use of pesticides.
Being a caring celebrity entails lending your name to worthy causes, donating cash, giving up royalties from existing or new compositions, making time to appear free of charge in fund-raising concerts, and sometimes even organising them, and becoming a public spokesman on behalf of that particular charity.
This in turn means swotting up on the subject, going on fact-finding missions and meeting politicians and organisers.
Never has the line between celebrity and ambassador been so blurred.
Apparently, 1989 is the Year Of The Rainforest.
Following the charity event of last year The Rainforest Ball (which was attended by so many of the titled upper classes that it was unofficially known as Toff Aid), attention is now focused on the Altamura Forest, Italy, the proposed site of a hydroelectric dam.
Plans are already in motion for charity events.
According to Peter Walker producer of Amnesty Internationals first and second Secret Policeman's Balls:’ Charity events are useful for celebrities for setting up new partnerships.
They also regard them as social occasions where they see their friends and have a chat, and they meet people they'd never work with otherwise.
It has a sort of networking effect’.
There are drawbacks, though, to this great glamorous whirl.
During the second Policeman's Ball, John Cleese introduced Eric’ God’Clapton as’Mr Eric Clacton’.
To this day, Cleese is probably unaware of his mistake.
And, ever since Bob Geldof, then a mere singer and nota saint, invented the celebrity charity circuit with Band Aid at Christmas 1984, and Live Aid the year after the subject of self-promotion has reared its ugly head.
Cynics have suggested that the reason the Nelson Mandela bash attracted so many celebrities, at the expense of the more official Amnesty gig and an earlier AIDS benefit, was because it was televised worldwide to over one billion viewers.
Tracy Chapman, for example, certainly owes her fame and a lot of her money to her brief appearance at it.
But, as Walker comments, where's the harm in that?
’ Charity events are a commercially sound idea for all involved,’he says.
’ Why shouldn't celebrities get something out of it?
After all, they turn up for free.
’ I'm sure Phil Collins works so hard for The Princes Trust because he's working hard for his CBE.
But what's wrong with that?
Its no worse than industrialists giving money to Maggie in return for peerages.
’ Of course, greed and self-promotion is evident, but it isn't rampant.
Though I do remember at one charity event the stage was invaded by all these uninvited, ageing rock stars only the older members of the audience could remember who they were!’
In reply to accusations of self-interest on the eve of the Human Rights Now Tour Sting exploded:’ I'm the sort of person who really needs publicity, ha ha.
I really need this tour for my career ha ha!’
Peter Gabriel had a more pragmatic approach.
’ Let's suppose every one of us here is entirely out to get publicity.
Does it really matter?
If people are being rescued from torture, from execution, does it really matter a damn?’
These days stars don't so much choose their charities as the charities choose them.
And while there are thousands of would-be stars willing to lend their names to a good cause, it is the successful stars that the charities squabble over.
Before long, a celebrity might find there is no time to tour write new songs or even go on holiday — there is still the charity compilation LP to complete, the three benefit gigs to appear at and the university talks tour to do.
This in turn causes far more crack-ups than the usual pressures of being constantly in the public eye, a symptom that has now been identified as charity-fatigue.
In the weeks leading up to Live Aid, each singer and band forgot their ego and worked towards a common cause — raising cash for the starving thousands.
But it can't be denied that in the days following the concert — which was seen by one-and-a-half billion people all over the world groups watched their LPs, new and old, surge healthily up the charts, taking their bank balances to new heights.
This was regarded by most as a just reward for helping to raise over £50 million for the cause, but the more sinister downside was that a few less scrupulous characters realised that supporting charities could boost flagging careers and chart positions.
For a while, the seif-centred members of celebrity circles were falling over themselves in their eagerness to jump on the bandwagon.
Suddenly, people were suggesting charity records for every tragedy that occurred, and while money was raised for worthwhile causes, such as the survivors of the Bradford City fire or the sunken Herald Of Free Enterprise ferry, one only had to look at the ropier ideas for fund-raising to question the motives involved.
Now, however, celebrities tend to give their time to causes rather than direct events — though the occasional deserving disasters, such as last year's Jamaican hurricane, squeeze through.
These causes tend to be ecology and personal freedom, inspired by charities such as Friends Of The Earth, Amnesty International, and Greenpeace (artists including U2, INXS and Terence Trent D'Arby will appear on a Greenpeace double album, Rainbow Warriors, to be released in April).
Health issues (for example, The Terrence Higgins Trust campaigning for AIDS relief) and human well-being (fund-raising to cushion famine) follow close behind.
If you examine these charities, and the pop stars who lend their support to them, it's like looking at a giant human Venn diagram, with the same sets supporting different charities.
But what happens when the celebrities get charted-out?
Amnesty admits this caused a problem last year, after two disastrous benefits at the Milton Keynes Bowl.
Poor attendances were put down to lack of big names.
Sting and Peter Gabriel had committed themselves to the Amnesty world tour later that year so gave the June concerts a miss, and Simple Minds had already said yes to the Nelson Mandela birthday celebration the week before.
’ The problem is everyone's after the same bands as us,’an Amnesty spokesperson said sheepishly.
And other more established charities have been heard to mutter most uncharitably about newer causes stealing’ their’acts.
Which brings up another argument.
Are we being bombarded by so many messages from so many different charities that we forget last month's cause in favour of the latest one?
Not so, according to Tracy Ward, the Marchioness of Worcester and sister of film star Rachel Ward.
She organised the Rainforest Ball and believes the message sticks.
’ I just wanted to get the message across to hundreds of people.
People already knew about the plight of the rainforests through TV and newspapers, but the ball made them read about it again.’
This is the caring side of celebrity charity, where people are actually concerned about the causes they support.
But a more calculating side is emerging, where celebrities are almost being blackmailed into lending their names to causes.
Fortunately, few have been foolish enough to succumb.
In 1987, for instance, Nottingham City Council allocated £330,000 of ratepayers' money to stage a two-day charity concert without even confirming any major bands.
They concocted a shopping list of stars, which included Queen, Peter Gabriel and Dire Straits, in an attempt to raise £250,000 for local charities, announced their plans and then started trying to secure the groups.
Needless to say the project never got off the ground, but this blatant assumption that pop stars will automatically say yes leads to exactly the kind of pressure that causes charity-fatigue.
’ Rock stars are always being asked to help charities,’sighs Sting, while Lenny Henry, who also gives a great deal of his time and resources to good causes, illustrates the bad effect charity appearances can have on your own career.
’ There is a danger of people perceiving you as Mr Cause and getting pissed off with you turning up yet again’.
Large corporations have been quick to see the financial potential in becoming involved with charity events.
The Amnesty Human Rights Now Tour bore the banner’ Made possible by the Reebok Foundation’.
In return, Amnesty got £2 million.
Cheap advertising or what?
But at least Reebok associated itself with a specific cause — unlike the American television' network that broadcast the Nelson Mandela bash.
Although they paid a fee for the transmission rights, they saw the star-studded line-up as an opportunity to boost viewing figures and distanced themselves from any contentious affiliations by renaming the concert Freedom Festival.
But while most stars are willing to give their time and talent to worthy causes, it seems there are great holes in the’ peace and goodwill to all men’attitude.
Jasper Carrott once brought a portable TV along with him to one particular charity do to while away the hours in his dressing room.
After coming back from doing his stint, he discovered that his dressing room had been broken into and the telly nicked.
The more charity events celebrities do, the greater the euphoria they experience.
One female rock star likened the feeling to the one some women have after giving birth — lets have another one.
This is exactly what happened immediately after Live Aid.
Said an excited David Bowie, minutes after the grand finale,’ A lot of us would do a show like Live Aid every year until starvation was under control.
I'd do it again like a shot’.
A knackered and dripping Bob Geldof replied:’ I've retired.
Let David organise it then’!
Even saints, it seems, have their limits.
Get Personal!
DO YOU LIKE QUESTIONNAIRES?
Then answer this.
Would you say you were very attractive, intelligent, witty, stylish, and kind to animals and shy men?
Yes?
Then contact me now — you're my ideal woman I'm 20, rather good-looking and in need of the feminine touch.
Enclose photo please.
MAD BLONDE, GOOD FUN, 17-YEAR-OLD FEMALE, seeks funny, heart-warming, intelligent correspondence with male, 17+.
I like any types of music, except The Smiths, The Cure, etc I like movies, fun and going out over the weekend to have a good old boogie- Write to Julie…
WHEN WILL I BE FAMOUS?
Two pop producers and a professional manager are looking for young (14-20) female bands (or individuals for a put-together band).
Must look good or interesting, and be vaguely talented.
A-HA!
IS THERE ANYONE OUT THERE whole seriously into A-ha?
Or if you're a former fan, I'll buy your stuff Both types contact me.
I'm a serious A-ha fan, A-hallo!.
MALE SPECIES ALERT!
We're two funky 17-year-old gals searching for fun and action.
If you're ready, willing and able, write now!!
WANTED: TOTALLY CRAZY MALE PENFRIEND.
Must like Prince, Bob Marley (or any kind of reggae or soul music), 16 Photo will be appreciated.
Must like a good laugh and be fun to get on with.
I'M GOOD-LOOKING, intelligent, and very friendly- 21-year-old male into Killing Joke and Killing Joke only, seeks females anywhere with similar qualities and musical taste.
Photo with letter please.
WANTED DESPERATELY, URGENTLY — please!!
VHS recordings of the four Pet Shop Boy's videos — Rent, Heart, It's A Sin and What have I Done To Deserve This?— for a good price, of course, or whatever you would like in return.
I beg of you!!
WE'RE NOT YOUR ORDINARY RUN-OF-THE-MILL Shaz'N'Trace We're two great-looking, fun-to-be-with intellectuals!!?!
We just lurve Aciieed and wild pizza parties Well write to every male aged 15-20 in the Lands End to John O'Groats area.
Piccy if poss — you'll get one back.
BLOND MALE, 16, wants exciting, beautiful, intelligent penfriends!
Preferably in Switzerland, Austria or London.
Come on, get writing to Mark now!
ARE YOU WALKING ON THIN ICE?
I know I am.
Discuss your problem with Larry the Lamb or Sin the Bad.
Day or night, we'll listen.
GET PERSONAL!
(Good name for a column, huh!)
I'm a 21-year old witty and attractive blonde female who wants to hear from humorous and intelligent chaps I love U2, INXS, gothic and heavy music; art and films.
All letters answered from any part of the world or universe!
Love from
SLEEPING RIVER PHOENIX CLONE desperately requires Talisa Soto lookalikes (or equivalent) to wake him up.
Enjoys cinema, eating out and expensive cars Send a message and a photo and make a dream come true.
MY PEN IS DRY, I'm staring sadly at the dawn as I hears deep, cool sigh- Please write to a lonely girl of 16.
I love The Cure, Pink Floyd, This Mortal Coil, and having fun- Freaky and friendly.
SCHIZOPHRENIC (SHY YET EXTROVERT) 6ft 4in male with probable symptoms of height paranoia wishes to consult with a reassuring member of the opposite sex.
’ Shy’likes Smiths and box bedrooms’Him’likes Depeche, alcohol, Armani and Smiley.
Unlovably handsome devil (19) in Dublin wants to forget the millenium.
How soon?
SENSITIVE?
BOHEMIAN?
Smash 17-year-old seeks to chat to witty, intelligent, green, non-assist, Hitch-Hiker's Guide lovers.
Open to anyone who cares about the environment- Reply guaranteed.
PS.
I'm female and from Betelgeuse!.
SOMEWHERE OUT THERE my Rose is searching to liberate me from my prison of love.
Come on girls, put on your Spear gear and let's have some fun!
Pictures to Grant.
ON NO, HERE COMES THE SEA MONSTER.
Close your eyes so he doesn't see you.
Three female ice-cream seem into World Patty, Wonderstuff, Waterboy's and Wham!?
Likes: rainbows, tree's bed, strawberry milk, profound people, laughing-Dislikes: Honest John.
Hates: nobody.
Loves: love and happiness Send favourite picture of anything.
TWO EXTREMELY UGLY, FAT BALDING MALES like playing darts, drinking constantly, breaking wind uncontrollably.
Heavily into Nana Mouskouri, Sacha Distel and Napalm Death.
Seek similar-minded females of any age for food fights and synchronised belching.
NO BROSETTES!
Three wild young, good-looking, extrovert males seek three or more similar females (17-20) for wild parties and drunken orgies in West Midlands area.
Write to Mark, Steven and Mark.
Photos if ugly.
CALLING ALL JACKSON FANS!!
Write to me with all news/ questions and gossip on Michael Jackson, Jackson 5, Jacksons Tell me how ya love 'em.
All letters answered.
Write now to Tarne G, whatever age, colour animal or human!
CALLING ALL THE HEROES.
Two sexy, not-so-dumb-broads would like the attention of some sexy dudes, preferably one nautical Smiths fan and one Ice-Man look-alike hip-hop, house fan.
Chris Quintins need not apply.
D and Maggie are waiting.
19+ please supply photo.
REBEL WITHOUT A CLUE.
Deep, intelligent, caring, sensitive West Midlands male, 22, seeks meaningful relationship with like-minded female Interests' music — Smiths, Bunnymen, Lloyd Cole, Silencers, New Order, Hue And Cry etc.
Cinema -Mickey Rourke, Blue Velvet- Clothes and fashion- Write now.
TO ALL MALE YOUNG FARMERS 18-year-old country girl working in London would love to hear from you— All letters replied to, especially the owners of a sense of humour and a pair of hunter wellies!!.
ATTENTION!
I'M 17, a little bit sad, female student from Prague (Czechoslovakia)-I would like to write to any male or female, aged 17-20.
I like music, theatre, cinema, books.
And what about you?
Don't forget your photo.
Love Kate.
FIFTY WORDS WOULD NOT BE ENOUGH to tell you about myself.
If you are a girl of 16+, write to a mad 18-year-old-guy Warning.'
writing to me could damage your health.
Photo gets a faster reply.
WE'RE INTO 501's INXS(style), VW Beetles (character) and Eddie Murphy (wit).
Two good-looking brothers require two good-looking girls for a correspondence to last a lifetime.
And we're off to the States to join the NYPD for fun.
You know us now so get writing.
Byee!.
CRAZY, SENSITIVE FEMALE, 20, with wicked sense of fun, is lonely and in need of friends- Into Kate Bush, Eurythmics, Marilyn Monroe, James Dean, Mickey Rourke, French and Saunders.
Seeks anyone anywhere 18+ for penpals and friends Only one qualification required — fabulous sense of humour Photo if poss, please.
TWO FUN-SEEKING, young.
free and single males require the attention of two females who will indulge in any way-out fun we all wish to choose.
We are Mick(19) and Steve (18) and we're in the Forces- So let us open your eyes and show you a new way of life.
MEN Wanted 17 Upwards.
We're two charming females (17) seeking some charming males to have loads of fun with!!
Reply guaranteed, if poss a photo, but not essential- Well, don't just sit there — get scribbling!
You can't afford to miss us.
BORED DEPRESSED ASIAN MALE, 18, studying in Glasgow, seeks companion of any age, nationality or gender for friendship and solace.
Interested in Prince, The Blue Nile, Gabriel, Martin Stephenson, Chaplin, De Niro, and anything else (within limits!) that you care to mention.
All letters replied to.
DOES ANYONE ELSE YEARN FOR PEACE, love, etc and want somebody to help them understand what is going on??
Tastes too varied, unconventional to name, but I'm 17, and would like to hear from anyone, specially male students of anthropology, etc.
ON THE DARK SIDE OF THE MOON?
Why hide behind The Wall when you can share A Saucer full Of Secrets with me!
I'm 16, 6ft, into Pink Floyd and weight-lifting.
If you're female, 15+ and really hate noise pollution like Bros, Wham! etc, then why not write to me.
GOOD-LOOKING MUSICIANS (most are)!
If you can explain the complexities of a Neapolitan 6th, I need to hear from you.
I'm a 19-year-old, very good female musician and would like to hear from others, 19+ — Love The Cure, Jethro Tull and Sting.
I'm Emma.
THREE GUYS 17-18 YEARS OLD looking for three girls in the Eastbourne area who are into heavy metal and skateboarding- Photos please- Check this out!!
IRISHMEN LOOK HERE!
I'm 19, Danish, female, living in Belgium.
I seek an Irish male, 19-25, as penpal.
I'm nuts about Ireland and everything to do with it.
I also like: fun, dancing, dogs and horses.
My all-time favourites are U2.
Drop me a line with a photo, please.
ANY YOUNG LADIES OUT THERE!
You are needed to cheer up a young 21-year-old male.
Into most music except heavy metal, house, jazz and soul!
So if you are fun-loving and open-minded, put pen to paper.
Chris.
ANY 22-30 YEAR OLD MALES INTO: THE SUGARCUBES Sylvia Plath, Otis Redding, J D Salinger, Fleetwood Mac, Creme Eggs, The Velvet Underground, Mickey Rourke, The Doors.
Ecrivez a moi s'il vous plait!
Eithne.
SKRIV!
That's Swedish, so that I could be sure that you wouldn't understand.
Anyway, I'm Swedish, 16, female and into U2 something fierce.
Anyone, anywhere, cheer me up with your letters and I'll do the same for you.
Okay?
AMBROSIAL ART STUDENT, harbouring firm, voluptuous aspirations desires woman with similar in southern England for southern comfort.
Come, nests amidst nature's nectar before its privatised.
Wanted: BOYS!
BOYS! 'BOYS!!!
Do you enjoy being stupid, having a laugh, parties, good music (no Bros fans please!) and making new friends?
Then write to me.
Doesn't matter what creed or colour you are, as long as you are mad! 16-18.
Send photo and letter now.
Clare XX.
SENDING OUT AN SOS!
Three’ Lost Boys’in search of buttercups.
Any female fashion victims into INXS, Camden Market, U2, Hampstead, Simple Minds, Vidal Sassoon, Milton, Aztec Camera, The Wag, Scritti, Rupert Everett and Imogen Stubbs, get writing now and let's sleep all day and party all night.
Adios!
METAL/GLAM FREAK seeks completely insane males(18-23) I'm 17 into-.
Kiss, Anthrax, Malmsteen, Faster Pussycat, Roth, Tigertailz, Guns N' Roses,’ W.Axi Rose’.
Pepsi Tate's more than welcome, but will accept Richie Samboras.
Must be crazy and be able to handle a blonde female.
You never know till you try!
Photos please (I’ shoot to kill.’)
IF YOU'RE FEMALE, 15+ and into one or more of the following: Scritti, Sprout, Daintees, Blonde, Cheers, charm, intelligence, elegance, wit, sin and 17-year-old boys, then write now with photos or self-portraits.
TWENTY-YEAR-OLD MALE SEEKING FEMALE 17+, for companionship Enjoy sports and weight-lifting- Tall, dark and handsome.
Half Asian.
Enjoys travelling and nightlife- Let me be your knight in shining armour.
Please include recent photo.
I'M THE PRINCESS BRIDE IF YOU'RE WESLEY.
I'd like to be a vampire.
What would you like to be?
All actors, dancers, singers, writers, interesting people, intellectuals, Lost Boys, Hitchers, send your scripts to Buttercup (16) and meet your match!
CAN YOU FEEL IT?
If you can and you're female aged between 16 and 18, living around the London area, contact us four trendy males, aged 17.
GET TO KNOW ME BETTER THAN MY BEST MATE DOES!
Hint.
I'm a 19-year-old Scottish university student- But why am I becoming so interested in the Personal columns?
Same reason as you, perhaps?
18-YEAR-OLD-FUN-LOVING YORKSHIRE LASS would like to hear from males and females aged 17-25.
My interests include Bros, Kyle Minogue and Brother Beyond — only joking, honest!
I really like Tracy Chapman and Julia Fordham.
I enjoy nature and long country walks, and I cheer-lead for my local basketball team.
Don't delay, write today.
I KNOW THAT I WILL NOT BE ABLE TO DIE until have met Morrissey, but I know that letters from males who are similar (mentally and/or physically) to this object of infatuation will serve to lessen the pain.
Please enclose a photo of your left knee (not essential).
WOO JUST HANG ON A SEC I'm a 19-year-old female wanting to get my hands on a good-looking male (19-21).
Must love going out and getting well sloshed, and having a mega-good time.
If this is your kind of thing, get writing to Shaz.
Pic if pose.
SUNS- SNAILS HEDGEHOGS, SMITH, Talk Talk, Crowded House, John Hughes movies, art, wacky humour, dreamy thoughts.
If you're into any or all of these things please write to a Chris Packham look-alike pronto, before I disappear into obscurity in the bottom of fete lost wardrobe.
an, male, 17, Piscean.
EVER WONDERED WHY good-looking folk put ads in this mag?
I will accept letters from any male 16+, 6ft+.I consider personality more important than looks.
I'm emotional, passionate, vivacious, intelligent (IQ- 140!) 15-year-old with an intense character.
No-one I know know a me as well as you will!
I WANT A NUT CASE- I am fed up with Janes so could I have some Claires and Sarahs please.
I'm tall, dark and handsome, actually.
Photos please, or an artists impression will do!
WE ARE TWO SISTERS, AGED 18 AND 22, who are into sarcastic and dry sense of humour travelling, art, Welter Matthau and funk.
Any humorous, intelligent males out there?
If so, don't be boring — be adventurous, please- All letters will be replied to.
PS- No Bob Holness fans, please.
IS THERE A PLACE IN THIS WORLD for sensitive (hmm…) young (20) musicians?
Could nice (youngish) females find it in their souls to converse on paper?
Who are there so many questions?
Are my 50 words up yet?
You may write to me at.
TWO FUN-LOVING WILD GALS, AGED 16, into most hard rock groups especially Bon Jovi, who cannot stand Brosettes and house music, are just desperate to write to guys.
aged 16+ with similar tastes in music.
So grab a pen and paper and write to Karen and Elaine now!
THE DREAMY-TIME ESCORTS seek two gin-aholic young females to come and sample our brew.
We started it yesterday, so it should be ready by now.
Photos essential.
Write to Loscious Luke and Rugged Ricki.
Bring some gin!
GETTING OVER CHRISTMAS?
Wondering what to do with the stationery set Aunty gave you?
Put into good use — write to me. 18-year-old girl seeks male penpals, 19-26, 5ft 9ins and over but above all, sensitive and funny.
Is this you?
All letters answered.
PRETENTIOUS, CYNICAL, ARROGANT, bad-tempered male (17), seeks friendship with people with personality.
Any age, either sex.
Wacky, zany fun-loving’ raving mad’trendies stay clear I like writing, music (playing/listening), Floyd, Gabriel, Straits, Marillion, REM, Erasure, Michael Jackson (not proud).
PS.
I tell jokes too.
HEY, ALL YOU BROSETTES OUT THERE!
Bored?
Depressed- Missing those three from Peckham?
Me too.
Get scribbling all that heartache now!
Send a photo if you like (Bros or you!) 15+.
OKAY BROSETTES, I'M HERE!!
Bros look-alike, but a bit better-looking, wants all you Brosettes to write to me, along with a photo.
So come on girls, get your pens out and write now!
PENPALS PLEASE!
Slightly insane and looking for a good laugh?
Can you accept humour- Two girls (aged 17) seeking friends.
HARRISON FORD!
Collector and fan in search of everything (videos, interviews, articles, etc-) Will trade or buy.
Also in search of all episodes of The Colbys on tape VHS, PAL, NTSC).
’ Trust me’and’May the force be with you’.
TWO HIP AND FUNKY REBELS seek two definitely groovy males (must like banana and Vimto parties and have humorous dispositions), aged 17-21.
Must like’ tasteful’music, ie, U2, Sinead O'Connor This does not include Bros!!!
All letters answered.
Write to Naomi and Co up north.
X.
FUN-LOVING YOUNG MALE AGED 24 wishes to meet young, attractive female aged 20-26 for friendship/romantic relationship (Birmingham area Please)-Likes 50's and Glenn Miller music, and anything else except heavy metal.
Will reply to all letters.
CALLING ALL MALES, 18 YEARS AND ABOVE.
Must be handsome, intelligent and witty and looking for a fun-to-be-with female student.
I'm into 60s and most chart music.
So brighten my day, and write straight away(corny, eh?)
MY NAME ISN'T LUKA, IT'S CHRIS, Suzanne Vega fan from the Netherlands (female, 19) in search of males and females (18+) in Great Britain.
Also like Joni Mitchell, Tracy Chapman, Peter Gabriel, Sting.
Grand passions include films (my favourite actress is Meryl Streep) and literature.
20-YEAR-OLD NEW POWER SOUL BOY from Liverpool.
Totally dedicated to Prince.
Would like to hear from any Prince fans in Liverpool area, especially Controversy and Revolution members.
Sheila E look-alikes more than welcome.
Photo if poss.
A MALE REQUIRES MAIL from a gentle and sexy female (16-19).
If you would like to share a bit of my life with me, then give me a bit of yours I will reply so don't make me cry, get me high, and reply to SKY.
WHERE HAVE All THE FLOWERS GONE, sun children?
Any indie boy's and girls in or near Penzance, Cornwall, please write.
Into Sarah, Sha-la-la, Primal Scream, Groovefarm/Yard, Cure, Mary Chain, Smiths, Loop, early MBV, Chesterfields, etc.
GET RICH QUICK- Anyone who has a copy of Hue And Cry's Shuggie And Shout tape to sell, write now and be rewarded generously.
Will pay for any early records/tapes as well.
Help a desperate person, and write that letter Please.
COOLER!
WANTED: STEVE MCQUEEN FILMS — Le Mana, The Blob, Papillon.
Also Dead Or Alive episodes, and any 60s TV stuff or memorabilia on Steve McQueen.
Will pay cash or swap.
Also wanted: Twilight Zone (BW/colour).
Write soon!
CALLING ALL MALES, 18+!
Please rescue me from my boring lifestyle.
Must like one or more of the following Voice Of The Beehive, All About Eve, Lone Justice, Echo And The Bunnymen, New Order T'Pau, INXS, The The, Heart, Alarm, Fairground Attraction, OMD, Randy Crawford, U2.
REMEMBER ME?
No, you wouldn't because we've never met before, but once written, forever smitten!
I need a gorgeous young American (18+ preferably, male or female) to pop a letter in the ice-box and air mail into me (or whatever)— a good-looking British male.
Pic if poss.
X.
HI!
I'M LOOKING FOR MALE AND FEMALE PENPALS from anywhere in the world.
I'm a shy female (21) who is feeling a little lonely.
I enjoy most music (except acid house) and enjoy watching good films.
Favourites Include Dirty Dancing, The Lost Boy's and The Outsiders.
All letters answered.
HOW SOON IS NOW? 19-year-old Smithsian-type male seeks correspondence with similar males/females.
Other likes include Housemartins, Brookside and Fourth Division football (Turf Moor attenders especially appreciated).
DO YOU FIND CAMBRIDGE BORING TOO?
I'm a tall, dark, athletic male lookIng for an attractive and lonely female to give loads of affection to, and to put the sparkle into her beautiful eyes.
Please write.
HELP!
WANTED: Any live recordings of Michael Jackson!
Jacksons, Whitney, George Michael/Wham!,
Phil Collins.
Will pay almost anything!
Love you all lots!
Write now!
12 INCHES!!
Wanted for record collection.
Ha, got your attention, girls.
Two good-looking good-time boyz from England, working in Germany.
Require contacts from stunning chicks who want to meet and maybe we can do some scratching and pecking together Pictures guarantee a party.
From two party loving animals.
CALLING ALL ALIENS, WEIRDOS AND THE LIKE.
I need someone to perk up my life a little with interesting banter about anything except maths!
I'm 16 years old and into any music from All About Eve to The Adventures.
Please take pity on me and write!
Yours, a moron.
ADVENTURE, TRAVEL, EXCITEMENT — my life is unfortunately lacking in these.
Can anyone help?
I'm open to offers.
Send letters to Ann-Marie.
A TOTALLY PSYCHEDELIC GUY, aged 16, who lives for a good time is out to see if there are any zany females into Pink Floyd, Cult and The Who.
If there are (which there must be), start scribbling.
WILD SCANDINAVIAN seeks someone to be wild with!
Outgoing, crazy, cuddly woman of 18 looking for friendship and passion.
Into rock: Bon Jovi, Europe, but will stretch to Bros and even classical.
Photo essential Let's have fun together!
(London area).
WHERE HAVE ALL THE BEAUTIFUL, caring young women got to?
Reasonably handsome, unattached 22-year-old male needs cheering up.
Help restore my faith in women All letters answered Photo appreciated.
SEVENTEEN, CLUMSY AND SHY — looking for a friend of about 17 to write to- Likes- reading (Fitzgerald, Steinbeck), history, Lloyd Cole, Smiths, Duran (my only weakness) and animals (which is why I don-eat them).
Be as’ sick and dull and plain’as you like — I will be your friend.
IF MICKEY ROURKE, ROXY, ROBERT DE NIRO Prince and the mice on Bagpuss are your scene, do what your never done before.
Two guys (22 and 23) seeking Kim Basinger (or you) for spiritual and other experiences.
Photos appreciated, sketches accepted, diagrams blushed at.
No Sharons.
West Midlands area.
Reply guaranteed.
CRAZY MALE.
ALL I want is a fantastic time with just as crazy a female.
Go ahead, make my day.
Write ASAP.
HELLO MY LITTLE FLOWERPOTS!
Get out your double-aided sticky tape and coloured pencils and compose me one wild and crazy letter Please include a photo, preferably of yourself!
U2, INXS and Simple Minds fans preferred.
If you are male and 15+ write to Sarah,’ the cool and sexy person’.
DO YOU FOLLOW OUR GLORIOUS GAME?
Are you into Billy Bragg, football fanzines, The Wedding Present, Pogues and drinking ales?
If this is you, write now to Centre Circle Sid.
IMPATIENT AND SOMEWHAT TACTLESS FEMALE seeks male willing to be ordered around and generally walked all over Age irrelevant.
Must like U2 and appreciate the good things in life — poetry, literature, and the pub.
Non-smoker preferred.
Absolutely no poseurs.
Thank you very much for your time.
THE STORK BROUGHT US — but we never got asked.
Two unrelated non-identical twins seek sun, sea, surf, sand, skiing, smoked salmon, sushi, Scritti, squash, Sting, Swatch, Saint Laurent and Seychelles sympathisers.
Answers answered and snaps swapped.
Women worshipped, wars won, monsters mauled.
All part of the job.
Alliteration welcome.
Hurry — we've only 40 years left to live!
JANET WEISS SEEKS BRAD MAJORS, I want anything concerning Rocky Horror Show or Return Of Captain Invincible.
Would also like to contact Dawn Thorpe, who has seen RHS over 300 times.
WANTED: TWO INTELLIGENT, ATTRACTIVE young ladies, who are into good clothes, acid music, and clubbing, and most of all, two intelligent young men.
Aged 18+ Jamie and Lee.
ARE THERE ANY INTERESTING PEOPLE OUT THERE?
I am young, female, into Enya, Clannad, Cocteau Twins, Tracy Chapman, Morrissey and any meaningful music.
If you are male, 18+, at peace with yourself or trying, then send me a line or two.
Please try to enclose photo.
TALL, DARK AND HANDSOME STRANGER REQUIRED by young lady of 18 years.
This damsel will reply to any romantic knight in shining armour
MERRYDOWN CIDER, THE DRINK OF ALL TIME, gets you feeling mighty fine.
Male clubbers get in touch with me, especially if you're sexy.
18-year-old long-legged language student, luvs lots of music except boppy types (Bros, etc).
We'll have a chuckle!!.
DIVINE!
DIVINE!
DIVINE!
Anything wanted on the late great Divine.
Videos, bootlegs, promos, cuttings, rarities, Everything wanted!
Also, anything on the Jaws films, especially merchandise, toys, etc.
And lastly, I want a full-size or half-size stars’ n’stripes flag and stars’n’stripes memorabilia.
State prices please.
FOUR FANCIABLE FEMALES seek four fun-loving, friendly fellas for frolicking and freaking out.
Interested?
If so, and you're reasonably good-looking and 15+ get scribbling to Laura, Julie, Debbie and Kirstie.
Photos preferred.
PS.
East Anglia area.
BORED?
ME TOO.
You don't feel you have any true friends?
Me too.
Let's change it all!
Any people with any sexual, political, musical, literary (need I go on?) persuasions will all be replied to by this young man Hurry up and write — we've got so much to talk about.
WE DON'T WANT TO GO TO CHELSEA!
But London is the city of our nightmares.
We am two Belgian girls, brilliant and totally addicted to Elvis Costello, Talking Heads and ourselves.
So if you know something odd or strange in London, give us advice, write to us!!
LONELY 17-YEAR-OLD LIBRAN FEMALE seeks male (or female) penpals aged 17-20.
I'm into Def Leppard (there must be other Def Leppard fans somewhere!) and INXS.
Will reply to everyone.
Promise!
So, what ya waitin' for?!
Get scribbling' Lynn.
(Send photo if poss).
’ JAMES MASON: THE MAN THEY LOVED TO HATE’.
Can anyone send me information on this velvet-voiced villain?
Will pay reasonable prices for Posters, stills, press books, etc. from any of his films, 1935-1984.
Any fellow Mason fans welcome to write.
TAKING A YEAR OFF FROM STUDY?
Then why not join me on an exciting tour of Europe next year?
If you're outgoing, trendy, intelligent and full of fun, get scribbling to me, a guy who's looking for adventure.
ABSOLUTELY NO BROS FANS!
Better tastes include INXS, Prince and Pasadenas.
Male or female Kiefer Sutherland look-alikes and fans of his and The Lost Boys film gladly accepted.
I have dark hair green eyes, I'm called Claire and I'm from Lichfield, Staffordshire.
If you don't write, you don't know what you're missing.
CALLING ALL LONG-HAIRED IRISHMEN!
(Or British men with short hair).
If you am 18-24, male, like a fun time and love music, I'd like to hear from you!
I'm an 18-year-old Canadian girl who wants to travel to the UK someday.
Send photo with your letter!
YOUNG(ISH) MALE (23) seeks people who are into Japan, Cure, Prince, Deacon Blue, PSB, etc- Help this young individual see the next sunset and on into the future until at least 24, anyway.
Photo if poss Thanks.
’ NO PHOTOS’.
Females 18+ — 5ft 10ins+ Sting.
Costello.
Eno.
Rain.
Poetry.
Windswept shores.
Just give me a glimpse of your soul — let the spiritus mundus do the rest.
Synchronicity?
HI THERE!
Who likes The The, All About Eve, and/or Prince?
Who hates big mouths like Stock, Aitken and Waterbucket?
YOU?
Well matey, you'd better write to Vicky then!
PS.
I'm a closet hippy and I love sunsets and The Breakfast Club.
Be groovy and froody now!!
HI!
FUN-LOVING GUY, Chris, seeks mates for correspondence and friendship.
Interests include 60s and 70s music, swimming, photography, travel.
Promise all letters answered.
I NEED RESCUING!
Seventeen-year-old Asian girl interested in having fun needs millions of friends.
Boys 17+ write, as I need some good male company.
Girls 18+ write, as I need some good female company.
All letters answered.
Expensive taste and some ambition in life are the only requirements.
WRITE TO THE A-TEAM.
We are the brains with the brawn.
We are the elite squaddies.
Apprentice technicians at a military college.
We like most music, especially female solo pop artists We want to hear from any female, 18+.
Must have a good sense of humour — wild and crazy.
Get scribbling!
TWO BROAD-MINDED YOUNG GIRLS with unfortunate habit of laughing too much, forced to wear thermal scoober suits under their clothing because of the weather, buried in a boarding-school in the Midlands, but actually enjoying it!
Looking for anyone from any background.
Musical tastes not important.
HEWO!
JINGS!
We've got two wonderful arms (each), we've got two wonderful lips (each), we're all 21 and free.
We've got hives full of honey for the right kind of honeybees.
Three fun-loving, mental bits of skirt require three individuals (male) for pleasurable activities.
Write expressing honourable intentions.
Now!
Ha!
SSSSSSSSSSSEVENTEEN YEAR-OLD MALE- Loves nights out with trendy girls.
Son of wealthy businessman so will travel anywhere (in Europe)-Get writing.
Photo essential.
COMMANDO ROCK- If you have a 12’ of this hip hop classic, write to me and I'll buy it off you- Peace!
Y'all later!
YO!
CALLING All SEXY MALES AGED 20-30!
Bored female requires scintillating correspondence to warm her winter nights-Most musical tastes catered for, but no Goths or Smiths fans please.
Must also like cinema and literature- Write to Liz today-All letters answered.
MY NAME IS RICHARD, I'm a 28-year-old American GI stationed in Germany.
I would like penpals from all over.
Age does not matter I like reading, travelling, making friends and photography.
I'VE GOT THE HOTS FOR YOU, but only if you are male, 17-19 and love the Pet Shop Boys and/or Sting- Photo not necessary as looks mean nothing to me!
WANTED: FEMALES OVER 16 any size, any shape to write to a bored 19-year-old male who's fed up with being single for most of the year.
Will reply to all letters received-Please include photos if possible.
FIVE FUNKY FEMALES between 17 and 18 years into soul/hip hop/house- Enjoy warehouse parties, would seriously love to hear from people all over the place, especially males who would like to show us some good places.
Write soon.
ANY SERENITY MOONCHILDREN wanting to write to a real cosmic far-out gal, get scribbling!
Are you in love with Elvis, Eddie Cochrane, Morrissey or Brian Setzer?
If so, I'm the person to write to- Male or female, ages 16-20- Toodle-pip'
NON-MANIC DEPRESSIVE, un-lonely, non-pretentious female devoid of potentially’ witty’comments in 50 words.
Sorry!
Likes: Smiths, Wonderstuff, Doors, R&B, James Brown, Floyd, Sugarcubes, Soft Cell and Joy Division.
Don't dislike much; everything has advantages — except Bros.
Looks immaterial.
’ It's your mind I'm after baby’.
SENSITIVE AND INSECURE STUDENT would like to correspond with anyone interested in George Orwell, politics and The Cure- Oh, hi Andrew, you're the best friend anyone could ever have.
Thanks Love Susan.
FOUR FUN-LOVING PHYSIOS who are into manipulating, massage and palpating muscular men are seeking hunky bodies for perfecting our techniques- Photos preferred- How can you resist us?
TWO ADVENTUROUS LEGIONNAIRES who are now in Africa, bored stiff — French (20) and American (23)— seek women (18-25) who will write to us and be ready to receive us on our return to Europe for good parties and fast times.
Into Judas Priest, Van Halen, etc- Write now.
BORED BLONDE GIRL, 23, seeks new friends, any age, either sex.
I'm completely mad, I love music (Prince, George Michael, Ruby Turner), films, writing (poems, songs, stories, letters), French and Saunders, Ben Elton and Victoria Wood.
And much more- I live in Telford — write now!!
CANADIAN AT HEART, cocky little monkey of an actress, who's very good at selling herself, but keeping her clothes on!
I need all the contacts or agents I can get.
I'm too much of a talent to waste.
Poe.
MIRROR MIRROR ON THE WALL, now that he has fetched her golden ball, the Princess doesn't want to kiss the frog, leaves him sitting on his rock.
If you want to cheer him up, write to him or kiss the chap, the male frog (22) awaits your letter.
RAUNCHY EX-MODEL, 17 YEARS, looking for a gorgeous, mad lad who enjoys a good laugh and good dance at a’ wild’club’So how about checking out a club one night in Nottingham/Derby/Leicester area followed by’a coffee’!'
Hurry and write, preferably with a photo.
WANTED: FEMALES, 16-35 YEARS, must be incredibly sexy, and have a sparkling personality.
I'm George, 5ft 10ins, light hair green eyes and reasonably handsome (and shy).
I like: dining out, pubs, cocktail bars, all kinds of music, especially Phil Collins and Eric Clapton.
Oh yeah, I live in the south-east and I'm 21, so get writing!
DOLPHINS AND SEAGULLS, silence and laughter David Sylvian and Charlie Parker John Cleese and Buster Keaton…who wants to write to this woman.
LONELY SCOTS LASSIE, living in England, into U2, INXS, Michelle Shocked and lots more.
Will write to anyone, anywhere All manic depressives and black-clothed persons accepted.
Love travelling (going to Austria this year), reading, cinema and all the usual malarky!
So get scribbling- Reply to all.
MAKE MY DAY!
Handsome hunk, 26, 5ft 10ins, slim muscu ar physique, dark hair and green eyes.
Likes sport, nitelife, and the company of attractive, extrovert girls.
Would love to write to, meet, any young ladies 16-30, who would fancy an exciting rendezvous some time in the near future.
Anywhere in England Photo please.
JULIE-ANN, 18, needs someone to keep her sane during the long winter months.
18+ males preferred.
Must love going out to pubs and clubs and having a good time!
Into most music, especially house- Replies guaranteed.
Photo not essential.
HAPPINESS COSTS NOTHING — well, 19p!
Lonely?
Tired?
Depressed?
Sick to death?
Yes?
Well, go away!
Only joking.
Tall, blond, blue-eyed 18-year-old male seeks famale 17+ to strike up a friendship.
Interests: most music, travel, having fun.
No photo, no worry.
Personality counts.
Write to David.
Q607 PGT.
It's the number-plate of a dark blue mini, but with the driver I want- Anyone, anywhere with any info on him, please write.
Desperate admirer.
I'M A PARISIAN GIRL seeking English penpals, over 17, mostly males, especially in the London area and with a view to an exchange during the summer holidays I enjoy nights out, music, cinema, literature.
Photo appreciated, all letters answered, promise' Write soon.
Thanks a lot!
DESPONDENT HIPPY — caring but reticent and indifferent towards trends and’ the norm’, needs love or just friendship from like-minded folk, male/female, long hair, 16-20, preferably in Somerset- Also to share a love for festivals, folklore and superstition, pagan sites and travel.
Help me somebody, please help me.
I'M DESPERATE: for any 20+ males who don't think about sex ALL the time- I'm female, 18, into very wild nights, INXS, Smiths, Bon Jovi, and having lots of fun.
Fancy coming to Italy with me in July ‘89?
Get those pens out now.
Photo please- Love, Lisa-X.
ARE YOU FEMALE, single, 18-28 and fed up with not getting replies from Get Personal?
Then write to this 24-year-old, 6ft 4ins male.
Nightclubbing and good music a must.
All letters answered- Photo appreciated.
but not essential.
WANTED — CRAZY INDIVIDUALS, male or female, to travel to Australia with me.
Only essentials are a sense of humour and itchy feet So what can you lose?
Get scribblin' and we'll sort something out.
I'm male and almost 20'
ABOUT LAST NIGHT — I'm desperate- For the soundtrack album, I mean, CD, record or tape, don't mind which.
I'm willing to pay.
If it's not for sale, I'll pay you to let me borrow it.
Get writing.
CARPHONE OUT OF ORDER, so could girls 17-21 drop me a line- Must like acid, Balearic, deep, etc- Love’ n’stuff, Bri.
I'M GOING TO TAKE YOU IN MY ARMS and kiss you, very hard and very quickly!
Get scribbling to me, if you're 18-21, female, pretty, and live in Cambridge- I'm 20 and like almost anything, including rock music and lipstick smudging!
Write with pic to James.
TENERIFE HERE WE COME.
We're six lads going on holiday in the summer to Tenerife- Can you tell us the best places to go beachwise and clubwise?
Write to Jimmy.
LAST NIGHT I DREAMT THE SOMEBODY LOVED ME.
But like everything else in my life, I'm sure it was lust a miserable lie.
Gasping but somehow still alive, 16, female, clumsy and shy — do you think you can help me?
WHAT ARE WE?
Will we ever really live?
Will I ever love again?
Did I truly love before?
Fatalistic female needed (with a talent for self-deprecation) to explain the mysteries of love, the female mind, and hat-blocking.
Send me a photo…of anybody.
HELP!
I've just been let loose in the big bad world and I'm scared to death!
I'm 17, an incurable romantic and I'm dying for cheery letters (all I ever seem to get are bank statements) Quick!
Write before letter-leprosy (hideous disease) rids you of your fingers' Cathy XXX.
21 YEAR-OLD STUDENT NEW TO LONDON looking for friends to write to and possibly meet.
Enjoy skiing, travelling and music.
All letters answered- Photo appreciated Love to hear from any Europeans.
HELLO!
DENMARK IS CALLING.
Danish boy, 20 years old, wants penpals all over the world.
Write to me if you like: going out, politics, computers, homebar all kinds of music — Bananarama, Fleetwood Mac, Kate Bush, Sandra, Jean Michel Jarre, Black, Diana Ross and INXS.
PS- I am not a bloodthirsty Viking!
ANY ONE WHO CARES ABOUT THE WORLD, everything in it, wants to change it, but sometimes despairs, please write to me' I'm also wondering where my life is going — perhaps you can help.
I'd really love to hear from students of anthropology or English.
I'm 17.
SCORPION WOLFCHILD, just recently moved to London, is stalking some attractive, mysterious, bright, sweet-smelling females to show him a good time.
I'm 21, 6ft 1in, fit, and have brown hair and blue eyes- I love 60s, house and underground music.
So give me a howl.
All replies answered quickly.
See you-Sean.
FALKLAND ISLAND BLUES.
Two young, fit squaddies desperately need the help of any females from 16 to 55 to save us from this dull and boring existence- Please, please keep us from talking to the penguins any longer— write now!
Photos preferred.
SARA AND GINA, 18 AND 16.
Morrissey, INXS, Bros and boogie.
Classic clothes, floral gums- We invite you to write.
Be a friend until the end.
MAN SEEKS WOMAN.
21-year-old Scotsman needs female for fun and romance.
Interests include travel, journalism, Prince, Deacon Blue, INXS.
If you're slim, honest and have a good sense of humour then send your photos to this lovesick laddie.
THE TIME HAS COME, a young girl said, to talk of many things: of shoes and ships and sealing wax, of cabbages and kings.
UNUSUAL FEMALE!
With a passion for MG sports cars, Marilyn Monroe, curry, skiing, Erasure and Kim Wide (but not usually together!).
Seeks male/female correspondents aged 16+ photos appreciated- So what are you waiting for?
Get writing' All letters guaranteed an answer.
ALTERNATIVE: COUNTRY BOY, 17, aesthetically pleasing and socially intercourseable.
Likes all Irish music, the arts, woolen suits, socks and hairy dogs I'm green-eyed, with long blond hair seeking attractive, long-legged brown-belly-buttoned. classy femme-type alternative.
If you don't write, you'll never know what you're missing!
BOOP BOOP BI DOOP!
Betty Boop look-alike, 17, mental, witty letter-writer Likes: cinema, dancing, food, mad people.
Music: All About Eve, Proclaimers, Hipsway, INXS,(basically anything) Seeking tall, dark male, 17+ sense of humour half a brain, blah, blah, blah.
Hot romantics welcome!
X Liz.
PS wacky photos would be nice.