

Your silver stamp of success Apply Now  If your company has successfully increased exports or achieved commercial success with innovative technology you could be eligible to apply for The Queen's Awards for Export and Technology.
The 1990 Awards will be extra special.
It is 25 years since the first Awards were made and a fitting celebration has been planned: * Each winner in 1990 will receive a special plaque as a permanent mark of their success * A special set of four Royal Mail postage stamps will be issued in April, when the Awards are announced.
* The Design Council will mount a major retrospective exhibition in London, which will tour to Cardiff, Glasgow and Manchester.
The Awards differ from personal honours in that they are given to a "unit" as a whole — management and employees working as a team.
There is strong competition for these separate Awards and Her Majesty The Queen grants them annually (announced on her birthday, 21 April) on the advice of the Prime Minister who is assisted by an Advisory Committee.
This Committee includes representatives of industry and commerce, the trade unions and Government departments.
It is supported by two Subordinate Committees, one examining the export applications and the other the technology applications.
Winning The Queen's Awards brings prestige, credibility and increased business.
For example, last year one UK firm was trying to organise a joint venture with Saudi Arabians, who wanted commercial references before signing the contract.
When the company knew it had won an Award it telexed the Saudis.
Back came the reply: "Don't bother about references, let business commence" .
The Awards are valid for five years and holders are entitled to fly the Award flag (or both flags if they score a double) at their premises.
You can also feature the emblem on goods produced in this country, on packaging and office stationery, in advertising, and on articles given to your employees — such as neckties, lapel badges, brooches, cuff links and tie-tacks.
This year three national papers carried special supplements to announce the successful companies, as did British Business magazine.
Further publicity can be gained from local presentation ceremonies later in the year.
While various factors are taken into account, including improved marketing organisation or new initiatives to cater for export markets and size of the unit's operations, a basic feature is that the unit must show a substantial and sustained increase in export earnings over three consecutive twelve monthly periods — the final year should end as near 31.10.89 as the unit's accounting system permits and may not be earlier than 31.12.88.
Firms with a sustained high level of exports over a longer period may provide further figures for consideration as a consistent exporter.
The Queen's Award for Export Achievement
Units are required to show a significant advance, leading to increased efficiency, in the application of technology to a production or development process in British industry or the production for sale of goods which incorporate new and advanced technological qualities.
The Queen's Award for Technological Achievement
An Award is only made when there is evidence that an innovation has achieved commercial success.
The R&D expenditure involved and the rate of return on this investment must be given.
Any organisation in the UK, Channel Islands or Isle of Man producing goods or services which meet the criteria is eligible for consideration.
Individuals are not eligible.
Who can apply?
Neither the type of activity nor size or location of the unit influences the assessment.
Apart from industry and commerce, research organisations, educational establishments and similar bodies, as well as central and local government undertakings with industrial functions, are eligible for the Technology Award if they can show they have contributed to industrial efficiency through improved technology.
You must apply on the official form — but don't be put off by that!
These forms and separate guidance notes, have been re-designed to ease completion and are available now (note the closing date of 31 October 1989 which is strictly adhered to.)
Simply complete the Apply NOW coupon:
When and how to apply