

INTRODUCTION
You will no doubt be familiar with the Tesco Healthy Eating campaign which started in 1985 and has been a major success.
We provide informative Healthy Eating leaflets an nutrition labelling on our products so you can be better informed about what you eat.
We now want to introduce you to an important new initiative under the heading of Tesco Cares.
As a major retailer we have responsibilities towards the health and well-being of the community, but they also extend to broader issues concerning our environment in general.
People are becoming increasingly aware of the need to take more care of our surroundings, to use our natural resources more economically and to improve the quality of life.
The special symbols you see here are arriving in your local Tesco store on different packs.
They represent products which have been singled out and improved to make them more environmentally friendly.
Some of them are explained in more detail on the following pages along with accounts of Tesco's efforts to tackle a range of problems from toxic chemicals to energy conservation.
This leaflet talks about the four main topics concerning all of us:
CARING FOR THE WORLD AROUND US
CARING FOR THE ENVIRONMENT
CONSERVATION
CUSTOMER SAFETY
So what exactly is the Ozone Layer?
What difference does lead-free petrol make?
What is biodegradable plastic?
Please read on.
We are, each of us, personally responsible for damaging our environment.
It is our individual decisions about how we travel, work, eat, heat our homes, wash our clothes', take our holidays and go about our daily lives that add up to the growing pressures on our planet.
WORDS OF SUPPORT FROM THE GREEN ALLIANCE
But by the same token, improving the quality of our environment is also in our own hands.
Small changes in the choices we make or the way we behave can make us part of the solution rather than the problem.
The Tesco Cares campaign gives us all a chance to help.
It shows us some simple ways in which we can all join the drive for a better environment.
I urge you to join the campaign, to read this leaflet and to take the opportunities it offers you to make your contribution to building a greener world for yourself and your children.
TOM BURKE Director of the Green Alliance
People need somewhere to live and a means of transport.
We buy things, use them and throw them away.
These sorts of activities take their toll on the world immediately around us.
Here are a few of the problems, along with some of the remedies.
When lead is added to petrol it improves a car's performance by increasing the octane rating.
Lead is toxic, particularly to pregnant mothers and children whose mental development and intellectual performance can be seriously impaired.
They are most at risk along our roads where the average family car can deposit a pound of lead (454g) per year out of the exhaust pipe.
Many new cars are now capable of using unleaded petrol and most modern cars can be altered to take it at very little expense with no loss of performance.
To encourage the use of unleaded petrol in the UK, Tesco has now installed at least one unleaded pump in nearly all of our 80 petrol stations.
The pump is easy to spot as the handle is green.
Lead-free Petrol
You will find a full list of our petrol stations serving lead free petrol in the Tesco Unleaded Petrol leaflet.
WHERE TO FIND UNLEADED PETROL AT TESCO
It is also company policy that all Tesco's car fleet of 1,600 vehicles are unleaded petrol and only cars that are capable of running on unleaded petrol are bought.
From October 1990 all new cars manufactured will have to be able to run on unleaded petrol.
If you want to use unleaded petrol now, check with your dealer, and look for more information in the Tesco guide — "Unleaded Petrol at Tesco" .
BIODEGRADABLE MATERIAL We can now make plastics which can break down and disappear into the soil.
This is done by adding starch to the material and this gives the soil bacteria something to feed on when the plastic is buried in the rubbish tip.
Following laboratory trials a limited number of materials will be tested in Tesco Stores.
These will be easily identified by a new biodegradable symbol.
BIODEGRADABLE PLASTICS
People enjoy shopping at Tesco, particularly the new Superstores.
These however take up space.
Tesco recognise this and are taking considerable steps to make sure flora and fauna are protected and conserved.
LAND CONSERVATION
At our new store in Solihull for , a meadow of great ecological importance, containing several species of rare Orchid was moved in 6 inch deep turves to a new location.This was done by co-operating with the Warwickshire Conservation Trust.
At Sandhurst in Berkshire, we have relocated several acres of wild flower meadow from the site of our new superstore.
Also, almost half the site will be dedicated to Bracknell Forest District Council to be used as a nature reserve, providing public access to what was previously inaccessible Ministry of Defence land.
As well as developing out-of-town stores, we also renovate derelict inner city sites, sometimes preserving buildings of architectural interest.
Many flowers are under threat of extinction because their bulbs are being uprooted from the wild to be replanted in the gardens of countries like ours.
For this reason we now sell only artificially cultivated bulbs and this is indicated on the packaging.
WILD BULBS AND CORMS
OZONE FRIENDLY With increasing frequency, scientists are discovering that our continuous use of certain chemicals is damaging the ecosystem of our planet.
Most recently, the controversy surrounding the use of Chlorofluorocarbons (CFC's) and the damage they are doing to the Ozone layer has received a great deal of publicity.
The ozone layer is located at an average height of 12 kilometres above the earth's surface an it screens us from 99% of the harmful ultra-violet radiation coming from the sun.
Ozone is an oxygen related gas and CFC's are believed to be damaging this important layer.
Even a 1% thinning of the layer could result in an increase of thousands of skin cancer cases every year.
THE OZONE LAYER AND CFC'S
In 1985 British scientists discovered a "hole" had appeared in the ozone layer above Antarctica.
CFC's are used in aerosols like hairsprays and deodorants, but since September 1988 Tesco's own products have been CFC-free and carry an "Ozone Friendly" symbol.
We have also developed meat and egg trays which are CFC-free.
CFC's are also used in refrigerators as coolants.
One which is considerably less damaging is now being introduced into our refrigeration systems at new Tesco stores.
As well as letting radiation in, both CFC's and carbon dioxide act like a blanket around the earth keeping solar radiation close to the surface instead of escaping into space.
This is known as the "Greenhouse Effect" — the subsequent gradual raising of the earth's temperature is expected to lead to climatic problems throughout the world unless the "effect" is checked.
Paradichlorobenzene (PDCB) is used to enhance the fragrance in toilet blocks.
It finds its way to the outside world via the water system and it is believed to be harmful to animals.
As an immediate response we have reduced the PDCB in our toilet products and we are currently reformulating to remove it completely.
THE GREENHOUSE EFFECT
PARADICHLOROBENZENE (PDCB)
PHOSPHATE FREE Phosphates, which can be found in sewage, industrial wastes and some fertilisers, have contributed to problems with excessive algae growth in lakes.
When algae are encouraged in this way, sunlight is blocked and the oxygen reduced in the water below.
This kills the fish and plant life.
PHOSPHATES & FERTILIZERS
Phosphates are also present in detergents and cleaners used in the home.
You can now buy phosphate free washing powder, cream cleaners an multi-purpose liquid cleaner in all stores so look out for the "phosphate-free" symbols appearing on products.
At Tesco we have a range of organic produce so you can buy fruit and vegetables that have been grown without the use of chemical fertilisers.
These are currently available in 57 of our stores and we plan to extend the range further.
Look out for the "Organically Grown" symbol.
We are beginning to understand that two of the most important resources worth conserving are energy and raw materials.
Many like steel, glass and paper can be re-used, and funnily enough it is cheaper the second time around.
For instance aluminium costs 95% less in energy when recycles which cuts down the use of fossil fuels and reduces pollution.
This is a typical list of waste produced by every one of us each year.
100 dustbins of rubbish
2 trees-worth of paper and board
90 drinks cans
100 food and petfood cans
Over 100 bottles and jars
45 kilos of plastic Much of that could be saved for other uses and not simply destroyed.
So what are we doing about it?
Tesco, working with local Councils and environmental groups, already provides bottle banks at 60 stores and we are developing recycling centres for glass, aluminium, steel and plastic.
In many areas, any money raised from the sale of recyclable materials goes to local charities.
RECYCLING
We are also experimenting with different processes for use on-site at our stores.
These include a compactor which collects waste polythene, cardboard and plastic wrapping.
RECYCLED PAPER It is estimated that certain plastics will take over 400 years to disintegrate, so that is why we are introducing more recyclable plastic, which can be melted down and re-used.
Containers like our soft drinks bottles are made of material which could be recycled into other packaging.
The amount of paper destroyed in the UK each year when quantified in numbers of trees equals a forest the size of Wales.
We are using increasing amounts of recycled paper and we plan to launch a range of recycled paper products.
Some of our packs which are recyclable now carry a symbol, and this will be added to many more in the future.
Tesco are well known for their energy saving initiatives.
We have won many awards and we co-operate with the Department of Energy on research effecting the retail industry.
ENERGY CONSERVATION
Every year our energy bill is a lot lower because we recycle energy.
By using special fluorescent lights, we save the equivalent of 1,000 tonnes of coal sufficient to illuminate 40 large comprehensive schools a year.
Refrigeration is another large expense, but we have economised by 20% — and that's enough power to run all the household fridges in Wolverhampton.
We even run our own Tesco Energy and Management (TEAM) awards each year, encouraging local authorities and others to economise.
From the layout of our stores to the construction of our packaging, we not only care about the environment, we are also concerned for the well-being of the public.
Selling merchandise in a public place carries heavy responsibilities, so we concern ourselves with the safety of our customers.
Visually handicapped people sometimes experience difficulty in distinguishing similar products and so Tesco has introduced braille where possible on products like household cleaners.
BRAILLE
In 1987, a law was passed which requires child resistant closures on certain very dangerous household products.
But we had already gone further than that and use child resistant caps on products wherever we can.
CHILD RESISTANT CLOSURES
It is estimated that at least 10,000 children and their parents are involved in the trauma of accidental poisonings every year.
To deter children from drinking household chemicals, we now ad Bitrex.
Bitrex is the bitterest non-toxic substance known, and even a tiny drop will encourage children to spit it out rather than swallow it.
There are now 17 products containing Bitrex ranging from multi purpose cleaner to disinfectant.
The majority are labelled "Bitrex Protected" .
These allow you to tell if a pack has been meddled with.
The ring-pulls on beer cans are a good example, so are drinks bottles where you have to break a seal to open them.
BITREX
TAMPER EVIDENT PACKS
There is a very active programme to provide tamper-evident packaging.
For instance, there is now an extra plastic ring on our mixer drinks, and our preserves such as cut comb honey have a paper strip across the lid to tell immediately if they have been opened.