

TESCO
TESCO CARES
AND NOW WE OFFER YOU THE CHOICE…
THE ENVIRONMENTAL ISSUE
Ozone is a gas closely related to oxygen.
It is located in a layer at an average height of 12 kilometres above the Earth's surface.
The ozone molecules are very thinly spread within this area but their fragile existence nevertheless serves a vital function to life.
They screen us from 99% of the sun's harmful ultra-violet radiation — the sort which causes skin cancer.
CFCs & THE OZONE LAYER
In recent years the use of CFCs (a group of gases known as chlorofluorocarbons) has caused increasing environmental concern.
CFCs are made and do not occur at all in nature.
They have been used for many years as propellants in aerosols, in the production of some foam packaging and as coolants in refrigerators.
CFCs are environmentally harmful in 2 ways:
CFCs contribute to what is known as the "Greenhouse Effect" .
When the sun's rays hit the Earth a lot of the heat is reflected back into space but some of it is kept within the Earth's atmosphere.
The problem is that more and more heat is being kept back by a blanket of gases surrounding the Earth (including Carbon Dioxide and CFCs) and as a result temperatures around the world are gradually increasing.
Scientists believe that if something is not done about this problem, glacial ice will melt raising the level of the sea and flooding vast areas of low-lying land.
Parts of London and Essex could disappear and Cornwall could become an island off the coast!
Other places such as Spain, could turn into desert.
THE GREENHOUSE EFFECT
OZONE FRIENDLY
There are a number of things we can do to try to prevent these problems:
WHAT CAN WE DO?
Use only CFC-free aerosols or alternatively buy products such as roll-on stick deodorants instead.
USE ONLY CFC-FREE AEROSOLS:
All Tesco aerosol products are CFC-free — look for the Tesco Cares "Ozone Friendly" symbol on the can.
We have also been encouraging our suppliers of other brands to stop using CFCs and all aerosols on Tesco shelves will be CFC-free by end of July 1989.
Wherever possible, buy CFC-free packaging.
At Tesco we have now started to use foam packaging, such as meat trays, which has been produced either without CFCs at all or with a CFC which is far less damaging to the Ozone layer.
CFC-FREE PACKAGING:
Unfortunately, we're not yet able to get a large enough supply of completely CFC-free material, but do hope to be able to in the near future.
Make sure that you have your refrigerator regularly serviced and dispose of old "fridges" carefully.
REGULARLY SERVICE REFRIGERATORS:
At Tesco, we are now installing refrigerators and air-conditioning systems in our stores which use a more ozone-friendly gas.
Our refrigeration service engineers check all equipment regularly and, when disposing of old equipment are instructed to collect the CFC gas carefully in cylinders which are then sealed for safe disposal.
You can do the same sort of thing with your refrigerator at home.
When servicing your "fridge" choose a service engineer whom you can trust and insist that he collects any gas that he bleed off in a proper cylinder.
When trading in or throwing away an old "fridge" try to make sure that it is not going to be just broken up without the CFC gas being properly collected first.
Some Local Councils can arrange this.
Remember, every little bit helps!
All Tesco own brand aerosols are now CFC-free, as are most brands.
By the end of July 1989 Tesco will only stock aerosols that are CFC-free.
THE PRODUCTS
Other CFC-free products stocked by Tesco are Tesco Garden Furniture (the foam in the cushions is CFC-free) and Style Plus Disposable Foam Cups.
…
NOW THERE IS SOMETHING WE CAN ALL DO TO MAKE THINGS CHANGE FOR THE BETTER
THIS LEAFLET IS PRINTED ON RECYCLED PAPER
Some of the items featured in this leaflet are available from our larger stores only.
Products specified were correct at time of going to press.
(June '89.)