

The President's New Year Message
Since the start of my Presidential year, Doreen and I have been ‘out and about’ at various divisional meetings and dinner dances, and would like to take this opportunity of saying a big ‘thank you’for the kindness and hospitality we have enjoyed during our travels.
I would also like to pay tribute to chairpersons, secretaries and committee members who give many hours of service to our  Institute .
From myself, as President, and on behalf of our faithful members, ‘thank you all’.
Now that 1992 has ended and a New Year has begun, I am confident that our Institute is in a strong position to deal with the challenges and opportunities which will come our way during 1993, and that we will steadily ‘go forward together and progress’.
To everyone — may I wish you all a very happy and prosperous New Year, and hope as many of you as possible will be able to join us at our annual conference, 3rd–6th June 1993 at the Peebles Hotel Hydro, Peebles, Scotland.
National President January 1993  
Annual Conference Peebles Hotel Hydro
Social Programme
Thursday 3rd June
Tweeddale District Council has kindly offered hospitality in the form of a Cocktail Party prior to dinner.
This will be held at the hotel.
Friday 4th June
Following the civic opening of conference and photograph, the ladies will have the morning free.
After an early lunch, they will travel by coach along the banks of the beautiful River Tweed to Selkirk, visiting Selkirk Glass and then Bowhill House and Country Park, the Scottish Borders home of the Duke of Buccleuch and Queensberry.
‘When summer smiled on Sweet Bowhill, and July's eve with balmy breath, waved bluebells on Newark Heath,…the aged Harper's Soul awoke.’
Bowhill, much as Sir Walter Scott saw it in the ‘Lay of the Last Minstrel’ is there for all to enjoy.
Outstanding art collection with works by Canaletto, Claude, Raeburn, Reynolds and Gainsborough as well as the world famous Buccleuch collection of portrait miniatures.
Its magnificent rooms contain tapestries, superb French furniture, Sevres and  Meissen china and silver.
There are strong associations with many historic characters including James Duke of Monmouth, Queen Victoria and Sir Walter Scott.
Many miles of paths meander through beautiful woodland, parkland and alongside lochs and rivers.
There is also an exciting woodland adventure play area with aerial rope ways, giant slides, wild west fort and much more to entertain the children.
On returning to the hotel, provided that the coaches do not break down (remember ‘85, Christine does!),
David Jordan will be in charge of the inter-divisional competition for the George Wood Cup, which I have been assured by Conor Massey, is in the safe hands of George and Sheila Rose.
Following dinner, we shall be entertained by the Bobby Harvey Scottish Show Band.
Saturday 5th June
Saturday has been deliberately left free so that the ladies can do as they please, either in and around Peebles, or perhaps venture to ‘Auld Reekie’, our beautiful capital city of Edinburgh.
It is the intention of the National President to ensure that the business sessions are completed by lunchtime, if not before, thus leaving the delegates with the afternoon free.
The children will have their tea and be entertained during the banquet, prior to which the adults can enjoy the music of Peebles Pipe Band, thus creating a setting for what we hope will be a truly enjoyable and memorable evening.
The Scottish Division look forward to your company at Peebles and the National President, Steve and his lady, Doreen, hope to reciprocate the kindness and hospitality shown to them during their year.
From the Editor…
AN ARTICLE in this magazine written by the editor must mean only one thing…
I am embarrassed about something and want to explain!
The people who probably will be most interested in my explanation are those in Scotland and perhaps those in the North West, because those two Divisions had the distinction of ‘advertising’ their Annual Dinners in the Autumn edition of ‘The Embalmer’, either in the Calendar of Events or as a separate notice, and saw the magazine arrive after the event!
So what is the explanation?
Quite simply, I lost the magazine!— the distribution is so sophisticated these days that there is a period of two weeks or so when our publication is in hands other than ours and all it needs is a breakdown in communications for the system to come to a halt with all parties oblivious to the standstill, which is what happened with the Autumn edition.
I can assure readers that particular problem will not happen again, all parties involved will be contacted throughout the distribution process until it arrives at members' addresses.
If the system is so ‘sophisticated’ that outside organisations are handling our magazine and problems like the one in Autumn occur why bother with that system? why not go back to good old postage stamps?…the reason is because we commenced distribution by Royal Mail's ‘Presstream’at the beginning of 1992 which involves the sender sorting all its UK mail into postcode order, the benefit being considerable savings from two discounts, firstly the Presstream pricing is lower than the standard postage rate and secondly an extra discount is earned because we have done the sorting instead of Royal Mail.
The savings are so significant that we can pay a specialist mailing company to envelope, sort, bag and post the magazine for us (this is a standard practice, very few organisations have sufficient staff to do this mammoth task, we certainly haven't).
At the moment we are also paying for a specialist company to provide address labels in postcode order (to quality for Presstream) because until a few weeks ago the National Office computer could not do this task.
These fees are also covered by the postal discounts but an obvious saving can be made by producing our own address labels.
John Stephens is aware of this expense and is aiming to have the new computer ready to fulfil this function any time now.
So, in closing I would to take this opportunity to apologise for a late magazine last Autumn, it was the only hiccup in the new system, and assure members that, despite losing our magazine to outsiders for a little while, it is well worth it…happy reading.
A tribute to 
Born in Nelson, Lancs 1920
Left school at 15 — Keen sportsman
School champion at swimming
Played football for Nelson
Keen cyclist, member of Nelson Wheelers
TOM joined the family business as the fourth generation and served in the RAF during the second world war.
On leave in 1942 he married Sylvia and then spent three years overseas.
He often relived the war years and still remembered his many comrades, especially those who did not return.
Tom returned to the family business and was a dedicated funeral director for over fifty years, he loved carpentry and was a sheer perfectionist.
His other love was embalming, becoming a member in 1955, proceeding from there to become an examiner and member of the Examinations Board, he continued to serve them up to his death in 1992.
For this and other services to the BIE he was honoured with a Fellowship and was also the National President in 1977/78.
His interest in education was very obvious and his attendance at Keele was evidence of this.
One of his proudest moments in his BIE life was the appointment of his son, Jeffrey, as National President in 1990/91.
Tom had an amazing knack of being able to put all his candidates for the practical examination at their ease, it certainly worked for me in 1967 and was still working for our students in 1991.
Membership of Rotary was always a delight to Tom, as was membership of his Masonic Lodge where he held top offices in both organisations.
During his last days was his Golden Wedding Anniversary, many of his BIE friends being able to be present with Tom and Sylvia at its celebration.
Many visitors to him made his time more bearable, most famous visitor was Princess Diana (yes, the real one!), but his close friends were always made most welcome by Sylvia who lavished all the love and care that ones who knew her would expect.
A family man in every sense of the word, he loved to be with Sylvia, Philip and Jeffrey and their families.
One abiding memory for me was on my first visit to his home in 1965.
I was shown the furniture that Tom had made for his marital home — all of the drawers with dovetails, sliding in and out without effort.
He was so proud of what he physically produced and was never happier than with his cabinet making tools around him, surrounded by wood.
Tom was a perfectionist and will be sadly missed by our Institute.
‘Well done, thou good and faithful servant.’
, FBIE.
Misleading cultural perceptions of death — a need for better death education by Ken Saunders
CAN you imagine a situation at a cemetery — the funeral procession arriving, formally attired people getting out of cars at a marked spot, but some of these well-dressed mourners removing their jackets, rolling up sleeves, unloading picks and spades from the boot and starting to dig the grave; possibly with the professionals cum gardeners watching from a distance and gloating at the mess these amateurs are making?
Could death education ever go this far as to teach the bereaved how to dig a grave and incidentally earn a discount?
It is already happening in New Zealand where you can qualify for a remission of 60 if you dig the grave yourself, provided you can do it to the proper standards as prescribed by the local district council and bring your own tools.
One doubts that this will catch on here but helps with an introduction to lead me into a number of important themes relating to culture and death education.
Most of us are aware that the traditional aims of death education have been to socialise individuals to the inevitable event in their lives.
Social scientists define socialisation as the process by which people learn the patterns of behaviour considered normal in our society.
However, death socialization and death attitudes have assumed more complex dimensions and in the broadest sense now encompass religion, philosophy, medicine, psychology, biology, demography, ecology, economics and politics.
My discussion has already set the parameter by the title above and I shall confine myself to these social issues of culture and education.
It is interesting to reflect on how we in this century tend to minimise or maximise the potency of death in shaping our social systems.
An example of the former is an orientation towards death denial.
In the words of Gorer (1965), if we can expel death from everyday life, the subject becomes taboo as a topic of disapproval and shame.
If the prevailing culture preoccupation with youth is equally a kind of self-deception, or shall we say a collective pretence of death denial.
Large sums spent on cosmetic surgery to obscure the aging process and the spenders' own mortality is best evidence of this trend.
Then again the need of some individuals to flirt with death (like hang gliding, swimming in crocodile waters, rock climbing or parachuting) in order to feel alive is less easily explained.
Although we no longer identify with the traditional practices of ancestor worship, the centrality of death is reaffirmed by wars and indeed, the frequency in which the dead are brought before us in television, in literature and politics in contemporary life.
But there is another, and very serious cultural problem, as discussed by Brian Masters, author of the book ‘Killing for Company’(1991), based on the Nilsen case.
He expresses extreme concern about how the entertainment industry is able to contaminate the mind of the public.
There are, for example, far too many films portraying psychopaths, homicidal maniacs and serial killers, the audience being spared none of the morbid details.
One of a number of examples he gives is ‘The Silence of the Lambs’, released in the West End of London in May, 1991.
This film was then the hit of New York.
It depicts the killer Dr. Hannibal Lecter as a genius who displays all the characteristics of a psychopath: he is civilised, articulate, manipulative, proud of his intellectual superiority and teasingly sarcastic.
Lecter, a practising psychiatrist himself then in prison for horrible crimes, had been enlisted to help a floundering FBI agent to find another serial killer.
One of Lecter's erstwhile victims was a musician from the Baltimore Philharmonic Orchestra, whose body was found minus its pancreas and thymus, which organs were served up by Lecter in a dinner he gave next day for the conductor and president of the orchestra.
It appeared he also liked to skin the bodies of his victims and had a capability to swallow eyeballs.
To Masters, this film is a vivid parable of the very notion of contamination and a badge our species wears with shame.
Such cultural manipulations of the public mind beg the question of the kind of death education that is presently available in our schools.
Although more people are aware of the term ‘Euthanasia’ and what this entails, general attitudes about death and its meaning are at best still ambivalent as is the case also in America, but where there is evidence since the 1960s of a burgeoning of courses in schools, colleges and some universities.
One is aware that educators in this field are treading sacred ground and expose themselves to accusations that they create unrealistic expectations (say, elaborate rituals), or that they encroach upon the territory of other professionals (the Clergy, perhaps).
As to schools, a DES spokesperson let it be known that such concerns are left to the LEAs and that studies of this kind are likely to be part of religious education.
An examination of the curricula of twenty LEAs enabled me to discover the word ‘death’ to be included in a third of the schemes for the different age groups from 7 to 14, although tucked away beneath such general headings as ‘Beliefs, Practices, Customs and Artefacts’; ‘Rites of Passage (e.g. Initiation through Baptism, Burial Rites’); ‘Self-understanding (e.g. Integrity, Pride, Humility, Loneliness, Suffering, Bereavement and Death’).
For younger children the syllabus contents included ‘Mysteries and Puzzles of Life’, taking in birth and death, or ‘Exploring Death through Stories’, the ‘Death of Pets’ and such.
One assumes that where the subject of death is touched on, the actual time given to it will be relatively short.
Some of the schemes thought out are, however, in a general way quite impressive.
An incident more affecting adult death education worth mentioning has come to light more recently.
Two curators at the V & a have spent months preparing an exhibition entitled ‘The Art of Death’, to be supported by a lecture on ‘Tarnished Coronets and Rotting Velvet’, and followed by a Mourning Supper of Hippocras and Cinnamon Cakes in the museum's restaurant, with members suitably attired for the occasion.
What an event that would have been.
At the time Ruth Guilding reported on the sudden cancellation of this educational occasion in the London Evening Standard (14.3.1991).
The short press release announced the decision by the trustees to postpone the exhibition on the ground that potential loss of life in the Gulf made it insensitive to proceed.
An earlier instruction to staff forbidding further publicity meant that little was known by press or public about this exhibition The art world condemned the decision as excessively  cautious, suggesting an embarrassment about the subject of death which people never felt in previous centuries.
As members will know, the exhibition has since taken place with great success, but the absence of the previously planned ceremonials (dress and food) at my visit left me disappointed.
I have barely scraped the surface of my topics singled out for illumination.
It may motivate readers to dig more deeply or may be make a practical contribution to death education in the local schools.
Face to Face with Tutankhamun
The Royal Mummy
SEVENTY years after the discovery of the tomb of Tutankhamun, people are now able to come ‘face to face’ with the king's mummy in a fascinating new exhibition now open in Dorchester to mark the 70th Anniversary of the discovery of the young pharaoh's tomb.
Visitors to the Exhibition, will, for the first time, be able to experience the mystery of the royal mummy.
Only a few select people have ever seen the mummy of Tutankhamun.
Ever since Howard Carter discovered his tomb in November 1922, the pharaoh's mummy has remained in his tomb unseen by the public.
Now, an amazing new technique has made it possible to produce an accurate facsimile of Tutankhamun's mummy which will form the centre-piece of the Exhibition.
This technique has enabled extremely accurate facsimiles of ancient bodies to be produced.
Developed in Britain, it uses medical skeletons and actual animal skin to re-create the body.
The bones are first modified and altered to conform to the skeletal dimensions of the body, which is then built up from the inside outwards using organic substitute flesh.
It is expected that the process will make it possible for rare and fragile mummies and other bodies such as the European bog bodies and the recently discovered Ice Man to be accessible to the public without putting the originals at risk.
Face to Face with Tutankhamun, an ‘exhibition within an exhibition’ is being held at the Tutankhamun Exhibition, Dorchester.
It features beautiful and accurate facsimiles of the treasures of Tutankhamun, including the famous gold burial mask, specially produced for the Exhibition, many of which have been made from the same materials and in the same way as the originals.
Perhaps the most unusual feature of the Exhibition, is the re-creation of part of the pharaoh's tomb, including the antechamber, filled with all its treasure as discovered in 1922.
With the closing (for conservation reasons) of the actual tomb of Tutankhamun in Egypt, the only place where it is possible to enter and see ‘the tomb’, albeit in accurate facsimile, is in Britain at Dorchester!
The tomb and treasures in Dorchester have been featured in The Face of Tutankhamun, a new BBC documentary series which recently featured on BBC 2.
Face to Face with Tutankhamun is open seven days a week from 9.30 a.m. to 5.30 p.m.
Hepatitis B — the most important infectious occupational hazard
HEPATITIS B is the most serious occupational infectious disease threatening healthcare workers today, a group of international specialists has agreed.
The group, all leading specialists in occupational health and safety, has called for action against the virus, through information about the risks of hepatitis B and vaccination for all staff who are at risk of acquiring infection through direct physical contact with blood or body fluids.
The dangers of hepatitis B infection were discussed at the First International Congress on Occupational Health for Healthcare Workers, which was held in Freiburg, Germany in September.The Congress was organised by the International Commission on Occupational Health (ICOH) and the Freiburg Institute for Occupational and Social Medicine (FFAS).
Dr Elizabeth McCloy, Director of Occupational Health and Safety at Manchester Central Hospitals Trust, UK, and a special adviser to the Viral Hepatitis Prevention Board (VHPB), alerted delegates to the dangers of hepatitis B, which, despite being preventable, continues to pose a serious threat to healthcare workers.
‘Hepatitis B has long been recognised as a risk to healthcare workers and is now considered by many authorities to be the most important infectious occupational disease, and yet we are still failing our workers,’ she said.
The warning was reinforced by data from Dr Friedrich Hofmann of the Department of Occupational Health at the University of Freiburg and chairman of the symposium.
He revealed that, during 1991, hepatitis B was the most frequently-reported, occupationally-acquired infectious disease in Germany.
This information was derived from an analysis of the claims received by the German occupational accident insurers BGW for occupationally-acquired infectious diseases.
The analysis showed that 40.9 per cent of claims were for hepatitis B.
However, the risk varied between different groups of workers, as measured by the number of needlestick injuries (accidents involving used needles) and blood markers indicating exposure to the virus.
‘German charwomen are number one in the league for needlestick injury,’ Dr Hofmann stated.
‘They are also top of the league for antibodies against the virus (23 per cent positive) compared with 13 to 15 per cent of laboratory workers and nurses, and they have the highest incidence of hepatitis B.
Another study, carried out by Dr Pierre Jacques from IDEWE Occupational Health Services in Belgium, looked in more detail at the level of markers in the blood of different medical specialities.
His group identified antibodies to the hepatitis B virus in the blood of 38.1 percent of laboratory staff in psychiatric institutions, 31.8 per cent of haemodialysis staff, 18.4 per cent of general laboratory workers compared with only 1.3 per cent of pharmacists
But as Dr Johannes Hallauer, Head of Communicable Diseases and Hygiene Section at the German Ministry for Health and a VHPB special adviser, pointed out, the degree of risk cannot be calculated by looking solely at a person's job title.
‘It is not job description or physical place of work that determines risk, it is the frequency of exposure to blood,’ he stressed.
And hepatitis B is very infectious.
Only 2 to 5ul of blood are needed to transmit the virus during a needlestick injury.
‘Hepatitis B is 40 to 100 times more infectious than HIV,’ Dr Hallauer warned.
‘In the USA, there has been a total of 29 cases of occupationally-acquired HIV reported in healthcare workers compared with thousands of new cases of hepatitis B transmitted at work each year.’
Dr Hallauer summed up the importance of vaccinating healthcare workers against hepatitis B, not only to protect their own health but also for the good of others.
‘Hepatitis B is one of the most serious infectious diseases the world faces with over 350 million carriers of the virus worldwide.
‘Worldwide 3–6,000 people are estimated to die of hepatitis B every day; one to two million every year.
Fortunately we have a vaccine to prevent hepatitis B, but how can we tackle the global problem of Hepatitis B when we as healthcare professionals are not even vaccinated ourselves?’ he said.
Where is ‘Heard on my Rounds’?
Those readers who like the gossip found in ‘Heard on my Rounds’ will have noticed that the column has not appeared in this issue.
The reason is that there is nothing to put in — so please, if you have some news, or know something interesting about a member (that can be published without attracting litigation) let the editor know.
The ‘Calendar of Events’ column is looking a little thin as well.
Divisional Secretaries, please keep the magazine informed of meetings, dinners and any other occasion that your Division is involved in.
It is difficult to plan far enough ahead for a quarterly magazine, but we have been quarterly for two years now and still manage a Calendar in most editions so please, members and secretaries…help the editor to make your magazine an interesting and informative read for the Institute.
Reproduced from the London Evening Standard…
UNDER the heading of ‘Obscure objects of desire’, an article in which one Julian Durlacher finds ‘a magazine for you’ which covers an extraordinary range of subjects such as the British Bee Journal, the Budgerigar, and Smooth, ‘a fashion magazine for those who love rubber, leather and vinyl’, came mention of the official organ of the BIE.
It read: ‘The Embalmer has been ‘devoted to furthering the interest, acceptance and practice of embalming throughout the world’ since the early Thirties.
Although they try to keep the tone up-beat with jolly, first-person accounts of parachuting, a sombre atmosphere prevails.
There's only so much you can do to jazz up articles on the efficacy of heart tapping in achieving full blood drainage.
But the embalmer's world is not a cloistered one: Winter ‘92 included a review of the Art of Death exhibition at the V & a , whose message of demystification is one embalmers throughout the world hold dear.’
(Submitted by )
Scottish Prize  Drawer Winners
On 7th November the Scottish Division held a Dinner Dance at the Caledonian Hotel, Edinburgh.
During the evening the winners of the Divisional ‘Christmas Prize  Drawer ’ were announced.
The lucky people are listed below:
1st Prize:, Cupar, Fife
2nd Prize: of D E Shoes, Anstruther, Fife
3rd Prize:(address not necessary!)
All three prizes were food hampers of varying sizes.
Health and Safety in the Funeral Service
AFTER two years of research and collating information the re-written, ‘Code of Health & safety for the Funeral Service’ has been published.
Its identity and appearance has changed — gone is the glossy apple green cover of the eighties version and gone is the cumbersome title, instead a simple title and many more pages of information.
Readers may be concerned at the loss of the glossy pages believing that format to be more serviceable in a wet environment but the cartridge paper used on the new book is equally strong and considerably cheaper!
Like the original handbook the new publication has been published jointly by the CFSMA, BIE, NAFD and BIFD.
A small working party with representation from all four organisations has reviewed and amended copy during the stages of development.
An important point to consider is that Local Authority Environmental Health Officers have shown a keen interest and are anxious to adopt the handbook as their working code when dealing with funeral premises.
Nobody relishes the thought of the EHO arriving unannounced, but there should be some comfort in the knowledge that the officer could well be working within our guidelines.
A new departure for the handbook is the inclusion of advertisers and the publishing protection of copyright, along with its intended inclusion on the Barbour Index for access by outside agencies.
This has enabled the publishers to receive instant revenue from the advertisers and ongoing income from royalties and cover price sales.
When the accounts are prepared in the new year the publishing cost per kindred associations will be negligible.
With ever changing legislation and medical progress, the handbook is destined to be out of date after a relatively short life.
Fortunately the whole subject of Health & safety is now constantly monitored within the funeral industry and the future updating and reprinting of the handbook can be dealt with on a more regular basis.
— BIE Publications
Guidelines for embalming infectious cases
THE following notes have been available from National Office for some time, but their inclusion in this edition of ‘The Embalmer’ is to coincide with the recent publication of ‘Health & safety in the Funeral Service’(See above).
The conclusion states that the BIE recommends that embalming of infectious cases should not take place, the guidelines are merely a service to members.
At a time when the funeral service is aware of the ‘grieving process’ and relatives' needs to view the remains of their loved ones, it should be noted that the reason for this recommendation is a legal requirement for the Institute.
Contact
The removal vehicle should be equipped with disinfectant, bodybag and disposable apron and gloves.
If the deceased has died in hospital, the bodybag should have been provided but the other items will be required for handling by funeral operatives.
The apron and gloves should be destroyed appropriately after the deceased has been placed in the shell or coffin.
A similar procedure should be adopted for transferring the deceased from the removal vehicle to the embalming theatre.
Protection
The following DISPOSABLE items should be worn by the embalmer before treatment commences:
Double gloves
Long-sleeved gown Apron
Over-trousers
Shoe covers
Safety goggles
Breathing mask (to cover nose and mouth)
Hair cover
Embalming
As the sheeting and clothing is gently removed from the body, all surfaces of the material and skin should be sprayed with a suitable disinfectant.
Body orifices should be sprayed, swabbed and packed.
The formaldehyde solution should be used in a stronger format than with non infected cases and information regarding the ratio should be obtained from your supplier beforehand.
Cavity treatment should be delayed for as long as possible to allow the injected solution to remain in contact with blood and other body fluids and care to avoid spillage should be exercised when carrying out drainage.
Anti-splash tubing should be used to avoid aspirated material causing bubbles which could escape into the atmosphere.
If the case has been autopsied, all organs should be sprayed liberally prior to placing a viscera bag and care should be exercised to avoid catching the rough edge of bones around the rib cage.
All incisions should be thoroughly sealed after suturing.
Instruments
All instruments should be immersed in either a suitable disinfectant or minimum 5 per cent formaldehyde solution as soon as treatment has been completed.
The same solution should be used for washing down all surfaces.
Conclusion
The BIE DOES NOT RECOMMEND the treatment of infectious cases but issues this guideline as a service to its members 
Notes from national office
1.
Members' Names and Addresses
Will all members please help us to correct all our records by advising us immediately of any errors in names, addresses and especially in postcodes, on correspondence from the Institute, including Embalmer Envelopes.
2.
Answering Machine
Nobody likes answering machines, but if we are out at the bank, or out of normal hours when you telephone, please leave a clear note of your name and telephone number with your message.
We will reply as soon as possible.
3.
Overdue Subscriptions
Reminders have been sent during the year, and the attention of all members is drawn to Rule 19, which reads as follows:
Any member failing to pay his subscription for one year or more may be dismissed from membership by the Council at a duly convened meeting, or by a postal ballot of the voting members of Council.
A member who is dismissed under this Article may be reinstated as a member on payment of all arrears of his subscription due at the time of his dismissal, and also any appropriate admission fee which may be decided by the Council.
Of course members would not wish to lose their hard won membership, and a renewed request is now made for all 1992 subscriptions unpaid.
Members will be excluded for non-payment, and the Council is likely to introduce a readmission fee at its next meeting.
4.
Computerisation
By the time this note appears, the changeover from manual to computerised records and supporting data should have been completed.
We must thank members for their kindly tolerance during recent weeks, and we hope soon, to achieve our aim of answering today's queries today, whether written or verbal.
5.
Student Registration Fees
A reminder, please, to all tutors.
The student registration fee from 1st January 1993 is 75.
Students cannot be registered until fees are received in full and fees must have been paid before tutors begin teaching.
6.
Tutors/Students Packs (Modular System) By now all tutors should have received their free copy of the above, with a request from National Office to check the text and to advise of any errors or omissions without delay.
This will assist the National Education Committee in introducing this as the required Institute precept and practice.
7.
Thanks Your friendly and warm welcome has been very much appreciated.
Whilst it is invidious to mention names, would like to place on record his sincere thanks to all those who have given advice and support, but especially to  who has been, and still is, a tower of strength.
Minutes of a Meeting of National Council held at National Office Thursday 15th October 1992 a 10.30am.
In Attendance:
Officers
President
National General
Secretary & treasurer 
Editor
Divisional Representatives
Midland
Northern Ireland
North West
Scottish
Southern
South West
Yorkshire
Belgium
Irish
Australasia
Midland
Appointed Representatives
Examinations Authority
Trustees
Education Committee
In Attendance
(1) Apologies
(2) Obituaries
The President called all present to stand in silent tribute to the passing of the following members:
(3) Minutes
The minutes of the previous meeting held on 27th February 1992 were approved, having been circulated, on the proposal of , seconded by , and signed by the President.
(4) Matters Arising
No news had been received from  regarding the membership application from .
It was proposed by , seconded by  and carried that the matter be held in abeyance.
should be reminded.
(5) Correspondence
reported that the correspondence with the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food regarding burial at sea of embalmed bodies was still ongoing.
(6) Executive Committee Report
gave a report, summarised as follows:
(a)
The audit charge in the Memorial Fund Accounts would be corrected in future.
(b)
was willing to write articles in ‘The Embalmer’ on subjects requested by members.
This would be reported in the next issue.
(c)
had received a letter from an Australian student on reconstruction work, with photographs.
This was to be considered by National Council.
(d)
‘The Embalmer’ would include press releases on viral hepatitis.
(e)
The Institute bankers were being changed from Lloyds to the Royal Bank of Scotland in order to obtain better interest rate bands on cash deposited.
Remaining items would be covered under the Agenda for the present meeting.
(7) Matters from Divisions
reported the proposition of a technical member.
After discussion  reported that the National Education Committee was considering the matter in conjunction with NVQ.
A degree of Associate Membership might be applicable if confined to interested parties, such as Doctors.
felt that the Rules needed to be changed but that more details were required.
felt that associated members might be connected with suppliers but not with Funeral Directors.
referred to the possibility of patronage and sponsorship money.
stated that NVQ could affect membership degrees, and that the matter should be kept under continuing review.
agreed and  accepted  's further comments and would report to his Division that these matters were under consideration by the National Education Committee.
stated that most members would, and many did carry out work on infectious cases, but medical opinion was that this should not happen.
reminded the meeting of the A4 sheet of Institute recommendations stating that such work should not be done.
stated that in his  opinion that if the Institute did recommend such action and an embalmer became infected as a result, the Institute could be open to legal action.
Local Authorities took the same attitude.
stated that members needed official visible support as many were employed and if they refused could face disciplinary action or dismissal.
He proposed that the Institute's official view be publicised prominently in ‘The Embalmer’.
This was seconded by  and carried.
(8) Matters Arising from the 63rd AGM
stated that time had overtaken such matters and there was nothing not covered elsewhere.
(9) Financial Report
reported that overdue subscriptions were being vigorously pursued.
Actual results for the current year would be close to budget, and a break-even position seemed possible if present trends continued.
put the following to the meeting:
(a)
Divisional Grant should remain at 230, but the extra payment option in case of need be increased from 75 to 100.
(b)
Subsistence should remain at 11.50 per day, as this had been increased ahead of inflation in recent years.
(c)
Hotels should be increased from 45 to 55 per night for a single room in line with costs being experienced.
Twice this rate was applicable for the President and his lady, or the appropriate double room rate if less.
(d)
Car mileage should be increased from 24.5p to 25p for return journeys of up to 100 miles, or any other amount that the Finance Act should decide.
These were agreed en bloc by the Meeting, on the proposal of , seconded by .
They were effective immediately.
(10) Data Processing Equipment
reported that delivery of the computer was expected shortly and that the writing of the software programs was under way.
Apart from teething troubles no major problems were expected.
Disposal of existing equipment at the agreed prices had been confirmed.
A simple standard accounting package was required, in order to dispose of hand-written cash books, at a small cost.
(11) Publications
The Report of the committee was considered.
It was noted that large stocks of the Haler text book (still selling well) existed and after discussion it was agreed that two pallet loads held in store should be destroyed, leaving a stock of approximately 1000.
Value of these was roughly 5000.
Much of the teaching content was obsolete.
The new text book was in course of preparation.
National Office was producing new packs as soon as possible and these would be distributed free to tutors.
Mr W Doggart emphasised that tutors would be expected to adhere to the contents of the packs which would become official Institute precept and practice.
Tutors were being requested to examine the new packs in detail for errors and omissions to be corrected.
reported that quotations were being sought for the 1993 ‘Embalmer’ magazines.
The present publishers, John Horbury & Associates, had quoted with an increase of only five per cent and they would be retained due to their reliability and flexibility.
On the recommendation of Mr D Kaye it was proposed by , seconded by  and carried unanimously that display advertising rates be increased by five per cent(rounded to the nearest £).
No increase in semi-display rates was applied.
pointed out that ‘The Embalmer’ did not currently use exclusive material and technical articles showing bodies etc. and the members present agreed that this should now be done.
reported that the Viral Hepatitis Prevention Board had listed all occupations vulnerable to blood-borne diseases, but that funeral directors and embalmers were not included.
This would be mentioned in the next ‘Embalmer’.
The new Careers leaflet was in stock and National Office had inserted it in the new student packs.
had asked permission to contact members on the Institute mailing list.
Mr  referred to the provisions of the Data Protection Act, and it was agreed that permission would not be given.
(12) National Education Committee
The Report to National Council was discussed in detail.
The tutors accredited list had again been updated.
Two tutors training sessions had been held and five candidates were to be examined on 28th October.
The post-graduate course in restorative art was in an advanced state of preparation.
It was not included in the main embalming course.
NVQ was discussed in detail.
read a letter to Clear unit regarding units of competence.
reported that he had attended a meeting and emphasised that the Institute did not wish to opt out.
He explained that by 1996 all trades and industry would be covered by NVQ's and government funding for training would only be given for NVQ's.
A unit of competence was split into various elements.
NVQ was a work-based assessment, not by written examinations, but if this were needed, it would have to be put through the Clear unit.
confirmed that he was willing to be co-opted onto the National Education Committee to assist with NVQ development and this was agreed by the meeting.
stated that regarding practical-based people, large organisations were likely to introduce training for embalmers, perhaps under NVQ.
The Institute must look to the future.
confirmed that NEC had the matter in hand and would adopt the format required by NVQ.
This might be a separate grade of membership.
A general discussion ensued regarding funding and practical problems.
and the members of the NEC were thanked for their work.
gave a detailed report regarding TEFS (Training and Education in the Funeral Service).
A Committee had been formed to see NVQ's through and a meeting had recently been held.
stated that the present Meeting needed to appoint a Deputy Director of TEFS in place of the late .
was concerned that the Institute was not controlling its own destiny, and that there was conflict between various procedures.
pointed out that the Institute must accept a commitment of time and cost to ensure that its interests were safeguarded.
Concern was also expressed by various members about the possibility of the Institute examinations and training being affected by, and possibly superseded by NVQ.
proposed and  seconded the appointment of  as a Director of TEFS and of  as Deputy Director to act in his absence.
This was carried unanimously.
(13) National Examination Authority
reported that the Authority had met once to discuss a complaint regarding a practical examination.
This had been investigated and the action taken was regarded as satisfactory.
A letter was considered regarding a tutor whose students were not registered and who were not up to examination standard.
It was agreed that the NEC should take appropriate action, and the letter was passed to ; on the proposal of , seconded by .
It was noted that the Examination Board had prohibited un-registered students from sitting the November examinations.
(14) Health and Safety Handbook
In view of its importance this was taken under a separate heading.
reported that it was currently being published and printed.
The Institute would be seen to have played an important part in the production.
The Council recorded its appreciation of Mr D Kaye's work.
(15) NAFD International Committee
There was nothing to report.
(16) Memorial Trust
was pleased to report that equipment to the value of 200 had been supplied to a  (no relation) in Bury St Edmunds.
Applicants for the scholarship were to be interviewed early in November.
A visit was expected in the Spring.
The Trustees might arrange a cosmetic course based in the Midlands.
The NEC was to consider these.
(17) Public Relations
(a)
A broadcast on embalming by , recorded twelve months ago, had recently been played on Radio Four.
This was a considerable success and showed embalming in a compassionate and considerate light.
A letter was to be sent congratulating and thanking .
(b)
A series of interviews had been recorded with 94 years old  in Wellingborough, probably the oldest member.
This was part of a programme about funeral business in the 1920's.
A broadcast would follow.
(c)
reported that , an Environmental Health Officer in North Wales, had requested information about the Institute and what it stood for.
It was agreed that where possible this should be extended into other areas.
Members were urged to get to know their local Environmental Health Officer.
(d)
and  had seen a TV programme the previous evening relating to death.
Both thought it natural, caring and realistic.
felt it had not helped embalming as it was not in a sufficiently dignified manner.
(18) NAFD/BIE/CFSMA/BIFD/ Liaison Committee
There was nothing to report.
(19) Company of Fellows
reported that a meeting had been held on the previous evening.
No new Fellows had been created.
There was a request to Council to investigate the position of those who had completed the first module but were not registered and whether they should be allowed to attend the Keele Conference.
replied that such students were excluded because they had not passed the Foundation Module, and the NEC was thus complying with the Rules.
pointed out that previously a preliminary examination had applied, but tutors now trained students to take the Foundation Module.
In his view the Rules needed changing.
stated that it was only Keele they were excluded from.
emphasized that persons should not be given a right to attend eg. the Press, who could state that they were very interested in embalming.
pointed out that the Council was not empowered to act to change the Rules.
If thought right a proposal must go to Divisions and be put at the Annual General Meeting.
This was accepted.
(20) ECTA
circulated a copy of the proposed regulations for ECTA, which was in some disarray, as the original rules were unworkable.
The rules had been amended for the November ECTA meeting.
Mr Ball gave details of the development of ECTA, and agreed to continue to look after Institute interests and to try to obtain uniformity.
Mr Ball expressed concern about likely members and honorary members, with many proxy votes.
Finances were being organised by levies or subscriptions, but no proper accounts were available yet.
No financial commitments would be made by the Institute and common standards of embalming would be insisted on which were acceptable to the Institute.
(21) Membership
There was nothing further to report.
(22) 1992 Conference
A profit of 172.72 had been made, including the raffle.  was to ask  for final details.
Budgets would be required to be sent to National Office in advance for future conferences.
The arrangements for the 1992 conference were referred to; when producing the initial costings, VAT had been overlooked.
(23) 1993 Conference Peebles, Scotland
confirmed the dates as arrival 3rd June, departure 6th June at an anticipated cost of 71.25 per person, per day room rate.
A clear budget was being prepared as required.
(24) 1994 Conference Durham
This was expected to cover four days, arriving Thursday and leaving Sunday.
(25) Any other business
(a) Officer for representation on CBFS:—
was elected, proposed by  and seconded by .
(b) International Committee:
This was representing the UK and was formed by NAFD.
The Nomination of  was carried, being proposed by  and seconded by .
(c) Examinations Authority
Tribute was paid to the late  's contribution and it was to be brought to the notice of Divisions that nominations were sought.
(d)
reported that a quotation for insurance cover for all members had been obtained at 3.50 per head.
This would be an addition to subscriptions.
After discussion it was agreed not to proceed.
(e) Presidential Chain
All spare spaces for names had been taken up, and the chain needed lengthening.
The meeting resolved on the proposition of , seconded by  that the chain should be taken to a jeweller to obtain design patterns with prices and format.
The President was requested to take the chain to a jeweller when it was convenient to do so.
(f) Members’ Badges
reported that supplies were on order from the manufacturers, and should be received by the end of December.
(26) Date of Next Meeting.
Thursday 25th February 1993 at National Office at 10.30am.
Reports to Council
Publications Committee
‘The Embalmer’
The magazine has received good support recently with a number of members submitting articles for inclusion.
This is encouraging and will hopefully continue.
Advertising is as poor as ever resulting in the production of ‘The Embalmer’ being a continued drain on Institute resources.
It is planned that the new computer will be able to produce the mailing labels in the New Year.
These labels have to be produced in postcode order to satisfy the conditions that allow us to use ‘Presstream’ mailing and are at present supplied to us commercially.
Once the labels are produced ‘in-house’ there will be a useful saving.
Quotations are now being sought for the production of the 1993 magazines.
Health & safety Handbook
This handbook now nears completion and is scheduled to be launched at a one-day conference on Health & safety organised by the NAFD.
The conference will be held at the Northampton Swallow Hotel on 19th November.
There has been good response from advertisers resulting in relatively small expenses being incurred.
If the exact figures are not available in time for the Council meeting, a full breakdown will be included in the Spring 1993 Council report.
It is likely that the new handbook will be adopted by local Environmental Health Officers as a National Code.
This is a welcome development as the alternative would be for EHO's to create their own code which would not be written from the funeral director/embalmer point of view.
Arrangements are also being made to copyright the handbook and include it on the ‘Barbour Index’ which will result in the four publishing organisations receiving royalties.
If all goes to plan, this handbook will be the most comprehensive publication produced by the funeral industry (in terms of content, distribution and public sector awareness) and National Council members should be encouraged by the fact that, despite an NAFD launch, it is very much a BIE production.
Chairman of Publications
Report of the N.E.C. to National Council 15.10.92.
Firstly may I apologise for not having this report in the hands of the secretary prior to this meeting.
1.
Module Notes.
These have been very well received by all who have obtained copies, tutors, examiners and students.
All find them extremely informative and helpful.
We realise they are complex and detailed, but we believe it is better to give maximum information at the start of the new system of teaching, and modify them as our needs dictate.
We have received a request from the N.E.B. for copies for all the examiners, and we were delighted to agree, and in turn asked the executive to consider financing this, or getting the office to supply copies.
We are pleased to say this is now in hand.
2.
Tutors Accredited List.
This is now complete, and is in printed form, all details therein are correct at print date.
3.
Tutors Training.
We have had two training sessions, and five candidates are to be examined on the 28th October 1992.
The examination is as follows.
Part A. Written test — 45 minutes.
Part B. A prepared teaching session — 20 minutes.
Part C. A short notice teaching session — 20 minutes.
Part D. An interview/discussion on practical embalming — 15 minutes.
Part E. Examination of the teaching facilities both for theoretical and practical.
4.
Post Graduate Course in Restorative Art
This course is in an advanced state of preparation.
It is based on the modular system and it is hoped our two experts, Messrs. V. Hull and C. Largefeuille will commence training and then, examining any of our Accredited Tutors who are interested in this subject, they will then in turn be able to teach embalmers these specialised skills.
It should be noted this is a Post Graduate course, and it is not our intention to include it in the main embalming course.
5.
Information for Prospective Students and others
All packs or information sent out by National Office have been updated and printed in a more acceptable format.
It was our opinion and that of , badly photocopied and written sheets of paper which did not even fit into the folders was not a good advertisement for our Institute.
We now believe the new packs give a correct image of our profession.
6.
N.V.Q.
This is a very difficult area, it would seem our type of qualification may not be what is required for our members to receive grades.
Ours would appear to be an academic qualification, which may not be able to be adapted to suit NVQ.
We prepared two units of competence, one on a non-autopsied body four pages long and one on an autopsied body five pages long.
We received a verbal report to say these were a start but needed more detail.
We wrote to  of the clear unit pointing out the variables in each case entrusted to our care, and it was not possible, in our opinion, to stereotype treatment in each and every case.
We did not get a written reply, however, via our National Secretary we heard our letter had been misconstrued and we were wanting to opt out.
This is not so.
It may be a practical based assessment of the NVQ system might offer a ‘Embalming Operative’ type qualification with a type of diploma being awarded, in addition to our own examination.
We are extremely aware of the number of people carrying  out treatments who are not members of our Institute for various reasons.
This area is being considered, and when we have concrete proposals we will place these before you then council for your consideration.
7.
Divisional Education.
Our President wishes divisions to hold at least one practical demonstration each year, with members of kindred organisations,(funeral directors, doctors, nurses etc.) being invited to attend.
We have written to all divisional secretaries and offered to supply a suitable person to carry out the demonstration if the division found it difficult to obtain one themselves.
8.
Keele.
As we have not received a report as yet, this will be given to council at their next meeting.
9.
Liaison with NEBE & nea .
We are in close liaison with the examinations board and both committees are working in harmony to make sure, the module system runs as smoothly as possible at this time.
10.
Late  's Students
All Mr Pym's students are continuing to receive training from accredited tutors arranged by this committee.
11.
of Redditch has been successful in passing his tutor's examination.
NVQs and SVQs for the Funeral Industry
The training and education world is currently changing at a rapid pace to meet the challenges created by the implementation of National Vocational Qualifications (NVQs) and Scottish Vocational Qualifications (SVQs).
These qualifications move away from the approach taken in many existing qualifications towards an emphasis on what people actually do at work.
They are based on standards of competent performance which have been specified by the industry and which are assessed in the workplace.
The development of NVQs and SVQs is underpinned by the assumption that in order for Britain to maintain and enhance its economic position in an increasingly competitive market it requires a more qualified, skilled, flexible and adaptable workforce capable of acquiring the competences to cope with changing technology and methods of work.
S/NVQs help employers achieve total quality in the services they offer through the adoption of national standards of performance for the industry as a whole, known as Occupational Standards.
The move towards NVQs and SVQs is taking place across all industries at all levels within the industry, from engineering and manufacturing through to the provision of health and social care, from the operative to the manager.
For the first time, a coherent national framework of vocational qualifications is available and at the end of this year NVQs and SVQs will be available for the vast majority of the working population.
The development of S/NVQs begins with the establishment of a ‘Lead Body’, recognised by the Employment Department.
This lead body comprises representatives from the particular industry, and normally includes employers, employee organisations, and sometimes education and training providers.
In the case of the funeral services sector, the lead body is the Care Sector Consortium, but the specific work to develop qualifications in this area is being done by the Funeral NVQ Steering Group.
The steering group is working with a wide cross-section of the industry to specify Occupational Standards.
These take into account all the aspects of skill and knowledge needed by an individual to work effectively in the industry.
One important source of information in the process of producing Occupational Standards is the content of existing qualifications.
The steering group are currently writing the first draft of these standards of performance.
When the first draft is completed, it will be piloted and revised.
Once the Occupational Standards are finalised, an awarding body (or possibly more than one awarding body) will look at ways of assessing whether an individual can meet the Occupational Standards or not.
This will almost certainly include gathering evidence from performance at work and may also include other types of evidence such as written tests or skills tests.
The awarding body must also develop all the necessary delivery mechanisms, such as assessment systems, quality assurance systems, certification systems, etc.
To be able to offer an NVQ or SVQ, the awarding body must make a submission to the National Council for Vocational Qualifications (England, Wales and Northern Ireland) and the Scottish Vocational Education Council (Scotland).
If it meets all of the criteria laid down by these bodies, the NCVQ or SCOTVEC ‘seal of approval’ will be given and the awarding body will be able to offer the awards.
As yet, no awarding body is involved in this part of the process for the funeral industry.
No existing qualifications will be accredited as S/NVQs as they are not based on the Occupational Standards which are currently being developed by the steering group.
However, this does not mean that they will become invalid — they will remain as evidence of achievement in their own right.
Because NVQs and SVQs are trying to raise standards of performance within the industry, the requirements of S/ NVQs are likely to be greater than any existing qualification.
As they are about competence at work, they will include not only competences relating directly to the funeral service but also competences to do with working relationships or health and safety.
Should an individual wish to take an S/NVQ who already has a qualification relating to the funeral service, that qualification will not give direct credit exemption but can count as evidence of competence.
In other words, an individual will not need to start from scratch where there is already reliable evidence of competence at work.
Training and NVQs and SVQs
S/NVQs are specifications of competence.
They therefore do not lay down requirements for length of time spent in training, number of years experience within the industry, the type of training that must be undertaken, and so on.
In other words they are independent of the time an individual has spent acquiring a competence or how that competence was achieved (training course, learning on the job, etc.)
For this reason, NCVQ and SCOTVEC do not approve training courses leading to NVQs and SVQs or the training materials supporting these courses.
Statement prepared by: Employment Department National Council for Vocational Qualifications Scottish Vocational Education Council 
Accountant warns don't be fooled by misleading VAT promises
A LEADING independent accountant has warned funeral directors against misleading claims encouraging them to take advantage of a tax loophole which could see them reclaiming up to 7,200 per year in VAT.
The North West-based firm Latham Crossley and Davis, says that many funeral directors have received letters from tax consultants and accountants, telling them that they are entitled to partial exemption from VAT under new rules introduced in April this year.
‘Although these claims are true, they are rather misleading and are an attempt to generate fees by the businesses concerned,’ says tax specialist Peter Howarth.
‘The VAT rules have previously been so complex that they have confused even the VAT man.
This is why the new rules were introduced in April, in order to simplify the problem for partially exempt businesses.
‘Basically under the regulations, those businesses which charge VAT to their customers are entitled to reclaim the VAT which they pay on stock and goods.
‘Under the new legislation, if the amount of VAT that a business incurs in relation to selling nonvatable items is less than 7,200 a year, then all the money can be reclaimed.
‘These changes mean that there is without doubt an opportunity for many funeral directors to recover VAT they once had to write-off.
The problem is that many will have to take some action to change the way they operate their business, before any benefits can result.
‘In order to reclaim VAT a business must first be registered with H.M. Customs and Excise, which must ensure that the business is selling goods and services which are vatable.
‘Many funeral directors already undertake vatable activities such as the hiring of wedding cars, the selling of monuments and other masonry work as well as the sale of floral tributes,’ says Mr Howarth.
So where does the problem arise?
‘In my opinion,’ says , ‘it arises in the definition of a business.
For an activity to be vatable it must  constitute a business and according to cases which have come before the courts definite criteria have to be fulfilled.’
Questions which have to be satisfied are: Is the activity a serious undertaking earnestly pursued?
Is the activity an occupation or function actively pursued with reasonable or recognisable continuity?
Does the activity have a certain measure of substance, as measured by quarterly or annual value of turnover?
And, is the activity conducted in a regular manner on sound and recognised business principles?
‘So if the hoped for vatable activity is tagged on to an existing business the Customs and Excise or the Tribunals, may refuse to accept the activity as a business and so deny the VAT registration,’ says .
‘In such circumstances there will be no VAT recovery but funeral directors will have to incur the costs both in setting-up the scheme and in defending their claim before the Customs and a Tribunal.
‘The situation is therefore very clouded at the moment and funeral directors should treat claims of big VAT refunds with caution.
‘What is certain is that the new legislation does provide an opportunity for all VAT exempt businesses to take a close look at their activities and it may be possible for many to commence receiving substantial repayments of VAT.
‘Once in the VAT field it must however be appreciated that a business could go over the 7,200 threshold, as a result of increased business activity or even an increase in the rate of VAT.
So once in the system, careful monitoring will be required and this will of course lead to higher accountancy fees.
‘The opportunity is there but funeral directors considering going down this path should consult a VAT expert as every case needs to be considered on its merits,’ says .
Surviving the ravages of loss
NOBODY escapes the ravages of loss; everybody tries.
It is everyone's companion from birth to the final change death.
The classic statement ‘What did I do to deserve this?’ has but a single answer: Nothing!
Loss is inevitable in life; it exists universally.
Each death is different.
When a parent dies, one loses the past.
When a spouse dies, one loses the present.
When a child dies, one loses the future.
Every person reacts to a loss in their own unique way.
Grief is as individual as a fingerprint.
Therefore, there is no magical procedure that will comfort all people during the period that follows loss.
Unfortunately, few people know what to do to help  themselves .
People's reaction to loss remains one of society's least understood and most off limits topics for discussion.
Often grievers are left totally alone to deal with their pain, isolation and loneliness.
There is no easy path through grief.
However, those who learn all they can about loss, grief and change and apply that knowledge to themselves are the ones who eventually emerge as stronger and more compassionate people.
HSC launches approved Code of Practice on Management of Health and Safety at Work
THE Health and Safety Commission (HSC) have published the Approved Code of Practice (ACoP) on Management of Health and Safety at Work.
The ACoP gives practical guidance on how to comply with the Management of Health and Safety at Work Regulations 1992 (‘Management Regulations’) which were laid before Parliament on 8th September.
The Regulations are reproduced in the ACoP together with comprehensive guidance on how to comply.
These Regulations implement the European Community (EC) Framework  Directive on the introduction of measures to improve the health and safety of workers at work.
They are the first in a series of six sets of Regulations to implement EC Directives which will all come into force on 1st January 1993.
The other Regulations should be laid before Parliament soon, subject to Ministerial approval.
HSC Members, and , launched the new ACoP.  said:
‘The Management Regulations are an important addition to general health and safety law.
They establish a structured approach to the management of health and safety and make more explicit what employers have to do to comply with the general duties of the Health and Safety at Work Act and as such they provide a very useful tool in our efforts to improve health and safety at work.
‘Some employers already do what is required by these new Regulations, others do not.
Often this is because they fail to understand what is expected of them under the broad, general duties of the Health and Safety at Work Act.
It will now be more difficult for anyone to claim that they misunderstood the law, as the Management Regulations — in giving more detail — make much clearer what is required.
‘Accidents and ill-health are never inevitable; they often arise from failures in control and organisation.
These Regulations are designed to ensure that employers introduce arrangements for effective management of health and safety in which employees and safety representatives will have to play their part.’
added:
‘These new Regulations — although inspired by the European Framework Directive — have given us the opportunity to progress one of the HSC's main objectives: to promote better management of health and safety at work.
The Regulations establish a structured approach which will be familiar to many employers who already take their approach to health and safety seriously.
‘Although the Regulations apply to all employers, the actions required will vary enormously since essentially the level of response is determined by the risk presented by the employer's work.
A central requirement in the Regulations is for a risk assessment in order to help the employer decide what health and safety measures are needed.
But the Approved Code makes clear that the level of detail in the risk assessment and therefore the effort required, should be determined by the risks.
Where there are significant risks, clearly the risk assessment should reflect this, for example in the level of detail and possible recourse to sophisticated techniques.
But for those work situations posing little risk, the assessment can be straightforward and simple.’
Mr David Eves, Deputy Director General of the Health and Safety Executive, explained that HSE was well aware of the difficulties faced by industry in getting to grips with these Regulations and all the other new Regulations in a short timescale.
He said:
‘HSE inspectors aim to help the committed employer improve the management of health and safety.
Our approach is to promote awareness of the duties the Regulations impose.
We will point people in the direction of sources of advice and guidance — such as this new ACoP.
‘Inspectors understand that employers need time to take sensible actions where requirements are completely new.
But where we find the law is deliberately being ignored or flouted, inspectors will be prepared to take firm enforcement action, particularly if serious risks to health and safety are evident or where what needs to be done is not new, i.e. where existing duties have simply been replaced by new legislation.’
The main requirements of the Management Regulations are for employers to:
* Assess risks to their employees and others who may be affected
* Make and record arrangements for implementing the health and safety measures identified as necessary by the risk assessment
* Appoint competent people to help with implementing the health and safety arrangements
* Set up emergency procedures
* Provide information which can be understood and adequate training
* Work together with other employers sharing the same workplace.
Some of these duties, such as the duty to assess risks, also apply to the self-employed.
There are also specific duties on employees to use equipment in accordance with training they have received and to report dangerous situations and any shortcomings in their employers' health and safety arrangements.