

3
PLURALISM AND THE POWER OF THE BUREAUCRATS
The emergence of specialized administrative organizations as part of the apparatus of government in the modern nation-state has been accompanied by the development of democratic ideology which stresses the importance of separating legislative, executive and judicial functions to prevent the concentration of power and therefore its abuse.
Under such separation of powers the executive is made responsive and accountable to political leadership.
A distinction has thus emerged between administrative and political roles, with appointed servants of the state acting under the direction of elected politicians and ultimately answerable to the people.
Constitutional arrangements have been developed to ensure that bureaucracies remain responsive to political direction.
It has become an assumption of liberal political and constitutional theory that public officials perform an instrumental role.
Hence the definition of bureaucracy, referred to in Chapter 1, which restricts it to the implementation of public policy made by elected politicians and supervised by those of their number chosen for the task and responsible for the outcome.
Public servants may advise on the alternative means to ends which politicians deem desirable but should not interfere in the choice of ends.
The quality of an official is to be judged by reference to the efficiency and effectiveness with which the chosen courses of action are carried out.
Officials thus have no political role, only an administrative one.
Such an interpretation of the relationship between elected politicians and appointed officials is given a certain amount of credibility by the existence of distinct bureaucratic  organizations staffed by people recruited and deployed on the principles of political neutrality, merit, anonymity and expertise.
Even in political systems where political neutrality is not regarded as necessary for public service, or is even thought undesirable, officials are subject to the formal authority of politically recruited executives, indicating that the responsiveness of bureaucracies to the political direction of other institutions is a universal problem.
However, as was indicated in Chapter 1, the assumption of instrumentality needs to be seriously questioned in the context of the modern state.
The comparative study of political systems and especially public policy-making has given rise to the belief that the distinction between politics and administration is artificial and that the role of administrators cannot be settled by a definition which relegates them to a purely instrumental position.
The politician-official distinction should not be equated with a policy-making-implementation distinction.
The realities of modern politics are such that roles may not be confined by constitutional definitions of office.
PLURALISM
This redefinition of the role of bureaucracy has occurred within the context of a re-evaluation of democratic theory which places the significance of individualism as a basis for political participation in a secondary position to association and group action.
Though the principles of representative government are important to pluralists as embodying equal rights to vote, express opinion and associate with like-minded people for political ends, the individual citizen of a democracy needs to be able to join with others before an interest can be effectively mobilized.
For the pluralist the most important political freedom is freedom of association.
Functional representation through organized interests representing the needs and demands of people in similar positions is as important to the pluralist as individual representation through the election of someone to represent the interests of a territorial constituency in a democratic assembly organized on  majoritarian principles.
While it is acknowledged by pluralists that groups and associations will not all be equal in the political weight they can bring to bear on governments, no group will dominate all the time, and most groups will be able to have their way some of the time.
A kind of equilibrium is maintained.
Power is believed not to be cumulative.
The state or political system is regarded as a neutral adjudicator in the competition for resources.
Policy issues are resolved in ways that are consistent with the preferences of the majority.
No single interest consistently obtains its objectives across a wide range of public policies.
Cross-cutting membership of groups means that demands are tempered because people have different interests that are articulated through multiple associations.
The state is also characterized by a plurality of elites to which access is relatively open and which do not form a cohesive ruling stratum.
In this conception of the state the bureaucracy is seen as drawing strength from different groups.
This is a fragmenting process, as different interests from alliances with different parts of the administrative apparatus.
Agencies mobilize their own client groups to make demands on the legislature for resources which the agency will disburse.
This process is most evident in the United States, where public administrative agencies have been found to resemble pressure groups in the way they attempt to influence public opinion and legislative action.
Continuous liaison with legislators is maintained by agencies at all levels of government.
Congressional committees work closely with administrative officials.
Administrative agencies also seek to mobilize the support of their employees, client groups and other influentials.
State administrative agencies thus feed off the results of interest-group pressure, and interest groups find in the administration multiple points of access through which they can influence the formulation of government policy.
Kaufman maintains that in the United States rivalries between bureaus, each with its allies in congressional committees and powerful interests outside government, constitute an important barrier against the assumption of power by the bureaucracy (Kaufman 1981).
This model of client-bureaucracy relations has been  summarized by Etzioni-halevy, who concludes that 
BUREAUCRATIC POWER
In pluralist theory bureaucratic agencies not only orchestrate group pressures so as to influence the development of public policy indirectly.
Bureaucracies have power resources which enable them to exercise influence more directly on policy choices (Rourke 1969).
An ability to mobilize external support is only one asset (and one which varies in significance from one political system to another).
The power resources of bureaucracies combine with what Wright has called the ‘political incapacity of non-bureaucrats’(1978, p. 225)— that is, the inability of political institutions to exercise the control and direction of bureaucracy which the classical liberal theory of the state presumes — so as to give bureaucracy a prominent role in policy-making.
The potential political influence of bureaucracy has long been acknowledged within the liberal state, and certainly since Weber analysed the problem of political leadership within systems of representative government.
One of the contradictions of the liberal state is that capitalism has required rational administration and greater state intervention.
Weber was aware that the development of capitalism not only necessitated the bureaucratization of organizations, particularly those which formed the administrative apparatus of the state.
It also required the state to have a technically superior form of organization.
One consequence of the bureaucratization of administrative organization has been the growth in the influence of the expert, trained official.
Since Weber analysed the organizational requirements of the capitalist state, this influence has increased as those characteristics of bureaucracy which he recognized as being a basis for political power have become more pronounced.
Efficient administration has become more and more indispensable in expanding spheres of state intervention.
This is evidenced by the growth in the number of public servants, the range of state functions and the level of public expenditure during the twentieth century (Dogan 1975; Peters 1978).
The volume of expertise available to bureaucracies has increased along with this expansion of state activities.
The range of professions utilized by the administrative agencies of the modern state not only encompasses all the traditional professional and scientific disciplines.
It includes many that have developed as a result of state intervention and which are only found within government, such as inspectorates of factories and public health professionals.
The more the institutions of representative government demand technical efficiency from administrative organizations, the more those organizations have found it necessary to employ specialists and the more difficult it has been for the judgements of the career officials to be resisted.
Bureaucracies are often credited with a monopoly of expertise which place them in a superior position to lay politicians.
The knowledge which is concentrated in government agencies is not only that which derives from the employment of professionals, scientists and technologists.
It includes the accumulation of experience in policy implementation.
Politicians thus are dependent on officials for advice as to the practicability of new proposals.
The authority of the official is also strengthened by their permanence compared with the terms of office enjoyed by political executives in modern democracies.
The expertise of the officials also gives their decisions and judgements a legitimacy which, though different  from the legitimacy conferred on politicians by their methods of recruitment into politics (notably election), is nevertheless important in the resolution of conflicts (Peters 1978).
It is a duty for public officials to advise, when called upon to do so, on policy choices which are ultimately the responsibility of political executives.
Senior officials in policy-planning units also handle most of the work involved in evaluating policy effectiveness and analysing how new problems perceived by the politicians might be solved.
The analytical techniques available to the bureaucracies of modern states are increasingly sophisticated.
But beyond this officials may be even more directly involved in policy planning.
In Sweden, for example, new policies are initiated by special commissions which constitute the preliminary stage of a legislative proposal.
These commissions consist predominantly of civil servants.
They collect information and make recommendations.
They are more important in the planning of legislation than parliament (Riksdag).
There has been a tendency for the proportion of non-civil servants in the membership to be reduced.
The second feature of bureaucracy which has enlarged its area of political influence over the choices to be made among values, priorities and objectives, rather than merely the technical means to be employed, is the discretionary power of officials.
In so far as the exercise of judgement by officials when applying rules to particular cases can never be made  entirely unnecessary by the articulation of rules to fit all instances, the values of individual officials will affect the outcome of executive action.
In addition, modern legislation often requires official discretion to be exercised before final decisions are made.
It is in effect impossible to eliminate discretion by the formulation of rules (Hill 1972, Ch. 4).
Finally, there is the secrecy and confidentiality which is so typical of public bureaucracies.
This is defended for numerous reasons.
There is the need to protect the state against internal and external subversion.
There is the need to protect the anonymity of public servants whose loyalty to different political leaders must not be jeopardized by public exposure.
There is the need to shield from public view the transactions between administrative agencies and private business lest commercial interests become threatened by ‘unfair’ competition.
For all these reasons the inner workings of the bureaucracy remain hidden from view.
Public scrutiny, whether it be by legislatures or the mass media, is hampered.
Large areas of administrative action avoid the discipline of public justification.
Secrecy is a weapon in the political armoury of bureaucracy.
However, it is often also expedient for political executives to conceal the reasons for their decisions behind a veil of secrecy, so bureaucrats and politicians may be drawn into an alliance against other politicians (the Opposition) and the public to enhance their collective power through confidentiality.
PROBLEMS OF POLITICAL CONTROL
Modern democracies are dependent on non-bureaucratic political institutions to ensure that the large bureaucracies employed by modern governments do not become excessively autonomous.
In so far as bureaucratic power has become a problem for modern democracy, it has been a result of the inadequacies of political control as much as the internal features of bureaucracies themselves.
Shonfield (1965) has argued that the problem of bureaucratic power in advanced capitalist societies centres on the adaptation of political institutions to the interventionist state.
Britain, for example, has been left with political institutions which were ideally suited to the protection of private property and enterprise and which could cope with limited government and restricted public power in which the executive was dominant.
Executive dominance has remained as the scope of the state has expanded.
Even when laissez-faire disappeared the political assumptions of limited government remained.
So the myths of ministerial accountability, bureaucratic neutrality and administrative anonymity have been preserved even though Parliament has proved incapable of controlling an administrative apparatus whose discretion and influence on public policy has been growing steadily:
It is a fundamental assumption of representative democracy that bureaucratic functions will be controlled and ultimately answerable and responsive to elected representatives.
The administration may be powerful, but it should also be accountable.
As one senior British civil servant once put it: Such a view of democracy depends on the existence of political institutions capable of exacting that responsiveness and exercising that control.
But the ability of such institutions to perform this role has become increasingly difficult.
The problem for legislatures in maintaining oversight and control has become particularly acute (Jacoby 1973, pp. 162–64).
Because of their composition, multiplicity of functions, procedures and restricted access to information, modern  legislatures are limited in their struggle with bureaucracy even when, like the UK Parliament, they have a longer history, stronger tradition, higher status within the political culture and more central constitutional significance than most.
After surveying some of the available evidence on the United Kingdom, France, Germany and the United States regarding parliamentary defence against the dominance of officials, Page concluded that in the approval of legislation, the approval of the budget and scrutiny of administration, European parliaments are largely dominated by the executive.
‘Legislatures in France, Germany and Britain do not initiate legislation to any significant degree, they are peripherally involved in the budgetary process and party cohesion and institutional limitations serve to restrict the scope of powerful scrutiny of executive actions by the legislatures’(Page 1985, p. 89).
However, the variability of executive-legislative relations is illustrated by the case of the American Congress, which was found to be ‘pervasive’ in all three areas.
Finally, it is as well to recall the lesson which Philip Selznick derived from his study of the Tennessee Valley Authority in the 1940s about how public organizations can increase the security of their position viz-à-viz social forces in the environment by co-optation or the process of ‘absorbing new elements into the leadership or policy-determining structure of an organization as a means of averting threats to its stability or existence’(Selznick 1949, p. 259).
This may be done formally, when there is a need to confirm the legitimacy of an agency's authority; or informally, when an agency has to respond to pressures from centres of power within the community.
Co-optation can thus work in both directions.
It can secure benefits for the  organization and reduce pressures upon it from outside.
But the price of legitimacy, security and stability may be to concede power to outside interests because failure to reflect the true balance of power within the community will result in concrete demands on the agency being enforced.
The creation of a ‘front’ without sharing power may suffice to secure an agency's legitimacy and respectability, but it may be necessary to share power and so succumb to external pressures.
As Selznick recognized, the desire to incorporate and absorb external opposition creates a dilemma for an  organization that wishes to preserve its autonomy.
the extent to which bureaucracies can indulge in co-optation will obviously vary from country to country, but the reciprocal relationship that develops between administrative agencies and client groups to the mutual benefit of each is very widespread.
Not all organizations will be in a position to engage in formal co-optation, in which the representatives of outside interests share the ‘burden of authority’.
But informal co-optation is a mechanism that few bureaucracies seem able to dispense with, though who benefits most, client group or administrative agency, will depend on the political system in which such relationships are found.
In questioning the assumption that public bureaucracies are apolitical, the point has been to show that public servants are involved and influential in the making of political choices (Smith 1976, pp. 100–9; Etzioni-Halevy 1983, pp. 144–58).
s The point is not to prove that officials are everywhere politically dominant.
This would certainly not be the pluralist position.
There is still a division of labour between politicians and administrators in pluralist theory, though it is a very different one to a model of government in which politicians make policy and administrators implement them.
Aberbach, Putnam and Rockman (1981) use survey data and case study reports to demonstrate the relative influence of politicians and bureaucrats and the emergence of an increasing overlapping of roles as state authority has expanded in response to the  political demands of newly mobilized groups.
Public servants are, of course, concerned with technical feasibility and administrative practicality.
They also have to mediate among interest groups affected by policy proposals.
The politicians take a more partisan stance, possibly in broad ideological terms.
Differences in style and substance between politicians and administrators are consistent with a view of politicians as ‘energizers’ and administrators as seeking equilibrium:
The factors which permit public bureaucracies to engage in politics are variable in their significance as between political systems.
In no system in which democratic political institutions are still vibrant do bureaucracies dominate politics.
One such political institution is of course the executive.
Except where the bureaucracy rules through the military and so itself constitutes the executive branch of government, the executive and bureaucracy should not be confused.
Modern legislatures may be dominated by executives, but this does not mean that executives are subservient to career public officials.
A powerful executive may owe its dominance to the party system.
If the representative assembly in such a system finds it difficult to hold the administration accountable, this may be because the collective political leadership of the administration finds it convenient to restrict legislative scrutiny and control.
When we move away from pluralistic systems of politics to single-party systems the executive branch of government is likely to be even more powerful in relation to elected assemblies.
The party may nevertheless dominate the bureaucracy, thereby  leaving politicians rather than administrators in control.
This is where the distinction between politician and administrator breaks down.
This is clear in the case of one-party states, where the party bureaucracy encroaches upon areas of decision-making that elsewhere would be reserved for civil servants.
But in the pluralist system it is important, when comparing the relative power of bureaucrat and politician, to ask which politicians are deemed to be in competition with officials.
The political leadership of the majority party and therefore the party in government and occupying ministerial office might find it politically expedient to preserve the rules and conventions which make it difficult for other politicians to call the bureaucracy to account.
It is notable that in the United Kingdom, for example, ministers have prosecuted civil servants for releasing information to Parliament.
Tighter control of the bureaucracy by one group of politicians may work to the disadvantage of others.
What the result of this equation is for democracy is not always easy to see.
CORPORATIST ADMINISTRATION
CORPORATISM
The growth in the level of state intervention witnessed in the second half of the twentieth century, particularly in relation to the management of the economy, has led some social scientists to argue that a pluralist model of the capitalist state needs to be replaced by a corporatist one.
A leading authority on corporatism has identified the following elements in modern capitalism as having led to the gradual displacement of pluralism by ‘societal corporatism’:.
Schmitter concludes: What corporatism means for state and society has been the subject of an extended debate in recent years.
The surprising thing about this debate is its relative neglect of the administrative dimension of corporatism (Etzioni-Halevy 1983, pp. 63–73), especially since the relationships between state and economy which compel a corporatist interpretation of modern capitalism manifest themselves through institutions which are grafted on to the administrative system.
The term ‘corporatism’ means different things to different people engaged in the analysis of socio-political structures in liberal industrial societies.
In the view of one of the major contributors to the debate about when and how the concept should be deployed, however, this is not the result of semantic ambiguity.
Rather, it reflects the need for different conceptualizations to cover the different dimensions of a highly complex phenomenon.
These dimensions can be assumed to be strongly correlated with each other, so that a model of ‘strong’ corporatism can be constructed in terms of which specific countries can be ranked.
Lehmbruch defines a fully corporatized political system as one in which:
Using such measures Lehmbruch is able to place Austria high on a scale ranging from strong to weak corporatism, because it ranks very high on all relevant dimensions.
Denmark, West Germany and —‘as a borderline case’— the  United Kingdom are ranked as medium corporatist and France is ranked as weak (despite the existence of an institutional framework for ‘neo-corporatist co-operation’).
Consequently, another aspect of the debate about corporation has been whether a particular country should or should not be given this label.
This will not be our concern here.
Rather, this chapter asks what the implications are for the administrative system, should a state develop corporatist tendencies.
This seems appropriate since, with the exception of fascist states and some contemporary authoritarian regimes, corporatism has developed to widely differing degrees, varies in intensity over time and is contained within vastly different state structures and administrative traditions.
THE STRUCTURE OF CORPORATISM
A political system with corporatist tendencies will have the following characteristics.
First, the distinction between public and private action will be blurred, not least in the administrative sphere as institutions which are privately owned are integrated into the structure of public policy to secure public objectives.
Corporatism also implies an institutional ‘fusion’ in that institutions for the representation of functional interests are also used for the purposes of state intervention (Jessop 1979).
An example of the fusion of public and private action in the United Kingdom were the ‘planning agreements’ at company level provided for in the Industry Act 1975.
These were an attempt to use individual companies as instruments of sectoral and national planning.
They were also a response to demands for a form of participation.
Agreements could be drawn up at the request of the government, the management or the unions: ‘it was tripartism at the grass roots’(Smith 1979, p. 168).
Second, executive power will have grown at the expense of parliamentary power.
Decision-making will have shifted away from elected representatives, particularly in the economic sphere, to become located in special committees and councils on which the spokesmen of interested parties sit.
Such organizations manage to avoid democratic scrutiny almost  entirely.
A consensus between powerful corporate interests is regarded as more important than the sovereignty of elected representatives.
The bureaucracy performs an important role in facilitating such a consensus.
The role of elected assemblies is largely reduced to legitimizing policy formulation in tripartite planning councils.
The British experience was perceived by Michael Foot when in Opposition in the following way: ‘I think one of the most serious threats to the power of the House of Commons is the notion which is growing up that you can have a meeting in Downing Street of the Executive and the CBI and the TUC who make an agreement that is binding and when it comes to the House of Commons the House of Commons has not the power…to tear that bargain apart’(quoted in Grant 1977, p. 169).
Harrison (1980) claims that all advanced societies have experienced corporatism to some degree in this respect, as all have suffered a growth in the influence of public bureaucracies and political executives and a ‘corresponding’ decline in parliamentary control.
Organized interests not surprisingly have increasingly turned away from legislatures and have concentrated their political pressures on the bureaucracy and the executive.
When relations between associated groups and the bureaucracy become ‘concerted’— when group representatives participate in policy deliberations, regulation and administration — there can be a loss of group autonomy.
Group demands become compromised.
Leaders become less representative of the rank and file.
More important to the demise of parliamentary democracy is the adverse effect on commitment to parliamentary politics which a reduced role in policy-making for a parliament can have: ‘disaffected elements are, increasingly, prepared to challenge directly the policy decisions of an elected government…using group power, even illegally deployed’(Harrison 1980, p. 73).
Third, economic and to a lesser extent social planning will be delegated to ‘tripartite’ arrangements in which representatives of the government, industrial interests and the labour movement negotiate bargains which secure action on investment, prices and wages in the private sector.
The ‘peak’ organizations of business and labour are granted a special consultative status in return for their co-operation (Schmitter  1979) Some corporatists maintain that within a capitalist economy such negotiations must be to the advantage of monopoly capital, since labour forgoes its local, workplace autonomy in favour of its corporate leadership.
Corporatism is designed to sustain the existing economic system by securing the co-operation of labour in policies for incomes, prices, profits and dividends which can only be against its long-term interests (Panitch 1979; Jessop 1979).
The associations representing capital and labour will be highly centralized, with leaders exercising strong control over members and member institutions.
The tripartite arrangement constitutes an ‘interlocking directorate’ of competing groups for the purpose of ‘corporatist intermediation’(Lehmbruch 1977a).
Opinion differs on the extent to which corporatism involves the voluntary compliance of interest groups with this system of policy-making (Lehmbruch 1979b), or entails state domination and coercion (Pahl and Winkler 1974; Winkler 1976; Panitch 1980).
Tripartism is said by Newman to be the essence of corporatism.
It symbolizes the significance of state intervention, of industry's renunciation of the market and labour's advancement to the status of an ‘estate of realm’.
It does not, however, mean that all three parties exercise equal amounts of power, or benefit to equal degrees from the arrangement.
Nor are all areas of public policy equally affected by such methods of policy-making (Newman 1981, Ch. 6).
An example of tripartism is the British National Economic Development Council, described by Harris in a way which indicates the ‘borderline’ nature of British corporatism:
Fourth, corporatism involves the displacement of territorial representation by functional representation.
Interest groups articulate the demands of sectional groups in society, and public policy responds to these pressures to the virtual exclusion of elected assemblies (though traditional principles of representation may remain operative at sub-national levels and for purposes of legitimation).
Indeed, some analysts stress the significance for the politics of the corporate state of the corporatist machinery in the field of state intervention in the economy and the persistence of competitive politics in the field of consumption as represented by the welfare state (Cawson 1978).
Corporatism differs from pluralism in its interpretation of the role of interest groups by stressing the control which the state exerts over the selection of groups to be incorporated into the policy-making process.
While some pluralists, notably Almond (1983), Jordan (1983) and Martin (1983), argue that what is described as ‘corporatism’ could equally well be contained within a pluralist conception of the state, theorists of corporatism maintain that there is a substantive difference between the two socio-political systems:
What is distinctive about corporatism, however, is the process of closure (rather than competition) which can lead to monopoly interest representation, and the form of the political exchange (representation/control/delegated self-enforcement) which takes place between corporatist associations and the state.
(Cawson, 1985, p.9)
Corporatism entails a special kind of political participation in which capital and labour participate in the formulation and implementation of state intervention in the economy ‘and in other matters relevant to capital accumulation’(Jessop 1978, p. 41).
Corporatism thus implies an ‘institutional fusion’, whereby organizations that developed for the representation of interests become instruments of state intervention (Jessop 1979).
In corporatist systems of government it becomes vitally  important that some organizations are brought into the consultation and implementation processes, while others are not.
Government recognition of some groups and not others for consultations, negotiations and arbitration, distinguishes corporatism from pluralism (Harrison 1980, pp. 73–4).
Schmitter contrasts the voluntary, competitive, non-hierarchically ordered and self-determined interest groups of pluralist systems with the compulsory, non-competitive, hierarchically ordered and functionally differentiated organizations of corporatism.
While pluralist groups are not licensed, recognized, subsidized, created or controlled by the state and do not monopolize the representation of interests within their functional areas, those of corporate society are granted a monopoly of representative activities ‘in exchange for observing certain controls on their selection of leaders and articulation of demands and supports’(Schmitter 1979).
Finally, and again in contrast with the pluralist conception of policy-making, the functionally representative producer groups whose leaders are integrated into the state structure under corporatism are used as instruments of mobilization, control and legitimization, rather than for the spontaneous articulation of a plurality of competing political demands.
The state employs the national associations representing producer groups as its agents (Panitch 1979 and 1980).
An example of this is provided by Boston's study of corporatist incomes policies in Britain:
a corporatist incomes policy is a negotiated policy which is enforced primarily by means of moral suasion and private coercion, rather than state coercion.
That is to say, compliance with the policy guidelines is maintained largely by the peak organizations of labour and capital, not by state controls and regulations.
Essentially this means that the peak organizations act as their own game-keepers….
One of the advantages of this approach, or so it is claimed, is that it enables governments to pursue policies based upon consent and voluntary cooperation and thereby to avoid both the ‘law of the jungle’(monetarism) and the ‘jungle of the law’(statutory incomes policies).
(Boston 1985, p. 66)
CORPORATISM AND ADMINISTRATION
There have been very few direct attempts to assess the  significance of corporatism for the administrative branch of the state.
The only systematic disentanglement from corporatist theorizing and policy analysis of the administrative component was by R. E. Pahl and J. T. Winkler, writing at a time when it seemed that  Britain had been developing in the direction of corporatism for the previous fifteen years and was experiencing sectoral planning, planning agreements and statutory or voluntary controls over prices, profit margins, dividends, wages, rents and the movement of capital.
Pahl and Winkler, however, construct an ideal type of corporatist system, and not a description of contemporary Britain.
The purpose is to provide a yardstick to measure how far any particular society has moved towards corporatism and its administrative traits (Winkler 1975 and 1977; Pahl and Winkler 1977).
Winkler sees the administration in the corporatist state as confronted by two dilemmas.
It has to cope with conflicts of interest when, according to corporatist ideology, there is supposed to be a single, overriding common interest expressing collective goals.
It also has to avoid appearing coercive, for the system claims to be based on spontaneous co-operation, the defining principles of corporatism being unity, order and nationalism.
The administration's response to these dilemmas is, first, to keep as secret as possible what the state is doing and, second, to operate through organizations not formally part of the state apparatus.
Contrary to expectations, the corporatist state is less bureaucratic that other forms: ‘Corporatism, therefore, will tend towards indirect, unformalised, non-public and covert forms of administration…theoretically corporatism is a system of state control without bureaucracy’(Winkler 1977, p. 50).
To realize this the corporatist state operates according to a number of principles of administration.
The first is antinomianism.
The corporate state needs — in order to secure legitimacy — to demonstrate effectiveness.
It can only do this if it implements its plans and policies flexibly, rather than according to formalized rules.
Bureaucratic forms of administration would reduce the state's capacity to direct the economy effectively.
Discretion has to be built into laws and regulations.
Enabling statutes are needed to legitimize state  action in new fields by defining broad aims and areas of applicability.
Quasi-contracts also form part of this approach, allowing the state to use its financial powers as bargaining levers with which to reach agreements with major economic interests.
Examples were the US government's control of defence contractors through purchasing powers, and UK controls over prices or its system of investment grants.
By such financial means ‘the state attempts to modulate private business's cash flow and barter this for conformity to public policy’.
The purpose for which such financial powers are used are not codified in law.
Indeed, Winkler argues that such devices ‘put a patina of legality on what is fundamentally a destruction of the rule of law’(1977, p. 51).
Winkler argues that the Industry Act 1975 embodied the essential features of corporatism: private ownership combined with state control; and the avoidance of explicit legal codification of control mechanisms (Winkler 1975).
Second, administration is accompanied by a form of inquisitorial justice in which judicial institutions act assertively rather than passively, inquisitorially rather than adversarially.
Courts and tribunals became concerned with restoring co-operation among disputing parties by seeking out the sources of disputes, and by revealing truth rather than identifying the stronger case.
The corporatist system tends to produce quasi-judicial bodies —‘aggressive’ institutions of arbitration and conciliation.
Consequently, the law profession increasingly becomes an instrument for the realization of collective goals (‘a sub-set of public administrators’) rather than servants of private clients in pursuit of private interests.
Third, the administration takes strategic control of the economy.
By controlling the oligopolies the state can direct aggregate performance.
It does not need a massive administrative apparatus for this, but can work through negotiations between a few key individuals in the state and business sectors.
If, however, existing levels of industrial concentration are insufficient for such strategic control, the state can foster industrial reorganization or cartels to facilitate it.
Delegated enforcement is the term used for the fourth principle by which private bodies are used to enforce  agreements and therefore administer state policies.
Britain's incomes policy in the early 1970s was taken as an example of this.
Based on a voluntary ‘social contract’ it was ‘a model of corporatist administration: effective state control, negotiated strategically, enforced privately, without the use of law or bureaucracy’.
Legitimation for such delegated enforcement was usually sought through schemes for participation, such as industrial democracy, regional devolution or community action.
What appears to be an institutionalization of pluralism is in fact a co-optation of dissidence — a form of social control.
Mediated enforcement through intermediatory, quasi-governmental bodies such as the BBC and the Bank of England and quasi-non-governmental such as the Press Council bring advantages of administrative economy and reduced political responsibility attaching to the government: ‘It is the essence of these organizations, therefore, that their relationships to state authority remains ill-defined’(Winkler, 1977, p. 54).
Newman believes that in Britain these quasi-governmental and quasi-non-governmental bodies, estimates of which have ranged from a few hundred to a few thousand, depending on definitions, are not ‘structurally integral to corporatism’ but a significant domestic phenomenon which reinforces corporatist tendencies.
Their functions may be classified as regulatory, executive, consultative, supervisory and quasi-judicial.
The filling of official posts in ‘quangos’— drawing from business, the unions and the civil service — is but one application of the tripartite principle.
Administration by agencies which are portrayed as non-political, expert, unbureaucratic and specialized, enhances the image of the corporatist state as depoliticized (Newman 1981, pp. 142–57).
They are also an important ideological mechanism by which the state may be identified with the pursuit of the common good rather than the interests of a dominant section of society.
Consequently, ‘a corporatist regime, with its strong ideological commitment to unity, will have increased incentive to use the more indirect, concealed forms of administration’(Winkler 1977, pp. 54–5).
Finally, Winkler claims that administration in the corporatist state engages in the exploitation of ‘extra-legal power’ by orchestrating private demands for public action.
Thus, while the pluralist political system may experience close liaison between bureaucratic agencies and client groups, in the corporatist state this spills over into covert encouragement by political leaders of direct action by pressure groups.
Referring to French wine-growers and British hospital auxiliaries, Winkler claims not to imply collusion between governments and the protest campaigns, civil disobedience, violent demonstrations and riots which are the hallmark of much contemporary politics.
But:
less fastidious ministers in future may draw the corporatist moral.
A minister need only let it be known directly that he would welcome such demonstrations of ‘spontaneous’ violent support, or at least would not use police power to suppress it.
The occasional use of such activism shades over into the regular use, the planned use, to the covert institutionalisation of extralegal power.
(Winkler 1977, p. 55)
Atkinson and Coleman offer a rather different view of bureaucracy under corporatist conditions.
Bureaucracy for them will have two important dimensions.
The first is associated with the state's need for autonomy from society.
This in turn is dependent on a well-developed and self-contained bureaucracy which can articulate a conception of the public interest.
Bureaucratic autonomy will be sought by giving agencies functional responsibilities rather than clienteles and by staffing them with specialized professionals with their own values.
Bureaus can also be expected to administer ‘a corpus of law and regulations that de fines barriers between itself and the sector of industry that it regulates’.
These rules will not be open to bargaining (compare this with Winkler's conception of antinomianism).
Bureaus will also be self-sufficient in respect of the technical information needed for industrial policy-making.
The other dimension of corporatist bureaucracy is centralization, or the domination of a given sector by a single agency.
Corporatism needs ‘hegemonic’ agencies, rather than bureaucratic competition, if policies are to be enforced nationwide.
This may involve overcoming entrenched bureaucratic interests if the bureaucratic co-ordination and centralization necessary for corporatism are to be achieved (Atkinson and Coleman 1985, pp. 29–31).
CONCLUSION
The administrative consequences of corporatism have been relatively neglected compared with, say, the implications of corporatism for the organization and representation of sectional interests.
In the United Kingdom there has been extensive discussion of the ‘quango’ phenomenon, but not always in the context of corporatist theory.
Other than that, the main focus of attention has been on whether corporatist state administration is bureaucratic (Etzioni-Halevy 1983, pp. 69–71).
Winkler argues that it is not, meaning that the state must be concerned with flexibility, bargaining, negotiation and even the orchestration of private power.
‘Corporatism is a bargaining system, not a bureaucratic one’(Winkler 1977, p. 56).
Others, such as Morris (1972), Panitch (1980) and Diamant (1981), think that corporatism must be bureaucratic, but meaning that the state will be dependent on expert officials operating according to technocratic norms only loosely controlled by a political elite.
Part of this theoretical conflict arises from different understandings of the term ‘bureaucracy’ and whether the bureaucratic phenomenon being stressed is the expansion in the number of state agencies, the rationalization of decision-making and planning processes or the role of ‘mandarins’in the policy process (Diamant 1981).
Once again it is clear than the concept of bureaucracy cannot be used in blanket terms.
The different dimensions of bureaucracy need to be specified if the object of the exercise is to see whether a state with corporatist features has developed distinctive administrative qualities.
5
BUREAUCRACY IN THE CAPITALIST STATE
The role of bureaucracy in politics has been central to Marxist debates about the state in capitalist societies, though the details of bureaucratic structures and processes have not received the attention they deserve.
This debate has centred on the two views of bureaucracy found in the writings of Marx himself, one presenting it as an instrument by which the dominant class protects its interests, the other as an instrument of power through which the state is able to rise above and regulate class conflict with a measure of autonomy from the dominant class.
The significance to be attached to the social origins of public officials has been an inseparable part of this controversy in the history of Marxist analysis of the state.
THE EARLY MARX
There are two main sources for Marx's most developed ideas about bureaucracy in capitalist society (Marx also wrote about bureaucracy under Oriental despotism and Russian czarism; see Draper 1977, Chs. 21 and 23).
These do not, as Liebich (1982) points out, amount to a theory of bureaucracy, but they contain all the elements of the debate about the role of bureaucracy in different socio-economic settings that occupy the minds of contemporary Marxists.
Even the attack on bureaucracy as a new ruling class has its origins in Marx's Critique of Hegel's ‘Philosophy of Right’.
This is the first main statement by Marx on bureaucracy.
Hegel portrayed the bureaucracy as the medium through  which the particular interests of society (represented by the professions, commercial corporations, municipalities, and so on) are translated into a general interest represented by the state:
In Hegel's conception of the state the bureaucracy constituted a ‘universal’ estate, capable of universal insight and universal will.
This results from its special form of organization, a system of relations based on hierarchy, specialization and co-ordination.
Through such relations the bureaucracy was, for Hegel, in a position to transcend the particularistic wills and interests of society.
The organization of bureaucracy educated its members into the proper fulfilment of their duties (Perez-Diaz 1978, p. 12).
Marx's reaction to this was as much an attempt to counter the claim being made on behalf of the Prussian bureaucracy in the 1840s that it offered an alternative to constitutionalism, as it was a theoretical objection to Hegel's interpretation of the state (Liebich 1982).
For Marx, the state did not represent a general or universal interest, but rather the interests of a dominant class.
Universalism was an ideological device to obscure the domination of particular interests.
The bureaucracy was for Marx the most important instrument by which such domination was exercised.
The task of bureaucracy was precisely to maintain a system of social relations which consolidate class domination.
To do this the bureaucracy had to be a ‘closed society within the state’, simply yet another closed and hierarchical corporation with its own particularistic interests.
It controlled public resources in the manner of a private owner, and used them for its own purposes.
As such, the bureaucracy, far from sustaining a universal interest, served to reinforce particularism in society.
Bureaucracy, for Marx, was indispensable to a society divided into antagonistic classes.
In fact, the classical Marxist  formulation cannot define the state without defining bureaucracy.
It is inherent in it and inseparable from it (Draper 1977, pp. 484–5).
The bureaucracy is the means by which inequalities are enforced without too often resorting to physical coercion.
It feeds off conflict, both within civil society and between civil society and the state.
The existence of such conflict could be used to justify the bureaucracy's claim to universality (Lefort 1986).
It was also a source of alienation, both between the state and civil society, and within bureaucratic institutions themselves.
It had become an oppressive force, felt by citizens to be distant, beyond control and beyond comprehension.
These feelings of alienation were reinforced by secrecy and inaccessibility, and by bureaucratic privilege.
Bureaucracy created two kinds of reality, one bureaucratic and derived from internally evaluated actions by knowledgeable professionals, the other the reality of a passive and uninformed citizenry.
Within bureaucracies alienation develops from the realization that the ‘general interest’ is a myth and that the state's administration is parasitic and oppressive.
Finally, in his critique of Hegel, Marx denies that bureaucracy is an efficient form of executive power.
Marx was thus concerned with bureaucracy both as a social formation and as a source of inefficient public service.
Marx claimed that bureaucrats typically lacked initiative and imagination, though this did not prevent them from trying to expand their powers and privileges.
Marx was contemptuous of the ‘sordid materialism’ of bureaucracy, and the constant struggles for promotion, status and prestige.
Hierarchy simply served to protect the incompetent and the officious from external control through the mutual support of superiors and subordinates.
Draper has documented how ‘bureaucratism’ attracted the attention of both Marx and Engels, notably the disastrous administration of the Crimean War, and the British colonial machinery for the control of India (Draper 1977, pp.511–13).
In a classless society the state, and therefore the bureaucracy, would wither away.
Administrative tasks would lose their exploitative character and consist of the administration of things, not the repression of people.
Marx also believed that when the division of labour was no longer necessary, administration could become democratized by becoming the responsibility of all.
In a truly democratic state the bureaucracy would be transcended.
Civil society would carry out executive functions itself.
Administration and public affairs would cease to be the private business of bureaucrats.
The other main source of Marx's ideas on bureaucracy is the analysis of the coup d'état of Louis Bonaparte in France in 1851 and the class struggles from 1848 to 1851 which lay behind it.
In The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte Marx describes how an authoritarian regime founded on the bureaucracy (both military and civil) enabled the state, led by Louis Bonaparte, to gain a measure of autonomy from the warring factions of the French bourgeoisie so as to preserve the bourgeois social order in the face of a mounting threat from the lower classes.
The insecurity of the propertied classes under conditions of universal suffrage was remedied by a regime which destroyed parliamentary democracy but safeguarded the economic order on which the privileges of the bourgeoisie depended.
The army, because of its links with the propertied classes, was anxious to support the social order against revolution, especially since it guaranteed it a monopoly of the means of warfare and substantial defence expenditure.
The bureaucracy also benefited from the willingness of the financial bourgeoisie to see public money spent on large public-works contracts and therefore to allow the public debt to grow.
Industrialists were also happy to see an expansion of state and therefore bureaucratic intervention to provide themselves with protection against foreign imports and their relatives with employment opportunities.
The bureaucracy also offered a means of social control over potentially antagonistic classes.
For the bureaucracy itself, Marx noted how a Bonapartist regime virtually eliminated the risk of public scrutiny and criticism.
The following propositions have been inferred from Marx's analysis of the coup d'état of 1851 and the civil war of 1871 (Marx 1871):
1.
An alliance between workers, peasants and petty bourgeoisie necessitates a bureaucratic authoritarian regime.
2.
That regime must reverse the process by which the resources of workers' radicalism have been accumulated, and neutralize the discontent of the petty bourgeoisie and peasants.
3.
To assist in the establishment of such a regime the bureaucracy must have been able to conserve most of its resources intact through the preceding liberal-democratic regime.
4.
To maintain itself, a bureaucracy needs control over the recruitment of personnel.
5.
Bureaucracies need to have a near monopoly of political and administrative information.
6.
The bureaucracy will be remunerated so as to set it apart from the rest of society and reinforce its internal hierarchy.
7.
Any threat to the exploitation of surplus value is a threat to the bureaucracy's sources of economic power (Perez-Diaz 1978, pp. 72–4).
THE FUNCTIONS OF THE STATE
 Further discussion of the role of bureaucracy in Bonapartist regimes will be reserved for the analysis of underdevelopment, since it is in the context of the post-colonial state that The Eighteenth Brumaire has provided most stimulation to contemporary Marxists.
Some, however, such as Poulantzas, have argued that relative autonomy is a universal feature of the capitalist state, and becomes particularly pronounced under conditions of crisis (Poulantzas 1973).
In fact, Marxism has been more concerned to establish the role of the state under different conditions, than to disaggregate the state apparatus and provide a detailed analysis of one or other of its institutions, such as the bureaucracy.
It is, of course, possible to infer some aspects of bureaucracy in capitalist society from the functions assigned to the state.
Different agencies and personnel will be required to administer the state's contribution to capitalist production by controlling the business cycle, providing subsidized energy and communications for industry and commerce, and investing in  industrial development from those involved in the renewal of society's productive forces, especially the reproduction of labour through programmes of social welfare.
Other parts of the bureaucracy will be engaged in the state's function of reproducing the relations of production through coercive, ideological and juridical means (such as the enforcement of private property rights, and freedom of contract).
The growth of executive power at the expense of legislative authority has been widely recognized as another feature of capitalism affecting bureaucracy, especially as capitalism moves through its monopoly phase, or as the class struggle intensifies and threatens the process of capital accumulattion.
The administrative consequences of the need to insulate the executive from the influence of elected bodies, popular influence and working-class opposition have been identified as centralization and corporatism, especially in the use of quasi-governmental agencies (Jessop 1978, Gough 1979, Therborn 1978; Panitch 1979; Mandel 1975).
Gough, in particular, has analysed the significance to capitalism of the growth and centralization of the welfare bureaucracy.
Different patterns of public expenditure reflect the state's role in the restructuring of private capital at a time of economic recession, and in the political crises which the recession and new directions of state intervention bring about.
The public service itself becomes an arena of conflict as increasingly unionized and militant public servants, together with their client groups, confront cuts in services, job losses and ideological attacks on the ‘workshy’, welfare ‘scroungers’, and bureaucratic impediments to the free market, individual responsibility and economic initiative (Gough, 1979).
O'Connor has argued that the expansion of state intervention has led inevitably to fiscal crisis.
The capitalist state has to perform two essential but often contradictory functions.
The first is to maintain or create conditions under which profitable capital accumulation is possible.
This involves state expenditure on social capital.
Two kinds of social capital expenditure are required.
There is social investment on projects and services that increase the productivity of a given amount of labour power and therefore the rate of profit.
An example is state-financed industrial  estates.
Then there is social consumption, expenditure on projects and services that lower the reproduction costs of labour (e.g. social insurance which expands the reproductive power of the workforce and lowers labour costs).
The second function is legitimization which involves expenditure by the state on social expenses, or projects and services required to maintain social harmony (e.g. welfare, designed to reduce tension among employees).
A modern capitalist state cannot openly use coercive powers to help one class accumulate capital at the expense of others.
O'Connor claims that ‘nearly every state agency is involved in accumulation and legitimization functions’(O'Connor, 1973, p. 7).
For example, some educational provision constitutes social capital by reproducing and expanding the workforce's technical levels and some constitutes social consumption (through socialization).
The growth of the state sector, and therefore of public spending, also provides a basis for the growth of the monopoly sector and is a consequence of the power of monopoly industries: ‘The greater the growth of social capital, the greater the growth of the monopoly sector.
And the greater the growth of the monopoly sector, the greater the state's expenditures on social expenses of production’.
However, monopoly corporations and unions tend to resist the appropriation of surplus created by social capital but appropriated privately.
Therefore state expenditure tends to increase faster than revenues.
Fiscal crisis results.
This is exacerbated by the demands of special interests which are processed by the political system (O'Connor 1973).
Another association between bureaucracy and the regulation of class conflict under contemporary capitalism has been noted by Wolfe (1977).
The uniqueness of bureaucracy in the era of late capitalism is the result of the ‘exhaustion of political alternatives’.
The expansion of bureaucracy reveals the inability of capitalism to resolve conflicts ‘within the sphere of private life’.
However, the management of class conflict bureaucratically is then incompatible with the demands made on the bureaucracy to intervene in society's productive activities: ‘productive activity, contrasted with allocative, is incompatible with a bureaucratic mode or  organization’.
The more that public administration is called upon to solve problems that were at one time left to the market, the greater the contradiction — a point made by Habermas (1976) and Offe (1975).
Wolfe argues that this contradiction has three consequences for public administration.
First, the administrative process becomes more politicized and less competent.
Second, public bureaus come to be organized in a monopolistic and centralized fashion to match the organization of monopoly capital.
Such centralization has been noted by others such as Beer (1982) and Gough (1979).
It stifles innovation and allows policy-making to stagnate.
Decentralization is often urged, but more often as a means of withdrawing the state from the provision of collective goods than as a means of making the state apparatus more efficient.
Finally, rationalization is sought as a way out of bureaucracy's predicament.
Planning-programming-budgeting systems, public expenditure surveys, programme analysis and review, the rationalization of budgetary choice and other planning devices have all failed to displace established bureaucratic procedures and elites.
Bureaucracy remains caught between its politicized tasks and its formal ideology of being non-political, rational and united (Wolfe 1977, pp. 262–71).
THE SOCIAL ORIGINS OF BUREAUCRATS
One of the most important advances in contemporary Marxist thinking about bureaucracy resulted from a debate about the significance of the social origins of bureaucrats in the capitalist state.
This debate has its origins in Laski's deprecation of the narrow social basis of recruitment into the higher civil service in Britain, making it impossible for such people to understand working-class problems (Laski 1938); and Kingsley's prediction that an unrepresentative bureaucracy would block radical reformist policies and therefore threaten democracy (Kingsley 1944).
It is easy to show, as Miliband and others have done, that members of the capitalist class participate directly in the apparatus of the state, that the social origins of senior  bureaucrats are those of the ruling class, and that there are many personal ties of influence, status and experience which link members of the ruling class with members of the state apparatus, especially the bureaucracy (Miliband 1969, pp. 48–68; Krislov 1974; Subramaniam 1967).
The propertied class is overrepresented in the governing institutions of all advanced capitalist states.
The most favoured section of the population provides a disproportionate number of recruits into state bureaucracies, aided by a system of educational inequality.
Having obtained access to the higher ranks of the bureaucracy, an official's career within it is helped by links of kinship, friendship and values.
Thus:
1.
The social origin of those at the ‘summit’ of the state apparatus is that of the ruling class.
2.
Personal ties of influence, status, kinship, and so on, link members of the ruling class generally to those who inhabit or have ‘colonized’ the state apparatus.
Poulantzas has argued, however, that these features of the state apparatus in general and the bureaucracy in particular may not be very significant.
What is important is not that members of the capitalist class participate directly in the state apparatus, but that the relation between bourgeoisie and state is ‘objective’.
So, if the functioning of the state and the interests of the bourgeoisie coincide, it is because of the system, not because of the participation of members of the ruling class in the state apparatus.
This participation is the effect, not the cause, of this objective coincidence.
It is therefore wrong, Poulantzas argues, to reduce the role of the state to the conduct and motivations of its personnel.
Indeed, the interests of the capitalist class are served better when the state apparatus is not composed of members of this class than when it is, when the ‘ruling class’ is not the ‘politically governing class’.
‘This is the exact meaning of Marx's analyses of 19th Century England and Bismarckian Germany, to say nothing of Bonapartism in France’(Poulantzas 1969, p. 73).
Class origins are less important than the objective function of serving the interests of the ruling class.
So the bureaucracy in advanced capitalist states serves the ruling class not because of personal ties or social origins, which may be very diverse, but because the role of the bureaucracy coincides with the interests of the ruling class.
This does not, however, render the question of social origins of state personnel, such as bureaucrats, sterile.
Indeed, Poulantzas suggests that it is precisely the relative autonomy of the bureaucracy as a specific social category from the ruling class which is so important, under certain conditions of capitalism, for the hegemony of the whole class.
Thus the relationship between the members of the bureaucracy and the members of the ruling class is far more complex than some of the social-science interest in social origins might suggest.
How the bureaucracy relates to the ruling class is more than a matter of origins.
It is a matter too of the autonomy with which the state apparatus can operate in order to serve the interest of this class as a whole by remaining free from colonization and control by one of its diverse fractions.
Miliband's response to Poulantzas was that he goes too far in dismissing the composition of the state elite as of no account, and in suggesting that structural constraints are so compelling ‘as to turn those who run the state into the merest functionaries and executants of policies imposed upon them by ‘the system’(Miliband 1983, p. 32).
This leaves the state totally subordinate to the ruling class, making a consideration of the ‘dialectical relationship between the state and ‘the system’ impossible.
Miliband argues that this complex relationship between state and society is ‘shaped’ by the factors that Poulantzas dismisses as unimportant.
THE FORM OF THE STATE
The Poulantzas argument, however, is not simply that state apparatuses, whatever the social origin, class situation and ideological disposition of their members, will operate under the structural constraints of the capitalist system.
It is also that different forms of capitalism will produce different relationships between state and society and therefore different relationships between state institutions.
The role and power of  the bureaucracy vis-à-vis other, non-bureaucratic institutions, will differ according to the stage of capitalism reached.
So structural constraints do not turn officials and others who run the state into the mere implementors of policies made inevitable by the system.
We are not, as Miliband thinks, ‘back at the point of total subordination of the state elite to that class’.
We are rather at the point of arguing that the state, and in particular its bureaucracy, may be free from subordination and manipulation by the ruling class in order to preserve its interests in the long run and as a whole.
It is thus argued that relationships between parts of the state apparatus (especially the bureaucracy and representative institutions) become a matter of the particular form of the capitalist state — liberal, interventionist, Bonapartist, military dictatorship, fascist — each relating to different stages in the development of capitalism (competitive, imperialist, state capitalism).
‘A significant shift in the predominant branch in the state apparatus, or of the relation between these branches, cannot be directly established by the immediate exterior role of this branch, but is determined by the modification of the whole system of the state apparatus’(Poulantzas 1969).
Such modification reflects changes in relations of production and developments in the class struggle.
This mode of analysis requires us to look beyond ‘forms of regime’(Poulantzas 1973, p. 153) such as constitutional monarchy, parliamentary republic, presidential government or parliamentary democracy, to forms of state, such as liberal or interventionist, and beyond to stages in the development of capitalism or, historically, to the transition from one mode of production to another.
For example, the absolutist states of seventeenth-century Europe may be seen as ‘the state of transition from feudalism to capitalism in Western Europe’(Poulantzas 1973, p. 157).
Perry Anderson has shown that the importance of bureaucracy in the absolutist state was that it was part of the state apparatus for a new kind of feudal domination.
Absolutism was required by the ruling class in order to maintain its domination during the spread of commodity production and exchange and the consequent transition in the social formation.
The absolutist state was necessary to maintain control of a peasantry freed from the  politico-legal coercion of feudalism by the commutation of dues into money rents.
The apparatus of royal executive power at the centre was a substitute for feudal domination at village level.
Its political function was as much the repression of the rural and urban masses as feudal vassalage had been, but in addition it had to act to protect the land-owning aristocracy against the growing power of the bourgeousie which was based on the technical and commercial advances underlying pre-industrial manufacturing.
So, as Engels had said in the Anti-Dühring, ‘The political order remained feudal, while society became more and more bourgeois’.
Within this reorganized framework the state could simultaneously ensure the interests of the nascent mercantile and manufacturing classes and protect aristocratic property and privileges.
The bureaucracy during this epoch was in transition from the hereditary administrative offices of the medieval political hierarchy to the rational legal administration of capitalism.
Renaissance bureaucracy treated offices as saleable property.
The feudal nobility and mercantile bourgeoisie were integrated into the absolutist state mainly by the purchase of offices in the public apparatus of the state.
This constituted an important source of financial support.
In return the office-holder could recoup through tax farming, exemptions, and so on.
But this bureaucracy had moved beyond the royal government of the Middle Ages, which relied on the services of the clergy.
As it developed, bureaucratic office-holding was competed for by members of noble families who formed patronage networks leading to factional feuds between rival clientages.
The bourgeoisie became a source of state functionaries as the sale of offices increased to pay for the ever-growing cost of armies.
The administration became increasingly professionalized.
Venality replaced patronage and created systems of clientage which replaced personal allegiance to feudal lords and provincial dynasties.
New ruling administrators owed allegiance to the state.
Functionaries gradually ceased to have  autonomous regional or military bases of power (Anderson 1974).
Administrative accountability and political control in liberal democracies is but one example of the liberal state's efforts, under competitive capitalism, to bring executive power under  the control of parliamentary institutions.
This kind of development characterized the transition from absolution to liberalism, just as the re-emergence of bureaucratic power has marked the transition from the liberal to the interventionist state of monopoly capitalism: ‘in the last analysis this democracy was erected precisely in order to place institutional limits upon the privileges bequeathed to the administration by the Absolutist State’(Poulantzas 1978, p. 226).
So the relative position of bureaucracy and other political institutions may be seen historically as a consequence of transitions in capitalism and the state.
THE AUTHORITARIAN STATE
Fascism similarly may be considered as a form of state with, historically, various types of regime such as National Socialism, and as related to capitalism in crisis.
During the great German and Italian dictatorships bureaucratic power was used to preserve and strengthen capitalism and the interests of big business.
But the price of obtaining the destruction of working-class power and organization was a loss of control over the state by the bourgeoisie and nobility.
Fascism, like Bonapartism before it, used totalitarianism to safeguard capitalism and bourgeois interests.
The state was independent of classes in determining how best to secure a social order given the circumstances of the time.
In Germany the bureaucracy played a vital role in the subordination of society and the creation of elites through which the regime played off one group against another, enabling ‘a minority to terrorize the majority’(Neumann 1944, p. 367).
The bureaucracy became the most important part of the state apparatus in the formulation of economic, financial, social and agricultural sectors.
It served the interests of industrial capitalism under the direction of the party.
The higher ranks of the civil service, mainly trained in law, were steeped in a tradition of technocracy and loyalty to any government that guaranteed efficient administration.
In the middle levels of the administrative hierarchy there was strong commitment to Nazism, and many Nazi leaders were recruited  from this stratum.
The civil bureaucracy as a whole was never committed to liberal democracy.
Indeed, the experience of Nazi Germany shows that an economy may be bureaucratized by the expansion of state controls while private ownership and capitalism thrives.
The bureaucracy organized the economy in a pragmatic way, though with the eventual aim of producing a wholly monopolistic system of capitalism protected by the state.
Capitalism provided the state with an economic foundation for political expansion.
The state operated in favour of the great industrial combines against small business, finance capital, the wholesale and retail sectors and, of course, the labour force and its trade unions.
State regimentation of the economy, price controls, the regulation of credit and the money market, the control of foreign trade all strengthened the position of monopoly capitalism.
It was in this major area of economic policy that early on the civil administration exercised a high degree of autonomy even from the totalitarian party.
When the power of the higher civil service declined after 1942 and the state administration became absorbed into the party structure, the running of the economy was handed over to the most powerful monopolists.
Eventually, Germany was led by ‘a small group of powerful industrial, financial, and agrarian monopolists tending to coalesce with a group of party hierarchs into one single bloc disposing of the means of production and the means of violence’(Neumann 1944, p. 634).
The state, and the civil bureaucracy in particular even when fused into the party apparatus, controlled the social formation of the Third Reich in the interest of German monopoly capital.
Monopolization required imperialism and both were incompatible with the political democracy represented by Weimar.
When republican Germany threatened to institute social reform, the privileged class mobilized the apparatus of the state — judiciary, bureaucracy and army — in order to establish a ‘bureaucratic dictatorship’ in place of parliamentary legislative power.
The decline of liberal institutions and the use of bureaucratic authoritarianism were consistent with the interests of German industry.
Only a return to imperialist expansion could protect German industrial interests faced with political, economic and social crisis.
But this, in an age of mass  politics, could only take place under a totalitarian dictatorship which destroyed parliamentary government and ruled through a politico-administrative bureaucracy.
So fascist ideology and terror were necessary to acquire a mass basis and eradicate opposition.
But this ideology, though revolutionary in content, in fact sustained capitalist relations of production in general and big business in particular.
Wage-earners were totally subject to the control of employers.
In fact, power in many walks of life was delegated to members of the business elite and business organizations which became part of the state apparatus (Miliband 1969, pp. 87–96).
Fascism as a form of state needs to be distinguished from other authoritarian forms which are associated with particular stages in the development of capitalism.
In the Third World the military dictatorship has been widespread and provides another example of the relative power of bureaucracy under specific capitalist conditions.
In the specific conditions of post-colonial underdevelopment it is not unusual to find conflict within the bourgeoisie working along ethnic lines.
Such a conflict is bound to dominate politics, as control of government policy is necessary if valuable resources are to be acquired by an emergent capitalist class.
Only the state provides these resources on any significant scale.
Political power is a necessary condition of economic power.
Business loans, contracts, foreign aid, patronage appointments, development projects and other sources of material reward are essential in state-supported capitalism.
After independence in Nigeria, for example, political conflict soon became conflict between sectional groups mobilized to support the political wings of the bourgeoisie who were in competition for the spoils of office.
Conflict was exacerbated by the uneven distribution of resources and development effort between the different regions of the country.
The crisis came when the political system proved incapable of controlling either the competing elites or the alienated masses (Post and Vickers 1973).
When the military assumed political control of the country, power fell into the hands of a small group of decision-makers composed of soldiers, policemen and civil servants.
There was bureaucracy in the sense of government by officials.
Within  this, the regime was heavily dependent upon the civil administration.
Though originally encouraged to reduce their dependence on civil servants, the soldiers could not govern alone.
The officer corps was small, young and inexperienced.
It was decimated by the loss of life incurred by the coup and the civil war.
It was less well-educated than the civil service.
Direct military administration of central and local government was never possible (Luckham 1971, p. 93).
Educational qualifications for entry into the officer corps had been lower than for other comparable elements of the administration.
Few officers had had any training in management, politics or diplomacy.
Lack of experience in command positions was due to the rapid Kigerianization of the army shortly before independence.
The simple organizational structure of the army and the short careers of its officer corps meant that no one had anything more than the most rudimentary administrative skills.
Few had even staff experience.
Indeed, it has even been argued that the army's own internal co-ordination, command and logistics were deficient.
So, ‘the prospects of using the military for effective socio-economic mobilization should be counted as very poor indeed’(Dudley 1971, p. 175).
However, this was not an unwilling dependence of the army on the civil service, as few army officers were hostile to the government by professional bureaucrats.
Nigeria thus became an administered rather than a political society, just as it had been under colonialism.
Civil servants dominated the crucial decision-making bodies.
Statutory power to make subordinate legislation was delegated to Permanent Secretaries.
Officials in charge of the central and regional ministries determined and administered policy in the absence of effective initiative and control by soldiers.
Senior officials could carry on with the day-to-day business of the state without concerning themselves with any kind of specialist ministerial control.
Local government councils were replaced by civil servants.
The administration became the channel of political communication and interest aggregation in the absence of parties and politicians.
Political pressures from different parts of the country were articulated on a geographical basis and directed towards bureaucrats  originating from the part of the country concerned.
Rivalries thus developed within the administration among officials of different places of origin.
To overcome this the ministries themselves were forced to create functional interest groups, such as farmers organizations, development associations and educational groups to channel political demands into the appropriate ministries.
But even here the administration was careful to build up formal channels of access that it could control and that would in turn support the regime, as in the case of traditional leadership, which was recruited as a legitimizing instrument of government in the localities.
The relative importance of the bureaucracy of capitalist states therefore depends on the distribution of class power within society.
In a military dictatorship the dominant apparatus is the army.
In Bonapartist states it is the civil administration.
In the fascist state it is the political police.
In the liberal state, and competitive capitalism, it is the system of representative institutions.
As capitalism develops, and state intervention grows, the relative position of the bureaucracy changes.
Economic crisis may produce political regimes which are radically different from those of even the interventionist capitalist state.
But even without crisis the liberal and interventionist states are different in respect of relations between state apparatuses.
In the interventionist state the executive is likely to prevail over the legislature.
In the ‘exceptional’ state, such as fascism or the military regime, there is a complete break from the electorial principle, class representation by political parties and parliamentary politics.
As one moves from the liberal state of competitive capitalism to the totalitarian state of monopoly capitalism in crisis, the state becomes more bureaucratized, the extent of bureaucratization varying according to the form of regime and the relationship between state apparatuses.
CONCLUSION
Marxists have rejected the utility of discussing bureaucracy in relation to other parts of the state apparatus in isolation from civil society.
Conventional public administration sees the  problem of bureaucratic power in these terms.
It is essentially seen as a question of the growing difficulty experienced in subjecting the administration to the control of non-bureaucratic institutions, mainly legislatures.
Bureaucratic responsiveness in thus a matter of relations between institutions.
Marxism sees bureaucratic power as a matter of relations between classes.
It locates bureaucracy in a class context rather than in a constitutional or even institutional context.
It then becomes apparent that there may well be no conflict between the power of the bureaucracy and the ability of other institutions to determine state policy.
The power of the bureaucracy merely corresponds to the power of the state as a whole and so may be quite compatible with the power (or lack of it) exercised elsewhere in the state apparatus.
So we need to think less of the state as getting out of the control of the legislature, and more of the state as getting out of the control of the dominant economic class.
The highest echelons of the bureaucracy may be drawn from a class which though part of the ‘power bloc’ is not in fact the ‘hegemonic’part of that bloc.
In Britain in the second half of the nineteenth century, for example, the highest-ranking bureaucrats were drawn from the land-owning class, while the bourgeoisie constituted the hegemonic class.
‘Moreover, this class or fraction in charge of the state may or may not identify itself with the ruling class or fraction in the political scene’(Poulantzas 1973, p. 335).
Hence, the way a bureaucracy functions is not directly determined by its class membership.
It will not necessarily operate in the interest of those classes or fractions from which it is drawn.
The exercise of bureaucratic functions reflects the way the state apparatus as a whole functions.
And the state functions in response to the political power of the hegemonic class: the functioning of the bureaucracy corresponds to the political interest of this class or fraction, but this is because of the state's complex relations with this class's or fraction's political power and not because of the bureaucracy's class affiliation or recruitment.
The bureaucracy, according to this line of analysis, exercises neither class power of its own nor the power of classes to which it is affiliated.
This really means  there can be no possibility of conflict between the bureaucracy and other parts of the state apparatus which will equally function under the direction of the hegemonic class.
What appears to be distortion in the allocation of power between different parts of the state apparatus (e.g. bureaucracy and legislature is in reality a reflection of the state's functioning of behalf of a dominant class.
The relationship between the bureaucracy and other institutions is not a consequence of the exercise of political power by the dominant class.
So the bureaucracy ‘puts itself at the service of the political interests of the hegemonic class’(Poulantzas 1973, p. 337) when the class from which the members of the state apparatus are recruited and the hegemonic class are not one and the same.
When they are, ‘the bureaucracy accedes to a relative autonomy with regard to the latter’.
It also possesses relative autonomy, however, when they are not.
This is not because of class affiliation to the ‘class in charge’ rather than the hegemonic class, but because of the bureaucracy's' character as a specific category through the intermediary of its relation with the state’.
The bureaucracy can nevertheless impose ‘limits’ and ‘barriers’to the hegemonic class or fraction by virtue of being affiliated by recruitment to another class.
Indeed, in periods of transition the class affiliation of members of the state apparatus can further the interests of the non-hegemonic class: ‘it creates the conditions for their accession to power’(Poulantzas 1973, pp. 337–8).
6
BUREAUCRACY IN COMMUNIST THEORY
There is a long tradition among revolutionary thinkers and activists that communist society would be administered without bureaucratic relationships between political leaders and the people — without, that is, an apparatus which represented the particular interests of a dominant class and which was divorced from those engaged in production (Hegedus 1976, p. 17).
The aim of this chapter is to examine what Marxists envisaged as the elements of non-bureaucratic administration in the communist system.
This is a prelude to a discussion of what has happened, in terms of bureaucratic developments, in states organized on Marxist principles.
Since Marxists have been more concerned to analyse the workings of capitalist societies than to draw up blueprints of collective organization after the state has withered away (an exercise which in any case Marx regarded as Utopian and unscientific), it is not easy to piece together a communist theory of administration, in the sense of a model for society after the stage of socialism, during which the dictatorship of the proletariat systematically removed the material foundation of state repression.
MARX
The model for Marx himself was the Paris Commune of March-May 1871, though he subsequently dismissed it as merely an uprising, and not even a socialist one (Lichtheim 1964, pp. 112–21).
At the time of the uprising, Marx found in  the form of government which the Paris revolutionary leaders established, something superior to the parliamentary system of democracy.
The Commune was a working institution, embodying both legislative and executive powers.
‘Public functions ceased to be the private property of the tools of the central government.
Not only municipal administration but the whole initiative hitherto exercised by the state was laid into the hands of the Commune’(Marx 1871, p. 471).
The Commune indicated to Marx that it was possible to have all public servants ‘elected, responsible and revocable’ and paid working men's wages.
It could serve as a model for all the great industrial centres in France.
LENIN
Marx's interpretation of the Paris Commune was, as Lichtheim noted, to become a Leninist shibboleth (Lichtheim 1964, p. 119) .2 Indeed, Lenin did more than Marx to contrast the administrative principles of the Commune with the bureaucratic workings of the bourgeois state.
Lenin believed that bureaucracy would become redundant after a proletarian revolution which would provide for the instant revocability of every civil servant, the reduction of official salaries and the simplification of control and accounting functions in society.
For Lenin the principal lesson of Marxism on the task of the proletariat in relation to the state during a revolution was that it should ‘break up the bureaucratic and military machinery’(Lenin 1918, p. 33).
Following Marx's analysis of the Paris Commune of 1871, Lenin believed that the people could, after a proletarian revolution, fulfil the functions once performed by ‘privileged officialdom’.
Bureaucracy would be abolished by a return to ‘primitive democracy’ in which state functions are discharged ‘by the majority of the population and by every individual of the population (p. 38).
This would be possible, Lenin believed, because the majority of state administrative functions had become so simplified that they could be ‘reduced’ to such simple operations as registering, filing and checking — mere routine.
So administration would be within the competence of any literate person.
Anyone performing  administrative functions would be paid a working man's wage.
Privilege, ‘official grandeur’, special allowances and high levels of remuneration would be abolished.
‘All officials, without exception elected and subject to recall at any time, their salaries reduced to working men's wages — these simple and self-evident democratic measures, which, completely uniting the interests of the workers and the majority of peasants, at the same time serve as a bridge leading from capitalism to socialism’(pp. 38–9).
It is clear that Lenin's references to ‘primitive democracy’ and the delegation of state functions to ordinary people did not mean that he thought there would be no place for administration in a socialist state.
It was sheer Utopianism to think that officialdom could be destroyed ‘immediately, everywhere, completely’(p. 42).
The task was to break up the old bureaucratic machine and construct a new one, but one which would ‘enable us gradually to reduce all officialdom to naught’(p. 42).
Lenin accepted that socialism would be a form of state, but with a different mode of organizing state functionaries.
These would no longer be parasitic, completely dependent on bourgeois society and playing no productive role.
They would cease to be a privileged stratum standing above the people.
This new machine would not be characterized by the ‘commanding’ methods of capitalist state officials but by the routines of managers and bookkeepers, ‘functions which are already within the capacity of the average city dweller’(p. 43).
Bureaucracy for Lenin was clearly associated with the repressive apparatus of the state.
So only the police, army and ‘bureaucracy’ would be dismantled by the representatives of the proletariat, leaving the registration and accounting work of banks, factories, academies, syndicates, experimental stations, and other institutions to be taken over by proletarian soviets.
These were to be ‘expanded, made more comprehensive, and nationwide’(Lenin 1917).
In place of bureaucracy, revolutionary leaders would simply need to borrow the best models furnished by the advanced countries and employ existing functionaries in the service of the new state.
Much of what had been in the public sector of the old bourgeois state would be destroyed, while what had been in  private hands would be taken over.
The moderately paid managers of the new regime would have technical knowledge ‘of all sorts, types and degrees’(Lenin 1918, p. 43).
Lenin clearly accepted the need for administration and administrators, but by a democratically controlled set of routine offices rotating widely among the population rather than by a ‘special stratum of the population’.
Workers' control and workers' wages for technicians, managers and bookkeepers would prevent the re-emergence of a privileged bureaucratic stratum —‘privileged persons detached from the masses and standing above the masses’(p. 97).
When the functions of the state had been reduced to routine accounting and control by the workers themselves, public functions would lose their political character ‘and be transformed into simple administrative functions’(p. 84).
When all become bureaucrats for a time, no bureaucracy can develop.
‘Under socialism, all will take a turn in management, and will soon become accustomed to the idea of no managers at all’(p. 98).
Technical personnel would, however, remain.
Lenin distinguished between administrative control and accounting on the one hand, and ‘the scientifically trained staff of engineers, agronomists and so on’ on the other.
The latter would work as before, but under the control of workers' institutions.
They could be expected to be as obedient to the workers as they had been to the capitalists.
In State and Revolution he wrote that the problem was only ‘to lop away that which capitalistically disfigures this otherwise excellent apparatus’.
The state would also be highly decentralized.
Lenin cites with approval Engels' recommendation that there should be complete self-government for the provinces, districts and localities through officials elected by universal suffrage and the abolition of all local and provincial authorities appointed by the state.
It would also be made impossible for posts in the public service to be used as ‘springboards’ to highly profitable posts in banks and joint-stock companies.
Eventually, Lenin had somehow to explain why the changes in the nature of public administration, which he hoped would be brought about by the revolution, had not materialized.
He identified a number of abuses and inefficiencies in the  administration of Soviet government and economy, and in the party, in the years immediately following the Revolution.
Post-revolutionary bureaucratism consisted of authoritarianism, unrealistic planning and red tape.
Lenin's explanation of these set-backs was the dependence of the new regime on the personnel of the old.
The cure was to get workers and peasants into the apparatus and into supervisory positions.
By 1921 Lenin was arguing that bureaucratism had dual roots.
The first was a developed bourgeoisie which needed bureaucracy as a weapon against revolutionary movements.
The second and economic root was part of the new state's backwardness.
Lenin blamed the ‘atomized and dispersed character of small production with its poverty, lack of culture, the absence of roads, illiteracy, the absence of exchange between agriculture and industry’.
Bureaucracy was also a necessary evil to cope with the ravages of war.
As the pressures mounted, Lenin was forced to admit that ‘an unskilled labourer or a cook cannot immediately get on with the job of state administration’ and that only a few thousand workers  throughout Russia had any experience of work in government.
Even the Bolshevik leadership lacked ‘knowledge of organisation on a scale of millions, knowledge of organisation and distribution of goods’.
In 1922 Lenin acknowledged ‘our complete inability to conduct affairs, to be organizers and administrators’.
The communist leadership ‘imagine they are directing, but are actually being directed’.
They needed to study the business of administration more.
‘They scatter orders and decrees right and left, but the result is quite different from what they want’.
Experience of the complexities of government in a society such as that of the new Soviet Union appears to have had a dramatic effect on his earlier Utopian vision of the conduct of governmental affairs (Medvedev 1981, p. 39).
Eventually, Lenin was even forced to acknowledge the need for bureaucratic privilege.
It was necessary to learn from Europe and America as well as from the administrators and experts of the czarist regime.
The bourgeoisie and petty bourgeoisie might contain traitors and saboteurs, but they also know the techniques of management, industrial production and trade —‘they do know how to run shops’, Lenin conceded.
‘Specialists’ might have to enjoy even better conditions of life under socialism than they had under capitalism if they were to be well motivated.
Lenin referred to them as a ‘separate social stratum’, at least until the highest stage of development had been reached.
Politics, Lenin thought, could be replaced by technocracy.
He became increasingly interested in the work of the American engineer F. W. Taylor on techniques for increasing productivity.
He advocated organization on strictly hierarchical lines, with a single responsible manager at the top so that, while policy questions could be discussed collectively, executive functions would benefit from ‘businesslike, disciplined, voluntary fulfilment of the assignments and decrees necessary for the economic mechanism to function really like clockwork’.
Lenin's confidence that the soviets would provide the country with a revolutionary form of government that could function without bureaucracy was proved ill-founded almost as soon as they began their work.
The Russian historian Medvedev described the process:
TROTSKY
As the state apparatus of the Soviet Union grew under Stalin rather than withered away, further justification for the expansion of bureaucracy had to be sought.
Stalin claimed that a powerful state machine was necessary in the face of hostile capitalism with which the Soviet Union was surrounded.
Trotsky, originally a champion of strong administration and hierarchical and centralized economic management, later related bureaucratism to the fallacy of trying to build a socialist political structure without the conduct of permanent revolution.
He took a greater interest in the phenomenon of bureaucracy than previous Marxists and wrote extensively about the ‘betrayal’ of the Revolution by self-seeking bureaucrats who had destroyed the proletarian and revolutionary nature of the Bolshevik Party.
Trotsky thus drew attention to what was to become a recurring theme in critiques of Soviet Marxism — the bureaucratization of the mass political party.
Bureaucratism for Trotsky was more than just maladministration or red tape.
The bureaucracy represented a stable social group with a specific psychological style.
However, Trotsky also recognized that to effect the massive social change needed in the Soviet Union a professional, trained and expert apparatus was needed.
The problem for Trotsky was thus very similar to the problem which bureaucracy poses for the liberal interventionist, or welfare, state: how can those with the responsibility for carrying out the functions of government be controlled — in this case by a political leadership consisting of dedicated and ideologically sound revolutionaries?
Trotsky set himself the dangerous task of explaining how not only the state but also the Party had come to be excessively bureaucratized.
First, he argued, there had been post-revolutionary disillusionment which had allowed reactionary forces to become influential.
Second, there was the isolated position of the Soviet Union in trying to establish socialism in a backward country.
Because of this, a strong administrative apparatus was needed to plan the use of scarce resources, organize production and regulate distribution.
Wage incentives were needed to motivate officials, thus giving  bureaucracy an institutional and material basis for power.
This again enabled the bourgeois classes to exert their strength and so benefit from the disillusionment with the costs of revolution (Krygier 1979c).
For Trotsky the Soviet bureaucracy was little different from any other in its regulatory functions, its maintenance of social ranks and ‘its exploitation of the state apparatus for personal goals’(Trotsky 1936, p. 248).
Its distinctiveness lay in the degree of autonomy it had achieved from the ‘dominating’ class, a class which in fact was ‘hardly emerging from destitution and darkness and has no tradition of dominion or command’.
In these circumstances, the state officialdom was more than a bureaucracy.
It was ‘the sole privileged and commanding stratum in the Soviet society’.
By appropriating political power the bureaucracy took control of the principal means of production: ‘The means of production belong to the state.
But the state, so to speak ‘belongs’ to the bureaucracy’(Trotsky 1936, p. 249)
Trotsky was more concerned to confront Stalinism and expose the bureaucratization of his regime than to set out an alternative model of non-bureaucratized government under socialism or communism.
His prescriptions can only be inferred from his denunciations.
Trotsky's analysis of the bureaucracy in the Soviet Union will be taken up again in the following chapter when the issue of the ‘new class, is considered.
For present purposes we can conclude that Trotsky looked to proletarian democracy as a defence against bureaucratization.
It was the underdevelopment of this class that allowed the bureaucrats to gain control.
But in the economic conditions of the 1920s in the Soviet Union, there was little chance of workers’ control.
As Mandel puts it:
CONTEMPORARY ASPIRATIONS
The Marxist position on the alternative to bureaucracy under socialism, in so far as it is ever made explicit, is still largely based on the lessons derived from the Paris Commune and from Trotsky's critique of Stalinism.
Thus Mandel had set out the three levels at which the fight against bureaucratization must be waged by the ‘revolutionary vanguard’:
1.
At the level of the political organization of the state by fostering workers' democracy and direct participation by the masses in the running of the state.
2.
At the international level by world revolution which, by breaking the isolation of the workers' states, will provide an effective antidote to bureaucratization.
3.
At the economic level by avoiding the separation of accumulation from production and so giving the working class control of the social surplus product.
‘Democratically centralized, planned workers’ management of the economy is the historical answer to this problem’(Mandel 1984, p. 69).
Andras Hegedus, the Hungarian social scientist and former prime minister, has written of the campaign against bureaucracy being waged in the socialist countries, a campaign which is largely unaware of the root cause of bureaucratism — the separation of administration from the ‘ultimate guarantor of power, i.e. society’, and the lack of social control.
For Hegedus the weakening of the bureaucratic character of administration will have to start with ‘social organizations’— party organizations, trade unions, youth movements, parliament, local councils, and so on, rather than in the sphere of state management.
Bureaucracy distorts the tasks of social organizations more than it does in management, where ‘the accumulation of bureaucratic relations does not necessarily decrease efficiency’.
The main means of bringing about the decay of bureaucratic relations for Hegedus (1976) are:
1.
Re-democratization of administration and the  development of self-administration in society ‘to ensure the institutional authority of society over the power of management’.
Experts would be called in who were independent of the administration to assist society's controlling activities.
2.
‘Healthy mobility’ in all spheres of administration.
Noting that the Marxist classics attribute great importance to the possibility of replacing officials, Hegedus argues that ‘for the most part, administration involves the sort of functions where a planned rotation of official personnel is expedient not only for the sake of opposing bureaucratic tendencies but also for the sake of greater efficiency’.
3.
Democratization of public life: ‘the creation of the kind of atmosphere in society which will prevent expert knowledge from having a monopoly in any sphere of administration and will make the unlimited rule of hierarchic conditions impossible’.
Hegedus recognizes that the ‘humanization’ of administration will be opposed by vested interests within the bureaucracy — the fetish of expertise, the ideology of centralized planning, the principle of personnel stability, and so on— but insists that the apologetics made for bureaucratic relations are inconsistent with Marxism.
For Hegedus one of the greatest distortions of Marxism was the ideology of centralized and hierarchical state management propounded during the first period of socialist development.
In place of this he asserts the rights of members of society to exercise supervision, as trustees of the property of the people, over economic and enterprise management, and to judge management performance.
CONCLUSION
Marxist theories of administration and bureaucracy have evolved from different strands of social analysis and criticism.
Marx and Engels were concerned with the emergence and development of capitalist relations of production and with the  crises occasioned by the contradictions inherent in capitalist property relations and political rights.
Lenin was involved in motivating revolutionary action by, in part, a critique of bureaucracy but later assumed responsibility for the economic development of a backward country that needed experts in positions of authority.
Trotsky and generations of socialist critics within and outside the communist states of Europe have attacked the transformation of officialdom into what appeared to be a new kind of ruling stratum.
From this amalgam of ideas there emerges a vision of collective ownership of social and economic property that is managed according to democratic principles.
‘Bureaucratism’, in the sense of hierarchical command structures alienating both those who work within administrative structures and those who are in one way or another dependent on them, is regarded as anathema to communist social equality.
The inevitability of professional and expert administration and management of the collectivized economy and society has been accepted by communist regimes.
But how far have the socialist techniques of control and anti-bureaucratism extolled by Marx and his disciples, been utilized in these states to ensure that politicians, not bureaucrats, remain in command?
The relationship between bureaucrats and the rest of the political system in communist states is the subject of the next chapter.
It is linked to a discussion of whether the form of communism practised in the Soviet Union, Eastern Europe and China has given rise to a new class whose domination rests on control of the means of administration.
7
BUREAUCRACY IN THE COMMUNIST STATE
Bureaucracy has come to have such enormous significance for government in communist states that some analysts claim that the whole political system warrants the epithet ‘bureaucratic’.
The system of bureaucratic politics is said to be analogous to a huge corporate enterprise.
Labels such as‘mono-hierarchical’, ‘mono-organizational’, ‘USSR Incorporated’(Meyer 1965), the ‘organizational society’, the ‘command society’(Rigby 1964) and the ‘administered society’(Kassof 1964) are used, implying that the political conflicts and struggles over resources, status and power that take place within the communist state are analogous to those experienced within large corporations.
To the extent that major interests compete and bargain for benefits, the system may be described as bureaucratic or institutional pluralism (Armstrong 1965; Hough 1973).
But the different ‘policy groups’ that have been identified as playing a part in policy-making and associated with specific interests and policy proposals are all bureaucrats — the military, industrial managers, agricultural experts, state officials, the economic bureaucracy, the party apparatus, police officials (Brezezinski and Huntington 1964; Asparturian 1968; Skilling and Griffiths 1971; Schwartz and Keech 1968).
As Hough points out:
All these institutions are controlled From above, all an subject to directives emanating from the same political institution or institutions, all have their key officials in the nomenklatura of higher Party officials (that is, their officials are appointed and removed only when a Party organ takes the action or agrees to it), all have developed many of the characteristics associated with bureaucratization.
(Hough, 1973, p. 144)
The attempt to impose the rational management of a whole society by means of complex organization produces a political system that can be characterized as ‘bureaucracy writ large’.
All the different bureaucracies covering the economic, political, social and cultural spheres of life are integrated and unified into a single, all-encompassing, centrally administered hierarchy: ‘no social organization has an institutional autonomy’.
These ‘partial bureaucracies’ are, however, capable of developing their own competing interests and alliances with the sectors of the population that they manage (Feher, Heller and Markus 1983, pp. 106–12).
Bureaucratic power has thus been a reference point for many outside observers of the Soviet Union, in particular, in their attempts to identify the distinctive nature of communist political systems (Lane 1978, Ch. 6).
The ‘bureaucratic politics’ model of communist government has four major elements that distinguish public administration under state socialism from its counterpart in the liberal-democratic state: the political dominance of a centralized and bureaucratized party; the absence of party competition, making the party a permanent government and therefore weakening accountability; the interweaving of party and state bureaucracies for control purposes; and the socialization of the means of production, distribution and exchange and most other social relations.
BUREAUCRATIC POLITICS
The bureaucratization of the party was first made a target of criticism by Trotsky, who drew attention to the way that, under Stalin, the party functionaries rather than its representative elements had come to control the party and how these functionaries had become indistinguishable in their political interests from the functionaries of the state apparatus.
‘The historic role of Stalin's faction was to destroy this duplication, subjecting the party to its own officialdom and merging the latter in the officialdom of the state’(Trotsky 1936).
Trotsky attached great importance, at least in his criticisms of Stalin, to political control by the elected  representatives of the mass membership of the party and of society generally over the party and state bureaucracies.
He observed how institutional forms of control by society had virtually disappeared.
While not objecting to centralized planning, proletarian dictatorship or the primacy of the Bolshevik Party, Trotsky strongly opposed the supplanting of the political by the bureaucratic-administrative, a process in which functionaries seek to solve all problems by purely administrative means (Krygier 1978).
This interpretation of relationships between party bureaucrats and political representatives was later modified by Milovan Djilas, a senior member of the Yugoslavian political leadership after the Second World War who observed that in Yugoslavia at least the party leaders had ceased to be revolutionaries and politicians but had turned into bureaucrats themselves.
The bureaucratization of the party has long been a source of political conflict within communist states.
In the USSR it is now officially recognized that the party should be organized more democratically, and attempts have been made at the level of primary organizations to involve the rank and file more in decision-making (Hill, Dunmore and Dawisha 1981, p. 201).
The bureaucratization of the party was a central theme in the political struggles and violence of the ‘Cultural Revolution’ in China from 1966 to 1975.
The party bureaucrats were accused of turning themselves into a new bourgeoisie whose revolutionary spirit had given way to capitalist tendencies.
‘Reds’ were to replace ‘experts’in the leadership of a society needing revolutionary transformation.
The dominance of technical experts within the Communist Party as well as the state bureaucracy had introduced a new form of social stratification derived from technical knowledge and professional qualifications.
Mao tried to reverse the trend by placing political power in the hands of people with the correct ‘revolutionary spirit’.
Opposition to the party establishment was created in the form of revolutionary committees and communes.
This was in effect a revolutionary attempt to revitalize direct accountability and mass control within the party: ‘The political will was to be established by direct consultation with the masses, with Mao Zedong having the power  to interpret the expressions of the popular will’(Holmes 1981, p. 60).
The party bureaucracy was to be bypassed.
However, the Cultural Revolution was also presented as an attempt by the party to gain control of the state bureaucracy and even replace it as an organ of implementation.
At the height of the Cultural Revolution Mao criticized the way state bureaucracy was merely being replaced by party bureaucratism and emphasized the need for non-party, mass organizations to control the party.
The Cultural Revolution could in fact be defined as a process by which ‘a highly mobilized population should permanently transform its society, led by the ‘reds’, no matter whether they were Party members or not’(Krug 1981, p. 72).
Turning to relationships between the state bureaucracy and other political institutions in communist regimes, it is frequently alleged that the bureaucracy is not subject to effective extra-bureaucratic constraints.
Those who are subject to the decisions of civil functionaries, industrial managers, local government officials or the police, have no power over them.
‘Lack of democratic institutions, secrecy that envelops decision-making in administrative boards, dependence of judicial organs on party directives, all increase the influence of functionaries and officials at all levels of public life’(Hirszowicz 1976, p. 265).
From time to time the Soviet authorities have expressed determination to counter ‘bureaucratic perversion’ within the state machine, though as Bettelheim has noted, the problem tends to be seen in organizational rather than political terms —‘improvement’in the machinery, ‘simplifying’it, reducing costs, defining responsibilities more precisely, overcoming inertia, red tape, bureaucratic suppression and indifference, and so on.
The problem of control by the masses tends not to be confronted directly.
Changes are also carried out from above, if at all(Bettelheim 1978).
Representative bodies in communist states are commonly depicted as ‘rubber stamping’ institutions, meeting infrequently, lacking partisan or factional divisions, producing a small legislative output, presenting no significant challenge to government, and with all important decisions taken by party members subject to party control.
At best they serve to  legitimize the system, give political experience to a wide cross-section of society and criticize government policy from the perspective of members' regions and constituencies (White et al.1982).
The transference of the principle of democratic centralism from party to state organization further weakens accountability and the role of elected bodies.
Article 3 of the Constitution of the Soviet Union describes the principle as follows:
In practice this produces a vertical integration of public services, with officials at each geographical level in the state hierarchy responsible to the relevant ministry at the level above them as well as to the elected organ at their own level.
Formal distinctions between elected and appointed bodies are made redundant by centralized executive control over recruitment, policy making and implementation (Feher, Heller and Markus 1983, p. 107).
However, there have been significant developments to strengthen the accountability of administrative agencies to society's representatives, some more revolutionary than others.
In the Soviet Union, for example, legislative committees have been set up to investigate matters of public concern, check on government performance and debate economic plans and government budgets.
The standing commissions of the Supreme Soviet and their investigatory teams scrutinize draft legislation and report after commissioning research and studying public reactions.
Most legislation is modified to some degree as a consequence, sometimes extensively.
Evaluations of policies are conducted through research and expert analysis supported by the Presidium's administrative staff.
Special commissions are set up to scrutinize budgets and economic plans (White et al.1982, pp. 85–7).
Attempts have also been made in the Soviet Union to strengthen democratic control of administration by augmenting the authority of elected deputies to exercise an ombudsman-like role (Hill, Dunmore and Dawisha 1981, p. 213).
In Eastern Europe, parliamentary scrutiny and criticism of bureaucracy has been strongest during periods of party weakness and resurgent democracy — Yugoslavia in 1963, Czechoslovakia in 1968 and Poland in 1980, for example.
In China, criticism of the bureaucracy has generally not been through formal representative assemblies, councils and congresses but through ‘mass campaigns’, though the direction of influence has tended to be from the party leadership to the masses through propaganda, political education and mobilization exercises rather than from the masses upwards.
However, such campaigns provide a measure of participation and control of party and state bureaucrats, a movement which reached its peak during the Cultural Revolution.
Here an attempt was made to strengthen the elected communes.
Both party and state bureaucrats were targets, inevitably so when the two are intermeshed by the practice of political leaders holding multiple offices in both organizations — the ‘interlocking directorate’ system.
By the mid-1960s the Chinese bureaucracy had become conservative and concerned with the politics of meritocracy and with preserving inequalities.
The Cultural Revolution aimed to reduce the size of the state bureaucracy and subject it to popular control and direct accountability to the masses.
Since 1976 the trend has been reversed, managerial values have again become predominant and the bureaucracy has expanded, albeit with some strengthening of the legislative role of the National People's Congress and, since the Democracy Movement of 1978–80, a strengthening of the role of ‘workers representative congresses’ to give workers a limited say in the management of enterprises (White 1985).
The emphasis is now on technical specialization and expertise rather than democratic control.
As one survey of tactics to control bureaucracy in the post-Mao period concluded:
The former necessarily put the experts above the masses, while the latter calls  for popular control of the bureaucrats through election; the former espouses elitism while the latter egalitarianism; the former restricts opportunities while the latter opens them.
The leaders try to reconcile these contradictory tendencies by arguing that given the freedom of choice, the masses will want a technical expert over a political ideologue.
Morgan 1981, p. 1233.
See also Zald and Ash 1966; Worthley, 1984.)
The extent to which mass movements in the form of ‘cultural revolutions’ may constitute a reassertion of party rather than mass control of the bureaucracy is illustrated by Albania's ‘Ideological and Cultural Revolution’of 1966.
This was publicly proclaimed as a struggle against bureaucratism and embourgeoisement.
The numbers of state bureaucrats and managerial staff in industry and agriculture were reduced because these institutions appeared to be developing as centres of opposition to the party (Szajkowski 1981, p. 34).
Hence the importance attached by some communist theoreticians to the issue of mass participation within the party and the dismay expressed by generations of dissidents that the party control of the state which the early Marxist-Leninists had thought so important so easily degenerated into the substitution of one autonomous bureaucracy by another equally immune to democratic control and accountability.
One way of establishing democratic accountability of administrative institutions is through workers control or self-management in factory, office and other socialized entitles.
Most communist states do not endorse organizational democracy, and some of those that do, such as Hungary, do so in theory but not practice.
It becomes an ‘empty slogan’(Huber and Heinrich 1981, p. 167).
However, Yugoslavia has adopted self-management extensively in its deviation from the Soviet Union's model of administration.
Workers' control of economic enterprises and community institutions is intended to reduce the power of the state apparatus.
The history of this experiment since the Second World War is one of attempted decentralization to self-managing institutions in the context of pressures to retain centralized bureaucratic control by state agencies.
Statutory rights to management control have been created for workers and enterprises have been given autonomy to plan production.
Banks rather than state grants have been used for investment capital as part of a strategy to protect that  autonomy.
The role of local authorities has been expanded and the ‘delegate’ concept of representation adopted in communes and collectives.
Public services are provided by ‘self-managing communities of interest’.
State intervention has, however, by no means been kept at bay and has many impulses: the need of many enterprises for state subsidies (which are accompanied by state controls); increasing income differentials between collectives and regions under market influences; and the willingness of centralist leaders, concerned about the way consumerism undermines socialist values, to resort to the constitutional right and responsibility of the state to act as the guardian of socialism.
The problem of bureaucracy is aggravated by the use of the party machine as an instrument of political control This has a number of consequences.
First, any distinction between party officials and state officials becomes very blurred.
Party officials may perform functions that in non-communist regimes would be reserved for public servants.
In the Soviet Union, for example, local party agents are responsible for the general performance of government and enterprises within their districts.
They are thus analogous to prefectoral officials found in some Western European systems of government (Hough 1969).
Particular individuals frequently hold both state and party offices.
The holding of multiple offices in state and party apparatuses is a very significant aspect of party control in Albania, Bulgaria and Romania.
Romania has many joint party-state organizations such as the Supreme Council for Economic Development, the Central Council of Workers' Control of Economic and Social Activity, the Defence Council and the Council for Socialist Culture and Education: ‘These organizations provide an infrastructure for blending party and state activities’(Szajkowski 1981, p. 47).
The German Democratic Republic no longer recognizes any distinction between professional and political judgements or decisions.
The party controls both in great detail.
In China the personnel departments of some ministries are staffed entirely by party members, while in other ministries the personnel departments are actually party offices.
In such ways the party retains ultimate control over appointments, transfers, promotions and discipline.
Second, the party forms a kind of ‘shadow’ administration parallel to and to a certain extent duplicating the state apparatus.
The party penetrates and controls the different structures of administration.
It ‘welds together all the differentiated and diversely articulated organs of social management, regulation and command into one immense structure of power’(Feher, Heller and Markus 1983, p. 109).
It acts as the sole broker in the bargaining and competition for resources between bureaucratic organizations.
In the Soviet Union each major sector of society and economy is matched by an administrative unit within the party — for culture, science, heavy and light industry, transport, communications, agriculture, education, the armed forces and administrative agencies.
The state apparatus is subject to scrutiny and investigation by joint party-state control committees responsible for rooting out inefficiency, red tape, departmentalism, localism, embezzlement and corruption; and for checking that governrnent funds have been used in ways intended by government policy.
In China each ministry is paralleled by a supervisory department of the party's central committee.
In addition, committees and branches of the party are established within all government agencies.
Major policy decisions are often transmitted through the party's chain of command before the regular departmental hierarchy is used for administrative communication.
In Czechoslovakia part of the authoritarian backlash against the reform attempt by Dubcek in 1968 was a strengthened control of the civil service and other parts of the state administration by giving party organizations in factories and offices additional powers.
The supervisory powers of the party in East Germany were considerably extended in the 1970s to include educational institutions, medical establishments, government ministries and other parts of the central administration, going beyond reporting mistakes and inefficiencies to the exercise of control to ensure conformity to party decisions and observance of ‘socialist legal norms’.
In industrial enterprises the party ‘base organizations’ already had the right to oversee management (Holmes 1981, pp. 131–2).
The relationship between party and state varies between greater or lesser amounts of party control of, or even  fusion with, the state apparatus (Sandford 1985).
Third, bureaucrats are expected to be politically committed rather than neutral as in the West.
Key leadership positions in Chinese state administration are monopolized by party members, and there have been times when this applied despite the presence of better-qualified non-party personnel.
Study sessions are organized by the party for both party and non-party members of the administration, and self-criticism is expected when policies change.
Problems of morale and motivation (such as accidents, absenteeism, lateness and waste) are regarded as political problems requiring stronger commitment to the regime.
Participation in physical labour may be required to combat ‘bureaucratism’.
Appointments are rarely made on the basis of professional or technical competence alone.
In the early years of the regime it was necessary to rely on the ‘retained cadres’ from the Nationalist government because the working and peasant classes, though loyal politically, could not produce people of sufficient literacy to staff the bureaucracy.
The communist regime had to create a new elite that was both ‘red’ and ‘expert’.
During more liberal periods the requirement of political loyalty has been relaxed to strengthen the expertise required for rapid technological progress (Schurman 1970; Hearn 1978).
But it is still found that entry qualifications for the bureaucracy are disproportionately obtained by the children of skilled and professional groups, not workers and peasants, so the emergence of a new kind of bourgeoisie seems inevitable (Barnett 1967).
In the Soviet Union it is difficult to disentangle political from administrative controls.
Deviations from norms of efficiency are regarded as political disloyalty, and political guidance, exhortation and criticism are seen as prerequisities of efficient management in Soviet industry and agriculture.
Appointments to administrative posts in government departments, public enterprises and other state bureaus are controlled by the appropriate party committee.
The system of party control has been described as making ‘the hierarchy of official state legislative organs…only the executive, administrative apparatus for carrying out the decisions and instructions of a parallel hierarchy of formal executive party  organs’(Avtorkhanov 1966, p. 372).
However, the relationship between party and state is by no means an easy one for the party to manage.
Control of well-qualified and experienced managers and administrators in the state apparatus is difficult for less able party officials and causes resentment.
The state apparatus is getting stronger as the economy is transformed by scientific and technological developments, as planning becomes more complex and as society generally becomes more educated.
In the Soviet Union it is officially acknowledged that government needs more and more highly qualified personnel and an increasingly professionalized state administration.
Soviet society is inevitably becoming more technocratic and under the control of an administrative stratum which many outsiders believe to have taken on the characteristics of a new ruling class (Hill, Dunmore and Dawisha 1981, pp. 209–11).
The administrative apparatus of the state has a special political significance when all social and economic relations are socialized and are planned and managed under central political direction through administrative institutions.
When the form of socialism is that found in the Soviet Union and most Eastern European states, with different social and economic organizations integrated into a single, state-wide organization, society is ruled by an apparatus which is largely bureaucratic and which attempts to integrate all collective activities.
In so far as socialism means the collective ownership and management of the economy and social relations, it requires an extensive administrative apparatus.
But what is significant about this apparatus is not the range of administrative functions to be performed but, as Lenin repeatedly stressed, who performs them and how they are controlled.
It is in this respect that the state in socialist societies has failed to wither away, becoming instead a massive bureaucratic and centralized organization, whose officialdom have some of the characteristics of a ruling class.
Lenin's vision of socialism and communism has failed to be realized in the Soviet Union in two fundamental ways.
First, the state remains bureaucratized, though with some interesting departures of its own from the classic Weberian model of bureaucracy.
Large-scale, bureaucratic organizations are the dominant features of the political landscape.
Internally, these  organizations are similar in many respects to the more or less bureaucratic corporations, military institutions and government agencies found in the West, not least in their dysfunctions of petty officialdom (Feher, Heller and Markus 1983, pp. 123–4).
However, there are some significant differences in terms of communications and technocratic approaches to administration within the Soviet bureaucracy (Lane 1970, pp. 175–8).
Hirszowicz summarizes the specific features of communist bureaucracies which make them a new species of bureaucratic order as follows:
1.
The overlapping of political and organizational structures that creates a situation in which communist bureaucracies are strongly opposed to all organizational improvements which might endanger the existing balance of power.
2.
Full control of the party-state over society, which means that instead of trying to implement targets determined by social expectations and social demands, communist bureaucracies can enforce and pursue aims of their own.
3.
Monopoly of assessing administrative and economic performance, which creates a temptation to cover up all sorts of organizational divisions, contrary to the uniformity and unity of the system which were regarded as important advantages of the centralized hierarchical administration (Hirswowicz 1976, p. 268).
Thus the Soviet bureaucracy does not correspond to the Weberian concept defined as expedient, impartial, efficient and committed to the rule of law (Bendix 1968).
On the contrary it is characterized by the importance of political patronage, a suspicion of written records, favouritism and by internal rivalries and disunity.
Other observers have also detected significant departures from ‘pure’ bureaucracy in Soviet systems of government, though these are often of a type familiar to Western students of bureaucracy and have positive results, such as entrepreneurial initiative, departures from hierarchical principles, the development of informal relationships, creativity, pragmatism and instrumentalism (Granick 1954; Armstrong 1965; Stewart 1969; Hough 1969; Churchward  1968; Hough 1973).
Hierarchical controls have been weakened by ‘family circles’ of interdependent and mutually supportive district officials.
The overlapping and duplication of administrative functions, designed to provide for political supervision, is a further deviation from the Weberian norm (Fainsod 1958).
Second, and even more important for the analysis of bureaucratic power, is the extent to which public bureaucracies in collectivized societies are controlled by non-bureaucratic political institutions.
Have they become a ruling elite or even a new ruling class?
Have the procedures for ensuring a responsive bureaucracy been nullified by the power of the bureaucracy itself, so that the functionaries, rather than elected politicians (who are no longer easily distinguishable from bureaucrats themselves), rule?
THE NEW CLASS
The debate about whether the bureaucrats of communist regimes have emerged as a new ruling class has largely centred on the relationship between state functionaries and collectivized property (Lane 1982, Ch. 5).
Control of the means of production is said to have replaced ownership as the economic foundation for the self-perpetuating power of the bureaucracy.
While the bureaucracy does not own the means of production, distribution and exchange, nor in any meaningful sense do ‘the people’, except constitutionally.
The lack of political control by the people over the bureaucracy thus becomes crucial.
Administrative control of property places a minority stratum, the bureaucracy, in a position of political dominance (Giddens 1981, p. 238).
This is the position that Djilas eventually arrives at, arguing that because ‘property’ meant the use, enjoyment and disposition of material goods, and the communist political bureaucracy uses, enjoys and disposes of collectivized property through the organizational medium of state administrative institutions, it obtains its power and privileges from the collective ownership of state property and therefore constitutes a new class (Djilas 1957).
Others, such as Rizzi (1939) and Burnham (1941), earlier argued that the bureaucracy could be  said to own public property, albeit collectively, not individually.
The collective nature of managerial ‘ownership’ provides no real distinction between ownership and control.
Since managers are in control, they effectively own the means of production.
Where there is such a controlling stratum it must become socially and politically dominant and therefore a ruling class.
A recent formulation of this position, which introduces an important distinction between state functionaries and enterprise management, is by Stoleroff: The ‘state bourgeoisie’ consists of two fractions: the state machine and the productive enterprise (Stoleroff 1985, pp. 280–2).
Bureaucratic power thus becomes the foundation for a new ruling class.
Evaluations of Soviet society inevitably focus on whether a ruling group that does not own, but controls, property, receiving a salary rather than extracting surplus for its own use, can legitimately be called a ruling class in a Marxist sense in which class depends on the ownership of the means of production and the extraction of surplus from an exploited class.
Lane has argued that ‘ruling class’ interpretations of the Soviet Union are inappropriate because the holders of state power do not possess and inherit property but are rather in the same market position as other wage-earners.
Furthermore, the boundaries of the so-called ruling class are too vaguely defined by proponents of this interpretation of the  Soviet system for the ‘class’ to develop a consciousness of its class position (Lane 1978, pp. 180–1).
However, Nove points out that wherever one draws a boundary to distinguish those with power from those without, those within the ruling stratum operate bureaucratically.
In addition, control by workers over those who run the state and economic machine has largely lapsed.
The bureaucracy enjoys more material rewards and privileges than other sectors of society.
They control the nationalized means of production.
The surplus product is controlled by the bureaucracy partly for their own benefit but mainly in response to demands from society which it would be politically dangerous to ignore.
It has achieved political and economic domination through the exercise of state power.
If the Soviet state machine, the process of production and the producers, are directed by the party-state nomenklatura officials, who recruit by co-option from among the beneficiaries of higher education, and who in various ways benefit from privilege, it follows that this ruling stratum has some of the characteristics of a ruling class, though not that of  ownership , except possibly in some collective sense.
(Nove 1975, p. 632)
Not all bureaucrats are in the ruling class — there are bureaucrats at all levels of Soviet society — but the ruling class is predominantly composed of bureaucrats.
And according to Nove, they also appear conscious of their class position.
Lefort similarly dismisses ownership of the means of production as insignificant.
If the abolition of private property still leaves the proletariat carrying out the orders of management, it remains an exploited class.
And if decisions about the economy are taken by a special social stratum, that stratum is a dominant class in relation to the proletariat.
In this respect the bureaucracy of the Soviet Union can be regarded as a class.
Its dominance rests not just on its material position in society but also on the power attributes which all bureaucracies possess — a hierarchical concentration of authority, the exclusion of mass involvement in decision-making, the specialization of functions —‘in short, a scientific organization of inequality, which became the principle of a new form of class oppression’(Lefort 1986, p. 115).
The bureaucratic class fuses political and economic power.
Since  political power is part of the class character of the bureaucracy, it follows that it ceases to be a class if its loses its dominance over the working class.
The class position of the bureaucracy cannot therefore be identified by reference to an a priori definition of class.
The dominance of the bureaucracy in social, economic and political relations, however, does not rule out intra-bureaucratic rivalry and conflict.
Responsibility for controlling this falls to the party.
The privileges enjoyed by the bureaucrats of communist regimes have constituted part of the evidence around which the debate about class relations has evolved.
It was the parasitic nature of the bureaucracy, rather than its class position, that originally impressed Trotsky.
For him it was clear that with the expropriation of the property-owning classes, the nationalization of the means of production and the formation of a planned economy, the ruling class was the proletariat.
However, the governing caste — the ‘sole privileged and commanding stratum in the Soviet society’— was the bureaucracy.
Trotsky refused to describe it as a ruling class since it did not own the means of production: it had ‘neither stocks nor bonds.
It is recruited, supplemented and renewed in the manner of an administrative hierarchy, independently of any special property relations of its own.
The individual bureaucrat cannot transmit to his heirs his rights in the exploitation of the state apparatus’(Trotsky 1936).
The bureaucracy was a ‘hireling’, an instrument of class rule, but one that had become inefficient, overbearing and incompetent.
It was, however, more parasite than exploiter, and had to defend state property because this was the source of its power and income.
The bureaucracy threatened the proletariat from within the state, not from outside as a new, rival class would.
It was not until 1939 that Trotsky, in the USSR in War, admitted the possibility of ‘bureaucratic collectivism’ placing the bureaucracy in the position of a new exploiting class (Krygier 1978).
The special privileges and preferential treatment of the bureaucracy was the starting point of Djilas' criticism of the Soviet Union and analysis of what he wished to call a ‘new class’.
Djilas believed that the dictatorship of the proletariat had produced a bureaucracy in the form of ‘a privileged caste  which lives at the expense of society as a whole’.
Djilas did not at this stage of his analysis refer to bureaucracy as a class, though he recognized that it had exclusive control of production and distribution and that it expropriated the economic surplus for itself at the expense of the ‘direct producers’.
Its administrative monopoly gave it special privileges and preferential economic treatment.
But it did not own the means of production.
It was not a class but a ‘reactionary anti-socialist tendency’ in the transition from capitalism to communism.
To struggle against it was revolutionary and progressive, whereas to struggle against the objective processes producing a class would be futile and Utopian.
When Djilas eventually decided that a new class had emerged in communist society he did not include all administrative officials but rather the ‘party or political bureaucracy’, by which he appeared to mean state functionaries who were also party members.
These are the bureaucrats whom he contrasts with those of other states in a way which is highly pertinent to Lenin's formulation of the problem: ‘Bureaucrats in a non-communist state have political masters, usually elected, or owners over them, while communists have neither masters nor owners over them’(Djilas 1957, pp. 43–4).
Although the functionaries of Soviet society merely earn salaries in return for the functions required by the state, this does not give a complete picture of their privileges; others derive from their control over the system of distribution.
Administrative power is not only a means to a comfortable lifestyle measured by easier access to homes, cars, holidays and schools than the ordinary citizen.
It also means that officialdom can participate in the ‘privatization’ of the national economy, including not only embezzlement and bribery but also exchanging services, making useful connections and lavishly granting administrative favours to potential allies and sponsors in expectation of reciprocity’(Hirszowicz 1980, p. 271).
The bureaucrats' control of appointments in all walks of life increases the dependence of their clients and followers on them for access to social wealth, thereby reinforcing their power base.
The final characteristic of a class is an ability to maintain its  exclusiveness in the face of social mobility.
In the early years of the socialist states, policies favouring the education of the children of manual workers and peasants, including positive discrimination through educational quotas, were promoted to break the domination of educational attainment by people from professional and white-collar families.
These policies have largely been abandoned, leading to an increasing social imbalance in recruitment to higher education, militating against the chances of those from working-class and peasant backgrounds.
Education is one of the privileges that bureaucrats increasingly are able to pass on to their offspring, together with their important connections in the state apparatus, which Cliff maintains is used as their private property (Cliff 1964).
The personnel of the state apparatus have become homogenized into a distinct social group whose backgrounds have become increasingly similar.
They occupy all the positions of power and use those positions to ‘reproduce and extend the material and social conditions of their own corporate dominance’.
Office cannot be inherited and members of the apparatus do not constitute a closed group.
But they are able to provide their children with advantages by securing access to higher education for them (‘the most important formal precondition for advancement’) and by personal connections (Feher, Heller and Markus 1983, pp. 113–14).
However, this increasingly self-contained stratum is broader than the bureaucracy.
It is the intelligentsia generally which people from ‘white collar’ families stand a higher chance of entering than people from humbler origins.
People from intelligentsia families have come increasingly to replace workers in the upper echelons of the party and the civil service because of their disproportionate share of educational opportunities and qualifications in a meritocratic system.
‘It has been assumed by many that this will lead to a system of ‘educational inheritance’ directly comparable to that observed in capitalist societies’(Giddens 1981, pp. 231–2).
THE PROBLEM OF THE ‘NEW CLASS'
A considerable amount of ambiguity surrounds the  controversy about the emergence of a new class of bureaucrats in communist society.
First there is the confusion between an institution (such as the party or the civil service) and a social stratum in some of the propositions concerning a bureaucratic class.
Class structure cannot be identified with institutions but with different occupational groups that provide recruits into different institutions which are themselves socially stratified.
The Communist Party of the Soviet Union, for example, saw a decline in the proportion of its members drawn from the working class in the fifty years after the Revolution and an increase in the proportions drawn from peasants and the intelligentsia.
Such developments may be compatible with an increase in the bureaucratization of the party itself, referring to the dominance of functionaries and the way they behave relative to the rank-and-file members and their elected representatives.
But they do not lead to an equation of institution with class.
Nor should the bureaucratization of society as a whole be confused with the emergence of the bureaucracy as a ruling class.
When all who direct, manage, control, teach, undertake research, plan and administer are ‘bureaucrats’ in the sense of being state functionaries, it is difficult to identify the class element in what is a large and heterogeneous stratum containing different and conflicting interests, such as those between the party and the scientific and technical intelligentsia, or the higher levels of state administration and the management of economic institutions.
Hence, among other things, the very different estimates of the size of the new ‘ruling class’, ranging from 200,000 to 1.5 million.
Hence, too, the formulation of theories that the intelligentsia forms the new ruling class in technocratic, collectivized societies (Lane 1982, pp. 141–4).
However, the intelligentsia cannot be equated with the ruling stratum in communist societies.
Many members of the apparatus are not intellectuals and many intellectuals do not belong to the apparatus of power (Feher, Heller and Markus 1983, p. 120).
The problem is how to distinguish ‘the bureaucracy’ from other white-collar employees and functionaries of the state.
Stratification in the socialist states takes the form of ‘an organizational society whose complexity of horizontal and vertical divisions is  perhaps comparable to a large-scale company with its many branches, divisions, chains of command, departments, occupational categories, functional units and various interests, all of which intersect formal boundaries.
Inequality is characteristic of such a system’(Hirszowicz 1980, p. 94).
‘Segmentalism’ also occurs as different categories of public functionaries develop eprit de corps, occupational values, special codes of conduct and professional communities.
Thus, ‘the concept of the ruling institution (or institutions) and analysis of the rivalries between segments of the Soviet power structure seem to be more illuminating than references to horizontal divisions based on the unihierarchical model of authority’(Hirazowicz 1980, p. 112).
The party in communist systems may control the state apparatus.
It may even act as a ‘unifier of elites’.
The institution of nomenklatura in the Soviet Union is important in maintaining a unity of political command.
None of this, however, precludes diversity within both bureaucracy and intelligentsia.
Party control over the army, KGB, state administration, economic management and other public institutions and professional groups that staff them does not lead to unity of interest among them (Hirszowicz 1976, p. 270).
Lane argues that the notion of bureaucracy leaves the boundaries of the so-called ruling class too generally defined, and that not all functionaries enjoy the same power or even relations with the means of production.
Of particular importance, Lane feels, is the fact that it is the government authorities and not the party that have legal authority over the activity of enterprises and the adminstration of laws (Lane 1978, p. 181).
Taking up the issue of the social basis of the so-called new class, Giddens points out that there is a fundamental difference between control over collective property and rights of disposal enjoyed by owners of private property in capitalist society.
Bureaucratic control does not allow the direct transmission of economic advantage across generations.
As Lane points out for the Soviet Union: ‘However much control they have over Soviet production enterprises, managers and administrators can neither dispose of their assets for their private good, nor can their children have any exclusive rights  to nationalised property’(Lane 1982, p. 135).
If the bureaucracy is becoming ‘closed’ it is through the inheritance of educational advantages.
There should therefore be fairly high levels of mobility in the long run and a more open system of elite mobility than in capitalist society.
And although elite mobility is likely to decline, ‘there is reason to believe that access to positions in the political elite will remain less restricted in character than is typically the case in the capitalist societies’(Giddens 1981, p. 242).
Furthermore, party membership is a valuable asset in competitions for administrative, managerial and technical posts.
It gives those of a less privileged social background better opportunities for appointment and promotion.
The party thus acts as a facilitator of social mobility for those from working-class or peasant origins.
Indeed, entry into the party-state bureaucracy may be more open than is the case with other elites (Hirszowicz 1980, p. 108).
Those occupying leading positions in communist (or state socialist) societies enjoy advantages denied to the mass of the population.
Efforts made by communist states to reduce inequalities vary, but it is generally true that bureaucrats are better off than those they rule.
The differentials are, however, relatively small.
‘Office is an avenue to material well-being; but not to great wealth’(Miliband 1977, p. 112; see Deutscher 1969).
The privileged elite enjoys power rather than wealth.
Whatever the motives of those in power, these can only be fulfilled by serving ‘larger purposes’ as well.
The state in collectivist society does not represent the interests of the bureaucracy; it represents the collectivist society and its needs, as perceived by those who control the state, for economic growth, the provision of social services, national defence, law and order and the repression of dissidence.
The collectivist character of society precludes state power being used as a class instrument (Miliband 1977).
A particular social stratum may be politically dominant, even in relation to decisions concerning the means of production, without acting in their own class interests.
Lane contends that ‘other social forces play an important role in the decisions of the leadership.
The bureaucracy is subject to rules or laws, and the broader values and beliefs which give the system its legitimacy constitute a  framework within which the elite must operate.
Here the idea of the economic plan and the notion of the building of communism are integrative mechanisms which bind the elite as much as the non-elites’(Lane 1982, p. 139).
Feher, Heller and Markus provide a critique of the ‘bureaucratic class’ thesis from the perspective of the structural determinants of social strata.
For them the ‘corporate ruling group’ is a ‘unique social group which has no convincing parallels in history’.
It is constituted in a way that is in principle different from a class.
Membership of an organization is the precondition of the power an individual in the corporate ruling group may exercise.
‘It is the process of being recruited, co-opted and accepted by the apparatus that makes someone a bureaucrat’.
Whereas classes are large-scale social groups upon whom production relations confer unequal access to the results of that production, the bureaucratic group in Soviet-type societies is constrained to act according to the rules and objectives set by the corporate organization.
‘The members of the apparatus are not constrained to act in a definite way by the position they occupy in the structure of social reproduction’.
The bureaucracy is more analogous to groupings found in traditional societies, such as estates, than to class, with the fusion of economy and politics; the authoritative allocation of positions in a hierarchy of ranks; and the specification by rules of the duties and privileges corresponding to rank.
The conflicts of interest between those who monopolize public authority and those managed by and dependent upon them cannot usefully be analysed in terms of class but rather in terms of the social division of labour (Feher, Heller and Markus 1983, pp. 114–33).
CONCLUSION
No doubt Lenin was mistaken in assuming that administrative functions (control and accounting) were so simple and routine that they could be accomplished without special professional training and experience.
But history has proved him correct in his belief that the problem of bureaucratic power could only be solved by a transformation of the class structure in which  administration is carried on.
Indeed, the history of capitalist and socialist societies alike in the twentieth century has shown that bureaucratic power is a function not just of the weaknesses of parliaments and other representative institutions (including soviets) but of the structural requirements of class domination.
Under capitalism the bourgeoisie has turned increasingly to executive domination to guarantee its privileged position against the threats posed by the political egalitarianism implicit in parliamentary democracy.
In socialist society the bureaucracy has not been ‘controlled’ by the strict application of egalitarian principles and the viability of democratic politics.
The crucial factor in the development of bureaucracy in communist states has been the impossibility of democratizing administration, of throwing it open to literate lay people as Lenin wanted.
Modern administration, whether technical or generalist, requires appointment, continuity and specialization, not election, instant recall and rotation among laymen.
It also requires forms of political control and accountability that cannot be evaded by the structural logic of the bureaucrats' class position.
How can these be guaranteed?
Only, presumably, by attending to Lenin's other requirement (which even he contradicted), that is paying officials no more than working men's wages and decentralizing the system.
Material equality and diffused power would seem to be the ultimate defence against bureaucratic domination.
They are also the most difficult things to maintain in any society (Deutsher 1969).
In this respect Lenin did not underestimate the importance of creating the political preconditions for the control of bureaucratic structures, a failing of which he is accused by Erick Olin Wright (1978).
Wright argues that Lenin failed to specify how ‘political struggles could mediate the relationship of economic and cultural conditions to state structures and thus affect the shape and strength of those inevitable bureaucratic structures’(1978, p. 224).
He accuses Lenin of seeing the problem in terms of organizational change rather then ‘in terms of a genuine political mediation process’(p. 224; see also Krygier 1979c, pp. 86–7).
Yet it would seem that Lenin well understood the kind of mediation that would be required  between bureaucracy and the working class and that this is shown by his emphasis on the need to prevent the bureaucracy emerging under socialism as the privileged social stratum it had been under capitalism.
Wright's criticism of Lenin's solution to the problem of post-revolutionary bureaucratization in socialist societies is Weberian in its perception of bureaucratic power as a problem of non-bureaucratic institutions: ‘bureaucratic power feeds on the political incapacity’ of non-bureaucrats and reinforces that incapacity (1978, p. 225).
Lenin, however, though resorting to organizational expedients in later life, knew that the crucial factor in the equation was the class position ofthe bureaucracy rather than its institutional relationships to parliaments, soviets and political parties.
8
BUREAUCRACY AND THE POST-COLONIAL STATE
The immense significance of the bureaucracy, politically, economically and socially, in the political systems of countries in the Third World has produced a variety of attempts to explain this phenomenon, including a theory of the post-colonial state which relates the pivotal position of the bureaucracy to the unique role of the state in conditions of underdevelopment (Hirschmann 1981).
The subject has, inevitably, been approached from different theoretical perspectives, some of which have been more concerned to improve administrative performance and technical assistance than understand bureaucratic power (as if the two can be separated).
The subject here, then, is the distinctive role of civil bureaucracies within developing and particularly post-colonial societies.
A certain amount of attention is paid to colonialism in seeking an explanation for the political power of the bureaucracy in post-colonial states, and in particular its ‘overdevelopment’ in relation to other political institutions, since the role assigned to bureaucracy under colonialism is widely reckoned to be responsible for its present dominance.
FUNCTIONALISM
Indeed, it was the attempt by American political science to construct a framework for the comparative analysis of modern, transitional and traditional societies under the guidance of structural-functionalism, that led to the logical  inevitability of the bureaucracy, particularly in developing states, being regarded as ‘multifunctional’.
Freeing the study of politics from its ‘structural overtones’, as Almond put it, not only meant searching for the familiar functions of government in unfamiliar social structures (such as administration by age sets).
It also meant that all political structures, especially the less specialized and differentiated ones found in Third World states, could be expected to perform additional functions to those which were their main raison d'être.
It became logically possible for bureaucratic structures to perform all four input and all three output functions.
For example, Almond cites the bureaucracy as ‘one of the most important sources of legislation’ and as dominant in rule-making in non-Western societies (Almond and Coleman 1960, p. 17).
If, however, we take The Politics ofthe Developing Areas as a classic of functionalist politics, we find that the statements on bureaucracy in the area studies presented there do not take us as far forward as the theoretical scheme promises.
Almond and Coleman, for example, tell us that in South-East Asia, ‘the bureaucracy and the army are positive actors in the political process and not neutral instruments of policy’(p. 145) and that public officials have been ‘a main factor in holding their respective countries together’(p. 131).
It is also often unclear whether it is being claimed that the bureaucracy is truly multifunctional or is merely recruiting and socializing its own members, articulating their interests, or acting as ‘one of the main channels of political struggle in which and through which different interests are regulated and aggregated’(Eisenstadt 1963, p. 112).
Indeed, applying functionalism to bureaucracy quickly throws up most of the theoretical limitations of this approach; in particular, the problem of limiting politics to seven functions, and its ethnocentric bias.
However, most observers of the Third World would accept Bretton's description of bureaucrats as ‘one of the strongest pressure groups’(Bretton 1973, p. 221) because of their advantages over politicians, the expansion and increased complexity of government activity, and corruption enabling knowledge of the government machine to be converted into personal gain.
The only factor undermining this powerful position is said to  be the incompetence of the majority of government employees.
COLONIALISM
In most theories of development a major source of bureaucratic power is thought to be the legacy of colonialism under which administrative institutions proliferated while other political structures remained underdeveloped (Riggs 1963).
The colonial form of government can perhaps be described as a ruling bureaucracy in the sense of government by appointed officials only slightly modified by the gradual emergence of consultative, advisory and legislative councils.
The major consequence of this bureaucratic inheritance is thus an imbalance between the power of bureaucracy and the power of other political institutions, an imbalance which is believed to have serious implications for further political development.
Explanations of this imbalance found in the structural-functional literature, however, tend to be narrowly institutional.
They are based on an assessment of relationships between different parts of the state apparatus.
Riggs, for example, dwells on how bureaucracy restricts the development of other political institutions, notably political parties, local government and autonomous and spontaneous pressure groups, and on the weakness of legislatures, judiciaries and even chief executives.
One problem here is that the bureaucracy is required to account for far too much.
The power of central executives is made synonymous with the bureaucracy, which exaggerates administrative power at the expense of other political forces which might equally subdue legislatures and judiciaries, such as monolithic political parties.
But the main weakness of this type of explanation is that it ignores the relationship between the various parts of the state apparatus and their socio-economic environment under both pre- and post-independence regimes.
Such studies tend to ignore the influence of economic relationships on the development of the state apparatus under colonialism.
When the political institutions of colonial dependencies are described  as interacting with their environments, the ‘environment’ tends to be described in terms of culture rather than class.
Political development under colonialism is conceived of as institutional change within the political system.
It is recognized that the state apparatus becomes more elaborate; for example, as Apter suggests, ‘proceeding through four main stages: the pioneering, bureaucratic, representative and responsible governmental stages’(Apter 1965, p. 55).
But ‘politics’ tends to be unrelated to the structure of colonial interests.
Descriptions of the state often even ignore metropolitan interests.
Colonial government is presented as a largely apolitical, administrative business, unrelated to any economic and social changes which might be taking place as a consequence of colonial domination and exploitation (Eisenstadt 1963).
From perspectives such as this, colonial governrnent tends to be judged by its competence in preparing a territory for independence, by the number of indigenous personnel trained to fill senior civil service posts, by the degree of success achieved in producing consensus and integration, by the effects of paternalism on ‘native’ self-reliance, by the use made of traditional political authority and by the development of local government.
Preparation for independence, when it occurred, was seen as a problem of constitution-building according to some model based on principles derived from the domestic experiences of the colonial powers.
The problem of the state was regarded as a problem of constitutional structures unrelated to the system of social stratification and the relations of production from which such systems were derived.
In fact, studies of colonial government have often involved a perspective which is derived from the colonialists' own assessments of their impact on dependent territories.
Concepts of developments employed in the analysis of colonial regimes emphasize the creation of bureaucratic structures for the performance of law-and-order functions and the introduction of rationalized administrative institutions.
The colonial tradition and legacy is seen as the creation of ‘a bridge between the dependent indigenous people and the ruling power from the West’.
Indigenous society appears as an undifferentiated whole, unmarred by class stratification or patterns of  economic ownership.
In so far as colonial bureaucracy extended its activities beyond law and order and the collection of revenues, they were perceived of as ‘nation building responsibilities’(Dube 1964).
As such, bureaucracy provided another kind of bridge, between tradition and modernity, sacred and secular, communal and associational, Gemeinschaft and Gesellschaft.
These are the kinds of conflict recognized as lying behind the bureaucratic politics of colonialism.
A perception of the bureaucrat's power resources is another characteristic feature of some theories of colonial government.
Power is seen as residing in office, and stemming from the bureaucrat's high social prestige and wide discretion to act within very broadly defined colonial policies.
Again the colonial bureaucracy is presented as a monolith, unrestrained by ‘the masses’ who are subject to its authoritarian and paternalistic administration.
Such conceptualization of the colonial situation cannot encompass any possibility that ‘the masses, may have been internally divided, that some indigenous elements had a vested interest in colonial rule and that the formation of society was directly affected by the actions of the colonial state.
Colonial politics is seen as based exclusively on the interests of the metropolitan power versus the interests of the colony as a whole.
Internal political conflict is seen as a consequence of independence (see e.g. Weiner 1965).
THE POST-COLONIAL STATE
One notable attempt to differentiate between political institutions within a post-colonial state, and account for the relative power of the bureaucracy by reference to the class structure of the colonial legacy, is Meillasoux's (1970) study of Mali.
Meillasoux places the bureaucracy within a class context, and accounts for its political dominance in terms of the instruments of power with which the bureaucracy was entrusted by the metropolitan regime, particularly expertise; and in terms of the ‘crisis of colonialism’ in Mali which brought about independence before any viable political structures other than the bureaucracy had developed within the state.
After independence the bureaucracy used its access  to political power to acquire some of the characteristics of a social class.
It controlled the economic infrastructure and used it as a means of exploitation.
It controlled the means of repression and used them to maintain its dominance in conflicts with weak indigenous classes, namely the aristocracy and traders.
It created a nationalized sector of the economy which, under the label of ‘socialism’, enabled the economy to be brought under bureaucratic control.
A closer link between class structure and bureaucratic power in the post-colonial state is made by Alavi's study of Pakistan and Bangladesh.
He demonstrates the power of military-bureaucratic oligarchies in mediating the competing interests of the indigenous bourgeoisie, the landed classes and metropolitan interests in post-colonial societies.
Although, of course, attention is paid to the class structure of society and to relations of production in this approach, the focus of the analysis is on ‘the relative autonomy of the state apparatus as a whole and its mediatory role as between the competing interests of the three propertied classes’(Alavi 1972).
It is the total state apparatus which is said to be ‘overdeveloped’ in relation to indigenous social classes.
Again the explanation of this has to be found in colonialism.
The imposition of colonial rule by the metropolitan bourgeoisie requires the creation of a state apparatus ‘through which it can exercise dominion over all the indigenous social classes in the colony’.
Given that the state superstructure might be ‘overdeveloped’ in relation to the class structure of a given colony, because it originally had its base in the metropolitan rather than the indigenous social structure, this does not tell us what it was about colonialism which produced a state system in which the military-bureaucratic oligarchy was dominant.
In what way does the ‘overdevelopment’ of the state viz-à-viz society imply the overdevelopment of bureaucracy within the structure of the state itself?
The answer lies in the fact that it was this part of the state apparatus that was dominant under colonialism and freed from political control by the metropolitan power at independence.
A military-bureaucratic oligarchy is functional to the needs of a state which requires a degree of autonomy from class interests in order to mediate between them while at the same time preserving capitalism as the dominant mode of  production and private property as a fundamental institution.
Political institutions, such as parties, may share in and even legitimize that mediatory role.
But if they challenge the bureaucratic-military oligarchy for dominance, they are likely to be confronted by a coup d'état.
A number of reservations have been expressed to this model of the post-colonial state.
Leys, for example, argues that the fact that the colonial state apparatus had to subdue opposition from pre-colonial ruling classes does not mean that it would inevitably be overdeveloped by the time of dependence, because ‘by that time the capitalist mode of production had been introduced, and made effectively dominant, in the colonial social formation’.
And in some colonial territories, such as those of East Africa, indigenous social classes were not strongly developed.
‘Overdeveloped’ is thus an inappropriate label: ‘The state is equally important in all class societies’(Leys 1976).
Assumptions about the bureaucracy based on the significance of the ‘over-developed’ state therefore became suspect.
In particular, it becomes important to differentiate between different branches of the bureaucracy (such as civil servants and managers of state-owned enterprises), and to distinguish between the class interests of bureaucrats and the interests served by the state.
It is also important, as Leys recognizes in another work, to consider the special bureaucratic needs of peripheral states (see below).
John Saul's analysis of Tanzania suggested a number of important qualifications to, and extensions of, Alavi's argument.
East African experience reveals the importance of clarifying the nature of the state's autonomy and of the bureaucratic-military oligarchy's ‘mediating’ role.
Does ‘mediation’ mean adjudicating, dominating or pursuing their own interests?
In East Africa the landed class and indigenous bourgeoisie was much less prominent than in South Asia.
The colonial state did indeed become ‘overdeveloped’, but because of the need to subordinate non-feudal, pre-capitalist social formations.
Under East African conditions, with weak indigenous classes, the bureaucracy has succumbed to control by the metropolitan, neo-colonial bourgeoisie in the form of the multinational corporations.
However, the centrality of the state in the development of Tanzania suggests that those who  staff the state apparatus do enjoy a measure of autonomy from class control.
Indeed, some would argue that the bureaucracy's privileged access to the economic surplus arising from the state's role in the production process gives it an interest comparable to that of a class, especially when control over property is combined with political power (Saul 1974).
An important interpretation of Indian experience by Wood suggests a further modification of the Alavi model.
The colonial administration was ‘overdeveloped’ in relation to other political and economic institutions and was supported in this by a complex ideology of racial superiority, paternalism and tolerance of indigenous institutions and practices that were consistent with imperial economic interests.
Considerable discretion was delegated to field officers who constituted the core of the imperial administrative structure.
Objectives and decisions were internally generated rather than responding to external political pressures.
After independence, however, the interests of different factions within the Indian bourgeoisie could be articulated through the institutions of formal democracy.
The bureaucracy, military and police were no longer dominant.
The administration lost a measure of its former authority, power and status.
‘The post colonial society may inherit an ‘over-developed apparatus of state’, but not for long’.
The bureaucracy became vulnerable to conflicting external pressures in its new ‘instrumental’ role.
In order to protect itself from the conflicting, volatile and diffuse demands of political groups, it retreated into greater bureaucratism.
This involved redefining its areas of competence, becoming more professionalized and articulating a new ideology of rationality and instrumentality consistent with the democratic model of responsible government and separation of powers.
More significantly for the model of an overdeveloped post-colonial state, the development of capitalism in India meant the increasing subjection of the state apparatuses to emerging capitalist classes and therefore a decline in the state's relative autonomy viz-à-viz indigenous and metropolitan classes.
The Indian case suggests that the role of ‘mediation’ between propertied classes disappears as capitalist forms of property ownership become dominant.
Relative autonomy is a temporary phenomenon, as is the significance of the over-developed  administration inherited from colonialism (Wood 1977).
A RULING CLASS?
One approach to the relationship between bureaucracy and class is to say that the bureaucratic stratum is itself in the process of becoming a class in almost every sense of the word, and the dominant class at that.
Marxists and non-Marxists alike have drawn attention to the fact that post-colonial relations of production give the state an economic role which is relatively independent of conventional economic classes.
The administration may not own the means of production but it controls them through bureaucratic direction.
This is not only the case in socialist states, where the old debates about the managerial revolution and the ‘new class’ suddenly become relevant again (though Mali, Tanzania and Ghana are among the states that have been singled out as using socialism as an ideology enabling the bureaucracy to control the economy).
It is an interpretation found equally applicable to developing capitalist states where indigenous bourgeoisies are yet to develop fully.
Bretton concludes that in Africa generally, ‘the public service, in particular the middle and upper level officials, are turned into a privileged social class that soon develops a vested interest in construction of strong defences against rival claimants from less favoured segments of the population’(Bretton 1973, p. 222).
Other characteristics of class have been noted: disproportionate recruitment into the bureaucracy from the offspring of bureaucrats; a distinctive subculture by monopolization of access to Western education; the relative wealth and privileges separating the bureaucratic stratum from the rest of society, and control of the means of repression to maintain the bureaucracy's dominance.
It has frequently been observed that bureaucrats have their own economic and political interests.
The economic interests of the state bureaucracy are largely realized through state revenue-raising.
They therefore have an interest in economic developments which will increase state funds.
Their political interests in maintaining and extending their social position and  power depend on a stable regime which they help maintain through repression, through the manipulation of potential dissenting groups and through maintaining the loyalty of other powerful social classes who have a conflicting interest in the distribution of state income (Ziemann and Lanzendorfer 1977).
There is of course a continuing controversy over whether the bureaucratic bourgeoisie of senior military, civil, party, co-operative and industrial administrators constitute a distinct class; or whether they merely form part of a larger and more differentiated social stratum; whether such a class is dominant or subservient to metropolitan capital; where the boundary around such a class should be drawn; whether it is fully formed or not, and whether the power of the state is equivalent to the power of the bureaucracy as a social entity (Murray 1967; Leys 1976; Zieman and Lanzendorfer 1977).
It is a controversy in which even the authorities on individual countries disagree.
BUREAUCRATIC POWER AND CLASS STRUCTURE
An alternative approach is to seek an explanation of bureaucratic power in the changing social structure of post-colonial states and the state's regulation of the political forces generated by such changes.
Colin Leys does this in his study of the political economy of neo-colonialism in Kenya (Underdevelopment in Kenya, 1975).
He, like Alavi, notes the parallel between contemporary politics in the post-colonial state and politics in the France of the 1850s as described by Marx in The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte.
The Kenyan government has to arbitrate in the conflict of interests between foreign capital, the local auxiliary bourgeoisie and the various strata of politically powerful petite bourgeoisie.
It also has to keep the mass of peasant farmers and unskilled workers passive so that bourgeois interests as a whole are protected.
In this the government is dependent on the police, armed forces and civil bureaucracy, a dependence which can only be offset by making concessions to one section of the bourgeois alliance or another.
What effect does the management of ‘a complex and fluid class structure corresponding to the still incomplete  evolved interrelationship of the capitalist and non-capitalist modes of production’(Leys 1975, p. 209) have on the bureaucracy?
First, it strengthens it viz-à-viz other political institutions.
If state institutions and social formation are out of phase, only those institutions which come closest to fulfilling the requirements of the state will grow strong.
For the institutions of liberal democracy to function as intended, namely according to the principles and practices of representative and responsible government, they need to be supported by the appropriate relations of capitalist production.
If the liberal-democratic institutions of an ‘imitation bourgeois state’, such as elections, parliaments, elected local government and multi-party systems are grafted on to neo-colonial relations of production, as was the case in many countries immediately following independence, they will decay.
Meanwhile, the bureaucracy, both civil and military, grows from strength to strength because it does fulfil the requirements of the post colonial state.
This point needs to be developed to incorporate the discussion by Wood of ‘disarticulated’ capitalism under colonial and post-colonial conditions, a discussion which suggests it is false to conclude that pure capitalism had become established by colonialism.
The colonial state was a peculiar extension of the metropolitan capitalist state, in that it established political authority relations at the point of production and expanded state control over marketing.
The state also ensured the general conditions needed for new commercial activities (especially law and order).
It enabled the rate of exploitation of labour to be intensified by raising the level of absolute surplus value.
The colonial state also invested heavily in infrastructure such as railways and ports.
In this way the state participated directly in processes of accumulation and reproduction: by controlling labour; increasing the rental and tax obligations on labour; elaborating its apparatuses of control; and establishing departments to manage public works, railways, ports, posts and telecommunications.
This capitalist thrust was within a largely pre-capitalist social formation.
The state consequently relied heavily upon  instruments of repression and pragmatic administrative management.
Under such social relations of production and with this purpose of the colonial state, economic and political relations could not be separated.
In the post-colonial state, that separation has not been completed because labour has not become fully commoditized.
In post-colonial economies there is a continuing reliance on raising levels of absolute rather than the relative surplus value of labour.
Political intervention is needed to realize absolute surplus value.
The peripheral state therefore contributes to accumulation and reproduction by directly or indirectly supporting authority relations in the labour process and dealing with subsequent conflicts.
It thereby assists the maintenance of domestic capitalist interests and elaborates its repressive apparatuses.
Bureaucratic allocations and intervention are also encouraged by indigenous capitalist interests requiring state subsidies, agricultural inputs, infrastructure, fiscal devices and market assistance.
However, factors of production are increasingly commoditized through such administrative intervention.
Authority relations are weakened.
Capitalist interests become threatened because the legitimacy of non-coercive regulation of capital-labour relations has not been established.
As a result, and with only weak private-sector mechanisms to be relied on, there is a cumulative bureaucratization of state intervention.
Apparatuses of control, registration and supervision proliferate agencies.
Rules of inclusion and exclusion for state service multiply.
The dependency of client groups on state institutions increases (Wood 1984b).
Second, Leys then notes that the civil bureaucracy is given a stake in the system.
It is, as Marx said of the mid-nineteenth-century French bureaucracy, ‘well-gallooned and well-fed’.
Many observers have noted how administration in new states consumed the bulk of revenue at the expense of investment and development (Dumont 1966; First 1970; Bretton 1973; Amin 1973).
In Kenya bureaucracy provided 40 per cent of the country's jobs and had to be kept content.
Pay increases alone could not achieve this without inflating the country's wage bill to an unacceptable level.
So modest pay increases were accompanied by a lifting of restrictions on public officials engaging in private enterprise.
They were given a share of the  profits: in Kenyan conditions — that is to say, the conditions of neo-colonialism — the public service had to be paid on a quasi-prebendary basis.
Bretton similarly notes how, in African states generally:
In this respect it is worth asking whether it is a mere coincidence that neo-colonialism produces for the bureaucracy a reversion to pre-bureaucratic (e.g. medieval) forms of compensation for service to the state.
Historically, pre-capitalist modes of production have been associated with the compensation of officials in kind.
Weber associated a prebendal kind of organization not only with a pre-money economy but also with ‘feudal dominion’.
He also noted that ‘the transition from such prebendal organisation of office to salaried officialdom is quite fluid’(Weber 1968).
The conditions of neo-colonialism suggest that this fluidity is still significant.
One of the first financial operations of ‘the Second Bonaparte’ was the ‘raising of officials’salaries to their old level and the creation of new Sinecures’(Marx 1869).
Thus Leys draws a parallel between Kenyan experience and Marx's observation that Louis Napoleon produced, alongside the actual class structure of mid-nineteenth-century France, ‘an artificial caste, for which the maintenance of his regime becomes a bread and butter question’.
BUREAUCRACY AND THE PEASANTRY
Leys also cites Marx on the subject of the relationship between the existence of a smallholding peasantry and a centralized, authoritarian government.
Marx observed two features of this  relationship.
Leys refers to them both, but only applies one to the Kenyan situation, that of the creation of state posts to absorb the unemployed surplus population formed by changing relations of production.
Leys notes, but does not follow up, the second connection made by Marx between the power of the bureaucracy and smallholding property relationships.
This was that their mode of production isolates smallholding peasants from each other and prevents the development of a political organization to represent their class interests.
Their interests can only be interpreted and protected by a central executive authority.
‘The political influence of the smallholding peasants, therefore, finds its final expression in the executive power subordinating society to itself (Marx 1869, p. 303).
This executive represents the conservative, superstitious and prejudiced element within the peasantry.
Bureaucratic power is strengthened by the uniformity of this class:
In this characteristically elusive passage it is not clear whether Marx means that the social relations of a smallholding peasantry make it easy to tax them (‘Taxes are the source of life for the bureaucracy’) or control them and therefore the bulk of society — uniform and routine administration being more effective than administration requiring flexibility, discretion, decentralization, and so on.
Probably both are true in conditions of underdevelopment, or at least bear investigation as hypotheses.
There are yet more clues in Marx's exposition of the autonomous state in the France of Louis Napoleon to the power of bureaucracy in the post-colonial situation.
These take the explanation beyond the fact that Bonapartism destroys all other political institutions — legislatures, parties, and so on— and only leaves a bureaucratic executive standing, the point beyond which contemporary theories of ‘military-bureaucratic oligarchies’ largely fail to take us.
There is first the idea that parliamentary regimes strengthen the resources of governmental power.
The statement that ‘the parties that contended in turn for domination regarded the possession of this huge state edifice as the principal spoils of the victor’ is nowhere more true than in the immediate pre- and post-colonial competition among indigenous interests for the administrative positions hitherto reserved for the imperialists.
And it presents an interesting parallel to the theory that powerful bureaucracies inhibit the development of parties and legislatures.
Second, there is the idea that the bureaucratic apparatus of the state grows as the institutions of feudalism and other pre-capitalist relations of production are absorbed into the modern state.
Marx saw this in relation to France:
Colonialism had much the same impact on the traditional political systems with which it came into contact, especially those which were hierarchically organized for the purpose of a feudal mode of production.
Finally, Marx saw that as bourgeois society became more complex and produced more group interests, so the state machinery was bound to expand in order to bring them under a measure of control:
In the post-colonial state this phenomenon is usually referred to as ‘national integration’ or the development of an administrative ‘capability’(a prerequisite of integration).
An ubiquitous feature of post-colonialism is the dominance of the state in the process of capital accumulation.
The state is rapidly drawn into more areas of intervention on behalf of the neo-colonial relations of production.
Laws to protect foreign investment are required.
Labour relations have to be controlled to reduce unemployment.
Loans and extension services have to be run in support of private commercial, industrial and agricultural enterprise.
The state has to provide the physical infrastructure for private enterprise — railways, trunk roads, harbours, power stations, irrigation, public health, and so on.
The state is responsible at both central and local levels for services which ensure the reproduction of the labour force — education, health and welfare.
Settlement and land reform schemes have to be administered in the interest of capitalist agriculture.
Indigenous economic interests and institutions become dependent on the state bureaucracy.
The small business class becomes dependent on the bureaucracy for credit, advice and protection.
Farmers become dependent on it for inputs and new techniques of cultivation and husbandry.
The mass of the population are made dependent on its for employment and welfare.
The bureaucracy uses its vast resources to sponsor dependent classes.
CONCLUSION
The conclusion to be derived from the above is that the overdevelopment of the bureaucracy in the post-colonial state can only be explained by reference to factors which render other political institutions impotent.
It is not enough merely to assert their impotence.
These factors are:
1.
The colonial state was not only overdeveloped as a  whole.
Internally its structure was dominated by bureaucratic institutions and values.
2.
In a state with relative autonomy the political leadership is forced to rely heavily on that institution which least reflects the interest of a particular class — the bureaucracy.
3.
If institutions are out of phase with social formation, the most powerful institution will be that which is most useful in regulating the conflict between interests which have their foundations in different modes of production — the bureaucracy.
4.
In conditions of transition from one dominant mode of production to another, the bureaucracy must be disproportionately rewarded for its support to a dependent political leadership.
5.
As the bureaucracy grows, its corporate interests, extending into the economy itself, develop into a class interest in its own right.
6.
The mode and relations of production in an economy dominated by a smallholding peasantry strengthen the ability of the bureaucracy to control without strengthening the ability of other political institutions to intervene in a representative capacity.
7.
Under conditions of underdevelopment the political elite seeks wealth through the direction of public resources by administrative action.
8.
The bureaucracy benefits disproportionately from the absorption by the state of pre-capitalist institutions, offices, powers and duties.
9.
As capitalist relations of production develop, the state is forced to extend the involvement of the bureaucracy into new areas of regulation, support, sponsorship and intervention.
9
POLITICS IN ORGANIZATIONS
It is now uncontroversial to assert that bureaucracy performs political roles in the context of the contemporary state (though there is still much controversy as to precisely which roles are performed and what, if any, their structural consequences are).
What has yet to become an accepted methodology in the study of public administration is a perception of organizations, including those in the public sector, as being themselves political systems.l Organization theory, drawing primarily as ever on evidence from private firms and corporations, offers political interpretations of the internal structures and decisionmaking of large-scale organizations which the study of public administration has yet to take up in any systematic manner (Walsh et al.1981).
Even in organization theory, however, it was found necessary as recently as 1980 by Bacharach and Lawler to reject a view of organizations as rational, harmonious, apolitical and normatively integrated, substituting instead an approach to them as ‘arenas for daily political action’ in which power and influence are mobilized by interest groups to gain control of resources through bargaining and the formation of coalitions.
The purpose of the present chapter is to review approaches to the interrelationship between politics and organization by identifying and sketching two types of interpretation.
The first sees organizations pluralistically and, from a fairly orthodox political stance, asks what leads to conflicts in organizations that have to be settled politically, and what resources of power and influence different groups within organizations can draw upon to protect and advance their interests.
The second asks  whether there is a systematic relationship between the structure of power and authority found within organizations and structures of domination found within society generally.
ORGANIC PERSPECTIVES
The contrast between such approaches to the nature of formal organizations and the assumptions (or ideology) behind much of the traditional literature on management should be immediately obvious.
A managerial perspective on organizations presents them as social entities with a collective purpose.
It is an organic view of the organization.
Organizing, managing and administering are about controlling and co-ordinating the diverse contributions needed for the attainment of some collective goal.
The ‘problem’ for management or the owners of organizations is to get the structure right and operate it efficiently.
The unitary view is epitomized by the classical theories of organization, by the work of Barnard on organizations as ‘co-operative systems’ and by the Human Relations School's concern to integrate individual and organizational needs.
‘Above all else the organization is viewed as a functionally integrated system, the operations of which can be understood with reference to the organizational goals which it is concerned to achieve’(Burrell and Morgan 1979, p. 205).
In contrast, a pluralistic perspective on organizations recognizes the possibility of conflict between human needs and formal structures, between different types of work group and between what is ‘dysfunctional’ for the formal goals of the organization but functional for other interests — the ‘bureaucratic personalities’seeking protection in rule-following (Merton 1940), the specialists seeking to further their own interests though ‘goal displacement’(Selznick 1949) and the workers and managers using bureaucratic rules in their own interests (Gouldner 1954).
A major preoccupation of writers on organization has been the design of structures that will maximize efficiency.
Volumes have been written on how to divide work into departments or sections; allocate responsibility and authority between different levels in the inevitable hierarchy; control and co-ordinate  the diverse contributions of different types of expertise and labour; communicate within the structure so created, and plan the performance of organizational tasks.
It is common to have an organization represented by an organization chart, showing lines of command, spans of control and broad fields of jurisdiction.
Organizations are thus conceived of as purposive social arrangements, as stable social groups with internally differentiated roles that are brought together for some purpose.
The structure of an organization is an explicit representation of that purpose.
The purpose of the organization is often explained in the language of ‘goals’.
Thus Selznick defined an organization as a formal structure representing rationally ordered instruments for the achievement of stated goals.
And Parsons claimed that what distinguished an organization from other types of social system is ‘the primary of orientation to the attainment of a specific goal’(Parsons 1956).
Goals are what organizations work towards.
They are the desired state of affairs which the organization attempts to realize.
A collectivity is thus endowed with some of the characteristics of an individual behaving according to motives, objectives, intentions and rational thought.
The history of administrative ideas and management theory is a history of prescriptive statements about how organizations ought to be structured to achieve their goals (Abrahamsson 1977).
The Weberian concept of bureaucracy is perhaps the most explicit statement about the purposive and rational nature of organization, and has been the starting point for many major contributions to organization theory.
Organizations are seen as rational instruments for realizing explicit goals, with different parts that can be modified so as to increase efficiency (Gouldner 1959).
The most ambitious attempt to formulate a set of rules applicable to all organizations and guaranteeing efficiency were the so-called ‘classical’ principles of administration enunciated by a group of management thinkers in the 1930s and 1940s led by the British management consultant L. F. Urwick (1947) and the American President of General Motors Export Corporation, J. D. Mooney (1947).
Different types of management experience were integrated into a set of principles  which were all interrelated and presented at a level of generality which made them as widely applicable as possible.
It was held that there was a common experience in the conduct of all social groups, whether they be the institutions of the state, the church, the military or industry, which indicate a universal design that provides a foundation for a true science of administration.
The guidance of logically interrelated principles in the effective integration of human effort was held to be far superior to an understanding of ‘personalities or politics or a precarious balancing of power between various vested interests’(Urwick 1947, p. 118).
This attempt to produce a scientific scheme of ideas has been subjected to severe criticism which need not be repeated here (see Simon 1957; Rose 1975).
Most of the criticisms have focused on the logical claims of the principles and the contradictions between them.
They have been found deficient in their prescriptive capacity rather than in their analysis of the social structure of organizations (of which they say very little).
However, the criticism that has been directed against the conflict between the principle of specialization (that efficiency is increased by specialization) and the principle of unity of command (that efficiency is enhanced by having members in a determinate hierarchy of authority receive orders from no more than one person) are relevant to a political view of organizations.
For the principles give no indication of how to choose when there is conflict over whose expertise should dominate in decisions that need more than one kind.
This leads to the now widely recognized potential for conflict between line and staff, especially when specialists are sub ordinated to generalists in the interest of unity of command.
It is also unacceptable that the classical principles should ignore the interactions between government bureaus and client groups when prescribing the grouping of specialized workers according to purpose, process, clientele or place.
Again there is no guidance as to how to choose between the four categories, and no acknowledgement that such choices will be based on political perceptions of where in the organizations a group's interests will be best protected.
A more genuinely scientific approach to management was provided earlier by the American engineer F. W. Taylor (191 1) and his associates F. B. Gilbreth and H. Gantt.
Taylor's use of scientific observation and experiment to rationalize work processes, reduce costs and increase productivity was based on certain specific assumptions about the motivation of workers as well as their physical attributes in relation to industrial processes.
‘Scientific management's’ mechanistic and materialistic model of the individual has been criticized for taking no account of other motives for work and, by implication, the diverse interests of which people might be conscious as members of groups and wish to protect and advance through group action.
The management techniques which are the direct  descendants of Taylorism and scientific management — work study, organization and methods studies, the industrial health movement, the various components of personnel management, and so on— represent very clearly a perspective not only on the individual member of an organization, but on the organization as a social entity.
It is one in which the task of management is to manipulate people into maximizing profit and achieving other goals with which other personal and group interests may conflict.
Scientific management implicity recognizes the potential for conflict in the motivational power which it ascribes to rewards and punishments, but  explicitly rejects the significance of conflict by isolating and dehumanizing the individual as someone whose activities can be integrated into the goals of the organization if those activities are scientifically analysed and objectively controlled (Braverman 1974; Rose 1975; and Clegg and Dunkerley 1980).
Central to this was a process of taking control of the workplace away from the operatives and placing it in the hands of management by providing the latter with the technical information that had formerly been monopolized by the former.
Recognition that the members of organizations share group identities and have interests which may not coincide with others who are contributing to the same goals began with the Human Relations movement and its founder George Elton Mayo (1933).
From these beginnings there developed ideas which have become standard in much management training and practice, that members of large organizations have social and psychological needs which may or may not be satisfied at  work.
This then becomes a problem for management: how to ensure that such needs are satisfied so that output and productivity are not adversely affected.
The Human Relations movement of Mayo and his colleagues based on the Hawthorne Studies and Mayo's wartime research into absenteeism and labour turnover, attempts to preserve a Taylorist division of labour through new forms of persuasion (Clegg 1979, pp. 132–7).
Again, however, the potential for conflict is glossed over.
There is no inherent conflict between self-actualization and effective organizational performance.
Man will voluntarily integrate his own goals with those of the organization if  management works on the assumption not that people dislike work, prefer being directed rather than taking the initiative and respond only to material rewards or threats and sanctions; but that they have needs for autonomy and independence which must be satisfied through structures of authority that allow self-motivation and self-control.
The Human Relations approach to management and its descendants still see the problems of industrial organizations in managerial terms.
The causes of poor organizational performance are seen as poor communications, bad supervisory practices, low levels of group satisfaction and cohesion.
As Hamilton points out, ‘very little attention is paid to the conflicts of interest between groups which may relate to their structural position either in an organization or in the wider society’(Hamilton 1980, p. 49).
CONFLICT IN ORGANIZATIONS
As soon as a holistic conception of organizations is examined closely, the potential for conflict and the consequent exercise of power becomes apparent.
If the ascription of organizational goals to collectivities is rejected as metaphorical or metaphysical, then the language of goals can only be maintained by ascribing them to individuals or groups within the organization.
But which individuals or groups?
The goals of a government department are presumably those of its ministers.
Or should they merely reflect the will of Parliament?
And if officials cannot realistically be relegated to a purely reflex role, what of their goals?
The problem cannot be resolved by aggregating.
There is too much evidence of goal conflict for this to be acceptable.
So the question of whose goals are to be regarded as those of the organization cannot be avoided.
The answer to this would usually be its leadership — shareholders, managers, ministers, and so on.
This leaves the majority of organizational members unaccounted for, to be integrated by coercive or ideological mechanisms (depending on one's view of human nature) into subsuming their goal under those of the organization's leaders.
This assumes that the behaviour of individuals that is part of the organization's structure of authority can be isolated from other roles and other aspects of behaviour.
But individual and group behaviour may deviate considerably from the declared goals of the organization, as in the case of punishment-oriented warders in reform and rehabilitation-oriented custodial institutions; or racially biased police officials; or socially biased welfare officials.
Conflicts between individual and organizational goals, made manifest in the discretion delegated to many categories of public officials in the interpretation of regulations and statutes, may be exacerbated by the fact that large organizations may have multiple objectives leading to goal conflict.
As Cyert and March (1963) pointed out long ago, individual subgoals in an enterprise may be contradictory, such as the inventory, production, sales, market share and profit goals of a firm.
Formal goals may be displaced by informal and incompatible goals that reflect the interests of members who happen to be in a position to substitute their goals for those of ‘the organization’.
Goal displacement in the form of means becoming ends in themselves is often said to be a characteristic dysfunction of bureaucratic forms of organization.
A political perspective on organizations begins with the sources of conflict between the interests which different categories of organizational members have.
What social features of organizations produce conflicts of interests?
First, there are the needs which individuals have for self-actualization, development of capabilities and other sources of job satisfaction and motivation which may not be satisfied by the organization.
If such needs are incompatible with the needs  of other groups for control and direction over what tasks will be performed and how work will be carried out, conflict will result and be expressed in ways which may obscure the underlying cause of conflict, such as strikes.
Such human needs will range from the basic ones for security, which are threatened when other members of an organization wish to close part of the operation down or attempt to perform the same operations with fewer personnel, to the need for self-realization, which may be threatened by extreme specialization and limited capabilities within the division of labour perceived by those in authority to be necessary for the maximization of their objectives (which will invariably be presented as the goals of ‘the organization’).
All such sources of conflict are familiar to those in the public sector as much as they are to those in the private.
Downs claims that the needs and self-interests of officials develop into informal social structures in bureaucracies which are not solely the consequence of goal conflicts and resistance to official objectives but are also designed to ease the process of implementation (Downs 1967, pp. 63–5).
Second, the division of labour which is the social and material basis of all organization, is itself a source of conflict, as the specific goals pursued by different sections and units frequently differ, though each presents its interests as being most compatible with those of the organization as a whole.
Lawrence and Lorsch,(1967) for example, showed how in private manufacturing firms the marketing divisions had a material interest in the maximization of sales, while research and development sought technical innovation and the production departments sought to control costs.
Hierarchical forms of control, the dominant feature of organizational life, exist according to Downs (1967) because conflicts of interest between people performing different tasks prevent spontaneous co-ordination.
These conflicts arise from the different perceptions of reality produced by the values ‘implicit in the trained outlooks associated with various technical specialities’(Downs 1967, p. 50; see also Pfeffer 1981, p. 73).
To this Downs added the technical constraints on spontaneous co-ordination arising from limited capacities for knowledge and information, meaning that different officials have to  specialize and therefore acquire different ‘bundles’ of information.
‘Inconsistency through ignorance’ becomes a source of conflict between actions if not necessarily between wills.
The larger the bureau, the greater the number of specialized tasks, and the greater the potential for conflict and need for co-ordination.
In public bureaucracies there may be conflicts of interest between different levels of the hierarchy arising from the values which different strata bring to bear on the policies being pursued by the government.
In the United Kingdom, for example, executive-level civil servants have become increasingly interested in policy issues, despite their formal assignment to implementation.
Those values and interests are articulated through their unions, especially when public policy entails the reduction of service and therefore employment levels in the public sector.
Self-interest becomes inextricably entwined with concern about the effects of public policies on the running of prisons, income support for the unemployed, tax evasion, smuggling, pollution, health care and the enforcement of minimum-wage and safety legislation in industry.
The competition for resources which expresses such conflict will increase when resources get scarcer, and greater efforts will be made to deploy power resources, many of which lie dormant during periods of expansion.
Growth is obviously preferred by people in organizations because it reduces conflict to manageable proportions (Pfeffer 1981).
Third, the conflict between expertise and office, between being an authority and being in authority, is probably the most familiar source of conflict in organizations.
It has been said to be a fundamental contradiction in the Weberian model of bureaucracy.
It manifests itself in different ways in different types or organizations.
Dalton found that in industrial plants conflict between line managers and staff specialists arose from the ambition and individualistic behaviour of staff officers, their efforts to justify their existence and gain acceptance of their contribution to the work of the organization, and their dependence on approval by line managers for access to higher staff positions.
Conflict between managerial and specialist groups hindered the attainment of organizational goals  (Dalton 1950).
The conflict within public bureaucracies between specialists and generalists is familiar to all students of modern government.
Gouldner (1957) had modelled the relationship in the industrial context in terms of‘cosmopolitans’ and ‘locals’.
Cosmopolitans were defined as showing higher levels of commitment to specialized skills and professional peer group judgement than to the employing organization.
Locals were defined as having stronger loyalty to the organization while being less committed to specialized skills and more concerned about the values of organizational colleagues.
Cosmopolitans and locals were shown to have different degrees of influence, participation, attitudes towards the solution of problems by means of formal rules and patterns of informal social relations.
Locals were found to have more power than cosmopolitans.
Benson has argued that it is artificial to abstract the different and competing interests which are found within organizations from the wider social world of conflict and dominance.
Linkages with society include the bases of recruitment of organizational elites; the limits which external interests impose on the operations of an organization; the power of external forces to control the flow of resources into an organization; membership of social classes, racial groups, ethnic groups and gender groups on the part of organizational participants; and institutionalized professionalism.
Conflict within society generally, such as that between capital and labour or between racial groups, leads to contradictions within organizations (Benson 1977).
SOURCES OF POWER
Interest in sources of power in organizations has stimulated a large literature within that particular combination of sociology and psychology known as organizational theory.
Only outlines of different sources can be given here.
When considering their applicability to particular organizations it is necessary to heed Clegg and Dunkerley's warning that we should not assume that power resources will have equal utility to the members of all organizations in all situations.
Bacharach and Lawler (1980) distinguish between what they call the bases of power (or what is controlled that enables behaviour to be changed) and sources of power (or how individuals or groups come to control the bases of power).
Organizations are thus characterized as combining controls and the means to exercise those controls.
The bases of power are coercion, or the ability to apply physical sanctions; remuneration or the ability to control rewards; normative power or the control of symbolic rewards; and knowledge, or the control of information.
The sources of power are office or structural position of authority; personal characteristics such as leadership; expertise or the specialized information than members of organizations have, and opportunity, or occupancy of a critical position in the flow of information or in the process of production.
Office, or being in authority, is a major source of power in organizations.
In Weber's terms, office legitimizes power in the sense of the decisions affecting and determining the behaviour of others that one is entitled to take by virtue of occupying an official position with a designated jurisdiction.
The office may come equipped with sanctions to enforce those decisions on those reluctant to obey simply out of recognition of the rightness to do so.
Such power is represented by the official hierarchy of subordination which characterizes formal organization.
It is built into the structure of organizations by the horizontal division of labour as well as by the vertical division into departments, sections and units.
Subordinates who accept the instructions of their superiors because they recognize its legitimacy rather than because they fear coercion are participating in the transformation of power into authority (Pfeffer 198 1, pp. 4–5).
Bureaus, as Downs points out, are oligarchic in nature, with power, income and prestige reinforcing the authority of officials holding positions at the top of the hierarchy (Downs 1967, p. 58).
High authority in an organization gives one the power to design organizational structure, make adjustments to its technology, motivate its participants and resist interference and opposition from within and outside the organization (Benson 1977).
Coercion may be even more central to organizational power than is implied by formal authority or by the existence of  material rewards as inducements and ultimately sanctions in all but voluntary organizations.
Etzioni (1961) has produced a typology of organizations based on the notion of ‘compliance’.
This concept refers to both ‘a relation in which an actor behaves in accordance with a directive supported by another actor's power’ and to ‘the orientation of the subordinate actor to the power applied’.
Three kinds of power are differentiated according to the means employed to make the subordinates comply: physical, material or symbolic.
Coercive power is associated with physical sanctions and force.
Remunerative power is derived from ‘control over material resources and rewards’ such as wages, salaries, commissions, fringe benefits and services.
Normative power rests on the allocation and manipulations of esteem, prestige, peer-group recognition — in other words, of symbolic rewards.
Most organizations utilize all three forms of power but, Etzioni argues, most emphasize one type and rely much less on the other two.
Etzioni links his three concepts of power to three forms of involvement of participants in organizations, ranged along a continuum from alienation to commitment.
Alienative involvement refers to organizations in which participants have an intense negative orientation — inmates in prisons, enlisted men in basic training camps, for example.
Calculative involvement refers to a low intensity of either negative or positive orientation towards the organization.
Moral involvement designates a high intensity of positive involvement — the loyal party member or church parishioner, for example.
Placing the three kinds of power in a matrix with the three kinds of involvement produces nine types of compliance, three of which are found more frequently in practice than the other six because they constitute congruent relationships: alientative/coercive (e.g. prisons); remunerative/calculative (e.g. firms); normative/moral (e.g. political parties).
These three commonest types of organization are labelled coercive, utilitarian and normative.
Etzioni formulates a hypothesis about organizations seeking to be effective: that they will shift their compliance structure towards one in which there is greater congruence between power and involvement, either by changing the nature of the power employed (e.g. from sanctions to ‘leadership’) or the participants involved  (e.g. by recruitment methods)(Etzioni 1961).
Despite the criticisms that can be made of Etzioni's methodology it is valuable in identifying different types of organizational power and relating these to other organizational characteristics, including not only efficiency but also the types of members, clients, customers and other ‘participants’ that Etzioni felt should be included in the analysis of an organization's existence.
As the frequent conflict between generalists and specialists in public bureaucracies indicates, expertise — being an authority in a scientific, professional or technical subject relevant to the decisions being taken within the organization — is a source of power.
It derives from the fact that knowledge is the foundation of rational organization.
Such knowledge may be deployed as resources to be mobilized by different occupational groups in opposition to the generalist management within the organization.
It may take the form of skills on which employers depend; commitments to craft principles which support group autonomy; a strategic function in the production process; or professional solidarity supported by peer-group values.
Occupational groups clearly vary considerably in the sanctions and resources at their disposal (Hyman 1980).
Being in a position to cope with uncertainty will be a source of power under certain circumstances.
As Crozier (1964) showed, when mechanical breakdowns were the only major unpredictable feature of tobacco manufacturing in the factories he studied, the engineers gained tremendous power in the organization.
Furthermore, since the production process was highly mechanized, so that mechanical breakdowns could totally disrupt production, the engineers' department became ‘central’ to the organization in the sense that the firm became more dependent on them than any other department.
Crozier developed the idea that the centrality, immediacy and pervasiveness of units within an organization could be measured in order to assess the relative power of different organizational groupings.
Similarly, Pfeffer has identified ‘dependence’ as crucial to a group's power, when the importance of a unit's tasks are greater than any other's: ‘Power derives from having something that someone else  wants or needs, and being in control of the performance or resource so that there are few alternative sources, or no alternative sources, for obtaining what is desired’(Pfeffer 1981, p. 99).
Being irreplaceable is an important source of power in social systems, and groups may take steps to strengthen their indispensability.
For example, the engineers in the French tobacco firms studied by Crozier developed verbal training methods so that inadequate documentation of their role prevented other groups from eroding their monopoly of crucial knowledge.
In so far as power in organizations derives in part from an ability to resolve uncertainty, then location within the network of communication is important.
Cyert and March have demonstrated the significance of an ability to absorb uncertainty by being in a position to distil, filter and transmit information (Cyert and March 1963).
So far our attention has focused on internal interests and values that are expressed through the interplay of political forces within organizations.
There is much scope for investigations of public bureaucracies in these terms.
Research would inevitably concentrate on informal relations and social structures through which power is exercised.
The formal structure of authority would be regarded as but one dimension of the political system.
PATTERNS OF DOMINATION
An alternative and equally fruitful approach to the study of power in organizations is to concentrate on the formal structure of authority and look for correspondence between this and patterns of social relations within the type of society in which the organization is located.
An approach to organizational politics which focuses on patterns of dominance goes beyond the by now familiar references in organization theory and public administration to the ‘environment’ of organizations and especially the political system, an example of which is found in Wamsley and Zald (1976).
The central question then becomes whether there is technological pressure towards a convergence of  organizational structures or whether the imperatives lie elsewhere than in the requirements of production technology.
The technological determinists have argued that the increased technological complexity of industrial production has led to a more complex division of labour and fragmentation of tasks which have to be co-ordinated through a structure of power and authority.
The process of industrial production becomes more significant than social or political variations in the society in which organizations are located as determinants of internal structures of organizational power.
So, for example, industrial organizations in the United States and Soviet Union are essentially similar, despite obvious political, economic and ideological differences.
The organizational ‘environment’ has formed part of a managerial perspective on structures of authority which sees variations in management structures and forms of control as reflecting the mainly economic environment of the organization.
Here a connection is made between organizational structures and the varying quality of technology and environment.
Contingency theory as a tool of management predicts that organizational performance will be maximized when there is a structure of management appropriate to contingencies deriving from the circumstances of technology, environment, scale and other factors.
Contingency theory thus combines elements of technological and social determinism.
The concept of technology, which plays a part in determining the appropriate model for the structure of authority in the organization, originally referred to levels of complexity in decision-making and manufacturing processes in industrial firms.
But it has been developed by Perrow to apply to the actions which administrators perform on the objects of their decision-making.
‘Technology’ in this sense has two dimensions, one measuring the familiarity of situations which decision-makers have to deal with, the other measuring the innovative judgement required in the search for a method of analysing and solving problems (Perrow 1970).
This attempt to elaborate a concept of technology in the administrative setting has some potential for the public sector (see Pitt and Smith 1981).
The environmental imperative is held to reside mainly in the market context of manufacturing firms and the rate of change as a variable determining the ‘best’ structure of an organization.
So, for example, Burns and Stalker (1961) were able to divide forms of management structure into mechanistic and organic, the former being appropriate for firms operating under relatively stable market conditions because routine decision-making handles unchanging tasks efficiently, and the latter being appropriate to rapidly changing product environments where there is a continuous need to innovate and deal with new and unpredictable problems.
Contingency theory has not remained entirely deterministic, mainly as a result of Child's insistence on the significance of ‘strategic choice’.
Child has drawn attention to the theoretical inadequacy of leaving an understanding of the process whereby strategic decisions are made to be inferred from statistical associations between organizational characteristics.
The choices which can be made about organizational design should not be obscured by stressing ‘functional imperatives’ rather than‘political action’.
Rather than technology determining structure, the latter is a product of decisions on work plans, resources and equipment made by those in control (Child 1972).
Organizations have ‘dominant coalitions’ which have the power to influence the structure of decision-making and the processes of production.
The choices of those with power to direct organizations and initiate changes in structure are among the determinants of organizational designs (Child 1973).
One of the earliest and most influential attempts to relate forms of organization to wider patterns of social relations was Max Weber's analysis of different types of belief in the legitimacy of domination (i.e. in authority) and the way these can be associated historically with different structures of authority and therefore different organizational forms.
Thus charismatic leaders, whose authority emanated from their personal qualities, have followings or disciples who form the ‘body politic’.
The followers or ‘administrative staff are selected not on the basis of status or qualification, but according to personal devotion.
Laws and arbitration under charismatic authority are ‘spoken’ by the leader and given obligatory recognition by the following.
Charismatic authority is thoroughly authoritarian in its pure form.
But when success fails, authority falters.
When the problem of succession has to be solved, rules have to be formulated: charisma has to be routinized unless one charismatic leader has been successfully challenged by another.
One way of routinizing authority is by tradition.
When the status and rights of a leader are endowed by tradition, they are authorized by belief in the sacredness of the social order; by appeals to divine authority; by a leader's designation of his own successor; by inheritance; or by consecration.
Obedience under traditional authority rests on piety.
The lord's administration: If the structure of administration is patriarchal, administrators have no personal right to their office, whereas in the ‘estate system’ of traditional authority, office cannot be taken away arbitrarily.
Finally, there is legal authority based on enactments that can be made and changed by formally correct procedures.
The acquisition of office is governed by the promulgation of legal rules.
Obedience under legal authority is not owed to an individual personally but to the impersonal and abstract rules  specifying the rights of office.
The pure form of administration under legal authority and rule is bureaucratic:
Weber associated this type of rule and its corresponding form of administration with the government of modern states and the power relations in private enterprise, public corporations and voluntary associations: ‘private enterprise, however, is autonomous in its increasingly bureaucratic organization of management’.
People may be free to decide whether to join and leave, but labour market conditions subject employees to organizational codes, and the contract in capitalist enterprise makes the form of authority found there pre-eminently legal.
However, in the state the structure of administration is never entirely bureaucratic.
Top positions in the body politic may be held by monarchs, directly or indirectly elected presidents, rotating office-holders, parliamentary committees and collegiate bodies.
Administrative staff are never exclusively bureaucratic, but usually include notables and agents of interest groups.
Thus elements of charisma and tradition will be present in otherwise legal-rational forms of authority and organization.
The deterministic view of industrialization and technology is directly addressed by those who point out that ‘imperatives’ do not exhaust the forms of work organization that are possible.
Choices can still be made between decision-making systems offering more or less opportunity for the involvement of workers in the design, planning and execution of production.
Furthermore, despite similarities between capitalist and state socialist industrial production, there are significant  differences.
Here, then, a connection is being made between organization power structures and the needs of dominant social classes for control over the workplace.
Technology and ‘patterns of work organization’ are as much the effects as causes of organization, especially in capitalist societies.
When industrialization takes place within a predominantly inegalitarian society, ‘the technology and organizational work patterns developed by the dominant groups are likely to be those that reinforce, can be adapted to, or at least not incompatible with, existing hierarchical structure of social control’(Fox 1980, p. 182).
The precise link between society and organization is found in relations of production.
Work in capitalist organizations, according to this largely Marxist approach, is characterized by inequalities — of rewards, dangers, deprivations, satisfactions and frustrations.
These and other aspects of ‘work structure and events’ are related to a structure of interests, power and values in society at large.
Ideologies of management are needed to buttress a system of inequalities in organizations and the major social injustice of the ‘daily routine of men and women wasting their lives and their intellects to gain their livelihoods’(Salaman 1980b, p. 1).
This radical critique of workplace organization under modem capitalism finds technology to be developed and applied in ways consistent with the dominant relations of production.
Salaman identifies two basic features of work: the purchase of labour power from which surplus value is appropriated, which requires management; and the conflict which this generates, which needs to be controlled: ‘under capitalism, management takes on functions specific to the needs and problems of controlling and directing the labour power of potentially recalcitrant employees to achieve profit’(Salaman 1980b, p. 11).
The design of work systems reflects assumptions and values about the nature of employees.
Work design does not reflect the imperatives of technology, but rather the need to control employees whose interests are in conflict with employers.
Both technology and its accompanying organizational forms, especially those concerned with increasing efficiency, are thus the result of essentially political choices: ‘when people enter into relationships of production they are, at the same time, engaged  in a political process out of which emerge structures of domination and subordination, mechanisms of social control and forms of exploitation’(Johnson 1980, p. 335).
As a commodity, labour cannot be allowed by management to participate in decision-making since this loss of control could endanger the private appropriation of profit (Nichols 1980, pp. 287–9).
‘Workers have to be treated as ‘factors of production’ rather than as men and women with distinctive needs and aspirations’(Hyman 1980, p. 305).
The utility of labour to capital requires the fragmentation of organizational tasks into routine, repetitive, uncreative and degrading work which then has to be managed, organized and co-ordinated by hierarchy and authority.
Management is thus the mediator of the ‘coercive and exploitative dynamic of capitalism’(Hyman 1980, p. 306).
Technological innovations occur and new professional and occupational groups arise, providing opportunities for new forms of domination.
But existing power structures, not the new technology, will determine the boundaries of the new sources of power.
This, for example, has been the experience of the medical profession viz-à-viz auxiliaries (e.g. in physiotherapy) and aspiring groups (e.g. osteopaths).
The owners and controllers of private and public property adopt an instrumental approach to the design of work processes and organization to minimize the immediate costs of production.
This allows little opportunity for self-actualization on the part of the majority of organizational members (those in the lower occupational strata).
The amount of discretion relative to the amount of prescribed action only increases as one moves to higher occupational strata, thus allowing the enlargement and fulfilment of personal needs.
For the majority the work experience includes alienation from the product of one's own labour; controls backed by ideology or coercion as management assert their ‘right’ to control; market or contractual relations with the organization, rather than integration into it; and occupational or professional solidarities and consciousness rather than working-class solidarity.
Occupational ideologies legitimize another kind of power, that which such groups exercise over their members and clients (Fox 1980).
Autonomy on the part of employees is  only tolerated to the extent that it contributes to productivity and profitability.
Ideology is an important part of the apparatus of managerial control.
Social mechanisms are necessary to produce self-discipline among workers.
Ideology supports a normative commitment by employees and legitimizes managerial control, hierarchy and power:
Socialization within the family and the educational system tends to inculcate an assumption that obedience to those in positions of authority is neutral and morally proper; and the legitimacy of industrial management is routinely insisted on by religious dignitaries, politicians, judges, editors of newspapers and others with the ability to exert ideological influence.
(Hyman 1980, p. 313)
Organization theory is part of this ideology.
‘Taylorism dominates the world of production; the practitioners of ‘human relations’ and ‘industrial psychology’are the maintenance crew for the human machinery’(Braverman 1974).
The movement in organization theory from scientific management towards the humanization of work have occurred because of the costs of the former in absenteeism, turnover, reduced productivity, poor quality, and so on.
The raising of morale has been imposed by management in pursuance of surplus value and the maintenance of managerial authority.
Enthusiasm for it tends to wane during economic recessions.
This approach to organizational structure leads to a novel typology based on the contribution of organizations towards the production of surplus value, rather than size, technology, compliance, prime beneficiary (Blau and Scott 1963), forms of legitimacy, market environment or main types of bureaucratic rules (Gouldner 1955).
Carchedi (1977) has produced a division of organizations into:
1.
Private capitalist productive organizations (e.g. a manufacturing company).
2.
Private capitalist non-productive organizations (e.g. a bank or private clinic).
3.
Capitalist state productive organizations (e.g. a nationalized industrial corporation).
4.
Non-capitalist state organizations (e.g. a public hospital).
Categories 1 and 3 produce surplus value; and category 2 produces services in support of the production of surplus value; category 4 produces services in response to need.
Whether and in what way an organization produces surplus value and responds to market demand will, it is predicted, determine the activities, skills, specialisms and organizational structures to be found within it.
Such a categorization is an advance on a simple distinction between state and non-state organizations since, as Clegg and Dunkerley point out, ‘little objective differences exist between state employees and non-state employees at the level of relations of production’(Clegg and Dunkerley 1980, p. 489).
10
INSIDE BUREAUCRACY
The study of bureaucracy has formed part of the analysis by economists of public choice in the non-market sector.
Bureaucrats have been included among the utility maximizing groups within the political arena.
This approach to bureaucracy coincided with the extension of government powers in Western democracies, an increase in the number of government officials and a growth in the proportion of national wealth allocated through public bureaucracies.
The study of bureaucracy thus provided a perspective on the supply side of the governmental equation, complementing the analysis of political demands through the study of voting, legislative behaviour and pressure groups (Jackson 1982).
The economists' approach to bureaucracy has been very different to that of conventional public administration, with its emphasis on constitutional principles, institutions of control and review, and structural features of public agencies.
Economists have considered public organizations, or bureaus, in the same manner as they consider firms, posing questions about the determinants of the bureau's size and about its maximizing activities.
In economic models of bureaucratic behaviour it is assumed that economic incentives and constraints are what count, rather than the moral or intellectual qualities of public servants (Niskanen 1973).
The key issues are what bureaucrats maximize and how external conditions of cost and demand affect bureaucratic behaviour.
Policy questions for the management of public services are also raised by economic models of bureaucratic motivation and efficiency (Niskanen 1968).
Since much of the discussion and critiques of economic models of bureaucracy focus on Niskanen's pioneering work, and particularly his Bureaucracy and Representative Government (1971), the following survey of ideas adopts a similar approach.
The elements of the model set out below are drawn from Niskanen, as are the policy recommendations flowing from it.
This is followed by a summary of the criticisms that have been made of the model and its policy prescriptions in order to assess the utility of such an approach to an understanding of bureaucracy.
AN ECONOMIC MODEL
From this kind of perspective bureaus may be distinguished from firms in a number of crucial respects.
First, a bureau does not produce a surplus of revenue over costs which can be appropriated by employers, owners or employees as their own income.
The remuneration of the employees of bureaus is determined by other criteria, such as‘fair comparability’ or labour market forces.
That remuneration is part of the budget to be raised from the bureau's ‘Sponsor’(as Niskanen named the legislative authority that makes appropriations to the bureaucracy).
Second, the revenues obtained by bureaus come wholly or substantially from grants made by the sponsoring authority rather than from sales.
Such grants originate in taxes or other compulsory payments such as national insurance contributions.
Third, the goods produced by bureaus are public goods in the sense that they are unlikely to be provided if charged for and offered for sale.
Their provision thus requires collective organizations such as states.
Resources have to be obtained and deployed by bureaus.
Goods are provided in this way because of difficulties in defining their desired characteristics sufficiently for private, profit-seeking firms to supply them.
The production of goods and services in this way entails a special kind of relation between a bureau and its sponsor or provider of funds.
According to Niskanen, this relationship is one of bilateral monopoly.
The sponsor has no other supplier  that it can turn to, and the bureau has no other customer or source of income.
The relationship is analogous to that in private markets between a seller with no alternative customer and a customer with no alternative supplier.
Whereas a firm offers units of output for sale at a price, a bureau offers a total output in exchange for a budget.
This gives the bureau the bargaining power of a monopoly in dealing with its sponsor.
Hence bureaucracies are more concerned with levels of activities (e.g. hospital beds per thousand population, teacher-pupil ratios, expenditure on school books, expenditure on welfare provision, numbers of missiles and infantry divisions, the size of police forces or standards of accommodation in prisons), than with output, or rather outcomes, such as health standards, educational standards, defence capability or public safety.
In the provision of public collective goods ‘consumer preference’ can only be expressed indirectly and imprecisely in a democracy through the relationship between bureau and legislative sponsor.
The bureau is interested in its sponsor's demands as a basis for the formulation of its budget.
The preferences of the sponsor are represented by a ‘budget-output’ function, any point on which represents the maximum budget the sponsor is willing to grant the bureau for a specified level of service.
A bureau may try to orchestrate those demands by its links with the organizations representing the consumers of its services, thereby affecting the influence which the public have on the revealed preferences of the sponsor.
Thus economic models of bureaucratic behaviour usually involve a theory of legislative behaviour in which politicians aim to maximize their electoral support.
One original assumption here was that legislators are more responsive to demands for expenditure than to public concern for tax levels.
It was argued that the political benefits of expenditure are more visible to elected representatives than the political costs of taxation.
The advocacy of spending is concentrated in vocal and influential communities and client groups that can affect the electoral chances of politicians.
Opposition to expenditure, on the other hand, was assumed to be diffused and less well-organized and so of less concern to elected representatives.
This has important consequences for a key factor in the model — the bureaucrat's monopoly of information.
The bureaucrat is assumed as a general rule to know more than the sponsor about factor costs and production processes involved in the bureau's services.
The election process generates very little information about the population's demands for specific public services.
Elected representatives have poor information on the minimum costs needed to supply a public service.
Neither executives nor legislatures in modern government are motivated towards maximizing the difference between the total costs of services and the total value of those services to citizens (Niskanen 1971, pp. 135–7).
The legislator has little incentive to improve the quality of information used to check on the claims made by bureaucrats about social needs, administrative costs, procurement levels and activity rates, especially when to do so is costly to the politicians.
Bureaucrats, on the other hand, are in a good position to distort information about costs because of their dominant role as interpreters of both governmental outputs and the relationship between government action and social outcomes.
Bureaucrats use their power to obtain policies with characteristics which will benefit themselves by distorting information, leaking information, distorting the speed of policy implementation and distorting the costs of policies as they are implemented (Breton and Wintrobe 1979).
This is but an extension of the expertise which Max Weber claimed to be the foundation of bureaucratic power.
Many bureaus are to some extent in the position of monopsony.
They are the sole buyers of some types of labour and materials for the goods and services that only they produce.
Examples of such types of labour are firemen, army officers and policemen.
In addition, a bureaucratic agency may be given preferential access to some inputs, such as land, through planning legislation, for example .
Bureaus can thus under some conditions exercise wage and factor price discrimination.
Under the conditions outlined above, this is likely to reduce the economic efficiency of public provision.
It is primarily the national bureaus, and in particular the military, that are able to exercise wage and factor price discrimination because of their greater monopoly power, use  of specialized resources and command of the ‘public domain,(e.g. air space, land, and nuclear materials).
This is not a general characteristic of bureaus (Niskanen 1971, p. 31).
Bureaus sometimes have two types of consumer.
There is the collective organization providing the grant (the direct sponsor).
And for agencies that supply some goods or services for purchase there are the consumers who pay for individual units of collectively provided goods.
The more that a loss of sales to the second group is compensated by a grant paid by the first, or the more the revenues for the provision of a service to individuals come from grants, the less likely is the bureau to be concerned for consumer interests and, hence, efficiency.
There is in any case, it is argued, less incentive for efficient production in a bureau than in a firm operating on a small profit margin where a small reduction in costs means a large increase in profits.
In a bureau a small reduction in costs would be followed by a smaller increase in the budget.
The reason for this constitutes the most critical part of the model.
It is assumed that, whereas the businessman maximizes profit to maximize his personal utility, the bureaucrat maximizes his budget and thereby his salary, perquisites of office, public reputation, power, patronage, ease of managing the bureau and ease of making changes to public policy which he believes to be in the public interest.
All form part of the bureaucrat's utility function and all can be regarded a ‘positive montonic function’ of the total budget of the bureau (Niskanen 1968, pp. 293–4).
The general output and budget functions for each bureau will differ among bureaucrats according to their preferences for income and the several kinds of perquisites (Niskanen 1975).
Budget maximization is held to be both rational and necessary for survival.
The rational pursuit of reduced management burdens, given the impossibility of acting in the public interest (because of the limits on the bureaucrat's information and the conflicting interests of others), is made possible by increases in the total budget.
Survival dictates that the bureaucrat keeps his subordinates happy with greater opportunities for promotion and other benefits from an enlarged budget, and his superiors satisfied with his performance as measured by the forceful promotion of incremental growth in the bureau's spending plans.
The constraint to which budget-maximizing bureaucrats are subject is that they must supply the output expected by the sponsor.
Their budget must be equal to or greater than the minimum total cost of supplying the expected output.
A bureau that promises more output than it can deliver can expect to be penalized by lower budgetary allocations in the future (Niskanen 1971, p. 42).
According to Niskanen's model, bureaucrats are able to inflate the cost of service provision by up to double the true marginal cost of services that would satisfy citizens' true demands.
The bureaucrat will attempt to acquire a budget in excess of what is required for the level of output indicated by the equation of marginal cost and political demand.
This is reflected in the model by a declining marginal cost curve.
Faced with this information, the politicians can be expected to choose the higher level of output indicated by the new equation of demand with marginal cost.
In theory this process could go as far as equating marginal cost with demand so that the bureaucracy obtains all the consumer surplus.
The only constraint on attempts to acquire a larger budget is that it would cost more than the total value to the politicians of the service, the value of additional output being zero.
The politicians would then prefer no service at all.
POLICY IMPLICATIONS
Acceptance of the assumptions contained in this model of bureaucratic-legislative relations leads to a number of policy prescriptions for the structure of the public sector that are designed to redress the imbalance of power between these two parts of the governmental machine.
First, competition within the bureaucracy should be encouraged, both between and within bureaus, especially since economics of scale have not been demonstrated to justify the monopoly supply of public services.
The natural competition between bureaus should be exploited to provide a more nearly optimal supply of public services.
The public should be offered a choice of agencies from which to benefit.
This should have the twin advantage of reducing the level of demand to be satisfied by any individual  agency whose efficiency should thereby be increased; and multiplying the information available to budget reviewers, thereby improving the detection of inefficiencies in bureaucratic budgeting.
Reducing the level of demand and increasing the elasticity of demand for a bureau's services will direct the budget-maximizing incentive towards finding the most efficient production process.
Furthermore, committees would have a better chance of identifying inefficient budget-output proposals.
The narrower range of discretion of each bureau in selecting production processes should mean that review committees are less likely to include strong representations by those with an interest in any given bureau's output.
This should increase the probability that a review committee will be able to approve a lower budget for a given output than if the bureau were a monopoly supplier.
Studies of the production efficiency of bureaus suggested to Niskanen that, for a given output, costs can be reduced by contracting with private firms, reducing the size of bureaus and increasing the competition among bureaus (Niskanen 1975).
Second, it is argued that bureaucrats should be offered incentives to increase the difference between the budget and the minimum cost of the service.
Such incentives might be made up of a share of the surplus which the bureaucrats could appropriate; ‘deferred prizes’ for keeping a bureau's output within what was promised in a budget-output proposal and for returning money to the general fund during an official's tenure of office; and allocations towards supplementary activities such as travel budgets.
Competition is essential to this proposal, since the effect of incentives on a monopoly would be to reduce the level of supply rather then costs.
A reward system should both increase efficiency and reduce the oversupply of public services.
A third proposal which finds support among economists persuaded by such interpretations of bureaucratic motives and behaviour is to rely more on private-market alternatives to state provision.
The state can retain an element of control when private-sector provision is used by subsidizing producers in order to lower costs as a matter of public interest.
Here efficiency is increased if a per-unit output subsidy is paid to suppliers, rather than a grant towards input costs.
Alternatively, vouchers can be allocated to selected consumers if the public interest requires that a specified social group enjoy a lower price for some service or commodity.
Contracting work out to private suppliers may reduce costs to a public agency which nevertheless controls the standard of service to the public through the mechanisms of competitive bidding.
The primary value of privatizing marketable services and contracting out some of the inputs to the production of non-marketable services is to reduce the monopoly power of bureaus and review committees and provide services at a price known to the representatives of middle-demand groups.
Constitutional changes also figure in the public choice programme of reform in order to reduce the power of demand groups, thereby making it more difficult for bureaucrats to oversupply public goods.
Legislative standing orders and procedures could be changed to increase the turnover of incumbency in crucial positions, such as legislative committees and ministerial posts, so that the spokesmen of client groups do not get too entrenched.
The random assignment of  legislators to review committees, the random allocation of review responsibilities among committees and the use of non-specialized review committees should all reduce the influence of high-demand groups in the budget review process.
Voting rules could be changed to make it more difficult to obtain legislative approval for budgets, again reducing the power of ‘high demand’ groups by requiring larger than simple-majority decisions.
PROBLEMS WITH THE PUBLIC-CHOICE APPROACH
A number of objections of both a theoretical and normative nature can be raised against the model and the policy prescriptions that flow from it.
As far as the limitations of the theory are concerned the main reservations that have been expressed concern the assumption that bureaucrats maximize their utility through the maximization of their bureau's budget.
This may be as crude a model of the public official as the models of ‘protector of the public interest’, ‘profligate incompetent’, insensitive automaton or neutral instrument of  political will that it seeks to replace.
Breton and Wintrobe object to the assumption that the factors which go to make up the bureaucrat's utility function — salary, ‘perks’, and so on— are necessarily a positive monotonic function of the total budget.
When bureaus are compared it is readily evident that the benefits of office, including salary, may be larger in bureaus with smaller budgets than in others with large ones.
Heads of bureaus may improve their positions by moving from large bureaus to smaller ones.
In Canada the salaries, power and prestige of senior officials in the Department of Finance and the Treasury Board are greater than those of their counterparts in much larger departments such as Health and Welfare.
There is also evidence that bureaucratic advancement may be obtained by successful efforts to cut back on departmental expenditure.
In fact, ‘there is a great deal of observable bureaucratic behaviour which is inconsistent with the hypothesis of budget maximization’(Breton and Wintrobe 1975, p. 205).
Similarly for the United States: incomes, perquisites and public reputation are not dependent on bureau size.
Consider, insists Wade, the office of Secretary of State with the smallest budget of the Cabinet Departments yet arguably the greatest status in the system (Wade 1979, p. 354).
Similarly, Jackson, reminding us of the different varieties of bureaucrat identified by Downs (1967), questions the assumption that everything contributing to a bureaucrat's utility function can be represented by the bureau's budget.
Furthermore, some items are inversely related to budget size such as ease of administration and ‘on-the-job leisure’.
Assuming that Jackson is right in thinking that a larger budget and extra staff will be less effective in achieving such objectives, a model of bureaucratic behaviour needs to include the trade-offs to be made by bureaucrats between the different elements in their utility functions.
Moreover, if as in the United Kingdom, bureaucratic salaries and perquisites are not necessarily related to budget size, ‘wherein lies the incentive for the bureaucrat to increase the size of his bureau?’
(Jackson 1982, p. 133).
Bureaucrats may be motivated to achieve positions of control rather than expansion.
Kogan attempted to test the Niskanen thesis in the context of British government policy in the late 1970s to cut  educational expenditure, and concluded that the administrative culture of the civil service militated against the inflation of costs.
Kogan also points out that bureaus are rarely composite elements with a single set of preferences: ‘educational bureaucracy in Britain is not only multi-level but also a strongly divided group at any one level.
Multiple viewpoints and motivations lie behind the apparent singleness and consistency of official behaviour’(Kogan 1981, p. 165).
Dunleavy also wishes to distinguish between different levels of the bureaucracy in explaining why, contrary to budget-maximization accounts, privatization has met with so little resistance from senior officials.
The preferences of officials not only vary according to the type of agency (delivery, regulatory, transfer, contract and control).
The class and gender interests of senior officials in all agencies are promoted more by ‘bureau-shaping’ strategies than by budget maximization.
The small, elite, central control agencies such as the Cabinet Office or Treasury takes on a new significance in the context of this kind of analysis (Dunleavy 1986).
A range of alternative motivations among bureaucrats have been identified by other investigators.
Migué and Belanger (1974) argue that managerial discretion is what bureaucrats seek, while Chant and Acheson (1972) present evidence that bureaucrats seek to maximize prestige consistent with self-preservation.
Self, in pointing out the difficulties of building political theory on the basis of the assumption that man is exclusively egoistic, finds Niskanen's theory to be ‘empirically false on each main point’.
Bureaucratic self-interest takes many different forms, depending on the different career patterns and normative constraints found in different public services.
Where bureau heads are mobile within the structure of state administration they have less of an egoistic interest in maximizing budgets.
Self also believes it is wrong to assume that bureau chiefs generally control a monopoly.
Rather they compete for clientele (Self 1985; see also Self 1975).
Breton and Wintrobe conclude that ‘one cannot build a generally applicable theory of bureaucracy on a specific objective function’.
Too many assumptions about bureaucratic behaviour have been derived from observations of a single organization and specific time periods: Niskanen  and the US Department of Defence; Tullock and departments of foreign affairs; ‘Leviathan’ models of the 1965–75 growth years, and so on.
Breton and Wintrobe rightly point out that ‘we will never have a good understanding of the working of public and private bureaucracies if a representation of the behaviour of bureaucrats requires as many models as there are bureaus’(1982, pp. 27–8).
They develop a theory of selective behaviour which does not specify what bureaucrats' preferences are, but rather the means they use to satisfy them.
Wade goes further and questions, on the basis of American administrative history, the claim that bureaucratic growth has come from the expansion of established agencies.
Most growth in fact derives from the creation of new bureaus to perform new functions and programmes which the political process brings into being: ‘the budget maximizing bureaucrat is not the source of this impetus’(Wade 1979, p. 359).
The idea that constitutional changes should be made to reduce the power of ‘demand groups’ may be objected to on both political and logical grounds.
Politically such change will almost certainly reduce even further the already weak position of high need interests.
The ‘deadlocks’ which some public choice theorists think desirable because they will reduce the over supply of public services might well deny needy groups the services on which they depend.
The social costs of not recognizing the intensity of high demand groups may be considerably greater than any inequities that may stem from their success in demanding more than the median voter is interested in (Wade 1979).
Beyond that, however, there is a contradiction between this proposal and the theory from which it springs.
For as Breton and Wintrobe show, if there is a fall in the demand for the services of an information distorting, budget maximizing bureau, it will not be able to deliver any output for a price that citizens and politicians are willing to pay and will probably disappear.
Budget maximization is a very risky strategy to adopt if there are going to be budget cuts.
A budget maximizing strategy is inconsistent with the aim of survival which is said to be the rational foundation for such a strategy (Breton and Wintrobe 1979).
More fundamentally still, Wade asks how can bureaucrats adjust their behaviour if it is presumed that they  are rational in the way they choose and allocate their resources (Wade 1979).
The market alternatives favoured by some public choice theorists also raise problems of a political kind.
Government services and power are often used for redistributive ends.
Market forms of supply are likely to increase rather than reduce the maldistribution of wealth.
Advocacy of the market also exaggerates the power of consumer preference, especially in the case of leasing out public functions to private bidders.
What power does the voter have over a local contractor who is one further stage removed from public control and accountability?
The risks of competitive bidding need to be included in the analysis when it is well-known that genuine bids are difficult to detect, so that large multinationals can make ‘loss-leader’ bids to exclude local firms, as in the case of refuse collection in the United States, and ‘performance contractors’for US school districts can leak ‘their’students the examination questions to improve the firm's success rate (R. Goodwin 1982).
The multiplication of agencies as a means to greater bureaucratic efficiency may be objected to on the grounds that one of the major obstacles to the successful implementation of government programmes has been found to be the existence of numerous competing administrative bodies which so many programmes seem to involve because of overlapping policy fields and jurisdictions (Gunn 1978).
In the American context Wade asks how politically realistic it is to assume that a President would willingly preside over an ‘overtly contentious and competitive bureaucracy’.
Political support is likely to be lost to the candidate promising executive control, co-ordination and effective management.
‘There is no chief executive in the marketplace (that is its genius) while one is constitutionally required in the polity’(Wade 1979, p. 367).
There is in any case no guarantee that bureaus operating in the same policy area will compete.
Emulating private firms could just as well mean collusion, the formation of oligopolies, price rings and cartels, or the withholding of information from consumers.
On a more theoretical level, Breton and Wintrobe show that the analogy between a monopolistic firm and its customers and a monopoly bureau and the public is misplaced.
Government agencies are not dependent on citizens for resources and revenues in the way that private firms are dependent on their customers.
Bureaus do not sell services to citizens or raise taxes directly.
Politicians, not bureaucrats, raise taxes, and bureaucrats serve politicians, not citizens.
‘If there were a thousand Departments of Defence in Canada or elsewhere, instead of one, these would still not compete for citizens, because citizens are not their customers; politicians are’(Breton and Wintrobe 1982, p. 91).
Furthermore, although public bureaus may be monopoly producers, bureaucrats are not monopolists.
They exist in a competitive labour market and are subject to competition and tests of performance within government.
Comparisons between the public and private sector also suggest that the question of incentives is more complex than it may seem from models such as Niskanen's.
The absence of the profit motive as an incentive to efficiency does not adequately distinguish public and private employees.
Employees in the private sector do not take profits home.
They are paid on the basis of their superiors' assessments of performance, as in the public sector.
Both types of superior have measures of the organization's overall performance — profits in private firms, popularity in governments.
So public employees cannot be said to have less of an incentive to be efficient or a greater incentive to pursue non-pecuniary rewards.
Indeed, comparison of managerial facilities and perquisites in the public and private sectors (such as office furnishings, secretarial support, company cars, expense accounts, etc) suggest that ‘it is the private rather than the public sector that offers greater possibilities for at least these kinds of non-pecuniary consumption’(Breton and Wintrobe, 1982, p. 77).
Government agencies are created to perform according to different criteria from private business.
But even when they are judged by the same criteria, the evidence does not support the contention that private institutions perform better (Goodsell 1983, pp. 48–55).
Breton and Wintrobe conclude that ‘the analysis of resource allocation in the public sector in terms of the alleged preference of bureau chiefs for larger budgets or non-pecuniary rewards, and of public sector growth in terms of bureaucratic monopoly, is entirely misplaced’(1982, p. 97).
The most devastating critique of the proposal to create incentives to efficient behaviour from a modified profit system and ‘deferred prizes’ comes from Wade.
The ethical basis for extending effective property rights in the public treasury to officials is overlooked in the Niskanen-type thesis.
To presume that large lump sums payable to bureaucrats would appeal to the median voter or taxpayer ‘requires an astonishing remoteness from political realities and culture’, as does the idea that the public would approve the accumulation of a portion of the savings from more efficient administration in the form of an increase in amenities (Wade 1979).
The interrelationships between bureaus, their clients, the political executive, legislative assembly and public are more complex than some economic models of bureaucracy allow, especially in the welfare services.
Here the one-to-one relationship between professional and client in such cases as family breakdown, mental illness, physical disability, child care under conditions of deprivation, or homelessness is not easy to fit into the market model.
Public administration also often has to satisfy equity criteria in its treatment of individual cases, especially when acting in a quasi judicial role.
It is not obvious how this can be guaranteed by bureaus competing for business in quasi-market conditions.
The claim that bureaus ‘oversupply is difficult to reconcile with another fact of social life — the existence of private security firms, schools, hospitals, employment services, and so on.
If it is true that public goods and services are oversupplied when benefits are concentrated and costs (revenues) dispersed, should they not by the same argument be undersupplied when benefits are dispersed but costs concentrated, or when both costs and benefits are dispersed (Goodin 1982)?
This leads to a final consideration, namely whether politicians behave in the way Niskanen and others assume they do, either in their sensitivity to the costs and benefits of public expenditure or in their inability to obtain adequate information for the monitoring job they are required to do.
Even casual observation suggests politicians are not simply budget maximizers.
Some seek electoral popularity successfully by promising and attempting to cut public budgets and reduce taxation.
An alternative model of legislative and  electoral behaviour has been offered by Downs (1957).
Downs assumed that the public was aware of the costs of public goods and services in terms of taxation.
Indeed, so visible are the taxes required to pay for services that some taxpayers may never use, that the total of public spending in a democracy is less than it would be if the real needs of society were to be met.
While it is true that in recent decades it has been made more, rather than less, difficult for elected assemblies to exercise control over public expenditure (Robinson 1978), it is equally true that political controllers are not completely starved of information about bureaucratic activities.
They often appoint high-status officials to monitor the spending and accounts of operating agencies (Self 1985, p. 68).
Jackson feels that Niskanen credits the ‘sponsor’ with too little power and too many information problems.
‘Having ignored the demand side and played up the supply side, Niskanen has unbalanced his theory’(Jackson 1982, p. 132).
Politicians do have access to independent sources of information and therefore countervailing arguments to those put by the bureaucrats.
McGuire adds another important qualification: that the sponsors of bureaus at state and municipal levels may be more informed as to the production function of their agencies than the national legislature.
This conclusion was suggested by the finding that evidence on the elasticity of demand for public services at state and local levels was not consistent with the prediction that a budget-maximizing agency will always increase the budget more than proportionately in response to a fall in cost.
Demand for public services was not uniformly elastic (McGuire 1981).
Bendor, Taylor and Van Gaalen (1985) feel that even at federal level in the United States it is empirically unsound to treat the relationship between politicians and bureaucrats as an ordinary bilateral monopoly.
Because of its superior formal authority, Congress can require the bureaucracy to state what combinations of price and quantity or budget and output it can offer before Congress releases its demand information.
This makes the bilateral game one in which legislators learn about bureaucratic biases and manipulate penalties for deceit.
The uncertainty about demand, penalties and costs facing a bureau weakens the temptation to ask for excessive budgets.
Breton and Wintrobe also question the assumptions about legislative behaviour and point to a further complication likely to arise from the recommendation to introduce competition into government administration.
Such competition would be designed to reduce administrative costs and increase politicians' information until a bureau's budget became optimal for the politicians.
But if politicians also believe that they are being fed distorted and incorrect information by budget-maximizing bureaucrats and that the resources they vote to the administration will be used inefficiently, they will reduce their allocations.
On the Niskanen assumptions, then, bureaus will receive less than they need, they will be too small rather than too large, and services will be under rather than over supplied (Breton and Wintrobe, 1982).
The same authors also question the assumption that it is too costly for politicians to develop effective means of financial scrutiny, pointing to evidence that instruments of control are widely used systematically and rationally, implying that the preferences of sponsors and citizens are likely to be adequately reflected in the supply of public goods (Breton and Wintrobe, 1975, pp. 202–4).
CONCLUSION
The early theories of bureaucracy associated with Tullock and Niskanen have been severely criticized as culture-bound and of declining relevance as governments move beyond periods of high levels of public expenditure and taxation, and inexorable incremental growth in public budgets.
Over ten years ago Breton and Wintrobe warned that ‘it is not clear that the behaviour of bureaucrats would be and what kind of models we would be churning out if government revenues were not increasing automatically’(Breton and Wintrobe, 1975, p. 205).
Yet the difficulties which some governments have experienced in recent years in delivering political promises that the size of the bureaucracy would be reduced suggest that there is something to the foundation upon which economic models of bureaucracy have been built.
The UK Parliament is certainly not widely regarded as being at all competent in the  scrutiny which it exercises over public spending, and few people are under the illusion that it is difficult for government departments to deceive MPs and Select Committees about necessary levels of expenditure and unnecessary levels of waste.
Even recent Conservative governments have found it extremely difficult to make real reductions in public spending.
Where economies in Whitehall have been made, they have usually been at the expense of services or functions.
It is easier to stop doing something than to continue with an activity but with greater efficiency.
The problem with any efficiency drive in government is that what some people regard as a mere means to an end, others regard as an end in itself.
The dominant characteristic of political decision-making when compared with market mechanisms is not that those who benefit from public expenditure are those who make the most noise politically.
It is that there are no unambiguous criteria with which to judge the contribution that different administrative activities make to some final goal or set of values.
Hence the difficulty in establishing what ‘the public’ really wants and consequently the impossibility of knowing how far in excess of that the overall level of public-service activity really is.
The public choice approach to bureaucracy has a definite appeal in the context of high public expenditure and ‘armies’ of bureaucrats.
And some of its basic assumptions seem to be confirmed by casual observations of the problems which legislatures have in performing one of their traditional functions.
But the relationship between the ‘army of administrators at their desks’ and the eventual supply of a public service to beneficiaries in society, is so complex that it is difficult to disentangle the contributions which different strands make to an individual's utility function.